

PUNCH 8 APRIL 1992 THE END
CONTENTS
8 April 1992
Features
Is There Life After Playaway ?
Sacha Givarsi finds those long-forgotten presenters of kids' TV still forgotten
How To Speak Hooray A language that's beyond the ken of most people but certainly not the South Ken of the braying buffoon
Who Cares Wins John Hind and Stephen Mosco search for MPs who provide a five-star service for electors
Dr No?
It's About The Vacancy So, you saw our ad asking for henchmen to various Bond villains, eh?
OK, how much henching have you done and will you wear a steel bowler hat?
Columns
The World According To Mr Punch Life's a beach
Review Of The Week The last sweep of the Guttersnipe
Politics This old House still filled with laughter
Money Oofy Prosser settles his debts
Sport Final whistle with no extra time
Punchbag There's a tear in the eye but a Beam in the glass
Bargepole Into the sunset with the Lewd Ranger
Caption Competition The bubble's finally burst
Charivari
Steve Smethurst on the not-so-snow-white world of animation.
Plus the Punch guide to the arts, media and more 
country life
The sender of the first cutting published will receive a bottle of Aberlour whisky and £5.
For all other cuttings published a miniature bottle of Aberlour and £5 will be awarded.
Cuttings should be sent to Punch,.
Don't get me wrong, I really enjoy the dressing up but I feel he is out of control.
I think I could have bought a new washer in place of all the vibrators he's bought.
Survivors of sudden cardiac death: a rational approach to evaluation and therapy of patients surviving ventricular fibrillation.
Bert Newman has sadly gone blind.
His wife, Josey, has suggested that he no longer drives their automatic Bedford fully equipped camper van.
Al Palanza Jr's brother died about two weeks before the letter arrived from Greenville County Department of Social Services, he said.
‘Your food stamps will be stopped March 1992 because we received notice that you had passed away.
God bless you.
You may re-apply if there is a change in your circumstances,’ the letter said.
‘What are you wagging your tail at, you cheerful bastard?’
‘Well, son — love is a very special thing which happens between a drummer and six or seven groupies’
The World According to MR PUNCH
Redundo Game-Boy
Essentially, it's all a tax-dodge.
Let me explain.
These days, more and more people are asking me, ‘Mr Punch, how can we survive the next few years?’
‘What's the problem?’
I reply.
‘Well,’ they continue, ‘we've been reading your columns and we're just a little bit worried that you might mean it when you say that the European Community is a fraudulent delusion; the German economy is kaput; the French are morally bankrupt; racism is becoming endemic; America's had it; Britain's in for five years of total chaos and the middle-classes will soon be taking to the streets.
You're not serious are you?’
‘Of course I am,’ say I. ‘Never been more serious in my life.
We're in for a serious bout of millennial malaise.
I wouldn't be surprised if the coming slump makes the Thirties look like the proverbial walk in the park.
Nor would it come as a total shock to discover that the world pulls out of the next slump the same way it did out of the last one, with a catastrophic world war.’
By now my interlocutors, who are apt to be young and sensitive souls, much perturbed by the effect that German-led interest rates have already had on their standard of living, tend to be looking a bit peaky and green about the gills.
‘What can we do?’ they cry.
‘How, oh wise one, can we escape this Armageddon?’
At this, a calm and seraphic expression fills my face with an almost spooky beauty.
A small smile plays teasingly around the corners of my mouth and I ask, ‘Do you have jobs?’
‘Yes,’ they reply with sighs of relief, for they are  all-too aware of the scourge of unemployment, particularly among white-collar workers in the south-east of England.
‘Then lose them,’ I say.
This tends to come as a bit of a shock and explanation is required, to wit: there is absolutely no point in persisting in salaried employment when taxes are rising to 59 per cent and beyond, and interest rates are equally upwardly mobile.
The smart move is to proceed according to Mr Punch's exclusive eight-point plan, as follows…
1.
Engineer the winding-up of one's job;
2.
Pick up a redundancy cheque;
3.
Pay off as much of the mortgage as possible, plus any outstanding embarrassments lurking around one's Access account;
4.
Head down to the local travel agent and check out the availability of sun-drenched spring breaks at resorts catering to families with small children;
5.
Lie in the sun for two weeks;
6.
Come back to town and beg old pals for freelance work, consultancies, etc, taxable on Schedule D, with minimum NIC liability, plus plentiful opportunities for legitimate business expenditure;;
7.
Don't do any more than you have to in order to pay interest on remainder of mortgage (see 3, above);
8.
Take it easy, mellow out and generally adopt a less stressful outlook on life.
Now you, dear reader, may be thinking, ‘Phew!
It's pretty lucky that Mr Punch's exclusive eight-point plan should be so eerily coincidental with the closure of Punch , of which we have heard so much.’
To this I say, coincidence?
You must be kidding.
Au contraire , it's Mr Punch's last, but greatest wheeze.
Surely you don't actually believe all that stuff in the papers about how it was so much better in the old days, but then they got in a bunch of yuppies and ruined it all by going down-market and yoof-crazed, do you?
You didn't fall for that ludicrous theory — advanced, if I recall correctly, in the Sunday Telegraph — that Punch died when it was deserted by the nation's finest cartoonists?
For God's sake, look at the facts.
The Sunday Telegraph article was illustrated by seven cartoons.
Of these, five were by Paul Thomas, Ed McLachlan, Mike Williams, Bill Hewison and Larry.
No deserters there.
Were we yuppies?
Maybe, but this regime was not the one that introduced columns on property, cars and antiques into the pages of Punch .
It was the regime that got rid of them.
Were we down-market?
Well, one of the first things I did on applying for this job was to  announce my intention to end the repellent Billy Bullshit column.
Nor did the earlier Bull Sheet column reappear.
In fact, the magazine became completely Bull-free.
Were standards lowered?
I don't know, but anyone who says they were had better contend with lawyers hired by scribes such as Stephen Pile, P J O'Rourke, Matthew Parris, Patrick Collins, Peter Tinniswood, Clive Anderson et al , none of whom would be amused by the suggestion that their work was anything other than top-notch.
I dare say a few prize juries might be peeved at having their judgment queried, too.
As for the yoof question, yes, there was an attempt to inject a certain spring into Mr Punch's aged step.
And, as subscribers with decades' worth of Punch purchasing behind them testify on pages 56–59, the effect was a bit like the first plunge into an icy pool: shocking at first, but pleasantly bracing once you got used to it.
But any magazine that retains a nonagenarian film critic and a weekly cartoonist who has entered his eighth decade can hardly be said to be immature.
Particularly when its editorialist is practically 151.
Contrary to reports of declining sales, there have even been rises in circulation, readership and ad revenue (slowly, but surely, the agencies have been coming round to Punch 's point-of-view).
The trouble is, the rises were just too slow.
Frankly, dear readers, I was getting bored waiting for the graphs to get to the point of maximum excitement.
And once I realised that I could swap this grievous toil for a life of tropical beaches, sweet-thighed maidens and minimal taxation, well, you can see how the choice became  all-too simple.
Inquisitive souls might wonder how I persuaded my publishers to go along with my plan.
It's simply a matter of beauty.
There is an aesthetic appeal to a really splendid piece of financial manipulation to which these gentlemen are fully sensitive.
They are, after all, pretty sharp when it comes to number-crunching.
If beans are there to be counted, here are the chaps to do it.
These upstanding citizens are the Beatles of the balance-sheet, the Pavarottis of profit-and-loss.
So when I approached them with my intricate scheme for escaping the greedy jaws of Mr Kinnock and his pals via the strategic disappearance of Punch , they saw the beauty of it straightaway.
So it is that my magazine is being put into a state of hibernation.
The world believes that it's all down to inexorable economic pressures.
It is, in fact, the first flowering of fiscal revolt against the high taxes of the Nineties.
Admit it — as scams go, this one is absolutely brilliant.
Review of the week
‘If only they'd kept the old Dicky Doyle cover, with a few blank pages inside, it'd still be going’
Mr PUNCH 1841–1992
‘Not as alive as he used to be’
It's not as financially viable as it used to be’
THIS F***ING EGG'S BAD
End of an era
Mr Punch 1841–1992 RIP
Mr Punch and his trusty chum Toby the Dog have appeared in many guises.
Here they make suitably valedictory gestures, by John Tenniel, October 1886.
Cheers!
A reflective Mr Punch celebrates his 90th birthday with a toast to the distinguished humorists who filled the editor's chair, by Bernard Partridge July, 1931.
The dynamic duo get away from the troubles of the world and curl up for a nap, by ffolkes, June 1954
The great man toasts his own 50th birthday, by Linley Sambourne, July 1891
Ever the dandy, Mr Punch models the ruff look, by Quentin Blake, January 1988.
There's not a dry eye in the house as Mr Punch and a startled Toby perform ‘Auld Lang Syne’, by Trevor Holte, August 1990.
Gutter gossip
Guttersnipe
A thinking man's favourite tabloid tattle
by Mr Mitchell Symons
I am intrigued by reports that, after the break-up of her marriage to Mr Alvin Stardust,Miss Lisa Goddard , the television ‘personality’, flew to Australia ‘to commune with a school of dolphins’.
‘I don't know what it is about dolphins,’ said the leading lady of the entertainment show Give Us A Clue , ‘but you just feel that they understand what you are going on about.
And while you don't understand them, you feel you're in the presence of greater intelligence.’
The dolphins' opinion of Miss Goddard was not recorded but it is believed that they would be unlikely to demur from her conclusion.
Mr Frank Sinatra, the popular entertainer, has been having his life chronicled by that fine gazette, the Sunday Mirror .
‘Frank was a wild womaniser between marriages — but every girl he took to bed had to pass a bizarre test.’
Guttersnipe could not summon up the enthusiasm required to wade through sufficient of this turgid stuff to find out what the ‘bizarre test’ was but suspects it might have something to do with explaining the meaning of the words ‘Do-be-do-be-do’at the end of his popular tune ‘Strangers In The Night’.
The step-son of Mr Ronald Wood of the Rolling Stones quintet has been rusticated from ‘a posh private school…after staff found cannabis being sold.’
Mr Wood, a former cocaine addict, was said to be ‘bitterly disappointed’.
Guttersnipe is not surprised at Mr Wood's chagrin: by the age of 15, most state school-children have graduated to much grander narcotic substances.
Mr Sylvester Stallone , the muscular thespian, is smitten once more.
His new inamorata is a 22-year-old mannequin named Jennifer .
According to his approving mother,Mrs Jacqui Stallone , Miss Jennifer has a surgically-enlarged bosom because ‘all his women have had big busts and he likes that.’
Fortunately for his pectorals and his cranium, Mr Stallone has yet to fall in love with a woman who likes men with small busts and large brains.
Mr Tom Jones , the pelvic thrust, has started the new year as he finished the old.
Contemporaneous reports claim that the vocal stylist has ‘fallen for a gorgeous dark-haired student, young enough to be his daughter.’
Guttersnipe has nothing against adultery per se , but feels that Mr Jones is trying perhaps a little too hard to live up to his theme tune ‘It's Not Unusual’.
Mr Matthew Kelly ,Mr Jeremy Beadle 's erstwhile co-presenter on the televisual feast Game For A Laugh , has apparently ‘set up home with a drag queen’ named ‘Dave ’.
‘I'm not going to be all macho and deny I'm gay,’ averred Mr Kelly, who favours the barbigerous look á la Mr Beadle.
‘Dave is a very close friend of mine.’
Guttersnipe couldn't care less whom Mr Kelly co-habits with and, after sharing a TV studio with Mr Beadle, nor, it is safe to assume, does Mr. Kelly.
Mr John Cleese , the icon, has revealed that when his mother dies he intends to ‘have her stuffed and put in a glass case in his front hall.’
This might seem a somewhat unusual thing to do, but if Mr Cleese can resurrect his dead mother as frequently as he does his dead parrot then she will have a busy afterlife.
Mr Oliver Reed , the thirst, while appearing on a ‘late-night Channel 4 talkshow’,After Dark , indulged in some ‘outrageous antics’.
Viewers (both of them) heard the 52 year-old actor say f***, b****** and ‘Let's get p*****.’
He sent a glass of wine flying and insulted two fellow guests during a debate on the topic ‘Do Men Have To Be Violent?’
(Evidently, yes).
Mr Reed then went on to put his arm around the ‘feminist’ author Miss Katherine ‘Kate’Millet and embraced her, cheek to cheek.
Guttersnipe would, in ordinary circumstances, reproach Mr Reed for his boorish behaviour.
However, his action has led to the scrapping of After Dark , a ‘show’ which has nothing to recommend it.
Consequently, instead of being censured, Mr Reed finds himself a heroic front-runner in the 1991 Guttersnipe Man Of The Year contest.
Ms Denice-work-if-you-can-get-it ‘Denice’ Lewis , the Hello!story, is to be the subject of an on-going biography.
The latest memoirist is her ex-husband, one ‘Steven Martin ’— a human being, not the ‘star’.
Mr Martin has revealed how Ms Lewis courted him in his ‘pick-up truck’ without wearing any undergarments.
Finally, however, he ejected a denuded Ms Lewis  from their estate.
Is it any wonder that Miss Lewis sought refuge with a man like Mr Jason Donovan ?
As Mr Ryan O'Neal , the thespian, approaches middle age, his weight has increased to some 15 stones.
Apparently his ‘lover’, the erstwhile Angel of Charles,Miss Farrah Fawcett , has confided in a ‘pal’: ‘I'm ashamed of the way he's let himself go.
When we first met, Ryan was lean and mean.
Now he's a middle-aged tub of lard.
I've told him no more sex till he gets back into shape.’
As incentives go, this would seem to be somewhat more potent than the weekly communal weighing-in ceremony at Weight Watchers.
Mr Reginald Kray , the professional businessman, has refused the claims of one Mr Tony Lambrianou , an erstwhile guest of Her Majesty.
Lambrianou ‘revealed’ that the resting place of the corpse of Mr Jack ‘The Hat’McVitie , the cookie who crumbled, was appropriately enough, Gravesend.
The former Kray henchman dashed Fleet Street scribes' hopes for a headline such as‘The Silence Of The Lambrianou’ when he said of the underworld bloodletting: ‘It was the biggest mistake the Krays made.’
Mr Kray spoke up in reply from his fortified Nottingham retreat to say that in fact Mr McVitie's remains are to be found in Whitstable Bay, Kent.
That then, clears up the mystery of Mr McVitie; no doubt the final resting place of Mr Lambrianou's kneecaps will come to light shortly.
The memoirs of one Señor Tony Sanchez , an erstwhile personal security adviser to members of the Rolling Stones, a once-popular beat ensemble, are currently being serialised in a periodical.
Mr Sanchez recalls that on one occasion,Mr Keith Richards , a musician once fond of exotic medication, was so vexed by his hound Caesar 's nocturnal barking that he administered him with a soporific known colloquially as a ‘mandie’.
The cur tumbled into the moat only to be rescued by the brave Señor Sanchez.
Caesar will never know how fortunate he was to survive this episode; Mr Richards could well have attempted to administer him a Mars bar instead.
Mr James Bowen , the televisionist, has been celebrating the tenth anniversary of his ‘television’ contest,Bullseye , an adversarial entertainment based on the art of projectile throwing.
Mr Bowen is nothing if not sanguine about his  succès  d'estime .
‘I wouldn't have given odds on it lasting ten minutes,’ he says of the programme's early days.
‘At first I thought it was rubbish and so was I.’ The implication, of course, is that Mr Bowen now considers it not to be ‘rubbish’.
Indeed, he even reveals that he has recovered from a bout of depression: ‘What right have I to be depressed?
I'm luckier than any man has a right to be.’
If self-knowledge is the key to life then verily might Mr Bowen change his name to Mr Yale.
Miss Joan Collins , the authoress, is said to have ‘fallen out’ with Ms Elizabeth Taylor over the latter's intention to introduce her husband,Mr Laurence Fortensky , the construction worker, to Miss Collins's 32-year-old inamoratum,Mr Robin Hurlstone .
When the plan was mooted, Ms Collins is said to have retorted, ‘Is she out of her mind?
Larry's a builder, Robin's an art dealer, a refined, elegant and sensitive man.
What on earth would they have in common?’
Sadly, gallantry prohibits enlightening the great lady.
Guttersnipe's Hall of Fame
Mr Rodlington ‘Rod’ Stewart, the proboscis-laden Caledonian chanteur;
Ms Kimberley Basinger, the pouting thespienne;
Miss Gorgeous ‘Gayner’ Goodman, the Page Three pulchritude;
Ms Cher, the miracle of nature;
Mr Warren ‘Bunny’ Beatty, the patriarch and Lothario manqué.
Guttersnipe's Hall of Shame
Ms Amanda de Cadanet, the hammock-breasted mother-to-be;
Mr Jason Donovan, the self-proclaimed ‘male tart’ with the citrus-enhanced coiffure;
Miss Sinead ‘Sindy’ O'Connor, the shaven-headed chanteuse and unsolicited opinion;
The Duchess of York, the holidaymaker and single parent.
‘That's not clever, that's sinister’
Politics
Julia Langdon
The lady's not for returning
Thatcherism is dead in the water — whoever wins
Whatever their own political persuasions, journalists tend to look for the most interesting outcome of any given set of circumstances.
Thus, at the time of the last Tory leadership election, a victory for Michael Heseltine would have been by far the most professionally exciting result.
It would have guaranteed a complete change in the way things were run at Westminster.
But it was not to be.
The chances are, however, that whichever way the cookie is crumbled on April 9 we are in for the shake-up we were denied with the departure of Mrs Thatcher.
Some results will be more interesting than others; none, alas, will be revolutionary.
All the same, whatever happens promises well for my trade.
There was a time when it looked as if Mrs Thatcher would never go.
It was simply impossible to imagine how she would depart.
No one ever thought she would go voluntarily.
A Minister of the Crown told me once of being present at a Cabinet committee meeting when she disagreed with her then chancellor, Nigel Lawson, and sensed that the rest of those present were also against her.
‘All right then,’ my friend claimed she said, ‘If that's how you feel, I'll go.
I'll resign.
That's it.’
At which point, according to my informant, everyone looked absolutely horrified and said: ‘Oh no, Prime Minister!
Please don't, Prime Minister!
We didn't mean it.’
I never reported this story because I didn't believe it.
Does it sound like Mrs Thatcher?
No?
Well, exactly.
What my source was up to, I have no idea; all I do know is that while the world was waiting to discover how Mrs Thatcher was ever going to be toppled, the most unlikely possibility was that she might admit she had been wrong about something and ask for her P45 without more ado.
The reality of her departure has, I think, proved this thinking right.
If Michael Heseltine had won the leadership in November 1990, he would have wanted to call an immediate general election.
His friends and colleagues were trying to persuade him at the  time that this would not be wise — what on earth would happen to the British election campaign if the country had to go to war in the Gulf half-way through?
The wise old heads believe that they would have prevailed and that he would have been forced to wait until the spring.
By that time, of course, he would already have effected a great many ministerial and policy changes, but there would still have been sufficient sense of novelty about everything he touched to have ensured his eventual victory at the polls.
Then the country would truly have known that the years of Thatcherism were over.
John Major's rejection of the policies and principles held by his political predecessor has been much more gradual.
The process will, of course, be greatly expedited if the Tories form the next Government and the Prime Minister can claim to be his own man with his own mandate.
Oh, but how much more interesting it will be if the other lot are given a go for the first time in 13 years.
It is a source of some regret to me that this column will not be here to report the changes.
A lot of fun is promised.
‘It's that crackpot Mark Lemon with his idea for a comic magazine.
I'd give it a week…‘
At the time of writing the anxiety in Tory Central Office has shifted to sheer bloody panic.
A Tory friend of mine who has been trying to write nice things about the Conservative campaign has been tearing his hair out in desperation, not just  because they are doing so badly — but because they deserve to.
Mrs Thatcher departed for the United States because the Conservative Party wanted her out of the way for the last week of the campaign.
I'm told, though, that she went with some relief — because she wouldn't be around to witness what promised to be the ghastly ignominy of election day.
It is with some pride that I am able to bring you a useful etiquette tip from the Denis Thatcher Handbook Of Handy Hints For Husbands.
One of the greatest difficulties Denis has faced over the years — and it has increased as the world has turned to harassing the smoker — has been how to keep awake through the after-dinner speeches without the benefit of a cigarette.
Denis, of course, likes to light up whenever possible, but he does recognise the propriety of waiting until after the Queen's health has been drunk.
Alas for him, the speech proposing the loyal toast can sometimes take a very long time.
Indeed, I recall being present at a formal state banquet in Malawi when the Life President, His Excellency the very elderly Dr Hastings Banda, had been speaking for 45 minutes proposing the toast and had still only reached 1947.
Anyway, news reaches me of how the most loyal of husbands handles this kind of situation without falling unconscious at the table.
You sit with one elbow on the table and rest your head on one hand.
You place your index finger against your chin and rest the upper jaw on the top of it.
That way, says Denis, you can achieve the sometimes difficult feat of appearing interested in what is being said.
If, however, you should fall asleep the finger immediately goes into your mouth and down your throat and wakes you before the cameramen have had a chance to snap their shutters.
Dispatch box
NOTHING will keep Paddy Ashdown from the fray.
There was nearly a chance when he got locked in a lift at the Horseguards Hotel the other day, but the prospect of being out of the front line for a few hours was more than he could bear.
The Liberal Democrats’ leader and their campaign chief, Des Wilson, got into the lift high in the hotel.
The doors shut and stuck.
‘We could be here for hours,’ said Wilson, into whose tired brain had crept the thought that they could just sit down and have a little sleep until they were found.
The idea clearly horrified Ashdown.
Not for nought did he train in the jungles of Borneo.
With his bare hands he forced the lift doors apart, freeing the duo in an instant.
‘It doesn't seem the same since the sponsorship deal’
This week's guest columnist is…
THE GRIM REAPER
HE'S LEAN, HE'S LITHE, HE WIELDS A SCYTHE
I WAS IN the office checking over a few invoices and trying to locate the squeak on my swivel chair when the phone rang.
It was my secretary.
‘Mr Reaper, I have Mr God on line two,’ she said.
‘Put him through, Tracey-Elaine, put him through,’ I replied.
We go back a long way, me and God, and from his first words I could tell that this was going to be a difficult call.
‘Grim,’ he boomed, ‘What the heaven and hell have you done to Punch magazine?’
‘What do  you mean what have I done?
It was 150 years old for Chrissakes!
It was past it, a goner, way past its sell-by date.
It was due for the chop and you know it.’
TRACEY
‘Yes, yes,’ said God.
‘But afterlife will never be the same again.
What are people going to do in purgatory without back copies of Punch to read?’
I settled back in my seat, picked some dirt from my fingernails with a spare scythe blade, and whispered discreetly through the partition.
‘Tracey-Elaine,’ I mouthed, ‘cancel my appointments for the day.’
I was clearly going to be on the phone for a long time.
SODOM
God, by this time, was in full flow.
‘…Basil Boothroyd, did you read his stuff on the Sodom and Gomorrah croquet club?
Classic!
And Coren, dressing up as Moses and leading 200 innocent bystanders into the Promised Land.
What a wag!
And did you read Bill Davis's defence of the moneychangers in the temple, Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall on the last supper (‘my partner chose the water then asked for it to be changed to wine’), David Thomas's theory that Cain was framed by a feminist group?
Where will we see gags like that again?
It just feels so personal.
I mean, I was at school with David Langdon!
Why did you have to do it.
It was a mistake, wasn't it?’
MAXWELL
I put down my scythe.
‘Mistake?’
I said.
‘Where did you hear that?
It's not true!
It's not true!
Oh, all right, it is true, but it wasn't my fault.
I had Bob Maxwell in the interview suite, and he was furious.
‘Look,’ he said to me.
‘This magazine has been giving me a hard time.
We've been pals for a long time.
Can you get rid of it for me.’
‘Sure, Bob,’ I said.
‘No problem.
What's it called?’
‘I can't remember the name.
But it's got jokes in it, cartoons, and the editor seems to be losing his hair.’
‘Well, I naturally assumed…‘
GRIM GRINS
THE MILK Tray man visits people in the middle of the night wearing black, and is greeted warmly wherever he goes.
I, too, visit people in the middle of the night wearing black, yet I am greeted by shrieking, moaning, wailing and a-gnashing of teeth.
It's a funny old world.
THE MAN IN BLACK WHO BRINGETH THE SACK
Money
Oofy Prosser
Funny money — the golden years
Our financial wizard picks his favourite tales of the City
How does one say ‘goodbye’ after night on ten years?
I toyed with the idea of reminding you of all my triumphs, of my prediction of the ‘87 stock market crash, of my warnings about the ERM and the dangers of Europe, about…
I could go on forever, but you know how good my predictions were.
Presumably that's why you read the column, and I hope that you are considerably richer as a result.
(If you want to buy a magazine with your wealth, I think I know of one up for grabs.)
But it would be too dull to rehash all that stuff for my valedictory column.
Far more cheerful, I felt, would be a reminder of some of the lighter moments from the world of finance that have appeared in this column.
My favourite story involved the joint telecommunications company set up by GEC and Plessey in France and called GPT.
Its representatives could not understand the peculiar reaction they got form the French whenever they produced their business cards.
it took some time before it was explained to them that the French pronunciation of GPT sounded just like ‘J'ai pété ’ which, as all you Europhiles no doubt know, means ‘I have broken wind.’
Marks & Spencer also came a cropper in France when it launched its yoghurts over there.
Now that the contents of everything have to be described in great detail on the packaging, they duly told the French people that it contained preservatives.
The yoghurts were an unexpected success, for the real translation of ‘avec preservatif ’ is ‘with condom’.
Life was happier in the old days.
Business was carried on at a rather more sedate pace, lunches were longer and boozier and I was far, far happier.
It was from those halcyon days that the following story dates.
It appears that one Christmas a stockbroker searching for a present went into a pet shop in the Square Mile.
Homing in on the parrots, he was shown one that cost £500.
‘Good grief!’ he exclaimed.
‘That seems a bit steep.’
‘Ah,’ said the shopkeeper.
‘But it does speak fluent French and has O-level Maths.
This one,’ he continued, ‘costs £1,000.
It speaks Italian like a native and has a PhD in Economics.’
‘Well, how much for that one?’ asked the broker, indicating a rather scraggy looking bird.
‘Ah, that one costs £2,000.’
‘What on earth does it do?’
‘Frankly, it doesn't appear to do anything at all, but the other two call it the Senior Partner.’
The criminal fraternity have often featured here.
Try as they might, the City's denizens have never been as colourful and flamboyant as those who set out to make crime a career rather than just a sideline.
I think Lonnie R Patterson of Urbana, Illinois, sticks most firmly in the memory.
He was a criminal who knew the virtues of saving his money, rather than frittering it away.
What was less sensible was choosing Urbana's First Federal of Champaign Savings & Loan as a home for his dosh.
Not only had he robbed that particular S&L just three days earlier, but the teller at the window was the same person who had handed him the cash at gunpoint.
Not surprisingly, Patterson was arrested.
I also admired the ingenuity of one Theodilus Dakanopolous, of Athens, who was fined 30,000 drachmas for tampering with his car registration plates.
The city had tried ameliorating its appalling traffic congestion by restricting entry to the city: card whose registration plates ended in an even number were permitted to enter one day and those in an odd number the next.
Although his plate ended with a ‘6’, Theodilus drove in every day.
He had fixed the number so that it would pivot and, on alternate days, would read ‘9’.
I can't go without reminding you of Prosser's First Rule Of Investments: don't invest in anything with the initials ‘b’ and ‘c’in its title.
Bank of Credit and Commerce International, British & Commonwealth, Barlow Clowes all fall foul of this rule, as do many older failed ventures like Clarence Hatry's Commercial Bank of London.
FNFC, that star of the Seventies' market crash started life as Birmingham Carriage and Wagon.
It can be no coincidence that the famed Fund of Funds, which so many investors wish they had never heard of, was set up by Bernie Cornfield.
For the last time, Oofy is signing off.
My sincere thanks to my amanuensis Simon Rose, to my personal assistants Cressida and Catherine and to my colleague Bargepole, for showing me the consequences of taking the wrong turning in life.
‘How do I know you're not Anneka Rice?’?
HISTORIC SPORTING MOMENT
MR.
PUNCH'S NOT WAVING BUT DROWNING WATER EVENT
Sport
Patrick Collins
Hook-nosed hero on the ropes
The brief sporting life of the battling hunchback with the big stick
The late Mr Punch was never much of a sportsman.
As we lower him into his pauper's grave, we may safely assume that he does not feel seriously deprived at having to miss the Rumbelow's Cup final or the Pilkington Glass European Badminton Championships.
Had he survived, the old chap would surely have found better ways to fritter this weekend.
Wading through the stream of overwhelmingly affectionate obituaries, I could not find a single phrase to support the view that Mr P ever had the slightest interest in the games that people play.
Of course, they may have got him wrong, since some of them also suggested that the great man had once possessed a robust sense of humour.
But no matter.
The truth, I suspect, is that sport and Mr Punch were not bosom chums.
Indeed, he had enjoyed his three score years and ten twice over before he thought it necessary to engage the regular services of a sports correspondent.
As it happens, he made an inspired choice.
In his day job with the Guardian , Frank Keating would write about sport with the wit and wonder of a fallen angel.
One boxing scribbler of the tabloid persuasion used to recite a Guardian intro which Keating dashed off in a Bavarian hotel room, while struggling to complete a long overdue script for children's television: ‘Tonight in Munich, Muhammad Ali of The Universe will defend his world heavyweight title against Richard Dunn of 23 Railway Cuttings, Bradford, West Yorkshire.’
The old scribe would shake his head: ‘I could have tried for 20 years and still not come up with an opening paragraph like that,’ he would say.
And he did not lie.
As sporting intros go, it ranked with the effort by the correspondent of the Irish Times at the Montreal Olympics of 1976.
‘Irish swimming enjoyed its finest hour at the Olympic Pool this evening,’ he wrote.
‘Nobody drowned.’
In time, Keating shuffled off to spectate for a rival weekly but, as a kindly man, he offered encouragement to his successor.
‘The great thing about writing sport for Punch is that people can't say it's not as funny as it used to be, because nobody's done it before,’ he said.
Then he added, ‘Well, Wodehouse once wrote some stuff about golf.
And Betjeman did a bit of cricket, if memory serves.
But that's about all.
Honestly.’
In truth, the task was less daunting than it could have been, partly because a considerable number of our sportspersons did not (Gasp!) regularly purchase the magazine and were therefore unlikely to spot the odd line which might interest m'learned friends.
Occasionally, a cricketer might cast subtle doubt upon the facts of a favourite tale.
‘You got the wrong man, the wrong match and the wrong bleeding decade,’ a Surrey spinner once confided.
‘Apart from that, I couldn't fault it.’
Football people were far safer, although a man from the Football Association once wrote in pained protest at the implication that Premier League chairmen were a bunch of avaricious mediocrities with the industrial attitudes of 19th century mill owners.
Or something like that.
Less surprisingly, a certain England football captain took careful note of a profile which appeared a year or two back.
‘Most of it was all right,’ said Gary Lineker.
‘But where did you get that bit about Gay Times calling me ‘the most gorgeous man in British football’?’
I quickly explained how that particular nugget had been unearthed by a vigilant sub-editor.
‘I see,’ said Lineker, suspiciously.
‘And this sub-editor, is he, like, a friend of yours?’
My thanks are owed to countless sportsmen and women for providing ammunition for my fortnightly meanderings.
Likewise to John Jensen, for whose brilliant illustrations this column has served as an 800-word caption.
But most thanks are due to all those fellow hacks who provided ideas, anecdotes and scurrilous rumours for no greater reward than a kindly word and a half of best bitter.
One such benefactor called me on that recent morning when the old fellow with the hooked nose drifted into his final coma.
‘How's things?’ he asked.
‘Not too good,’ I said, ‘I've just been told that Punch is closing.’
A groan of real sympathy came down the line.
‘Bloody hell!’ he said.
‘That's a bit of history gone down the tubes, eh?
The lads always used to drink in there before mid-week matches.
Few pints in the Punch, then a quick cab to Spurs or the Arsenal.
Real tradition, that was.’
I explained that the Punch Tavern in Fleet Street was perfectly safe and identified the real victim.
‘Oh!’ he said.
‘The magazine!
For a moment there, you gave me a nasty turn.’
Patrick Collins is chief sports writer of the Mail On Sunday.
Is there life after Playaway ?
SACHA GIVARSI looked up the children's TV presenters of the Sixties and Seventies to find out if they were still young at heart.
Would they undertake some really,really exciting, cutting-edge media projects?
That fat kid from the Double Deckers who played the tuba and made it look the size of a bag of crisps…what is he up to now?
In fact, where are they all now?
The other Double Deckers , the presenters of Magpie ,Blue Peter ,Playaway ,How ,Screentest ,Crackerjack and Vision On .
And what of Basil Brush and Mr Roy?
Certainly Lesley Judd is working.
She pops up during a day-time TV maths programme with a handful of chocolate mice and a pair of weighing-scales.
But then she was also hosting a radio cookery show on LBC.
Cookery?
On radio?
The only sound effects are the bing!of the microwave and Leslie's indefatigable ‘Mmm!
Mmmm!’
But what of the other icons of children's television.
Do they still harbour desires to reprise their old roles?
What lengths would they go to do so?
How desperate were they for work?
Surely it was time to investigate.
We quickly drew up a children's broadcasting legend hitlist.
The man at the top, the very embodiment of super-suave tea-time television, was Michael Rodd, the ebony-tressed presenter of Screentest .
Rodd was the man who brought to Britain's attention the existence of the Children's Film Foundation, a body never heard of before or since.
Here was a star who could ask in all earnestness, ‘What was the colour of the bearded villain's folder that contained the nuclear secrets which Alan threw down the well before running towards the car park with his sister?’ secure in the knowledge that he would receive a suitably excited reply from Manchester Grammar's finest.
Our ‘Rory Caversham’, an independent producer, rang to find out.
Without any warning, and hardly half a ring, the phone was answered.
The stern yet mellow voice was unmistakeable, as bright and fresh as if it was 1979 when I was in my school uniform eating beans on toast, stretched out in front of the telly…and boy, did he speak quickly
MICHAEL RODD:
Michael Rodd.
RORY CAVERSHAM:
Er, is that Michael Rodd?
MR:
Indeed it is.
How can I help?
RC:
Um, Mr Rodd, allow me to introduce myself, I'm Rory Caversham from Brian Caversham, an independent production company.
And myself and my partners were wondering really what you were doing…
I mean whether you might be available.
MR:
Well, that would depend, of course.
RC:
I mean, we've been longtime admirers of yours, well you might even say fans since the days of Screentest really.
MR:
It's amazing people still remember, I mean it went off air over eight years ago.
RC:
Is it that long?
It seems like yesterday (much sentimental laughter between the two ).
Well, the reason I'm calling is that we're thinking of doing what some would consider an update of the show.
MR:
An update?
Go on.
RC:
Well, obviously it would have to be different.
I mean, the thing would need to be adapted for today's youth audience.
MR:
Absolutely, sure.
RC:
What we thought, bearing in mind the current vogue for environmental-style entertainment shows for kids, would be, instead of using clips of films, we'd show clips of vegetables.
MR:
Vegetables?
RC:
Yes, fresh farm produce (MR in stunned silence ).
Well, the idea would be really to educate kids about the produce, nutrient values etc, the different types of quash or nutmeg that exist around the world.
MR:
That sounds…interesting…a kind of environmental education style show using the old Screentest format…have you got a name yet?
RC:
We thought Beantest .
MR:
Beantest !
I love it.
What a superb idea.
Macho moodster Michael Rodd: was he up for Screentest II?
RC:
And not only that, the contestants would be in costume too…
MR:
Costume?
What do you mean?
RC:
Each show would be themed, but initially at least they'd be dressed as runner beans, large pumpkins, that sort of thing.
I mean the point would be to give it that kind of pzazz that the young kids love so much.
MR:
(pause) You know something…
I think it's absolutely brilliant.
It's so wacky it could work .
What about John Noakes and indeed his trusty helpmate Shep?
Sadly John's agent informed me, that ‘Noakesy’ was living on a houseboat in Spain without a telephone.
Such is life.
And then it hit me, an overwhelming desire to find the most eccentric performer ever to entertain the youth of Britain — Rick Jones, the long-haired, bearded hero of Fingerbobs .
A BBC researcher informed us that he was last heard of as the proprietor of an organic health food store in San Juan.
Rick's old agent, however, had not heard from him in ten years, and could neither confirm nor deny the rumour.
We had wanted to persuade Rick once again to don his mouse disguise for a series of public road safety commercials for the Mongolian government.
Alas, his number was disconnected.
ROY NORTH:
Hello?
BEN STACEY:
Is that Roy North?
RN:
Yes it is.
BS:
This is Ben Stacey.
I work for a record company called Geffen Records.
RN:
Gettin?
BS:
Geffen Records.
The reason I'm calling is that one of our biggest artists is a band called Van Halen.
Have you heard of them?
RN:
Van who?
BS:
Van Halen, they're one of the biggest heavy metal bands in the world.
RN:
Right.
BS:
The reason I'm calling is that the lead guitarist Eddie Van Halen has a daughter, Katie, who's eight, and somehow they've managed to get hold of some of the videos of your shows with Basil.
RN:
Really?
He's lucky, I've only got one!
BS:
Basically I got a fax from him in LA yesterday, and apparently his daughter is a great fan of yours and Basil's…and he too has become quite a fan.
Anyway, the upshot of it is that he's written a song, for his daughter, based on the Basil Brush thing.
It's a kind of metal anthem called ‘Basil Goes Boom’.
RN:
What?
BS:
Yes, he's recorded the song, and he's asked us over here to make contact with you to see whether you and Basil…
RN:
Ivan (Basil's creator is Ivan Owen).
BS:
Sorry, Ivan.
To see whether you'd be prepared to do a little rap over the track, the two of you, some kind of scripted chat.
RN:
'Cos you know we're hoping to make a comeback next year.
We're going to make a pilot and we hope to go out on the network next year…on Central.
So how did this all come about?
BS:
Actually it was an English friend of Van Halen's who passed on the tapes to them.
What can I say, you made a big hit with their daughter.
I mean, I've actually heard this song, it's quite, er, metallic, quite heavy, kind of a little like early Slayer, the first album, do you know it?
RN:
Can't say I do.
BS:
Anyway, thus far all they've done is sampled the boom boom.
It sounds terrific.
What they'd like to do is script it really.
I mean whether the Basil Brush angle is going to click with the American public is irrelevant, the song's really commercial.
RN:
I get you.
BS:
I just wanted to run it past you and see what you thought really.
RN:
Yeah, it sounds fun…
I mean is it like how they've done various singles in the past, Cliff Richard and ‘Summer Holiday’, you know putting a little voice on top, a little snippet.
BS:
I suppose so.
I mean, Van Halen are massive Stateside.
They usually play to 100,000 or so at a time, so it should be fun.
RN:
Would there be a fee involved, I mean I ask not only for me but for Ivan as well since he lives in Devon.
Anyway, can I write all this down?
So that's Gessin Records is it?
BS:
Geffen…
Geffen Records…
And the daughter would very much like to meet you when they come to tour here, as would Eddie.
RN:
No problem — you must understand that I've aged a little, I mean I still look roughly the same.
BS:
Good.
RN:
Of course, Basil's still the same, because you know puppets don't age.
Did you know we were originally a record plugging show?
I mean we were the first show to put Demis Roussos on.
Did you know that?
BS:
No.
Er, well, that's great.
If you could get on to Basil, then we can get the ball rolling.
RN:
Wonderful, well I'm sure Ivan should be pretty keen…great, super, I'll get back to you certainly by the end of the week.
It's the same number is it?
BS:
Yes (it was the phone at the Pizza Hut, Tottenham Court Road).
Rug-laden Roy North: keen to bring back Basil Brush?
But sadly, after all this drollery, our next target was untouchable.
Protected by four, yes four , agents, the ex-presenter of Play School , Chloe Ashcroft was not to be ours.
We had originally intended to pose as representatives of Mattel Toys USA, a company who wished to take advantage of the fact that Play School had become a cult hit among children in the Midwest.
Would Chloe be prepared to pose with our new toys in glossy American mags?
But these were not just facsimiles of Big Ted and Little Ted, no: this time Hamble was dressed head to toe in leather astride a miniature Harley Davidson.
Hamble from Hades the line was to be called.
Never mind, perhaps next time.
But what of Chloe's Playaway cohort, Brian Cant?
The man who had brought Chigley and Camberwick Green to us.
And, of course,Trumpton .
We left a message and didn't have to wait too long.
BRIAN CANT:
Is Ben Stacey there, please?
BEN STACEY:
Speaking.
Is that Brian Cant?
BC:
Yes it is.
BS:
Great, I've been trying to get hold of you.
Basically my father who I believe you knew in the Sixties…he organised lots of the roadhouse shows?
BC:
Oh yes.
BS:
Well, I'm working for him now, and he's still in theatre, working in the US, actually.
He does quite a lot on Broadway in fact.
Anyway, my father and his theatrical consortium have always been great fans of Trumpton .
BC:
Oh yes.
BS:
And always looked at it as perhaps a format with great theatrical potential particularly with the kids audience in mind.
I mean what they're considering at the moment is making Trumpton into a live-section, full-blown Broadway show, with perhaps a major star playing the train driver.
They're looking at Pacino right now.
I mean this doesn't exclude you because they'd like to keep the British angle.
With you as narrator perhaps on a plinth to stage left or something.
BC:
Really (lots of laughter ).
BS:
So what do you think?
BC:
Yes, it sounds really fun.
About three years ago, I was called to a bread commercial: Windmill Bread.
I didn't know what it was all about till I got there and one of them said ‘You may recognise this,’ and it was all in the style of Camberwick Green .
They were two guys who had come up through Play School and Trumpton as well, I mean the commercials were fairly far out, Windy Miller's head falls off when he eats the wrong bread or something like that.
Fairly wacky.
Again, they were worried they wouldn't get the same voice, after all these years.
Well, it all sounds great, very interesting indeed, I'm just going off to do a play in Wales for five weeks…
Sadly, Cant's Broadway dream remained unfulfilled.
But what of the fabulous Magpie team?
All was about to be revealed as we tracked down madcap Jenny Hanley, the woman at the heart of a million schoolboy fantasies.
DAVID PALMER:
Hello.
JENNY HANLEY:
Mr David Palmer please.
DP:
Yes, you're talking to him.
JH:
Am I?
This is good then, this is Jenny Hanley speaking.
DP:
Jenny!
Super.
I want to talk to you…
JH:
Fire away.
DP:
I'm working with a company, in fact we manufacture Strepsils.
JH:
Strepsils?
DP:
You know, the lozenges.
Basically we're sponsoring a new event which is starting this summer.
It's a kind of sports/entertainment event.
It's actually the annual aquasports and rollerskating world championship, in Bucharest, this summer.
JH:
Wow, that sounds super .
DP:
Basically, we're putting together this package of presenters.
So far we've got an American, Dwight Buchanan, an Italian called Gianfranco Roselli and a guy called Benito Pepys.
We thought of you really because we all remember the good old days, you know Magpie .
Just out of interest, when did it finish?
JH:
This is going to shock you David…but it was 12 years ago.
DP:
12 years ago!
My!
JH:
Funnily enough, I just saw Mick (Robinson, the Brian May lookalike ) the other day, and he hasn't changed at all.
DP:
How is Mick?
JH:
Very well, he's got his own company Six for Gold .
DP:
What?
JH:
(sings Magpie song )‘…five for silver, six for gold…‘
DP:
Oh from the theme tune.
Great.
Who else used to do it?
JH:
Thomasino Boyd, who joined us for the last couple of years, and before that (in Scots accent ) Doogie Rae.
DP:
Oh what happened to him.
JH:
Oh, he had the bobble hat concession in the Cairngorms.
DP:
He had the what ?
JH:
He had the bobble hat concession in the Cairngorms.
DP:
Are you serious ?
JH:
Absolutely true.
(At this point La Hanley's sprog begins whining in the background )…yes, be with you shortly, poppet.
David, have you ever played football in moonshoes?
DP:
No, I haven't.
JH:
Do you know what moonshoes are?
DP:
Are they those huge inflatable snow boots?
JH:
They're the bouncy things, they're not snow boots, they've got bungee ropes in the base.
The problem is you never know which way you might wobble.
DP:
Can you swim?
JH:
Yes, why?
DP:
Well, we may need some ‘in pool’ commentary.
And you'll be wearing a swimming hat.
JH:
I think it's terrific, the only proviso I would make is that I'm not prepared to do a parachute jump.
DP:
Fine, no problem.
You know the Dougie Rae thing, it's still bothering me, how exactly did he get the bobble hat concession?
JH:
Well, he found them the best ski runs in the Cairngorms when they started and they couldn't afford to give him anything very spectacular, so he said, ‘Can I have the ski shop and the bobble hat concession?’
And you know what?
The stupid prat got it.
Philip Schofield, eat your heart out.
Playaway beefcake Brian Cant: who does he play with now?
Tea-time temptress Jenny Hanley: is a comeback overdue?
Random samples
‘You spoil that compost heap’
‘The hype's brilliant but I think you should do some more development of the product’
‘Thank you.
I just thought I'd try running that one up the flagpole to see if anyone would salute’
Regarding Henry
Their government may be in mortal danger, but the upper classes still thrive.
MARK McCRUM is our guide
How to speak Hooray
For 13 years the forces of Hooraydom have stalked the land, set free by a government that slashed their taxes and showered them with Bollinger, BMWs and bijou terraced houses in the smarter parts of South London.
Now, as socialism knocks on the door of Number 10, the Hoorays are preparing to go back underground, adopting once again the protective colouring that has kept the British upper classes safe and sound while heads have rolled all over Europe.
Here's how to spot them.
About now, the first Hooray of spring can be seen stepping gingerly out of The Admiral Codrington and standing with his G 'n' T in the middle of the road.
He is wearing his traditional outfit of pinstriped suit, pinstriped shirt, spotted tie and Gucci shoes; or perhaps he has been home and changed, and is now sporting yellow cords, a maroon V-necked jersey, and highly polished brown brogues.
He is called Jeremy, or Giles, or Piers, or Rupert, or even Harry and by his side is a girl called Camilla, Antonia or Annabel, with splendid teeth, an Alice band in her swept-back hair and a blue quilted Puffa jacket over sensible skirt and shoes.
What should you do if you meet one of these social mastodons?
Don't worry.
With our guide at the ready, every Hooray Triumphus in the land will soon be eating out of your hand.
The first thing to observe is that no genuine Hooray ever moves his upper lip while talking.
And out of that strangely distorted mouth comes a series of sounds that you will soon start to recognise.
Air-hell-lair:Hi, how are you?
Wojupto?:
How are things?
Air-nair:I'm so sorry.
As in: ‘My mother just died.’
‘Air-nair.’
Muss-juss-gair-nah-dring:I find you too boring to talk to.
Excuse me.
Juss-goh-ha-pee:Ditto.
Rarely musing:What you should try to be.
Giles, over there with the bow tie that lights up and spins round is ‘rarely musing’.
Copy him.
Wojado?:
What is your line of work/occupation?
Bons:A job, ie: ‘Wojado?’
‘Airmin bons’‘Air-nair sair-mair.’
With this basic collection of sounds, and the famous Hooray parting cry of ‘lairs-hairv-lunch-vair-soo’, you are now ready for that quintessential Hooray event:
The Drinks Party
•The Wrong Thing To Say:Goodness, what a lot of people wearing pinstriped suits!
Gosh, it's 9.00pm already, what d'you say we get a carry-out and come back?
Where's the dancing?
Oh dear, oh dear.
No, even though their parties don't officially start until 7.30pm, and actually until well after 9.00pm, all  Hoorays turn up at parties in their work clothes, ie pinstripes.
The girls, meanwhile, will have raced home, had a bath, washed and dried their hair, to return in either a) the same quilted jacket, Alice band, and sensible skirt/shoes combination they were wearing before, plus a single string of pearls, or b) an incredibly short and low-cut minidress, lip-gloss and handmade high heels.
No, you can't dash out for something to eat.
Even though he's been up since six at his job in the City and is absolutely starving, the Hooray must wait until 10.30pm and then ‘gair-airt-dinner’ or ‘gair-fair-n-Indi’.
There is no dancing.
Sorry.
If Hoorays want to dance they ‘gair-tair nie-clair’ such as Tramp or Annabel's.
If they really want to dance, they ‘hairv a dance’, which means Mummy and Daddy spend thousands of pounds on a marquee and all the trimmings, and their friends pile down to their place in the country and run amok in the rhododendrons.
•The Right Thing To Say:Air-hellair!
Hair you?
Air-nair thair's Bella.
Godda talk to hair.
Air-nair dairnt blee vit!
Flossie!
Mwah!
Long time no hair.
Coming ate for dinner lair?
Rarely good Indi just dairn the row.
Gairn to Rupa's wedding?
Air-nair they din split up?
Gar din nair thair…
And so on for three hours on one piece of celery and a prune wrapped in bacon.
Advanced Hooray
Most Hoorays you are likely to come across will have been educated at a public school.
Such are the rigours of their adulthood (working in bons, never eating till 11pm) that many Hoorays remember their schooldays as the happiest time of their lives; their schoolfriends are those they feel most at ease with, even if at the time they couldn't stand them.
So go the whole hog.
Buy the old school tie.
Mug up on a few details: whether they called the masters ‘beaks’ or ‘dons’; whether sweets were referred to as ‘tuck’or ‘sock’; where you would have slept, in a ‘house’or ‘dorm’; what barmy school game was played on them once a year.
Then, one fine day, at one of these parties, someone with a big nose and a wide pinstripe will stumble up to you, notice your tie, and say: ‘Wair-you-a' schoo'?’
Now's your chance.
•The Right Thing To Say:Yah.
TSBC.
Dairnt I r'member yair?
Lair Sixpenny.
What was that beak we used to mob up — air-nair, you were up to Wettie Wilkinson, for Constrair.
Ha ha ha!
Oh yah, d'you r'member the time on the Fourth o' June we broke into Tairp and airt all the long eggs and threw up all over pop room and ha ha ha ha!
Oh yah, I r'member yair.
By the time you've finished, if you aren't the best of mates and invited down for a vair long weekend in the cuntrair, I can only say — Air nair.
Footnotes (1) A pub in Knightsbridge, London, known colloquially as ‘the Admiral Cod’ and the mecca of Hoorays.
Other popular ‘watering-holes’ are The Australian, The Antelope and The Duke of Bute, all in the same area.
(2) Gin and tonic is his drink when in town, unless he has a hangover (which he never does) when it's a ‘Bluddeh’(Mary).
(3) The idea that all Hoorays are called Henry is misguided.
He may have been christened Henry but he'll certainly be known as ‘Hairy’.
(4) If not in bonds he's most likely to be a ‘breaker’.
There are two types, the ‘stop-breaker’ and the ‘loys-breaker’.
(5) Actually, lunch is out of the question.
However, better this than the alternative, ‘Dookeepent-arch’, which means ‘Please, let's never see each other again’.
(6) No self-respecting Hooray would ever refer to a female friend as anything other than a ‘girl’ or ‘filly’.
Even his mother is ‘the old girl’.
The only ‘woman’ he knows is his cleaning-woman, Maria, who is ‘rarely nice’and comes from Portugal.
(7) b) are the Hoorays' girlfriends, a) their future wives.
(8) Hoorays love Indian food and on non-party nights (Mondays), you will find them in groups of eight or ten, stuffing down chicken dopiaza and naan bread with all the vengeance of people who haven't eaten properly for days.
(9) Eton, Harrow, Radley, Stowe, Gordonstoun, Haileybury, Charterhouse…all have their own incomprehensible languages.
This is Old Etonian.
Unauthorised versions
‘Wait!
There's an 11th, about sexual stereotyping!’
‘They'll blame it on Pilate error’
BARABBAS VERDICT RULED UNSAFE
‘Hey, Steve — who's the guy who's surfing barefoot?’
THE BEGINNING IS NIGH
‘Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God…’
‘It's that relentlessly upbeat approach that really grates with me’
MPs with empathy
The election campaign has forced Britain's MPs to be nice to absolutely everybody, no matter how irritating.
JOHN HIND and STEPHEN MOSCO set out to try the patience of Britain's most caring MPs
Who cares wins
When they're not debating matters of national and international importance, MPs also try to help their constituents, or indeed, anyone else with a problem.
In the middle of the election campaign, we decided to test our MPs.
How much did they care about their constituents?
What would they do to please the electorate?
We posted requests for help to a cross-party selection of 15 MPs.
Posing as tax-payers engaged in writing, film-making or oddball societies, we tried to enlist the honourable members in activities and causes close to their hearts.
In so doing, we would discover who was the most helpful MP, who was the rudest, and who couldn't even be bothered to reply.
Some of our selection are leaving politics after this election.
Others, however, are counting on your vote.
Read this before you write that X.
Landslide winners
They're kind, caring and at your service!
Geoffrey Dickens JP MP, Littleborough and Saddleworth
Request:that eternal campaigner for true justice was asked if he would consider writing a foreword for a book titled ‘An Eye For An Eye, A Tooth For A Tooth’.
‘Central to the theme is our strongly held belief that society is suffering now for the liberal views of the Sixties.
We include a call for the swift return of capital punishment.’
We felt sure his endorsement, ‘would add considerable weight to this literary plea for the return of the rope.’
Reply:Delightful.
‘Your book has strong appeal and I would be pleased to consider writing a foreword.
I look forward to receiving a draft in due course.’
Service rating:Top-notch!
This much-maligned quotemeister is there for you, his people.
Sir David Steel KBE MP, Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale
Request:The Liberal ex-chief was asked to write a few words for ‘Backroom Boys’, a book about ‘men who distinguish themselves without excess, folk quite happy to take a pleasingly light and unimposing approach, and yet who nevertheless make a reasonably fair showing throughout life’.
Reply:‘At present Sir David is out of the country,’ replied his assistant Rafe Bullock, ‘and therefore unable to reply personally.
In his absence I have attached an extract from his recent book,Against Goliath , in which he reflects on leadership and success  in politics.’
‘As leader of the Liberal Party,’ Steel noted in the extract enclosed, ‘I do not think I will ever be awarded full marks for either party management or pioneering policies…‘
Service rating:The wee Scot is still as frank and fair as ever.
Roy Hattersley MP, Sparkbrook
Request:In the guise of pop-group ‘The Howlers’(‘We play loud modern rock music not entirely lacking in melodies’), we contacted the portly football fan to request his consent for a song (and concept album) to be titled ‘Mad Hattersley's Tea Party’.
‘Additionally could we ask whether it would be possible for you to attend a recording studio at a time convenient to yourself and allow us to record you reciting the refrain ‘I'm Roy, I'm Roy — Roy Of The Reds Am I!’
Reply:Five days later came the Hatter's reply, ‘I  neither approve nor disapprove of your using my name and therefore do not object.
I regret that I cannot participate in the production on your track but will follow its release with interest.’
Service rating:Labour's lovable gourmet is as sporting as he's spitting.
Neil Kinnock MP, Islwyn
Request:We asked the opposition leader to help with a book entitled ‘Married To Teacher’ by writing a few lines in response to the statement: ‘Being married to a teacher is rather demanding.’
 Request: Joan Hammell, his secretary, wrote to say: ‘I am afraid it is not going to prove possible for Mr Kinnock to make a contribution as much as he would love to.
I'm really sorry about that.
I do hope your book will be a huge success.’
Service rating:No firm commitment, but the Taff teacher's husband can't be faulted for attitude.
Dudley Fishburn MP, Kensington
Request:Posing as a female post-grad English student, we wrote to ask Parliament's Mr Fixit whether he could be questioned on his name and how it affected him.
Her letter asked: ‘Do you personally know the origin of your surname and what is it like being called ‘Dudley Fishburn’?’.
Reply:Two days later, Fishburn responded: ‘Yes, I would be very happy to see you here in the House of Commons.
Perhaps you'd like to phone to arrange a suitable date.
Fishburn is a Yorkshire name.
It is derived from ‘fossa’ which is Latin for —‘ditch’and ‘bourne’, meaning ‘edge’.
We lived on the edge of the ditch.
We were early suburbanites, I'm afraid.’
Service rating:Always ready to answer your train-spotting queries, too!
Marginals
Not rude — not quite — but could try harder
Clare Short MP, Birmingham Ladywood
Request The anti-Page Three campaigner was contacted by ‘a feminist film-maker’ scripting a docu-drama entitled ‘Men: The Phallocentric Enemy’.
‘The film will feature interviews with victims of male aggression in Ireland, Nicaragua, Palestine and Hackney, focusing on the need for women everywhere to join hands and liberate ourselves from the yoke of anti-female oppression,’ said the letter.
‘I would be delighted if you would consider being interviewed for the film.
A woman of such forthright views as yourself would, I feel, lend considerable weight to this project.
Yours in Sisterhood…‘
Reply:Several days later came the following Short reply: ‘Thank you for your letter requesting an interview.
I am sorry but I am very over-committed.
Good luck with your film…’
Service rating:Sad.
Is Clare's commitment waning?
Has she, perchance, sold out to the patriarchy?
Sir Cyril Smith MBE MP, Rochdale
Request:Disguised as the ‘Proud To Be Fat Association’, we requested Sir Cyril's celebrity presence at an annual meeting.
‘We are an organisation of like-minded plump people who stand firm and say ‘No’ to demands to develop bulimia and anorexia and walk around weak, thin and dispirited.
We say fat is fantastic, cellulite is cultured and plumpies are passionate!’
In the event of Sir Cyril being unable to attend, he was asked instead for  a short message for the association's newsletter, ‘Tummy’.
Reply:Short and sharp: ‘Thank you for your letter.
I ask to be excused.
Sorry.’
Disappointed, we put in a request for a signed photograph of himself ‘head and torso if possible’ for the ‘Gallery of Girths’section in ‘Tummy’.
Cyril's hasty hand-written response exclaimed succinctly, ‘Herewith, as requested.
In haste, Sir Cyril.’
The photograph was of a cheery Sir Cyril's head & shoulders.
Service rating:No stomach for the fight.
We were gutted.
Nowadays, the adiposally-challenged need all the help they can get.
Margaret Thatcher OM FRS MP, Finchley
Request:The soon-to-be-retired Mrs Finchley was selected to write a short introduction for ‘The Twilight Zone’, ‘an anthology of essays from eminent people in the twilight of their careers.’
‘It must be stressed, however,’ we noted, ‘that the book has an optimistic tone, asserting that there is still much to be gained from life even in the quickening twilight years.’
Reply:Assistant Joan Foley replied that ‘Mrs Thatcher was interested to read your letter concerning your book, but sadly is unable to help on this occasion.
As you can imagine, she receives many requests of this nature, and it is simply not possible for her to respond positively to them all.’
Service rating:Self-defeating.
At this stage in the game, can she really afford to turn work down?
John Major PM MP, Huntingdon
Request:As President of the ‘Glad To Be Grey Society’, we contacted the PM to write a short passage extolling the virtues of greyness for our newsletter ‘Grey Pride’.
‘We discuss the benefits of greyness as it relates to our lives,’ we explained, ‘and also act as a support network for those who feel embarrassed at going grey.
‘What better way to show that going grey can lead to the heights of success and power than the example of a world leader such as yourself, John,’ we said.
We further requested a signed photo should the PM be unable to meet our request.
Reply:The Premier's deputy secretary Jonathan Haslam replied: ‘As I am sure you appreciate, particularly after recent events, the PM's schedule is such that he simply does not have time to contribute to your magazine.
However, as requested, I enclose a signed photograph.’
Interestingly enough, no such photo was enclosed.
Service rating:Quite considerably underwhelming.
Were all those charters really in vain?
And where's his name-tag?
Out!
Out!
Out!
Listen, do you want to be re-elected or what?
Edwina Currie MP, Derbyshire South
Request:The former holder of the parliamentary egg portfolio was asked to pen a brief preface to a book called ‘Egg On Their Faces’—‘a humorous anthology of incidents which have embarrassed people in the public domain.’
‘Included in the book,’ we noted, ‘will be famous falls — George Brown's drunken tumble down steps, Kinnock on the beach etc.
You get the general picture.’
A photo was requested for inclusion in the book, should Mrs Currie be unable to contribute.
Reply:Unfortunately, Mrs Currie was low on Commons notepaper and photos.
In response she simply returned our letter with the words ‘Sorry.
No’ added.
Service rating:Sorry.
None.
At least La Currie replied to our enquiries, no matter how brusquely.
The following five-star rudies preferred to remain resolutely out of touch…
Dennis Skinner MP, Bolsover
IGNORED our plea for him to address the ‘Southgate Semiotics Society’— a body ‘concerned with discussing the most poignant examples of what we believe to be ironic, individualist/regionalist and deconstructionist English.’
(Though maybe the non-response is a semiotic message in itself.)
Paul Boateng MP, Brent South
SHUNNED our interview request for a documentary on ‘Black Power: Looks, Clothes & Hairstyles’, which would explore the ‘gamut from Robin Givens's hair extensions and Craig Charles's pony-tail, to Normski's sunglasses and Nigel Benn's shorts.’
Rosie Barnes MP, Greenwich
BLANKED a complimentary letter from the ‘Proud To Be Plain Club’(‘we believe a woman can look average and human in public and still play a role in society’) asking her to be club mascot.
Mixed blessings
‘A word in your ear.
Next time, don't use your tongue’
‘Tell me more about this tall dark man’
‘Arthritis has been good to Arthur’
‘Ursula Andress!
What brings you to these shores?’
‘Hollywood legend or not, the white rat did it quicker’
‘This is the bacteriological police!
Throw out your Brie de Meaux and come out with your hands up!’
‘It's sad.
He moved on to build up quite a successful sub-post office, yet still people remember him for his first novel’
‘Him?
Oh, he's OK — for a screw’
WHO GIVES A MONKEYS?
A CRITICAL LOOK AT MODERN LIFE
by Richard Littlejohn
Punch's Demise
Mr Punch is the first recorded victim of chatricide.
He has been chattered to death.
Once, middle-class muesli-belt dinner party guests would choke on their chardonnay when they learned I wrote for the Sun .
More recently the revelation that I was also a Punch columnist has provoked an equally predictable and ill-informed reaction.
You wouldn't have thought a small-circulation satirical magazine could excite such ignorant indignation.
Not funny anymore, run by suits, staffed by schoolboys, bloody shame, should never have got rid of Malcolm Muggeridge.
That's what you'd expect from some of the bitter old farts who used to fill the magazine with self-indulgent whimsy about lawnmowers and the ex-colonial buffers who let their subscriptions lapse when India was granted independence.
It was more surprising coming from thrusting thirtysomethings who had probably never picked up a copy in their lives, certainly not since their last visit to the school dentist.
With sad paradox, Mr Punch himself became the man in the Bateman cartoon, unwelcome in polite company.
The posturing classes would no more admit to reading Punch than voting Tory.
Those responsible for the smear campaign were the self-centred old soaks who thought Punch should have remained a gentleman's club for geriatric minds, a sort of glossy version of Alzheimer's disease.
Most of them were never very funny themselves, although there were distinguished exceptions such as Alan Coren and Keith Waterhouse.
Impotent old devils and dried-up hags always deride the efforts of the young.
Others had tried the same demolition job when Ian Hislop took over at Private Eye , but the continued involvement of icons Ingrams and Cook helped him survive.
Many of the gloating obituaries were graceless and did no one any credit.
The magazine was in trouble long before David Thomas and his young guns attempted to give it a lifesaving bypass.
It would have been more worthy of those now dancing on Mr Punch's grave to acknowledge the part they played in his illness.
For my own part, I enjoyed reading the old Punch and writing for the new one.
But then, I don't suppose anyone gives a monkey's.
Oddjob club
Dr No?
It's about the vacancy
Bored with commuting?
A job with James Bond's villains promises plenty of adventure — but the penalty for failure is death.
All the same, MIKE CONWAY drummed up 200 eager applicants
Where do Bond villains get the staff?
Wherever 007 goes, he can be sure of encountering megalomaniacs set on world domination.
And every one of those evil hoodlums comes equipped with a horde of underlings, clad in silly uniforms and ready to die at a moment's notice.
Take, for example,Diamonds Are Forever .
The setting is Ernst Stavro Blofeld's oil rig, somewhere in the Gulf of Mexico.
The villainous head of Spectre is under attack from the US Air Force, M16 and the Florida Coastguard.
An eminent scientist, duped by Blofeld into working for ‘world peace’, tells his Mao-suited boss that the game's up.
‘Go back to your post or I'll have you shot!’ snaps back Blofeld.
Then, gliding slyly over to a nearby telephone, he sends new orders to a quivering goon with the immortal Bond film catchphrase: ‘Prepare my battle-sub immediately.’
Blofeld is not alone when it come to the Josef Stalin Caring Employer Award.
In Goldfinger , when the plan to nuke Fort Knox goes awry, the glitter-loving head of Auric Industries machine-guns his own men.
In Moonraker , beautiful specimens queue to join Sir Hugo Drax's space stud farm, unconcerned that he plans to blow up the world.
Even Nick-Nack, the dwarf assistant of triple-nippled assistant Scaramanga in The Man With The Golden Gun , shows loyalty beyond the call of duty.
How can one acquire such loyal employees?
If housewives can't get the help, how do megalomaniacs manage?
We decided to find out.
Working under the name of Professor Dent (a minor henchman in Dr No ) we contacted newspapers and magazines to see if they would take the following advertisements:
DOMESTIC STAFF VACANCY
Our client is an international gun collector and specialist precious metal firearm manufacturer.
After the sudden retirement of the previous postholder, we require a valet for duties at his home on a private island in the South China Sea.
Our client operates an equal opportunities policy and positively welcomes applications from ethnic minorities, Hispanics, the disabled, and persons of restricted height.
Please apply in writing to: Scaramanga Ltd, Fantasy Island, Hong Kong.
MAJOR EXPANSION DRIVE
We require central command staff to work at Crab Key, our magnificent Caribbean headquarters just outside Kingston, Jamaica.
Our military personnel structure combines the high standards and severe sanctions against personal failure you would expect with a more-than-generous salary.
Benefits include free uniform, seven weeks annual holiday (subject to Crab Key's alert status) and the opportunity to work with one of the world's finest scientific minds.
Definitely not a hands-on employer!
No experience necessary.
Hurry, hurry, hurry.
Interviews to take place as soon as possible.
Apply to: Dr Julius No, Bauxite Mine, Crab Key, PO Box etc.
INTERNATIONAL APPOINTMENTS
When the boss disappears, would you work on or wimp out?
The first is the kind of trainee we require at the Special Executive, a world-wide expert in breaking up and reassembling old bonds.
We are now involved in even bigger projects, and the successful candidates could work for such companies as Ernst Oil, Stavro Construction and Blofeld Engineering.
Most trainees enjoy privileged access to top executives.
These may be tough in their  methods, but if you survive, as we hope you do, the world will be your oyster.
You may even meet the chief executive himself, as he travels from site to site in his corporate battle-sub.
If you have what it takes, send CV and covering letter to: Klebb Memorial Suite, Smersh, PO Box etc.
STELLAR OPPORTUNITY
‘We at Drax Industries are experts at making the impossible happen.
Now, under the patronage of our founder, and employing equipment surplus to the Soviet space programme, we are working to see if humans really can live in space.
If you want to become a trainee ‘Master of the Universe’, simply write to: Hugo Drax Esq, SPECTRE, Dept .
‘Moon’, Sinistre, Switzerland, PO Box etc.’
Reaction was mixed.
Those canny Scots at the Glasgow Herald rejected Dr No's craven appeals.
‘I'm afraid we don't take adverts for foreign work,’ explained a telesales executive.
Ms London immediately smelled a rat.
Similarly, the Birmingham Post spurned the Scaramanga shilling.
Poor old Professor Dent had to be part of a company, or else it was no-go.
On his next outing, the Prof got smart.
The South London Press was faxed an advertisement on business notepaper, ‘Spectre Associates’ decorating the letter head, and listing a board of directors including ES Blofeld, Dr J No and V Stromberg CBE.
A reply was received but again no luck.
One office sent a covert fax to Professor Dent saying, ‘Keep this a secret but I'm very interested in the position.
Remember, you hold the key to my dreams in the palm of your hand.’
When phoned, the office told us that no such girl worked there.
Spooky…
Switching to a smaller scale, we placed advertisements in South London newsagents.
The response was terrible.
Only one letter came for Sir Hugo Drax, asking for ‘more details’.
And only one for Blofeld, saying, ‘It's people like you who are ruining the ecological balance of our very planet.’
The last resort was the Manchester Evening News , which finally ran our Goldfinger advert.
The response was impressive: more than 200 replies.
Of these, only four spotted the 007 connection.
A Mr Smith of Manchester, writing on notepaper emblazoned with an eagle and the legend, ‘TALON’ said, ‘I am a member of Mensa,’before adding, sagely, ‘Your company name looks familiar.’
Mr Whitehead of Withington wrote ,‘I must point out the startling resemblance between your advert and the basic storyline of the James Bond film Goldfinger .’
Even more ‘intrigued’ was Mr Ryan of Bolton, who quipped, ‘I have golf caddying experience and look good in a bowler hat.’
From Levenshulme came Mr Higgins, who was a bit of a Bond expert.
He said, ‘I have never heard of Auric Industries before, although I have heard of Auric Enterprises.
This concern was also based in Switzerland and Kentucky and made moves to expand in the Fort Knox area until the intervention of James of Universal Export.’
Of those applicants who were oblivious of Bond, most were, like the geriatric security officers and weedy office workers, sadly wide of the mark.
The 20-stone fork-lift truck operator was much more suitable, as was a private detective.
One former member of the Royal Corps of Signals had been to Hong Kong preventing the ‘illegal entry of persons’, which would have come in handy for protecting intruders at Goldfinger's headquarters.
Another was a chauffeur to a lord — just perfect for Herr Goldfinger's gentrified lifestyle of plus-fours, horses and mint juleps in the afternoon.
Many letters came from ex-army personnel, all of whom stressed their loyalty.
While not explicit, many implied that they would indeed fight to the death for their managing director.
Others were RAF or Navy veterans — a must for villains equipped with the latest hardware.
Their applications came complete with curricula vitae and official Discharge Certificates and Conduct Assessments.
Had we kept the scheme going, we could soon have accumulated a sizeable fighting force, ready to do battle on land, sea or air and happy to seize the controls of any passing battle-sub.
More to the point, we had proved that a Blofeld or No need never be short of hired hands.
All those who scoff at Ian Fleming's spy fantasies should think again.
There are more Oddjobs than you think.
Dr No: is he your idea of a hands on employer?
Oddjob from Goldfinger: who'd want his job?
James Bond gets it in the neck from Korean goon Oddjob
Auric Goldfinger: a firm but fair boss
Our ad to recruit henchman
‘Uh oh…‘
Charivari
Punch's weekly guide to the arts, entertainment, media and more…
Drawn into dirty pictures
A Roger Rabbit-style cartoon,Evil Toons , released on video this month, promotes itself like this: ‘Innocently the four girls unleash a nymphomaniacal cartoon monster from the pages of a spell-book which intends to scare more than the girls' pants off.’
But is the combination of sex and animation a new phenomenon?
Consider for a moment the following: Bugs Bunny — gay?
Rupert Bear — a purveyor of erotic fiction?
Captain Pugwash's chum — Master Bates?
Admittedly, the last one is a fake, but it took a lawsuit to convince the Daily Express that it wasn't true.
It was during the 1989 London Lesbian And Gay Film Festival that the organisers screened ‘damning evidence’ against Bugs Bunny.
They accused him of dressing up as a woman to seduce his enemies, and of fancying Elmer Fudd.
Even worse was their accusation that he encouraged Daffy Duck, Porky Pig and Elmer to cross-dress.
A spokesman for the festival commented, ‘He revels in that female garb.’
There were even suggestions that he change his catch-phrase to ‘What's up my frock, Doc?’
Meanwhile, back in Norwood, things may never be the same again.
Only last September every frame of Rupert Bear's new animated TV series had to be minutely examined after a Canadian animator decided to liven up Rupert's life.
In one frame he is pictured with a couple of magazines —Matrons In Leather and A Guide To Knickers And Spanking .
They were spotted by a five-year-old playing around with the freeze-frame on his parent's video.
A spokesman was provoked into calling the animator ‘irresponsible and unprofessional’.
Unfortunately, the latter insult is somewhat inaccurate: animators have a long history of injecting a little ‘adult’ spice into what is essentially a children's medium.
Nor is it the first time that Rupert's good name has been besmirched.
In 1971 he was a key figure in the Oz magazine obscenity trial.
The magazine had shown him in a ‘compromising position’ with Gypsy Granny.
The saga was started by ‘Grim’ Natwick, creator of Betty Boop.
He called her ‘a suggestion you could spell in three letters, S-E-X. — she was all girl.’
She started her life in 1930, loosely based on Mae West.
Over time she evolved, throwing kisses and hearts to the audience and lifting her skirts to reveal her thighs.
On occasion the animators got sufficiently carried away to draw in additional detail.
But before the invention of freeze-frames no one ever noticed.
The Daily Telegraph pointed out in Natwick's obituary, ‘Sex was her raison d'être .’
Indeed the authorities became so concerned that in 1935 she became the first cartoon character to be censored.
By 1939 she had made her last film.
Her cartoons were never innocent flirtation.
In one 1933 short,Boop-Oop-A-Doop , Betty is propositioned by Boss, the proprietor of a local circus.
This leads to a violent tussle between them with Betty refusing to yield.
Finally he is subdued, with Betty telling her friends, ‘He couldn't take my boop-oop-a-doop.’
In another sexual adventure,Is My Palm Read?, a palm-reader turns out the lights on her so that he can leer through her see-through skirt and blouse.
Fortunately for fans of Betty, her career did not die in 1939.
In the Seventies she made a come-back and played to full houses at the Institute of Contemporary Arts, re-coloured and with some discreet censorship.
In 1988, she made a cameo appearance in Who Framed Roger Rabbit , vying for the sexiest character award with Jessica Rabbit, she appeared in her original black and white amongst all the coloured-in cartoons.
The Roger Rabbit film provided an echo of the old days in more ways than one.
Jessica Rabbit (‘I'm not bad, I'm just drawn that way’) mimics her monochrome predecessor in a particularly notable scene.
Starring with the diminutive Bob Hoskins, she lets her breasts bounce on top of his head in a blur of movement that passes almost unnoticed to the naked eye.
Even the puritanical Disney organisation sees the benefits of combining sex and animation.
Their Epcot centre features a sex education cartoon.
Officially named The Making Of Me , it is affectionately known as ‘Shorty The Sperm Meets Ovette The Egg.’
Steve Smethurst
‘These lights seem to be taking a long time to change’
The SAFEWAYS
Boosted by a timely personal appearance by Margaret Thatcher, Giles Pincock — the Conservative candidate for Esher — had romped back to Westminster with a majority of 3 votes.
Sadly, however, the Esher result proved to be something of a RED HERRING.
Nationally, the Labour Party had enjoyed a stunning landslide victory.
GEOFFREY SAFEWAY, Giles Pincock's triumphant campaign manager, was lauded by the tabloids.
TORIES HOLD ESHER!
SAFEWAY SLAMS ‘DIRTY TRICKS’
CONSERVATIVES HOME IN SURREY!
TORIES WIN ESHER SEAT
TORIES ROUTED!
KINNOCK IN NUMBER TEN!
CONSERVATIVES WIN ONE SEAT!
BLOODY NORA!!
The disconsolate — yet irritatingly smug — Geoffrey was walking in the grounds of Pym Hall with his generous-mouthed wife, Laura…
AND, ALTHOUGH I'M FLATTERED THAT THE SUN IS TIPPING ME TO REPLACE CHRIS PATTEN AT CONSERVATIVE CENTRAL OFFICE, I MUSTN'T FORGET WHY I ORIGINALLY DECIDED TO BACK THE TORIES IN THIS ELECTION…
NAKED GREED?
PRECISELY!…
I'M DAMNED IF I'M GOING TO HANG AROUND IN BRITAIN AND BE SHAFTED BY NEIL KINNOCK — WE HAVE TO GET OFFSHORE, A.S.A.P.…
HOW?…
WELL, WHEN I OFFERED SIR WILFRED MY RESIGNATION, THE OLD BUGGER GAVE ME A SECOND-HAND YACHT HE'D PICKED UP AT AN AUCTION…
Eight days later in Plymouth…
THANKS FOR EVERYTHING, WILFRED — LOOK AFTER DAD…
WILL DO.
BYE-BYE, GRAMPS…
YOU OLD BENDER…
GOD I'M EXCITED, LAURA…
ISN'T SHE A BEAUTY?…
I SUPPOSE SO, BUT THE  DECK'S A LITTLE SLIPPE…
WHOOPS!…
Charivari wireless
Waving goodbye to the airwaves
JUDGE:
BIG EARS, you stand accused of writing 85 radio reviews in Punch .
How do you plead?
Big Ears:
Guilty.
Judge:
Do we have psychiatric reports?
Social Worker:
We do, m'lud.
The defendant is a cantankerous individual gripped by the dangerous delusion that his opinion matters.
Without warning he attacks perfectly charming people like Gloria Hunniford and Katie Boyle.
He has vilified Simon Bates with a campaign that amounts to persecution and he flies into a howling rage every time he hears Sing Something Simple (R2).
Judge:
But this programme is balm to millions, many of them toothless, gaga and slumped across a Zimmer frame.
Social Worker:
Quite so, your honour.
And yet Big Ears has publicly abused the Cliff Adams Singers and the Jack Emblow Quartet.
He has condemned the programme as depressive, blamed it for our low national morale, inquired on numerous occasions why they can't sing something sophisticated for a change and twice called upon the public to stick a pitchfork through Jack Emblow's  accordion .
(Uproar in court .)
Judge:
Silence in court!
Mrs Big Ears:
(Sitting in the public gallery ) I am his wife.
And look, this is his small son, Lobes.
And dribbling quietly beside me is Grandma Luggs.
We are all thrilled that we don't have to listen to his disgusting wireless any more.
It's a dead medium.
Nobody's interested.
(Thunderous applause in court .)
We want to follow Baywatch on ITV like everyone else.
What is more, radio reviewing is not a proper job for a grown man.
Big Ears just lies around all day ‘tuning in’.
And who cares what he thinks about Pete Tong's Essential Selection (R1)?
(Wild cheers .)
Judge:
Silence!
Silence!
Take that unruly woman from the court.
Big Ears, before sentence is passed do you have any last wish?
A cigarette?
A last meal?
Big Ears:
Yes, your grace, I would like to make one final attack on The Jamesons (R2).
Judge:
Very well.
Big Ears:
The Jamesons (R2) is the weirdest programme currently broadcast.
It veers from pieces that sound stilted and scripted to free-form passages when the Jamesons hold what they consider to be a conversation.
I also enjoy the outrageous effrontery of this former editor of the News Of The World displaying sadness that the tabloid press have ignored Princess Diana's wish that she should not be photographed in mourning.
Furthermore, Derek and his wife are obsessed with their ‘What's That Noise?’ competition.
Each week we have to listen to mystery hand drills and various bangs and hammerings as the Jamesons get increasingly excited about the whole thing.
Last week they played a new noise that was obviously the sound of a ball dropping into a roulette wheel.
The first caller came on the line.
‘It's a ball dropping into a roulette wheel,’ she said.
Yeah.
Hooray.
Congratulations.
You've won £5.
Listening to this programme it is very hard to see how their relationship works.
Derek is bombastic, opinionated and very happy to correct his wife in public.
She had not, for example, seen Silence Of The Lambs because she was ‘slightly horrified it would be too squeamish for me.’
Faced with this rank illiteracy, Derek steamed in and said…
Judge:
Stop, stop.
I have heard enough.
Big Ears, you will be taken from this place to receive a punishment in keeping with your crimes.
(He rises and dons a black hat .)
OFF WITH HIS EARS.
(Big Ears is led from the dock in handcuffs .
The rest is silence.)
Big Ears
Highlights from the famous case of Big Ears vs. the Crown:
Silence in court!
Surely we can listen to the radio?
EXHIBIT A — The carrier through which the disease was transmitted.
Comments overheard in the audience:
Now he'll be able to get a proper job.
MRS.
BIG EARS.
About time — he's always been a disappointment.
GRANDMA LUGG.
The family will be able to hold its head up again, Aurelia…
LAWRENCE BUBB (Trusted friend)
…without the weight of those ears!
HEARING AID (assistant.)
This ‘cathedral to ear removal’ was designed by the great grandson of Monsieur Guillotine himself.
AFTERMATH — the legal process is over and Mr Big Ears queues at the deed poll office:
Derek Jameson? lovely man…
Charivari music
Washed up — but eight great discs come too
‘AND THIS WEEK'S CASTAWAY IS…‘
‘Look, if you don't mind, Sue, I'd rather we skipped the biographical stuff.
It's only a short time to squeeze in eight gramophone records, isn't it?
Besides, I'd like to hear what your reaction to Albert Ayler is going to be.’
‘Albert who?’
‘Quite so.
I've never been very sure if the eight records are meant to be eight long-playing records or not.
I mean, eight singles hardly seems like anything at all.
And now we have CDs and all, you could squeeze in the St Matthew Passion and still have room for the rest.
Come to think of it, that's really been the biggest change in music since it started coming on ‘gramophone records’.
CDs have changed the whole show.
The future is going to be one long, looped soundtrack, a disc that just plays on for ever.
Music will be stored in such small compartments that people won't even have record collections that people won't even have record collections any more, they'll just have this sort of cartridge that plays things.’
‘Can we have record number one?’
‘Sorry, yes, I was carried away for a moment there.
I'd have to start with Louis Armstrong, the father of our popular music.’
‘What A Wonderful World’, then?’
‘Well, no.
I was thinking more of ‘Tight Like This’, made in 1928 and probably still the best record ever made.
Then, um, ‘Bird Gets The Worm’ by Charlie Parker, from 1947.
I doubt if we'll ever hear a man play a saxophone like that again.
I wonder if that one ever turned up on juke-boxes?’
‘Jolly interesting.
Would you try and escape?’
‘What's there to go back to?
Record shops that sell mostly videos, stadium shows with stars miming to tapes, the charts full of soap stars…all right, it's not as bad as all that.
‘When people ask if music's in a good or bad state, the answer has to be ‘good’.
Even if 95 per cent of it's rubbish — and it's usually been like that — the other five per cent is always going to be enough.
‘I'd like to stick with old records, though, and have ‘Charlie Brown’ by The Coasters on my makeshift but serviceable raft, because it always makes me laugh, and I love the saxophone solo.
Then something by The Detroit Spinners —‘I'll Be Around’ or ‘Games People Play’.
Romantic black music must be the best kind of pop.
You feel as if a group like the Spinners really mean it when they speak of tenderness and affection.
‘That's one of the things that keeps my faith in pop music, no matter what nonsense gets put out in its name.
It can still put across simple, direct feelings which cut through all the nonsense that goes into the selling of it.
That's why I'd choose Madonna, too, doing ‘Live To Tell’, which has so many layers of meaning that the simplicity of it can get forgotten.’
‘You only have three records left.’
‘Already?
Well, Scott Walker singing ‘Winter Night’.
Funny how an American caught the feel of a cold evening in England better than anyone else.
Tony Bennett doing ‘The Touch Of Your Lips’.
And Albert Ayler blowing his heart out on ‘Ghosts’, from Spiritual Unity .
Pity I can't play it for you now.’
‘And one luxury?’
‘I don't know.
Tie-pin.
Hedge-trimmer.
I suppose I'd like to feel safe in the knowledge that whatever else happens to music, people will just keep listening.
I think we all need it, after all.’
Richard Cook
film
Clear as a Belle
Rivette's shortened masterpiece is small but perfectly formed
THE MINEMA IN KNIGHTSBRIDGE makes a welcome reopening with La Belle Noiseuse: Divertimento (15), the shorter version of Jacques Rivette's splendid La Belle Noiseuse which runs for four hours and which we were shown the other day.
Shorter (the film at the Minema runs just over two hours) but not minor.
Divertimento still tells the story of the French painter (Michel Piccoli) who is distracted by the appearance of a young artist and his girlfriend (Emmanuelle Béart) from his determination to leave a portrait unfinished and live quietly with his wife in the country.
Now with the beautiful girl as naked model he works again — and disrupts his life.
I admit that I prefer the longer film, but that may be because I saw it first.
Possibly the emphasis in Divertimento on the actual act of painting (the hand of Bernard Dufour supplies the work on the canvas) is stronger.
Possibly the feeling for the hot French south is less marked; there may be shade less stress on the role of the model in a work of art.
But nothing vital is missed.
The miracle of sharing, as the audience of both versions shares, in the devotion of the artist to his work and in his emotional involvement is always the motivating force.
Divertimento gives you a chance of looking a second time, without much delay, from a slightly different point of view.
At any rate I am grateful.
‘I expect he's their warm-up man’
At the ICA cinemas Scorsese × 4 , a 75-minute programme of short, early and sometimes student films by America's distinguished Martin Scorsese.
An interview with the director's parents (memories of the past from the father, instructions on sauce-making from the mother) is dated 1974; it has reminiscent, personal touches.
The two earliest pieces come from the Sixties: a sketch looks at obsession with a painting, another hints at an interest in criminal society, and a rather later sketch (The Big Shave , 1967) has suggestions of future edgy jokes.
I am afraid I personally see not much of a guide towards, say, the brilliant Cape Fear .
Kuffs (15) MGM (Trocadero and Various Cannons) is about the San Francisco Patrol Specials, a body privately run to police some areas of the city with, apparently, considerable licence in the use of firearms.
The rather likeable hero is played by Christian Slater; Bruce A Evans directs.
Dilys Powell
Agent Orange by Haldane
THE END OF THE AFFAIR
‘MY MISSION IN ENGLAND COMPLETED, I WAS RECALLED TO WASHINGTON’
YOU LOOK EXHAUSTED, AGENT ORANGE, I THINK YOU SHOULD TAKE A VACATION
A VACATION — AT LAST…
‘I DECIDED TO GO HOME.
HOME TO MY PARENTS' PLACE.’
‘MOM AND POP CAME RUNNING TO MEET ME.
I FELT WARM,SAFE .
SAFER THAN I HAD FELT FOR A LONG, LONG TIME
‘AS WE SAT SIPPING COFFEE ON THE FRONT PORCH I TURNED TO MY PARENTS, SMILED AND SAID…
…
CAN YOU HEAR A WHOOSHING SOUND?
THE END 
Charivari theatre
One Haluva sterile show
HENRY IV Part I
ROBERT STEPHENS as Sir John Falstaff
Alarums: excursions.
Exeunt: Sir John Falstaff, the Caricaturist, a Midget — pursued by a Dog.
A RATHER STERILE EXCITEMENT pervades Adrian Noble's production of Henry IV, Part 1.
Bob Crowley's design divides the two worlds of the play into the chilly heaven of Henry's court, all censers and crucifixes, and the red hell of the Eastcheap tavern, a kind of multilevel beatnik car-park.
In these vast spaces, concepts rather than characters seem to be doing battle, prominent among them a prince who appears to be acting the part of the roistering boy because he feels it is expected of him.
Michael Maloney's Hal is a pleasant fellow who looks to Robert Stephens's rather subdued, warm-hearted Falstaff for the affection he doesn't get from his testy, disapproving father.
Anger and impulse don't seem to be a part of his make-up: when he parodies the swaggering Hotspur, we can already see the fastidious distaste for self-dramatisation that will make him disown Falstaff, just as, when he imitates his father, we can see the strength this quiet man derives from the stately deliberation of majesty.
It's a legitimate interpretation, but not a very thrilling one.
In the battlefield scenes, though, the swift, well-choreographed clashes pay off both visually and emotionally.
Accepted by the king at last, Maloney, no longer jolly Hal but Prince of Wales, straddles his fallen father to cross swords with Angus Wright's dashing Douglas.
Protective though this prince is, and tender with the supposedly dead Falstaff, we can see the steel has emerged; the torch has already been passed.
In the minor parts, Joanne Pearce makes an adorable, pouty Doll Tearsheet.
Sylvestra le Touzel, as Percy's wife, swishes back her skirt to indicate hauteur and then carries on playing a petulant Sloane.
Strange how the most unlikely lines can show their age.
‘It's much better out of a bottle,’ says a character in The Chalk Garden (1956) to a servant preparing the salad dressing, encapsulating the post-war world of anti-sensuality in which the gourmets began at Calais.
Enid Bagnold's creepy comedy is dated in more subtle ways as well—‘She's behind the escallonia hedge,’ sounds like a line dropped from a Beatrice Lillie sketch — but, in this strongly cast production, it also retains much of its original charm and piquancy.
Though the King's Head deserves credit for mounting this version, its venue, unfortunately, is the biggest drawback to enjoying it.
Like Mark Rayment's direction, the playing space is tightly constricted, making what should be eerie merely precious.
I haven's seen the film but I can imagine that it would be a great advantage to be shown the highly symbolic garden and to breathe the house's atmosphere of sunny perversity.
Constance Cummings, with her bossy graciousness, infuses some air into the play, as in her dismissal of the fact that her new governess has no references: ‘I never listen to what one woman says about another.’
Mrs St Maugham has hired Miss Madrigal (a deceptively serene Jean Marsh) to look after her granddaughter, Laurel, who, after a sexual assault, has become an irritatingly smug little pyromaniac.
The mystery of Miss Madrigal's past plays against the question of Laurel's future: will she leave the barren chalk garden for life outside with her remarried mother?
Bagnold contrives a clever and, at times, poignant battle of the females.
But there is a huge hole where the play's heart should be — in the warped relationship of Mrs St Maugham and her daughter.
Their encounters, confined to a couple of uninformative scuffles, make the eccentric old lady out, finally, to be fretful rather than evil.
A friendly wave, before we go, to a most amusing Robert Austin as the earthy, peevish servant, who busts out, at the self-dramatising Laurel, ‘I was found in a field.
I don't make a fuss about it.’
Rhoda Koenig
NEXT WEEK IN PUNCH
Erm…
Not as funny as it used to be.
Now it's official.
Punchbag
Letter of the week
I was distressed to read of the imminent closing of Punch .
I am a recent subscriber, having recently renewed my subscription for a second year and I have enjoyed every issue that has come to me in the post.
The Spring Edition was really one of the best.
I was recently diagnosed with a malignant tumour and expect to observe my 42nd birthday in hospital.
I was really looking forward to having fresh issues of Punch at my bedside table during recovery.
You should know, at least, that Punch has given me much laughter.
I, for one, shall miss it.
We cannot thank you all enough for the kind letters of support and assistance.
Some of you generously sent in cheques and one loyal reader even sent a glazed Amazonian plant seed.
Purely as a gesture of solidarity, you understand.
Unfortunately, we don't have room to print all the hundreds of letters we received.
But who knows, the illustrious Mr Punch may yet ride again at some time in the future.
A time to die
Rotten luck.
Don't take it personally or too much to heart.
All the very best to you and the lads over there.
Electrode therapy
No, you can't do it!
You must deploy Mr Bargepole equipped with a pair of electrodes and a can of Aqua Regia in the MD's office of United Newspapers and not let him at it until he has secured your reprieve.
Failing that, make Punch a monthly instead of a weekly and charge us more.
Punch , in particular Bargepole's column, is the only thing keeping me in England at the moment.
PS How about a Bananaballs-style appeal to keep Punch in print?
No cant do
They mentioned it on BBC TV yesterday.
How terribly sad.
You made such an effort — amusing, entertaining, bright — laughing at hypocrisy and cant.
As a reader of over 60 years I never found you more stimulating.
I wrote you that before.
If an old man thinks so, what is happening to the young?
Can only mean and pornographic smut survive in the Thatcherite Britain of the Nineties?
They said that Private Eye and the Sunday papers knocked you out.
I cannot see that.
What is going to happen to all you bright people?
I hope you will soon find your feet again.
Tender is the knight
With the obvious exception of Clement Freud [Note: that's Sir  Clement Freud who said on our 150th anniversary, ‘I would do nothing for Punch except cheer for its demise.’], everyone must be saddened by this week's news.
I first read Punch in the school library in 1962 and have read it ever since.
I like my humour served up intelligently and well presented.
I don't want it poured over my head from a bucket in a comic that only appeals to the most basic and obvious, nor do I want to read the photo-copied scribblings of an undergrown fifth-former.
What will be the alternatives now?
I'd be prepared for you to go fortnightly.
Bloody hell, I'd even settle for a monthly but Punch shouldn't be allowed to just expire.
I'll feel that I've lost a good friend.
Housewife's choice
I wish you and your staff to know how sorry I am that Punch is to be no more.
I loved it and I am not a ‘yuppie’— I'm a 45 plus housewife/mum/part-time worker.
What is to become of you and Guttersnipe and particularly Bargepole?
Who is or was he incidentally?
Ad luck
The Bunyip Magazine 's heartfelt condolences go out to you all in this blighted advertiser-dependent electronic media world.
Your publication has given some of the world's best humorists and cartooonists their most memorable exposure and has inspired countless others to pick up the pen and make complete fools out of themselves.
The world of satire will surely be greatly and irrevocably diminished when the ink wells finally dry up at Ludgate House.
Best of luck to you all.
Shock of the news
I am writing to convey how shocked and saddened I am at the news.
I have always found the quality to be of an extremely high standard and presumed that with the publicity generated by the 150th anniversary celebrations last year, there would have been an increase in interest in the magazine.
Punch is certainly one of the great British institutions, and has become so much a way of life as to make it impossible to imagine a world without it.
The real Mr Punch writes
Oh, what a pity!
On behalf of the members of the Punch and Judy Fellowship and, indeed, Mr Punch himself, may I express our sincere condolences.
Mr Punch wishes to assure you that he has had many a good belly laugh from the magazine which bore his name for so many years.
The old rascal is still very much alive and kicking — he is 330 years old on 9 May this year — and looks forward to several more centuries of roguery yet!
Really, truly, awful
This is awful news.
Total disaster — how am I going to exist without you?
And why now, when the magazine is better than ever?
Will be crossing everything in the hope of a last minute reprieve.
Yours wretchedly 
Laughing in the dark
I was horrified, and very sad, to hear the news.
Punch has provided me with laughter on many dark (and good) days, and I shall badly miss it.
There is no comparable magazine in England (Private Eye is incomprehensible and Viz , shall we say, lacks subtlety).
Please accept my thanks.
A hundred years of jollitude
My family has taken Punch since 1892.
In my opinion it was good before 1900 but lost its bite under Owen Seaman.
I never thought much of A A Milne.
I think that you have made the magazine more interesting, more satirical and funnier than it has been this century.
There is something wrong when Viz sells and Punch doesn't.
Perhaps at the last moment an angel will appear.
Peerless and ga-ga
What will happen to you, David?
I've started reading your column in the Sunday Express but that won't satisfy my insatiable appetite for your peerless wit.
I would be grateful if your last issues are full of Private Eye and Ian Hislop bashing — the smug munchkin.
All tried out
You tried, mate.
Christ, how you tried!
You and the others.
Thank you for it and best wishes for your futures.
Pass it on.
Scroll over
It is with great sadness that I write this letter having been informed of the possible demise of what can only be the most important publication since the Dead Sea Scrolls.
I have over 400 bound volumes, 24 years short of a complete run, plus over 150 compilation publications, numerous almanacs, diaries, specials, postcards etc.
As you can see I take my Punch , so to speak, rather seriously.
May I thank you all once more for an excellent publication and wish you all well for the future.
A cartoonist writes
Devastated to hear the news.
I'm sure you must feel pretty bloody at the moment but look on the bright side, you could be Belgian.
Anyway, as I have been given more recognition and opportunity to draw to my strengths under your editorship, I would like to express my appreciation and thanks for giving me a ‘go’.
At least we know it didn't fall through lack of effort.
Another cartoonist writes
During the late Fifties, Sixties and early Seventies, I was a contributor as a cartoonist under the pseudonym Pav.
I remember the feeling of joy on having my first cartoon accepted.
Ralph Steadman was said to have run down the street telling passers-by, including bewildered elderly ladies, that he had got ‘one in Punch !’
The Sixties was the golden age for cartoonists.
Please accept my sincere wishes for the future.
Short and sweet
Dear Mr Punch, don't do it.
(I'll miss you.)
With best wishes,
Kiwi fruitcake
New Zealand television has just announced the impending demise of Punch .
I have read Punch for years through the public library.
I am horrified to think that there could be 120,000 Kiwis of Scots descent who are doing the same as me and depriving you of decent circulation.
I'm only 47.
If Punch dies, how do I keep sane for the next 40 years!!
Goodbye old friend
I weep at the impending demise of my oldest and supportive friend!
How am I and the family I have brought up to love Punch going to survive?
Who says it's no longer funny?
I was introduced to Punch at the age of 12, grew up on Basil Boothroyd and have relied on my weekly ‘fix’ to get me through life's crises over the past 47 years — including moving house six times, several bereavements, liquidation (yes, me too!!), my daughter's attempted suicide and my recent divorce.
No fooling
This is one letter that I didn't want to write.
I have just heard that without a buyer Punch will close.
This is, of course, April Fool's territory but I think this is real.
What can I say?
Maybe it could be done monthly rather than the punishingly weekly?
Don't you wish you had a couple of million quid?
I do.
Taking life for granted
If you do close then it will pretty conclusively solve my dilemma about whether or not I could have afforded to tap 50 quid out of my grant for a subscription next term.
‘Have ten bloody subscriptions — free!
On the house!’ you are probably mumbling to yourself as you polish off the bottle of Jim Beam meant for the 15 April issue winner.
Well, if you want something to drink to, this one will make you laugh — I was actually nurturing the idea of working for you one day.
Cheers!
From bad to verse
Bad luck.
I wrote you a little poem, in memoriam, before Ian Hislop and Co. do:
POEM BY J P FAIRLEY, AGED 35½
So, farewell then Punch —
gone to the great dentist's waiting room in the sky.
Doomed, perhaps, in an
age when (as Keith's mum says)
readers prefer tits to titters.
Let's hope your redundancy cheques
gave you the last laugh.
All the best to everyone there — you all tried brilliantly.
Ray of light
Predictably, you seem to be getting all the flak for the Bill Davis/Alan Coren years of stagnation and complacency that led to the Punch you inherited a while back.
More surprising, to me, about the present sorry situation, is how the old regimes managed to get away for so long with presiding over such a ragbag and still getting all that advertising!
Best wishes and thanks for making the old rag worth reading again for a few years…
Jewel from the clown
This week's offering (25 March) was a gem — the epitome of the revitalised Punch .
The cartoons were hilarious, Guttersnipe was at the height of his form, Hind and Mosco were up to their mischievous tricks.
What more could I want?
Don't let Toby get too far and don't let him run away to the moon again.
At a gloss
It's not REALLY true, is it?
The ghastly glossy mags for the Working Women Of The Nineties simply don't have caption competitions.
Nor do the mags aimed at Homemakers With-Beastly Babies contain anything remotely amusing…
I am shocked and upset, but look forward to my invitation to call round to help drink up stocks of Jim Beam.
And finally…
If the modern world no longer has room for Punch , I'm not sure that I have any room for the modern world.
They think it's all over…it is now.
Charivari drink
I drink, therefore I am
The sad life of a wine writer
IT IS NOT the free trips that I am going to miss.
Nor the samples that the postman has kindly left on the doorstep these last few years, thereby avoiding the abuse I was wont to hurl from the bedroom window at anything that made a noise before 8.30am.
What I am going to miss is the opportunity to pontificate in peace, without let or hindrance, as Punch has let me do for eight years.
For instance, among the veritable rarities that have come my way in that time, I have had at least as many disappointments as pleasant surprises.
The more I drink, the more I am persuaded that young wines offer most pleasure; a constantly renewable resource, popping up fresh every year.
It is often more fun to taste a wine's potential than wait years for it to reach a maturity that may not be so splendid after all.
The beauty is that wine never stands still.
The bottle you tasted six months ago is now softer and more appealing; the one you drank yesterday should have lost its sharp edges by the summer.
Just as you think you have found a magical Pinot Noir at a price you never believed possible, somebody else seduces you with an even better one, 50p cheaper.
Just as you have written off the 1991 vintage in France, a sample appears on the doorstep to confound you.
Just as you think you have a job for life, the magazine folds.
So it is the wine's variety that appeals most.
It surprises and it is not always well ordered.
Trying to discover what grapes go into an Italian vino da tavola called Concerto is next to impossible.
Italy is a black hole as far as regulations are concerned; they disappear without trace.
And Italians seem to have the most matter-of-fact attitude to drinking wine; they take it for granted, just like the bread and salt on the table.
The absence of reverence for wine is what endears one to the Italian approach.
Anybody who reveres wine has got it all wrong.
Wine is intended to be drunk, as I aim to be shortly after finishing this.
I shall now have to find a new Saturday morning job.
This one used to occupy me till coffee time.
I may read the papers, or perhaps just stay in bed wondering if there's anything on the doorstep.
Bargepole
This rainswept airfield in the mad heart of England seems as good a place as any to contemplate my own demise.
Half a century ago, youths in Wellington bombers flew out to deal death and have it dealt to them in return; now the American F-111s roar overhead, and, from time to time, a plume of orange flame and a cloud of smoke appear on the horizon to remind us all that dishing it out and taking it are widely differing talents.
I have been dishing it out for  a number of years, and now it is my turn to take it.
How does it feel?
Piece of cake.
No sweat.
Frankly, it's you I worry about.
This week you will vote for the next government, and I shall not be around to ventilate, on your behalf, your righteous rage at the disgusting results of your electoral behaviour.
I shall be gone, but you will have to live with the consequences, and no more passing off my stuff as your own at the office.
I worry about you; yes I do.
How will you manage?
The parade of lunacy and corruption will continue, but all you will be able to do is go red in the face, mobilise glycogen from your under-used body, build up huge deposits of cholesterol in your coronary arteries and eventually explode, collapse and croak.
I wish, like Arthur or King Stephen, I could tell you that I will return when the hour comes round again; that, one day in the future, some public relations executive, some politician or health fascist, some snivelling egalitarian with dandruff in his eyebrows, some stunted corporatist with a filthy mind will go too far, and with a bright flash, a smell of freshly-oiled leather and the sound of a celestial whip cracking, I will once more be among you, eyes blazing, tongue wagging ten to the dozen, and in my bronzed and muscular arms a lovely cornucopia of drugs, women and vulgar abuse.
But I cannot.
I cannot make such a promise.
Why, even the executives — clever men,ambitious men, men with briefcases full of management accounts and demographics — cannot make such a promise.
So you are on your own from now and serves you right.
All I can do is offer you a little advice.
I don't see why the hell I should, but here goes.
1.
We live in filthy times, and if you find yourself in tune with the Zeitgeist you will know you are doing something wrong.
Other symptoms of a life coming off the rails include smarmy phone calls from your bank manager, ownership of any item from the Innovations Catalogue , saying ‘Thank you,’ after sex, and actually quite liking Jonathan Ross.
Symptoms of a life securely established include heavy drinking, constant sexual harassment, contumely, hospitalisation, bankruptcy and death.
If you have a nice circle of friends, professional people mostly, one of them is actually a judge — a judge!— then there is no cure and you must kill yourself.
2.
Do not go to EuroDisney, or patronise anywhere or anything with a capital letter in the middle of its name.
3.
If you work for a company which insists that you drive a particular brand of car, resign, first writing off the car in an accident in which two teenage hookers and a hallucinating macaw reach a rather untimely end.
4.
Keep your dirty hands off any woman whose name has been mentioned in this column, or it will go worse for you.
5.
If the pressure becomes unbearable, take up a hobby, but make sure it is a suitable one.
Unsuitable hobbies include philately, railway archaeology, home computing, golf or anything which has a magazine devoted to it.
Suitable hobbies include merchant banking, astrophysics, gynaecology, pyrotechnics and troilism.
6.
Make sure that your dress fits your station in life.
There is no station in life for which grey Clark's slip-on shoes are appropriate, save that of junior regional sales executive for a white goods chain-store.
7.
Express your anger.
It hardly matters what you are angry about, so long as you convey clearly the message that you are on the point of a serious psychotic meltdown and anyone getting in your way is liable to be no more than a bag of pimply skin and bone shards lying in a pool of blood within seconds.
If you cannot think of anything to be angry about, you need help.
Sources of anger are all around you.
The climate.
The licensing laws.
Mr Major.
Mr Kinnock.
Television cissies.
‘Male interest’ magazines.
The man who invented foil-embossed paperback covers.
Aids activists.
The man who truncated the glorious French litany —‘Cette sauce…’ on the HP bottle.
Architects.
European federalists.
People who say ‘I think you'll like it,’ as they give you something horrible to eat or drink, cow's rumen in bilberry vinegar, say, or that coconut liquor peasants use to salve their verrucas.
Women who ask if you'll respect them in the morning when you don't even respect them now.
The people who closed down Punch .
Use your imagination.
Because now you really are on your own.
This is it: the very last words on the very last page of the very last issue of Punch .
It's a privilege; I'd say more, but I would only be cut for the usual reason, lack of 
‘I'm going to be sick — in about half an hour’
Tailpiece
United Newspapers has been the proud owner of Punch since 1969.
Even before then the circulation of the magazine had been steadily falling and attempts by able editors and publishers failed to stem this sales decline.
Punch played a central role in the evolution of satirical humour and in creating opportunities for the cartoonist and the illustrator.
It will be famed as such.
The celebration of Punch's 150th anniversary was an important publishing landmark.
But titles and businesses can't survive as landmarks and in the last advertising revenue increasingly moved into the proliferating newspaper magazine supplements.
Punch is an institution as it will probably be so remembered.
But, in spite of the considerable effort and investment, it has for many years failed to pay its way.
It is with sadness, but with realism, that it closes.
Caption competition
I'LL BE GLAD WHEN THESE HESELTINE PHOTO-CALLS ARE OVER!
NOW, A PHOTO OF JUST THE TWO OF YOU, MR WYATT