

Advanced Fuels
Clean your engine as you drive
You can tell when it's Shell
ADVANCED FUELS
Shell Advanced Fuels clean your engine as you drive.
The washing liquid in Shell fuels cleans inside your engine just as a washing machine cleans your clothes.
All Shell Advanced petrols and diesel contain a unique detergent that cleans the inlet system of the engine as you drive.
We've spent years developing the perfect formulation.
As you can imagine, it's rather effective.
Independent tests have proved that Shell Advanced petrol will keep your engine three hundred per cent cleaner than ordinary fuels.
The dirt that Shell Advanced removes is carbon.
All engines produce it.
It's a by-product of combustion.
(rather a lot of which goes on inside an internal combustion engine.)
Left to its own devices, carbon will accumulate in your engine's inlet system.
Heat will bake a filthy black crust of the stuff onto the fuel injectors (or carburettors), inlet ports and valves.
These are the vital components of your engine's breathing system.
As it thickens, the carbon will gradually choke it.
Even relatively small carbon deposits can reduce engine performance.
They will also increase fuel consumption and the level of undesirable emissions from the exhaust.
Starting the engine can become difficult, and flat spots will disrupt the power curve.
Today's high performance engine technology means higher temperatures inside the engine owing to their more efficient combustion technology.
And today's slippery aerodynamics, whilst improving a vehicle's penetration through the air, actually divert the flow of cooling air away from the engine bay.
More heat means more carbon.
So a modern engine can need decarbonising in as little as 20,000 miles from new.
Unless, of course, it runs on Shell Advanced.
In which case the build-up of carbon deposits will be prevented.
(The detergent also has the power to reduce the build-up of damaging deposits from older engines.)
With the engine breathing freely, it will perform at its best.
It will start more easily, run more smoothly, delivery more power and consume less fuel.
And if your car is fitted with a catalytic converter, Shell Advanced will help enhance the catalyst's performance.
Maintenance costs will be reduced because the engine will stay in tune — and you won't be paying for it to be stripped and decarbonised.
And because Shell Advanced reduces carbon monoxide emissions by 13%, compared with ordinary fuels, it's less harmful to the environment.
When you take into account the effectiveness of this remarkable detergent, and the fact that Shell Advanced Diesel also contains singularly effective ingredients to reduce foaming and smell, you will appreciate why we call all Shell fuels ‘Advanced’.
Manufacturers like Porsche and Audi are sold on them.
They agree you really can tell when it's Shell.
Follow their advice.
Make regular use of Shell's washing machines to protect your engine and save money.
Which fuel should you choose?
All Shell fuels are Advanced, with one to suit every type of vehicle.
Look out for the special colour coding on the pump nozzles and hoses to check which grade you need when re-fuelling your car, van, truck or motorcycle.
Unleaded (minimum octane of 95) is for all petrol vehicles that do not need lead for ‘valve’ lubrication.
Most cars on the road today can run on this grade.
All new cars since October 1990 are manufactured to do so, whilst some older cars may need a simple adjustment to their engine timing .
Super Plus Unleaded (minimum octane of 98) is for a small number of cars that actually need a higher octane unleaded fuel or that have not been specifically adjusted to run on 95 Octane Unleaded.
All cars with catalytic converters must use an unleaded grade.
4-Star (minimum octane of 97) is a leaded petrol for cars that cannot use one of the two unleaded grades .
Advanced Diesel is for all diesel engined vehicles.
Its high Cetane number of 54–56 (compared to a British Minimum of 48 Cetane), gives a more rapid and complete combustion with less smoke and engine noise.
A powerful cleaning ingredient and inhibitor cleans and protects the injectors.
A special anti-foam additive also gives a more complete fill-up with less spillage, and a deodorant reduces smell .
Not all fuels are the same
THE SHELL AIR MILES CLUB
For drivers who are really going places
AIR MILES Travel the World
COLLECT AND FLY
The further you drive with Shell Advanced Fuels, the further you could fly!
Shell has teamed up with Air Miles to launch The Shell Air Miles Club — and as a member, you can collect 2 FREE Air Miles for every 25 litres of Shell Advanced Fuels and every litre of Shell Oil you buy.
Take advantage of this brand new collecting opportunity and you could soon be aboard a British Airways scheduled flight to any one of 140 international destinations.
Alternatively, use Air Miles to get generous discounts on holidays with leading tour operators.
Or choose an allinclusive City Break specially arranged by Air Miles.
Membership of The Shell Air Miles Club provides these new and exciting travel opportunities.
You'll receive a distinctive personalised Club card with which you can claim you Air Miles at participating Shell Stations.
Imagine — with Air Miles you don't have to wait for your annual summer holidays to come around.
Why not take an extra break at no extra cost — courtesy of Shell and air Miles?
Remember, the more you buy, the further you fly.
So make Shell your first port of call every time you need fuel — and watch those Air Miles add up.
And, of course, you Shell Air Miles Club membership will help you get further, faster.
Your card will be recognised at every participating Shell Station up and down the country.
2 FREE Air Miles with every 25 litres of Shell Advanced Fuels or with every litre of Shell Oil.
SHELL ACCOUNT CARD
For the local business it's the business
You can tell when it's Shell
SHELL ACCOUNT CARD
WE VALUE YOUR CUSTOM.
As a regular and valued customer at your local Shell station we are pleased to be able to offer you or your company the opportunity to apply for the Shell Account Card.
We may already have built a rewarding business relationship together and feel that by offering you the shell Account Card this will help to consolidate it.
The card signifies our regard for you as an important customer who warrants priority attention at our service station.
A SIMPLER WAY TO PAY.
Most importantly, it presents the account holder with a more convenient and straightforward way to pay for fuel, servicing and shop sales.
The Shell Account Card provides for a fast efficient transaction and eliminates the need for cash or cheques.
It also gives you the greatest possible control over costs, because your fuel, servicing and shop sales are centralised at our service station.
Regular statements can simplify book-keeping by detailing VAT and are approved Customs & Excise documents.
Payment by automatic direct debit will further relive your administrative burden.
And you'll find our billing methods are flexible enough for us to agree whichever best fits in with your existing accounting system and credit period preference.
A VERY PERSONAL SERVICE.
Furthermore, of course, there are the benefits — with which you are already familiar — of the personal service which is reserved for our most valued local customers.
Offering you the Shell Account Card is a away for us to demonstrate our appreciation of your custom, and our resolve to continue doing our utmost for you in the future.
The formalities of putting the Shell account into operation involve a minimum of paperwork.
All that remains is for us to discuss and agree your particular account requirements.
We look forward to welcoming you as one of our Shell Account Card customers.
THE VERY IMPORTANT BENEFITS OF THE SHELL ACCOUNT CARD.
Convenient fuel and service purchasing.
The Shell Account Card will only make the purchases you authorise — eg. fuel only; fuel and oil; fuel, oil, servicing and shop sales; named drivers only; specific vehicle registration numbers only.
Credit periods and trading terms to suit your business.
Security: computerised transaction data collection and itemisation reduces costly human errors.
Mileage may also be included if required.
Invoicing intervals planned to fit in with your existing accounting methods.
Simplified administration: detailed invoices from your local station can itemise VAT; payments can be made automatically by direct debit, to save you time on paperwork.
Improved cost control — nowadays more important than ever for local businesses — as invoices can list who has been buying what and when on your Shell account, and the card can remove the need to settle your account with cash or cheques.
The card immediately signals you as an important customer.
Produced on Environmentally Friendly Paper.
VODAPAGE
BUSY PEOPLE GET THE MESSAGE
Don't be a Nigel…
VODAPAGE
ARE YOU GETTING THE MESSAGE?
Do you ever wish you could get a message to somebody quickly when they are out and about?
Or have you ever wishes there was some way that someone could contact you…
A vital telephone number, news of that big order, a cancelled appointment or a message that you're needed.
Paging from Vodapage gives busy people like you the freedom to go about your business and get the message.
PAGING WHEREVER YOU ARE
The Vodapage National Paging Network is the fastest-growing UK paging network and offers the most cost-effective form of mobile communications available.
Four regions cover over 98% of the UK population so from these it's easy to select the right coverage package.
Then, choose from the range of Tonecall, Codecall and Wordcall pagers and find the rental or purchase package to suit you.
Whichever option you choose, you can be sure that the monthly fee is fixed and messages from anywhere in the UK are only charged at local call rate — no hidden extras.
EASY-TO-USE
Paging is a simple but fast way to keep in touch.
To send a message to a Wordcall pager, simply call the Vodapage 24-hour Bureau Service, quote the pager number you wish to call and state your message — up to 80 characters.
And for Tonecall and Codecall pagers, it's even simpler!
You can send tone and numeric messages from any DTMF phone.
Either way your message will be transmitted over the Vodapage Network and typically received within 60 seconds — fast and reliable communication.
ONE MONTH'S RENAL FREE
Take advantage of Vodapage's special offer to you — the first month's rental on every pager FREE OF CHARGE!!
DON'T BE A NIGEL!!
Get the message from your office, your customers and your family — Call Vodapage on 0399 1111 (Local call rate) or return the reply-paid card NOW!!
Sandra hears from the office…
SHE GET THE MESSAGE
Because Frank's got the message…
HE'LL GET THE JOB!
Julie's kids must be home, she'd better rush…
JULIE GOT THE MESSAGE
BRITAIN'S MOST COST-EFFECTIVE PAGING COVERAGE
Four region covers over 98% of the UK population so from these it's easy to select the right coverage package.
‘Carry on enjoying your life in your own home with a Stannah Stairlift…‘
SEND FOR A FREE INFORMATION PACK.
Glide upstairs on a Stannah.
The easiest and least expensive way to retain your freedom and independence.
It's a beautiful answer to the ‘stair problem’, just sit comfortably (or stand) and glide up or down smoothly and safely.
Stannah Stairlifts can go easily round corners and fold up when not in use so others can use the stairs.
They come in a range of models, all with a choice of options, colours and fabrics to suit you and your home.
Save the cost and trouble of moving home.
Automatic push button control.
Fully Approved to British Safety & quality standards.
Nationwide service and advice.
Stannah Stairlifts 
Carry on enjoying life with a Stannah
How do you dispose of a disposable nappy hygienically?
With Sangenic.
Sangenic The most hygienic way to dispose of disposables.
As many parents have discovered, the problem with disposable nappies up to now has been with that word ‘disposable’.
Yes, you can put them in bags and carry them out to the bin.
But this is an old fashioned and potentially unhygienic method.
Furthermore, mixing up used disposables with the rest of the household rubbish makes it difficult to recycle them afterwards.
And that's a pity, because the technology for recycling is being developed.
That's why Sangenic is the invention that disposable nappies have been waiting for.
For like all great ideas, Sangenic is simple, safe, easy to use, environmentally sound — and economical into the bargain.
Outwardly, Sangenic is a light, portable yet sturdy plastic container.
Inside, it contains a cassette of strong film for totally cocooning those smelly nappies from the outside world.
Having folded your used nappy, you simply insert it into the tub.
Then give it a short twist.
Instantly, the nappy is compacted and sealed — without smells, germs or mess.
Sangenic can take about three days' supply of soiled nappies before it needs emptying.
When it's full, Sangenic is simply emptied — and out come your chain of sealed nappies.
And we mean sealed .
The film has a gentle fragrance, which will please your dustman when he calls.
The relief is tremendous.
And so is the sheer convenience!
You won't be surprised to hear that Sangenic is already being used in maternity wards.
Sangenic cares for the environment in three ways.
Firstly, it hygienically collects and stores soiled nappies.
Secondly, it uses the minimum amount of film to cocoon each nappy.
And thirdly, everything used is itself in tune with the recycling technology being developed.
Sangenic also has the advantage of providing very good value for money.
Each cassette can easily wrap up to 180 nappies.
Result: not only is disposal much more hygienic than other methods, but it's also cheaper.
The most hygienic way to dispose of ‘disposables’— Sangenic is that, all right.
But it's more.
Sangenic is so easy and quick to use that it allows you more time to care for your baby.
In short, Sangenic is the most modern, most environmentally friendly and most economic way to dispose of disposable nappies!
AROUND THE HOME THINK!
SAFETY!
FIRST!
ALWAYS BUY SAFE TOYS AND NEVER KEEP BROKEN TOYS
STORE HOUSEHOLD CHEMICALS AND MEDICINES CAREFULLY
KEEP YOUR HOME TIDY AND PREVENT FALLS
SELECT THE RIGHT TOY FOR THE RIGHT AGED CHILD
dti the department for Enterprise
Huggy's HOME SAFETY TIPS
Every year 960,000 children in the U.K. go to hospital following accidents in and around the home.
Many of these accidents simply needn't happen and Huggy's Home Safety Tips are designed to help prevent them.
1.
ALWAYS BUY SAFE TOYS AND NEVER KEEP BROKEN TOYS Pick only quality toys from reputable trader — one you know, or one of a well known chain of shops.
Check all toys carefully to make sure that they do not have sharp edges.
If a toy is wrapped in a plastic bag make sure that you keep the bag out of the reach of children.
Always throw away broken toys and don't give them to others — it just passes on the risk of accidents to someone else.
2.
KEEP YOUR HOME TIDY AND PREVENT FALLS Always put things away, falls are the greatest single type of accident in the home.
Falling over toys that have been left lying around can be fatal for elderly people and very serious for children.
3.
SELECT THE RIGHT TOY FOR THE RIGHT AGED CHILD A safe toy becomes a danger if it is in the hands of too young a child.
Look for any safety warnings and if it says NOT SUITABLE it means what it says.
Young children can choke on toys with small parts.
Remember that this also applies to young children playing with small toys like marbles with older brothers or sisters.
4.
STORE HOUSEHOLD CHEMICALS AND MEDICINES CAREFULLY Household chemicals and medicines can look like soft drinks or sweets to children.
Always store them in their original containers, out of sight and reach of children and if possible locked up.
For further help and advice about Home Safety please contact your local Trading Standards Officer at the Council Offices.
CUT OUT AND KEEP
Issued by the Consumer Safety Unit.
Department of Trade and Industry.
Huggy's CORNER
5 PEUGEOT CYCLES MOUNTAIN BIKES (INCLUDING CYCLE HELMETS) TO BE WIN PLUS 50 RUNNERS UP PRIZES OF CYCLING HELMETS
If you are a lucky winner you will be given a mountain bike or helmet suitable for your size.
HOW TO ENTER
Look carefully at the cut away section of the house below and, using your skill and judgement, see if you can spot the five different safety hazards in the picture.
Carefully circle each of the five hazards on the picture and then in not more than 12 words complete the tiebreaker over the page.
To help find the hazards the balloons and text over the page will give you some clues.
See over for details.
Competition closes 28.2.92 
SELECT THE RIGHT TOY FOR THE RIGHT AGED CHILD
KEEP YOUR HOME TIDY AND PREVENT FALLS
ALWAYS BUY SAFE TOYS AND NEVER KEEP BROKEN TOYS
STORE HOUSEHOLD CHEMICALS AND MEDICINES CAREFULLY
RULES AND CONDITIONS
1.
No purchase necessary for entry.
2.
Employees of the D.T.I., their agents and families and anyone else connected with the promotion are not eligible to enter.
3.
Anyone over the age of 14 years (by the closing date of the competition) is not eligible to enter.
4.
The prizes are as stated and no cash alternative will be offered.
5.
The prizes will be awarded to the entrants who circle the five hazards on the picture correctly and answer the tiebreaker in the most apt and original way.
Any entry with more than five circles will be disqualified.
6.
All entries must be received by 28.2.92.
7.
The prize winners will be notified by post within 8 weeks of the closing date.
8.
The promoter will appoint a panel of judges whose decision in all matters concerning the competition will be final and no correspondence will be entered into.
9.
A list of winners will be available to those sending a S.A.E. to the competition address within 8 weeks of the closing date.
Promoter: Department of Trade and Industry 10–18 Victoria Street, London SW1H ONN 
ADJUSTAMATIC
Write for full details TODAY
The World's Most Comfortable Bed?
SEND FOR A FREE BROCHURE NOW
Wake up feeling refreshed
What could be more restful than a good night's sleep?
You wake refreshed and revitalised, ready for the challenges of a new day.
However, many people find it difficult to sleep soundly and maybe you are one of them.
No matter how hard you try, you just can't seem to get comfortable.
Perhaps you have a medical condition that makes things worse — a back problem, arthritic or rheumatic pains, muscle tension, bad circulation or chest ailment.
A better bed
An Adjustamatic Bed can put an end to your restless nights.
A touch of a button is all that's needed to change your sleeping position to one that's so much more relaxing.
Discover for yourself why thousands of satisfied customers say that Adjustamatic is the most comfortable, most supportive bed in the world.
Send for the brochure today.
A LOW FIGURE FOR A HIGH CONFIGURATION
CALL DELL FREE
Dell System 325SX with 80Mb hard drive, 4Mb RAM and colour VGA monitor
Plus :
Free Windows
Free MS-DOS
Free DELL mouse
Free technical support hotline
Free on-site warranty
Free 30-day money back guarantee if not completely satisfied
ALL THIS FOR JUST £949 + VAT
This is a dream of an entry level computer: A 25MHz Intel386SX system with full 386 compatibility, plenty of disk space and memory to keep you going now and into the future, everything you need to get started in the newest version of Windows (one of the new ‘standards’ in business computing), and most important of all,the peace of mind and rock-solid warranties afforded by the Dell Customer Satisfaction Charter .
And you get it for only £949 plus VAT.
To order your system, or request further information, telephone today on our FreeCall number — 0500 121 121.
THE DELL CUSTOMER SATISFACTION CHARTER
A total commitment to your satisfaction (we've won awards to prove it).
Free comprehensive one year on-site warranty (covering parts and labour).
Free tutorial with every system (simplicity itself to understand).
Free technical support hotline (90% of problems solved in under 5 mins).
30 day money back guarantee (if for whatever reason you're not satisfied).
Software excluded.
FISA — factory installed software applications (installed at no extra charge).
BACK SUFFERERS!
The relief you've been waiting for
OBAS SUPPORTS YOUR BACK
AS SEEN ON T.V.
WRONG a sagging bed or a hard bed can aggravate back pain.
RIGHT the OBAS bed gives correct support for each partner, helping to bring them relaxation and relief from pain.
Years of experience tell us that standard beds may not be right for every human body.
If they provide excellent support for someone of heavy build they're most unlikely to suit anyone lighter.
And vice versa.
Either way, at least one partner may well experience aches and pains.
What's the answer A bed from the Orthopaedic Bedding Advisory Service.
A double bed with two entirely different types of springing to suit the needs of each partner exactly; to ease them gently into the right positions to keep the spine relaxed and flexible; to help lift the pressure off bones, muscles, tendons, nerve endings and joints.
Who are OBAS?
We are the Orthopaedic Bedding Advisory Service.
Our surgical orthopaedic tradition and our professionally qualified consultants have been responsible for the design of thousands of OBAS (single and double) beds to specifications dictated by weight, shape and medical history of each of our customers, including doctors' diagnosis, where known.
We are the experts All our beds are made by our craftsmen and are in appearance just like top quality ‘standard’ beds — but only in appearance.
And we do not charge the earth — in fact no more than a good quality single or double ‘standard’ bed.
Because our beds come straight from our factory we are able to cut out the middlemen's profit and keep our prices down.
If you have a back problem, if your partner is heavier than you or if you suffer from back pain — contact OBAS now.
Now available in N. Ireland 
Boots Travel Safely
Every year about 70 children are killed and more than 12,000 are injured whilst travelling in cars.
Three quarters of these lives could be saved and two-thirds of the injuries avoided, if all children in the back seat wore restraints.
Since 1983 it has been compulsory for car drivers and front seat passengers of all ages to wear seat belts or use child safety restraints.
Children under one year must be in a restraint appropriate to their age and weight.
Since this law was introduced the number of deaths and serious injuries to children as a result of car accidents has been significantly reduced.
Since September 1989, a new rear seat safety law has been in force, in addition to the existing law relating to the front sea.
Under this law if seat belts or child restraints appropriate for the age and weight of the child are fitted in the rear of the car, the driver has a legal responsibility to see that children under the age of 14 wear them, unless they have a medical exemption certificate.
Since June 1991 adults must also wear seat belts in the rear if available.
Safety Advice for Travelling
In an accident, an unrestrained child can be thrown against the dashboard or through a window.
Even for short journeys children should be restrained.
It is worth remembering that most accidents happen within a few miles of home.
WHY ARE CHILD RESTRAINTS NECESSARY?
When travelling, it is not safe to hold a baby or small child in your arms or in a slight.
In a crash, you could not hold on to your baby, or she might be crushed between you and the dashboard or seat.
A seat belt encircling both you and the baby could also result in her being crushed and receiving serious injuries.
So, it is far safer for the child in your car if, even though the law does not require it, rear seat belts or restraints are specially installed into cars where they have not been automatically fitted from new.
Even at low speed, an accident could mean serious injury or death for a child.
All cars built after 1981 have anchorage points in position for attachment of Safety restraints.
Cars manufactured since October 1986 are required to have rear seat belts or child restraints fitted.
In theory children over the age of 12 months could just use an adult seat belt.
Clearly, this is not practical in terms of safety or comfort for a small child.
She should have a purpose-designed restraint appropriate for her age and weight.
WHAT IS ‘APPROPRIATE’ FOR A CHILD?
Purpose-built child restraints are now available to suit children of all ages and sizes.
The following pages detail the wide range of restraints available and show each product in further detail to enable you to make your choice.
Consult the table on the back page for easy reference to assist you in your choice of the correct Child Car Safety Seat.
Use a child restraint on every trip even the shortest.
Most accidents occur near home.
Baby Car Seats
BOOTS RECLINING BABY CAR SEAT
Rear facing infant carrier.
For front or rear seat use.
Secured with most adult lap/diagonal seat belts.
Two reclining positions.
Integral harness.
Quick release buckle.
Adjustable crutch and shoulder straps.
Can be used as a day seat indoors (as shown here).
Carrying handles.
Washable, lightweight, padded cover.
Tested and certified to BS AU 202a.
Suitable for babies up to 10Kg (22lbs),(from birth to approx. 9 months).
KANGOL CARRYTOT CAR SEAT
Can be used as a day seat or rocker indoors (as shown here).
Carrying handle.
Tested and certified to BS AU 202a.
Suitable for babies up to 10Kg (22lbs),(from birth to approx. 9 months).
Please note cover design may vary from those illustrated.
BABY SEATS
Rear-facing baby carriers can be fitted to the front or back seat.
They can be used with most front or rear-seat lap/diagonal adult seat belts, and are suitable for babies weighing up to about 10Kg.
Choose one that conforms to BS AU 202a or ECE 44.
When buying a baby seat check its weight, capacity and whether it has an integral harness and quick-release buckle.
You will also need to decide if you want one with a reclining facility.
Some baby seats can be converted into car seats for older children.
CARRYCOT RESTRAINTS
A Carrycot can be used on the rear-seat of your car if you have a carrycot restraint fitted.
This incorporates a harness anchored securely to the car, and straps encircling the carrycot.
Check that the restraint conforms to BS AU 186a.
Make sure the carrycot cover is fixed firmly in place, to help prevent your baby from being thrown out in the event of a crash.
Carrycots are sometimes recommended for us up to nine months.
However, a baby seat is safer than a carrycot for your baby.
Never put your seat belt around yourself and your baby.
In a crash your baby could be crushed to death.
Also available but not illustrated :BOOTS HEAD SUPPORT CUSHION Provides comfort and support for a very young baby.
Fits most car seats and pushchairs.
Machine washable .
Child Car Seats
As your baby gets older and can sit up unaided (at about 8–10 months), you will need to change to a forward facing child car seat.
Some rear facing baby car seats convert to forward facing car seats and are known as ‘2-way’ seats.
These must conform to either BS AU 202 and BS 3254 or EEC 44.
Alternatively, an ordinary forward facing child car seat can be used which must conform to either BS 3254 or ECE 44.
Some child car seats can be fitted with a special anchorage kit or an adult seat belt.
Your child is restrained by a separate integral harness.
Make sure that the seat is safety secured according to the manufacturers instructions, and that the integral harness is always correctly fastened.
Alternatively in some child car seats, both the seat and the child are held in position by a 3 point adult lap and diagonal seat belt.
KANGOL SUPER DREAMSEAT 2-WAY
Rear facing secures baby from birth to approx.
10Kg. fits with most front or rear lap/diagonal seat belts.
Forward facing secures child from approx. 9–18Kg.
Fits with most lap/diagonal seat belts or its own fitting kit (available separately).
Three reclining positions, adjustable with one hand when forward facing.
Adjustable side, shoulder and crutch straps.
Tested and certified to BS 3254 and BS AU 202.
BOOTS 2-WAY CAR SEAT
Fits with most front or rear lap/diagonal seat belts.
Rear facing secures baby from birth to approx. 9 months.
Forward facing secures child from approx. 6 months–4 years.
Washable, extra thick padded cover for added comfort.
Reclining facility when used forward facing.
Five point adjustable harness.
Tested and certified to BS 3254 and BS AU 202.
BRITAX 2-WAY CAR SEAT
Rear facing secures baby from birth to approx. 10Kg. fits with most front or rear lap/diagonal seat belts.
Forward facing secures child from approx. 9–18Kg. fits with most lap or lap/diagonal seat belts or its own fitting kit (available separately).
Adjustable side, shoulder and crutch straps.
Washable, padded cover.
Tested and certified to BS 3254 and BS AU 202.
BOOTS 3 POSITION RECLINER CAR SEAT
Forward facing for rear seat use.
Secured with most adult lap belts, lap/diagonal seat belts or with its own anchorage kit (available separately).
Three reclining positions, adjustable with one band.
Integral harness.
Quick release buckle.
Adjustable shoulder straps and hip straps.
Washable, light-weight, padded cover.
Tested and certified to BS 3254.
Suitable from approx. 6 months–4 years.
FITTING KITS
In some cars, child seats with integral harnesses cannot be tightly using the adult seat belt, often because the seat belt buckle rests on the frame of the child seat.
To overcome this problem a fitting kit can be used.
These fit simply to the lower seat belt anchorage points (or anchorage points can be drilled if necessary) and can be used to securely fasten the car seat.
Ensure you use the correct fitting kit for your make and model of car seat.
Always fit and use a car seat properly
Older Children
From the age of four years, a child can use a booster seat or cushion in conjunction with an adult seat belts.
BOOSTER SEATS
These are best for children from about four years onwards, although some are designed for younger children.
They can be secured by an adult lap and diagonal seat belt or a child harness.
They have a back rest as well as a base cushion, and often the back rest can be removed as the child gets older.
These must conform to ECE 44 or BS AU 185.
BOOSTER CUSHIONS
A booster cushion raises a child up so that she can safely use an adult seat belt or a child harness.
These are purposedesigned and should conform to BS AU 185.
Make sure you secure the cushion according to the makers instructions.
(A household cushion must not be used).
BRITAX CRUISER CAR SEAT
Secured with most lap/diagonal seat belts.
A unique sliding head support.
Seat belt ‘lock off’ guide ensures the seat belt is held at the correct position.
Washable, soft, quilted cover.
Tested and certified to ECE 44.
Suitable for children 9–25kg (20–55lbs)(approx. 6 months–6 years).
Safety Tips
CAR SAFETY TIPS
Ensure that your child restraint is fitted in your car in accordance with the manufacturers instructions.
Always ensure that your child is properly restrained in the car on every trip.
Never carry a child on your lap, either in the front or back seat, it is dangerous and probably illegal.
Never put a belt round you and your child — your weight could crush her.
Never let your child alone in a car — even for a short time.
Never let your child stand in the gap between the front seats, or anywhere else in the car.
Always make sure that all passengers and heavy loads are strapped in.
In the event of a crash an unrestrained passenger or heavy package could be thrown on top of your child and cause serious injuries, even if she was properly restrained.
Protect your child from direct sunlight when travelling by using a child sunscreen or roller blind.
Always make sure that all passengers and heavy loads are safely strapped in.
BOOTS BOOSTER SEAT
For front or rear seat use.
Secured with adult lap/diagonal seat belt or Boots Junior Car Harness.
Ensures the adult seat belt fits securely.
Tested and certified to BS AU 185.
For children of 15kg (33lbs) and over (approx. 4 years and above).
ROAD SAFETY TIPS
Follow these guidelines to help make our roads a safer place.
Over 25% of all road accidents involving children feature bikes.
Encourage your child to wear a helmet when cycling.
Fluorescent and reflective clothing make children easier to spot both during day and night time.
Use toddler walking reins.
Contact your local council to campaign for pedestrian schemes in residential areas.
Road humps have cut deaths by two thirds in some areas, significantly slowing down traffic.
We are the biggest danger on the roads.
Enrol on a first aid course — it could save a life.
Fluorescent and reflective clothing make children easier to see.
FLUORESCENT RETRO REFLECTIVE HARNESS AND ANKLE/ARM BANDS
Provide greater visibility.
Harness has adjustable shoulder strap and waistband.
Front buckle fastening.
Armbands have velcro adjustment to ensure correct fit.
Yellow, Green.
ANKLE/ARM BANDS
Available separately in a pack of two .
THE LAW
IN THE FRONT OF THE CAR
Babies up to one year must be secured in an approved restraint designed for their weight.
Older children must wear an approved child restraint or an adult seat belt.
FURTHER INFORMATION
You can get further information about the safety of your children in the car from Road Safety Officers.
Contact your local council for the address and telephone number.
IN THE REAR OF THE CAR
Babies up to one year must use a suitable seat or restrained carrycot, if available.
Children aged 1, 2, or 3 must use a child restraint (or an adult seat belt with a booster cushion) if fitted.
Children who are 4 or over should use an adult seat belt if available.
A restraint is considered to be available if it is not being used by another child or adult.
Drivers risk a £50 fine for breaking the law.
Children risk serious injury or death.
SPECIAL BATHROOMS for special needs
We don't just fit bathrooms, we build independence
DOLPHIN Special Needs Bathrooms
If you want more than just an ordinary bathroom, Dolphin can provide all the help and advice you'll need to create the complete special bathroom.
From easy access baths to level access showers for wheelchairs, our local home adviser will visit you and discuss your requirements, without obligation, then plan and design a bathroom that best suits your individual needs.
Our bathrooms are not only safe and functional, they're stylish and colour coordinated.
We'll take care of every detail including installation, and just for piece of mind each bathroom comes with a full guarantee — all part of the complete Dolphin service.
‘It was tailored just for me’
‘Those Dolphin people understood’
‘Going to the bathroom's a pleasure again, it's so easy’
Keith Floyd ON The COOKS KITCHEN
The COOKS KITCHEN
Value for money is something that Keith Floyd holds very dear to his heart.
We feel exactly the same way.
That's why we make all our own kitchens, so we can bring you a beautiful, individual designed collection for far less than any comparable kitchen.
What's more, every kitchen we sell is planned and designed free of charge, then expertly installed by our teams of specialist craftsmen.
A well planned, well made kitchen that doesn't cost the earth.
In short a kitchen fit for a Floyd.
If you'd like to know more about a real cook's kitchen, phone us free on  or return the coupon today.
FREE OVEN & HOB Right now with every kitchen we fit there's a free oven and hob.
satellite tv
EXCLUSIVE TO GRANADA & Visionhire
satellite tv SKY
widen your choice of viewing with satellite tv
and get more sport, films, news, music and entertainment.
When you buy or rent satellite from Granada and Visionhire you can choose from leading brands such as Amstrad and Pace.
You will be secure in the knowledge that your system will be the latest in technology, and installed quickly and professionally by our team of skilled installers.
You can confidently take advantage of Tomorrow's Technology Today.
what is satellite tv?
It is the entertainment revolution of the 90's, with a wide range of TV programmes beamed into your home via satellite, instead of by ground transmitters, as used by BBC and ITV.
To receive satellite TV all you need are two pieces of equipment.
An antenna (commonly known as a dish) to pick up signals, and a receiver-decoder to convert these signals into programmes that you can watch on your TV.
what can satellite tv offer you?
More channels which means more choice.
How many times have you flicked through the TV channels to find nothing worth watching?
With satellite TV there is something for everyone.
Specially themed channels, covering movies, rock and pop, fun shows for the kids, sports, news and much more.
sky movies plus…24 hours a day
Movie action, adventure, comedy, horror, plus a wide selection of movies for adult viewing.
Also enjoy special events such as exclusive world class sports, and top rock and pop concerts.
the movie channel…the best in motion picture entertainment
Enjoy a new film premier every day, and great blockbuster hits for all the family.
Available around the clock.
sky sports…the top sport events live!
The best in British and overseas sporting events, many exclusive to Sky, such as live English International and Scottish league football, Sunday afternoon cricket, and championship boxing.
sky news…the latest news, around the clock
The highly acclaimed 24 hour news and current affairs channel.
keeping you up to date with what's happening at home and around the world.
sky one…the very best in entertainment
Great all round family entertainment with family game shows, mini series, comedies, documentaries and lots more, including the very popular Simpsons.
Available at an extra subscription.
Ask for details.
As well as the 5 Sky Channels, you can tune into more English and foreign language channels, with more planned in the near future.
Pop and Rock 24 hours a day, featuring concerts, reviews and interviews.
Sport from around the world with particular emphasis on top American events and Motor Sports
Top sporting action from around Europe.
Chat shows, food programmes and ‘soaps’.
A channel dedicated for women.
Entertainment and education for children of all ages.
radio & teletext
Via your satellite receiver you can get up to the minute teletext plus superb stereo radio.
From the classics to the latest hits, on stations such as Sky Radio and Radio Luxembourg, you'll be spoilt for choice.
Teletext TV is required.
Stereo sound available via Stereo TV or via Stereo Hi-Fi System.
GRANADA rental service
the tv, video & satellite repair experts
‘Exclusive for Granada Lodge Customers’
Long term experience of TV, Video and Satellite repairs of any make
Benefit from a professional repair service previously only available to Granada/Visionhire customers
Competitive rates starting from £40 inclusive of labour, materials & VAT 
Over 1800 fully trained technicians
Nationwide service network
Only a phone call away
Contact your local Granada or Visionhire shop for details of your nearest service centre.
For repairs completed in the home
Call us now for repairs you can trust!
MiLAN TECHNOLOGY
All the right connections…
1992
CREATIVE NETWORK INNOVATIONS
10BaseT UTP Products with an Extra Twist…and Added Flexibility for Your network
NEW
Micro Twist
MODEL MIL 10P MICRO-SIZED DIRECT CONNECT TRANSCEIVERS
Micro Twist is designed to effectively convert DB15 AUI Ethernet ports to 10BaseT.
It quickly provides the necessary interface to network workstations, PCs, and other Ethernet equipment.
SQE and LINK SELECTABLE
Micro Twist II
MODEL MIL 22P MICRO-SIZED DUAL PORT TRANSCEIVER
Micro Twist II adds two AUI Ethernet connections from one 10BaseT hub port.
Its small form factor allows two computers, in close proximity, to double up on the 10BaseT hub.
The Micro Twist II is remote and local mode selectable so that the attached computers can communicate alone or through the 10BaseT network when you flip a switch.
SQE and LINK SELECTABLE
More Twist
MODEL MIL 100E MICRO-SIZED 10BaseT EXTENDER
More Twist is the straightforward way to integrate 10BaseT nodes beyond the 10BaseT limit.
It allows you to double 10BaseT segments by adding a length of at least 100 meters to an existing segment.
Micro Twist incorporates the ability to disable the link integrity test, thereby allowing older Starlan equipment to be integrated into the 10BaseT environment.
This small, wallpowered unit can be placed almost anywhere for flexible installation.
HUB CARD
Model MIL 4081 4/8 PORT 10BaseT REPEATER
The Hub Card features four or eight 10BaseT Ethernet ports for networking workstations or PCs.
It is ideal for configuring NOS servers or inexpensive PC-based concentrators.
The Hub Card is powered from the IBM PC/AT bus in your computer.
The four RJ-45 connections can be configured so that the unused wires carry an additional four 10BaseT connections by using the MiLAN MIL 4084 Expansion Module or by punching down the extra lines.
10BaseT ports for less than $45
Flexible and easy installation
Reliable Five-Year Warranty
Can be configured to 4 or 8 ports
Features 10Base2 thin coax
Available with IBM PC/AT bus or standalone
NE2000 Novell Compatible MODEL MIL 2000C MODEL MIL 2000TP ETHERNET ADAPTER CARDS
MiLAN's 16-bit Ethernet adapter cards are fully compatible with the Novell NE2000 adapter card driver.
These adapters are available in both 10BaseT and think coax versions.
They allow Pcs with Novell's popular NOS to plug into a 10Base2 or 10BaseT network environment without the extra expense of adding software or reconfiguring your system.
Both models are fully compliant with the IBM PC/AT bus architecture which allows inter-operability with many PC specifications.
MiLAN's 4080 Series hub line is the least expensive 10BaseT hub solution available.
Its small and efficient designs allow entry-level, departmental and company-wide network users to distribute UTP twisted pair cabling for less than $45 per port.
The hubs feature 10Base3 coax connections so that backbones and subnets can be built using thinnet cabling.
These products fit in PC backplanes or in standalone versions for distributed workstations.
The 4080 series hubs are IEEE 10BaseT compliant and are built around a single, integrated circuit to ensure years of trouble-free service.
Micro Hub
MODEL MIL 4083 4/8 port 10BaseT REPEATER
Micro Hub features four or eight Ethernet hub ports for distributing 10BaseT Ethernet devices.
This small, wallpowered hub features a rugged yet lightweight aluminium chassis.
Its small size and durable design allows you to use it in many convenient locations.
The Micro Hub can be configured for eight ports if you use MiLAN's MIL 4084 Expansion Module or if you punch down extra lines to a splicing block.
Alternet
MODEL MIL 100A COAX to 10BaseT CONVERTER
Alternet converts 10BaseT hub segments to think coax cabling.
It allows you to integrate small, thinnet subnets of up to 10 nodes into a 10BaseT hub.
Alternet is the perfect solution for 10BaseT users who want the flexibility that thin coax provides.
Alternet installs in seconds and will prove years of troublefree networking service.
Duplinet
MODEL MIL 100C Ethernet Media CONVERTER
Duplinet is the fast and easy way to connect different Ethernet medias.
To connect the segments all you have to do is attach two different transceivers to the MIL 100C.
Duplinet is ideal for converting from thick coax to 10BaseT or thinnet.
This small, wall-powered unit installs almost anywhere.
Automatically partitions and reconnects problem segments
Delni Style
Multiport Transceivers
Multiport transceivers add AUI ports to existing Ethernet transceivers to make networks easier and less expensive to install.
MiLAN's three models feature two, four, or eight ports in small, attractive enclosures.
All units are SQE (heartbeat), local, and remote mode selectable by flipping a switch.
The draw power from both the attached computers and external wall adaptor.
Octaplex
MODEL MIL 800X 8-PORT TRANSCEIVER with AUI Network Port
The Octaplex connects eight workstations or PCs to an external Ethernet transceiver via the network port.
This small, wall-powered unit can be installed almost anywhere to allow one Ethernet connection to become eight.
Diplex
MODEL MIL 201X 2-PORT TRANSCEIVER with AUI Network Port
The Diplex connects two workstations or PCs to an external Ethernet transceiver via the network port.
This small, wallpowered unit can be installed almost anywhere to allow one Ethernet connection to become two.
Local and Remote Switch Selectable
Quadplex
MODEL MIL 400X 4-PORT TRANSCEIVER with AUI Network Port
The Quadplex connects four workstations or PCs to an external Ethernet transceiver via the network port.
This small, wallpowered unit can be installed almost anywhere to allow one Ethernet connection to become four.
Maxi Mau
MODEL MIL 01V 10BASE5 THICK COAX TRANSCEIVER
The Maxi Mau transceiver features an interchangeable tap design and five easy viewing LEDs which provide assistance in detecting faults.
SQE selectability and a rugged design make this transceiver an attractive choice for your thick coax environments.
Configurable Taps N series, BNC series, and Vampire series.
Micro Mau
MODEL MIL 05T Thin Coax Micro Sized Direct Connect TRANSCEIVER
MiLAN'S original thin coax transceivers connect directly to your networked PCs, workstations and other Ethernet devices.
The small form factor does not block I/O ports.
Low power design uses less than 200mA 12VDC.
The sturdy metal case ensures years of trouble-free use.
Externally SQE selectable.
Unix Printing Just Became This Easy…
FastPort MIL 3000
TCP/IP Network Print Server
The age of networked printing is here!
FastPort makes fast, distributed printers available in the Unix environment.
It lets you eliminate the cabling and software problems that occur with Remote Network Spooling.
FastPort gives everyone direct access to the printer.
Direct Network Spooling eliminates the need for a remote LPD spooler.
FastPort provides a TCP/IP interface so that Unix computers can spool directly to the printer.
The host software interfaces with the native Unix spooler to allow the workstation to use its own printing resources.
The host software installs in seconds so that FastPort is up and running on your Unix LAN in minutes.
It's that easy!
FastPort supports most serial and Centronics printers and plotters.
It has built-in 10BaseT, Thinnet, and Thicknet ports.
You can select cabling by flipping a switch.
FastPort allows you to move printers to convenient locations and connect them directly to the network.
This increases their performance and usability.
FastPort will give your printers the plug and play functionality of printers that cost thousands of dollars more.
TCP/IP protocol
Supports Lpr-Lpd-Lp spooling utilities
Built-in 10BaseT-thinnet-thicknet
Concurrent printing to serial and parallel ports
Supports Adobe TransScript printing
16-bit microprocessor
Switch selectable: 10Base2–10Base5–10BaseT cabling
Supports arp-rar-ping
Supports most serial and parallel printers
300 to 38,400 bsp serial port
Host software is available in source form
Host software for Sun-DEC-HP-IBM-SCO-Mips, and more
Now Everyone Has Access to the Printer
Direct Network Spooling eliminates the need for a remote LPD spooler.
FastPort provides a TCP/IP interface for the printer so that Unix computers can spool directly to the printer.
Printers can be moved to convenient locations and connected directly on the network/
The first, the fastest, and the most flexible print server for under $1,000.
It's Easy to Order MiLAN Products
Ordering Information : MiLAN has a worldwide network of distributors.
To locate the distributor nearest you, call our Sales department.
Discounts : Discounts are available based on volume orders or blanket purchase agreements.
Call our Sales Department to inquire about reseller, education, or government quantity discounts.
Returns : Any product purchased from MiLAn may be returned for a full refund, less shipping and handling charges, within 30 days of the original factory shipment date.
Contact the MiLAN Return Material Authorization (RMA) desk to obtain and RMA number.
Support : Support is an integral part of our customer service program.
To better understand and service your needs, we make a special effort to answer all of our customers' questions and to help them with any technical problems that may be related to MiLAN products.
Warranties : MiLAN warrants all of its products for a minimum of 1 to 5 years, depending on the type of product.
Consult your warranty card, dealer, or MiLAN Service department.
MiLAN, at its option, will repair or replace any defective product within its warranty or extended warranty period.
MiLAN Network Innovation and Creativity at Work
In 1990, MiLAN Technology introduced the industry's first Micro Transceivers for networking Unix workstations and the Alternet for integrating coaxial and twisted pair environments.
In 1991, MiLAN introduced the first dedicated print server for TCP/IP networks priced under $1,000.
In 1992, MiLAN will continue to bring unique and innovative products to the UNIX and LAN marketplace worldwide.
New for ‘92…
Our advanced corporate design facility and sales complex in Sunnyvale, CA.
A first-class hub for MiLAN's growing, worldwide distribution network.
NEW IN ‘92
Smaller transceivers
Thicknet 10Base5 Mau's
Flexible multiports
PC adapter cards
4-port hub card for PCs
Micro-Hub, 8-port 10BaseT
10BaseT media extender
Network print server
MiLAN products are distributed worldwide by a growing network of committed resellers, VARs, and OEMs.
MiLAN is committed to providing cost-effective solutions for networked Unix users.
We will continue to design and manufacture our products using the latest technology and materials the U.S.A. has to offer.
ETHERNET/IEEE 802.3 The Original Micro-Sized Transceivers
MICRO MAU MIL 05T MICRO TWIST MIL 10P
DIRECT CONNECT MICRO-SIZED TRANSCEIVERS
Micro-sized transceivers are designed to effectively convert DB15 AUI Ethernet ports to thin coax or 10BaseT.
They quickly provide the necessary interface to network PCs, workstations, and other Ethernet equipment.
Their new, smaller form factor eliminates bulky drop cables and does not block I/O ports.
MiLAN low-powered design uses less than 200mA 12VDC.
The sturdy metal case ensures years of trouble-free operation.
Externally SQE selectable.
Q ASSOCIATES LIMITED
New LAN Products — Special Launch Prices
Introducing a new range of high performance LAN connectivity products from MiLAN Technology…
…
Combining performance, reliability and the lowest prices, MiLAN Technology presents a comprehensive new range of Ethernet communications devices that includes repeaters, extenders, transceivers, hubs and converters for use in any thinwire, thickwire and twisted pair environment.
Also now available, the new MiLAN Fastport 3000 network print server allows direct connection of serial and parallel printers to any TCP/IP LAN without the need for a dedicated workstation or remote spooler.
As UK Distributor for the MiLAN range, Q Associates is able to offer the following prices, throughout September, for all miniature transceivers and Fastport devices;
Micro Transceivers
MiL-05T Miniature 10Base2 Thinwire transceiver £29
MiL-1OP Miniature 10BaseT Twisted-pair transceiver £29
Direct PC or workstation connection
Fully IEEE 802.3 compliant
Eliminates bulky drop cables
Externally SQE selectable
Includes 5-Year warranty
Fastport Print Server
MiL-3000 TCP/IP Network Printer Server £499
Direct network spooling
Serial & Parallel printer ports
Supports IEEE 802.3 Thinwire, Thickwire & Twisted-pair
MiLAN Micro-transceivers and Fastport units will also be on show at Sun Expo ‘92, 22nd–24th September at the NEC.
See them on Q Associates’ stand 431.
Special introductory prices are exclusive of VAT and delivery and are valid for all orders placed on or before 30 September 1992.
For further product information, pricing or complimentary Sun Expo tickets, contact Dermot French or Nick Bishop  
Utopia UCKFIELD'S LEISURE CENTRE
Rent a lightweight FERGUSON CAMCORDER from Leisure Centre and make special days last forever.
—
keep Gran in touch with the kids progress
—
remember the Wedding day
—
send greetings in person
—
catch all those party tricks
—
capture that first swimming lesson
—
rent-a-coach.
Any sporting activity within the Centre.
We film it and the coach analyses it.
An easy route to improvement.
Press for power, point the camera and just shoot — nothing could be easier.
A superb picture quality, perfect sound, faithfully capturing both special events and every day occurrences, breathing life into those magic moments.
Taking you down memory lane time and time again.
VIDEO CAMERA HIRE
PLEASE ASK AT RECEPTION FOR FURTHER INFORMATION.
VIDEO CAMERA HIRE SERVICE
PLEASE PROVIDE
£100.00 DEPOSIT (REFUNDABLE)
IDENTIFIABLE PHOTOGRAPH (RETURNABLE)
Any two of the following checks must be made for each hiring
Gas Bill No.
Electricity Bill No.
Telephone Bill No.
Poll Tax No.
Any two of the following checks must be made for each hiring
Credit Card No.
Driving Licence No.
Passport No.
PRICES INCLUDE INSURANCE — NO HIDDEN EXTRAS 
IMAGES VIDEO CAMERA HIRE
Wealden Leisure
BUSINESS PLANNING ON LOTUS 1–2–3
Now it's so easy…even man's Best Friend can do it!
Lotus 1–2–3 & MBS BUSINESS PLAN
Superior business planning for Medium to Large sized companies
SAVE 100'S OF HOURS OF PROGRAMMING ON LOTUS 1–2–3
Tired of grappling with complex macros?
Now with MBA Business Plan there is no need to waste days of self-build modules…
Even better…
You don't have to be an expert in Accountancy or computers.
MBA Business Plan harnesses the power of your Lotus 1–2–3 spreadsheet, saving you over 200 hours of programming.
Our team of spreadsheet experts have spent many years developing a complete range of dedicated Lotus 1–2–3 Business Planning Templates designed to suit every size of company and type of industry.
RIGHT FOR YOUR BUSINESS
Different businesses need different business plans, so MBA Business Plan offers four different models:Manufacturing, Trade, Service and Professional .
You can also choose from four different versions of each, depending on the size and complexity of your company, and your own skilled level and objectives.
NEW MBA BUSINESS PLANS V3 & V3D — POWERFUL, EASY TO USE, PLUS SUPERB FEATURES SUCH AS:
SmartTools Customise and print your plan with single keystrokes
MBA Tracker Actual versus Forecast performance reports in seconds
Stunning Graphics 26 Key Ratios presented in clear graphs
MBA Business Plan V3D All the features of V3 plus much more…consolidate up to four profit centres, forecasting to eight currencies.
FOR YOUR FREE MBA BUSINESS PLAN BROCHURE 
Lotus 1–2–3 & MBA EASIPLAN
The UK's top selling Business Plan for small businesses
BUY MBA EASIPLAN FOR LOTUS 1–2–3 FOR ONLY £49.99!
ESSENTIAL FOR ANY BUSINESS
Whether you are starting a new business, raising finance, or simply planning for profit and expansion,MBA Easiplan will help you create a well structured Business Plan, guaranteed to impress Bankers, Investors or business colleagues.
IDEAL FOR NEW & SMALL BUSINESSES
MBA Easiplan is specially designed for Trading/Service based businesses with up to 20 staff.
It's also suitable for Startups, Franchise Expansions, Venture Funding, Management Buy-outs/Buy-ins.
EASY TO USE — SAVES TIME
MBA Easiplan is the fastest, easiest way to prepare your business plan.
Fill in the blanks and in just a couple of hours you can have a fully integrated 3 year financial forecast, including Sales, Operating Expenses, P&L, Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Analysis.
READ WHAT USERS SAY ABOUT EASIPLAN
‘What an excellent product…its first use has prevented the bank foreclosing on a client when it seemed certain that they would wind them up ’(HBB Group of Chartered Accountants)
‘My bank manager said ‘This is the best cash flow presentation I've seen’ and agreed to an extra £50,000 on my overdraft’(S J Franklin, Cheltenham)
EASIPLAN — HIGH PERFORMANCE FEATURES
SmartTools Customising Easiplan to fit your business is easy with SmartTools.
Easiplan Reports Opening Balance Sheet, Sales Forecast, Staff Costs, Overheads, Capital Expenditure, P&L, Balance sheet, Cost of Sales, Cash Flow, VAT Assessment.
Plus, enter your cash flow assumptions, operating statistics ratios, and project Cost, Sales and Wage inflation separately.
To run Easiplan You'll need an IBM or compatible PC with a hard disk; minimum 640k with Lotus 2. x, 1Mb with Lotus 3. x or 1.5Mb with Lotus Windows.
Are You Ready For The Revolution?
7th October 1992
An examination of the issues involved in the acquisition, distribution, and use of information
PRAXIS
INTRODUCTION
The Seminar
Organisations have known for some considerable time that the acquisition, distribution and effective use of information is a key factor in gaining a competitive advantage.
Unfortunately, the realisation of this knowledge has been difficult or impractical owing to several well known factors including ‘closed’ systems, immature software standards, and high development or re-development costs.
We are now moving into a revolutionary era in which technology will reach a stage when simpler, more efficient manipulation of information will be demanded as a right.
PRAXIS is at the forefront of the design and development of information systems for its clients, many of which are leading UK organisations.
At their request, we will be presenting a half day educational seminar on 7th October 1992 when these issues will be examined more closely.
No charge will be made for attendance at this event.
AGENDA
Timetable
Wednesday 7th October 1992.
Chairman: Martyn Thomas
9.40am Registration and Coffee
Current Approaches to Information Systems.
Methods
Tools
Technologies
New Technologies.
Object Orientation
Client/Server
Graphical User Interface
Case Study.
Management of a large information project.
Venue
The Motor Cycle Museum, Birmingham (Close to the M42 and NE).
How to Book
Complete and return the attached enrolment card.
Confirmation of your booking and travel directions will then be sent to you.
NO CHARGE will be made for attendance at this seminar.
Further Information
Lotus USER GROUP
SUPPORT SERVICES FOR PROFESSIONAL USERS
Regular Magazine
Technical Support
Special Discounts
Upgrades
Conferences
Seminars
Software Library
Books and Magazines
Bulletin Board
‘The Lotus User Group could save every user time and money.
Every user should seriously consider joining.’
Kevin Coe, Customer Services Manager, Lotus
LOTUS USER GROUP MEMBERSHIP INVITATION
…
SAVE TIME AND MONEY WITH THE LOTUS USER GROUP
As a Lotus user, you obviously want to get the most from your software.
You know it will save you time and money to learn tips and tricks which maximise productivity, to keep up to date with new developments which can help you, and to have someone to call, free of charge, whenever you have a query.
To really save time and money, you need The Lotus User Group.
We are a totally independent company dedicated to providing a high level of professional services to users of all Lotus software.
Impartial advice and support, and up to the minute information, can dramatically increase the value of your software, enabling you to achieve more and really reap the benefits of the investment you have made.
Through our regular newsletter ‘Lotus User Forum’, and our free technical support line ONCE, we aim to help you get the most our of your software, allowing you to concentrate on using it to solve business problems.
Thousands of users find our service of great benefit and come back to us year after year.
Whether it is providing a tip for better spreadsheet design, finding a useful ‘add-in’ to save hours on a routine problem, or changing over to Windows, we can help.
Whatever you want Lotus software to do for you, and whatever your level of expertise, you will find our help invaluable.
In order to join the community of professional Lotus users, simply fill in the attached form and return it to us.
By return we will rush you your membership details, plus the latest copy of Lotus User Forum, and enrol you immediately for free technical support from our product experts.
If you have any queries about what we can do for you, please don't hesitate to call us on 
Simon Moores Chairman 
…
SUPPORT SERVICES FOR PROFESSIONAL USERS
All members receive an unparalleled range of professional services including:
ONCE FREE technical help and support with fast and efficient access to the expert knowledge of our specialist consultants backed up by the latest online information sources.
‘Lotus User Forum’ Our bi-monthly publication, packed with news, useful hints and tips, independent product evaluation and much more.
The most informed and valuable publication for Lotus users.
Software Upgrades The latest releases from Lotus at a special discount for members.
You will be among the first to know how a new release can really help you, already evaluated and tested by our experts.
Conferences and Seminars Designed to keep you informed and to improve the use of Lotus products to solve business problems, these regular events are available at a discount to members.
Bulletin Board Access technical information, utilities, templates, drives and other software via our Bulletin Board.
Share problems and solutions with other members and Lotus users worldwide through our online information network.
Add-in Software The most comprehensive catalogue of add-ins available, with attractive discounts and fuel support from technical experts.
It an add-in exists to solve your specific problem, we will undertake to find it for you to at the best price.
Training and Consultancy Databank
The only independent databank of training and consultancy services.
Tell us your needs and we will find the right people to help you.
Lotus Library An extensive list of books for the beginner and specialist
Lotus Magazine By special arrangement with IDG Publications, members can receive a concessional discount to the Lotus Magazine
Lotus Software The UK's best selling software, available to members at competitive prices with next day delivery.
SOFTWARE ASSURANCE FOR LOTUS USERS…
THE SOLUTION YOU WANT, WHENEVER YOU CALL
FREE SOFTWARE OFFER IF YOU JOIN NOW!
THE YAMAHA-KEMBLE PRO.
MUSIC NEWSLETTER
The Latest Product News
BAND EXPLOSION Music Quest ‘92 is a blast
Last year's Uk finals of Yamaha's global search for the hottest unsigned band of the year saw memorable performances from Manic Street Preachers, chapterhouse and Teenage Club, and put Nottingham's Glory Boys on route to Tokyo for the worldwide finals.
Once again, this year's UK finals will be held at London's Marquee Club and broadcast live on TV and Radio.
So if your band is between 2 and 5 members, without a record company contract but big on talent, pick up an entry form from your local music shop, any Virgin Megastore, May's Making Music or direct from us at Yamaha Kemble Music.
EMP 700 Stereo FX at mono price
Unlike other multi effects processors in its price range, Yamaha's new EMP700 is a true stereo (2 in/2 out) device, perfect for use with stereo keyboards and stereo sources and guitarists on stage and in the studio.
The range of 90 sparkling, full bandwidth preset effects include compression/limiting, EQ, reverbs, delays, enhancer, distortion, overdrive, panning, pitch shift, wah, phaser and a full complement of modulation effects.
User programmed effects can be stored in 50 memory locations or on optional external RAM cards, including specialist guitar effects cards.
ACCESSORIES DIRECT from Yamaha mail order
Now the fast expanding range of Yamaha software, clothing and accessories can be purchased either direct from Yamaha-Kemble at the address on the back page, or from your local Yamaha Dealer.
Bags — Ideal for musicians on the move, Yamaha's new instrument bags are designed to protect a number of Yamaha hitech instruments.
They're padded, branded with the Yamaha logo and finished in rock ‘n’ Roll black with an adjustable shoulder strap.
T-Shirts — Just available, the 1992 Band Explosion highquality T-shirt in XL grey only and the very popular Pro-Music ‘Y’ T-shirt in XL black or white.
Software — Too vast a selection to mention here, ROMs, RAMs, disks and more, just call Yamaha Pro-Music for a free copy of ‘Sound Explosion’, our software and book catalogue.
ARTIST UPDATE Elton John
Four months in the making at Guillaume Tell Studios in Paris, Elton John's new album The One is set for June release on Phonogram.
A central feature in the studio was a 9′ Yamaha Disklavier Grand Piano, a prototype version loaned to Elton for the recording and used in conjunction with a TG77 tone generator.
Keyboard player Mark Taylor played a SY99/TG77 combination which will form the main part of his keyboard rig when the show hits the road at the end of May for a year long world tour.
Enthusing about his Yamaha set-up, Mark was particularly impressed by the clarity of the SY99's sounds along with the string sounds available from the TG77.
YAMAHA In the West End
The hit West End Musical ‘Moby Dick’ opened earlier this year with a unique sound system, designed by Martin Levan Sound and installed by Farrahs.
Members of the cast are assigned to one of two completely different speaker systems depending on the particular qualities of their voice.
22 Yamaha PM4002M and 12 P2700 power amplifiers are used, plus 15 Q2031 graphics, 22 D1030 delay lines, 6 SPX1000 processors and 5 DMP11 digital mixers.
A Yamaha YPDR601 professional CD recorder was used to site to transfer sound effects to CD for instantaneous playback.
SY35 Vectoring through the '90s
Fans of Yamaha's dynamic vector synthesis will already know all about the huge creative potential of combining AWM and FM sound generation under vector control.
Now from Yamaha comes the SY35, a low-cost dynamic vector synthesizer (only £5.99) with an extended memory of 128 AWM and 256 FM waveforms for even greater sound flexibility and power.
With an 8 part multi-play mode, built in drums and 16 on-board digital effects, the SY35 is ideal for use with a sequencer while a velocity and after touch sensitive keyboard will satisfy even the most discerning musician.
And alongside 64 memories in which to store your own unique sounds, the SY35 comes with 128 stunning preset voices that you can play straight away.
NEW APXs Electro acoustic quality for the masses
By combining traditional craftsmanship with state of the art electronics, Yamaha's APX range of electro-acoustic guitars has long been the professionals' choice for performing and recording alike.
Now, APX quality and sound are available to the more budget conscious musician with the launch of three new guitars; the APX-4, APX Special I and APX Special II.
At just £349, the APX-4 features a spruce top and piezo bridge pick-up, and is available in black, natural or violin sunburst finishes.
At £359, the tiger-striped sycamore top APX Special I is available in an orange stain finish while the similarly priced, curly maple top Special II is available in faded burst and purple burst.
Both APX Specials have single piezo bridge pickups.
SY85 Get to grips with the sound
Never a company to rest on its laurels, Yamaha has refined the performance of its influential AWM synthesis to create a second generation, AWM2 tone generation system, the driving force behind the new SY85 synthesizer.
The SY85 combines its new AWM2 sound generation with advanced digital filters, full bandwidth digital effects (as in the SY99), extensive real time control, a unique ‘easy editing’ interface, a multitrack sequencer and a disk drive.
Look out for the SY85 at your local Yamaha music shop from August.
RY10 Rhythm with strings attached
Now this is a really neat idea.
A fully programmable drum machine with 250 stunning AWM voices, a complete range of preset patterns and fills and a selection of programmable bass instruments from which to create a full backing track.
Sounds great for guitarists doesn't it?
Well add to this a built-in tuner, internal monitor speaker for practising and a versatile range of footswitch control and you'll see that the RY10 is set to do for guitarists what our ground-breaking QY10 has done for Keyboard players and for just £249!
TG100 Direct access to 200 great voices
To describe Yamaha's new TG100 as a tone generator is really to tell only half the story.
Sure, with 192 instrument voices, 10 drum kits, 28 note polyphony, 16 part multi-timbrality and digital reverb, it lives up to its description better than most of its competitors.
But two things really set the TG100 apart.
The first is its conformity with the General MIDI Specification, designed to provide greater compatibility for MIDI song files when they are played on different MIDI set-ups.
The second is the provision of a ‘To Host’ computer connection, enabling direct connection of the TG100 to a computer without a MIDI interface.
Add to this the killer price tag of £349 and the TG100 makes a pretty potent package.
Customer Service Centre 0800 010 100 Freephone Enquiry Service
enquiries, complaints, compliments…
…and anything you want to know about Shell
‘Where's the nearest Shell station selling Super Plus unleaded petrol?’
‘Which type of oil do you recommend for my car?’
‘What's so advanced about Shell Advanced Diesel?’
‘The air machine is not working.’
‘Please convey my thanks for the help your service station gave me.’
‘How can I get some information for a school project on energy?’
‘I'd like to suggest that you install public telephones at your garages.’
‘How do I go about buying central heating oil from Shell?’
At Shell, we're always open to our Customers' suggestions, questions, complaints, even compliments — and anything else they want to say or know about Shell.
Because the more we hear from our Customers, the better we can make our service.
That's why we've opened the Shell Customer Service Centre.
Designed to provide a straight answer to a straight question as fast as possible.
Usually immediately.
Whatever our Customers want to say we like them to speak to the staff at Shell stations first.
In many cases Shell Retailers and their staff are able to help on the spot.
If for any reason station staff do not know the answer, call us.
Our line is staffed Monday to Friday from 9am to 5pm with an answering service to take your calls at other times.
Whatever you need to know our specially trained staff are always happy to help.
Please keep this card by your telephone.
Then, if you have a question about Shell, call our number.
Fuel Cards
How to keep your fleet under control
You can tell when it's Shell
SHELL FUEL CARDS
The fuel card that makes a statement about you
The Shell gold Card says a lot about you.
For it's a comprehensive source of management data as well as a fuel card.
It can also secure valuable discounts for you.
Every month the Shell Gold Card provides a series of reports which give you a complete picture of your fleet's performance.
You receive detailed information on each vehicle, summaries at department or depot level if required, and a summary for your whole fleet.
The result is that you know who bought what and where.
You know how your vehicles are performing and what your fleet's running costs are.
And you know you have total control.
Shell Gold Card at a glance
Comprehensive management reports
Interest-free credit
Restrict purchases to fuel and oil only or choose full service
Simplified VAT administration
Savings on vehicle parts and accessories
Preferential rates on AA Company Membership
Cards can be specific to driver and/or vehicle
The simple way to control fleet fuel costs
Shell Agency offers a comprehensive service for UK transport managers.
Combining financial security with a nationwide network of service stations, interest-free credit and clear, detailed invoicing, it offers everything that you need to manage your fleet.
Shell Agency at a glance
Purchases restricted to fuel and oil only
Accepted at Shell and BP Service Stations
Clear weekly invoices approved by Customs & Excise
Interest-free credit
Cards can be specific to driver or vehicle
Milage Capture
The fuel card that translates across 26 countries
Over 11,500 service stations in 26 countries welcome euroShell.
It's Europe's latest network, so drivers are never far from a fill-up.
In the UK, euroShell provides separate invoices twice a month for each country of pick-up, showing the value of purchases in sterling and local currency.
These invoices simplify VAT returns by splitting out the total amount paid.
We can even refund VAT on overseas payments.
What's more, there are no charges for currency conversion or handling.
euroShell at a glance
Europe's largest fuel card network — 11,500 service stations in 26 countries
Detailed invoices for each country
Simplified VAT returns
Overseas VAT refunded
No handling or currency conversion charges
PIN numbers for added security when abroad
Facility to pay for many tunnels, motorway tolls and ferry tickets
24 hour breakdown service in 13 countries
Shell fuel Cards give you the control you need
Whether you manage one vehicle or a fleet of 10,000, whether your journeys are long haul or local, whether you operate cars or coaches, vans or HGVs, Shell Fuel Cards can bring a new level of control to your fleet.
They offer a high level of financial security.
They give you competitive fuel prices and valuable credit.
And they do away with cumbersome expense claims and time-consuming paperwork.
Each card also offers important additional features.
By comparing these with the needs of your fleet, you can select the type of card that will help your vehicles to operate a peak efficiency — and help you to keep your flock in line!