

Attrition, bribery and plain common sense brought about the fall of Kyrenia a few weeks after Nicholas returned there, and although Carlotta, kept in ignorance, might have been devastated by the news, it held no surprises for the people of Cyprus.
The Savoyard knights and their companions marched out, and Zacco and his army crossed the drawbridge and took possession of the castle.
There was a banquet, shared by all his captains, when gold plate, money and villages were freely dispensed and no man, Mameluke or white, was favoured over the other.
Having garrisoned the citadel, Zacco left.
The town outside was long since ruined and empty, and he preferred St Hilarion in the heat of the day.
He would admit, when brought to it, that the bulldog policies of this Niccolò had achieved what he himself, had he cared, could have brought about several years ago, with some small application.
At any rate, it had been accomplished.
The last private nest of the Lusignan Queen had been raided, and Carlotta had no home to return to.
Now, in all Cyprus, there remained only Famagusta to recover.
Nicholas, presented with the problem of capitulated Kyrenia, adopted his best bulldog stance and based himself, perforce, in the north in the weeks after his marriage.
It was during that time the lady Primaflora was summoned to the palace at Nicosia to be scrutinised by the King's mother.
Despite the siege, Nicholas had made the short journey many times to sleep at his villa.
While there, he naturally spent time at the dyeworks; and twice, he had made the longer journey to Kouklia.
Nevertheless, as Primaflora was immoderately aware, he would not have come for these alone, with no heed for the heat of the day.
Since Rhodes she had known (since he told her) how he had met the Flemish woman in Lindos; and had equally known (although he had not told her) that Katelina van Borselen had somehow been persuaded or forced into commerce with him.
Whatever had happened, nevertheless, he had not brought the girl back, but had turned her off to go home to her husband.
Whatever had happened, the experience had disturbed him.
She knew him well enough now to see through some of the camouflage — perhaps all of it.
The effects of this unease she found entirely rewarding.
Then Kyrenia surrendered, and he was away, inescapably, for some time.
The prisons filled.
Atrocity stories filtered through, of the Mamelukes bursting into the citadel; of the destruction, the rampage; the plundering.
It would take time to set that to rights, and make of Carlotta's old home a palace fit for her brother to live in.
Meantime, Primaflora amused herself perfecting her household, an art in which she had long experience.
She made it her business to get on well with the steward, and her pleasure to keep Bartolomeo Zorzi dancing to an almost inaudible tune.
She liked to preserve an edge on her training.
When the summons came from the Palace, she took care to dress neither as a lady of pleasure nor a noblewoman.
A courtesan was a woman of gifts who attached herself to a great man, and expected to be displayed as a badge of his wealth.
Marietta of Patras had come from the Morea in the train of Helen Paleologa, wife of John, King of Cyprus.
Whether she came to Cyprus a virgin was unknown.
What was patent was the King's installation of her as his mistress, his delight in Zacco her son, and his habit of avoiding the febrile company of Carlotta, his legitimate daughter by Helen.
Marietta of Patras was a woman of birth, honoured as a dead monarch's permanent mistress.
In status, she ranked as far above Primaflora as Primaflora above a public prostitute.
Otherwise Helen, Carlotta's mother, would never, of course, have felt impelled to bite off her nose.
In the dying heat of the day, Cropnose gave audience to Primaflora on her balcony.
Muslin fell between arches which overlooked a garden of palms and fountains and citrus trees.
Vines shaded it, and pots of brilliant flowers had been placed on the balustrade.
At one end there stood a stand made of gold, upon which slept a red and blue bird, its chain hanging.
Above, a smaller bird sang in a cage.
A woman fingered a lute, and there were two others seated on cushions, one reading.
A page behind the only fully-framed chair moved a long-shafted fan over his mistress's head.
Because of the heat, the King's mother wore none of her noses, but a Syrian half-veil, light as a kerchief.
An embroidered cloth concealing her hair was bound with a complex gold fillet, and her robe was of Caspian silk woven in Florence.
Clasped on her lap, her fingers were rose-tipped and heavily ringed.
The upper part of her face was exquisitely painted, and her perfumes were slight, and varied, and seemly.
Primaflora, who wore no scent at all, crossed her unadorned wrists and sank to the ground.
After a considerable  space, the woman above her said, ‘You may sit.’
A low stool had appeared.
Primaflora rose and bestowed herself naturally, so that her skirts fell with grace.
The King's mother said, ‘So.
You are old for the boy.’
‘Niccolò, my lady?’ said Primaflora.
‘He is old enough to lead armies.’
‘He is young enough to inflame my son.
It is your practice to come between lovers?’
Too well-informed to pretend shock, Primaflora evinced instead a form of gentle regret tinged with reproach.
‘Gracious lady, I knew nothing of that.
Before we ever reached Cyprus, Niccolò had demonstrated where his desire lay.’
‘A year ago,’ said the woman.
‘He had not met the King then.
On my advice, the King sent you off.
What makes you so bold as to Come back?’
Primaflora bit her lip without disturbing the paint.
She said, ‘Knowing nothing of this, how can I answer?
The parting was hard.
You know that Ser Niccolò, to end it, came to fetch me.
Was I to spurn him?
My feelings for him were — are — fondly engaged.’
‘Are they?’ said the asthmatic voice with amusement.
‘That is dangerous, lady, for one of your calling.
And marriage, I should have thought, is a false step you must have been well warned against.
With such as you as his wife, how can a man prosper in public life, and earn the gold that you need?
How can you leave, should his fortunes alter?’
Primaflora looked down.
‘Well?’ said the woman.
‘Bashful?
Hardly.
He has expectations you thought worth the venture?
You made marriage the price of your body?
He made marriage the price of his body?’
Primaflora shook her head and then spread her hands in a sudden gesture of confusion.
‘All I know is that he would not have left Rhodes without marriage.
He had prospects, but for his friends’ sake, I shall not be endowed with more than enough for my needs.
But his passion runs deep; and…’
She hesitated again.
‘What?’ said the woman, still entertained.
‘I would give him sons,’ said Primaflora.
‘Ha!’ said Marietta of Patras, ‘I thought there was something of the brood mare about you.
You have some already, no doubt, being discreetly raised by their fathers?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Speak up!
And daughters, as well?,
Then she looked up.
‘No.
Only sons.
A man such as Niccolò can find himself lonely.
I would give him companions for the years to come.
I would stay with him and rear them.’
‘It is true,’ said the old harridan, whining, ‘that presently your looks will leave you, and if you have amassed no property, no wise  investments, you must plan for your future.
But I have to tell you that a man such as Niccolò needs sons less than he needs marriage, and needs a woman at present not at all.
What may suit you would be folly for him.
Get back to Rhodes.’
Primaflora stood up.
She said, ‘I am married.’
‘That is soon cured,’ the woman said.
‘With a hatchet.
It is your choice.’
So all she had heard of this woman was true.
Primaflora remained standing still, although she knew she had blanched.
She said steadily, ‘You would lose your commander.
The King would lose his friend.
I know Niccolò.’
‘And I know Zacco,’ the King's mother said.
‘Do you think your
Niccolò would ever know how you died?
Make some excuse and go back to Rhodes.
Once you are there, have your death proclaimed.
It will be more convenient, I promise you, than the alternative.’
The woman's eyes over her veil were black as gun-tubes.
Primaflora had confronted jealous women before; angry women; threatening women; but none with the power of this one.
She said, ‘Parted like that, what good would he be?
What good would I be?’
Then, under the steady stare of the eyes, she said with sudden despair, ‘I would share him.’
‘How kind,’ said the woman.
She laughed, and the veil blew out like a flag.
‘And you think the King would accept that?’
‘I don't know the King,’ said Primaflora in a thin voice.
She had stopped her tears with the heel of her hand, and face-paint smeared it.
The King's mother snapped her fingers.
‘A kerchief.
To see you now, who would want you?
Go to Rhodes.’
Primaflora took the kerchief and drew it over her cheeks and then held it taut, staring at the damp blotches.
She said, ‘I see you want me to go, for the King's sake.
For Niccolò's sake, would you let the King arbitrate?’
The cloth blew reflectively, and again.
The King's mother said, ‘You think you can persuade the lion that he is not hungry?’
‘No,’ said Primaflora.
She did not try, this time, to keep her voice steady.
‘But the quality of any man's service depends on his wellbeing.
My death, my banishment would deprive the King of contentment as well as my husband.
And sooner or later, another would come in my place.’
Above their heads, the fan brushed the air; the coloured bird woke and stretched one indolent leg; the caged bird, which had been silent, suddenly launched into a piercing, rattling trill.
Marietta of Patras turned her head, her breath whistling, and silent hands bore off the cage.
The King's mother said, ‘You are singularly mature for this boy, but I would not have him distressed before Famagusta is won.
Very well.
Stay in Nicosia and hold  yourself ready.
When he returns, I shall ask the King to receive you.
Perhaps you will accept his dismissal.
Indeed, my woman, you will have no other choice.’
The northern mountains were cool, and the King protracted his stay, taking up residence in St Hilarion, the summer palace of the Lusignans, in the airy apartments of the absent Carlotta and Luis her consort.
Long ago, the broad tactics for the next and final stage of this war had been decided; all that remained were a host of small decisions and, of course, the normal government of his kingdom.
During this brief interregnum, it pleased Zacco to call Nicholas to St Hilarion for disputatious council meetings which occasionally ended in concord.
Problems were more often solved when, after a day of hard, heated riding, the King repaired with his shrewdest advisers to the cool belvedere suspended over the castle's north precipice, with its stupendous view to the sea, and the mountains of Asia beyond.
Then, with men of Naples and Sicily like Rizzo di Marino, or Conella Morabit; or with the excellent Bailie of Karpass, or the Venetian commander Pesaro, Nicholas could share the moulding of the King's mind.
At the end of such evenings he found his own bed alone, walking through blackened courts where once Saracen climbers had run with fire among the poisoned and the dying.
He had not forgotten.
But now, with the campaign against Famagusta looming over him, and the palace full of the wild exhilaration of a conquering army, Nicholas was too occupied to be haunted by anything of the past.
Every day, he passed between the cliff-top fort and the captured castle at its foot, clearing the way not just for the King's casual occupation, but to repair the defences of Kyrenia against the corsair, or Carlotta, or the Turk.
More importantly, and as often as he could, he rode to Pesaro's citadel west of Famagusta.
The guns, under John's supervision, were already on their way there, and the sutlers with the siege engines.
Soon, the full army would move.
Twice, he got to Nicosia and could hardly respond to the ardour he found in Primaflora.
It was then, too, that he found that her meeting with the King's mother was over — happily, as she told him, smiling; although her welcome would not be complete until the King himself left St Hilarion and sent for her.
It seemed satisfactory.
He would like to have had Cropnose's version, but their paths didn't cross, and there was no reason, meantime, why he should seek the King's mother.
In any case, he was busy.
If he felt, sometimes, that he had heard too little of that interview of Primaflora's, and that there was something of desperation now in her love-making, he didn't pursue it for once; and even the matter of Katelina remained only as an anxiety held well in check.
The Levant was in arms: there was  danger in every voyage, and no way of telling how a half-Portuguese youth or a Flemish woman would contrive safely to make their way home.
From his days as a courier, Nicholas had many sources of information, and had asked them all to report.
Venice and Ancona, Naples and Sicily, Florence and Bruges would watch and listen and notify him in due course of their passage, as well as of other things.
His Western network for other news was wider even than that, not to mention the other more extravagant system he had discussed with no one except, of course, Loppe.
But, of course, there had not been time yet for anyone to report on Katelina, even had shipping been normal.
Venice had placed an embargo on Bosphorus trade and was hesitant even over her Alexandria fleet.
The Order would keep its vessels for safety at Rhodes.
Florence would also be circumspect.
It affected his own supplies, as well as the carriage of news, and forced him to make secondary plans, among other things, for the sale of his new sugar crop.
But planning was what he liked, and he had contingency plans, too, for whatever news he had in the end of Katelina, good or bad.
He had, now, friends in many places, or people who owed him a favour.
He worked through his programme meticulously yet with the flamboyance that entranced Zacco, and invigorated even the sluggish.
He somehow managed to pound down to Kouklia on Chennaa, half by night and half by blazing day, and crossing the island was able to see for himself that it had been a more settled and prosperous year.
Smitten by war, the plains of Kyrenia were barren, and the sponge-divers of the Karpass had made barely a living.
But cistern-drenched wheat and barley had burst yellow over the plain of the Messaoria, and the sickles twinkled and chimed as, booted and belled, harvesters strode to their work among serpents.
The pods of the carob trees dangled, black and leaking rank gum, ripe for cropping.
There were pomegranates in baskets and gourds drying on roof-tops.
In every village, it seemed, a donkey circled its trough of crushed olives, and the press thudded down, helped by many brown arms, as the mash yielded its oozings through wicker.
Where the scent of orange had deadened the senses in March, the resinous odour of olives weighed down the humid, hot air of this journey.
Instead of flower-infused silence, the air was filled with the clamour of autumn: the cries, the chaffing, the folksongs, the team-songs of the villages; the chinking of blades; the rumble of flint-studded boards driven over the threshing-ground.
The objecting bray of working donkeys.
The shuddering tramp of the oxen spinning the Persian wheels set over every deep well, so that the jars came up, roped with pomegranate wood withies, and tossed their icy water into the stone channels that fed the fields and the housewife's wood buckets.
Vines and almonds, lemons and oranges, pomegranates and sugar.
In the fields around Kouklia  and Akhelia his second crop of cane was strong and healthy and promising; the men in good heart; Loppe full of plans.
For a moment Nicholas, too, saw the future as something splendid and bright; a fertile island, well run and blooming, and owing nothing to all the nations that warred round about it.
Then he stopped himself and Loppe and said, ‘I am glad.
This is what we all wanted.
But we are not alone on this island.
And of all the lands of the world, this is a place armies covet.’
‘This and your land,’ Loppe had added, after a silence.
‘Bruges?’ he had surmised solemnly after a moment.
‘I was thinking of Simon's island,’ had said Loppe.
‘The sugar ships should be due in November.
Will Famagusta have fallen by then?’
And Nicholas had said, ‘More to the point, will the Turkish fleet have gone back to Gallipoli by then?
It doesn't matter.
We'll get the sugar out somehow.
Then our Syrian friend might like a short visit home.
Is that why you asked?’
‘You know as well as I do,’ said Loppe, ‘that when Famagusta surrenders, this island will split into flame like a fireball.
Nor will it be between brother and sister.’
‘I can stop it,’ said Nicholas.
‘With a cataract that will flood them?’ said Loppe.
‘The Venetians have bested you once already at least.’
‘Ah,’ said Nicholas.
‘But it's the last time that counts.
I agree, the taking of Famagusta will be the signal for a great deal of treachery.
But if all goes well, James might end up King of Jerusalem again.
Think of all those Syrian cane fields.’
‘You're talking rubbish,’ said Loppe.
‘That will never happen.’
‘Of course it will never happen,’ Nicholas said.
‘But a lot of other things might.
There's no sense in letting things become dull.’
Then he thudded back to Nicosia again.
Primaflora was absent when he arrived at the villa and when she returned, an hour later, she was wearing a girdle and a left sleeve he had never seen before, and a jewelled coif with a curled feather in it.
She stood in the portico of his chamber and gravely allowed him to admire her.
He cogitated, his head on one side.
‘Cropnose bas made you one of her ladies?
No.
A better guess.
Zacco is back in the Palace, and has agreed that you stay?’
Then she gave one of her small, pleated smiles and said, ‘It pleased him, I think, to rob his sister.
Even the sleeve came from her.
And he has realised that he had nothing to lose even if I am spying for Carlotta.
But these, of course, are not his main reasons.
I am to stay for your sake.
He is fond of you.’
‘And you think I am fond of him?’
Nicholas said.
‘I would ask you to come in and sit down, but you are wearing so many clothes.’
‘I can still come in and sit down,’ Primaflora said, doing so.
‘Yes, I think you are fond of him.
But I believe you would be fond of him if he looked like your camel.
It is your nature.
I think you have grown fond even of Tzani-bey.,
She had said that once before, surprising him, on the voyage from Rhodes.
He said now, ‘Tzani-bey, I assure you, has not grown fond of me.
As I told you, the present war rules us both.
He is only waiting, as I am, until Famagusta is taken.’
‘So?’ she said.
‘And that will be next week?
The week after?
It's a year since you sailed to Cape Gata.
Nine months since you came back from Rhodes, and then deserted Cyprus again.
You promised Zacco his kingdom this summer, and he is still waiting.
He said so this morning.
Also, I had to give him news.
After four years, the Queen his half-sister is carrying.’
And Zacco was not married.
She didn't have to say so.
Her conversation, full of spice and amazements, was always different from other people's.
He said, ‘Famagusta will fall, and with luck, before the rain comes.’
‘With luck?
Did you win Kyrenia with luck?
Or has Famagusta heard what the Mamelukes did?’ asked Primaflora.
‘Are those the rumours?’
Nicholas said.
‘The Mamelukes did nothing to the hurt of Kyrenia, because the King stopped them.
The Brethren of the Order were set free to go to Kolossi.
The Queen's Marshal and all her associates — Montolif, Pardo, de Bon — were allowed to take ship for Rhodes.’
‘But they surrendered because they were starving?’ said Primaflora.
Her voice, for once, was a trifle sharp.
‘Eating dogs, cats and mice?
An egg sold, we heard, for a hyperper?’
‘They certainly didn't have any pork,’ Nicholas said.
‘But I think a few rats did survive.
Kyrenia surrendered because the commander Sor de Naves had been promised wealth, estates, the office of Constable and the hand, when she is out of napkins, of Charlotte, the elder daughter of Zacco.
But it was necessary, of course, for the garrison to experience discomfort first.
Unfortunately, the other daughter is a little too young, and I don't think Zacco wants a Genoese good-son.’
He always enjoyed her silences, because he knew she was trying to read him.
Sometimes, she succeeded.
Now she said, ‘Why is Famagusta so difficult?’
‘Because it's Genoese,’ Nicholas said.
‘And they are not going to give it up.
Also, it's not simply a garrison, it's a fortified city; with damned great walls and ditches and bastions built on three sides of it, and the sea to defend it on the fourth.’
She said, ‘A place of that size must contain thousands; and must have to feed thousands.
Or have they all left but the soldiers?’
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
‘The children have gone, and the sick, and the older women and men.
The rest are all still there, because the  blockade was not very efficient till recently.
We found two underground passages, one to the sea and one to the landward side.
It's how they got supplies in, among other means.
We have sealed them.’
‘But they will have stockpiled all the food and wine, the grain and livestock and powder that they could?
What about water?’
‘They have some brackish wells, and some very deep ones.
Until recently, they had water,’ Nicholas said.
‘But you have stopped it?
In some way you have stopped it?
I see, she said slowly.
I see why you hope for surrender before the rain comes to refill their cisterns.
Or they may linger on, starving all winter, to the shame of Zacco; inviting Christian rescue?
What if there is a crusade, and Cyprus is still divided?
Venice, Burgundy, Bohemia, the Pope longing to throw out the Egyptians and reinstate Carlotta?’
Nicholas said, ‘There can't be a Crusade before next summer.
And by that time, if Cyprus is still divided, then I shall be too.
But it won't be.
Famagusta will fall, and the Pope will regard Cyprus as a unified, Christian kingdom.’
‘So you may even join his Crusade?’ said Primaflora, surprising him again.
He laughed.
‘The Crusade he'll pay for from papal alum?
As it happens, there'd be a certain rough justice if I got a wage from it.
But no.
Even if my fighting contract has ended I shall still, I hope, have my sugar franchise.
Only if I lost that would I have to take my little warband elsewhere.
Unless you think I should?
Are you tired of Cyprus?’
She rose, and crossed the room and, taking a cushion, knelt at his feet, gathering his hands in hers.
She said, ‘Sometimes you wonder, I know.
Sometimes you believe that, with the first change in fortune, I shall go back to Carlotta.
Sometimes I think you suspect me of many things.
But don't suspect me of wanting to leave you.
I didn't tell you this, for if you loved Zacco it might make you dislike him; or change the dealings you have with his mother.
While you were in the north, his mother spoke to me.’
‘I remember,’ he said.
Her hands were cool, in spite of the heat.
His hands were cold.
She said, ‘I kept to myself what she said.
She said, under pain of death, I was to leave you, for I interfered with her son and his lover.’
Her eyes, unshadowed, intelligent, were unmoving on his.
He said, ‘Did you believe her?’
‘I believed she hoped it would happen,’ said Primaflora.
‘Perhaps I was wrong in what I then did.
I said you and I were man and wife, and to lose me would break or damage your bond with the King.
I asked her to let me put the matter to Zacco himself, and let the King decide.
I said that, if need be, I would share you.’
Her gaze remained direct; her body still, but the fingers between his were rigid.
Nicholas withdrew his own hands and placed them lightly on her two shoulders.
He said, ‘And today, the King himself exacted this promise, and you gave it?’
‘I am used to sharing,’ she said; and laid her cheek in fondness, or in weariness, or in sorrow, on his knee while he stroked her hair, his head bent, and then kissed it.
Nicholas said, ‘He has always had hopes.
They are always going to be disappointed.
Primaflora, now he will blame you.’
She lifted her wet face, smiling at last.
She said, ‘What is this?
You want me to urge you to submit to him?
No.
All I am saying, my dear, is that you have another reason to end this war quickly.
When he is truly King, he will find other favourites, and no reason to keep you or me at his side.
But quickly!
Quickly!’
And he didn't tease her, or court her, or divert her, because what she had done was risk death, which was a thing better honoured by abstinence.
Only, next day, he rode to Famagusta with less than a light heart, to lead his men to the end of the game.
The hot Cyprus autumn moved from one week to the next, and Zacco prepared for his forthcoming triumph by installing himself in the moated citadel built by his great-grandfather at Sigouri, ten miles west of the besieged Famagusta.
This was not to say that he didn't spend time with the army, lending vigorous help as the trains of oxen dragged the batteries into position, and the wagonloads of food and fodder, weapons and powder bumped fifty miles south-east from Kyrenia to where Famagusta lay, lodged in its bay, divided by ninety broad sea miles from Syria.
As the cannon arrived, so the masons prepared the stone shot, meeting the carts that arrived every day from the agora and temples of Salamis, tipping fluted cylinders and marble capitals and Egyptian granite into the yards.
Camels, horses and oxen ground the dried earth to powder, and the deposits of sheep and cattle and goats, pigs and poultry added their stench to that of human and vegetable waste.
The physicians were busy, and Nicholas seldom saw Tobie or Abul, spending two-thirds of his time with Astorre and Thomas and John, and the rest at Sigouri, with Zacco.
Here, there was no ambiguity; no difficulty over marriage or courtship; no women at all but the camp-followers, or the whores who were for sale, with other merchandise, from the second, vagabond camp that stood as a fringe to the first.
It was at that time like wine to be in the presence of the Lusignan Bastard, ebullient, assured of success, glowing with pride in himself and his army.
‘The Feast of St Nicholas!’ he had cried, slapping Nicholas one day on the back.
‘We shall give you a celebration on your Feast Day, Niccolino, in the place best fitted for it.
A Mass in the Cathedral of St Nicholas in Famagusta itself, and a feast in my Palace to follow!’
The Feast of St Nicholas was in the first week of December; a  month away.
Until the age of seven, Nicholas had received a treat every year on the Feast Day of his patron; and from the age of ten he grew to know that the day would generally be marked for him in some way or another — in many different ways, although not every year — until, of course, his wife Marian died.
Now, as if it had never happened before, Nicholas thanked the King, but not as the King wanted.
Later, John le Grant got Nicholas away from Sigouri, put him in a tent and said, ‘Right.
We're not going to do this in four weeks.’
‘I've heard Astorre say that too.
So long as neither of you says it aloud.
We're not going to do it at all if the King loses interest too early.’
He kept his voice as reasonable as he always did, since there was no point in anyone becoming heated.
They had both hoped for a classic siege manoeuvre: a complete blockade of supplies, followed when the city was weak by an assault over ditches infilled by themselves, and preceded by feints, night attacks and heavy bombardment.
To this end, a deep trench had been begun long ago: deep enough to bring a file of men and their weapons in safety close under the walls.
But, baked by summer, the earth and rock round Famagusta had resisted digging, and the sappers themselves had been depleted by storms of arrows from longbows and crossbows; by the methodical firing of handguns and serpentines.
The trench was only three-quarters finished, and wouldn't progress until the rains came.
The rain which would turn their campground to mud, and fill the cisterns of Famagusta.
So there faded their hopes of a final assault before winter.
That left deprivation.
Nicholas said, ‘There's still a very good chance they'll surrender.
They haven't used their bows or their guns for four days.
We know their food is low.
You've drained the water table and their wells are either dry or running salt water.
The only drink they have left is wine, diluted with whatever is still in the cisterns.
They've used all their timber stores and cut up every bucket and table and door to make all those fighting platforms and towers, so they can hardly have plugs for their cannon, and they won't have any fuel except dung.
They haven't made a cavalry sortie for three weeks, even though the cannon weren't in place yet: they must be killing and curing the horses.
The only missiles they're using are stones.
John: they're going to give up before they actually starve.
And they're going to give up before that if they've run out of arrows and powder.’
‘No, they're not,’ John le Grant said.
It was hard, sometimes, to be reasonable with John le Grant.
Nicholas said, ‘So, why?’
The engineer pursed his face and scraped the sandy bristles on his chin.
He said, ‘Someone came over the wall.
They do, now and then, and our Egyptian friends usually cut out their tongues and  their livers.
We got to this one in time.
A Jew, who thought their quarrel wasn't his quarrel, and was likely right.
He knew more than most: the stores and the munitions are locked, and only the Genoese in the castle know how the supplies really go.
But this fellow had helped with the stocktaking.’
‘And they're living off fresh-cooked lamb and white bread and sweet Commanderie?’
Nicholas said.
‘They're living off beans and cheese and horse and ass-meat if they can pay for it, but even the price of dogs and cats is getting on the high side.
Their cattle are finished: they made the last batch of bread with oxblood to save what's left of the water, and they drink that mixed with wine, of which there isn't all that much, either.
They're reduced to five thousand with short commons and sickness, and the extra irony is that a cargo ship diverted from Chios got in just before the port closed.
It had a big crew and a full commercial load — wax and mastic and wormwood seed, six bales of carpets and eighty baskets of sulphur, fifty bundles of silk and five hundred oxhides, two hundred barrels of saltpetre and a hundred bales of Syrian soda.
Three cases of our very own sugar.
Oh, and sixteen tons of alum that must have been left over from Phocoea.’
He stopped, his unwinking blue eyes on Nicholas.
He had his own sense of drama, John le Grant, as well as a very good memory.
Nicholas said, ‘God's left big toe,’ in a sad voice.
John le Grant said, ‘Precisely.
Nothing to eat, of course, excepting the sugar, which will scour the inside out of their stomachs.
The ship wasn't even properly victualled for the crew: they'd been going to take food on at Crete.
But enough saltpetre and sulphur to keep those guns firing for ever.,
‘And alum and oxhides,’ said Nicholas slowly.
‘That's why the galleries weren't burning.
But charcoal?
They'd need charcoal.,
‘They have it, he says,’ said John le Grant in his sensible voice.
‘Or if they didn't, they could always burn the ship, couldn't they?
They've no beasts to work the powder mill, but men could do it, if they aren't too weak.
Or they could mill it by hand.
Lacking the piss of a wine-drinking man, the poor sods will have to do without granules.
But these two nice bombards that bastard Sor de Naves presented them with?
They've got gunpowder enough to keep the whole battery firing for ever.
That's why they pretended to stop.
They knew by now we'd think they'd run out.
They were hoping against hope we'd attack them.’
Nicholas was silent.
The engineer said, ‘So they've enough powder, very likely, to baulk that final attack we were all counting on, but on the other hand the food is just about finished.
A sensible Genoese colony, however stiff-necked, might therefore meet over its ass-bones and set a date for surrender, you'd hope.
But here's a twist.
They've heard a relieving fleet's on the way.’
‘How?’ said Nicholas sharply.
‘Someone got in from the sea-wall.
It isn't hard to cross from the islands.
So long as no food's going in, our soldiers don't mind allowing an extra mouth or two into the city.
But a rescue fleet?
It isn't true, is it?’
‘No, it isn't,’ Nicholas said.
‘I know that much at least about shipping moves.
They expect a Genoeseship?
The Bank is exhausted.’
‘They expect a fleet of Genoese ships.
And whether they're coming or not, that city is going to hold out to starvation point and beyond, so long as it believes in a rescue.’
After a while he said, ‘Nicholas?
Astorre and Tobie should know, but I wasn't going to announce this in public.
God knows what the King will decide to do.
Or Tzani-bey.’
After another pause, he said, ‘It's only a planning problem.
This is war, too.
It's just a different sort of war from bashing at someone on horseback.’
Nicholas said, ‘I'm not sitting fainting with horror: I'm trying to make God-damned plans.
First, what happened to the Jew who told you all this?,
‘He's dead,’ said the engineer, his face expressionless.
He added, ‘He spoke Italian.
No one interviewed him but me.’
‘So,’ said Nicholas.
‘I'm a stiff-necked Genoese sitting starving inside that city.
A note flies over my wall telling me there's no fleet on the way: I'm not going to believe it.
A trumpet arrives offering a million ducats and freedom: I'm not going to surrender when I know I'm going to win anyway — or at least get supplies to hang on until something happens to Zacco.
I might have a traitor or two who would offer to open the gates for a square meal, but I'd kill one of those before he got very far, and I'd turn my guns on any army approaching.
So I would probably hold out to starvation point and possibly inadvertently beyond, because there will be disease in that place very soon.
And Zacco will walk into his own very dead city.’
‘There are alternatives,’ John le Grant said.
‘Of course.
Zacco doesn't know this.
Left to himself, he would pretty soon let the blockade ease off for winter, as he's always done.
Minimal food will get in, starvation will be avoided, and Famagusta will hold on until, who knows, next summer a Genoese fleet might set out and rescue it.’
‘And not left to himself?’ the engineer said.
‘If he knew this?
He'd wait and starve them.
Tzani-bey would do the same, only with decorations.
Poisoned wells, putrid carcases slung over the walls.
He'll suggest that anyway, as soon as he and the King begin to see the surrender isn't coming by the Feast of St Nicholas.’
‘It's a damned pity,’ said John, ‘that you weren't called Stephen.
It would've given us another month to play with at least.
So what?’
‘So three things,’ Nicholas said.
‘Empty Kyrenia and Salines and Paphos and double the men on those trenches.
Establish as heavy a bombardment as the cannon will stand against the walls and the guns by the walls.
And let's get rid of the powder.
It's bound to be in the fort, and that overlooks the harbour.
Mick Crackbene is there sitting outside that harbour with the Doriaand at least one galley at his disposal.
So why not increase his artillery, and give him all the fire-missiles he can carry.
Better still, get him to try and slip a man in through the sea-gate.
A single explosion would silence their guns.
Then we take by assault when the ditch is done.
Or perhaps, if they're starved and weary of waiting, by then the people will force Lomellini to a surrender.’
He stopped.
‘What else can you think of?’
‘Broadly the same,’ John le Grant said.
‘I've changed my mind, too, about something else.
Tell the King.
If you leave it till later he won't forgive you, or maybe even believe you, if you have to expend soldiers on something he doesn't think necessary.’
Nicholas grunted.
John le Grant said, ‘You don't want to, but you're better at it than most.
In this game, every employer's an eccentric.
Tobie nurses a dream of spending his life in the field with Urbino, but he'd find he's unpredictable too.
He's better off with you.
At least you're unpredictable in a more interesting way.’
‘And that's a damned lie,’ Nicholas said.
‘You knew what I was going to say throughout this entire conversation.’
‘And that was what was interesting,’ John le Grant said.
‘You said only what I'd expect you to say.
So what else is happening?’
‘Nothing yet,’ Nicholas said.
‘Maybe nothing at all.
Come on.
You're right.
We ought to tell the whole story to Zacco.,
Zacco was told and threw himself, burning with zeal, into the new plans.
The extra sappers were in place in a week, and the big hooped bombards and mortars, repositioned, were firing their three-hundred pounders as frequently as bombards were ever able to do, with a hundred balls beside each to do it with.
Neither their range nor their alignment being of more than average accuracy, the damage they did was haphazard but promising.
The medium bombards and basilisks, made by John in his wisdom with trunnions, now showed the virtues of his new two-wheeled carriages, which made them easy to move and regroup whatever the weather.
They had powder enough — sixteen tons of it.
In the hinterland, under cover, three new fighting-towers and several new engines were taking shape while Mick Crackbene, from his round ship, perfected his trajectories against the stout keep with its four corner towers that housed, they suspected, the city's great store of powder.
They had all grown used to the sounds of the camp: the low  open-air roar of many voices, the lowing of cattle, the chiming of harness and smith-work, the continual creak of John's waterpumps; the intermittent discharge of either cannon or handguns.
Now there was an unremitting and thunderous noise of explosions punctuated by clanging and shouting, and the watchful discharge of small arms in a series of smoky thuds from the city walls.
Napoleone Lomellini had discovered the absence of the Jew, and had ceased pretence, at least, of possessing no powder.
Three tiring and deafening weeks passed with no obvious change.
Once, the King sent a herald with banner, trumpet and tabard, to invite the captain of Famagusta to surrender.
The captain replied that the city was well off, sound, and had no intention of relinquishing its hard-won rights to Monseigneur the Bastard who, as was well known, had usurped the legitimate claims of the true Queen, Carlotta.
He added that any further approach would be greeted by gunfire.
Ten days after the first herald, the King sent another man in, of slightly less seniority, to repeat the royal offer.
The Genoese shot him.
About then, word came from Salines, three hours away, to inform Nicholas that the Venetian sugar ship had reached Alexandria and would be leaving soon for Episkopi to pick up the combined Cypriot cargo.
Nicholas went to the King and asked leave to absent himself for four days.
Zacco gave it, impatiently.
That day, the skies had clouded and, for the first time, the weather was cooler.
Soon, it would take the better part of two days to pass between Famagusta and Kouklia.
Loppe had made the awkward trip once since the siege began.
Otherwise they communicated through their agent at Salines.
But for the excellence of Loppe and his sugar-master, it would not have been very satisfactory.
On the way this time it rained, but despite his dragging cloak and the glum faces of the small train he took with him, Nicholas made the journey in a condition of numbness that amounted almost to happiness.
The country was silent.
That is, there was work going on everywhere, but the noise of it was dispersed in the mild cloudy air, no longer staring blue, with the brassy sun striking down on dry earth.
The villages were noisy with smiths and coopers and loom-work, dicing and singing, but the noise was contained, and cheerful, and natural.
Nowadays, quite a few recognised him, and seemed to bear him no grudges.
He stayed the night at Salines, and arrived at noon next day at Kouklia.
Only on the last part of his journey had he put his mind to questions of waxed cloth and canvas, cubic capacity and rates of exchange.
It was Advent again.
It struck him then how long a year it had been.
How last year the crop had meant nothing to him at all; how, without understanding, he had walked about the harbour and warehouses of Episkopi, and the misuse of the Order's cargo of  sugar had been simply a matter noted and used as a playing-counter.
Now, arriving at his own manor of Kouklia, he recognised as if he had been bred to it the sound and smell and look of each component; each piece of equipment.
At Stavros, the new grinding mill had been built.
It was empty now, and so was the echoing hall of the old, its oxen safely stabled.
In the yard, newly muddy, planks ran between vats, some empty and scoured, some still steaming.
Over each, now, a wooden shelter was in place, already bleached by the sun.
In the refining sheds, the last of the cones stood, cooling and whitening, and dripping their slow, golden molasses into their jars.
There were not so many men about now.
Some had gone back to their villages; some to the pottery; some to begin the maintenance tasks that would take place, at the yard or by the hearth, all through the winter.
The rest were employed at present between Stavros and Episkopi, loading and transporting the casks to the warehouses to await the arrival of the all-important galley which was to take them to Venice.
Later, he would have to go there.
But first, Nicholas walked uphill back to the manor with Loppe, and in the office there read the ledgers and saw what had been done.
Then he said, ‘Loppe, it's a miracle.
You've doubled it.’
Loppe smiled.
Throughout the tour, his bearing had been one of well-mannered gravity.
It was not perhaps natural but it had served him well, Nicholas knew, from the beginning.
Cyprus society did not readily recognise the management skills of a negro.
Loppe knew better, of course, than to expect to enter any nobleman's house as a friend.
He never seemed to let it trouble him.
But now, in private with Nicholas, Loppe said, ‘What's this, a miracle?
This is the result of my experience and your money and a touch of genius that follows me whatever I do.
If you'd been quicker over the refining equipment —‘
It was an old story, and Nicholas did no more than pull a molasses-type face.
Left under-equipped by the Martini, it had taken him too long to realise that copper vats were not now to be had; that all the pottery stores had somehow been requisitioned; that skilled men had been seduced away to serve elsewhere.
Someone cleverer or luckier than he was had noticed that the way to make money wasn't this way, risking the mice and the drought and the locusts, managing the men and the beasts and all the complexity of arrangements that ended here, in the yard, with crushed cane and coarse syrup fit for refining.
Someone had noticed that the easy, clean way was simply to buy the end product and refine.
He said, ‘How much do we have to send as unrefined sugar?’
And Loppe said, ‘A quarter.
We lose the profit of half the increased production.
It will be better next year.
I have three vats on the way from Damascus.’
‘And this one firm are refining?’ said Nicholas.
‘There are others, but their rates are far higher.
These are moderate.
It is a question,’ Loppe said, ‘whether it would not be cheaper to let them do all the refining.
You could sell the vats, let the men go; run down the pottery.
All that would offset their charges.’
‘For one year,’ Nicholas said.
‘After that, they could charge what they pleased.
And what would all these people do?
Not praise Zacco, at any rate.
The Corner are still refining?’
‘They are in the same difficulty,’ Loppe said.
‘You will see them at Episkopi.
What is happening at Famagusta?’
He deserved an answer, and Nicholas gave it.
He supposed his reserve was apparent.
John le Grant had viewed him, it was obvious, as a child enjoying rough play, and brought up suddenly short by reality.
He had meant to point out to John le Grant that they had both engaged in extremely rough play at Trebizond, and if he chose to carry out another war contract, he was not doing it blindfold.
But it was true that he had forgotten, in the turmoil of Famagusta and Sigouri and the turbulent wake of the Bastard, that there was another régime which lay entirely under his hand, orderly, productive and satisfying to heart and head.
He had felt the same, momentarily, stepping into the dyeyard at Nicosia, but put it down to a foolish nostalgia.
Or perhaps he was quite mistaken, and what his nature called for was both.
At the moment, he would have given quite a lot to stay here, and never return to the other cities again.
Even though his wife Primaflora was there and it was four weeks since he had touched her.
This train of thought led to another.
He finished his story and said, ‘I can't stay long.
I'd better go down to Episkopi.
Then I'll come back and we'll talk.
When this ship has sailed, can you come to Famagusta?
Will it run well enough in your absence?’
‘How long an absence?’ said Loppe.
‘Perhaps the siege is over.
Perhaps the magazine has blown up already.’
‘But that's why I want you there,’ Nicholas said.
‘Not for the siege; but what's going to happen after it.’
For the rest of the time, they spoke only of business.
At Episkopi, he found one of the Martini brothers down by the warehouses.
He had met him before, since his second coming from Rhodes, and on both occasions the Venetian was civil, if not effusive.
Nicholas supposed honour was partially satisfied.
The Martini had helped free the Flemish lady from Zacco.
And Nicholas, as was now known, had prevented the acquisition by Madeira of the best vine and cane cuttings in Europe.
That of course had not been his prime reason for going to Rhodes.
Indeed, he had no proof, until he reached Rhodes that Katelina had taken cuttings with her.
But no one but himself happened to know it.
The Order, when he came across its several agents down by the waterside, was civil for no doubt the same reasons.
Zacco, as King of all Cyprus, would have the Venetian fleet on his side.
So the Knights would have orders to smile on him; forgetting any small item such as the kidnapping of their ship and their cargo.
Nicholas, in the course of these encounters, failed to meet John of Kinloch whose regard for him, he rather feared, would be unaltered.
His last visit was to fulfil an invitation from Marco Corner to take supper with him at his house.
It had happened on the last occasion as well, for Venice was delighted with Niccolò vander Poele, who had destroyed the plants and was freeing Cyprus, God be good, of the Genoese.
Even his marriage to Primaflora in some way had charmed them although, of course, there had been no opportunity for her to visit either Episkopi or Kouklia.
This time, Loredano was there, the perfect Venetian; but not the perfect Venetian princesses.
It was a relief; although again, naturally, the subject of Katelina van Borselen arose, and he had to explain, again, that he had seen her last in good health leaving Rhodes.
‘A charming guest,’ returned Marco Corner, lifting his bulk from a settle and signing a servant to light the small brazier.
‘Although her captivity chafed her and her disappearance, as the lord King has found cause to remind me, has deprived him of her considerable ransom.
Nevertheless, one would not have wished her to be miserable.
The countryside troubled her.
Fiorenza observed it.
She had a great fear of insects.’
‘The lady Fiorenza is sensitive to the feelings of others,’ Nicholas said.
‘I trust she and her sisters are well?,
‘Of course.
Of course,’ said Marco Corner.
‘You will see them in Venice.
Surely, when the King is in possession, you will allow yourself a small trip to Venice?
It would be wise, in any case, to supervise this vile matter of refineries.
You are suffering too?
I am told they have touched pawning as well.
The Order and Carlotta have cause to know it.
You will have to look to your Bank.’
‘My Bank,’ Nicholas said, ‘is as well protected as I am.,
Slithering north in the rain the next day, he thought he ought to be commended for speaking the truth, for what it was worth, which was little.
He returned to find the Cross of St George still flapping from the walls of Famagusta and nothing obviously changed except the weather, which would, of course, put out the slow-matches and the fire-missiles and make it increasingly unlikely that the tower of Famagusta was going to prove combustible.
On his way to his tent, he fell in with a captain who told him gloomily that three men had individually been sent in to find and blow up the magazine, and all had presumably died.
Meanwhile, the firing from the walls was  undiminished, and the last stages of trenching had proved extremely costly.
The city would now, in addition, possess some water.
He then added the news Nicholas had least wanted to hear.
The King had gone back to Nicosia, taking his whole Council with him.
In the most artistic way, Nicholas swore.
The man grinned.
‘What have you to worry about?
He sent a message for you.
It's in your tent.’
There proved, when he got there, to be two messages.
The first, from the King, summoned him forthwith to Nicosia.
The other, from Philip Pesaro, asked that no matter what time he arrived, he should ride on immediately to Sigouri.
The Château Franc at Sigouri was ten miles away.
It was dusk, it was wet, and Nicholas had been riding all day.
He sent for Astorre, and there appeared instead Thomas, who reported smartly that Captain Astorre had been called to Nicosia, and Master Tobie and Messer le Grant with him.
He answered, when pressed, that he didn't know why, but it was understood that the young fellow was mad, that is, Monseigneur the King was in one of his fits of impatience.
The rumour was that they were to give up the siege and have their contracts revoked before Christmas.
Nicholas said, ‘Don't believe it.
All we need is a bit of good action.
Wait till I get back from Sigouri.’
‘They say,’ said Thomas, ‘that you're not coming back.
That the King'll keep you beside him at the Palace.’
‘And that'll be nice and dry and warm for us both.
I can see how the thinking is going.
Well, tell them I'll be back whether the King wants me or not, We said we'd take this damned city, and we're going to.’
Thomas didn't look immediately cheered, but might relay some of that, Nicholas thought, where it would help matters.
He felt wet and cold and touched with foreboding.
He sent for one man and Chennaa, swallowed some cold meat and wine and, wrapping himself in a dry cloak, went and mounted the camel, crooning love-talk as she rose to her feet and took up her soft, swaying gait.
She was a racing-camel.
Although booted and plastered with mud and out of temper with herself and with him, she deposited him at the drawbridge of Sigouri in just over an hour.
Pesaro met him in the yard.
Philip Pesaro was a good fighting man in a post that controlled all north-east Cyprus from Famagusta to the end of the Karpass.
He took Nicholas into his office, shut the door and spoke as soon as the servants had gone.
‘I've got a report from inside Famagusta.
Their food is virtually finished.
There are only two thousand still alive in the city, and the survivors are dying off daily.
But Lomellini and his men will not give up.
They will starve to the end, because  they believe rescue is coming by sea.’
He paused and said, ‘The King is not here.
He has offered honourable surrender, and his envoys have been killed or turned back.
The responsibility for what is happening does not lie with us.
But I must report it to you.
‘Yes,’ said Nicholas.
He pushed aside, untasted, the food Pesaro's servant had given him.
He said, ‘Of course, the King has not heard this latest news.’
He looked at the window and said, ‘I'll go to Nicosia tonight.’
Pesaro said, ‘You might as well have your night's rest.
I know what the lord King will say.
It is no concern of his if the city is stubborn, and suffers.
And until after your Feast, he will do nothing.’
Nicholas stopped in the act of rising.
He said, ‘What?’
‘The Feast of St Nicholas,’ said Philip Pesaro.
‘You had forgotten.
He offered to hold it in Famagusta.
Since you have failed to give him Famagusta, he proposes to celebrate it in his own capital.
That is why you have to go.’
He paused, and said, ‘You won't persuade him to do otherwise, Messer Niccolò.
Don't think that you can.’
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
‘I shall go, then.
But there are some orders I should like carried out.
I shall write them down and sign them.
Then when this mad Feast is over, I'll bring the King back.’
He wrote, and Pesaro watched.
At the end, the captain said, ‘I shall do it, of course.
But —‘
‘But it may make no difference,’ Nicholas said.
‘It probably won't.
And I know what you're thinking.
Every gun in Famagusta is trained on the end of that trench, and Genoese archers are among the best in the world.
But in the end, we may have to save the honour of Genoa the Superb by attacking her.’
The following day was the eve of the Feast of St Nicholas.
Consumed with rage and anxiety, Tobias Beventini, physician, prowled through the warm, pretty villa of the loveliest woman in Nicosia, bumping into maids carrying baskets of linen and other maids bearing pressed robes and doublets, concealing himself from the man who wanted to trim the fluff round his scalp, and using long Latin words to the other man who wanted to polish his spurs and his jewellery.
He had no jewellery.
The last time he had felt like this was in a house in Florence, when he and Julius had been about to visit Cosimo de' Medici and extract a commission to represent the Medici in Trebizond.
That time, Nicholas had arrived late as well.
Tobie made to sit in a chair and then desisted, because it was inlaid and foreign and breakable.
He noticed that John le Grant avoided the furniture too.
There were cushions with long, voluptuous tassels, and in the master bedroom (he had looked) the quilt was of white silk brocade.
They had hardly ever been in this house belonging to Nicholas, and never since it received its new mistress.
Tobie had previously met Primaflora on rare occasions only — during the search for Tristâo and Diniz Vasquez on Rhodes; on the ambushed ship that brought them from Rhodes, and in the King's hall at Kiti immediately after.
In Rhodes he had seen a lot of her, right up to her thigh, and Nicholas was right: he was pea-green with envy.
She was still golden, and silken, and goddess-like, and had welcomed John and Astorre and himself with a kind of free, self-possessed amusement that had seemed to make them at once her long-established friends.
The house, their chamber, the food were arranged to perfection, and after the brutish clangour of Famagusta they should have been in a state of bewildered gratitude.
But John, he noticed, tended to wander outside as often as he felt tempted to do; while Astorre had set up house quite candidly in the kitchens.
Primaflora appeared wholly unruffled, but every now and then someone in royal livery would appear in the yard and go away again.
The King was arranging a feast tomorrow for Nicholas, and Nicholas wasn't here yet.
Late in the afternoon, Loppe arrived, which frankly no one had expected, for Loppe was managing things at Kouklia just as Mick Crackbene was guarding the harbour at Famagusta.
The surprise was mutual.
Tobie explained about the Feast of St Nicholas with many and explicit adjectives, and Loppe clearly thought his exasperation well-founded while refraining, annoyingly, from any breath of criticism of the absent Nicholas.
Loppe was, it appeared, expecting to join up with Nicholas on the battlefield, but on hearing the news, obtained Primaflora's permission to stay.
Being Loppe, he solved the problem of protocol by returning silently to his role of major domo, having made a small accommodation with Galiot whom, after all, he had trained.
His previous incarnations seemed well known to Primaflora who had last seen him, presumably, crossing from the service of the Grand Commander Louis de Magnac to that of Nicholas with total aplomb.
She had not seen Nicholas himself, Tobie learned, for five weeks.
He arrived after supper that evening, having spent the previous night, it transpired, at Sigouri.
Why it had taken him all day to travel thirty odd miles was not explained.
He came directly to the parlour shared by Astorre, John and Tobie, followed by servants attempting to rid him of his wet cloak.
They were immediately replaced by Loppe, whose presence he appeared to accept without question and almost without greeting, as he did theirs.
On his face, with its childlike planes and arrogant nostrils and affectingly large eyes, was a distinct absence of the play of simple expressions that usually took place there.
He looked tired, which he didn't usually do.
He looked — which Tobie in particular didn't care for — uncommonly like the way he had looked more than two years before at a place called Skylolimne; and later at another place called Kerasous.
Tobie looked at John, and their eyes met.
Astorre, wiping peach juice from his beard, threw down his napkin and said, ‘Well, you took your time.
We might have got this contract finished, but for your God-damned Feast Day.
What were you thinking of?’
‘I wanted a good meal,’ said Nicholas.
Primaflora appeared in the doorway behind him and by instinct, it seemed, he knew it and turned round.
Or perhaps, thought Tobie, her scent had something to do with it.
She said, without touching him, ‘Talk to them.
Then find me when you are ready., Her face was smiling and apparently calm, unless you looked below the painted line of her brows.
What it reflected of her husband's face, Tobie couldn't see.
Then Nicholas said, ‘No.
Please join us.
And Loppe.
I suppose I have to go to the King.’
‘He can wait,’ Primaflora said; and crossing the room, held the great chair by the brazier until Nicholas walked over and dropped into it.
Then, restraining Loppe with a light hand, she fetched wine and a platter for Nicholas, and poured for them all before she sat down herself.
Nicholas said, ‘The Feast Day wasn't my idea.
I want it over as quickly as possible.’
‘There is Mass tomorrow,’ said Primaflora.
‘Then a great feast at the Palace.
All the Haute Cour will be there.
The King has invited every great nobleman, every high officer of the church and the Knights of the Order from Kolossi.
The Venetians, the merchants will be present, and even Sor de Naves and the abbot of Bellapaïs from Kyrenia.
Only the Mamelukes will be absent.
You couldn't leave in less than two days.
It is a mark of the King's personal love and regard.’
Astorre snorted.
‘He's bored.’
‘I told you,’ Nicholas said, ‘to entertain him while I was away.
Do your tricks.
Turn somersaults and climb up the underside of a ladder with your armour on.
Well, it's too late now, so let's make the best of it.
I have something I want the King to agree to.
There might be a better chance now than most times.’
‘You want to leave?’ said John le Grant.
It was the first time he had spoken.
Very often John le Grant disconcerted Tobie.
With Julius, he had always felt more comfortable.
Nicholas said briefly, ‘Something else.’
Captain Astorre had been paying small attention.
He said, ‘And anyway, what did Pesaro want at Sigouri?
He said he'd sent for you.
‘He was concerned,’ Nicholas said.
‘He says the whole army is unsettled because it's known that Famagusta will never give up while it expects a relieving ship to arrive.
He says that if the King persists in staying away, there will be mutiny if not now, then when the weather gets wetter and colder.
No army expects to keep the field through the winter.’
John le Grant said, ‘And so what's his suggestion?’
‘It's mine,’ Nicholas said.
‘It's what I want to put to Zacco.
This is December, when truces are common.
I want Zacco to invite four leading citizens from Famagusta to share the Feast of the Nativity with him, and to allow food and wine to be sent into the city between then and Epiphany.
And during that time, I want those four Genoese to see for themselves, beyond all possible doubt, that there is no question of rescue arriving.
Then, I hope and believe, they will surrender.’
‘Amid casks of wine and barrels of cheeses?’ said Astorre, scowling.
‘The food would stop on the sixth day of January.
I don't think,’ Nicholas said, ‘that anyone in Famagusta will have the strength of purpose left to starve to death after that.’
Tobie said nothing nor, after a glance, did John le Grant.
It was Primaflora who said, ‘Forgive me.
This is not women's business.
But will starvation not bring surrender without the King being asked to make such concessions?
They must be suffering now.’
And Nicholas looked at her with his childish, bovine-eyed face and said, ‘You would think so, but no.
They have been judicious in storage and, besides, many have died.
They could hold out until spring.
The King must agree, and then I will give him Famagusta.’
Soon after that, when the rest had retired, Nicholas went alone to the Palace for his long-deferred interview.
He found Zacco lightly intoxicated, and playing dice for high stakes among a circle of friends.
He was greeted, berated and kept many hours, drinking very much more than he wanted.
At no time did the King mention the progress of the war, and it was hardly the place or time to open the subject.
At no time, either, did Zacco either seek to be alone with him, or utter a word of reproach about his failure with Famagusta.
They parted eventually on the same curious, jovial note, and Nicholas returned to his villa.
The torchlit streets, as he passed through them, were not given up as usual to the cats and the late-night lovers or revellers but were occupied by knots of busy, muttering men, putting up ladders and hoardings, clearing mud, hanging carpets for tomorrow's Festival which was for St Nicholas and himself, not for the burghers of Bruges.
At home, he simply said to Primaflora, ‘It was a waste of time.
He had drunk too much.
So have I.’
They were alone in their chamber, but she was still fully dressed.
She said smiling, ‘We shall see.
Talk to me.’
He found he was too tired to unbutton his doublet.
She came to help him, kissing him lightly and absently on the face, the neck, the hands as she unfastened it, and his belt, and the ties of his shirt.
She said, ‘I have your dress prepared for tomorrow.
You must look splendid.’
‘And you?’ he said.
‘Crimson satin and gold?
Pearls and ermine?’
She smiled, her eyes on what she was doing.
‘No.
A gown you will recognise, but fine enough.
It seemed unwise, this time, to wear anything of Carlotta's.’
He stopped her hands.
‘But you have money?’
She looked up, still smiling.
‘You left me a fortune.
I didn't need it.
My own robe, and your jewels.
Besides, the King has sent mantles.
One in velvet for you, with the badge of your Order.
One of tissue for me.
Master Tobie's robes and the dress of your  engineer and your captain have presented a much greater challenge.’
‘We're all invited?’
Nicholas said.
He sat down and laid hands, with misplaced confidence, on his boots.
‘Even to Bartolomeo from the dyeyard, and his brother.
And Nicholas —‘
He heard her voice flatten and left his boots alone.
He said, ‘What is it?’
‘Only some sad news from Bartolomeo,’ she said.
‘His partner from Constantinople has come.
You know the Sultan has been imprisoning the Venetians and worse?
This Messer Girolamo has escaped from Constantinople, with terrible news about Trebizond.’
There only remained one kind of news that could be terrible.
Nicholas said, ‘The Sultan has broken his word?
They have killed the Emperor-in-exile?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
Her eyes were oval, and pain-filled and perfect.
She had a classical nose with curled pink pads like a kitten's; like Tobie's.
A short, deep channel introduced the fruit of her lips.
She said, ‘Despite the surrender, the amnesty, the promises.
They've killed David Comnenos and his children.’
‘Long live the lord Sultan’ said Nicholas.
‘All of them?’
‘There were seven sons and one unmarried daughter,’ she said.
‘I know how many there were.
All of them?’ he repeated.
‘The girl Anna is…
She stays where she was placed.
The youngest son was kept alive, to be reared as a Muslim.’
‘He would be nearly four,’ Nicholas said.
‘And the six other sons, then, are dead.’
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘You don't ask me why?’
‘I am just about to.
Why?’
Nicholas said.
‘It happened, he says, because of a prince of the Turcomans called Uzum Hasan whose wife was a princess of Trebizond.
This lady, the Turcoman's wife, sent a private message to Adrianople, inviting a son of the Emperor to join her.
She was the exiled Emperor's niece: it was possibly harmless.
But the letter was intercepted by Amiroutzes the Emperor's Chancellor, who deduced that the prince Uzum Hasan wished to rear a child of the blood to lead armies one day against Trebizond.
He told the Sultan.
The Imperial family were thrown into prison…’
‘We knew that much,’ said Nicholas.
‘…and in the Sultan's present mood, he was evidently thought them now better dead.
I am sorry,’ said Primaflora.
‘It was not until I saw how Messer Bartolomeo's news was received by your friends that I realised its importance for you.’
She paused.
‘You were fond of the Emperor?’
Nicholas said, ‘I was in Trebizond, as I am here, with an army.
The Turk proved stronger.
One can feel responsibility without feeling love, otherwise the world would be uninhabited.
My face feels green.’
Primaflora sat back on her heels.
She said, ‘If your stomach ails you, blame Zacco.
Perhaps you should go and deal with it.
Shall I help you?’
‘No,’ Nicholas said.
‘I'm good at this.
So long as you don't arrange a leopard-hunt afterwards.
Will you wait?
In the hope that there's something worth waiting for?’
But in the end when he went back she was asleep, and he didn't wake her because there were few enough hours before dawn, and he had to get through a day — a series of days — that would put to the test the most dangerous set of manoeuvres he had ever conducted.
Nicholas Thaumaturgas, worker of miracles.
In any case the blame, as she had said, was most certainly Zacco's.
Of the company of Niccolò, the only truly happy person next day was Captain Astorre, who relished parades and believed in dressing up for them.
The weather, though chillier than in Famagusta, was dry and even intermittently sunny.
The captain assembled with his fellows in the Dominican monastery next to the Palace, watching bright-eyed as the notables arrived for the procession that would march eastwards from the Porta Santo Domenico to the Cathedral of Santa Sofia.
Nicholas, who had missed the victory Mass for Kyrenia for the sake of an axe in his shoulder was present today, in body if not especially in mind, from the look of him.
His face was the same colour as that of the King when the royal cohort arrived from the palace.
Astorre chuckled.
‘So it was like that!’ said the captain.
‘Well, the poor lady.
She wouldn't get much good of him last night.’
Tobie gritted his teeth.
Unlike Astorre, who recovered as quickly from his rages as he fell into them, Tobie had not forgotten what lay behind them suspended at Famagusta.
He had not forgotten, either, the story Bartolomeo Zorzi had regaled them with last night, and which he supposed had now been repeated to Nicholas.
He had tried once already to talk to Nicholas about it, and had been kicked on the ankle by le Grant.
He walked all the way to the Cathedral brooding about that inside his new scarlet robe, with the blue mantle and golden links of the Order of the Sword on the shoulders of Nicholas before him.
C'est pour loi-auté maintenir .
Well, Queen Carlotta had given him it, and her bastard brother-usurper had confirmed it, so he either had it twice or not at all.
The procession filled all the space there was between buildings, so there were few people about in the street, except peering over shop-ledges or within doorways.
The upper windows and galleries were full enough, however, although the faces were more respectful  and curious than ecstatic.
Trumpets blew all the time, and drums were beating.
A smell of incense grew strong as they approached the immense triple portico of the Cathedral, begun in the French style two hundred years ago.
He noticed the King stepping forward with a firming of the step.
He ought to feel at home.
Without the help of the Pope, his royal father had made Zacco Archbishop of Nicosia when he was thirteen, and he had lived in the Archbishop's Palace with Cropnose for years.
The present more orthodox incumbent was a tough man as well as an Augustine; accustomed to risky assignments in Cairo.
Tobie spared a thought for Cairo, and Mamelukes, and Tzani-bey, and wondered if Nicholas knew what the emir was doing in the Mameluke camp outside Famagusta.
One thing for sure: Tzani-bey hadn't been asked to the Feast of St Nicholas, although the Arab physician was here.
He had seen him in the city.
Once inside the nave, Tobie's ankle reminded him that if Nicholas was thinking of anything, it was probably another service not unlike this one.
That had taken place two years ago, in Trebizond; and had celebrated the Feast of St Eugenios, not St Nicholas; and instead of James, Dei gratia Jerusalem, Cypri et Armenie rex illustrissimus, the chief celebrant had been the dead Vice-Regent of Christ, David Comnenos, twenty-first Emperor of Trebizond, accompanied by his Grand Chancellor and betrayer, George Amiroutzes.
The liturgy began and Tobie moved, craning uneasily.
Behind the fountain of plumes that arose from Captain Astorre's headgear was the shining head of Primaflora, its hair looped and plaited under the horns of a cap, and a cameo on a gold chain round her throat.
Admiring her, Tobie didn't feel impelled, for a while, to look further.
Then he did, and saw Nicholas.
If painful reveries of any kind had once overwhelmed him, they did so no longer.
Nicholas was standing so still that the thick painted glass struck motionless light from his chain, and his face was glazed like a jug with mixed colours.
Tobie followed the line of his scrutiny.
Beside the King and the Archbishop, the Bishops of Paphos and Limassol, the several abbots, the Knights Hospitaller of the Order and the ecclesiastical officers of the Cathedral, stood a thick, black hairy fellow in a battered conical cap with a veil, below which an assortment of robes vaguely Greek and vaguely Coptic did not quite cover the stained brown habit of a Franciscan friar.
Tobie recognised him.
A hundred years ago, this man had stamped into the Medici Palace in Florence and nearly wrecked the whole Trapezuntine expedition.
He had interfered in the snow by Bologna, so Nicholas said.
He had been in Rhodes, and indeed his ship had transported home the body of the Portuguese whom Nicholas had said he hadn't had murdered.
Even without hearing  the ineffable pitch of his bellow, it was possible to pick this man out in any circle.
It was Ludovico de Severi da Bologna, the Latin Patriarch of Antioch; and Nicholas, animated once again, was bestowing one of his broad, well-meaning smiles on the fellow.
The friar returned a light scowl, after which they paid no more attention to one another.
Tobie, who regarded the Patriarch with undiluted horror, felt thankful.
The head of the House of Niccolò, who had considerable reservations himself about Father Ludovico da Bologna, was content enough to remain unmolested through the Mass, and the procession back to the Palace, and even the banquet itself, although that presented different pitfalls.
Knowing the King, as he believed, Nicholas had always assumed that now, through his placing at table, Zacco would take his chance to belittle in public this favoured commander who had failed to give him his kingdom as promised.
But instead, in a table filled with knights of his name, Nicholas was placed on the King's right, and Nicholas (Conella) Morabit, on his left.
Through the meal, it was the same.
The King recounted past adventures, selected meats for him, joked about the abstemious habits of the baby St Nicholas, who refused the breast every Wednesday and Friday.
The jokes, if coarse, were quite good.
From the other tables, Nicholas could see John's face, red under its freckles, glancing his way more often than not.
The churchmen, because of the feast day, kept their own table next to the King's, sharing it with the Knights Hospitaller of St John.
He had had a stiff greeting that morning from the Grand Commander Louis de Magnac, whom he had tricked over Loppe, and again on shipboard coming from Rhodes.
With him was Brother William de Combort, who had entertained Primaflora so warmly at Rhodes in the belief that she was in Carlotta's employment.
Perhaps they all still believed that she was.
At any rate, they could see that Zacco, not Carlotta, was going to hold Cyprus; and that they must treat a commander of Zacco's with care.
At another table sat the Venetians: the brothers Martini as well as Corner and Loredano and Paul Erizzo.
They looked well satisfied: another crop safely transformed and delivered; Zacco more firmly enthroned and in their perennial debt; their share in bringing Nicholas and his army to Cyprus fully justified, despite the small delay in completing the contract.
And after the contract, who knew?
Nicholas had seen, as they came in, both Corner and Martini find occasion to shake John le Grant by the hand.
As indeed they should, since John le Grant had solved their water dispute.
There was no need for them to know that engineer John le Grant was its author.
His eyes rested on the Zorzi brothers.
Jacopo, whom he had invited to Kouklia, and whose vineyards he still had not visited.
Bartolomeo who managed his dyeworks, and Bartolomeo's partner Girolamo, whom Nicholas had met also on his way to Trebizond, and who had brought the information he didn't wish, at present, to think about.
He didn't want, either, to think of the third Zorzi brother, known to the world as Nicholai Giorgio de' Acciajuoli.
The Greek with the wooden leg, whose machinations, he sometimes felt, ran as a dark undercurrent below all his own devices, robbing him of his belief in his will.
In that message from Constantinople, sent here, and at this time, he saw the hand of Acciajuoli, not of this self-seeking merchant.
And Primaflora.
She was admitted, now, to the feasting-hall of the King, and placed at the long women's table presided over by Marietta of Patras, the King's serene and excellent mother.
His wife's beauty, little adorned, seemed to draw the lamplight towards her: it shone on the latticework of her sleeves and the exact and regular folds that defined the slender bones of her body.
He saw her glance at Ludovico da Bologna whom, of course, she had met in Rhodes, and further back, in the snow with Carlotta.
In the snow between Porretta and Bologna, where Nicholas had been called to the rescue, and Ansaldo her lover had died.
Sor de Naves, here with his brother, had also bowed to Primaflora at her table and had taken the chance, stopping Nicholas, to congratulate him on his marriage.
Civility was not his objective.
‘What habit of the brake or the burrow do you employ, Ser Niccolò, that you attract to yourself so many beautiful females?
The Queen has lost her waiting-woman to you, and you have married her?’
Until bribed to surrender Kyrenia, the Sicilian admiral had been one of Carlotta's closest advisers.
‘The Queen?’ said Nicholas.
‘A slip of the tongue.
The lady Carlotta.
The pity is that you married this lady, dear sir.
But perhaps you have children enough, or see no need for them.’
‘I suppose,’ Nicholas said, ‘that like yourself, I believed the matter could wait.’
He turned his shoulder, but not quickly enough.
The Sicilian laughed.
‘I make a good target.
The King's daughter is six.
But she is a virgin, be sure; and will bear to me when she bears.
Whereas those who eschew bearing, or have too often found means to abort it may prove, like your wife, to be barren.’
‘And you think that concerns me?’ said Nicholas.
‘I must disappoint you.
The man smiled.
‘You had been told.
I might have known.
At Carlotta's court, it is common knowledge.
Well, Ser Niccolò, let me end as I began, and wish you joy of your marriage.’
He hadn't known.
It didn't matter.
Now, it didn't matter.
He got through the meal.
He displayed gratification through all the entertainments that took place during and after the feast, and took the floor with the rest during the slow, formal dancing, in which he had been well taught by the various females attracted to his brake and his burrow.
Towards the end, when the Palace was still filled with people, and wine, and hilarity he and Rizzo di Marino were chosen, as he had hoped, to attend the King when he withdrew from necessity.
In the moment before they returned, Nicholas spoke.
‘My lord.
To give me this day at your side was an unforeseen joy, but it oppresses me that it is undeserved: that Famagusta is not yet yours.
Before we go back, my lord, might I put something to you, and to Ser Rizzo?’
The King was sober and affable.
The Chancellor, an experienced man, knew an opening of consequence when he heard it.
An office was found, and the King sat and said, ‘Well, what is this?
We keep your lady wife waiting.’
And, warm with dancing, he pulled off his jewelled hat, so that the brown hair fell free, and opened the close-pearled band of his doublet so that his throat might be bared to the air.
He said to Nicholas, ‘Ask.
This is your night for receiving.’
Afterwards, Nicholas wondered what he had expected from Zacco.
The favour of a hearing, which he had.
An appreciation that a truce over Christmas might seem magnanimous to his Christian allies, which Zacco appeared to find appealing.
But the idea that the season of leisure should be marred by the presence of men from that vicious republic?
The conception that a Lusignan should humour the fools, to persuade them that surrender would not be dishonourable?
The suggestion that —‘Christ God in heaven,’ said James, King of Cyprus, rising slowly to his feet.
‘Are you deaf, blind, witless?
Do you expect me to send food and wine to the men whose forefathers took mine to wretched imprisonment in Genoa?
Who forced the wife of the first James of my line to earn bread with her needle?
Who killed with privation his nephew?
James, my great-grandfather, would have known what to say to you, despite the badge and the silver buckle you wear.
Suggest that to me again, Messer Niccolò, and you will lose them, and more!’ said the King.
His face was livid, and his hand had clapped to his sword.
Behind him, di Marino had risen also, ready to soothe.
Usually, such an explosion could be anticipated.
This time, it was so unheralded as to appear almost artificial.
Standing, Nicholas said, in the humble voice known to every Bruges magistrate, ‘Lord, I would not displease you.
I merely seek to end a war.
If you give me leave, I will do it in a way that would not dishonour your forebears.’
The young man still stood, his breath short, his hand braced on the hilt of his sword.
Their eyes were level.
‘How?’ he said.
‘I shall go back and prepare an assault,’ Nicholas said.
‘Tomorrow, if you will allow me.’
Zacco drew a long breath through pinched nostrils.
‘Yes?’ he said.
‘And that would be quicker than starving them?’
‘It could not fail,’ Nicholas said.
He avoided the Chancellor's eye.
He kept still, and calm, and gentle of voice.
‘And who would lead it?’ said Zacco.
‘You?’
‘Monseigneur,’ said Rizzo di Marino.
‘This is a counsel of courage, and I respect it.
But our trench is exposed to artillery.
The vanguard of such an assault will die.
‘You?’ repeated the King.
‘Of course,’ Nicholas said.
‘I should allow the honour to no one else of the lord King's adherents.
Unless he wishes to strip me of his confidence.’
Rizzo di Marino said, ‘Of course he will take Famagusta.
But need our troops suffer the cost of it?’
No one spoke.
Nicholas stood, expressing only what he felt, which was patience, and understanding, and a baseless, inbred, unnatural optimism.
And gradually, the King's hand relaxed, and his bearing, and lastly his face, across which flickered indistinct and curious emotions: of relief and annoyance, of affection and something that might have been shame.
Zacco raised his hand from his sword and took Nicholas by the face in hard fingers.
‘I forbid you,’ he said.
‘I have bought your life.
I forbid you to waste it.
Starve them.
They deserve it.’
Nicholas dropped to one knee.
For a moment they remained apart.
Then the King's hand touched his cheek, differently, and the King's voice said, ‘Enough.
Let us return.
They will think the worst of three handsome men who have taken leave together.’
There was nothing more to be done.
Nicholas cast a single glance at the Chancellor's considering gaze, and followed the King back to the hall.
He had nearly reached it when the hand of Ludovico da Bologna grasped his shoulder, and the voice of the Patriarch pronounced in his ear: ‘Well, my son.
Does the King pay for all night of you, or can the Church claim an hour of your time?’
The King turned.
The Patriarch said, ‘I ask a favour of James of Cyprus.
May the Church, on this Feast Day, command one of its sons?’
‘You wish to shrive him?’ said Zacco.
He gave his most charming laugh.
‘You will be disappointed.
A well-constructed artefact possesses no sins.,
‘If I believed you,’ said Ludovico da Bologna, ‘I would be the happiest man in Nicosia.
But the sins are there, in small corners, to be hunted out.
Come, my little lord Niccolò.’
‘Where is your house? said the Patriarch of Antioch.
‘I want to talk to you.’
‘Too far away,’ Nicholas said.
‘And that concubine will be there.
I thought she had a lover at Bologna?
I've got rooms at the Dominicans’; that'll do.
There's your doctor.
And is that fox-headed fellow one of yours?
Tell them to come.’
Nicholas stood stock-still, in a condition of protest, thought or even possibly refusal.
The fox-headed fellow, in the interests of a deep intellectual curiosity, strolled up and said, ‘I'm John le Grant, my lord Patriarch.
Everyone in the Levant has heard of Ludovico da Bologna.,
‘They ought to,’ said the Patriarch.
‘I've travelled about it enough.
Leave it to the Greeks, and you'll never get a Crusade.
It needs Latin stomach to do it.
This fellow's been wrangling with Zacco.
Didn't think he had it in him.
Not the way to keep your fief and your perpetual pension.
Are you coming?
What's that bloodletter's name?’
‘Tobias Beventini.
He met you in Florence.’
‘I know he met me in Florence.
A testy, petulant sort of fellow, they tell me, who bares his scalp instead of his buttocks.
Ah, there you are.’
‘I'm going home,’ said Tobie briefly to Nicholas.
John le Grant put out a hand and pinched a stiff scarlet sleeve.
He said, ‘You're easy baited.
Come on.
You don't want to miss this.
And when you've time, take a good look at Nicholas.’
A flicker of angry impatience immediately manifested itself in Tobie's face, and he fell into step with the engineer.
There were times when John le Grant wondered how Tobie managed to be such a very good doctor and yet fail to ask himself primary questions about Nicholas.
Such as, whether the expression you saw was what he wanted you to see, and was genuine.
Or what he wanted you to see and was misleading.
Or was what he wanted  no one to see at all, and had failed to disguise.
A sporting interest in pursuing such failures was one of the reasons John le Grant stayed with Nicholas.
There were, of course, several others.
The room they were taken to was bare, panelled and had a stone floor, but had been hastily equipped with stools and benches and tables for the Patriarch's visit.
Against one wall stood a battered chest covered with donkey-skin, with several pairs of old slippers beside it and a patched travelling cloak thrown on top.
On a side table stood a pitcher and beakers and a pile of washed linen, some darned and some not.
In the centre of the room stood an extremely well-tended brazier before which sat two men in low conversation with broke off as the door opened.
One was the spare, bearded figure of Abul Ismail, the Arab physician.
The other was a heavily-built, muscular man with a lobster nose and none of his sister's lost beauty.
Markios of Patras, the brother of Cropnose.
‘You all know one another,’ said Ludovico da Bologna, pushing Nicholas in with a hand like a bakery paddle.
Tobie followed, and John le Grant just evaded the powerful thrust.
‘Oecumenical conference, except we've no Orthodox  cantankerous Greeks and no clip-arsed, fornicating, drug-chewing bastards of Mamelukes.’
He glanced at Abul.
‘I make a distinction for Arabs.’
‘We thank you,’ said the physician politely.
John le Grant sat with the others, casting a glance at the pitcher as he passed.
It was full of water.
The King's uncle said, ‘You mystify our friends from the West.
Mamelukes are not a sect, merely children of any faith bought young, and reared as Muslims to serve and rule Egypt and Syria.
Have you met the present Sultan in Cairo?
The first of Greek birth.
Purchased fifty years since, and began as a page in Damascus.’
He fixed the Patriarch with an eye.
Le Grant recalled that in his time Markios had led a company of Egyptian Mamelukes in some of the hottest fighting for Zacco.
Ludovico da Bologna said, ‘Don't be afraid to speak out: Abul Ismail knows all about Mamelukes.
Yes, I know Khushcadam.
Yes, I've been in Cairo.
Murder and poison, torture, bribes, sales of office.
Terrorising and plunder, all by Mamelukes, and all countenanced by the Sultan because he's afraid of ‘em.
They depend for business on Copts, but Prester John's poor little Ethiopes are not even permitted to roll eggs at Easter.
You can thank your Creator that vander Poele here has done something about it.’
There was a momentary vacuum, as all the air in the room was sucked in.
Then Markios said, ‘Vander Poele has done what?’
Seen in profile, Nicholas had not so much changed colour as quietly congealed.
He stirred.
‘The Patriarch is pleased that my sugar-master comes from Damascus.
I have men, and buy equipment from Syrian moderates.’
‘And I don't suppose,’ Father Ludovico remarked, ‘that you had to pay all that much for them either.
The prince Uzum Hasan would be glad to make up their salaries.,
‘Uzum Hasan!’ said the King's uncle.
‘Vander Poele was in treaty with him in Trebizond.
Uzum Hasan, head of the Turcoman tribe of the White Sheep; the strongest sect in all Persia; the biggest rival to Constantinople.
It was touch and go — wasn't it, heh?— whether the White Sheep would beat the Turks into Trebizond.
The way it turned out was the way young Niccolò wanted it.
I am right?’
Fair play, to John le Grant, was fair play.
He said judicially, ‘I expect that's what you heard; but no, you've got it wrong, Patriarch.
We fought the Turks, and the Turks frightened off Uzum Hasan, and the surrender was the Emperor's choice.
Or rather…’
He stopped, his voice fading out; and on reflection stayed stopped.
The damage was done.
Everyone could see where that trail was leading.
Except Tobie.
Tobie said, ‘Well, of course: the responsibility for the surrender lay with that traitorous scoundrel Amiroutzes.
If you want the facts about Trebizond, Nicholas here will be happy to tell you.
In any case, it wasn't Uzum Hasan that we dealt with, it was his mother.
Sara, the prince's Syrian…’
At that point, his tone faltered as well.
With fascination, John watched the thoughts enter his mind.
The mother of Uzum Hasan was a Syrian.
And the wife of Uzum Hasan was mother's sister to Violante, Fiorenza and Valenza of Naxos.
The circumstance of the surrender of Trebizond was not what was being discussed.
Tobie resumed with sudden asperity.
‘We had no call to be in touch with Uzum Hasan after that.
Or his mother.
I suppose Nicholas needed sugar equipment.
That would be common enough.
Supplies passing between Kouklia and Damascus in Syria.’
He had turned rather pale.
It seemed to John le Grant that having gone so far, this thought, at least, must be completed.
He said, ‘It would be common enough, but that isn't what the Patriarch was implying.
Nicholas, did you inspire the letter from Uzum's wife to the Emperor?
The one that Amiroutzes betrayed to the Sultan?
I don't think I could blame you, but Tobie would be happy if you could say no.’
‘Then of course,’ Nicholas said, ‘I say no.’
‘Quite right,’ said Ludovico da Bologna.
‘Anyone who knows George Amiroutzes knows who the real devil is.
The head of a philosopher on the loins of a tomcat.
Fell in love with the Duke of Athens’ sweet little widow, and tried to get rid of the Patriarch of Constantinople when he wouldn't let him divorce his first wife.
The Greek Patriarch, that is.
He should try the Latin Patriarch  next: that's Bessarion, godfather to one of his sons.
Or perhaps not.
The other son's converted to Mohammed and they say George is going the same way.
Et Filioque with a vengeance.
And talking of children, Carlotta's lost the heir to her kingdom.
Would you care for some water?’
Nicholas said, ‘No, thank you.
A son?’
There was no chance, now, of reading his face.
He had schooled it so well that it received the implications of that entire passage of information with no expression at all.
‘A premature son,’ the Patriarch confirmed.
‘So Zacco can take time to frame his marriage plans.
And so what was your quarrel with him all about?
The King didn't want Uzum Hasan to march in and help clear out the Sultan's rough Mamelukes?’
‘The question didn't arise,’ Nicholas said.
His eyes, and those of the priest, moved and shifted like sun on two knife-blades.
‘And you were a fool to put the question that did arise,’ said the King's uncle unexpectedly.
Nicholas turned his head.
Markios said, ‘I know what you asked the King to do.
Your lady wife told my sister at table of your desire for a truce with Famagusta, your wish to feed the pigs and convince them of their isolation.
Your idea that the King and I would lean back in indolence, allowing Famagusta to fatten and snigger, throwing away all the months of striving so that you could save your thick skin from a fight?’
‘She said all that?’ said Nicholas mildly.
‘No,’ said the Patriarch.
‘I heard her.
For a lady of doubtful morals, she put your case well.
The rest is merely what the court will also say when they hear.
Calm yourself.
If I were a liar, I should prettify the past of your wife, but I am not.
But this is what I am here to discuss.
You have proposed a truce, and the King has refused it?,
‘I have proposed to leave Nicosia immediately,’ Nicholas said, ‘to prepare and lead an attack on Famagusta.
He refused to allow it.,
‘You were not very convincing, perhaps,’ Markios said.
‘And when first proposing your truce,’ Father Ludovico said, ‘did you put yourself out to press that view in any way either?
Did you call the Archbishop?
The Knights of the Order?
Myself?
It is regarded as worthy of Christians to feed the starving; to desist from war during the time of our dear Lord's Nativity.’
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
‘From me, he would take no advice of that sort.
But you are welcome to try.’
‘He will not,’ Markios said.
‘Forgive me, Father.
You speak as if these thieves in Famagusta had rights.
I believe, as Zacco believes, that to yield would be a weakness amounting to sin.
I should hold no truce.
I should pass no food.
I should not let them linger, wasting time, wasting money, until the spring brings them fresh  hope.
I should persuade the King to change his mind, and let Messer Niccolò lead an assault.
Of course, in that I should probably fail.
We know why Messer Niccolò made the offer.
We know with what confidence it must have been made.
We have seen the King and his favourite together.
There is nothing more certain than that Zacco will not send his friend into danger.
Is that not so?
Ser Niccolò, is that not so?’
‘Yes,’ said Nicholas.
He got up, with the smooth, small dovetailing of joint and sinew and muscle that was the hallmark of well-realised design, and surveyed them all five, ending with the blue-jowled, pitted face of the priest.
He said, ‘Since no one can persuade Zacco I have, of course, made the decision myself.
I leave for Sigouri tonight, and Famagusta tomorrow.
Whoever wishes may follow me.
As soon as the assault can be prepared, it will be made.
And I don't really see how Zacco or anything else is going to stop me.
You will excuse me, I hope.’
With admiration tinged with dread, John le Grant saw Nicholas bow, turn, and, with decision, walk out on the Patriarch.
The door closed.
Tobie jumped up.
Markios laughed.
He said, ‘Puppies need kicking.
You saw.’
‘Yes.
I saw,’ said the priest.
‘Your Mamelukes, at least, will give him a welcome.
God works in wonderful ways.
Allah too, I dare say.
Abul Ismail?,
‘I should go,’ said the Arab, rising.
‘If this attack is to be, I too will be needed at Famagusta.
And you, my lord Patriarch?’
‘Famagusta?’ said Father Ludovico in surprise.
‘With Christmas coming?
My son, the casals of the Patriarchate have not even submitted their dues.
A churchman is busy.
A churchman is always busier than other people.’
‘Come on,’ said John le Grant to Tobie.
‘We've got some riding to do.’
To Nicholas, the only immediate benefit of that wholly unpleasant discussion was that it shut up both le Grant and Tobie; and even Astorre, when found and brought to the villa, was unnaturally silent except on matters purely martial.
An excellent soldier, Astorre simply accepted the prospect of a night ride to Sigouri, and made no bones about his employer's decision that, against the King's wishes, an assault was to be made.
All along, Astorre had been longing to get the campaign over and done with.
Meanwhile, there was a need for discretion.
Their departure from the royal precincts had not, Nicholas believed, drawn attention.
After that display of high temper, Zacco wouldn't send for him, even if sober.
And tomorrow, one hoped, he would merely assume that Nicholas had made a pettish departure and was sulking somewhere, awaiting apology or forgiveness.
Markios, for one, would not disillusion him.
Primaflora was not at the villa.
But now, attending on the King's mother, she might be expected to stay tonight at the Palace.
He could imagine the two clever women, and the delicate fencing.
He left her a note and, after hesitation, a small parcel which contained the most personal, the most valuable object he possessed.
He would have liked to have said goodbye in another way, but this was probably best.
There was no doubt at all, if he led this assault, that he would not return.
For as long as she lived, she had been provided for.
He wondered, once, if she would weep for him as she had done for Ansaldo.
The other note he left with Loppe who had received him, and listened, and then deftly completed his packing.
To Loppe himself he had nothing to give save the task in Cyprus which had seemed most worth doing.
Nicholas said, ‘The company will have the Kouklia franchise so long as the King has a conscience.
Run it well, so long as it pleases you.
The dyeworks are different.
They are lost, I think to the Venetians, whatever happens.’
After some moments of silence, Loppe spoke without apparent emotion.
‘You forbid me to come?’
‘You know why,’ said Nicholas.
‘Or does even a temporary steward open no chests; fold no linen away?’
And then, answering the look on Loppe's face, he said, ‘Don't be sorry.
For what I do, I need larger reasons than that.’
To Sigouri was perhaps thirty miles and, although the rain kept away, it was dark and treacherous underfoot and they hardly spoke, men-at-arms or servants or principals, as they guided fresh horses across the grey soil of the Messaoria, splashing over burgeoning rivers; imperceptible to silent villages, churches and monasteries except by a thud of hooves and the swimming spawn of their brands.
It was grey daylight when they crossed the moat of the Château Franc and besides himself only Astorre, Nicholas saw, had tried to keep the iron back and square shoulders of duty.
Astorre, because he was content under orders.
Himself, because alone of them all, he knew what he was committed to.
What he had brought them to.
What, without him, they would never have had to face.
But that was the risk they had taken in joining him.
Their approach had been seen.
With Pesaro, striding to meet them, was Thomas.
Thomas said, ‘The heathen bastards!’
‘Wait,’ said Nicholas.
In the captain's room, hardly cold from the last time, he said, ‘Now.
Tzani-bey?’
Philip Pesaro looked gaunt.
He said, ‘We carried out all your orders.
We restored the water.
We sent loaves over the wall, with a message.
The Genoese sent them back.
They thought they were poisoned.’
‘They've had no food then?’ said Nicholas abruptly.
‘They are starving still?
But you went on trying?’
‘Over and over.
Until we collected the bread they kept returning and started to use it.
Four men have died.’
‘It was poisoned,’ said Nicholas.
‘I asked you—’ He heard his voice hardening and stopped.
The others, who knew nothing of this, were turning their heads like three blackbirds.
John le Grant said, ‘You stopped the pumps?
Put water and food into Famagusta without Zacco knowing?’
‘No.
He didn't know,’ Nicholas said.
‘Or he wouldn't have agreed to a truce over Christmas.’
Tobie said, ‘He didn't agree.’
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
‘And as it turns out, it doesn't much matter.
Even if he'd sent in a flock of prime cattle, they'd have known, after this, after St Hilarion, not to touch it.
Why didn't you protect that damned food ?’
That was addressed to Philip Pesaro.
The captain said, ‘What do you think I feel about it?
I did all you asked.
I had the emir watched.
I had the bread guarded.
Still he managed.’
‘And you spoke to Tzani-bey?’
Nicholas said.
‘Oh, I spoke to him,’ said the captain.
‘He was extremely polite.
He said my words were of pellucid clarity and great wisdom, but he knew nothing of poison, and if I wished to complain, he would be glad to take sherbet with you, or with Zacco.
But the King hasn't agreed to the truce?’
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
‘There is only the alternative that we spoke of.’
Pesaro's face altered briefly.
Then he said, ‘I remember.
They starve.
Or we save the honour of Genoa the Superb by attacking them.’
‘Nicholas,’ said John le Grant, making three words of it.
He had forgotten the others.
He said, ‘I'm sorry.
I didn't tell you, because it was all planned to — to have its effect.
There is no food in Famagusta.
They are dying.’
‘And you put food in, against the King's orders, before ever you came to Nicosia?
And gave the King a false story?
And now Tzanibey has seized the chance to defy you and poison it?
Nicholas, you fool, why don't you tell us?’ said le Grant.
What would a truthful man say?
You are too honest to be trusted with some secrets.
One slip of the tongue would have betrayed all I was working for.
There are more threads in this web than you even know yet; more than you could understand; more than you would ever forgive.
Nicholas said, ‘I thought he might agree to the truce.
But now, you see, the only way to save them is to fight.’
‘Then we fight,’ said Astorre.
‘I thought we'd agreed on it.
And if they're starving, it'll be all the shorter.’
‘They can still fire cannon,’ said Nicholas.
‘No.
Let's sleep, and then get to the siege camp.
I want to plan.
I want to do this thing  as well as it can be done, and with as few deaths as we can manage.
And before anything else, I want to have a word with Tzani-bey al-Ablak.’
The following night, Nicholas presented himself with Astorre at the gate of the Mameluke camp, with its well-defended ring of wagons and store-houses.
He had chosen an hour at which the emir would certainly have retired, and might not have heard of his arrival.
There was a chance, of course, that he would be refused entry, but he didn't think so.
He, like the emir, was a commander answering straight to the King.
While Famagusta stood out, the emir should want no altercations with Zacco.
And the bey's communication with Zacco had been cut.
Philip Pesaro had seen to that.
For four days, whatever courier came to Sigouri, he would never get further.
After that, it would be different.
And, of course, if he was shrewd enough, the emir Tzani-bey would want to bargain with him.
He received Nicholas and Astorre in his pavilion, and within a reasonable time, although the quilted cover had barely been flung over the mattress, and the pile of carpets was ruffled.
To one side, dropped unnoticed, lay a silver cup which had not contained sherbet.
Among the many odours was the one that, until this moment, Nicholas had thrust forgotten deep in his memory.
He bowed correctly, and sat crosslegged on the cushions as offered, while Astorre, smart as scissors did likewise.
The emir took his place thoughtfully opposite.
Seen in undress, in the vivid fabrics of winter, he was a smaller man than he seemed in the field, despite the broad shoulders and sinewy limbs.
The sooty eyes, the olive skin, the coarse black mop of the moustache gave little clue as to his origins.
He spoke Arabic, and fluent Greek, and had acquired reasonable French; he was well trained in arms, and perhaps in other skills too: an education in philosophy, divinity, science was open to Mamelukes, and not always incompatible with brutish behaviour.
But if he had a Christian past, it was not apparent in his dress: the crimson hat with the kerchief wound lightly about it, or the striped Tartar tunic with its  oblique seam, or the coat he wore open over it, its buttons of gold, and the pious inscription of the tirâz embroidered in gold on its sleeve.
He had changed his yellow leggings and boots for pointed slippers in soft Moroccan leather.
A long time ago, Zacco had sent this man, lord of his Mamelukes, to fetch Nicholas from the monastery to which the Venetians had brought him.
For a year, an open breach with Tzani-bey had been denied him.
But now, James was about to be King of all Cyprus and the final reckoning was close.
Nicholas wondered whether, sitting there, the emir felt the same bitter exultation that he did.
Nicholas said, ‘I will be brief.’
‘Because time is short?’ said Tzani-bey.
‘I agree.
The end of such a partnership as ours cannot be long delayed.
It is fitting that words should be spoken.’
‘Certainly,’ Nicholas said, ‘we have served the same master.’
The emir placed his brown fingers together.
‘You dislike the word partnership?
But what have we been but Frank and Saracen, yoked like camel and ass to the plough?
You prefer sugar paste and old women, I'm told.
Sugar paste, the smooth skin of young girls.
Old women, such as the mother of Uzum Hasan; such as the wife who gave you your fortune; such as Marietta of Patras, the mother of the lord Zacco.’
He turned to Astorre, who had growled.
‘I do not criticise.
A man's appetites are half the man, and must be known if you would understand him.’
He turned back to Nicholas.
‘I say merely that I know nothing of your late wife.
I know Uzum Hasan; and his mother, though courageous, is only his mouthpiece.
That is not so with Zacco.’
‘You surprise me,’ said Nicholas.
The black moustache moved.
‘Ah!
He is a man with his own will, and much cleverness.
She does not work alone.
They work together.
He must have successors.
She gives him women.
He prefers his own kind.
She selects what will benefit him most.
She is harsh.
He succours.
I am a counter in this game.
You also.
And when it is finished; when Famagusta is taken, what do you think will happen to you, and to me?’
‘Emir,’ Nicholas said, ‘I was about to inform you.
After Famagusta is taken, I propose that you and I face one another in public combat.
In spite of what you have said, I should prefer to obtain satisfaction for past injuries from yourself than from either King James or his mother.’
‘Spoken like a stout Latin,’ said the emir.
‘And you imagine you or I will survive to take part in this chivalrous duel?
Or that if we do, the survivor will live?,
Nicholas said, ‘After the duel, who can say?
But it is my intention to attack Famagusta before the King even suspects it is happening.
Do you dare join me?,
‘When?’ said Tzani-bey al-Ablak.
‘Within three days,’ said Nicholas.
‘And we'll take it,’ said Captain Astorre.
‘With or without you, my lord.
We're asking no favours.,
‘That is fortunate,’ said the emir, ‘for I was of a mind to present you with none.
Attack Famagusta, by all means.
Indeed you must, for you have transgressed as well as I. The pious accusations of Captain Pesaro!
Why do Latins profess outrage against poison?
Every Frankish court uses it.
In your time, Messer Niccolò, you have maimed and killed men in the flower of their youth: what disgusts you about murder in other forms?
The King was glad enough to have Kyrenia delivered to him through fire and through illness: it spared lives, no doubt, in the end.
Yet there raged the good captain, demanding satisfaction over a minor matter of bread, when I promise you that the King will pay far less heed to my action than he will when he hears of yours.
I could not have poisoned the bread, my lord Niccolò, if you had not introduced it, against explicit orders.
And if you take Famagusta, it will be because of these actions.
These joint actions of yours and mine that have weakened it.
The camel and the ass, Messer Niccolò.
Do you not see now how we are being used?
And how, by fighting each other, we are placing ourselves in Zacco's hands?
Everything you have ever done against the Venetians, against the Genoese, against me, has turned to Zacco's personal benefit.
When it is done, he will rid himself of us both.
And you do not yet know what else you are losing.’
Nicholas smiled.
He said, ‘How can you guess what I know?
You are wise.
If you shared this assault, you might lose control of your Mamelukes’ conduct, and for what they did, the King would have an excuse to retaliate.
Also, we attack without the King's knowledge.
If we fail, my company will take the brunt, during and after.,
‘I fear,’ said Tzani-bey, ‘that whatever quarrel we have, there may be little chance after to settle it.’
Nicholas surveyed him gravely.
‘I might survive,’ he said.
‘But of course, you may not wish to meet another man, except with a whip and when he is manacled.
In which case, I may have to seek you out.
I felt I should warn you.’
The emir Tzani-bey laughed.
He said, ‘I am warned.
I am solemnly warned.
How it rankles, that one small experience; that journey from Cape Gata to Zacco's succouring arms!
I expected you to pay me for such attentions, my dear.
Zacco does.’
‘The slut!’ said Astorre, once they were outside the camp.
‘You should have let me nick them off him.’
‘Fine,’ said Nicholas.
‘But you were there to protect me, not get  us all slaughtered.
At any rate, now we know the Mamelukes won't be with us, and I feel a bit safer.
Not a lot, but a bit.
I wonder if Abul Ismail has got to him yet.’
‘Could you believe it?’ said Captain Astorre, who preferred dealing with certainties.
‘The little heathen thought you might combine against Zacco.’
‘That's the point,’ Nicholas said.
‘It sounded as if Abul hadn't joined him.
But maybe that was just how it was meant to sound.
He's a tricky devil, our emir.
Well, let's see how our private war is progressing.
If John doesn't blow himself up, we have three days.’
John le Grant, when designing mines, had never been known to make a mistake, and he made none now, although he worked without sleep, as they all did.
Until now, the siege plan had been orthodox.
Now it had to be different.
Despite the immense firing power of the city, they had to cease relying on simple blockade and long-range cannon.
They had to breach the walls at close quarters and then scale them, using ladders and fighting-towers.
For that, Nicholas had his own company, and another one hundred men picked for him by Pesaro.
He had refused to take more.
Whatever happened, the losses were going to be his responsibility.
And if there were only two thousand living souls in Famagusta several days ago, there would be fewer now who were both soldiers and active.
The men firing those guns, manning the walls, shooting from the high galleries might not amount to much more than half that number.
Once they had been overcome, there would be no resistance.
From inside, he or his men would open the gates, ready for Zacco.
The plan, therefore, had been made by John and Astorre, Pesaro and himself while the Mamelukes kept to their camp, and the King and his other officers prepared to hold Christmas at Nicosia.
The weakest stretch of the walls had been identified.
Stone and clods and faggots were brought and by day, under murderous fire, were projected at three different points into the great ditch that surrounded the city.
By night they were added to, using the trenches.
By day, the defenders shot fire-bolts into the rising piles of brushwood, causing them to burst into flame and reducing their height by half.
Only on the south side, where his biggest battery of light cannon stood, did Nicholas build his bridge from the start almost entirely with stone.
There, by the end of two days, the pile of rubble had reached two-thirds of the way to the top.
Nearly high enough for an army to cross, or a siege-tower.
The fourth day dawned, and wore through its hours of abrupt rain and mild, blustering wind.
They all worked in scuffed brigandines and thick caps, most often with their helmets on top, and they were chilled with weariness, and grim and lewd by turns in the raw, brittle moods that went before battle.
John le Grant said, ‘They're not fools, you know.
Some of these fellows will be veterans of Caffa.
They know what a feint is.’
‘But they don't know what your little bundles can do,’ Nicholas said.
‘And they haven't the strength for heavy digging.
There hasn't been a longbow on those walls for two days.
Even if they suspect, they can't cover all three places at once.
And there remains double bluff.
We can always attack from the south, at a pinch.’
‘At a hell of a pinch,’ said John le Grant.
Tonight, two of the piles, including the highest bridge, would be offered nothing but brushwood.
The third, already made half of stone, would be raised through the night to ground level and across that, the attack would be made in the dark just before dawn.
But long before that, he and John and two chosen men would have planted the mines with their fuses.
When the army attacked, they would attack a collapsed wall, over rubble.
‘If you've got your sums right,’ Nicholas said.
‘You don't look as if you could get anything right.
Go off and sleep.
It'll be dark soon enough.
I've sent Pesaro away, and Astorre will keep the gunners at work.’
He watched John trudge off.
On him and on Astorre had rested the burden of maintaining the guns, for the noise of the cannonade was vital to their stratagem.
Even so, they might all be shot as they crossed the moat with their explosives, or wounded before they could leave, having planted them.
Not a bad way to go, in a blaze of your own gunpowder.
Either way, it would damage the walls, and Astorre and Pesaro between them might manage to scale them.
John had made quite a serious attempt to stop him joining the mining expedition, and then had dropped it.
After all, the work was done, and anyone could take Famagusta now who was willing to pay the price in lives from both sides.
They would possibly attack with all the more force, to avenge him.
Which was not to say that he intended to be a martyr tonight, if he could help it.
He slept a little, waking in his pavilion at dusk of his own accord.
The rain had stopped its vibrating patter above him, although the air was laden with moisture and the planked floor of the tent moved on its bedding of grey sand and mud.
It was not really cold.
Except on the mountains, it never became cold in this island.
It seemed a long way, though, from the summer perfume of myrtle and orange-blossom, the brilliance of white fluted marble, the wreathing steam, the orderly practices of the sugar-yards, the worksongs of the scything and the vintage, the glory of the sun setting, of the sun rising out of the sea.
From a valley full of doubt and’ serpents and mischief, sunlight and another manner of glory.
He was glad that the design of his own life seemed, in the end, to be taking a shape that was not entirely haphazard.
If, in the real  world, you couldn't always realise the perfection of the model, the miniature, the diagram, at least the pattern had something in it to be pleased about.
His friends would never lack: his Bank would see to that.
Equally, his young step-daughters in Bruges would be protected.
Here, if he didn't return, Primaflora would receive his letter, and his parcel, and would understand why he had done what he had done.
And far away, his child would grow, in peace henceforth, with a father who would never know he was not his own, and who, with Nicholas gone, would have no reason for spleen or for bitterness.
To be his friend, the boy would have Diniz, who would think him his cousin, and who would grow to gentle manhood in the vineyards of Portugal, and honour Tristão his father.
And for a loving mother the child would have Katelina, who would cherish him now, and make what she could of her marriage, for the sake of what she had found in Kalopetra.
For himself, nothing bound him.
He was vaguely surprised that what sense of loss he did have seemed to be connected in some way with Cyprus.
It was the first place he had come to in his own right, with something to give.
He had had no time to acquaint himself with his fief, twice seen, and well enough served by its own.
Two-thirds of the land he had never visited.
He had done what the Phoenicians had done, and the Byzantines, the Romans, the Crusaders, the Genoese and the Mamelukes.
He had come for his own ends to this island, and used it.
Of his conscious will he had given it nothing, except a single ruler where there had been two.
And a sugar factory.
John le Grant said, ‘Nicholas?
We would go.
They've broken through, and the tunnel is ready.’
And very willingly, he got up to prepare.
They wore brigandines and soft boots and dulled metal helms strapped over a coif of thick wool.
Each had a heavy satchel, a pick, and a knife sheathed at his belt.
In addition, Nicholas carried a short bow at his shoulder, with a quiver.
They entered the trench, leaving Astorre and Thomas and Pesaro standing silently at the entrance.
Then they made their way crouching along it, their feet splashing through muddy water.
The way was lined with long narrow carts, each piled with stone, ready for its last journey.
They avoided them by touch, for here there was no glimmer of light.
Overhead, the nightly bombardment had started.
The night was so dark that the end of the trench was perceptible only as a lightening of the murk, where the ditch of the town lay ahead.
Before that, on their left, was a speck of light that didn't come from ditch or cutting, but from the tunnel so laboriously bored, and whose end John's sappers had now finally opened.
The men who had pierced the final aperture were waiting to greet them: identifiable as a body of sweat, and heat and small movements that  resolved into a murmur, a clink of spade and a clap on shoulder or back.
Then they withdrew, leaving the task force of four at the foot of the ditch of Famagusta.
This was immense, and hewn out of bare rock, although clothed now with dirt and bushes and rubbish.
Walking to the right in its shadowy depths, one would come sooner or later to one of the three great heaps of rubble that now patched it.
Further south was another, and bigger one.
But to reach the third, Nicholas bent low and, crossing the ditch like a lizard, reached the base of the wall and, in its shadow, followed it round to the left, John and the other two following.
No challenge came from above.
The wall towered, impossibly high, its profile distorted by the hide-covered galleries.
Designed long ago, the defences of Famagusta consisted of towers and wallwalks, battlements and arrow slits, without proper seating for cannon, or for the ventilation that cannon demanded.
And on this stretch, in particular, there was no provision for crossfire.
So the wall here was stronger and higher, and the manning of its towers stretched thinnest.
Especially when the defending force was painfully slight.
And especially when all its fire was being drawn to the southern stretch.
All the time he was running, Nicholas was half deaf from the open-air thud of Astorre's guns, maintaining their pre-arranged and regular sequence.
In response, there came the pop of fire from the battlements.
Against that noise, their presence would hardly be heard, or the stealthy sounds John would make, sinking his petards.
Or, later, the manhandling of the carts and the completion of the bridge that, sooner or later, would conduct the whole army across to a ruined wall.
Before he expected, his feet met blocks of stone, and he realised that he had come to the edge of the great sprawling tip of the infill.
He waited, and stopped John and the others.
Then, keeping close to the wall, they began the swift, careful climb over the rubble.
Then John gripped his arm briefly and left him.
One of the sappers went with him.
The other went on and up, his hand holding his satchel.
Nicholas stood, watching the place where the walls met the sky, and the towers, and the galleries, and unslung his bow and bent it.
They had practised this, through these last days.
Pesaro knew Famagusta, and had found others who could describe the walls, and their thickness, and their character.
From as close as he dared, John had surveyed them himself, over and over.
He knew exactly where he wished to slot his explosive, and how long a fuse he needed to give it.
The largest explosion would take place at the base, where he was now working and that, too, would take the longest to plant.
The guns continued to fire.
There were men, Nicholas saw, on the wall-top above him, although not many.
Twice, he saw the glint of metal and once, when the cannon fell silent, he heard distant voices.
Beyond the opposite rim of the ditch lay the stretch of rutted wasteland that lay exposed and empty between Famagusta and the bivouacs of his army.
Within it, grey and white in their sockets, lay balls fallen short of their target.
They reminded him of his puzzles.
He looked up suddenly at a noise.
Someone or something had tumbled.
Someone.
One of the sappers, from a precarious perch a third of the way up the wall.
Nicholas could see where he lay, his limbs cocked and black against the paler stone of the wall.
Whoever he was, he had had the guts not to shout.
John?
John?
No.
John was ahead of him, softly running and climbing.
Nicholas followed, his eyes searching above.
The line of the wall-walk was not suddenly crowded.
Of the two galleries he could see, he had already decided that one was unmanned.
But the other had somebody in it.
Several men, all of them at the end closest above them, and peering.
Nicholas caught John by the arm and they stood, their backs pressed to the wall.
Far to one side, Nicholas now saw the remaining sapper, also frozen, his eyes on the gallery.
The fallen man lay in the ditch, black upon black, and made no sound.
A long moment passed.
A gun boomed; then another, blanching the sky to the south.
They stood in the shadows, unmoving.
Then suddenly the sky above them flashed a stuttering crimson, and iron balls and lead shot rapped into the ditch from above, in a din of sharp hackbut explosions.
Chipped rock flew, and the noise of it ricochetedfrom wall to wall of the ditch and then faded.
He could hear John breathing, and in the distance, distinguish the dim shape of the sapper.
He hadn't moved.
They hadn't been seen.
It had been a nervous reaction — a test — an act of meaningless defiance from the worn soldiers watching above.
They waited.
Voices came from the battlements, and a twinkle of steel.
Voices from the gallery.
A more authoritative voice from above, and dwindling noise, and an absence of glitter.
And finally, only the gallery, silent again, with the men on duty watching unspeaking.
After a long spell, John touched Nicholas on the shoulder and pointed.
Nicholas nodded.
Then, as John began to climb to where the other had been, Nicholas felt his way to the fallen sapper.
He was dead.
Nicholas knelt, then lifted him to the base of the wall and knelt again, to make certain.
He felt a touch on his shoulder.
The other sapper was looking at his partner.
Then he whispered, ‘Ser Niccolò?
You too?’
After that scything spray of stone he had felt the blood, but whatever had cut him, it was minor.
He shook his head.
The man said, ‘Broke my arm.
You've to finish mine off.
Master John's going up for the high one.’
A one-armed man was no use.
Nicholas sent him off back to the tunnel, and glanced upwards.
Master John, a natural chimpanzee, was always going for the high one.
If he had been able to shout, Nicholas would have told John to let well alone.
But he couldn't, so he climbed to the disabled man's perch, and began a sensitive, confident probe, and discovered quite soon how far the man had progressed, and finished the work, fast and easily.
He had wanted to do this job with John alone, but miners were professionals, and didn't like laymen interfering.
He cut the correct length of fuse, and set it, and lit it, and looked to see how John was doing.
The last mine was giving him trouble, partly because his position on the wall was so insecure.
Once, this had been an expanse of perfect, squared masonry, but three years of siege and three months of heavy bombardment had produced enough gouges and bruising to offer some kind of a foothold.
Where there was a real flaw was where the explosive itself was being planted.
Because it was difficult, John was unable, he could see, to keep watch around him.
The battlements offered small danger: such was the slope of the wall that a man would have had to lean far out to see him.
The penthouse above them was different.
For the present, John's position was wholly in shadow and the bombardment, if the single, continuous shots could be called so, was lighting the sky from emplacements which, as they planned, left their stretch of wall in welcome shadow.
It was possible that flares might be dropped.
The real threat was more substantial, and imminent.
Somewhere in that clouded black sky there was a moon due to rise very soon now.
The disturbance had slowed them, and so had the loss of two workers.
Now he and John were still on the wall and, caught by light, would be fully in view from the gallery.
John was not far away, and the stretch of wall that lay between them was not wholly smooth.
Bit by bit, Nicholas began to inch towards him.
He had progressed halfway when John raised his head and noticed.
Nicholas pointed to the sky, made a gesture, and then clutched the wall, swearing.
It was his year for skinned fingers, and climbing.
It was the end of his year.
He knew anyway what John was doing, which was setting the fuse.
He waited, watching John's hands shielding the spark from the tinder, and the moment he finished, he turned to descend at his back.
He had taken two steps when the guns stopped.
It had happened before: a mortar would jam, overheat, miss its turn.
If caught climbing you checked and adhered to the wall, until the bombardment resumed to cover the rasp? f your movements again.
It was not a good place to have to wait, this time.
His handholds were slight, and his footholds were almost non-existent: from the way John was clinging, he was worse off.
And to the right and  above them were the black floor and lighter awning and sides of the gallery, which contained three nervous men who had already let off their handguns at random.
His fingers scraping, Nicholas let his mind dwell for a moment on fuses.
They were lit, but they were long.
They had been deliberately set to defer the explosions.
There was intended to be time to descend, to retire through the covert and to supervise the fast, careful infill of stone that would give them their bridge when the walls fell.
Of course, if a random ball hit a mine, the wall would collapse before that, killing them, and the men in the gallery.
He had cramp in both the hands stretched above him.
On his right, John suddenly changed his grip, grunting.
The guns had not begun again.
None of them.
Why?
His ears sang.
It was silent, and they were marooned in the silence.
He turned his head, and saw John's face, tilted enquiringly.
There was no point in waiting.
He jerked his head, and began to move down.
as if he had thrown a torch into oil, light exploded.
Radiance spread from the sky, and every object in the wide landscape stood revealed by it.
The wall, the ditch, the countryside, the camps, the immobile guns and their gunners appeared painted with light on stark vellum.
Above, the cloud banks had parted: the moon poured down its drenching blue brilliance.
Below, a serpent of flame wreathed the ground: a burning river of light which wound from behind a dark knoll and spilled, slow as honey, towards the blind gates of Famagusta.
He witnessed a great procession, black-edged, bearing hundreds of flambeaux.
The torches blazed upon tall tasselled banners, and lit robes of white and scarlet and gold, borne by men with innocent faces.
In their hands shone the emblems and harness of sanctity: gold rood glimmered, and monstrance and thurible; and the Crucifix from St Sophia itself rode the night like a ship on their shoulders.
Behind it, rank upon quiet rank, marched the Knights of St John of Jerusalem, the white linen cross on their mantles.
And the singing was not in his head, but rose from the cowled, slow-moving figures who edged the bright file with their tapers.
Their petition reached to the walls, clear and pure, low and rhythmic, invoking God, and forgiveness, and pity.
Behind that, laden with food, came the wagons.
Nicholas turned his face to his arms, and was silent.
He couldn't tell when the singing came to an end, or the Archbishop's voice was first raised, addressing the city; offering it God's peace and succour so long as the Feast of Christ lasted.
He didn't move until John's hand smote his weak shoulder, and John's voice said, with desperate hoarseness, ‘You thrawn God-damned fiend of a Fleming!’
He lifted his head, and they looked at one another.
John's face  was furrowed with tears.
Nicholas said, ‘I didn't know if they would do it.’
His arms over his head were an agony.
He began to bring them down, still in a daze, and then remembered, with terrible clarity, where he was and what he was doing.
At the same moment, he saw John's eyes suddenly widen.
The fuses.
The fuses must be put out, or the miracle that was happening out there would be useless.
They scrambled, this time, as if secrecy didn't matter, although of course it did.
If they were seen, they'd be picked off.
If they failed to reach the fuses in time, they'd be killed with the rest on the wall, and only a little earlier than the men of both sides who would open fire, without doubt, claiming treachery.
They shared the task between them, descending first to the biggest mine, by the base of the wall.
Next, the one fixed by the dead man.
And lastly, the two higher up.
By then, the fuses were short, and there was no time to be nice about quietness.
In any case, the wall-walk above them was empty.
Only the hide-covered penthouse was occupied, and the three men in that were jammed at the opposite end, craning to watch the brilliant theatre; the exchange at the gates upon which their survival depended.
Breathless and dizzy, Nicholas found and pinched out his fuse, and looked across gasping to John.
The task was almost done.
In a moment, they could take stock, and be thankful together.
Hampered by his terrible perch, the engineer, as before, was making slow work of it.
As before, he had not wasted energy in trying to keep watch about him.
Not as before, someone this time was leaning out, watching him from the gallery.
They had been seen.
Not as yet by all three of the men, but by one who already had his handgun set up, aimed fully at John, and the flare in his hand to ignite it.
Without thinking, Nicholas unslung his bow.
Clinging with toes and with knees, he leaned into the wall and drew an arrow, fast, from over his shoulder.
He had it nocked, and the hemp half drawn back when an extra flare lit the sky, and he saw how close the man was to firing, and how ill he looked, and how young he was: a hollow-faced boy, defending the walls of Famagusta.
Saw, then, that the hollow-faced boy was Diniz Vasquez.
There was a moment when Nicholas could have released his arrow: he let it pass.
He spoke John's name, to make him look up.
Then he tossed his bow to the foot of the wall, and unslung and threw down his quiver.
From the gallery, the feverish gaze of Diniz Vasquez held no recognition; but still he hadn't touched fire to his weapon.
His two companions, readying theirs, crowded behind him.
The boy said, ‘What are you doing ?’
Nicholas said, ‘We'd planted four mines, before we knew of the truce.
We've just made them harmless.
Bring us up: we'll tell where they are; you can check them.’
His eyes on Diniz, he spoke in Italian.
The boy's sunken face changed.
A man said, ‘Treachery!
The bugle!
Sound the bugle!
They're Zacco's soldiers.
The bastards!
The bastards!’
He was weeping.
He said, ‘You thought these turds with candles were churchmen.
D'you imagine those wagons hold food?
Wait till we turn the guns on them all.
Watch their powder blow up.
Pour lead shot into their fat, meat-stuffed bellies.
And as for you…’
It was his handgun that fired, not the boy's.
But although he aimed it at Nicholas, it fired into the air, for the boy knocked it sideways and held it.
The boy said, ‘No.
I've sent for the captain.
But the men in that column are churchmen.
Look.
I know them.
And look, too.
The sides of the wagons are slatted.
You can see baskets, Vito, not soldiers.
And where is the ditch filled with troops?
I see only two men, and a bridge too low yet to be of much use to anyone.
You?’
He was speaking to Nicholas.
Behind him, distantly, a bugle was sounding, followed by the clank and shuffle of armoured men running.
The conference outside the gates had ceased, and the torches wavered as men turned to seek the disturbance.
Nicholas said, ‘It is a real truce.
There is no army coming.
Throw us ropes.
You can hold us until you have proved it.’
Above, the battlements had become crowded with men, and with the mouths of many handguns, pointing downwards.
The voice of authority, heard once before, became louder and recognisable, and ceased at the battlements.
It said, ‘Bring these men up as far as the penthouse, no further.
I will speak with them.’
The voice of Napoleone Lomellini, last seen in the Lusignan castle of Kiti where he had lied, without pleasure, to try and prevent Nicholas from joining Zacco.
And from which Zacco had freed him, on ransom, to take this post once again as his enemy.
There was no reason for a beleaguered host to be gentle when hauling two spies into their precincts, and in their anger and disappointment and fear, the men who handled the drag-ropes would have made sure, but for Lomellini, that these climbers never climbed again.
Rising to his feet on the floor of the penthouse Nicholas staggered for a moment, while his wrists were being wrenched back and lashed; and knew from the way John was standing that he had received the same treatment.
Where there had been three men there were now a dozen, although he could not now see Diniz Vasquez.
Instead, Napoleone Lomellini stood there, no longer furred and beringed, in a helm and cuirass dented and dull in the moonlight.
There was no softening in his stare.
He said, ‘Niccolò vander Poele.
I am told there are bombards.
Did you plant them?’
‘I am the engineer,’ John le Grant said.
‘They're safe of themselves, I guarantee it; but of course, a chance shot could do for them.
If you give me a torch I'll show your pioneers where they are bedded.’
‘It seems fair,’ said the Genoese captain.
‘And if they blow up, you will know you have forgotten one.
Take him away and get him to do as he says.
Vander Poele will remain.’
His face, grotesque in the torchlight, was little but bone, dirt and gristle.
He turned to Nicholas.
‘I am in no mood for anything but the truth.
You will probably die, but certainly you will speak before you die.
You, the head of a company, are here as Zacco's sapper?
Explain yourself.’
‘The King is in Nicosia,’ said Nicholas.
‘And all his officers.
This attack was my own.
He knows nothing of it.’
‘But the churchmen did,’ Lomellini said.
‘They came to keep us in parley, while you assault us.’
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
‘The church has come in good faith, and is innocent of any deception.
I planned an attack, and have cancelled it.
You will find we have lit and put out all our fuses.
If you want better proof, ask the churchmen.
You will learn Zacco has sent them.
You will discover, I am sure, that he has forbidden me or anyone else to attack you.
If you doubt me, ask yourself where is my army?
If it were a ruse, they should be here to exploit it.’
‘Except,’ said the captain, ‘that the wall has not fallen.
You show  us some mines: perhaps there are others still due to explode.
Perhaps you have spoken the truth, but, waiting in vain, your friends may well think you dead, and carry out an attack to avenge you.
What truce can we accept on this basis?’
The skin of his face hung on its framework like the hides of the penthouse, and weariness and anger and pain scored his brow as if done by a hatchet.
Nicholas said, ‘You have myself as hostage.
Let my engineer go hack and tell them so.’
The man called Vito said, ‘My lord Napoleone.
Let me have them both.
They will tell me the truth.’
Through the hubbub of agreement that followed, the captain was gazing at Nicholas.
He said, ‘You would deserve it.
You have given me no reason to trust you.’
‘We are your prisoners,’ Nicholas said.
‘Since our story is true, we cannot change it.
I will tell you this also.
If you take this step, you will lose the offer of truce.’
The eyes of the captain turned dark, and if there was any emotion left in his voice, it was that of distaste.
He said, ‘From what I hear, that is not impossible.
Very well.
We stand to arms.
I myself will inform the Archbishop what has happened.
You and your engineer will be fettered, and will pass the night here, in the penthouse.
If there is a cannonade, an explosion, you will be the first to experience it.
If the night passes without incident, I may consider the Archbishop's offer.
Meanwhile, the gates remain closed.’
He paused.
He said, ‘In the event of trickery, you will know better than to hope for your life.
If your story is true, you will be treated according to rank as my prisoner.
Meanwhile, the penthouse must serve.
I am afraid you have missed the last serving of supper.’
Nicholas heard the grim humour.
From where he stood, he could see the long procession outside the walls, motionless now, and the wagons unshackled behind it.
He said, ‘At least, let the wagons come in.’
‘Are we animals?’ said the Genoese bitterly.
‘That we forsake prudence, right conduct and dignity for the sake of our stomachs?
In the morning, should this truce be agreed, leave will be given to draw in the wagons.
Until then, we wait.
We are accustomed to it.’
The night wore on.
Stretched on the floor of the penthouse, Nicholas could glimpse the outside world between the battered planks.
The procession from the Cathedral had not deserted the city but remained, silent now, on the land that lay before its main gate, its banners planted like wings about a central pavilion, its walls gold from the brazier within it.
In front the Crucifix stood, warding tired men in sleep and in prayer.
All around, torches burned; and in the centre candles guarded an altar.
The carts, with  their peaches and oranges, their almonds and grain, their meat and herbs and pulses and pies, their hens and walnuts and figs, their pumpkins and mutton and collops, their casks of sweet fortified wine stood unattended.
John le Grant, his face barred with light, said, ‘Nicholas?’
‘The answer is yes,’ Nicholas said.
John le Grant was not Tobie.
The engineer said, ‘Someone waited three days, and told Zacco what you were doing.
Who?
The Patriarch?’
‘Possibly,’ Nicholas said.
‘And, of course, Tobias Lomellini is Treasurer of the Knights Hospitaller of Rhodes.’
There was a silence.
Then —‘And if they hadn't come?’ the engineer said.
‘You would have gone through with it?’
‘I thought I was going through with it,’ Nicholas said.
He felt bewildered by the ironies of what had happened.
He felt terror, and relief, and perplexity, and a consequent inability to plan anything.
John le Grant said, ‘But the boy?
You believed him safe in Portugal?’
That was another matter.
After a while, Nicholas said, ‘He left letters.
He thought he was going there.’
‘So?’ said the engineer.
‘So Bartolomeo Zorzi,’ Nicholas said.
‘Diniz escaped so very easily.
He would go to Famagusta, where he thought his Genoese friends would help him.
He didn't know, as Zorzi did, that the harbour was sealed.
Zorzi, you see, is a Venetian.
And he has an older brother who tells him, sometimes, what to do.’
‘I'm sorry to hear it,’ said John le Grant.
‘So the lad has been in Famagusta ever since?
Then I expect Diniz owes you his life.
You and Zacco.’
‘Provided,’ Nicholas said, ‘that they take in the wagons tomorrow.’
‘They will, now they have you,’ said the engineer.
‘They will use you to taste what they've been given, You may die like those men of Pesaro's.’
‘Before Famagusta surrenders?
No,’ said Nicholas.
‘That is why I am here.
I'll be kept alive until then.
After that, you're going to help Diniz.’
‘Your dying request?’ said John le Grant.
Nicholas turned on him a look of chilly surprise.
He said, ‘Are you my employee?
Am I the head of a banking house?
You help Diniz Vasquez or I dilute the shares and merge with the Strozzi.
Until you've worked with Lorenzo, you don't know what discontent is.
‘I don't know about discontent,’ said John le Grant, ‘but I know what its opposite is.
And I hope you do.
Because for once, I will admit, you deserve it.’
Despite the stiffness and soreness they slept towards dawn, and so missed the colloquy at the portals; the ultimatum; and the exchanges which led, soon after daylight, to the opening of the gates of Famagusta, and the entry, drawn by many weak hands, of the carts with their soft, fresh, redolent burdens.
The gates closed.
Outside, the pavilion was packed and placed in its wagon, and the file reassembled, creased and pallid in daylight, to make its way back to beds, warmth and comfort.
With them walked four thin men in rich-coloured rags.
The Genoese, invited by Zacco, had freed a group of their merchants to pass Christmas with James in his Palace.
In exchange, Famagusta was to keep two men of Zacco's as surety.
One was the Arab Abul Ismail, who had come to offer his skill as a doctor.
The other was Niccolò vander Poele, recently arrested, and at present a prisoner.
No special diet (mentioned the captain of Famagusta) would be claimed for these two Lusignan hostages.
The lord Bastard had provisioned the city.
What had been given, being sound, would amply nourish them.
Nicholas woke to the flash of a knife; and found his bonds being cut, and John le Grant already stretching and groaning beside him.
Then Napoleone Lomellini came, and informed them succinctly of what had happened, and left.
Sickness and pride, in the grey light of day, were set in his unchanging face like a mask.
The soldiers who flanked them in his place looked no better.
John was to be released: Nicholas himself was to be marched to the citadel.
It was what he had hoped.
He had not been prepared for John to stand on the floor of the penthouse, complaining.
John said, ‘I'm not leaving.
If they keep you, they might as well keep me.
Unless, of course, Tzani-bey's poisoned the food again.
Don't worry.
They don't understand Flemish.’
‘Some day,’ Nicholas said, ‘You'll find yourself somewhere where someone does understand Flemish, and they'll cut your ears off, and then all your red hair, wherever you grow it.
You've to go back and get hold of the Patriarch and convince those four Genoese that no rescue is coming.
It's hardly three weeks to Epiphany.
This truce is going to end then.
And unless the city knows that it's hopeless, they might simply pick up the whole war again.
And that isn't what I risked my skin and yours for.’
‘I don't know,’ said John le Grant.
‘You wouldn't make a bad pioneer if you had a bit more time for practice.
All right.
You've persuaded me.
What do I say about Diniz?’
‘Don't upset the Venetians,’ Nicholas said.
‘Leave that to me, when I get back.’
He watched the engineer go, and then turned and let them take him up to the wall-walk, and down into the beleaguered city where, once, the Genoese had planned to keep him hostage while his company fought for Carlotta.
Where now he was  to be incarcerated as a hostage, a prisoner, an enemy.
As a favourite of James, and therefore the most powerful lever for peace and for charity — did they know how to wield it — that the Genoese had ever been granted.
A hundred years before, richest of all cities, concourse of merchants and pilgrims, haunt of courtesans, sink of unnatural vice, pride and luxury, Famagusta housed a hundred thousand citizens within its two miles of walls, and was a place of fine squares and great houses, of mills and warehouses, shops and monasteries, stables and shambles and forges, barracks and ovens, merchants' villas and loggias.
A royal palace.
A cathedral.
A hospice of St John.
And three hundred churches.
With the wars of this century, it had shrunk by a third.
That meant that one would expect, close by the walls, dilapidated streets and ruinous houses, robbed out for their stone.
A piazza made into a drying-field.
A warehouse turned into stables.
A mill housing poultry.
A marketplace harrowed for beans and melons and cucumbers, and vine-covered shacks and sheep pens and orchards among the stumps of great houses.
One would expect to pass those kind of suburbs while lifting the eyes to what still lay in the centre, busy, well kept, and profitable.
What could still be seen, in the splendid roof-tops and towers of magnificent buildings.
A Genoese city, run on good, efficient, prosperous Genoese lines.
Flanked by his guards, Nicholas stepped down from the wide, crumbling wall-alley into a dark arena of rubble, of stench and of silence.
Of the weeds of dilapidation there were none: they had been eaten.
Where they had been was raw earth, smothered with the rubbish and dust of bombardment, and pitted with curious mounds and recesses which Nicholas recognised only slowly as rank upon rank of recent, random, haphazard graves.
The houses here were ruined and roofless and unoccupied.
Because he had slowed, the man behind struck him a blow.
‘Heartburn, is it?’ he said.
‘A congestion after yesterday's eating?
That was the Armenian church.
Them that died of typhoid, that's where they were put.
There's St Anna's.
The women liked to go there, but the priests were the first to die.
These last months, the women have taken it over, giving birth in the annexe and taking and bricking the babe up as soon as it breathed, and before it got found and eaten.
Do you think God punishes men who eat their own children, Zacco's pageboy?
Do we not only die, but go to hell for what we have suffered?’
‘Raffo,’ said the other man.
‘He is hostage.
We have to escort him safely.,
‘I will.
I will,’ said Raffo.
‘St Francis’ monastery, do you see it?
Beautiful, isn't it?
A bridge joins it to the old Lusignan palace.
The Lusignans called it their own royal chapel.
There are how many monks?
Four, perhaps.
They keep the infirmary for those who die clean of infection, from a falling gable, perhaps, when your serpentines find the right range.
And there is the covered market.
Not covered: the flying stone ripped the awnings.
And not a market unless someone finds a birthed dog, or a bird.
The roofs are covered with lime to bring in the birds, but the birds are intelligent: they know when there is nothing to feed them.
Only the worms from the graveyard, but we are there before them, aren't we?’
‘Raffo,’ said the other man.
‘And the Cathedral,’ said the man.
‘Do you like our Cathedral of St Nicholas?
The Lusignan used to crown themselves there.
King Peter — was it King Peter?— who used to stamp his feet weeping if the cook had no oil for his asparagus.
We bury our noblemen there, except that they have to lie at present without coffins.
I would take you in, but for the smell.
And there is the Citadel.
You will find people in the yard of the Citadel.
Didn't you wonder why all the streets were empty?
All the hearty citizens of this city who can walk are at the Citadel, because that is where they have locked up the food, and are distributing it.
Otherwise they are afraid we will kill one another.
as if we would so dishonour our mother republic!’
Nicholas said, ‘You had the choice of surrendering.’
‘There is a ship coming,’ said Raffo.
‘We will never surrender.’
Diniz Vasquez was not visible in the shouting throng of people with sacks, boxes and baskets that crowded the inner yard of the fort of Famagusta, although Nicholas scanned them all as he was led across it.
He didn't see where their baskets were filled, but he observed that soldiers had been appointed to escort each laden man to his house, and that the man's chin would already be glistening, from the raw food that he chewed as he hastened.
Some were unable to chew, or to hurry.
Some carried enough for a family.
Or for those, he supposed, who were too weak or too sickly to walk here.
There were monks moving slowly in pairs, bearing great crates of foodstuffs between them, with a soldier on guard at their shoulders.
The soldiers stared at the food, and kept swallowing.
He learned, when he asked, that they had eaten already, from stores given out in the barracks.
It explained, he thought, the absence of Diniz.
Nicholas followed where he was led, and climbed the stairs to the captain's own quarters.
Once there, his escort opened a door, saluted, and left.
After a moment, Lomellini rose and came forward.
He had the look of someone felled by sleep, and just wakened.
Nicholas said, ‘You have enough to do.
Tell me where to stay, and I will go there.
The food is clean, but I will taste if you want it.’
‘Whether it is clean or not, they must eat,’ said Lomellini.
‘I want to speak to you.’
Leaning on the edge of his table, he let his hollow eyes rest on Nicholas.
He said, ‘It seems that you are more our enemy than your master.
You planned to attack, while he was planning his truce.’
Nicholas remained where he was.
He said, ‘Neither of us knew what the other was doing.
I believed he would not agree to a truce.
I thought an attack the most merciful answer.’
‘Merciful?’ said Lomellini.
Nicholas said, ‘I knew you were starving.’
‘And he did not?’ said the captain slowly.
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
‘Or he wouldn't have offered his truce.
He will not do it again.
He has only to wait.’
He paused and said, ‘This is not the time to discuss it, but if you will use me, I can help you.
What you must do meantime is regain your strength.
And I have to ask you a favour.
I have a relative here.
A youth.
A boy called Diniz Vasquez.
I would see him.’
The captain stood up.
He said, ‘A room is being prepared.
You will be taken there.
And yes, the youth Diniz Vasquez has been to see me.
He has asked me to send you to his lodging.
It is in a house outside the Citadel.
He has this privilege, since his kinswoman is dying.’
‘My lord, he has no relatives here.
It is Diniz Vasquez, the Portuguese youth, I would see,’ Nicholas said.
‘I speak of Diniz Vasquez,’ said the Genoese wearily.
‘The vassal you chained to your dyeyard.
He escaped, and was joined by the lady.
You didn't know of this?
A young woman of good family who has not deserved, I am sure, the privation that she has shared with him.
You know her, of course.
She was a supporter of Queen Carlotta, and Genoa.
She was on Rhodes when the father of Vasquez was killed.
She came to Cyprus with us both on the ship that was waylaid by Mamelukes.
I am not sure whether, as a hostage, you should be allowed near to these people who — although you claim them as relatives — have no cause that I can see to regard you as a friend.
But I have placed the boy on his honour.
He will not harm you.
And the young lady, alas, has not the strength.’
Nicholas said, ‘What is her name?,
‘Are there so many?’ said the captain, his lip curling.
‘Her name is van Borselen.
Katelina van Borselen, a married lady of Flanders.’
The young squire who led Nicholas this time through the city was rough and angry, but also sick.
At the first sign of dissent or hesitation, he fetched his mailed fist full across his captive's bruised face, splitting his lip and causing all his contusions to bleed again.
Immediately after, he turned aside to a doorway and vomited.
Nicholas smelt fresh meat and lemons.
Unless Napoleone took care, the food he had given out would bring its own troubles.
His mind noted this fact among others, ticking efficiently on like a water-clock.
The rest of him was suspended in limbo.
Diniz was here.
Here and starving.
That was catastrophic enough.
But Katelina?
Katelina ?
He didn't really believe it, all the time he was being dragged through near-empty streets which were no longer silent, but filled with curious brawls, or outbursts of squealing or, what he had just heard, the sound of terrified retching.
He didn't believe it up to the moment that he found himself outside a half-house that had once been graced by a classical loggia.
Behind its wreck stood a fine double door with an architrave, and behind that an elegant courtyard, its fountain and pillars and statues smashed to splinters by heavy stone shot.
In one wall was a door, and a womanservant disappearing inside it.
She gave them a terrified glance, and then bolted.
The young Genoese picked his way over the wreckage and, gripping Nicholas, arrived before the same door as it opened again.
The man who opened it was Abul Ismail the physician.
The squire said, ‘Zacco's other fornicating fat hostage.
I'll leave you.
Don't think you can get out.
I'll be waiting.’
He retreated.
Nicholas stood.
The Arab said, ‘I am sorry.’
‘I am not sure,’ Nicholas said, ‘what you are sorry about.’
The brown, smoky eyes were not especially compassionate; merely lucid.
The doctor said, ‘I am here attending a patient, and I have to tell you her story.
You left the young lady Katelina van Borselen at Rhodes.
She was about to sail home to Portugal.
On the eve of her sailing, she learned from a spokeswoman of the Queen's that news had come in from Cyprus: that Diniz Vasquez her husband's young kinsman was trapped in Famagusta.
She elected to join him.
He survives.
But her house was struck by a ball from your cannonades.’
He had been feeling cold for some time.
Now he felt not only cold but quite bloodless.
He said, ‘She is very ill?
I would have brought her away.
Why did Diniz not send me word when it happened?’
His voice, he noticed, remained perfectly steady.
‘Death has made an appointment with her,’ said the Arab.
‘Her heart is great: she might live to your Feast of Epiphany.
Meanwhile she cannot be moved.
She would find no better fate in Nicosia.
She would not have you informed, in case it placed your own freedom in jeopardy.
But now God has brought you; you are held here a captive, as she is.
She fears for you, but is joyful, for now she will see you.’
He waited, and then said, ‘She will depend on you.
Sit.
Come in when you are ready.’
Aphrodite, Aphrodite.
He said, ‘I must go, if she is waiting.’
She lay in a room from which all the wood had been stripped, save for the pallet beneath her.
What wouldn't burn still remained: bare walls muffled with incongruous tapestries, flooring tamped over with carpets.
There was a stand of bronze inlaid with silver, looted perhaps from a rich merchant's house, and a cut of marble propped on an empty brazier and supporting the physician's jars and boxes and bottles.
There was a brazier newly in use, and still smoking a little.
The air in the room was not yet warm.
From her throat to her feet she was covered in velvet and gold, furs and silk and jewelled embroidery.
From her throat to her feet, the housings of her single, stark pallet were royal.
The plain sheets that should have served it were also there, but torn into strips and padding and squares, and laid on a tray on the ground.
The door closed behind Abul Ismail, and Nicholas looked at his father's wife.
Her face was ivory.
Upon those sturdy, well-defined bones the clear, even tint seemed translucent.
The hollows under her cheekbones were sepia, and the skin which sank into the new, heavy arcs of her lids, and the shadows beneath ear and chin.
Her brown hair, newly combed, coiled ash-dull among all the rich fabrics.
But the eyes on him were shining as at Kalopetra, when he had been constrained to leave, and she, for a while, had stood to stop him; stood as close as the flesh on his body.
The Fontana Amorosa.
Whosoever drinks from that, they are thirsty for ever.
He said, ‘They have just told me.’
When he knelt, his eyes were level with hers; he saw them moated with tears.
Her hand wanted to rise: he found and made a tent for it with his own.
He said, ‘Are you in pain?’
‘I don't know,’ she said.
She smiled, arrogant eyebrows clenching, tears sliding into her pillow.
She said, ‘I used to be.
Not now.
Not now.’
And her breath, as she smiled, began to catch in weak, involuntary sobs; so that he bent over her, his cheek against hers, his arms embracing hers in spectral and impotent comfort.
Then he felt her lashes stir at his cheek, and raised his head and kissed the place where they lay, and then her brow, her throat and her chin, while her lips went on smiling.
When he drew apart, she said, ‘Your face.
Your face is marked.
Have they hurt you?’
‘No,’ he said.
‘I would have come before.
I didn't know.
You should have told me.’
‘How could you have come?’ she said.
‘They would have killed you.
When I could walk, I would climb the wall and look across to your camp.
Then so many fell sick.’
She stopped, and then said, ‘There were flies.
I remembered what you said.
Their lives were short, too.’
Nicholas said, ‘This should never have happened.’
Her tears had halt closed her eyes.
He cupped her cheek in his hand and pressed his kerchief under and over her lashes.
She said, her eyes shut, ‘I chose to come.
They told me Diniz was here.’
She opened her lids.
‘I would rather be here than in Portugal.’
He shook his head, taking her hands again.
She said, ‘Yes.
When must you go?’
‘How could I go?’ he said, smiling.
‘For the length of the truce, I'm a prisoner.
They can't stop me seeing you.
Unless you get tired of me.’
She had begun to weep again.
She said, ‘It's just weakness, I'm sorry.
Diniz has been so good, and I am so happy.
Is that wrong?
Is it wrong, what we've done?
Will you be punished?’
He knew what she was asking.
He said, ‘You talked to someone?’
The weeping had stopped.
‘A priest,’ she said.
‘He is dead, now.
He said that this is my reparation, and I need fear no other.
But you —‘
‘Simon will never know,’ Nicholas said.
‘If we've betrayed him once, he has betrayed you many times.
And if some greater authority decides the offence requires atonement, then I can only say that I shall pay the cost of it willingly.’
He couldn't tell whether it was enough to comfort her.
She smiled, her eyelids heavy.
He studied them, smoothing the fragile skin of her hand, and saw them falter shut, and heard her breathing soften and settle.
There was no other sound, outside or inside the room.
After a while, he let his head sink on his arms, deep among the chilly, metal-chased velvets.
Perhaps he slept.
He roused to a touch on his shoulder and Abul Ismail stood at his side.
The Arab said, ‘Come.
Eat and share some of our wine.
Your escort will wrench you away soon enough.’
This had been the house of a banker.
There were two servants still: the woman he had glimpsed, and a steward more frail and more sullen.
The Arab said, ‘They blame me for guarding the  food.
But if they gorge, they will die.
The boy Diniz is wiser, though weak.
All his food has gone to nourish the lady, and to placate the woman, so that she would stay here and nurse her.,
‘And the lady?’
Nicholas said.
Long ago, outside Kyrenia, he and this man had come to know a little of one another.
He would never be able to read Abul Ismail, as he found he could decipher so many.
It had pleased him, that discovery.
He had wondered, also, how much the mediciner had been able to guess about his own mind and nature.
Whatever it was, he knew he would receive the truth now, however unpleasant, and was aware of nothing but thankfulness that it should be Abul Ismail here to tell him.
Abul Ismail said, ‘She was starving before the beams fell on her body.
Her limbs lack feeling: she would never have walked.
Now she seems to have little pain, and little hunger, although she takes what the boy gives her, and today, we have improved upon that.
You must not blame the lad either.
He tells me he implored her to let him beg her release, but she refused.
She wished to share his fate.
She wished to die under the flag of St George, and not the flag of the Lusignan.
She is loyal to the allies of her husband, however weak a provider her husband has been.
But she has said nothing of that.
I am only guessing.’
Nicholas said, ‘For what you are doing, I hope God or Allah will reward you.
Tomorrow, I will have her taken to Nicosia.’
‘No,’ said the physician.
‘Forgive me.
I have said this to the boy.
She will die very soon.
Such a move would cause her pain, would shorten her days, would deny the stout heart that has kept her here all these weeks.
Now you are here, she has all she wants.
Take her to Nicosia, but only if you will not do her the service of remaining here, in this town, at her side.’
In face of that, there was no question, now, of disturbing her.
The questions he had to ask now were practical ones, to do with comfort and nursing, and the mediciner answered them.
Presently Diniz himself, released from duty, walked into the kitchen.
The boy said, ‘You came.’
He paused.
He said, ‘Senhor Abul will not permit me to dine quite so lavishly.’
‘You know what would happen if you did,’ the doctor said equably.
‘Here is soup.
Sit.
How are the pains?’
‘Worse,’ said Diniz.
He looked at Nicholas.
He said, ‘It is a crude business, starving.
Did you not know we were here?’
Nicholas said, ‘No.
I was told you had escaped.
Your note said you had gone home to Portugal.
I thought you were at home, and the demoiselle also.,
‘Your manager helped me,’ said Diniz.
‘The Venetian, Zorzi.,
The food he had eaten burned in his throat.
‘Not by my orders,’ said Nicholas.
‘No,’ said Diniz.
‘She said that would be so.
You saved her in Rhodes.’
Diniz Vasquez was like a drawing of himself, done by Colard in black ink and white powder.
There were sores of malnourishment at the edge of his mouth, and his skin was crossed with premature folds and lines, like a map of the face of his father.
Upon it were visible the prints of many different thoughts, and some conflict.
Nicholas said, ‘Whatever she has told you, it is true.
What you would do for her, so would I.’
‘But,’ said the boy, ‘you married Primaflora?’
‘Do you want her?’ said Nicholas.
The silence stretched.
The boy said, ‘Who would want her now?
She is alive?’
Nicholas said, ‘But for Primaflora, the food would not have come today.’
It was the truth, in its own macabre way.
Stiff with disbelief, the boy's dark eyes stood in their hollows.
Nicholas went on talking persuasively.
‘So the apportioning of blame, as you see, is not simple.
If you wish to go to Nicosia, I could arrange it.
I will stay with her.’
A smell of hot soup filled the room.
Like the mark of a slap, an arc of pink sprang across each of the boy's whitened cheeks.
He watched the bowl, and seized it, and then, meeting the physician's eyes, took the spoon and fed himself, slowly.
After a very short time, he stopped, and laid the bowl down.
He bent his head, his arms hugging his body.
The Arab shook his head, and then rising, touched his shoulder.
‘Have patience.
Let it cool.
Eat as if it were poison.’
‘Is it?’ said the boy.
‘No,’ said Abul Ismail.
‘I have tasted it.
Since I came, I have tasted all I have been asked to.
Messer Niccolò has offered, I'm sure, to do the same.
Your body will grow whole again.
Why not do as he says, and let him send you to Nicosia as an envoy?’
Diniz Vasquez looked up.
‘To spend Christmas with Zacco?’ he said.
His eyes went to the door and returned.
He said, ‘I would stay where she is.
You will be under guard, for your own safety.’
‘Ser Niccolò will be kept, as I am, in the Citadel,’ said Abul Ismail.
‘But I am allowed in the streets, with my escort.
Once I am known, and my work, they are unlikely to harm me.’
‘I can pull weights,’ said Nicholas.
‘And carry loads that men here are too weak to manage.
I can be your assistant, unless my presence would harm you.
Food will strengthen their anger.
They know I planned to attack them.’
‘They know that if they harm you, their food will stop,’ said the Arab in his precise, guttural voice.
‘Work, and they will not resent the food you eat.
On the other hand, there will always be hotheads.
There is one.’
A handgun had fired in the house.
Diniz sprang up, but Nicholas reached the door before him, wrenching it open.
Outside, smoke and stench met him together.
The body of their steward lay on the floor in a pumping fountain of blood.
Beyond it stood the young squire who brought him, the smoking tube in his hand, his face stamped with rage and with loathing.
The reek of ordure voided from all his clothing.
Then he saw Nicholas, and flung the hackbut away and drew his sword with a wet, shaking hand.
‘Poisoners!’ he said.
He took a cumbered step forward, and Diniz Vasquez strode into his path and stood unarmed before him.
‘Well, you too!’ the boy said.
‘We're the same, even the women.
Thank God we have water.
Come with me, and we'll see to it.
Fresh food on empty stomachs, I'm told.
I've made them eat everything I do, so I can tell you the food isn't tampered with.
We have a doctor, though.
Senhor Abul?’
‘An old story,’ said the Arab.
‘Sweat and blood, a true bath of honour.
Should starvation be any less honourable?
What did the lady your mother have made for flux in her household?
Elder flowers in vinegar?
Rue in breadcakes?
I have something as useful.
Come with me.
Messer Diniz, I will need you.
Messer Niccolò…’
Nicholas knelt by the body.
He said, ‘I will deal with it.
Is the woman his wife?’
‘She won't mourn him,’ said the Arab.
‘She will stay.
She has seen worse, I dare say, these many months.’
As he had done on the journey to Rhodes, from that time onwards Nicholas gave up his will, his designs, and his planning, and lived from hour to hour simply to work as he was bidden.
Each day he came twice to the banker's house and sat in the sickroom, warm and better furnished now, and kept his lover company; sometimes talking, sometimes in silence.
With the coming of fresh food, and the medicines that Abul had sent for, she seemed to rally her strength.
She slept, with something of her old determination, in order to be awake when he came; and often she wanted to talk: about Bruges; about the past; about all the foolish exploits that had made Claes the apprentice notorious — the jokes with the gun and the waterwheel; the chases, the skating; the escapade with the ostrich.
The first time they had met, he had fished her headgear out of the canal.
She had been nineteen, and affronted.
‘You were so kind with the children,’ she said.
‘And Felix.
You have that gift, to be liked.
Gregorio, the lawyer who fought Simon for you.
Your engineer and your doctor.
Diniz is ready to take you as friend, or will be soon.’
Once, she spoke of the day of the bombardment.
‘The balls didn't often come quite so far.
I expect you aimed at the walls.,
‘Wherever we aimed, they always fired in another direction,’ Nicholas said.
‘It was a marble ball.
They showed it to me later.
There were inscriptions half buffed from the surface, but you couldn't see what shrine they came from.,
Whichever it was, it had brought death to her.
‘Aphrodite or Pallas Athene?’
Nicholas said lightly.
‘I think I prefer either to the Heart as Love's Captive.
Since you spoke of it, I've found out the story.
The Knight Coeur is a failure.
And the lady Sweet Grace is never liberated.’
‘Not entirely a failure,’ she said.
‘The lady escapes from the Manoir de Rébellion.
But of course, the three enemies of Love trap her eventually.
Shame, Fear and Denial.’
She smiled.
‘We have escaped them.’
The rest of his time, he spent with Abul Ismail.
The sick who had no one to tend them were spread through the inner, inhabited core of the city, in the monasteries, in the hospice of the Knights of St John with their double chapels.
There they were tended by the Brethren of the Order, and elsewhere by those monks who had survived.
Still, their strength and their knowledge were limited, and the physician in daily demand.
Among the patients were the injured and sick of the army.
Once they had had their own barracks, their own surgeons.
Now they stood to the walls, and if they fell, had no more help than the civilians had.
The others in need were those still in the care of their families.
The roofs were most often not their own: long since, the community had drawn in from its perimeter, sharing its water, its food and its warmth, and distancing itself so far as might be from the walls and the thud of the cannon.
All these people, Abul Ismail visited.
He was given a boy, and two soldiers, and a handcart.
In that, he took the box of his instruments, and the pills and plasters and powders which took Nicholas and himself half their sleeping time to boil, to mix and to stamp.
Every second day, food and medicine were delivered from Zacco and, strictly watched, the doctor was allowed to speak with the courier who came with the convoy.
Nicholas was never given that privilege.
For him were the heavy tasks.
Now, with new carts, he could drag both water and food to where they were needed.
He took the night soil and the corpses to the south wall, where the north wind would scour them, and ground off the flesh of his hands, digging trenches.
He never lacked for both helpers and escort, but men on starvation diet take time to respond to good feeding, and their willingness far outran what was left of their strength.
And even good food was not proof against the malignance that hung in the air, in the rotting soil, in the ill-washed vessels from which they ate and drank.
Typhoid, dysentery struck every third household, and the marshes from the north sent their evil on the sharp, wintry  wind.
Once, Abul Ismail said, ‘You do not eat.
I have been watching.
You are subject to marsh fever?’
‘I am subject only to grief, Nicholas said.
He would have said it to no one else.
It happened to be true.
Christmas came, and High Mass in the Cathedral of St Nicholas.
The last carts from King James had contained candles, and they stood in front of the altar: stout towers of wax that once would have been raided and eaten.
Even so, their numbers seemed to have dwindled.
Abul Ismail now had better stuff for his plasters than cobblers’ wax.
Katelina had shared in that Mass, carried there by Diniz and Nicholas on a stretcher of rafters and carpets.
Latterly, a greyer tinge had coloured her skin; and the scented rosins Abul threw on her brazier disguised a different turn in her illness.
But always, welcoming Nicholas, she was washed, combed and seemly, and had formed out of her obstinacy, it seemed, a frail steely courage that endured where others succumbed.
She returned silent from that communion, but roused to the dinner that Abul, Diniz and Nicholas spread in her chamber.
She took, too, the first cup from the flask of good wine that Nicholas had found for her.
‘Droit de prémices,’ Nicholas said, clasping his hand over hers to keep the stem steady.
‘But then, we had that already.’
And she drew his hand closer and laid her cheek on it, so that he knew she, too, was thinking of Bruges, when she had allowed him that right, and of Ghent, and of a place by a waterfall.
When he lifted his head, Diniz was looking at him.
Then he looked away.
After that, he was commanded to the Citadel, to dine with the captain.
With Napoleone Lomellini were other Genoese noblemen he had come to know, and sometimes find ways to baulk, when common justice appeared to be slighted.
All were shabby; all had about them the cleanliness of icy well-water, spoiled and fetid with the reek of the city, that nothing but fire could dispel.
The meal was stiffly formal.
At the end, the captain said, ‘I have had a message which concerns both of our hostages.
Since this is a Christian festival, I have not sought, Messer Niccolò, the company of your colleague.
I wish, therefore, that you will convey to him all I am about to say.’
Since he became first their prisoner and then their enforced guest, Nicholas had rarely met all his present masters; and had thought it best not to seek their company.
Today, he had suspected that something was brewing.
It was possible, of course, but not likely that Zacco had grown tired of his Christmas truce.
His clemency had earned him the regard of the West and would, surely, last until Twelfth Night.
It was likelier that Zacco had grown uneasy over his own unforeseen absence.
Nicholas had  asked to remain.
He had been held, in the first place, because he had been caught carrying out what must now appear an ill-judged and irresponsible foray.
An act of defiance, in Zacco's terms.
So now, perhaps, Zacco wished to replace and recall him.
In which case, Nicholas meant to refuse.
Napoleone Lomellini drew out a paper.
The labours of his protesting stomach had corroded his dark skin with pustules; he was still sharp of bone and languid in movement, but something of the family vigour was visible.
His voice, as he continued, was brusque.
‘You will know that James of Lusignan is passing Christmas at Nicosia with four ambassadors from this city.
We have heard from them.
Talks have taken place.
A document has been drawn up, and has been sent here to me for consideration.
My colleagues and I have discussed it, and we propose to recommend that its terms be accepted.
It will be signed on the sixth day of January.
Since it affects you, I shall read you its contents.’
So suddenly it had come, all they were working for.
Talks.
A document.
And acceptance.
Nicholas sat perfectly still, his heart shaking him.
‘Yes, my lord?’ he said.
‘I am glad to tell you,’ said Napoleone Lomellini, ‘that it is the Bastard's intention to lift the siege of Famagusta.
This will be done fourteen days after this treaty is signed, and will be followed by a truce of one year.’
He looked round at his companions, and then at Nicholas.
He had kept triumph out of his voice but not, perhaps, a shade of justifiable satisfaction.
‘That is the gist of this document, and I have instructed our envoys to agree to it.’
Nicholas felt as if turned to stone.
In all his plans, he had never let himself contemplate an outcome as vicious as that.
Zacco had tired of the siege.
Zacco had thrown the Genoese twelve months of a truce.
St George and the dragon still flew from the walls of Famagusta.
For another year, the Genoese could continue to squat in the wreck of the city, clutching the rights to their ruined, foundering colony; promoting nothing; permitting nothing to flourish, either of theirs or the Bastard's.
Another year for the divided island to suffer.
For himself, another year of detention, at Zacco's whimsy.
And at the end of the year, the siege to start all over again.
He realised that he had not thought of it before as detention.
He said, ‘The lord Abul and I are therefore expected to return to the King at Epiphany?’
‘That is for your employer to say,’ the captain said.
‘Under the terms in this document, two of the Lusignan's men will stay here, and four of the city's will stay in Nicosia until the rescue fleet comes.
We are allowing our four men to remain at the Palace.
I he Bastard may wish you to stay, or to replace you.
I shall now read —‘
‘Rescue fleet?’
Nicholas said.
The captain looked up.
‘That is the condition of the truce,’ he said.
‘Rescue fleet ?’
Nicholas repeated.
The Genoese looked angry.
He said, ‘Do you interrupt your own lord?
Ours is a Republic which cares for its citizens, and will support them against a common enemy.
There is a relief expedition on the way; carracks which bring arms and soldiers, as well as provisions.
It will arrive here before the testing span of this treaty has ended.
And when it has come, the armistice will begin, and the hostages on both sides will be freed.
That is all, surely, that concerns you?’
‘But-’ Nicholas said.
He drew a long breath.
‘You expect a fleet?
What fleet?
Genoa has nothing to spend.
There is no fleet moving or building elsewhere.
Every port, every chance ship confirms it.
What fleet , Ser Napoleone?,
‘What do you know of the Republic?’ said Lomellini.
‘If one single vessel enters the port of Famagusta in the fourteen nights that follow Epiphany, the siege will be lifted.
That is what this document says.’
‘And if no ship comes?’
Nicholas said.
‘Or coming, cannot enter in time?’
‘It will not happen,’ said Lomellini.
Nicholas waited.
‘It will not happen,’ said the captain once more, and less fiercely.
‘But if no ship enters, then Famagusta surrenders to Zacco.’
He could not, at first, even think of his regular call to Katelina.
He walked round and round his small chamber, haranguing the walls.
Abul Ismail, who had come for news, retired to a cushion and sat, his hands on his lap.
At the end, having exhausted himself, Nicholas looked at him, stopped, and then with a groan, dropped to the opposite corner and put his head in his hands.
He gave a laugh.
‘I apologise.’
‘You received a fright,’ said the Arab in his judicial way.
‘It is natural.
If you now set your mind to do so, it will tell you all the components, reasonable and unreasonable, of your fury.
This in turn will render you able to master your body.
Tell your hands to be still.’
Around the knot of his stomach, everything seemed to be shaking.
He told it to stop, and it didn't.
The Arab said, ‘Why do they think a fleet is coming?’
‘Because they don't know what is happening out there,’ Nicholas said.
‘Their precious Republic has ruined itself over the Naples war.
The Fregoso and the Adorno are tearing Genoa apart with their rivalry.
The Bank of St George have already advanced Famagusta all they can spare: they have nothing left.
And the seas are blocked anyway with the Turkish fleet.
They've signed a treaty of surrender, and they don't even know it.’
‘It isn't signed yet,’ said Abul Ismail.
‘It will be, in eleven days,’ Nicholas said.
‘You are confident,’ the Arab said.
‘But what you have told me will now be known to these four Genoese in Nicosia.
Indeed, is this not what you advised in the first place?
Convince them no fleet is coming, and they will bow to surrender?
And if that is so: if they are so convinced, why does this document talk of fleets and of truces?’
‘They aresurrendering,’ Nicholas said.
‘But they have to obtain the leave of the Commander of Famagusta, who still believes in a fleet.
Hence the conditional clause.
It will make no difference.’
‘Unless a fleet comes,’ the Arab said.
‘Come.
The times have been hard on you, these last weeks.
To a mind delighting in tactics and devices, grief is not a familiar factor, but it cannot be excluded from any man's calculations.
In the simplest of games, one person at least knows the pain of doubt, or defeat.
It can be of high value.
Success seldom teaches what is worth knowing.’
He waited, but did not seem disappointed that Nicholas made him no answer.
I he Arab said, ‘Visit your lady, and then I will prepare you some easement.,
There was nothing of that Nicholas wished to discuss, so he answered only the question.
‘Thank you, no.
I have seen Tzanibey so reduced.’
‘That remedy I do not offer,’ said the Arab.
‘Although I should advise you not to scorn it.
Unreasonable tasks sometimes need unreasonable tools to perform them.
No.
I think you deserve other excesses.,
It proved to be some extremely strong wine he had hidden.
It allowed Nicholas a long, hard night's sleep, followed by a splitting headache in the morning.
On the day after Epiphany, Famagusta heard that the treaty had been sworn before the Haute Cour in the Royal Palace of Nicosia, and that the fourteen days of extra truce had begun.
A year of peace with the city would follow, provided that, as the city expected, a relief ship or ships arrived before the end of that period, passed the chain and entered the harbour of Famagusta.
If such a ship or ships failed to enter, the city would capitulate by the time January entered its twentieth night.
In that event, the ambassadors stipulated that Famagusta would be governed henceforth by James of Lusignan and his Christian lieutenants, and not by Mamelukes, Moors or other infidels, who were to have no authority over Famagustans.
The lord James had undertaken that the Sultan in Cairo should not contravene any article of the pact, and his emir Tzani-bey al-Ablak had been asked to give his word to that effect.
The Genoese city of Famagusta did not intend to be at the mercy of Mamelukes.
By then, released from stricter vigilance, Nicholas had been able to move from the Citadel to the house of Katelina, and soon Abul Ismail was permitted to join him.
As the life of the city began, haltingly, to achieve some simple routine, Nicholas spent his time more and more on the business of medicine.
He was good with patients, as he was good with children.
He watched Abul Ismail in silence, and helped without flinching.
He learned, among other things, what alum served for, besides dyeing.
The rest of the time he spent with Diniz, and Katelina.
Once, it had seemed that the candle of her life would burn only till Christmas, and that it was towards that single point that she was spinning out the last hours of her life.
Then it became apparent that she was holding to some other lodestar.
She believed in the ship, and was waiting for it.
Abul Ismail had said that she was loyal to Genoa, and it seemed this was true, whatever Carlotta had done to her.
She had lived among Genoese merchants in Bruges: Anselm Adorne had her respect and affection.
Genoa was the home of Simon's company, and he owed his start in Madeira to Genoese money and skill.
And through Genoa, the ally of Portugal, she could repay her debt of indifference to Tristão Vasquez, who had married Simon's sister, and her gratitude to the boy Diniz, on whom her eyes rested, half sleeping, in a strange, touching pride.
In the sickroom or with Diniz, Nicholas never threw doubt on the arrival of Katelina's dream fleet.
Nor, in the long hours of her sleeping, when he and Diniz shared the same room, did he say more than he thought might reassure the young Portuguese.
Any plan for the future depended on the term of the girl's life now ending, and neither could speak of that.
Sometimes, though, the boy would now talk of the past.
‘You were in Rhodes.
The demoiselle spoke of it.
She said my father was killed because of her.’
‘Because of me,’ Nicholas said.
‘We had a misunderstanding, the demoiselle and I, and, for a while, she wanted to punish me.
The Queen thought my life was in peril, and she should get rid of my enemies.
She thought too, she would recover Cyprus.
She didn't want Madeira to rob her of vines and of sugar, and your father had tried to do that once.
So she had no compunction, I think, in allowing your father to be lured into danger, so that the demoiselle would leave the City to follow him.
The assassins meant to kill her.
They didn't care whether or not they killed your father or you.’
Diniz said, ‘The demoiselle said my father was killed by the Queen and someone else.
She didn't say who it was.
She said the Queen and somebody else made sure she knew I was in Famagusta.
She said you went to Rhodes to find out who killed my father.’
‘They were only hired assassins,’ Nicholas said.
‘Astorre helped me kill two of them.
The Queen was behind most of it.
She needed mercenaries.,
‘But you were already with Zacco when they tried to kill the demoiselle at Kalopetra,’ the youth said.
He paused.
‘Was that why you married the lady Primaflora?
Did she warn you of the new plot, and needed protection?’
‘She told me where to find Katelina,’ Nicholas said.
‘I should have stayed, then, to make sure she left safely for Portugal.
But I was being hunted as well.’
‘But you didn't love Primaflora?’ the boy said.
‘You wouldn't have married her otherwise?,
‘I shouldn't have married her otherwise,’ Nicholas said.
After a moment he said, ‘What do you think you've been watching, these weeks?’
The boy's eyes were dark and level, dense as the Arab's.
‘Compassion?’ he said.
Leaving, Nicholas crashed the door open and  then, remembering, closed it soundlessly in the last inch of its movement.
The word followed him into the courtyard.
When, calmer, he went to her room, Katelina was awake, and he was able to expend on her all that Diniz thought he was capable of.
The following day, Diniz apologised.
Nicholas heard it in silence.
She was worse, today; her breathing irregular, her words sometimes confused.
Latterly, she had been in pain.
Today, Abul Ismail had stayed at her side, and now Nicholas had been banished from the sickroom.
Diniz also had stayed, and had found his way out into the yard, and the broken pillars of the loggia, where he had found somewhere to sit out of the wind.
Today it was cloudy but bright, and the thick, accustomed smell of the city was better than the hospital smell in the house.
Coming out for the same reasons, Nicholas found him there and heard him make his excuses.
His mind was not especially on Diniz.
He said, ‘You needn't be sorry.
None of this is your fault, and a good degree of it is mine, which is why I lose patience easily.
I have nearly insulted you, several times, by promising that you will forget all this when you are home again.’
The boy's eyes fell.
Nicholas dropped to sit on a block, and picked up a stone, and took out the knife he had been given back.
Diniz said, ‘You made carvings in Bruges.’
‘It passed the time,’ Nicholas said.
A short silence followed.
Diniz said, ‘Katelina says you think we are cousins.,
Both his hands stopped.
‘Katelina?’ he said.
‘She asked me to call her that.
She says your mother was Simon's first wife.
I call him Simon,’ he added.
‘He is your uncle,’ Nicholas said.
He had resumed carving again.
‘Did she say anything else?’
‘She said that Simon denied he had fathered you, and this was the cause of the feud, and that it would get worse, unless something stopped it.
She said that when she was…that Simon would think you had killed her.
Would think that you had killed my father.
That unless something was done, he would kill you.,
‘And?’ said Nicholas.
‘That was all,’ said the boy.
That was all.
Nicholas looked at what he had been doing, which was nothing very much, and laid down the stone and the knife and, clasping his knees, looked at Diniz.
He said, ‘Has it shocked you?’
‘About your mother?
It happens everywhere.
It makes me feel different,’ Diniz said.
‘In what way?’
‘We may be cousins.
If Simon is your father.
If he is, why didn't he believe…?,
‘It's a long story,’ said Nicholas.
‘But I was glad for a lot of reasons that you didn't aim true in the dyeyard.’
He smiled, watching the boy's face turn crimson.
‘I didn't blame you.’
‘So why?
Why send me there?’
Diniz said.
The flush was still there, and in his voice something that might have been an appeal.
‘Not from spite.
Some day I'll tell you.
Diniz, you are not to take part in this feud.
Katelina was warning you.
All she says is true: Simon will blame me for everything.
But you can't protect me, no one can.
He is beyond believing the truth, especially when the truth itself is not black and white.
I expect she has asked you to tell him everything that has happened, and persuade him to make friends and thank me?
But she knows, too, in the depths of her heart, that it isn't possible.
He is beyond reason, Diniz.
What you must do is help him forget; plunge him in business as your father would have done; save him from ruining the rest of his life hunting for vengeance.’
‘He'll kill you,’ said Diniz.
‘She says he'll try to kill you unless one of us gets to him first.’
‘He might,’ Nicholas said.
‘That isn't my fear.
My greatest fear -my greatest fear is that I shall find I have to kill him.,
At that point, Abul Ismail came into the yard and said, ‘Messer Niccolò.’
They had turned her pillow so that it was fresh, and the tawdry finery had long since been replaced by a smooth, pale quilt that reached to her breast.
Over it, the slender bones of her arms showed under the sleeves of her bedgown, with no roundness of flesh left anywhere.
The brown hair, the dark brows and, when he took her hand, the open brown depths of her eyes were like molasses drained from white sugar.
Lady Sweet Grace.
He said, ‘I have a complaint.
I've been kept out.’
Her lips were leaden, but able to smile.
‘He is a bully,’ she said.
‘Nicholas.
You must hide.
I can't wait.’
But for Diniz, he couldn't have followed the thought.
He said, ‘Simon?
I know.
I've thought about it.
I shall be careful.’
Her fingers stirred in his.
She said, ‘I can't wait.
Abul has told me.
When the siege ends, you can leave Famagusta.
Go somewhere safe.
The King, Astorre will protect you.,
Peace of mind was all he could give her.
‘I shall,’ he said.
‘And Diniz will get safely home.
I shall see to that.’
He waited again.
He found he couldn't pursue the thought to its proper conclusion.
He couldn't distress her with his own, raw, terrible dilemma.
She divined it.
She said, ‘You are wondering about our child, too.
If you think it right, I want you to take him.’
He couldn't stop himself showing what he felt.
Then he didn't try to stop it.
Katelina said, ‘I hadn't forgotten.’
There was so little time.
He got back half his control, and then all of it.
He said, ‘We spoke of this.
No.
Simon must never doubt who his son is.
Katelina, who could care for him?
Would Lucia take him, now Tristâo has gone?
Or Tasse — perhaps I could get Tasse.
She looked after —‘
He stopped.
Tasse, adoring, elderly Tasse, had looked after Marian on the journey that led to her death.
Katelina said, ‘I wrote a message, to Lucia, in case you thought of that.
And to Simon.
There is another note, just a record.
If the child stayed with Lucia, Diniz would be kind.’
‘Diniz doesn't know?’
Nicholas said.
‘No.
I've told him you think I should have called my son — what is it?’
‘Arigho.
It's only a pet name for Henry.
And Arro is the little name.’
‘Like Claes,’ she said, and fell into still, smiling silence.
Then she said, ‘And Tasse.
She looked after Marian.
Marian was afraid for you, too.
She said you couldn't protect yourself.
She saw you learn how.’
His hand cradled hers on the coverlet and he studied each wasted finger, rather than have his face read.
He said, ‘She brought me up.
I used to dream that, one day, I would come to her with the girl I was going to marry.’
He raised his head slowly.
The hollow eyes on the pillow were filling with tears.
He would never have said that to anyone living.
He had said it because she was dying; and she knew it.
The greatest balm he could bring, brought on a knife-point.
The door opened on the bearded, calm presence of Abul Ismail.
He said, ‘She is in pain, Messer Niccolò.
Give me a moment.’
Their hands fell apart.
He bent and kissed the tears in her eyes, resting his lips in their hollows.
Then he straightened and left.
Standing waiting, he heard the noise of the city oddly magnified, like the clamour of a classical triumph, with guns and bells, drums and trumpets and piping.
And the roar of many voices.
The door of the sickroom opened, and the doctor came out.
He said, ‘I need your permission, and the boy's.
She is in pain, but wants to endure it.
What she may endure now is, however, nothing to what she will lace very soon.
I would not inflict on her either this knowledge, or this eventual indignity.
I ask your leave to remove her pain when it begins to grow past her bearing.
You have seen me do this for others.
She will drift into sleep.,
‘And never waken,’ Nicholas said.
‘It may shorten her life by a day,’ said Abul Ismail.
‘I would allow her this peace, if you can.
Is the boy there?’
‘I shall fetch him,’ Nicholas said.
But Diniz was not in the yard when he sought him, or anywhere  to be found in the house.
In a rage of despair, Nicholas flung open the doors to the street and he was there, running towards him, and the clamour he had heard was real, and louder than he would have thought possible.
And Diniz, arriving, flung his arms around him sobbing and said, ‘Oh, tell her!
Let us tell her!
It is coming!’
Then Nicholas held him off, and said, ‘What is coming?
Diniz, what is it?’
‘A ship!’
Diniz said.
‘A round ship from Genoa.
The fire-signals are burning.
The ships in the harbour are letting off rockets.
We told you it was coming, and you didn't believe us.
Zacco drew off his vessels.
It will come in.
It will save us.
The siege will be lifted.
And Famagusta stays Genoese!,
Within Nicholas, all the clamour fell silent.
He said, ‘What is the name of the Genoese ship?
Has anyone signalled?’
‘Yes!’ said Diniz.
‘It's the Adorno.’
And that, then, was what she had been waiting for.
He said, ‘We shall go and tell her.
Diniz, she is dying.’
‘Then she will die happy,’ said Diniz.
He stopped.
‘You won't be angry with her?
She said you and Abul would be set free.
The treaty ensured it.’
‘I shall be angry neither with her nor with you,’ Nicholas said.
‘The doctor has something to tell you.
Make your decision.
Whatever you want, I shall agree to.’
The door of the sickroom was open when they got there, and inside was quietness, and no movement except Abul Ismail's, withdrawing a slow, smoothing hand from the pillow.
No movement at all, not even of breathing.
‘No !’ said Nicholas in a whisper.
‘No?’ said Abul Ismail.
‘God is great, God has called her.
Is this a man who prates of mercy and would deny it another for his own sake?
She has won the Truth; she is in Paradise.
In the night does she see the sun, and in the darkness does she see light.
When God decreeth a matter, it is not for man to deny him.’
‘I would have said farewell,’ Nicholas said.
‘The loss is yours and not hers,’ said the Arab.
‘She learned that the vessel had come, and was glad, for she said that the young man would speak for her.
And she left you her soul, and her son.
To hold such a cure, a man must aspire to the crown of humanity.
You know, and only you, if you are worthy.’
‘No,’ said Nicholas.
He did not look up.
Her soul and her son.
A boy in Bruges, he had been older in wisdom than Katelina.
He had let himself fall in with her will, and had not seen that she had no will, but was calling, alone, for a friend.
From that had come all this misery.
All he had given her was bodily joy, and a life that had ended in pain, among strangers.
He said, ‘I have destroyed her.’
And: ‘Look at her,’ said Abul Ismail.
‘When you die, you should wish to die thus.’
And Nicholas looked, and saw for the last time the face of Katelina van Borselen, into which Abul Ismail read contentment.
And it was true, and in that lay the tragedy.
She lay, her eyes closed and smiling, surrendered to death like the moth, symbol of passionate love, which yields its life to the taper that lures it.
She had died, who was not his beloved, and he had killed her.
Outside the sealed city, the advent of the round ship Adornoroused the kingdom.
One by one, the north-west balefires blossomed in warning, and St Hilarion, Buffavento and Kantara added their signals.
The news came to the capital, where James of Lusignan-struck the bearer to the floor.
It was his mother, arching her brows, who said, ‘Zacco.
Desist, I think you will find this has been prepared for.’
Outside a grand villa in the same city, a priest in an assortment of ramshackle clothing stopped his mule in the gateway, descended by lifting a leg and bellowed to the first person he met, which was Tobie.
‘Are your ankles too weak for your belly?
There's a Genoese ship on the way.
Zacco's off to the coast with his officers.
If you want to see it, start riding.’
He retired, lifted a leg, and was carried bobbingly onwards.
‘What?’ said Loppe, materialising.
‘His lordship the Patriarch of Antioch,’ Tobie said, beginning to run.
‘There's a rescue ship on its way to the Genoese.
If it gets into the harbour, it'll stop the surrender.
Tell John.
I'll get the horses.’
‘I heard,’ said John le Grant.
‘What are you expecting to do about it?’
‘Get across to the bay, and watch what happens,’ said Tobie.
‘It'll make a change.
It isn't really a day for the beach, but I'm tired of my sewing.
And it would be nice to know who might be on board.
Or hadn't you thought of that?’
‘Jesus Christ,’ said John le Grant.
Then he said, ‘How is she coming?’
‘Round the Karpass, because of the wind.
She'll hold off as long as she can; we won't get much of a view, and they are saying shore batteries couldn't do her much damage.
Zacco's men will either catch her at sea, or not at all.
And once in the harbour, she can unload all she's got through the sea-gate.’
‘That's about it,’ said John le Grant.
‘She would expect, maybe, to get into Kyrenia, then see the Lusignan flag on the castle.
At any rate, our Genoese friend has a chance.
Round ships can come fast on the north wind, and our galleys will have the worst of it, facing them.’
He paused, and said, ‘So it's up to Mick Crackbene then, isn't it?’
‘Against the wind?’
Tobie said.
‘We discussed it with Mick,’ le Grant said.
‘Of course, plans get changed.’
He didn't say what he was thinking.
In Trebizond, Mick Crackbene worked for the Genoese against Nicholas, in the very same ship he's now sailing .
Loppe said, ‘The sea-tower in Famagusta is high.
Lomellini will see a relief ship is coming.
Master Nicholas will have some sort of warning.
And he is a hostage, and sacrosanct.’
‘Right enough,’ said John le Grant.
‘Just let's hope that no one forgets it.’
For a month, he had played a master's game lacking a master.
Released from Famagusta, he had retired to Nicosia, as Nicholas wanted.
Astorre, denied his attack, had stayed with Thomas in camp, uneasily brooding.
Philip Pesaro had remained in Sigouri, stupefied with relief, and only briefly touched, it appeared, by Zacco's displeasure.
That had been reserved for Nicholas and even there, le Grant wondered how far it was genuine.
The King had forbidden Nicholas to attack, and when defied, had found a method of saving him.
His concern for Nicholas was possibly real.
But there were, patently, other advantages.
No one, knowing the Patriarch, could doubt that, after a day of his voice, Zacco was sick of him.
By allowing the Church to intercede, Zacco had ended by pleasing almost everybody.
It would not do, however, to let Nicholas think so.
Nicholas, therefore, was stuck in Famagusta over Christmas, and needn't hope that Zacco was going to miss him.
That Diniz Vasquez was also in Famagusta was not common knowledge, although le Grant had told Astorre, Loppe and Tobie.
Specifically, neither the King nor the court had been informed.
Tobie, back in the villa and cascading with loud, screaming sneezes, had proposed marching at once to the dyeworks and shaking Bartolomeo Zorzi by the hand: le Grant dissuaded him.
‘No.
The boy did well at Famagusta, and Zorzi had no right to do what he did.
Nicholas wants us to let it alone.
He'll have it out himself with the Venetians.’
‘And when will that be?’
Tobie had asked.
‘After he's had an axe sunk in the opposite shoulder?
What can he do for anyone in that graveyard of a city except catch their rot and pass it on to us in the long run?
If he'd talked hard enough, they'd have exchanged him.’
John le Grant had said nothing.
He had seen some of the men of Famagusta.
He had been appalled, as had the rest of the court, at the emaciation of the four ambassadors sent them by the city, but he had not been surprised.
He was not surprised, either, when all of them took to their beds within a day of arriving at the Palace.
He hung about the Palace a good deal himself, as he was entitled to do, being the King's only contact with Astorre's army.
He called  on the Latin Patriarch of Antioch and had a brief, one-sided exchange.
Occasionally he saw Primaflora who, from serving Carlotta, had turned her training to attendance on the King's mother.
On their first encounter, she had drawn him abruptly into her chamber and asked him to tell her about Nicholas.
He had told her the story, and reassured her as far as he was able.
After that, she didn't seek him out, having no doubt more direct news from Zacco.
In Loppe's care, the villa ran smoothly without her.
After a week, Loppe handed the task back to Galiot, mentioning that business required him in Kouklia.
Tobie had been inclined to object, but le Grant helped him pack and assemble his travelling party.
Loppe had had least to say about the incarceration of Nicholas.
His journey, John assumed, was either because of genuine business, or because he found it trying to wait in the capital.
It irked John himself, the easy carousing of the long, sprawling festival, the noisy pastimes of the court, the King's sudden tempers.
He wondered how Loppe would know if Nicholas was sent back before Epiphany, or if there were news of a worse kind.
Then he realised that Kouklia was in daily touch with Salines, and Salines, unobtrusively, with Nicosia.
He wondered, again, who or what Loppe was eluding.
Then the ambassadors found their feet, and were to be seen at table, and occasionally with the King's special officers.
Returning to the villa one day, John le Grant said, ‘Something's happening.
The Bailie of the Secréte has been with them twice, and Podocataro, the lawyer.’
The next day, he said, ‘There's rumour of some sort of pact.
If the King lifts the siege, I'll mine his privy.’
‘We could go home,’ Tobie said.
‘He'll have broken the contract.’
‘I'll leave you to tell him,’ said the engineer.
Then the terms became known, and the day the treaty was sworn, they retired to the villa and drank all night to celebrate.
Surrender in fourteen days, unless a ship got in.
And Nicholas had been sent for.
The King regarded his penance as over.
Next day, as silently as he had gone, Loppe returned.
The day after that, Tobie was commanded to the Palace and returning, seized Loppe by the arm and marched him into the workroom John le Grant had devised for himself, where he scowled at them both.
‘All right.
Did either or you know about this!
John le Grant laid down what he was working on.
‘About Nicholas?
What?
You know all I do.’
‘He's written asking to stay in Famagusta for two weeks.
The King knows the boy Vasquez is there.
He's livid.’
‘I didn't tell him,’ said John.
‘Nicholas told him.
In the letter.
He also said he felt responsible  for the Flemish lady who, being royally connected, ought to be well looked after.’
‘What Flemish lady?’ said John le Grant.
Loppe stirred, then said nothing.
‘You didn't know.
Katelina van Borselen.
Famagusta is full of God-damned Flemings.
She's been trapped there as well as the boy.
Simon's wife as well as his nephew.
He says she's ill.
I say it's a trick to persuade him to stay.
I think they're trying to hold him.’
Loppe said, ‘He can't be harmed, he's a hostage.
What is the King going to do?’
‘Well,’ said Tobie.
‘It began with striking his spurs off for disobedience, but ended more on the lines of he could stay and rot for two weeks for all Zacco cared.
I thought the Flemish woman was sailing for Portugal?
That was the point.
So that Simon wouldn't come looking for her.’
Soon after that, the news of the round ship arrived: the round ship called the Adorno .
On the hard, muddy ride to the shore, no one spoke very much.
They joined up with others: Philip Pesaro and a group from Sigouri and later, a familiar glitter of feathers and armour — Astorre, pounding across from the camp with Thomas behind him.
Every villager who had a mule seemed to be making his way that day to the beach north of Famagusta, by Salamis.
The King was already there, with half the court and the Mamelukes; and a tent, shivering in the wind, had been set up but was not so far in use.
For in view, over the ruffled grey sea, was the round ship from Genoa.
She was large, and low in the water, and the size of her guns showed quite clearly, as did the red and white flag of St George, glinting in occasional sunlight below a cloud ceiling harried by blustering wind.
The wind was strong, and from the north.
When Zacco's two war galleys appeared, they seemed hardly to move.
The long shells of the hulls were wiped from view by the heave of the sea, so that the prow platforms and tents of the poop could no longer be seen, and only the pennanted masts told where they were, until they rode into view once more, in a steam of spume from the bite of the oars.
The round ship raced towards them, her canvas taut.
Her bows plunged, shouldering aside streaming seas upon which the galleys slid and swooped and plummeted like seal pups caught in the wash of a bear.
The Adorno fired, and the watchers saw two patches of smoke, and heard the flat thuds, and saw the dash of white water between the galleys.
One of them had broken away and appeared to be attempting to struggle upwind.
‘They'll have naphtha,’ said John.
‘And they've got guns.
But with that sea and that wind, the round ship'll outrun them.
She'll be in Famagusta before they can touch her.
So where in God's name is Crackbene?’
‘There,’ said Loppe's quiet voice.
He was looking neither to the right nor the left but out to sea, where a round ship was coming in from the south-east, her sails shuddering, her course designed to intersect with the Genoese just outside the harbour.
The Doria , their own ship, brought by the Venetians and Zacco from the Abruzzi, and a veteran now of the war for which she had been chartered.
On the mast flew the red lion of Lusignan, and at the helm, they knew, was Mick Crackbene.
Tobie said, ‘Will he do it?’
‘Look at his guns,’ John le Grant said.
‘We designed them for this.
They can even be trained upon galleys.,
The crowded strand where they stood was full of noise.
It beat about them on the wind as men shook their fists and shouted, faces shining.
Zacco stood on high ground, his hat pulled off, his hair blown free of his sable-lined cloak.
Beside him, the face of Rizzo di Marino was as intent.
Beyond them was the emir, Tzani-bey.
Captain Astorre, surveying them all, turned back and caught what they were talking about.
‘Crackbene?’ he said.
‘Knows his job.
Knows his mind.
And sticks to the rules.
A contract's a contract.’
And John le Grant said, ‘But if the Adornogets in, the contract falls to be renegotiated, wouldn't you say?’
The Doria fired.
She let off a salvo of three guns, spaced so that the first ball fell well in front of the Genoese ship.
The last was much closer.
The Genoese ship replied, firing wide.
She was taking in canvas.
One of the galleys had vanished from sight.
The other had turned and was waiting for the Genoese, standing off on the landward side with her crossbowmen and hackbutters lining her port rail, fore and aft.
The Genoese round ship turned to present her poop guns to Mick Crackbene, and the galley sprang into action.
In a sequence of thuds, the galley fired into the round ship, her shot exploding into the broad flush planks of the prow; arching over the tumble-home curve that should have protected the gunners.
At the same time, her oars sent her spinning into a turn, so that her iron beak pointed outward, ready to gore the towering sides of the Genoese.
For a moment it looked as if the classic capture was about to take place: the low, lean greyhound was about to sink its teeth into the boar.
Then the prow guns of the Adorno spoke in unison with those of her poop.
To seaward, the ship of Mick Crackbene shuddered within a column of smoke which blossomed into red flame.
To landward the Lusignan galley disappeared behind a column of spume and of fire.
‘Christ !’ said Tobie.
‘Look,’ said John.
‘Look what they have done.’
The galley now limping to landward had been bait.
While she presented herself as a target, the second galley had rowed against the wind north.
Now she had turned.
Now she swayed on the  towering waves to the north, and glittering on her prow were the slim copper tubes that had faced the ship of the Order that had brought them all from Rhodes to Cyprus.
She had the wind, and the fire.
At a spark from her tinder, a sheet of flame could envelop the Genoese.
And advancing steadily from the east, limping a little, but with the lines of his guns unimpaired and intact, was Mick Crackbene on the Doria .
Tobie said, ‘The Genoese.
She's slowing.
She's not making a run for it?’
‘She's coming to rock,’ John le Grant said.
‘There's a reef parallel to the shore.
It joins all those islands.
The galley behind her has pushed her in, and she's got to change course and then turn, or she'll overshoot the entrance to the harbour.
But Mick is blocking her way.
That's why he left it so late.
He couldn't have done this while she had all that sea room.
Look.’
The Doria had fired again.
This time the ball made a hit.
They heard the crash, and saw smoke rise from the forward quarter of the Genoese round ship.
At the same moment, a rush of flame came from the rear, followed by a flock of fire-arrows streaming into the rigging.
One of the sails burst into flame.
‘The second galley, in place at her rear,’ said John le Grant.
‘And there goes the first, firing into her flank.
You see, because of the rocks, she can't reply to Mick's cannon.
All she can do is tack forward and crash into him, which would be suicide for them all.
He's got her.’
‘Has he?’ said Tobie.
‘How many men will she carry?’
‘The Genoese?
Less than fifty, most likely.
That ship's full of provisions, not soldiers.
Good co-ordinated fire might have wrecked the two galleys, and she could have got on course before Crackbene arrived.
But she didn't.
Listen.
He's hailing her.’
‘She won't give way?’
Tobie said.
‘She can't.
She's got to get in, or she throws Cyprus away.’
‘What do you think she is?’ said John le Grant.
‘A ship from Olympus, a martyr?
She was sent by the Republic, and she's made an honest effort.
But behind her is a galley that can burn her down to the waterline, and beside her is Crackbene with a genius for sailing and guns he has hardly used yet.
They can give in, or they can die.
They have no hope of succeeding.’
He looked at Tobie.
‘Have you forgotten?
They are the enemy.’
‘I think I had forgotten,’ Tobie said.
Across the water, the loud hailers were blaring and squealing as they had in the winter, when Tzani-bey had caught and herded the Order.
From the shore, they couldn't hear what was said.
But they saw, clearly enough, the galleys take their place on each side of the Genoese ship, and the big ship of Mick Crackbene approach and cast out its grappling irons, and then its nets.
Soon the seascape seemed to be occupied by nothing but the two great ships clamped together, with a web of men and weapons passing glittering from the one to the other.
Then the Adorno'ssails rattled down, and the flag of St George on her mast trembled, and drooped, and slipped down its cords.
Then, running free as a dart, the lion of Lusignan replaced it.
Zacco shouted.
They could hear his great cry, and see the flash of his hat flung in the air, and the brown silk of his hair whipping free as a flag against his glistening eyes, and the bright joy-stained red of his cheeks.
He swept his friends into his arms and the shouting multiplied and reverberated on and on, up and down the beach and through the distant war-broken theatre of Salamis.
John le Grant's powerful fingers dug themselves into Tobie's arm.
He said, ‘That's it.
That's the only ship that's ever going to arrive here.
Come the end of the fourteen days, Famagusta surrenders.
Nicholas emerges.
We get paid.
We can go if we want to.’
Tobie was watching Loppe, who had suddenly disappeared to the shore, and was now coming back rather more slowly.
He said, arriving, ‘The Doria's put off a skiff with a message.
The Genoese ship has surrendered.
With the King's leave, Master Crackbene takes the captured ship and his prisoners to Salines.
Six are dead.
The rest will be dispatched north to Nicosia, to coincide with the official surrender.’
He broke off and stepped back, for the King had broken free of his friends, and was running alone down the strand to the messenger.
He passed beside them all, seeing no one, his eyes fixed on the sea and the skiff, and the two great ships and the galleys beyond, all of them flying the Lusignan flag.
He had been weeping.
He let the tears lie on his cheeks, and men cheered as he passed them, their young golden King who had won his crown at last.
Who had seen enacted before him the last skirmish in the war which had now given him his own longed-for kingdom of Cyprus.
Loppe watched him go.
Loppe turned his eyes from the victorious, the vibrant, the magnificent figure and looked instead towards the chill, battered walls of Famagusta.
He said, ‘I would not like to be a man in that city tonight.’
Pride held shut the gates of Famagusta until the fourteenth day after Epiphany had expired without bringing rescue.
That night, they dug away the earth and drew the nails from the planks and removed the great bars that had closed all the formal entrances into the city, and completed the bridging of the ditch that led to the land gate.
The next morning, in solemn cavalcade, James, King of Cyprus rode in to receive the keys of his city, and the flag of St George and the Dragon was dropped from the walls.
The company of Nicholas were among those who rode with him.
This was not the triumphal procession which one day would beat a noisy and brilliant path to a swept and garnished city, but a military operation, to do with the handing over of power.
Riding through the battered gates, unarmed, with nothing but the richness of his furs to identify him, James of Lusignan looked like a King, with the youth gone from his face along with the high-spirited waywardness.
Prepared as they were, the reality of what had happened to Famagusta struck silence from them all.
The tumbled buildings.
The abandoned houses.
The places blackened with fire.
The intact ghosts, deeper into the city, of the splendid Frankish villas and lodgings and trading loggias, the fine-cut bulk of the church of St Peter and St Paul, the towering buttresses of the great convent of St Francis, with its empty gardens and cloisters.
The disused markets.
The silent streets of the craftsmen.
And over all, the smell of sickness and death.
To wait for their enemy, the ordinary people of Famagusta had made their way to the heart of the city, where the Cathedral soared like a vast triangled reliquary, flanked by princely buildings and faced, across the piazza, by the handsome, doorless shell of the Palace.
They stood in silence: two living hedges of worn and stinking humanity between which the cavalcade passed with no  sound but the tinkle of harness.
They were Greeks.
The uplifted.
hand of the Archbishop of Nicosia meant nothing to them.
And then, ahead, were the walls of the Citadel, with its drawbridge down, and the portcullis updrawn to give entry.
In its doorway, awaiting them, was a figure in rich, damaged velvets which must be Napoleone Lomellini.
Within the court of the castle no doubt attended the garrison, and the Genoese lords, and their former hostages.
One of whom was Nicholas.
For several weeks, Tobias Beventini had found it impossible to speak of the apprentice he had chosen to follow, to dissect, to guide, in a medical way, towards the real, adult world.
Long ago, he now realised, Nicholas had slipped from his grasp.
Alone of all the men who now surrounded him, Tobie carried the knowledge that the son of Katelina van Borselen belonged to Nicholas.
He knew what had already befallen every kinsman with whom Nicholas had come in contact.
He now knew, too, what had happened, through the contrivings of that tortuous, ingenious mind, to the last exiled Emperor of the dynasty of Byzantium, and all his grown sons.
He knew that Katelina van Borselen was in this city, along with the sister's son of Simon, her husband, while alone in Nicosia was Primaflora, the lovely woman Nicholas had taken in marriage after Marian, the simple widow who had founded his fortune.
Once, in the wake of the St Hilarion assault, Tobie had said to John, ‘Would you follow vander Poele?
After this?’
And the engineer had raised his sandy eyebrows and said, ‘After what?
You were in Trebizond with him.
He hasn't altered, that I can see, since he came away a rich man.’
Little that John le Grant said was ever reassuring, no matter how right he might be.
It didn't strike Tobie that John, too, had had no wish to talk about Nicholas.
The Great Court of the Citadel of Famagusta was one hundred and sixty feet long, and built to accommodate the grandest of ceremonials.
A third of it was occupied by the surrendering forces.
Placed to the rear of the Lusignan retinue, the company of Nicholas barely heard the clipped and formal exchanges demanded by protocol, or the clink of the keys as they were handed over, or the flourish of trumpets that heralded the raising of the Lusignan banner on every wall.
Behind Napoleone Lomellini and his noblemen; behind the Pallaviccino, the Doria, the families of Gentile, Verdure, Archerio, de Pastino and the ranked faces, filled with hate, of the soldiers, there stood the men hitherto guarded as hostages.
The Arab Abul Ismail, erect and gaunt and impassive in turban and robes.
And beside him, a strong, familiar frame unfamiliarly reduced, on which hung the soiled and ill-fitting clothes of a labourer.
But the colourless face of Nicholas vander Poele with its rarefied structure had nothing in common with the dimpled  joker of Bruges.
His hair, untended, curled thick as a dog's at his neck under a shapeless wool cap, and his mind was turned patently inwards; far from seeking, or even thinking of the men from whom he had been parted for six weeks.