

THE BEST WAY TO CELEBRATE SUMMER
FREE
FREE INSIDE YOUR WINE PULL-OUT WINE GUIDE
RECIPES FOR IMPRESSIVE SUMMER ENTERTAINING
PLUS WIN A TRIP TO CHAMPAGNE COUNTRY 
FREE INSIDE — your 32 page pull-out wine booklet, listing everything in the Sainsbury's range with descriptive notes.
It is a guide for wine-lovers and includes an exciting competition to test your skill!
LOOK OUT FOR THE MULTIBUY SYMBOL 
When ever you see the Multibuy symbol it means the more you buy the more you save.
The way they work is simple.
You buy two (or more) bottles of wine, and you save a certain sum of money.
The savings are clearly displayed with the Multibuy symbol each time.
When paying for your wine, you don't need to draw the assistant's attention to the Multibuy the saving is automatically credited to your bill, even if the bottles are not entered into the till consecutively.
It couldn't be easier.
EASY WAYS TO PAY 
You can enjoy the convenience of paying Access, Visa and Mastercard at Sainsbury's as well as cash, cheque or debit card.
Front Cover painting: Georges-Pierre Seurat, Bathers at Asnières (1883)
SAINSBURY'S summer COLLECTION
Welcome to summer, and a whole season of relaxation and good living!
In this season's wine magazine we're delighted to announce a host of exciting new wines to try — plus news of what's ahead during the summer and imaginative ideas for entertaining.
INTRODUCING SOME NEW ARRIVALS
Throughout the magazine you'll see news of the latest good buys from Sainsbury's.
Here's our stop press of wines we believe are specially worth looking out for.
Fans of organic wine will be pleased to see two new choices made from organically grown grapes.
These are Sainsbury's Costières de Nimes, Domaine Grand Bourry 1989, £3.79 and Sainsbury's Coteaux d'Aix en Provence 1986, Cuvée la Source, £5.25.
Austrian wines are at last being recognised for their quality and interest: try Winzerhaus Gruner Veltliner, 1991.
And from Hungary, an exceptional new white wine from the British wine-maker Hugh Ryman, Gyongyos Estate Chardonnay, 1991 — excellent value at £3.25.
From South Africa, we have now added to our list Sainsbury's South African Chenin Blanc, £2.55, Swartland Colombard 1991, £3.45.
All are good value at under £4.
We've introduced two innovative wines from Italy — made from Australian winemaker in the New World style.
Try Sainsbury's Winemakers' Choice Bianco and Rosso at £2.65 each.
From Spain we recommend Sainsbury's Valencia Red — great value summer drinking at £2.55.
Idea for light summer drinking, Sainsbury's Blanc de Paraiso is a fresh and fruity white wine made in France from grapes harvested in Spain, £2.25.
SAINSBURY'S/GOOD FOOD WINE TASTER OF THE YEAR COMPETITION 1992
At Christmas we announced the Sainsbury's/BBC Good Food Wine Taster of the Year competition, and the entries poured in by the thousand.
The prize is a superb trip to Bordeaux, taking in all the beauties of the region at harvest time — as well as some serious sampling!
The winner will also receive £1,000 worth of Sainsbury's wine.
In the spring the regional heats were held and as in previous years our expert judges were pleased by the excellent standards.
The 27 finalists are listed below and at the time of going to press they are poised for the grand final in London.
The lucky winner will be announced in our Christmas magazine.
FINALISTS:
TEST YOUR PALETTE!
As you'll have noticed, Summer Wine has an artistic theme this year, but you needn't be a fine art expert to enter our simple Champagne competition on the next page.
You could soon be flying away for an exciting holiday in Reims, the heart of Champagne country — all it takes is three questions and a little imaginative sparkle!
contents
SPARKLING SUCCESS!
Discover the magic of fine Champagne
THE GRAPE CLASSICS All about Chardonnay & Cabernet Sauvignon
DISCOVER AN OLD MASTER Question-and-answer guide to choosing vintage wines for all occasions
THE GENTLE TOUCH Exciting new ideas for reduce alcohol and no alcohol wines
EASY SUMMER ENTERTAINING Our six page guide starts here
THAT SPANISH INFLUENCE Colourful recipes for summer parties
OUTDOOR ENTERTAINING The perfect recipes for an al-fresco gathering
THE FINAL SHOWING Two light and quick-to-prepare fruit desserts for an elegant finish 
sparkling SUCCESS
Add a bubbly atmosphere to any occasion with our extended range of sparkling wines and Champagne
WIN A HOLIDAY — OR A TRIP IN A BALLOON!
This summer we've an exciting competition for every fan of sparkling wine.
Turn to page 29 of your wine list for the three simple questions and entry form.
The prizes are very desirable, as you can see below, and you certainly don't have to be an expert to enter the competition.
All it takes is to answer to simple questions, and to explain why, in your opinion, the méthode champenoise produces quality wines.
Simply send off your entry form and you could soon be celebrating your success with, naturally, a glass of Champagne!
1st PRIZE A trip for two to reims, the Champagne capital of the world.
2nd PRIZE.
A fantastic flight in the Champagne Mercier hotair balloon.
RUNNERS-UP 100 copies of every Champagne lover's guide, the Magic of Champagne.
Can you tell the difference between a sparkling wine and Champagne?
For many years champagne — which can only be made in the Champagne region, north east of Paris — has been regarded as the ‘real thing’, and other sparkling wines as poor relations.
But times are changing.
Not only are there some excellent buys to be had in the traditionally exclusive Champagne market, but wine enthusiasts are beginning to discover that there are some superb choices to be had among ‘méthode champenoise’ wines such as Cava from Spain — Sainsbury's Cava, £4.75.
‘Méthode champenoise’ wines are sparkling wines that have been made in exactly the same way as Champagne, but do not quality for the name because they're not made in the Champagne region.
Non-méthode champenoise wines are made by different fermentation methods, and the prices are more reasonable still.
For example, Sainsbury's Asti Spumante , £4.72 and Sainsbury's Vin Mousseux, £3.99.
FAVOURITES WITH FIZZ
Two great examples of sparkling wines to look out for are Sainsbury's Sparkling Vouvray Brut, £6.15 and Sparkling Saumur, £5.75.
They are light and fragrant — idea for high summer drinking when the sun is shining!
From California comes Mumm, Cuvée Napa, £8.59.
Made by the great Champagne producer using the traditional method, it is a sparkling wine of great finesse, dry and very crisp.
Just the thing for special occasions, when you fancy something special and a little bit different.
Also from the New World is Sainsbury's Australian Sparkling Wine, £5.35.
THE VINEYARDS OF DUVAL
Have you popped the cork on a bottle of Sainsbury's Extra Dry Champagne?
It's flowery, light and elegant — typical, in other words, of Champagnes from the Côte des Blancs, the best Chardonnay-growing region within Champagne.
It is here that Duval-Leroy, supplier of Sainsbury's Champagne for the last 14 years, has its headquarters.
The company, founded in 1859, is now the tenth largest in the region, selling nearly 4 million bottles worldwide per year.
Unlike most of its rivals, it remains family-owned and run; it is also unusual in being directed by a woman, Carole Duval.
A further distinguishing feature of the Duval-Leroy is the way in which it has its feet firmly planted in the vineyards rather than in the cities of Reims or Épernay.
Not only are there vines as far as the eye can see from its brand-new winemaking centre in Vertus, but the company also owns nearly 310 acres of its own vineyards, most of them sited on the Côte des Blancs.
In the darkness and silence of Duval-Leroy's cellars in nearby Chalone sur Marne, you'll find more bottles of Champagne than there are people living in London — some 12 million bottles all told, ageing quietly along two and a quarter miles of underground alleyways and lanes.
ANDREW JEFFORD,the author of Sainsbury's The Magic of Champagne, for which he won the Prix de Lanson Award 1991 .
Auguste Renoir OARSMEN AT CHATOU (1879) A view of the Seine on a bright summer day, with the fashionable set embarking for a day's outing.
A Duval cellar.
THE grape CLASSICS
Spot the name Chardonnay or Cabernet Sauvignon on a wine label and you know you've something to look forward to
among the dozens of grape varieties grown around the world stand out from the rest.
They're versatile, consistently good and — to almost every palate — delicious.
Watch out for them when you buy it and it opens up a whole world of experimenting.
THE BEAUTY OF CHARDONNAY
Winemakers love the Chardonnay grape — and so do wine drinkers!
From the producers' point of view, it is the single most sought after ‘grape variety’ in the world, and right from Britain to Chile and New Zealand (and even India!) more and more vineyards are being planted with it in preference to any other.
There are many reasons for this popularity.
The grape has good resistance to cold weather and grows well even in cool climates (such as the Champagne region).
It is vigorous and productive.
In fact, it is difficult — thought not impossible—to make a poor Chardonnay wine.
If you've tried several different Chardonnays you'll have observed another advantage too.
It's an exceptionally adaptable wine.
It has a natural affinity with oak ageing, and yet it can be fresh and light.
It is a wine that succeeds in many different styles.
For instance, it can be sharp and lemony, or soft and buttery (such as Meursault) or rich and fruity (such as the Chardonnays of Australia).
In the 1970s Australia and California were producing such full, fruity and oaky Chardonnays that it was hard to drink more than one glass.
Since then, this style has been questioned, and earlier picking of grapes and more judicious use of oak ageing means the wines are capable of being confused with the great French Chardonnays, such as Chablis, which have always been more restrained and elegant.
If you're interested in extending your Chardonnay repertoire, look out for those choices.
From France, Sainsbury's Chablis, £6.99 — crisp, clean and fresh, only slightly buttery — and Château de Davenay, 1990, Montagny Premier Cru, £7.25 — a bigger, broader, oaky and buttery French Chardonnay, but not as opulent as one from Australia.
Two wines of excellent value are Chardonnay 1991, Vin de Pays d'Oc, £4.99, and Sainsbury's Chardonnay Selection, Vin de Pays d'Oc, £4.15.
It is also worth remembering Chardonnay is a major ingredient in Champagne — for instance, Sainsbury's Non-vintage Champagne, £ll.29 is 70 per cent Chardonnay, and Sainsbury's Vintage Champagne, £13.45 is 100 per cent .
Italian Chardonnays can be lighter, slightly lemony and even biscuity.
Such as Sainsbury's Chardonnay Alto Adige, £4.49 or the softer, ‘fatter’ style of Sainsbury's Chardonnay del Piemonte, £3.65.
From Australia the Chardonnay par excellence is Sainsbury's Hunter Valley Chardonnay, Denman Estate 1991, £4.99 a lovely, big, rich, oaky wine.
The depth of flavour results from the warm climate, which ensures all the grapes are ripe, sweet  and juicy when picked; the wine is oak aged, during which time it develops much complexity.
California — try Sainsbury's California Chardonnay, £3.99 — again, a round, full, fruity wine, with higher acidity than the Australian wine.
Look out too for Chardonnays from elsewhere as they come on the market — for instance from Chile.
Santa Rita Medalla Real Chardonnay 1990, £5.99.
CABERNET SAUVIGNON — THE NOBLE RED GRAPE
Winemakers often argue over the question whether Cabernet Sauvignon is universally liked because it is the best red grape variety in the world, or because it is the main ingredient in claret the world's most widely available red wine.
Whatever the answer, Cabernet Sauvignon's earns its accolade as ‘the most noble grape variety’, and is well loved for its delicious blackcurrant and cedar flavours.
Like Chardonnay, it's an accommodating grape to grow, and easy to harvest.
Its hard wood helps it resist cold winters, and its thick-skinned grapes are almost impervious to rain, disease and insects.
In both hot and cold climates you can provide a good quality result, and it is no accident so many of the world's ‘serious’ wines are made with Cabernet Sauvignon.
The grapes tend to make a very dark coloured, deeply flavoured wine, especially in Bordeaux, where it is tempered with Cabernet Franc and Merlot to make it drinkable.
It ages well, especially in oak, to give delicious, mellow, ripe, fruity wines.
Cabernet Sauvignon is the main grape grown in Bordeaux — especially in Medoc and Graves.
Try Sainsbury's Claret 75cl, £2.95, Châteaux Barreyres 1988, £5.95.
Sainsbury's Cabernet Sauvignon Selection, vin de Pays d'Oc, £4.15 is a deep, ripe, fruity wine, a proportion of which has been oak-aged.
Australian Cabernet Sauvignons tend to be made from very ripe, full flavoured fruit, which gains complexity and depth from oak ageing.
The best examples have a good balance of dry tannin and rich fruit.
Try Sainsbury's Hunter Valley Cabernet Sauvignon, Bin 937, Wyndham Estate, £4.49, and Sainsbury's Australian Shiraz Cabernet, £4.49.
The latter is a good example of a Bordeaux-style blending, in which the tannic Cabernet Sauvignon is tempered by a richer, softer grape — in this case, Shiraz.
California — Sainsbury's California Cabernet Sauvignon, £3.95 is full, ripe and rounded, with a strong blackcurrant flavour and a little more body than Australian Cabernet Sauvignon.
The Cabernet Sauvignons of Chile are similar to those of Australia and California.
A good example is Sainsbury's Chilean Cabernet Sauvignon, £2.89 — rich, well-balanced and most enjoyable.
Claude Monet APPLES AND GRAPES (1879) A masterly still life with a wonderfully powerful use of colour and atmosphere.
DISCOVER AN old master
Vintage wines need not be complicated or pricey — once you know how to choose.
Here we take the mystery out of the subject
One difference between a vintage wine and any other is that it is generally made from the grapes of only one year, rather than a blend from several.
While it is true to say that the best wine each year is often reserved for vintage wines, non-vintage blends are not necessarily inferior.
On the other hand, vintage wines open up such a vast and fascinating selection that many wine enthusiasts can't resist experimenting.
As all Sainsbury's wines, Vintage Selection or otherwise, are carefully described both on the bottle and on the shelf or rack (and you can immediately spot the Vintage Selection area in your store because the wine is stored in special racks), you can find something of the right character and desired sweetness with complete confidence.
To whet your appetite, here are some of the most commonly asked questions about fine vintage wines.
Q What does the term Reserva mean on a Rioja label ?
A The word ‘Reserva’ on the label of a bottle of Spanish wine indicates that it has undergone a special ageing process over five years.
‘Gran Reserva’ indicates it has been aged for seven years.
These words are your guarantee of quality, and enforced by Spanish wine law.
We recommend you try Vina Herminia, Rioja Reserva 1985, £5.99 to appreciate the full beauty of a Spanish red wine.
Interestingly, the word ‘Riserva’(spelt thus) is also applied to Italian Chianti — but in that case it means the wines are three years old before being bottled.
Another secret of choosing is the word ‘Classico’.
This refers to the area between Florence and Siena, including the towns of Castellina, Radda, Gaiole, Greve and San Casciano.
Furthermore, some of the best producers are members of a consortium called the Consorzio di Chianti Classico — the bottles are sealed with a black rooster symbol.
An example that carries all three of these recommendations is Castlegreve Chianti Classico Riserva 1988, £5.89.
Q What is meant by Beaujolais crus?
A In the northern part of the Beaujolais region there are 10 ‘crus’ or ‘villages’which use their own names and whose wines show distinct characteristics of their own.
Some of their names are probably quite familiar.
Fleurie — the lightest and most luscious.
Similar to this is Chiroubles.
Moulin à Vent has a more serious style that is darker and stronger with great ageing potential.
Morgon is very long lasting, Brouilly is grapey and rich and Côte de Brouilly is similar but more intense.
Julienas has more substance and vigour than Brouilly whereas St Amour is a little lighter.
Regnié is the newest of the Beaujolais crus and has a very appealing fresh style.
What they all have in common is the delicious easy-going fruit flavour of the Gamay grape.
The wines from the Bordeaux region of south west France are classified by the property — the estate or château is given a ‘class’ or ‘classed growth’according to its owner and the quality of the land.
The Médoc was classified as long ago as 1855, and 5 different classes were identified — which are still the same today, with the single  exception that in 1973 Château Mouton Rothschild was upgraded from second growth to first.
Q How long should I keep Sainsbury's Vintage Champagne?
A As vintage Champagne is not released before it is three years old it is a relatively mature wine and is thus ready to drink when available in Sainsbury's.
On the back label we state that the product should be drunk within one year of purchase as this is when the product will be at its best.
Q I've heard that Sainsbury's vintage wine ought to be stored in special conditions.
Is this really the case?
A Absolutely it does.
There are two key things to remember; bottle position and temperature.
Bottles should be laid on their sides with the wine keeping the cork moist.
This prevents the cork drying up, shrinking and letting in air thus oxidising the wine.
The temperature should be dry and above all constant.
Q Are there alternatives to Claret and Port to drink with cheese?
A Traditionally mature, full-bodied red wines such as Claret and Port have been drunk with cheese to round off a meal.
However, now sweet white wines such as Château Maynes des Carmes, or Clos l'Abeilly from Sauternes, or Clos St Georges from Graves are often drunk with cheese as their luscious flavours combine well with cheeses such as mature stilton and some of the creamy blue cheeses.
WINES TO LOOK OUT FOR
During the summer why not try some of our new Vintage Selection wines?
They're specially chosen for summer drinking, when you feel like giving yourselves a connoisseur's treat.
Below you'll see three labels to watch out for.
Keep an eye open also for Torres Vina Sol 1990, £4.35, white and Château de Camensac — in convenient 1.5 litre, £22.45.
Luis Melendez STILL LIFE WITH ORANGES AND WALNUTS This clear, frank treatment of everyday objects by a contemporary of Goya is characteristic of Spanish painting.
Pouilly Fuissè 1989, Domaine Henri Carrette, £8.25 — clean and fruity; produced from Chardonnay grapes grown in favoured sites.
Chablis Premier Cru, Côte de Lechet 1990, £9.95 — full, rich, white, great depth of flavour.
Hautes Côtes de Beaune, La Perrière, 1989, £6.45 — a full bodied red burgundy from the Pinot Noir grape.
THE GENTLE TOUCH
Next time you throw a barbecue party — or just for lazy summer days — make the most of all the new reduced alcohol drinks
Nowadays many people consider it essential to offer a wide range of reduced alcohol drinks at parties, but the new generation are delightful in themselves.
What could be more refreshing, for instance, than to sit in the sun sipping a glass of one of the latest fruit wines?
These light, slightly sparkling tastes come in Peach, Lemon and Tangerine flavours from the Italian maker Giacobazzi, and in Raspberry and Strawberry from Santero, also an Italian winemaker.
At £1.99 they are great value.
MUCH MORE CHOICE
Buck's fizz is always popular, and we've two special new premixed versions on offer this summer.
Sainsbury's Buck's Fizz is a light and very attractive sparkling blend of wine and orange juice; Zimmermann Graeff's Exotic Buck's Fizz is made with delicious tropical fruit juices including pineapple and passion fruit.
Both are just £1.99.
Equally different are three other reduced-alcohol drinks: Sainsbury's Aperitif, £1.49, Zimmermann's Sparkling Aperitif, with an appealing fizz to it, and Lambrusco Light, which comes in Bianco and Rosè — which incidentally is also available in 1.5 l bottles, £1.59 for 75cl and £2.99 for 1.5 litre.
Finally, what about choices which are totally de-alcoholised?
Look out for Sainsbury's Alcohol-free Still, £1.79 and Sparkling Wine, £1.99 very reasonably priced, and a new taste experience, Bitter Kas, £2.55.
This makes very pleasant drinking in the Pimms' style.
Gustave Caillebotte THE ORANGE TREES (1878) A large painting of the artist's family in the garden of their country estate.
EASY summer ENTERTAINING
Our six page guide to enjoying summer's high days and holidays starts right here — and every recipe has a useful wine suggestion
there's no time like summer for throwing a party.
It's such a relaxing time of year, and everyone — cook included — welcomes the informal atmosphere.
If you've a garden or a balcony, summer's the time to make the most of it.
Food tastes even better out of doors, and the right choice of cool or chilled wine will really add to the occasion.
As for the choice of menu, the secret is to keep it simple.
No one— least of all your guests — wants you to be preparing in the kitchen for hours, so go for freshness, and all the light and colourful foods available during these summer months.
On the following pages we offer a selection of rather special recipes created for just such occasions.
On pages 12 and 13, a Spanish extravaganza: 1992 is very much the year of Spain, so why not celebrate it?
For a large gathering, you could make all four dishes (finishing with one of the desserts on page 16)— or choose your favourites.
On pages 14 and 15, see our lovely salmon and salad menu — it's very quick to prepare, very light, and for that special touch, the salmon is served with an impressive hollandaise sauce: this is best made at the last minute, but it's not difficult and well worth the effort.
Finally, page 16 has a couple of tasty dessert ideas.
As for which wine — there's all the choice in the world at Sainsbury's from the freshest white wines — chilled for a summer evening to warm generous reds for the cooler evenings.
We've made lots of recommendations on each page for wines to complement every dish.
Above all, try something new and have fun experimenting with wines at a party.
FRESH FRUIT BRULEE
Beneath the caramelised topping is a delicious layer of strawberries, grapes and peaches.
Made with crème fraîche this is a brulée with a difference.
See page 16 for recipe.
MELON AND ORANGE SALAD
This attractive dish is a light, fresh-tasting starter to any main course, particularly when eaten outdoors.
See our outdoor entertaining spread on pages 14 and 15 for the full menu.
THAT spanish INFLUENCE
Celebrate the ‘Year of Spain’ with a feast of Spanish food and wine
think of Spanish food and you think of strong, exotic flavours — and sunshine.
That's why this authentic Spanish feast is ideal in summer and for experimenting with some new combinations of flavours.
Another beauty of Spanish cookery is its simplicity — most of these dishes can be prepared in advance, then served at your convenience.
For a party you could prepare all four — and why not finish up with the orange and almond dessert on page 16.
TORTILLA ESPAÑOLA (Spanish Omelette)
8 tablespoons olive oil
6 medium-size potatoes, peeled and diced or sliced finely
½ large spanish onion or 1 onion, chopped finely
6 eggs
Edouard Manet LE BALLET ESPAGNOL (1862) A fresh and virtuoso impression of a company of Spanish dancers who were visiting Paris at that time.
Heat the oil in a 20cm (8-inch) omelette or frying pan.
Fry the potatoes and onion gently in the oil for about 20 minutes until softened.
Transfer to a bowl.
Beat the eggs lightly with a little salt and add them to the bowl.
Discard all but 1 tbsp of the oil in the pan, heat it again and tip in the egg mixture.
Fry gently over a low heat for about 10 minutes.
As it cooks, neaten the sides with a spatula to build up a deep, straight edge.
Slide it out onto a plate, then invert it back into the pan and cook the other side for about 5 minutes.
A little more oil in the pan may be necessary.
Drain well.
Serve warm, cut into neat squares for tapas, or quarters if it is to be the centrepiece of the meal.
Serves 2 as a main dish or 4 as a starter.
THE RIGHT WINE
Often a national cuisine is best accompanied by wines from the same country, and Spain offers wonderful choices to the wine-conscious gourmet.
With the Gazpacho the ideal partner would be our top value Sainsbury's Valencia Red, £2.55, or Sainsbury's Rioja Seco, 1990, £3.59.
For the Asadillo a perfect choice would be a stylish, fruity and attractive red: such as Sainsbury's La Mancha 1991 Castillo de Alhambra, £2.99.
The Spanish Omelette would be complemented by either Sainsbury's La Mancha Bianco, £2.59 a dry white, or Sainsbury's Navarra, £2.99 a simple but full-flavoured red.
The strong flavour of the sardines would suit an elegant red wine, such as Sainsbury's Utiel Requena, 1988, Vina Calderon, £2.85 ripe, fruity and oak aged.
GAZPACHO (Iced tomato soup)
1½ slices of day-old bread
300ml (½ pint) cold water
1 tablespoon wine vinegar
1 garlic clove
½ small or ¼ large cucumber, diced
500g (1 lb) ripe tomatoes, scalded, skinned and chopped
1 green pepper, de-seeded and chopped
½ large spanish onion or 1 onion, chopped
1 tablespoon olive oil
150ml (¼ pint) canned tomato juice or water
To garnish (optional):
chopped hard-boiled egg
croûtons fried in olive oil
Soak break in a few tablespoons of water with the vinegar and garlic for 10 minutes.
Put aside a quarter of the chopped vegetables in separate dishes to serve with the soup.
Liquidise the soaked bread and garlic, the rest of the chopped vegetables and the olive oil.
Add tomato juice or water and then the rest of the water until you have the consistency you like.
Adjust the seasoning with salt.
Refrigerate for an hour at least.
It should be very cold.
Serves 4.
SARDINAS ASADAS (Grilled Sardines)
Gut 500g (1 lb) of sardines by removing soft bellies with your index finger or the knife.
Leave the heads and scales on, and sprinkle the fish with about 1 level tablespoon of salt.
Grill under maximum heat turning the fish once.
As soon as the skin blisters black and bubbly, they are ready.
3–4 minutes on each side.
Serve with lemon quarters and bread.
Serves 4.
ASADILLO (Baked peppers and tomatoes)
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 red peppers
2 garlic cloves, chopped
2 beef tomatoes, sliced
1 tablespoon chopped fresh marjoram or oregano or 1 teaspoon
salt and pepper
Preheat the oven to Gas Mark 8/230°C/450°F.
Oil a shallow casserole.
Skin the peppers by roasting over a gas flame or under the grill until the skin blisters black.
De-seed and cut into strips.
Arrange the peppers, garlic and tomatoes in layers, seasoning as you do so.
Sprinkle with the rest of the oil and the marjoram or oregano.
Bake in the oven for 20–30 minutes.
Serve on squares of bread, or with bread for mopping it up yourself.
This keeps well in a screw-top jar in the fridge.
Delicious warm or cold.
Serves 4.
OUTDOOR entertaining
Everyone loves Barbecues and garden parties at height of summer — here's the perfect occasion
the secret of successful al fresco entertaining is simplicity.
And what better time of year to rely on clean, fresh, natural flavours than high summer, when everything's at it's best?
Our impressive menu for four is both delicious and practical.
A quick-to-prepare, pretty and unusual fruit based starter followed by lightly cooked salmon.
Choose a dessert from over the page or serve cheese.
THE RIGHT WINE
With a simple but delectable meal such as this, clean fresh wines are essential.
With the melon salad serve a simple Italian white, such as Sainsbury's Cortese Alto Monferrato, £3.49 or the light, refreshing and fruity Sainsbury's Kabinett, £2.99 form the Rhine.
With the salmon an excellent choice would be Sainsbury's Hunter Valley Chardonnay 1991, Denham Estate, £4.99 a luscious and popular choice from Australia.
Or have you tried serving red wine with salmon?
Sainsbury's light and fruity Beaujolais, £3.49 is just right, and on a very warm evening it could be served cool.
MELON AND ORANGE SALAD
This is a light, clean-tasting starter to act as an appetizer.
1 Galia melon
4 oranges
8 kumquats, sliced thinly
4–6 tablespoons Cointreau
mint springs to decorate
Cut a Galia melon in half and scoop out the flesh with a melon baller, or cut into cubes.
Place in a bowl, adding any juice.
Thinly pare the rind from 1 orange and cut into narrow strips.
Place in a small saucepan, cover with boiling water, bring to the boil, then simmer for 5 minutes.
Drain and cool, then add to the melon.
Peel 3 more oranges, cutting away all the pith and membrane.
Cut into segments and add to the melon.
Stir 8 thinly sliced kumquats into the other fruit, pour over 4–6 tbsp Cointreau and mix well.
Cover and chill for 1 hour.
Serve decorated with mint.
Serves 4–6.
NEW POTATOES IN BASIL BUTTER
Place 750g (1½ lb) new potatoes in a saucepan of cold water with 1 large sprig of basil and salt.
Bring to the boil, then cover and simmer for 10–15 minutes, until tender.
Drain in a colander and remove the basil.
Melt the 125g (4oz) butter in a pan, add 4 tbsp chopped basil and cook for 30 second, stirring, taking care not to brown the butter.
Toss the potatoes in the butter, spoon into a warmed serving dish and garnish with more sprigs of basil.
Serve immediately.
Serves 4.
SALMON WITH HERBY HOLLANDAISE
4 middle-cut salmon steaks, each weighing 175g (6oz)
150ml (¼ pint) dry white wine
1 shallot, chopped very finely
1 bouquet garni salt and pepper to taste
For the sauce:
3 egg yolks, size 3
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1 tablespoon each chopped parsley, thyme and dill
125g (4oz) butter
To garnish:
lemon slices or wedges, dill sprigs
Place the salmon in large dish, pour over the wine, add the shallot and bouquet garni and season well with salt and pepper.
Cover and chill for 1 hour.
Transfer to a large frying pan with a lid, bring to the boil, then cover and simmer very gently for 4 minutes, turning the fish once.
Meanwhile, make the sauce.
Place the egg yolks, lemon juice and herbs in a blender or food processor and season well with salt and pepper.
Blend for a few minutes until light and fluffy.
Melt the butter carefully, until very hot but not colouring.
Increase the speed of the machine and gradually pour in the butter.
Blend for about 30 seconds, until thick and creamy.
Check the seasoning and spoon into a serving bowl.
Using a fish slice, lift the salmon from the pan onto a warmed serving plate Garnish with the lemon and dill and serve with the sauce.
Serves 4.
Pierre Auguste Renoir THE LUNCHEON OF THE BOATING PARTY (1881) As well as capturing a moment in all its exciting realism, this painting is a social document, recording the early days of the restaurant
THE FINAL showing
We present two glorious desserts with a light, impressive and summery theme 
PASTEL DE NARANJAS (Almond sponge with oranges)
butter for greasing
flour for dusting
1 medium-size or 2 small oranges
4 eggs, size 3
175g (6oz) caster sugar, plus extra for sprinkling
250g (8oz) ground almonds
4 tablespoons rum
Preheat the oven to Gas Mark 5/190°C/375°F.
Line a cake tin 16–18 cm (6½–7 inches) in diameter with a circle of greaseproof paper.
Butter and lightly flour the tin and paper thoroughly and sprinkle with a little sugar.
Grate the orange zest and reserve it.
pare off the pith from the orange(s) and cut into thin slices, removing any pips.
Drain in a sieve, reserving any juices.
Lay the slices in the bottom of the cake tin.
Whisk the eggs together until frothy.
Sprinkle in the sugar and beat the mixture until it is white and stiff enough for the whisk to leave a trail.
This is easiest with an electric beater as it takes twice as long as you expect.
It should be pale, frothy and quite thick.
Fold in the ground almonds and reserved orange zest.
Spread over the sliced orange in the cake tin.
Bake for 40–50 minutes, until well-browned and firm.
Leave to settle for 5 minutes and then tip it out onto a plate.
Sprinkle with the rum and any reserved juices from the orange slices.
Serves 4–6.
FRESH FRUIT BRULEE
227g (8oz) punnet strawberries, washed and sliced
125g (4oz) white grapes (seedless or with pips removed), washed and halved
1 fresh peach, washed and sliced
8–10 ratafia biscuits
2 x 200ml (7fl oz) tubs crème fraîche 125–175g (4–6oz) light brown soft sugar
fresh mint, to decorate
Arrange the strawberries, grapes, and peach in the base of an approximately 900ml (1½ pint) souffle dish or 4 individual ramekin dishes.
Place the ratafia biscuits on top.
Spoon over the crème fraîche to completely seal in the fruit and chill for at least 1 hour.
Sprinkle over the sugar and smooth the top, place under a preheated hot grill for 1–2 minutes until the sugar has caramelised.
Decorate with sprigs of fresh mint and serve.
Serves 4.
When the weather's good there's nothing like a luxurious dessert to give a special menu a final flourish.
Nothing heavy — just a light gateau, like the Spanish style almond sponge, or a fruit confection.
The secret of both recipes is bringing out the natural fruit flavours — why not try them soon?
THE RIGHT WINE
Desserts give more wonderful opportunities to taste a whole range of fine wines.
With the almond sponge choose between a Spanish treat such as Sainsbury's Moscatel de Valencia — rich and sweet, and an excellent buy at just £2.99 — or the extremely flowery and delicious Muscat de Beaumes de Venise, £7.25 a justifiably popular dessert wine for a special occasion.
For the fresh fruit brulée we recommend Sainsbury's Muscat de St Jean de Minervois, £2.79 for a half bottle or the classic Sainsbury's Premières Côtes de Bordeaux, at the excellent price of £4.05.
SAINSBURY'S
J Sainsbury plc Stamford Street, London SE1 9LL Some wines featured are available in selected stores only.
All prices are correct at time of printing.
Prices subject to fluctuation.
All wines are 75cl size unless otherwise indicated.
The law does not allow us to sell alcohol to persons under 18 years of age.
These debit and credit cards are now welcome at all our stores.
Paul Cézanne STILL LIFE WITH APPLIES (1877) Cézanne's still lifes were revered by his contemporaries for their daring painting techniques.