

NEWS AND CONTENTS
Graduate job prospects ‘worst for 60 years.’
Graduates are facing the worst prospects for employment since 1932 according to a report from the Institute for Employment Statistics issued last month.
The report also drew attention to the fact that no information was collated specifically upon graduate unemployment until 1932 — so this could be the worst recession ever, in terms of graduate opportunities.
The situation now is particularly bad when compared with the situation only three years ago, when most of today's newest graduates entered university.
The sudden rise in graduate unemployment is unparalleled in the post-war period.
The report suggests there is a glut of exstudents from 1990 and 1991 who have yet to find work, and these are adding to the problems faced by the most recently qualified.
The rise in graduate unemployment is particularly shocking when compared with equivalent figures in other European countries.
2.7% of German graduates are out of a job; France has graduate unemployment of 3.7%.
In Britain the figure is 6.5%.
The report is backed up by anecdotal evidence from careers fairs.
The number of stalls and the range of employers represented at careers fairs has dwindled sharply.
Graduates who attend them seem to be becoming increasingly fatalistic that they will go away empty-handed.
The situation will not improve for at least 2 years, and even then the Institute's report warns that no dramatic changes are to be expected.
In the meanwhile, careers officers suggest that graduates lower their expectations of the sort of work they will get when they leave university.
As one put it:
‘Nowadays, there is no such thing as a bad job.
Every job is worth having.’
Employers rank universities
A survey of graduate employers has selected Cambridge as the University producing the most employable graduates.
100 employers were questioned in the survey, each employer naming ten institutions that it thought produced ‘above average’ graduates.
The results reveal little departure from the traditional view that applicants from large, old-fashioned institutions make the best employees, although UMIST and Loughborough are ranked highly, largely because of their more vocational courses.
The employers' pecking order may undervalue polytechnic graduates: the three highest-ranking Poly's (Kingston, Huddersfield and Nottingham) only start to appear after twentythree universities.
however, as polytechnics become universities, employers may become more prone to rank those graduates highly, so the position of polytechnics in the table is expected to rise.
The Performance Indicators Project, a long-running body based in Nottingham, stress that the sample of 100 employers can only provide an approximate ranking of universities.
The employability of graduates produced is only one measure of the quality of a university.
Also the decision to employ or not to employ is based ont he particular case: it is extremely rare that someone is given a job just because they went to a particular university.
However, as universities compete for applicants, rankings like this one may well become increasingly important.
First Class Degrees will be Split
The British academy has decided that first class degrees will be classified further, into 1:1's, 1.2's and 1.3's.
The academy is responsible for issuing funding for postgraduate work in humanities, and their proposal is very likely to be implemented by Whitehall.
The idea of split firsts will help the academy decide which applicants are eligible for funding, although many academics vehemently oppose the move.
The secretary of the academy, Peter Brown, said that split firsts are required as more students with firsts apply to stay on  and do post-graduate work.
Without a similar increase in funds available for post-graduates, he argues that the academy needs a proper system of choosing between first-class candidates.
The academy is certainly having to reject a lot of highly qualified applicants.
Each year 960 research awards are allocated by the academy; last year 72 applicants with first-class degrees were turned down.
Split firsts would mean that fewer rejected candidates had really good firsts.
However, the move has been greeted with derision by many academics.
The chairman of the Association of University Professors of French, Michael Kelly, said, ‘The British Academy is trying to cope with economic misery by inventing bogus academic qualifications.
This is not academically respectable.’
There is also a feeling in some circles that firsts should represent ultimate academic success for undergraduates, and that if they were split further it would be possible to get a ‘bad first’.
As one lecturer put it, ‘I don't want one of my students working for a first to have the achievement marred because it was ‘only a 1.2’.’
Others are questioning the whole basis by which grants are allocated.
Monica Hicks of the Association of University Teachers argues that the proposal of split firsts is a distraction: ‘If you're in the first category, further refining is an unnecessary detail.’
‘Academic ability is not the sole criterion for allocating funds.
The candidate's interests, and ability and motivation to study at a higher level are what matter.’
The proposal will probably be debated in Parliament in two or three years.
If it is passed, it will be implemented two or three years after that.
Crumbling Concrete
By Pui-Wing Tam
Universities do not have enough money for urgently needed repairs claims a report published by the Lay Chairmen of University Councils.
The report focussed particularly on universities which were constructed at a time when long-lasting buildings were not a priority.
It seems that many buildings will soon become unsafe unless there is a big increase in funds available for much-needed work.
A spokesman from Cambridge University commented ‘while the University's buildings are in reasonable condition for their age, the maintenance staff have to work on emergency work and are not able to put time into other things.’
‘The most urgent work is always done first.
However, this does mean that priority is given to the heating, the pipes and the boilers, and in some buildings, the air conditioning system.
New money should be spent on these things first.’
The report condemns this widely-held opinion as short-sighted, and warns that it would be very dangerous to allow buildings to deteriorate further.
The report estimates that most universities need maintenance costing several million pounds, and it seems unlikely that this money will be forthcoming.
Short Stories
What's in a name?
All polytechnics are now entitled to call themselves universities.
However, the renaming of revered academically institutions has not been without problems.
Newcastle Polytechnic were unable to become simply ‘Newcastle University’, because there is already such a university.
After much debate and consultation, it was decided that the polytechnic be renamed the ‘City University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne’.
The polytechnic was busily being renamed, and at considerable expense, when the new name was suddenly dropped.
A spokesman sheepishly explained the reason for the abrupt change of heart:
‘The new name was unsuitable in its abbreviated form’
Pub Lecturers
Two lecturers at the University of Swansea are lecturing in a local pub.
The philosophy lecturers were banned from the campus after allegations by five faculty members that students were being awarded degrees for sub-standard work.
The move to the Inn on the Lake seems to have met with a favourable response from students; the pub has been described as a ‘nice place to work’.
However, there is a more serious side: some finalists have been warned that some employers might refuse to recognise their degrees.
Bike Ban Abandoned?
Cambridge city centre is already inaccessible to traffic in most places, but pedestrians are still in danger of being ‘run down’ by bikes.
To cut congestion down further, an experimental ban on cycling was introduced.
On the first day of the ban, signs banning bikes were ignored and eventually ripped down.
New gates were vandalised.
John Hopkins, the Liberal Democrat councillor leading opposition against the ban, expects the ban to be dropped: ‘banning bikes from the centre of Cambridge is like banning gondoliers from Venice.’
Apathy Society
A stall at Durham University Freshers' Fair attracted a  surprising amount of interest when many freshers paid the requisite two pounds to become members of the ‘Apathy Society’.
Controversy followed when, after several weeks, nothing had happened.
Several new members complained that their subscriptions had been misused, but nobody running the society bothered to answer the complaints.
The new members have been told that it is unlikely they will get a refund, and they have decided not to take the issue further.
Condom Giveaway
Are you at risk of HIV?
Campaigns have been held across a number of universities asking this question to raise awareness about AIDS and HIV.
The campaign has involved such events as a candle-lit vigils, bops and raves, and the catchiest gimmick of all, the distribution of free condoms.
As one sabbatical welfare officer put it: ‘We needed a gimmick and this was an ideal one.’
Universities employed several means to distribute the condoms.
Undergraduates at Bristol were asked ‘have you had your present yet?’
Elsewhere, condoms mysteriously appeared in pigeon holes, or were stuck to doors.
A note accompanied the free condoms in most universities.
The note was intended to avoid offence being caused by the free condom.
However, certain phrases in the notes such as‘this condom is intended to inform’ were met with the charge that the campaign was wasteful and expensive.
Others complained that the whole campaign was misguided, arguing that people should have fewer partners rather than safer sex.
But this attitude was vehemently attacked by the campaign organisers, who argued that it is hard to influence the number of partners people have.
‘It would be barbaric to insist that condoms should not be given out.
It amounts to saying that people who have sex more regularly somehow deserve the disease’
The campaign was intended to change certain attitudes about AIDS and HIV, but mainly simply to raise awareness.
A spokesman from Body Positive, a support group for people with the virus justified the campaign: ‘We still have a long way to go because the general public is still very ignorant and there's a lot of misinformation around.’
The prevalent ignorance is especially alarming as the number of HIV cases increases.
In the UK there are 15 224 known cases of HIV, although estimates of the number of unknown cases are around three times this figure.
The World Health Organisation estimates there to be 11 million cases worldwide.
One million of these are children.
The condom campaign will probably be followed up with action on other attitudes to the virus.
The organisers would like to address the view that the infected are ‘victims’, not just people living with the disease: ‘A negative input only serves to make them feel they're under a death sentence.’
Ultimately it is very difficult to evaluate the success of such campaigns.
The organisers regard the condom campaign as successful if just one person is not infected because of the campaign.
LEFT: Two graduates of Manchester University draw a blank at the job centre.
New jobs often require experience which is hard to come by.
Photo: Burke.
Repair now or despair later: a much-needed facelift
THE APATHY SOCIETY CARTOON HAS BEEN CANCELLED DUE TO LACK OF INTEREST
Trashed!
Students at Oxford University about to be covered in all sorts of disgusting things after their last exam.
Afraid that ‘trashing’ may become a tradition, police and university authorities clamped down, but no arrests were made.
POLITICS & PROTESTS
National crèche scheme proposed
Most Universities now have crèches.
However there are still large differences between the services offered across the country.
To remedy this, a proposal has been made to the NUS that would make crèche facilities in different universities more similar.
The proposal, which will probably be taken up by the NUS, is for a ‘national crèche scheme’.
The scheme would involve a set of standards for crèches across the country.
When a university in the programme cannot meet these standards, funding from other universities in the scheme would be used to subsidise improvements.
The scheme draws attention to the main problem faced by most university crèche schemes: money.
A new nursery for 25 infants can cost as much as £100,000.
Even if the crèche is already built, running costs can be considerable.
Often students with babies or young children are not able to pay the full cost of a place at a crèche, so usually alternative funding is required.
Some universities fund crèches for their students; other crèches are supported by local district or county councils.
Without backing from councils or universities crèches are sometimes funded by local firms or charity events.
One of the most common methods of funding, and one that is becoming increasingly popular, is for a small levy to be made on students' charges.
The national crèche scheme, if it is adopted, will aim to support some of the crèches that are hardest to fund with money from other areas.
Although most crèches will agree to the scheme in principle, problems may arise if efficient, cheap crèches are asked to subsidise a more extravagant service elsewhere.
Proponents of the scheme hope that new money will be put in from the NUS to smooth over any such problems; also to remedy the poor funding of crèches generally.
The scheme highlights the other problem with crèches, namely the shortage of places.
Some students are forced to choose their university by the chance of getting a place in the crèche.
There are few universities where crèches are not at or above full capacity, and without new thinking or new money, the situation is unlikely to change much.
Crèches seem to be becoming norms rather than novelties — the House of Commons even looks likely to get one soon.
Even without any extra funding, the scheme hopes to help crèches with the information and advice that is often lacking when new crèches are set up.
NUS electoral reform
The NUS has announced a radical set of new voting rules that the ruling executive committee hopes to introduce as soon as possible.
The new rules include a way in which national policy, currently decided at conference, can be overturned if a certain number of university unions oppose it.
The rules will increase the power of the soft-left, and diminish the influence of the hard-left that is particularly strong at the national conference.
The reforms will have to be passed by the national conference where they will face considerable opposition.
A sit-in at Bristol Polytechnic has ended in disarray after a court injunction forced the Union President to clear the building.
The dispute, originally over food prices and student hardship, escalated into a sit-in with 300 students occupying the refectory for ten days.
Bristol University Student Union declined to join the protest, afraid it had been hijacked by extremists.
The protest was further undermined by a compromise package put forward by the polytechnic that many students accepted.
The threat of force to clear the building was conclusive.
Questionmarks over Rag?
There appears to be a growing dissatisfaction with Rag in several universities across the country.
Two student newspapers have run editorials criticising participants in Rag as selfseeking, and there have been suggestions that Rag should contribute to the rent of their offices, currently subsidised by student unions.
The dissatisfaction stems from the impression some students get of Rag.
Cherwell, the Oxford University newspaper, described participants as ‘normally sober physicists called Chris and Andy who go and make pricks of themselves.’
In Bristol there have been complaints that the hit squad are ‘out of touch’ after several insensitive hits that were not entirely well-meaning.
It seems unlikely that anything much will come of this discontent — there will always be some students eager to defend an institution that in most universities contributes up to £100,000 to charity each year.
However, codes of practice may yet be introduced that curb the distasteful excesses of Rag.
PICK OF THE POLITICS
Lampeter Students' union unanimously passed a motion calling for a ‘Funky Student Big Steaming Lurrve Palace’ to be built near the library.
Proposing the motion, Stewart Day suggested that it could have a sado-masochists dungeon, a jungle room, a vicars ‘n’ tarts room, and so on.’
The aim would be to help people ‘who never find love, it's not about casual sex.’
However, free condoms would be provided.
An amendment that the palace be run jointly with the Graduate Union was turned down on the grounds that ‘the Graduates are too old and it's bad for their health.’
Leeds polytechnic has voted to change the method by which it elects its President.
The new method involves candidates literally wrestling for power in a knockout tournament.
For the new system to be introduced properly involves a change of constitution and a further vote.
In the meantime, the Polytechnic will still use old-fashioned ballot boxes.
Christ Church JCR in Cambridge has just voted to place a compulsory levy on students' charges to subsidise tampons and sanitary towels.
The motion met with considerable opposition, but was passed when a large number of students left the room, apparently disgusted by the way the meeting was being run.
The  women's officer commented: ‘It looks as though men have thrown in the towel!’
A new political club has been set up in Durham University called the ‘Southpaws’.
The club intends to promote lefthandedness.
‘There is a lot of discrimination’ explained a spokesman.
‘We would like the phrase ‘right-hand man’ changed to ‘no-handed person  in particular .’’
The inaugural wine party was marred by accusations that a member of the executive had opened the wine with right-handed corkscrews.
The JCR at St. Catherines College Oxford has declared its disinterest at nearby Somerville College being forced to accept men next year.
A motion was passed:
‘This JCR notes that there are already enough ‘women’ who look like men at Somerville, and couldn't give a flying toss if they get any more.’
FIGHTS break out at a Black Rights demonstration in Euston, London.
The demonstrations were led by Al Sharpton, the controversial American activist on a visit to Britain.
The National Front is very strongly implicated in the orchestrated violence that accompanied many of the demonstrations — the man photographed here being arrested by the police is an NF member.
However, there have been suggestions that Reverend Sharpton deliberately provides such violence by his uncompromising rhetoric, to gain political capital from the forceful backlash.
PHOTO: JASON BURKE
Steven Hall who proposed the national crèche scheme.
Are the hit-squad as well-meaning as they make out?
TRAVEL
A Weekend in Paris
Jason Burke discovered much more than the clichés of Paris, and decided that a short visit need not be too expensive.
Paris in the spring?
Echoes of Cole Porter, Ella Fitzgerald; budding trees on shower — soaked boulevards; strong black coffee on a café terrace in early morning sunlight — very Robert Doisneau; the Louvre, the Champs-Elysée, the Trocadero, even the little bistro where the patron hands you a bottle of wine at the end of the evening on the house…naaah, too much of a cliché.
And far too expensive.
To the first charge Paris pleads guilty, but to the second?
It is possible to spend a really full weekend in Paris for £150 each, and that's without holding back.
OK, you can't buy a hand bag on the Rue de Rivoli or a box at the opera but you don't have to skimp on the house red.
We flew to Paris, Charles de Gaulle with STA for around £80.
It is possible to get cheaper tickets but you risk landing at 3am and then facing an hour or more coach journey culminating in a vagrancy charge because all the hotels are shut.
The coach, from London, costs under £40 but the trains, actually taking longer, weight in at a hefty £68.
Hotels, whatever people say, are rarely a problem.
Even in July or August it is possible not only to find accommodation but to pay very little for it.
We paid FF140, around £15, for a double room with breakfast.
It was clean, relatively well-furnished, and only a minute from the Gare du Nord, although the purple palm tree wallpaper took some getting used to.
The quartier was full of similar establishments: the best alternative area to try would be Montparnasse.
Filling a day isn't difficult in Paris — if expense is a major concern the great cemetery at Père Lachaise, complete with Jim Morrison's grave and attendant junkies, graffiti etc. is well worth a look.
Its eerie avenues of tombs are best savoured on a moody misty day but whatever the weather, it's free.
The Louvre too, though not cheap, has so much in it that you could spend days there and not see all of it.
The new Pyramid, recently constructed smack in the middle of the palace's main court is either an obscene postmodernist eyesore or a sensitive and daring contemporary addition, depending.
Either way, it has cut the vast queues.
For the artistically inclined the flea markets of Paris are full of interest and are, of course, totally free.
Otherwise wandering the boulevards, discovering unspoilt backwaters or just watching the people is as much fun as more expensive pastimes.
Picnics are the cheapest way to eat — a few chunks of cheese, or slices of meat from a supermarket eaten with fresh fruit and fresh bread certainly beats Co-op sandwiches.
Eating out, however, can be amazingly cheap.
It is possible to find 3 course menus for around £5 and even in lively, touristed areas such as Les Halles excellent food can be found for very little more.
So for a little over £100 it is easy to spend a long weekend in Paris in the spring, summer or whenever.
If you work out how much you would have spent in the bar, clubbing or eating out over the weekend and subtract it from the cost of the trip it all seems cheaper than ever.
Inside the New Pyramid, Louvre, Paris.
Photo: Jason Burke
FEATURE
In a class of his own.
Auberon Waugh, editor of the Literary Review and son of Evelyn ‘Brideshead’ Waugh, seems totally oblivious to any new ‘Classless Society.’
‘Borrie’ said Willie.
‘Yes Willie’ said Borrie.
‘Do we want a bridge or just the dreaming spires?’
‘Just the spires, I think…don't you?’
Borrie, better known as Auberon Waugh, and Willie, as in Rushton, were busy designing the front cover of the next issue of the Literary Review.
They were looking for something ‘studenty’, so, of course, languid blondes in punts with medieval architecture in the background duly emerged from the dozens of rough sketches scribbled by Willie Rushton.
The offices of the renowned Literary Review are well camouflaged.
A dusty doorway in a sidestreet off Carnaby Street flanked by a rack of intercom buttons opens onto a steep staircase.
You step over piles of old papers and up past several floors of small businesses before being welcomed into the small, busy room that seems to be all the space that the magazine requires.
Whatever the pretensions of Auberon Waugh and the Literary Review, their premises are extremely modest.
The great man himself sits at an aircraft-carrier of a desk across the room from the entrance.
On either side sit attractive, dynamic, rather intense young women sorting through heaps of correspondence and submissions.
Those they select are passed up to Waugh's desk whether they are lost in the plethora of paper that almost obscures the wood.
When I arrived Willie Rushton was comfortably sunk into a voluminous armchair in one corner.
I was there to take some photographs of Waugh and he  welcomed me very heartily with a firm handshake and a glass of Beaujolais Nouveau.
His voice was immensely rich and strong and suited his heavy features and bearing.
All I knew about Waugh was that he was the son of the famous Evelyn, and has a reputation for the sort of scathing wit that seems to epitomise the self-appointed arbiters of literary, and more generally, artistic taste and standards.
Though the voice was larded with the tones owed to ‘land in the family’, the man himself was decent, polite, unpretentious, and unpatronising throughout the half hour or so that I spent photographing him.
He told me about the sheer quantity of submissions that the Review received and regretfully had to reject, and spoke admiringly of much of the material that does come to him.
I put my cameras away and took my leave, stepping out into the muggy London air on Carnaby Street.
Alright, so his friends call him ‘Borrie’ and he believes he has a God-given right to opine on any subject and be published, or to criticise any work and be broadcast.
But he was, a he would have said himself, a very pleasant chap.
JASON BURKE
REVIEWS
Me, You and Him
Isn't this all a bit familiar?
A small group of single blokes sharing a house, just out of university.
It's a bit like Men Behaving Badly.
It's a bit like The Young Ones.
Let's face it, there have already been plenty of situation comedies in this situation before.
In some ways this programme improves on what has gone before.
The character Hancock is one of the best slobs in any of the ‘batchelor’ sitcoms.
He defrosts a chicken in the tumble dryer and eats deep-pan pizza with marmalade and Rice Krispies for breakfast.
The waster, played by Steve Punt, is a nineties version of Neil the hippie — less ideological, but more funny: ‘You should think yourself lucky if you get invited to parties.
The last party I went to, I ate too much jelly and was sick during pass the parcel.’
The third character is a neo-yuppie, obsessed with career, promotion and his rivals within the corporation.
However, he is not an unmitigated success, giving the show something slightly more than the banality of most sitcoms.
The charm of this series will be the little things that they have got precisely right, like the way they shout out the answers on blockbusters or coyly ask about women they adore.
Although in places you may feel the canned laughter machine is exaggerating — the script isn't that funny — the show definitely has its moments.
Steve Punt and Hugh Dennis are almost as funny as they are in The Mary Whitehouse Experience , the show that earnt them this sitcom.
Basic Instinct
Sex, violence, mystery — all the ingredients of a box-office record breaker.
There is even considerable controversy surrounding the film to attract people who ‘want to make up their own mind’.
Basic instinct almost goes a little too far, too many tabloid themes in two hours detracts from each of them.
It only needs a voyeuristic archbishop and an alien disguised as Elvis Presley to provide the material for an entire Sunday Sport .
As it stands, Sharon Stone's habits and associates could fill two-thirds of an issue already.
The film itself should not be written off just because it uses unsophisticated material.
There is a plot, a beginning, a middle and an end.
Unlike your average Agatha Christie, there are only two suspects rather than ten.
The film is careful not to leave anybody behind, or confused as to what is happening.
Not only is the audience told what has just happened, it is told what is going to happen, just to keep you in the picture.
If Basic Instinct is trash than it is trash of a distinguished standard.
The film may lack subtlety and political correctness, but it can be thrilling if you let it.
Star Trek VI
To be or not to be.
Star Trek VI considers such questions without even trying to be convincing.
It seems as though this is what has kept all those trekkies going for decades.
Star Trek raises deep, even philosophical questions in a school panto environment.
In place of those silly horses with two people inside them there are fat people made-up as Klingons.
Although the costumes are laughable, the themes are not.
For example, did you realise that in all the other Star Treks the Klingons, a backward, confrontational brunch, represented the Soviets?
In this film the Klingons come to be  led by a progressive pacifist called Gorkon (sounds like Gorbachev), who ends the futility of the Cold War with the Federation.
This film  reeks of moral contemplations about such issues.
Star Trek is the series made split infinitives famous.
There is less ground-breaking material in this film; it is more a case of tying up loose ends: it was James Tiberius Kirk — so now you know.
Time is catching up with the baldly-going heroes.
A quarter of a century since the first Star Trek, these oldies are making way for the New Generation.
With Gene Roddenberry and Kirk's son already dead, the rest leave together in this film knowing that the end is fairly nigh anyway.
Chekov's melodramatic last words sum up the film quite neatly: ‘Well I guess this is goodbye!’
Retrospective Pet Shop Boys
From West End Girls to the camp reworking of U2's Where the streets have no name , this band has had the smash hits Neil Tennant used to write about when he was an anonymous music journalist.
The Pet Shop Boys could never rely upon sex appeal.
They could never even rely upon a good singing voice — instead there is that distinctive nasal whine.
The band made it through their music — melodic, interesting and eminently danceable.
These guys proved that synthesised music didn't have to be cold and aloof.
This album is a collection of their best.
The music is still as good as it used to be.
It deserves more hype than it needs.
Unrefined Sugar Bullet
This new band lacks nothing in the way of promotion.
According to their ever-so convincing press release ‘They know what they're doing and they use loops, breaks and samples the way other people breathe.
They're unique and what makes them unique is that they do not know it.’
I was sceptical too.
The band don't deserve such praise, but they have earned this record deal.
The music is a clever combination of hiphop, punk and dub.
The bass is central, and it's all very evocative, especially the tracks Rise and Shame .
However, the lyrics, some of which are spoken by a seven-year-old, are annoyingly political and can be as unbelievable as the band's promotional literature.
Radio Plays
If video killed the radio star, then the continued survival of radio drama must suggest something, like radio drama doesn't need stars to be good.
Television may be much more popular than radio, but radio plays still deserve their place amongst the airwaves, and they are worth listening to.
The BBC broadcasts around 2,000 radio dramas every year, including soaps, short stories, and dramatised features.
About 30% of the plays are adaptations of classics from an A-level English syllabus, like Dickens, Hardy and Dylan Thomas.
The other 70% is new stuff which is usually quite good, occasionally excellent and sometimes terrible.
A plethora of famous twentieth century writers made their names on radio.
This is because radio presents the writer with awkward problems alongside great opportunities.
On radio, letters and signposts have to be read out loud by actors that are continually talking to themselves.
This drawback is offset by the chance to create absolutely anything words can conjure up.
The radio version of The  Hitchhiker'’ Guide to the Galaxy had this freedom that could not quite be translated onto television.
Radio is far more intimate than television.
Many radio plays exploit the eerieness of a disembodied voice whispering intensely into your ear.
It's not the same on telly.
Radio plays can be a fresh alternative to yesterday's video or tonight's television.
They're definitely worth a listen.
Norbert Grindstone, the much-hyped  karaoke kids who should stick to  karaoke .
Not recommended.
Sorry lads.
TABOO: DRUGS
High Culture
Why smoking is just a drag
Have you been at a party where you found yourself in a room and people started skinning up?
How did you react?
Impressed?
Intrigued?
Or did you just find the whole business tedious?
Some do.
Non-smokers often report being treated with condescension in such situations.
Not explicitly, but by the perfected mannerisms of smokers, like the way they lick the  Rizzla or flick the zippo open.
Actions that show practice and dedication worthy of respect.
There is the added machismo of breaking the law.
Telephone messages that have to be carried out in code.
The police could arrive at any minute!
They hardly ever do, so it's not as daring as they make out, is it?
Most tedious of all are the conversations that will take place in this upstairs room at the party.
They're rolling the joint and it's…did you hear the one about…so and so's mate who scored some really good stuff from some new dealer somewhere.
Oh.
That must have been fun for her.
Far more interesting than your average conversation that involves people or a good old fashioned joke I don't think.
I suppose you get it in most things.
When ‘the lads’ talk about football they exclude others by discussing the intricate implications of a second division transfer that nobody else knew anything about.
Even the ‘Dungeons and Dragons’ anoraks are sometimes superior because of their knowledge of the game.
But druggies usually claim to be a liberal bunch, intelligent enough to value breaking the law in moderation.
Most of them seem to get a power trip from their ritualistic behaviour.
Obviously they're as hung up as the rest of us.
Every time you hear about a rave being busted, it's always E that the ravers were taking.
Acid house has happened, and things you smoke belong to the sixties.
Although it's a Class A drug, there are no side-effects (well, none anybody wants to know about).
Easy to take, easy to make, and easy to carry about without being caught.
Could it catch on?
It has already, in a big way…
E was first discovered in 1898.
It was patented in Germany sixteen years later as an appetite suppressor (and then the First World War happened…).
It was never marketed in Britain, despite its potential as a slimming aid.
Rediscovered in the sixties, it was not an illicit substance, and so came to be used quite widely.
However, when a huge ecstacy laboratory was raided in 1977 the drug was banned and listed as ‘Class A’— which means that the maximum penalty for possession is seven years imprisonment and an unlimited fine.
Dealing the drug can result in life imprisonment.
Ecstacy, or XTC, or E, or MDMA, or 3,4-methylene to be brutally scientific, is an amphetamine-based drug.
About ten minutes after taking a tab of E, the drug will produce a high that can last for hours.
It works by boosting the amount of serotonin in the brain to about ten times the usual level.
Serotonin is a low level nerve transmitter which naturally makes people feel alert and happy, and these are the sensations associated with the drug.
E also increases heart and pulse rates, it raises body temperature and it brings about minor hallucinations.
These are potentially dangerous side effects for anyone with heart disease, epilepsy, asthma, or indeed anyone in a poor mental or physical condition.
A sixteen year old girl collapsed and died at the Hacienda in Manchester after ‘dropping an E’.
Apparently she had a severe allergic reaction to the drug, although it could have been a lethal impurity in the tab she took.
More worrying are the longer lasting psychological effects, usually associated with acid, that can be wrought by any hallucinogenic drug.
Hallucinations occur when the division between the subconscious and conscious mind is blurred, producing a form of psychosis.
If there is any predisposition to psychosis then the changes induced can be permanent.
There are not yet any documented cases of this happening with E, but there are plenty with acid.
The E-culture has only been raving since 1986, so perhaps it is too early to tell if it can cause long term mental changes.
Most experts are hard pushed to explain why normal, healthy people should not take E. Some suggest that it may promote Parkinson's disease — after all, the symptoms are fairly similar: short-term memory loss, the shakes, jaw-ache and constant chewing.
Others point to the effect E has on the clotting mechanism of the blood and how it can cause internal bleeding, haemorrhaging and death.
More dangerous than the drug itself are the things that come with it.
Because the drug is too powerful on its own, and to bulk it out to increase profit margins, E is mixed or ‘cut’ with other similar looking substances.
Vitamin C powder, chalk and glucose are used by the nicer manufacturers; others add bleach, brick dust or oven cleaner.
Occasionally, heroin and strychnine are put in, and no doubt there are sometimes other additives that would fail an Olympic drug test if the user remained fit enough to do athletics.
One way to detect some impurities is to put the tab on your tongue and see if it fizzes (it shouldn't).
The real thing is granular, not powdery.
E capsules (as opposed to tablets or ‘tabs’) have the added problem that it is easy for a dealer to alter the ingredients after the drug is manufactured.
One capsule of the good stuff can be split into several capsules and mixed with assorted cutting agents.
Hey presto!
An opportunistic dealer can make four capsules from one, although it clearly won't make people four times as happy.
With all these ‘adjustments’, few Es are more than 5% pure.
Most are only 2–3% pure, which means 98% of an average E is, at best completely inert.
Not only are there dangers that a particular tab of E contains strychnine or whatever, there is also the chance that it is not E at all.
Some tab-labs don't get the formula right, either by mistake or as an experiment.
Then they try to market the not-sogoods at a slightly cheaper price.
More cunning still is the practice of launching a brand of E with good stuff, so that the manufacturer gets a healthy reputation, and then distributing more dubious material, often brought in from other areas.
Dealers may like people to take E, but this doesn't stop them ripping the users off.
But it seems as though most of the problems and dangers with E come from the underground manner in which it is supplied.
In Switzerland the drug is used legally and openly to treat psychological disorders, especially depression.
If, as many now believe, E is not dangerous, then maybe government regulation is the answer.
Strict rules on the make-up of a British Standard tab would stop it being cut with more harmful drugs, and only the best form of the drug would be traded.
For government regulation to be a good move there needs to be confirmation that the drug is harmless, and there is the ‘thinend-of-the-wedge’ argument — that it will break the taboo surrounding other more noxious substances.
Of course, no government with half an eye on re-election would ever legalise anything it didn't have to.
There is also the problem that even a ‘harmless’ drug can be misused in a harmful way.
A ‘New Yorker’ is a tab of E that has been marinaded in LSD (they were particularly fashionable a year ago).
Trippers experience the short-term euphoria associated with E alongside a full scale acid trip.
These variations on the E- theme are taking off almost as fast as E itself.
Part of the reason these new forms of E are being supplied si that the body's tolerance to E builds up very quickly.
Users need to take more and more E every time to produce the same high.
However, this same increased tolerance to the high associated with E also makes the body more susceptible to some of the longer term psychological side-effects of the drug, such as insomnia, anxiety attacks, panic and depression.
Although it is not physically addictive, E can become psychologically addictive, and this is where the problems can start.
Despite all this, E still compares very favourably with other drugs.
Acid, or LSD, can do much more psychological damage.
One trip on acid can lead to flashbacks years or even decades later.
These are unlikely to cause death (unless you're a surgeon or an airline pilot), but all who have experienced flashbacks regard them as  extremely disturbing.
Acid can also lead to paranoia, self-hatred and loss of fertility.
Cannabis, the most widely used illegal drug in Britain, is not physically addictive either.
Most users believe that the drug is less harmful than the tobacco it is rolled with, but this can only be supposition given the lack of knowledge surrounding the drug's long-term effects.
There is evidence that points towards cannabis occasionally causing sterility, and there is certainly evidence to prove that the drug attacks the body's fatty tissues.
This may sound like good news it you're overweight, but please consult your doctor before taking cannabis as a part of a calorie controlled diet.
Like acid and E, cannabis can cause psychosis to anybody with a disturbed personality, although this only occurs in extreme cases.
There is even more mystery surrounding the harmful side-effects of home-made narcotics — I don't mean designer drugs, but things in the garden shed that can be ‘used’ in various ways.
Banana skins, for example, are sometimes dried for weeks until they have gone black, then the inside off the skin can be scraped off and smoked.
Veterans of this procedure describe it as ‘more hassle than it's worth’ and ‘a complete waste of time’.
Balsa wood can also be smoked after it has been broken into little pieces, but some say it is even less rewarding than banana skins.
More dangerous on the home front are the volatile substances that are inhaled to produce a high.
Glue, lighter fuel, gasoline, nail varnish and aerosols: these act by cutting down the amount of oxygen in the brain.
Sadly, they can very easily be used in fatal proportions, even on the first use.
Almost every month it seems as though some sad parent on the local news is bemoaning the loss of their teenager who died in this way.
Other, ‘professional’ drugs have been designed to overcome some of these problems, but they have often been designed to have even more worrying characteristics.
Crack is the classic example.
Crack is derived from cocaine by ‘free-basing’ it, which means the cocaine is dissolved in water and then heated with baking powder (or something similar) until the cocaine base is separated from salt that usually accompanies it.
Crack delivers a high within seconds, but the high wears off after ten or fifteen minutes.
This leads on to a dramatic low and a severe craving for another dose of the stuff.
It is the most addictive drug ever — many become addicted from the first time they use it.
Fortunately, the wave of crack that swept American ghettos and the  Caribbean has not taken root in this country apart from a few isolated cases in the North of England.
It is even worse than heroin in terms of the dependency and hopelessness it creates.
So E is certainly an improvement upon many other substances on the market E may be a fad, or it may fall out of favour because somebody proves it makes your legs fall off or something.
At the moment it is fast becoming the nicotine of the nineties.
Counting the cost
Drug:
Cost:
Effects:
Acid
LSD
Less than £5 per tab (often half this price)
An hallucinogenic ‘trip’ lasting several hours.
Can cause paranoia, psychosis, sterility and flashbacks several years after the drug is taken.
Cannabis
Dope
Gear
Hash
From £10–£15 for an  eighth of an ounce
Light-headedness, sometimes followed by giggling fits.
Causes bloodflow to the extremities to increase and a reddening of irises.
Difficulty in maintaining coherent flow of thought.
Lethargy and a desire for food, ‘the munchies’.
There are no known physical side-effects even after years of use, although good evidence is hard to collect.
However, the lethargic effects of dope (incl. grass) can de-motivate young people, making it harder for them to get bored with doing nothing.
There is a saying, although it is accepted by smokers as being mildly humorous, ‘Dope will get you through times of no money, but money won't get you through times of no dope.’
Cocaine
Coke
Around £60 for one gram
Snorting produces a high that lasts about half an hour accompanied by loss of appetite and an indifference to pain
Crack
Around £20 for a ‘hit’, an average ‘rock’
Produces an immediate high that lasts for about ten minutes followed by a deep low and often instant addiction
Ecstasy
From £10–£20 for one ‘E’
Literally induces a sensation of ecstasy that lasts several hours.
See main text for full effects.
Heroin
About £80 per gram
Sedation.
Highly addictive.
Injecting can spread HIV
Speed
Whizz
Amphetamine
From £10–£15 for one gram, a ‘wrap’
Increased activity for several hours.
Increases the amount of adrenalin in the body.
The high is usually followed by exhaustion.
From left to right: amphetamines (or speed); cannabis (grass, marijuana or pot); hashish resin (which is derived from the Indian hemp plant like cannabis) and ecstasy  tabs (see text).
Civil Rights up in smoke?
James Dewar argues that smoking cannabis should be no more criminal than watching TV
Firstly I would like to state that this article in no way seeks to encourage the smoking or eating of cannabis, or of any substance containing the active ingredients TetraHydroCannabinols.
Indeed, I would personally recommend that, as it is unnecessary for the full enjoyment of life, it should not be used.
However, I don't particularly like watching television for more than 5 hours in a day, and that is certainly not necessary and is possibly harmful to mental and physical health.
Should I seek to impose a legal limit on daily TV viewing, even supposing that it were enforceable?
Forgetting prejudice it would seem from the table that the objective equivalence of these two unrecommended activities is straightforward.
Try to restrict TV watching and nearly everybody would, quite rightly, be complaining that civil liberties were being attacked.
This would be irrespective of their desire to watch more than 5 hours of TV in a day.
Relations with the police force would reach a new low.
Supposing that we took the route to legalisation of cannabis, what larger scale social and economic issues may arise?
1)
Removing crime from cannabis by making the user (c. 5,000,000 regular in UK) a client of a legitimate outlet that does not seek to ‘push’ anything else.
2)
Distancing criminal elements of society from a sizeable minority of otherwise reasonable people who smoke, or have smoked, cannabis, and who presently need to deal with such persons.
From personal experience having a status as a criminal with respect to smoking cannabis encourages an insidious deterioration of respect for law as a whole.
3)
Providing additional resources for the state in the form of excise duties.
These could then be spent on a range of things, not least for improvement of drug education and counselling/rehabilitation services.
4)
The amount of money that is taken out of the country's economy by cannabis each year is estimated at £250,000,000 the street value being nearer £500,000,000.
A not insignificant dent in our trade deficit, and a loss to the Inland Revenue.
Beware the patrician whose natural argument is that ‘we are educated and able to make an informed decision, but not so most people, hence we had better protect the masses from their own folly’.
The logical conclusion of this conceited but surprisingly widely held stance should be to declare all such people as legal minors.
When, and if, these people ever reach the ‘responsibility  threshold ’ then and only then will they be allowed to participate in a legal contract and to vote.
This is not the society that I want to live in.
Who are these sad inadequates anyway but a consequence of looking at society through middle-class-tinted spectacles?
I will reaffirm that I cannot condone the use of cannabis, nor for that matter daily watching more than 5 hours of TV.
I think it is a waste of time.
It leads to a lethargy I think we do better without.
But we do much worse without the freedom to choose for ourselves.
OVERVIEW
When the BBC surveyed four thousand drug users and their families in 1986, half of the users were found to have broken free from their addiction.
Esther Rantzen called this a sign of hope, ‘Addiction isn't necessarily the end of the line.’
But what about the other half (not all of whom were still alive)?
Since then the number of users has only increased and the market has been penetrated with new drugs.
Officialdom's response has been to throw more money at the problem.
Which is understandable if you believe that there is a ‘solution’ which can be bought.
But why do people use chemicals on their bodies in this way?
Precisely here, where we should be asking this key diagnostic question, we are getting the fuzziest answers.
Like Tony Banks MP (on Moral Maze, BBC Radio 4, 23 July 1992) who thinks that the cause might be unemployment, poverty and homelessness.
A cruise around a local library's shelves will give a plethora of other reasons — curiosity, peer group pressure, desire for elevated consciousness, boredom, challenge to authority, or pressure from the instant gratification culture fostered by the advertising industry.
Talk to users themselves however, and after the first half dozen you will have concluded that drug use is a spiritual phenomenon.
On this diagnosis progress can be made.
Even in the Biblical record drugs were considered as inextricably linked with (harmful) spiritual power and as such were seen as susceptible to permanent cure.
Society tells your drug friend living in the squats that he or she is incurably evil.
Christian teaching tells them that we are all curably sinful — which given the choice is a relief.
If the spiritual foundations of the drug culture ever needed to be proved again in the twentieth century, its great introductory fanfare in the 1960s surely did the trick.
Now the proof of the pudding should be in the eating.
What happens when the spiritual dimension is recognised in treatment and rehabilitation?
The facts speak for themselves.
In its national directory the Standing Conference on Dug Abuse (SCDA) it lists seven counties in Britain where the only residential rehabilitation available is a Christian centre.
The best known of these is probably Yeldall Manor in Berkshire.
Their success rate is remarkable, not just in the number of people drug-free after one year but by the quality of their product.
One recent exresident, Kenny Taylor, who himself grew up as a son of a criminal in the  East-End , says, ‘Since becoming a Christian, I have passed my driving test — I was driving at the age of ten, but now I drive with tax and insurance!’
Now he is a care worker in a home for mentally handicapped adults.
Yeldall's position is that ‘The best means of achieving true freedom from dependency is rehabilitation through discipleship to Jesus Christ’.
But ‘We do not insist upon, or force such a commitment on anyone.’
Meanwhile, back at the ivory tower, lobby groups are busying themselves with the legal questions while waiting to get the big question answered (i.e. why do people do it?).
No further away than this morning The Times printed an advertisement from 209 of the great and the good who are calling for the legalisation of cannabis.
I had a curious brush with the law myself once when I was sent by my employer to attend a day seminar on drugs to be given at the local university by a police sergeant.
For his last session, which was about cannabis, the sergeant brought along a whacking great sample of the stuff which he placed on the lecture bench in front of him.
Ten minutes after the lecture as he was jovially chatting with the conferees a cry went up ‘the cannabis has been nicked!’
To give the sergeant his due, he wasn't too alarmed.
At the end of the day he confided, ‘Everyone has his [her]addictions; mine's Carling Black Label.
It just happens to be legal.’
The sooner we can say out loud ‘Substance misuse and addiction are evidence of a spiritual vacuum’ the better.
Then we can get the help we need.
And so can the sergeant.
DAVID WILSON.
(National Director Agape)
The opinions expressed on this page do not necessarily represent those of Uniview.
Magic Mushrooms
Used by the Aztecs in ancient rituals, magic mushrooms are a hallucinogen.
There are twelve different types although by far the most common are called ‘liberty caps’, shown below.
John Chong, pictured right, is picking mushrooms on Hampstead Heath, North London.
Picking the mushrooms is not against the law, but crushing them or any other form of processing is strictly illegal.
The mushrooms themselves are only as harmful as most other hallucinogens.
However, it takes some skill to identify them.
A handful of people die each year from mistakenly eating poisonous fungi