

the gift of GOLD
The dress has been packed away, the wedding album has finally found a resting place and the honeymoon has become a fond but distant memory.
Yet a far stronger and more symbolic object remains — the wedding ring.
Eternity, union, love, the gold wedding ring has come to symbolise the devotion of a groom to his bride, a bride to her groom and reflects perfectly the harmony between the couple.
This band of gold probably originates from Egypt, where lovers wore it on the fourth finger of the right hand or ring finger.
now it is worn on the third finger of the left hand where a vein of love was believed to run straight to the heart.
The wedding band appears throughout history in various forms.
In ancient Greece, two rams' heads facing each other on an open band was a favourite design and snake rings were also common, the serpent being a symbol of eternity.
The Irish Claddagh love ring, a heart between two hands, was often popular and in Ireland the wedding wasn't considered legal unless the ring was made of gold.
Gold has been the object of admiration and wonder for centuries.
Its rarity and beauty has made it much prized, easily worked by skilled craftsmen and worn by both men and women.
Gold's precious beauty has been universally recognised by every major civilisation.
The Aztecs believed it to be the ‘sweat of the sun’ whilst the Egyptians connected gold with their Sun God, Ra.
It is therefore apt that we choose gold for our most symbolic adornment, the wedding ring.
Rare, everlasting and immensely treasurable, gold has all the qualities we hope to find in marriage.
GOLD TODAY
The qualities of gold; rich hues which last forever, versatility and strength, eternal value, all make the gift of gold one to treasure.
Today, gold is mixed with a variety of alloys to enhance these qualities, and it is this mixture which determines its value and purity.
Two things determine the quality of gold; hallmark and carat.
The hallmark indicates that gold has been tested for quality at one of the UK's four Assay Offices and is your safeguard that the gold is of a legal standard of purity.
It is also your guarantee that you are buying real gold.
24 carat gold is the purest gold you can find being 99.99 per cent pure.
Next is 22 carat gold which is 22 parts pure gold to two parts other metals and is 91.6 per cent pure.
18 carat is 75 per cent pure and lovers of gold will appreciate the wonderful warmth and rich colour whilst 9 carat gold is 37.5 per cent pure.
18 carat gold is becoming more and more popular for gold jewellery and for something as special as your wedding ring it is worth spending that little bit more.
After all, your wedding ring is something you will wear for the rest of your life.
For your free information booklet on gold, contact World Gold council Information Office, 10, Haymarket, London, SW1Y 4BP.
BEAVERBROOKS THE JEWELLERS
Like all the best British institutions, Beaverbrooks the Jewellers began as a small family business.
Established in the twenties in Belfast by brothers Harry Isaac and Maurice Adlestone, the original shop bears the Adlestone's name to this day.
In the thirties the business expanded, with further branches opening in the North of England and Scotland and it was at this point that the name Beaverbrooks was adopted.
The name was intended as a tribute to Lord Beaverbrook, the politician and newspaper magnate, whose name was synonymous with trust, a quality Beaverbrooks still maintain as one of their principal values, together with their ever present high quality and good service.
With 27 branches nationwide, Beaverbrooks has retained its outstanding reputation for fine quality jewellery and is still run as a family concern, with customer satisfaction the most important guiding principle.
As well as their expertise in the field of wedding and engagement rings, Beaverbrooks offer all the services you would expect from a quality jeweller.
Based on the principle of customer loyalty, their Price Promise guarantees to refund the difference if an item stocked by them can be purchased locally at a lower price.
They offer free professional advice on jewellery repairs, all of which are undertaken by highly skilled goldsmiths, and as Registered Valuers, approved by the National Association of Goldsmiths they offer detailed, accurate valuations, and advice on the purchase of jewellery.
All branches of Beaverbrooks also offer an earpiercing service using the Inverness System, a healthy authority approved and recognised method with a discount of 10 per cent on your first purchase of gold earrings.
Beaverbrooks' payment terms are extremely favourable with nine months interest free credit available on all purchases over £300.
Such purchases will require a 10 per cent deposit.
PERFECT FOR THE BRIDE AND GROOM
For brides and grooms Beaverbrooks are the ideal jeweller offering expert advice, help and special services.
Their range of wedding rings is unrivalled.
In 1991 the average that was spent on a gold wedding ring was £119 by the bride and £104 by the groom.
18 carat gold wedding rings at Beaverbrooks start from £55 for her and £75 for him.
Take your time choosing your ring and enjoy the benefit of receiving expert help and advice from the Beaverbrooks professionally trained staff.
Beaverbrooks recommend you choose your wedding ring about three months before the big day so that you have no last minute worries.
A full guarantee comes with every Beaverbrooks purchase and a year's free insurance policy with your engagement ring.
Front Cover 1.
18 carat gold 5mm court shaped fancy cut milled edge wedding ring, £169.50 2. 9 carat gold polished fancy link bracelet, £250.
Contents Photography Still life photography by Will White.
Fashion photography by Sean Knox.
Hair and makeup by Jo Gillingwater.
Photograph by James Martin.
decorative designs
The beauty of 28 carat gold
Embellished, embossed, entwined and engraved, pretty rings for the romantic bride and her groom Above:
made to measure
If you cannot find exactly what you want, a ring can be designed specially for you and your groom in any width, ring size or carat of gold.
Beaverbrooks also offer a special range of wedding rings, in a variety of shapes to complement and fit round an engagement ring.
Silk duchesse satin and beaded lace dress by Wizard of Gos (Donna, £1,850)
Hand crafted rings in 9 carat gold
going for gold
Make sure you try jewellery on.
Different styles suit different people.
Check that the shade of gold really complements your skin, and hold earrings up to your face to check you are happy with the shape.
Make sure you know how a piece of jewellery is intended to be worn.
For example which way up it should go.
Make sure rings and bracelets really fit you.
A ring should feel comfortable, not so loose that it slips down your finger but not so tight that it is difficult to remove.
Check all the fastenings are secure and if necessary have safety chains fitted for added peace of mind.
Left: Antique lace dress by Catherine Buckley (£1,500) matching veil by Catherine Buckley from a selection starting at £200
9 carat wedding bands for him and her in classic yellow and soft colours
18 carat gold for the man in your life
shapes that suit
Court shaped and D shaped wedding rings are traditionally heavier bands.
A Court ring is rounded for comfort on the inside as well as the outside with across section forming an oval.
A D shaped ring has a cross section forming the D shape.
The heavier the ring, the more accentuated the D shape.
Right: Embroidered silk paper taffeta dress by Wizard of Gos (Monica, £1,400) headdress from Nazareth Walsh (£35)
classic shapes
Sleek and stylish eternal bands of gold in shapes as timeless as your love
Timeless designs in 18 carat gold
something for him
87 per cent of grooms now choose to wear a wedding ring and with the Beaverbrooks extensive collection of men's rings including rings to match the bride's he'll be spoilt for choice.
9 carat classics for the bride and groom
shine on
Take good care of your gold, a little loving care and attention will keep your jewellery looking its very best.
Although one of gold's most prized qualities is that it does not tarnish easily, it deserves to be treated with respect.
The best way to clean gold is to use a specially formulated cleaner and then gently brush with the soft brush provided, to remove any grease or dirt.
Never use silver dip or abrasive powders on gold and be sure to check that any commercial cleaner you are using is specifically designed for gold.
Beaverbrooks recommend the Inverness Sonic Cleaner, a new battery operated jewellery cleaning system suitable for all jewellery in gold, silver, platinum and precious stones at £22.95.
Or ‘Jewel Clean’ a liquid cleaner for gold and precious stones at £2.50, both available from all beaverbrooks branches.
To prevent scratching, store your jewellery separately in a lined jewellery box or jewellery role.
Try to remember to put your jewellery on last when getting ready; hairsprays, nail enamels and make-up could tarnish the gold and also you might catch rings on zip fasteners or earrings and necklaces on clothing.
Remember to remove your jewellery, especially rings, whilst doing any housework; detergents and scouring powder can tarnish and scratch gold.
22 carat gold: simply the best
18 carat gold — elegant shapes to give and receive
modern looks
Dare to be different with an innovative style that will become a contemporary classic 
shades of gold
Gold in its natural form glows deep amber yellow, but when mixed with the various alloys it takes on a variety of hues.
Choose from warm rose gold, classic rich yellow, or the more unusual white.
A popular mix is used in the Russian wedding rings combining red, white and yellow golds in their three entwined bands.
Stars and stripes in 9 carat gold
Beaverbrooks offers
Beaverbrooks offer special incentives for brides on wedding purchases.
If you buy your engagement ring from them you will get a 10 per cent discount on your wedding ring or rings.
When you buy your wedding ring you will received a 10 per cent discount on your next purchase, such as bridesmaids' and best man presents.
A perfect fit — a selection of six made to order 18 carat gold rings especially shaped to flatter your engagement ring (also available in 9 carat gold)
White heat — the warmth of white 9 carat gold
Above: Beaded lace short dress by Tatters at Harrods (£780), veil by Nazareth Walsh (£49.99)
GOLD…with love from Beaverbrooks
On the wedding day itself what could be more appropriate than gold, the symbol of everlasting love?
Its warmth and richness will add the finishing touches that are all important to the dress of your dreams.
Say thank you with a gift of gold from Beaverbrooks.
It will ensure that the memory of your wedding day will remain uppermost in the minds of your nearest and dearest.
You'll be spoilt for choice at Beaverbrooks who, along with wedding rings, offer the widest selection of gold jewellery to delight even the tiniest bridesmaids.
And don't forget the 10 per cent discount you will receive on further purchases when you choose your wedding ring at Beaverbrooks.
Exclusive to Beaverbrooks is the Beaverbrooks Collection; a stylish and innovative range of jewellery inspired by sleek continental designs.
Perfect as a present for your mother or to complement your own wardrobe, each piece is fashioned in 9 carat gold and designed specifically to be co-ordinated within a Suite or worn on its own.
A Collection Suite comprises a necklet, ring, bracelet, brooch and earrings to add a touch of glamour and by mixing up the styles you can create an individual look for that final touch.
If you just can't decide, why not select a gift voucher in an attractive presentation box, available from all branches nationwide?
9 carat gold…just for him
Don't forget the men in your life when it comes to buying thank you presents.
The groom, your father, the best man and the ushers will all find a subtle touch of Beaverbrooks gold elegant and adaptable.
the gift of GOLD…by mail
All the jewellery which has been featured can be ordered by mail.
Just fill in the coupon in block capitals and send to Beaverbrooks the Jewellers at the address below.
Or, place your order by telephone on 0253 721262 (ask for the mail order department).
Whether you decide on a honeymoon at home or you're planning a trip abroad it's a wonderful excuse to treat yourself to a couple of new outfits for the beach and it's essential to look after yourself and protect against the sun's more harmful rays.
We have put together pages of new summer beauty and beach products to help make your choice easier.
Talking of exotic locations, our lucky fashion department have been off to colourful Morocco, to see how they got on turn to page 37.
Did you know when you marry a man you'll also be marrying his hidden debts?
Our report on page 97 looks at where you stand and your legal rights when it comes to joint finances — and how to avoid getting into difficulties that are not of your own making.
It would be lovely to have the most expensive of everything at your reception, but we are only too aware that most people planning a wedding have to run a pretty tight budget.
There are ways of saving money without missing out and in this issue we look at sparkling alternatives to champagne which will add the fizz to the proceedings without breaking the bank.
Our home section looks at functional yet funky cutlery and classy glass for your gift list, and our Ducal bedroom furniture competition offers prizes worth £6,000.
Also on the competition front one lucky reader will be flying off to the sunny Bahamas for her honeymoon — so hurry up and enter, it might just be you!
Debbie Djordjević Editor P.S. Did you propose to him this leap year?
If so write and tell me all about it — I'll be sending a bottle of Moet & Chandon Champagne for the best letter!
contents
june/july 1992
FRONT COVER: Photography by Sean Know.
Lemon silk poult dress with pear beaded detail on bodice by Margaret Curran (Lemon, £900), earrings by Butler and Wilson (£32).
Hair and make-up by Jo Gillingwater for Shiseido.
Dress stockists on page 138
Beautiful beaded dresses
Honeymoon style
Summer treats
Glass with class
something new
BRIDAL SHOPPING
Designer Donna Salado specialises in prettily embroidered gowns, and co-ordinating attendants' outfits.
Donna Salado is at 16a Northampton Lane North, Moulton, Northampton, NN2 1RQ (0604 647858).
Florentina by Donna Salado
CAKE COLLECTION
This unusual wedding cake is the perfect present!
From Stephen Haudé, it uses gift boxes from Tiffany's of New York as its theme.
Stephen Haudé is at 109 Midhurst Road, Ealing, London W13 (081 567 1081).
Wedding Memories
The Bride's Book will help you keep a perfect record of your relationship from the moment you met through to the big day.
With space available for you to add your own pictures and information it makes an invaluable keepsake of your courtship.
Published by Collins it costs £11.95 and is available from bookshops and stationers around the country.
We have 20 copies to give away to the first 20 readers whose names are pulled out of the bag on July 9 1992, send your name and address on an adhesive label to Business Executive Diaries Ltd, Cornerways, Brenchley Road, Brenchley, Tonbridge, Kent TN12 7PB.
Mah Rana will design your wedding or engagement rings especially for you from around £95.
Contact 071 377 0261 for more details.
We have eight of these stylist fifties retro inspired ties from Thomas Pink Shirtmakers to give away.
They are handmade in England from a heavy jacquard woven silk, cost £28.50 and are available from Thomas Pink, 32 Castle Street, Edinburgh and 35 Dover Street, London W1 and branches.
Send a postcard to Wedding and Home/Thomas Pink Offer, Greater London House, Hampstead Rd, London, NW1 7QQ before July 9, 1992.
Medallion silk waistcoat and bow tie from Oxford and Swan, perfect for your groom or best man.
Their new collection also includes scarves, ties and braces and all designs are based on antique decorative arts.
Stockists include Fortnum and Mason, Piccadilly and Herbert Johnson, 30 New Bond Street, London W1.
Too good to miss is this special offer from designer Nazareth Walsh, who, for the rest of 1992, is giving a free pair of dupion shoes (flat, court, or Louis heel) with every wedding dress order over £600.
For further information telephone 071 250 3451…
Cinderella's Slippers will cover your favourite pair of court shoes in the fabric of your choice for shoes that perfectly match your wedding dress or going away outfit.
Telephone 081 969 5652 for details.
This dress is by Caroline Alexander (WD14C92, £1,635) at Collections, 3 Motcomb Street, SW1, a new shop which holds a wide selection of wedding dresses by a group of well established designers — Fiorito, Andrea Wilkin, Louise Hamlyn-Wright and Rebecca Street — each one is available, by appointment, to create the dress of your dreams.
Your little bridesmaids will love these Pony Brides from My Little Pony as a memento of your wedding day.
The white pony comes complete with veil, wedding cake, wedding ring, comb and ribbon, for perfect grooming!
We have 50 ponies to give away with a My Little Pony Fun & Learning Pack, to keep your bridesmaids occupied throughout the ceremony!
Write on a postcard to Wedding and Home /My Little Pony Bride Offer, Ref MLP/LH, Hasbro-Bradley UK Ltd, 2 Roundwood Avenue, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex UB11 1AZ.
This offer closes July 9, 1992.
Pretty Fleurs
This stunning bouquet is from Tiger Rose.
Working from her small shop in Lupin Street she is happy to feature catkins and pussywillows in her innovative designs as well as roses and carnations.
For further information contact Tiger Rose, 2 Lupin Street, London SW1V 3DY (071 976 6667).
WITH THIS RING…
Anneau from Chaumet is the perfect symbol of life long fidelity.
Made in 18 carat gold it costs £380.
The beautiful earrings, also in 18 carat gold, cost £740.
Lady Grace bridal gowns from Sposa Bella Manufacturing Ltd are designed and made especially for the larger bride in sizes 18–30.
The collection is stocked in 100 specialist bridal shops around the country.
For further details contact Sposa Bella Manufacturing Ltd, 22 James Road, Tyseley, Birmingham, B11 2BA (021 708 1841).
Above: Charlotte from the Lady Grace Collection.
The perfect gift for the one you love, Lovers is filled with over 230 beautiful duotone photographs of the great screen couples through the ages.
It depicts the passion between Clark Gable and Jean Harlow, the elegance and class of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers and explores the relationships of off-screen lovers too, such as Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton, Bogart and Bacall and others.
Lovers is published by Virgin Publishing and costs £14.99.
We've got 10 copies to give away, so send your entry on a postcard to Wedding and Home /Lovers offer, Greater London House, Hampstead Road, London NW1 7QQ, before July 9 1992.
A Gift of Love
Amaretto di Saronno, so the story goes, was created by a beautiful young widow who, having fallen in love with an artist from Leonardo da Vinci's school, presented him with the recipe as a token of her love.
And to this day Amaretto is made to the original recipe of apricot kernels, almonds and brandy.
We've 30 bottles to give away for you to share with your loved one.
With a soft flavour — most often likened to almonds — Amaretto di Saronno is a delicious drink all year round.
Try it neat or with ice, you'll find its languorous and intense taste very moreish.
Simply send your name and address on a postcard Wedding and Home/ Amaretto offer Greater London House, Hampstead road, London NW1 7QQ, before July 9 1992.
Hartnell have designed their first bridal collection, prices start at ‘1,250 for a short dress and £1,950 for a long dress.
Telephone 071 629 0992 for an appointment.
something new
Reception Venues
New Quebec Cuisine is a new company that specialises in catering for small intimate receptions.
Held in a privately owned Mews House off Porchester Terrace — just five minutes from Marylebone Register office — they can cater for up to 40.
Telephone 071 723 0128 for details.
Imagine your evening reception around the torchlit Roman Baths in Bath.
The price is around £478 and catering by Milburn's Restaurants Ltd (0225 444477) is around £12 per head.
The Assembly Rooms and Guildhall would make a lovely setting for a wedding breakfast.
(Contact 0225 461111 ext 2782 for details).
You too can eat with the animals if you hold your reception at the Zoological Gardens in London's Regents Park.
They have a variety of interesting reception options including aperitifs in the famous London Zoo Aquarium.
For details telephone Zoo Hospitality on 071 586 3339.
Off-the-shoulder gown with floral trim, style B4BS07 in sizes 10–16 (£795) from Berkertex.
Telephone 0908 669977 for your nearest stockist.
You can now visit Diane Hassall at her new shop, Hassall & Carlow, 5 Theberton Street, Islington, London N1.
As well as Di's shoes, there's a selection of wedding stationery, hats, headdresses and jewellery — the perfect place to browse for all your wedding accessories.
If your man really wants to dress up on your wedding day send him to Louise Verity's Dressing Up Box (071 622 7125).
Pleated waistcoats from £168 and silk crêpe de chine shirts around £130.
Opulently trimmed dress by Ellis, available in white or cream,(below, style number 14003, £375).
For a colour brochure send £2 to Ellis Bridals, Suite 220, 50–60 East Castle Street, London W1.
Get your wedding ring for free when you buy your engagement ring from The Burlington Jewellers, 56–57 Burlington Arcade, Piccadilly, London W1 (071 499 6814).
18 carat gold plated silver wedding rings ( below ) by Valérie Tohmé from £45 to £70 (071 831 6212).
This wedding cake is decorated with a cascade of handmade sugar flowers by Vivien Grimes of Sweet Artistry, for an appointment phone (0689 837501).
beauty news
Tone Up
Arays is a no mess inch loss system which gives slimmer, firmer contours in only 17 minutes!
It's available amongst many other treatments at the Balance Health and Beauty Salon at Pineapple, 38 Harrington Road, South Kensington, London SW7 (071 581 4905), open weekdays 9am–9pm, Saturdays 9am–5pm and Sundays 10.30am–2.30pm.
Help at Hand
Every bride-to-be should be heading for a RoC Pure Beauty Centre.
Included as part of their complimentary hour long consultation is a Skin Analysis to determine skin type, a Pure Beauty Facial and make-up and at least four relevant trial size samples to test at home.
Phone the RoC Pure Beauty Centre Hotline on 0891 555545 to find your nearest centre.
For those who want an uncomplicated skin care routine, pond's have Hydro Nourishing Moisturiser: a light night cream suitable for daytime use (£2.65 for a 75ml tube).
They have 75 for the first readers whose names are pulled out of the bag on July 8 1992 to try.
Send your name and address on a postcard to Wedding and Home/ Pond's Offer, PR Newslink, PO Box 563, London EC1V ODE .
Get into shape for your honeymoon with the minimum of effort’ A BaByliss BodyToner Plus will tone up hips and thighs and have you looking firm and trim on the beach.
Massage, along with good diet and drinking plenty of water, is one of the most effective ways of tackling cellulite.
The gentle deep massaging fingers of the BodyToner Plus stimulate the blood supply which encourages the body's lymph drainage system to work more efficiently so ridding the body of toxins that cause cellulite.
BaByliss have ten BodyToner Plus worth £34.95 to giveaway to the readers whose names are pulled out of the bag on July 8 1992.
Send your postcards to Wedding and Home /Babyliss Offer, PO Box 21, Godalming, Surrey GU7 1YS.
Black Beauty
If you're at a loss with what to do with your hair and make-up on your wedding day, why not pay a visit to the 10th Afro Hair and Beauty Exhibition at The Business Design Centre in London?
The two day event will comprise a hair and fashion show in which individual manufacturers including Lusters, Soft Sheen, M&M and D'Orum will showcase the versatility of their products.
There will also be makeovers, cosmetics, new hair products and techniques and nail treatments which should provide you with lots of ideas.
Doors open: 10am–7pm May 24, 10am–6.30pm May 25.
Admission is £7 for adults, and £3 for accompanied children under 12 years old.
The Business Design Centre, Upper Street, Islington N1.
The only way to delay signs of ageing, according to top skin specialists, is to use a moisturizer with SPF at all times, Neutrogena's are reasonably priced at £8.65 for 125ml.
Bathe with this fragrant heart shaped soap from Moschino (£14.95) on your wedding day.
We have 15 to give away to the first readers whose named are pulled out of the bag on July 8.
Send your postcard to Wedding and Home /Moschino Offer, Network Management Ltd, Christy Estate, North Lane, Aldershot, Hampshire, GU12 4QP.
Illustration by Andrea Byrne
exclusive to readers of Wedding and Home
No doubt you will be putting a great deal of time and effort into the arrangements for your wedding, ensuring that your chosen colour theme and style are just right.
However the first indication your guests will receive as to your plans, is when their wedding invitation arrives.
So, what better way to impress your guests than for them to receive a beautifully crafted and colour themed wedding invitation designed exclusively for Wedding and Home readers.
These two beautiful designs have been specially chosen to complement any style of wedding, and to co-ordinate with your chosen colour theme.
Both ranges comprise a wedding invitation, evening invitation, Order of Service, menu, place cards and napkin ring with complimentary napkin.
All of these excluding place cards and napkin ring, will be personalised to your exact requirements in the format and wording shown.
Order as few as 20 items and thereafter in multiples of ten.
Ordering couldn't be simpler.
Fill in the details as required on the order form, and send it, with a deposit of £10 to the address shown.
You will then receive within 14 days a proof of your order together with a sample card for your approval.
If you are happy with all the details, return the proof with full payment, less your deposit and your order will be completed and despatched to you within 28 days.
Should you require your order immediately, a special wedding speed service is available, details of which will be sent with your proof.
If for any reason you are unhappy with your proof and sample, any changes can be made or your deposit refunded.
Payment can be made by cheque, postal order or Access and Visa credit cards.
price list
All prices include postage and packing within the UK and Northern Ireland.
HOW TO GET MARRIED
A foolproof guide to who does what, where, when and how.
WEDDING DAY COUNTDOWN
15–6 MONTHS
See the minister, priest or rabbi to book the big day (register office weddings can only be booked three months in advance)
book your reception venue and caterers/band/disco
Start deciding what you are going to wear and plan well ahead if your dress/shoes/bridesmaids' dresses etc. are being made
Decide upon and book your honeymoon to avoid disappointment
Consider taking out an insurance policy against possible disasters such as your dress being damaged or the pictures not coming out
Compile your guest list and decide upon your best man/ushers/bridesmaids/pageboys
5 MONTHS
Book cars , especially if you want something unusual
Book professional photographer /video company
Have fun window shopping , getting lots of ideas for your gift list
4 MONTHS
Confirm arrangements with the person who is performing your ceremony and decide what service you will have and how you will decorate the church/synagogue/register office
Order your wedding stationery — you will need invitations/service sheets/printed serviettes/place cards etc.
Organise your flowers with the advice of your florist
Buy those all important wedding ring(s)
Decide upon your menu with the help of your caterers
Order your cake
3 MONTHS
Book register office ceremonies now
Finalise your honeymoon plans and book a hotel if needed for your wedding night
Shop for your going-away outfit , lingerie etc.
See your doctor /family planning clinic if necessary
2 MONTHS
Send your invitations and gift lists out at least six weeks before the wedding
As your wedding gifts arrive , send out thank you letters
Make sure that your guests have details of hotel accommodation etc
Buy presents for attendants/best man/bridesmaids etc.
1 MONTH
Chase up late invitation replies and finalise guest list.
Work out seating plan
Check that all the wedding clothes are near completion
Visit your hairdresser and book your final appointment 
Check that all transport is organised
If you want your wedding to appear in the local newspaper , now is the time to organise it
1 WEEK
Now is the time to get involved with:—
Rehearsals
Final checks on clothing
Wearing your wedding shoes at home
Final checks on honeymoon arrangements
Stag and hen nights (not advisable the night before the wedding!)
THE BIG DAY AT THE CHURCH
Ushers should arrive 40 minutes before the ceremony, armed with service sheets
Groom and best man arrive 20 minutes before the ceremony, the best man will pay the fees and then they take their places in the front right hand pew.
Guests expected to arrive 15 minutes before the ceremony.
Bridesmaids arrive ten minutes before the bride.
The bride's mother takes her seat last of all with only a few minutes to spare.
ORDER OF SERVICE
This is something that you will have discussed with the minister when you arranged the wedding and may vary according to religion and/or ceremonies decided upon.
The procession arrives at the altar in the following formation:
Altar
Minister
Bride's Father Bride Groom Best Man
Chief Bridesmaid
Other attendants
The chief bridesmaid takes the bride's bouquet which she keeps until after the signing of the register.
The minister addresses the congregation, performing all the rights which will have been rehearsed beforehand.
After the ceremony and the signing of the register, the party will proceed outside for photographs.
Most places of religious worship ask that confetti is not throw inside the grounds and photography during the service is often not permitted.
This is entirely at the discretion of the minister.
AT THE REGISTER OFFICE
The whole bridal party are expected to arrive about ten minutes before the ceremony.
Guests should assemble in the waiting room not more than 15 minutes early, register offices are busy places so early arrivals may cause some confusion!
The couple are first to go in, there the proceedings will be explained and they will pay the fees.
The ceremony is much shorter  than a religious one so many people like to hold a service of blessing afterwards.
You do not have to exchange rings as it is not a legal requirement, although once again the bride and groom will have to sign the register.
Religion and the law
THE LAW
The minimum legal age for getting married is 16 years although you will need the written consent of your parents or guardian if you are under 18.
The marriage must take place in a registered place of worship (church, synagogue etc.) or district register office, using an authorised religious or civil ceremony.
The ceremony must take place in front of two witnesses over the age of 18.
You can be married between the hours of 8 am and 6 pm, at the discretion of the person performing the ceremony.
Register offices are closed on Sundays and may have other times when they are not open.
Exceptions to these rules in England and Wales include marriages by Special Licence and Jewish and Quaker weddings.
In Scotland you have much more freedom of choice.
You can marry in any church in Scotland, regardless of where you live.
Parental consent is not needed if you are aged between 16–18.
Whether you are having a religious or a civil wedding, you must apply (in person or in writing) for a marriage schedule by giving notice to the local registrar where you want to marry at least 15 days (but not longer than three months) beforehand.
Banns are no longer legally required.
The contents of the Church of Scotland ceremony and where it is to be held is entirely at the discretion of the minister.
He may marry you at home, or in a hotel, and is unlikely to refuse second time around weddings.
CHURCH WEDDINGS
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND
When you and your fiance visit the minister of your church, you will have to fill out a form giving your personal details such as date of birth etc.
He will then explain that the banns will be called three Sundays before the wedding date, both at the church, and at the parish church of your partners if this differs.
If you wish to get married in a church which is not in either parish, you will have to apply to be put on the electoral roll or take up residence in the parish for the period over which the banns will be read.
Or you can apply for an ecclesiastical licence from you local diocesan council, which means that you can dispense with the formality of  having the banns called at all.
The minister will also give you details of the fees which you will be expected to pay.
Now is the time to ask him whether you can take pictures or videos during and after the service, where you can arrange for any flowers to be positioned, decide upon readings, hymns and the music.
OTHER DENOMINATIONS
All religious have their own special requirements so it is essential that you see your minister as soon as possible to find out what these are.
Most Christian ceremonies are similar, with maybe slight changes in vows to distinguish between them.
For all, apart from Anglican weddings, you must obtain a certificate or certificate with licence from the local superintendent registrar.
In some cases, if the person performing the marriage isn't authorised to register the marriage, the registrar may have to be present.
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
See your priest at least two to three months before you plan to marry, in order to receive adequate instruction.
Don't forget to take with you your baptism and confirmation certificates.
If only one partner is Catholic, permission to marry in a non-Catholic church may be given but is entirely up to the discretion of the priest.
The same applies to someone who is not a Catholic wishing to get married in a Catholic church.
It is sometimes possible to arrange for both ministers to be at the ceremony, sharing the responsibility between them.
NON-CONFORMIST OR FREE CHURCHES
Banns are not necessary in these churches and you may get married in any church which is the place of worship for either you or your partner, whether you live in the parish or not.
An outside registrar may have to be present at the ceremony.
ORTHODOX CHURCHES
The ceremony is very similar to that of the Catholic church also being rich in ceremony and ritual.
This includes Serbian, greek, Russian, Romanian, Bulgarian and Cypriot churches.
QUAKERS
The Religious Society of Friends keep their ceremonies as simple as possible, in fact they have hardly changed since the 17th century.
The wedding is held at a worship meeting in which the couple make a declaration of marriage.
If either partner is not a member of the Society their application must be approved in writing by two adult members of the Society.
JEWISH WEDDINGS
Jewish weddings are both religious and civil so therefore two official applications for marriage are necessary.
When applying to the religious authority under which the ceremony is taking place the couple must be accompanied by at least one witness (preferably a parent) and have relevant documents (birth certificates, parents Jewish marriage lines, etc.) with them.
Most ceremonies take place in a synagogue, but can be performed anywhere so long as they are under a chuppah (wedding canopy).
REGISTER OFFICE WEDDINGS
There are a variety of reasons why people choose a register office wedding.
They may have no religious beliefs, or may be looking for a much simpler ceremony.
Maybe they are divorcees or are from different faiths.
You can get married either by certificate or by certificate with licence.
To marry by certificate the couple need to have been living in the district for seven days before applying.
If you live in separate districts you must apply to both the registrars of both districts.
You may then marry after 21 clear days of having given notice.
To marry by certificate with licence either of the partners must have lived in the area for 15 days ad both must be in the country when notice is given.
The certificate can be issued after one clear day.
Both certificates are valid for three months and the ceremony must take place in the district where notice has been given.
The ceremony is short (about 15 minutes).
The couple must have two adult witnesses and you must check beforehand as to how many guests you may invite.
FURTHER INFORMATION
For full details on marriages, both civil and religious, remarriage, ‘mixed’ marriage and divorce, contact whichever of the following authorities are relevant to your case:
The Bridal Party
These traditional guidelines don't have to be rigidly adhered to — it's quite common these days for everyone to lend a hand whether on a practical or financial level.
WHO PAYS
THE BRIDE'S FATHER
Bride's wedding dress.
Bridesmaids' dresses.
Press announcements.
All of the Wedding stationery.
Photographs/Video Flower decorations.
Transport (except groom and best man).
Reception cake.
THE GROOM
Engagement and wedding rings.
Church/legal fees.
Flowers for the bride and bridal party.
Transport for himself and best man.
Presents for the bride, attendants, best man and ushers.
Honeymoon.
THE BRIDE
WHO DOES WHAT
THE BRIDE
Chooses the type of ceremony.
Chooses here attendants.
Chooses her dress and that of her attendants.
Writes thank-you letters.
Receives the reception guests with her parents and husband.
Presents her attendants with gifts at reception.
Throws her bouquet to her unmarried friends before she leaves.
THE GROOM
Chooses his best man.
Chooses wedding attire.
Arranges the honeymoon.
Makes a speech of thanks at the reception.
THE BEST MAN
Liaises with bride's family to keep up to date with wedding plans.
Organises the stag night.
Drives groom to wedding and pays necessary fees.
Looks after wedding ring(s) until needed.
Supervises the ushers.
Arranges transport to the reception.
Makes a speech and toasts the bridesmaids at the reception.
Reads any cards or telemessages.
CHIEF BRIDESMAID
Helps bride on her wedding day.
Organises other bridesmaids.
Holds the bride's bouquet during service.
USHERS
Organise the seating in the church.
BRIDE'S FATHER
Travels to the church with the bride.
Gives the bride away.
Gives the first speech at the reception.
THE MOTHER OF THE BRIDE
Sends out the invitations.
often organises the gift list with the bride.
Invitations
These can be engraved or handwritten, formal or informal, the choice is yours.
Only one invitation is necessary per family/couple and should be set out six weeks before the wedding.
The wording depends on the relationship between the bride and the host (ie her parents).
Most often the bride's parents are hosts: Mr and Mrs Charles Brown…at the marriage of their daughter.
If the Bride's mother is widowed:Mrs Charles Brown…her daughter.
If the bride's mother has remarried and she and the bride's stepfather are hosts : Mr and Mrs David Green…her daughter (the brides surname may be included if different).
If the bride's father has remarried and he and the bride's stepmother are hosts:Mr and Mrs Charles Brown…his daughter
If a stepparent is to be the sole host:Mr David Green (or Mrs Charles Brown)…his (her) stepdaughter Jennifer (again the bride's surname may be included if different).
Sometimes divorced parents will jointly host their daughter's wedding;Mr Charles Brown and Mrs Anna Brown…their daughter.
If the bride's mother (divorced) is sole hostess:Mrs Anna Brown…her daughter.
If the bride's mother has subsequently remarried but is jointly hosting the occasion with the bride's father:Mr Charles Brown and Mrs David Green…their daughter.
If the host is some other relation to the bride:Mr and Mrs James Fullerton…their niece/ward or his (her) cousin/goddaughter Jennifer (Brown)(again the bride's surname may be included if different).
If there is no relationship, eg the host is a friend of the bride:Miss Jane Archer…
Jennifer Brown.
If the bride and groom themselves are hosts:Miss Jennifer Brown and Mr John Smith…at their marriage OR The pleasure of the company of…is requested at the marriage of Miss Jennifer Brown to Mr John Smith.
At double weddings, the elder sister takes precedence:Mr and Mrs Charles Brown…their daughters Jennifer to Mr John Smith and Susan to Mr Peter White.
Invitations to the reception only:Mr and Mrs Charles Brown…at a reception, following the marriage of their daughter Jennifer to Mr John Smith, at The Royal Hotel…
You may include a short explanatory note.
Owing to the small size of St Peter's Church/Newtown Register Office it is possible to ask only a few guests to the service.
Please forgive this invitation being to the reception only.
NB A guest should not be invited to the service and not to the reception.
If the reception is to be held at home:Mr and Mrs Charles Brown At Home following the marriage of their daughter…
When an invitation is to a whole family , you need not include children's names on the envelope.
Address it to either Mrs Edward Black (it is traditional to use only the wife's name) or to Mr and Mrs Edward Black.
It's usually a good move to enclose a reply card to encourage a prompt response: Thank you for your kind invitation I/We…will be able/unable to attend.
If a whole family is included on the invitation it's worth adding No. of persons…
You may want to stipulate a time limit for replies:to help with your catering arrangements: Please reply on or before May 8, 1922.
If the wedding has to be postponed or cancelled after the invitations have been sent out notification cards should be promptly despatched.
In case of an indefinite postponement due to bereavement:Owing to the recent death of Mr Arthur Smith, Mr and Mrs Charles Brown deeply regret that they are obliged to cancel the invitations to the marriage of their daughter Jennifer to Mr John Smith on…
Postponement to a later date:Owing to the illness of Mr Arthur Smith, M and Mrs Charles Brown deeply regret that they are obliged to postpone the invitations to the marriage of their daughter Jennifer to Mr John Smith at St Peter's Church, Newtown from Saturday, June 2 1992 to Saturday, August 8 1992…
Cancellation because the wedding is to take place quietly:Owing to the recent death of her husband, Mrs Charles Brown regrets that she is obliged to cancel the invitation to the marriage of her daughter Jennifer to Mr John Smith, which will now take place quietly on 5th July 1992.
Cancellation due to a broken engagement:Mr and Mrs Charles Brown announce that the marriage of their daughter Jennifer to Mr John Smith which was arranged for June 2, 1922 will not now take place.
Invitation to a service of blessing:Mr and Mrs Charles Brown request the pleasure of the company of…at the Service of Blessing following the marriage of their daughter Jennifer to Mr John Smith.
summer palette
Caramel silk dupion dress with embroidered ribbon bows by Phillipa Lepley (Brown Bow £1,850), earrings by Elizabeth Edema (£12)
Dress stockists on page 138                
Cornflower blue silk dupion dress with beaded detail on bodice by Ronald Joyce (style 608, £565 other colours available) headdress by Sasha Hetherington (£55), earrings by Elizabeth Edema (£22), shoes by Jimmy Choo (£225, made to order)
Lilac silk taffeta dress with pearl beaded bodice by Nazareth Walsh (Collette, £900, other colours available), matching headdress by HatStop (£35), earrings by Elizabeth Edema (£22), shoes by Hanna Goldman (around £150)
Peach organza and silk dress by Rose Coutts-Smith,(peach Surprise, £650), matching cathedral length veil by Silk (around £45), earrings by Elizabeth Edema (£32)
Lilac silk dupion dress with small pearl trim by Sasha Hetherington (Zig-Zag, £850, other colours available), matching headdress by Sasha Hetherington (£55), earrings by Elizabeth Edema (£5)
Apricot Indian silk dupion dress with overlaid gold lace bodice by Fiorito (Royalty, £810), earrings (£45) and necklace (worn as headdress, £18.50) both from Butler and Wilson, shoes by Diane Hassall (£145)
Silver silk dupion dress with strapless bodice by Amy and Grace Li (W3D, £975, other colours available), necklace (worn as headdress, £18.50) from Butler and Wilson, earrings by Dower and Hall (£40)
Tea rose silk dupion dress with embroidered ivy detail on collar by Tussie Mussie Designs (Ivy, £700), cathedral length veil by Silk (around £45), earrings from Butler and Wilson (£18.50), shoes by Hanna Goldman (around £160)
Lemon silk poult dress with pearl beaded detail on bodice by Margaret Curran (Lemon, £900), earrings Butler and Wilson (£32)
heat and dust Dresses with luxurious corded lace bodices make a beautiful bride
White silk taffeta dress with corded French lace bodice and matching bolero by Jenny Dobell (JD324, £1,100), lace headdress by HatStop (£45), earrings by Valérie Tohmé (£40), mules from Russell and Bromley (£125)
Dress stockists on page 138       
Ivory Thai silk dress with French corded lace bodice and sleeves by Helen Marina (Zowie, £1,070) earrings from Butler and Wilson (£32)
Ivory silk dupion dress with French corded lace bodice and sleeves by Danteé (3054, £899), earrings from Butler and Wilson (£32)
Ivory silk taffeta dress with corded lace bodice and sleeves by Nazareth Walsh (Rebecca, £875), bouffant veil by Silk (£34), earrings by Valérie Tohmé (£40)
Ivory tulle dress with corded lace bodice by Manouche (Karen, £422.50), bouffant veil by Silk (£34)
White paper dupion dress with French corded lace bodice and sleeves by Jenny Burgess (Elizabeth £1,200 available in other colours), bouffant veil by Silk (£34), shoes by Jimmy Choo (£225, made to order)
Ivory satin dress with lace bodice by Pronuptia de Paris (Tsarina, £699), earrings by Elizabeth Edema (£38)
Ivory Thai silk dress with French lace bodice and sleeves and pearl trim by Caroline Alexander (WD21C92, £950) earrings by Valérie Tohmé (£95)
Ivory silk dupion dress with lace bodice by Ronald Joyce (595, £750), pearl tiara by Silk (£71), earrings by Elizabeth Edema (£32)
beads & pearls
White duchesse satin dress with medieval sleeves and pearl trim by Cushla Kelly for Tatters at Harrods (Camelot, £1,996), earrings by Valérie Tohmé (£90), ring by Valérie Tohmé (£75)
Dress stockists on page 138 
White duchesse satin dress with chiffon overskirt and neckline trimmed with pearls by Sarasusa (Bubbles, £1,400), large pearl headdress by Silk (£86), earrings by Van Peterson (£110)
Ivory silk dupion dress with cut glass beads and pearl trim by Sasha Hetherington (Daisy, £995), earrings by Valérie Tohmé (£90)
Vanilla silk dupion mini dress with shield of beading worn with long chiffon skirt by Louise Verity (Vanilla dress £530), skirt £380), full length veil by Louise Verity (£65), earrings by Van Peterson (£110)
White Thai silk dress with large crystal and pearl crucifix by Anneliese Sharp (style 301), £1,179), original Schiaparelli earrings (£1,500)
Off-white silk poult dress with shawl neckline and sleeves decorated in mink coloured beads by Allison Blake (Malgre Moi, £2,300) matching tiara by Allison Blake (£300)
White Italian satin dress with full train and pearl beaded lace neckline by Demetrios for Ilissa (style 2253, around £1,000), beaded veil by Silk (around £20)
White silk dupion off-the-shoulder dress with pearl detail by Tracy Connop (Pearl, £1,100), earrings by Van Peterson (£110)
Ivory Thai silk dress with French corded lace bodice trimmed with pale coral pears by Jeni Calvert (Maidenhair, £1,400) earrings by S.C.H.
(£69)
honeymoon essentials…
Don't be unprepared for your honeymoon, choose from this selection of useful things to help your trip run smoothly.
By Sue Allmann.
Tag Heuer professional sports watches for diving…series 40000 with sharkskin straps, £520 (071 371 6166)
A sun hat will keep you cool but they're difficult to pack, the Neal Street East shop, Neal Street, London WC2 have large brimmed, cotton, coolie hats that fold up into themselves (around £3)
Lime green bikini from the Next catalogue (M85328, £17.99)
…
Try Clinique's Gentle Exfoliator (£11), the Body Shop's Rice Bran Body Scrub (£4.85) or Seaweed and Loofah Body Bar (£1.45) to slough off dead skin cells to prepare for your tan…
Make the most of your chosen destination with Lonely Planet travel guides in five series — Travel Survival Kits, Shoestring Guides, City Guides, Walking Guides and Phrasebooks
Jeff Banks has designed this cropped swing coat (£95) with matching shorts (£39.99) and A-line button back tunic (£85) exclusively for House of Fraser Stores (071 834 1515)
Stylish sunglasses by GianFranco Ferre (£175)(0423 520303)
Invest in a set of strong, waterproof luggage.
Pictured here is a set of 4 by Symphony International (£116)(0533 763171)
Make sure that everything you pack can be worn with at least two other things, tulip print bikini top and leggings, both (£29.95) and poppy mercerised cotton shirt (£28.95)…all by Laura Ashley (0628 770345)
…
Protect your skin with Piz Buin's Oil-Free Lotions in SPFs 8 and 4…for those who dread that first exposure of their white body on the beach, get a head start with Piz Buin Jet Bronzer Creams for the body and legs (£7.14) and for the face (£6.50).
They work by reacting with the skin's natural proteins to turn the top layer of the skin an authentic brown…
J.F. Lazartigue have all the essentials to prevent your hair from frazzling on your honeymoon.
Slick or style for the daytime with Protective Hair Milk (£12), then wash with After Swimming Hair Care Shampoo (£15).
Their Marine Shampoo (£13), and Conditioner (£9) contain spiruline, a form of blue algae found off the coast of Mexico (071 629 6487)
…white square neck swimsuit (£19.95) and seaspray and white voile skirt (£38.95)…all by Laura Ashley (0628 770345)…
Passion fruit juice soothes burns, try the Body Shop's Passion Fruit Cleansing Gel as a substitute for soap
Don't miss your flight…a Braun travel alarm at £22.95 is an invaluable travel accessory…
Squinting causes wrinkles, these sunglasses by Benson & Ashley should shut out the glare…around £29.95 to £39.95 (081 965 5768)
Don's neglect your nails, take the Elegant Touch Travel Manicure Kit (£9.95), it contains eight products and a guide to achieving three different manicure effects
…(right) her sleeveless blouse (£12.99) and shorts (£19.99), his printed silk shirt (£34.99) and trousers (£19.99) all by BhS (071 262 3288)…
…
Hawaiian Tropic's Self-Tanning Lotion (£7.95) is formulated for light and dark skins…
For instance advice and information leaflets on safe tanning contact the Hawaiian Tropic Tanning Advice Bureau, dial 100 and ask for Freefone Tanning Research…
WEDDING DAY STYLE
Angela asked us for some help with her wedding day look, she had been growing her old hairstyle out but realised it wasn't going to be long enough for her wedding day in September.
Angela is planning a traditional wedding but the dresses she had seen were too romantic and frilly, and she was unsure about what to do with her make-up as she normally wears quite strong colours but felt she wanted to tone them down for her wedding day.
Before
John cut Angela's hair short around the neck to create more body and fullness on top of the head.
He then dried the hair off slightly before applying mousse for a stiffer effect.
While her hair was set in large heated rollers to give fullness, Lizzie set to work on Angela's make-up.
She recommends gentle exfoliation ten minutes before moisturising and making up.
A blend of foundation and concealer is applied around blemishes and the nose and eye areas.
Above, right and top right: Old ivory silk dress with pearl grapevine embroidery by Allison Blake (Vine, £1,295), pearl necklace,(£24.95) clip earrings (£30.70) and drop earrings (£27.95) from Harvey Nichols, headdress (£60) and veil (around £35) from Silk.
Above and below: Silk dupion jacket with red rose appliqué and embroidery with co-ordinating long ivory full skirt and short red skirt by Anna Belinda (Eva, £1,295 complete), pearl drop earrings from Harvey Nichols (£14.95), red embroidered mules by Diane Hassall (£175).
Above: White Thai silk dress with pleated crossover bodice and sleeves by Helen Marina (Julietta, £1,070), headdress (£60) by Silk, pearl earrings from Harvey Nichols (£19.95)
Right: Ivory silk dupion halterneck dress with beaded bodice and rose trim by Margaret Curran (Dawn, £950), pearl drop earrings from Harvey Nichols (£14.95).
White silk bustier dress and bolero jacket with lemon beads and embroidery by Allison Blake (Mimosa, £1,100), silk shoes with beaded hearts by Emma Hope (£149), gold, silver and pearl earrings (£125) and ring (£88) by Sarah Jordan.
DEVON AND CORNWALL SHOPPING GUIDE BY KIM JONES
WEDDING DRESS
Dresses in Indian dupion, Thai and Shantung silk from Romantica of Devon are hallmarked with a hand stitched pale blue appliqué rose — something blue for extra luck!
Visit them for delightful bridesmaids' clothes, too.
Specialising in fabric and wedding accessories, Bridal Fayre has everything for the bride to create her dream dress — over 1,000 fabrics including James Hare Silks, trimmings and ribbons.
Accessories from Warren York are also available and take along the mother of the bride and your guests to view their exclusive range of day and evening fabrics, gloves and silk and satin shoes.
Falmouth Bridal Centre stock dresses for sale and hire in sizes 10 to 26 from designers like Ronald Joyce and Hilary Morgan — there's over 400 designs to choose from and over 800 bridesmaid dresses to complement.
Pageboy suits, mother of the bride outfits and smart options for second marriages are also available.
Winners of a National Training Award, the family team at Prudence Gowns have expert knowledge in tailoring, design and bridal industry to advise and help the bride choose her dress or design something for personal.
For sale or hire, there's something for everyone and their new ‘Plus’ range is in sizes 16–24.
Menswear is for hire and their waistcoat range comes in snazzy silks and satins.
Designer gowns from Hollywood Dreams, silk dresses from Andrea Wilkins, beautiful bridesmaid outfits from Sallie Bee and others, are all at Premiere Bridal Wear, although a complete design service is available.
They stock headdresses from Cupid, handmade garters and shoe clips from Butterfly and Lace accessories, veils from Jean Elizabeth and offer a dyeing service on Dana Bridal Footwear.
Choose romantic bridalwear from Veronica Moss, Ellis and others at Penzance Bridal Centre where a husband and wife team guarantee personal attention and friendly advice, with up-tothe-minute styles for fashion conscious brides.
Attendants' outfits and accessories are all available and a department especially for the men, with a wide range of morning wear, a Highland Collection and evening wear, ensures the best dressed wedding in town.
If you can't find your dress from designers like Lucy Rowlandson and Special Day, a qualified seamstress of Theodosia Bridal Studio can create one for you.
Bridesmaids' dresses in stock include creations by Just Candy Confetty and Annejuleen.
Their resident florist will make sure your headdresses and bouquet are a perfect match.
For a true country bride look, girls visit Caress for fairytale dresses in a wide range of silks and antique type cotton laces with floral accessories, hand decorated shoes and antique lace veils to complete the look.
Brides and flower scan dress you in designer gowns from Benjamin Roberts, Strelli and Bridget Black or choose from their selection to hire.
Complete you look with fitted veils and headdresses, shoes by Shico and Rainbow Club and designer hosiery.
A visit to the florist department on the ground floor is a must, for designer bouquets and headdresses and flowers for the church and reception.
In the sleepy market down of South Molton, the talented team at The Lace Shop will design a fantastic and original outfit for you in silks and Jacquard.
Fittings are relaxed with plenty of tea on offer!
Choose hand embroidered tablecloths and bedlinen for your first home, nightdresses for the honeymoon and antique laces and linens to make you own dress.
Brides at Cockings stock designer gowns by Jilly C, Trudy Lee and others with an extensive range for hire.
Also available are bridesmaid dresses, shoes, stationery and flowers.
View the selection of Dizzie Lizzie Bridalwear at Amanda of Torquay, comprises of the Diella Collection, a  range of sophisticated and romantic pure silk gowns and the Princess Collection, stunning beaded gowns.
A full design service is available and there's a wide range of accessories, page boy outfits and formal hire for men.
Wedding Daze Bridal Shoppe stocks the full range of Romantica of Devon bridal gowns and bridesmaids' attire, and will also offer a hand design service.
Working with fresh, dried and silk flowers, they make up pretty headdresses and bouquets, and also have hand decorated and beaded shoes to complete the look.
Long or short, silk or satin, Wendys will have the designer dress for you and your bridesmaids.
Veils and headdresses, shoes and lingerie are also available and you can complete your look after a visit to their flower shop.
See Cupid International's exclusive designs including Giorgio di Roma, Italian influenced styles for a sultry Latin look.
Also available are Jean Elizabeth gowns and accessories, Hilary Morgan and Margaret Lee bridesmaid dresses and outfits for your pageboys.
Described as an ‘Aladdin's Cave’ full of silks, satins and lace, Truly Delightful stock gowns by Catherine Rayner, Jane Gray and others.
They specialize in designing veils, headdresses and shoes to match.
Brides International dresses at Debenhams and Dingles in Plymouth are in silks and satins, embroidered or beaded in sizes 10–22 and for real value, most are under £500.
Romantic dresses with a French feel in a wide range of styles on show are Pronuptia de Paris & Youngs with dashing suits for the groom to hire.
FLOWER SHOP
In the Penzance Bridal Centre, Jeffery Florists specialise in individually designed traditional, modern or continental bouquets and headdresses in fresh or silk flowers.
Arrangements are also supplied for the church and reception, with presentation bouquets, corsages — everything you need for a wonderful floral day.
RECEPTION CHOICE
Devon and cornwall are full of romantic settings for your wedding reception — try the luxurious country house Porth Avallen Hotel, the seaside Fairbank Hotel, the five star Atlantic Hotel or a historic coaching inn, the Kings arms.
horoscopes by Elizabeth Hollander
GEMINI
May 21–June 21
Partnership matters are on your mind in June, Gemini.
If you're getting married shortly, mid-June is the time when you may have second thoughts!
Take some time for yourself to think things over.
By the end of June, you should realise that what you really want in your life now are love and security.
July is a busy time of preparation!
LEO
July 23–August 23
You're very keen on commitment this summer, Leo and if you've recently decided to marry, this will be a very happy time of year for you.
Don't worry if you get cold feet at the end of June — you will soon be back on target knowing exactly what you want from a loving relationship.
This is an excellent time of year to fulfil your ambitions!
VIRGO
August 24–September 23
You need to put a lot of energy into your work and career at the beginning of June, Virgo, when all you really want is to create a secure home environment for yourself!
If you're getting married this July, you're going to be in adventurous mode when it comes to the honeymoon!
Let's hope your partner doesn't want to lazy on a beach all day!
LIBRA
September 24–October 23
This isn't a good time of year on the whole for a wedding, Libra, mainly because you're so busy with other areas of your life now!
Your career could be causing you some concern and as changes in your home life are likely too, you may wonder when you're going to feel settled again!
Make do with a passionate summer and security will soon follows!
SCORPIO
October 24–November 22
If you're getting married later in the year, this is a time when you and your partner will need to sort out a lot of practical and emotional matters between you.
Mid-June may find you concerned with earning your own living and your fiancé's ideas may be very different to your own!
A romantic holiday for two in July will help to sort things out!
SAGITTARIUS
November 23–December 22
June is an excellent month for marriage, Sagittarius, and if your wedding is this month it's going to be a happy time for you both!
You're at your most passionate at the beginning of July and a honeymoon at this time will be a wonderful experience.
Your only problem now is the fact that you're finding it difficult to get on with work and responsibilities!
CAPRICORN
December 23–January 19
You may feel rather unsure of what you want in life mid-June, Capricorn, but by the end of the month, you will know that you're doing the right thing!
You may find yourself attracted to someone new in July and you're going to have to deal with an interesting temptation! by July 14, you will have your answer.
AQUARIUS
January 20–February 18
An enjoyable social life at the beginning of June may make you think twice about getting married now, Aquarius!
However, as the month progresses, you're likely to realise how important security is to you at this time.
The end of July sees you making an important commitment in a relationship, but not before you've had to think hard about what you really want!
CANCER
June 22–July 22
You're going to be happiest closer to home now, Cancer and you'll need time to yourself at the beginning of June.
By the end of the month, you're full of self-confidence again and a new development is likely in an intimate relationship.
July sees you needing to buy expensive purchases!
PISCES.
February 19–March 20
Personal growth and opportunities come to you through intimate one-to-one relationships this summer, Pisces.
You're probably quite sure what you want from love and romance in the weeks ahead!
Mid-June finds you thinking of changing your place of residence and by July you're going to be happier than you have been in quite some time!
ARIES
March 21–April 20
Home and family matters are on your mind now, Aries and love and home life will be closely connected.
You may feel like running away from a situation which no longer excites you mid-June.
Stay put as you will change your mind again by the end of the month!
July brings confusion to your romance and you may need to remind yourself why you're in love!
TAURUS
April 21–May 20
You're determined to do what you want now, Taurus and you're not likely to compromise yourself for anyone else at this time.
A desire for intimacy in your life mid-June means you may need more from your partner.
This is a good time to be thinking about wedding arrangements, but do not commit yourself to anything until July is past.
dear Wedding and home
Concerned about your fiancé's personal hygiene?
Is your fiancé's brother making your life difficult or are you struggling to find the perfect bridesmaid's present?
Wedding and Home's Kim Jones has the answer to your queries.
CHURCH FEES
My Church of England wedding is to take place later this year.
Can you tell me how much I should put aside for the church's legal fees and, out of interest, where exactly does the money go?
SB Norwich 
The Church of England's statutory scale of fees are paid for the legal aspects of your wedding.
Church councils will make their own scale of charges for any extras you choose to have, such as bellringing, music or additional heating.
Ask your parish priest to show you the scale of charges and to explain the fees to you.
The basic marriage service fee in the Church of England is £39 and there is sometimes and additional parish clerk's fee of £10.
Your marriage certificate is a couple of pounds extra.
Half of the marriage service fee (£19.50) goes to the clergyman but this will be deducted from the salary paid to him by the Church Commissioners.
The other half of the fee goes directly towards the running costs of the church.
TRANSPORT PARTY
My fiancé and I ant to do something a little different for our wedding reception next summer.
As we both live in London and most of our friends and relations live nearby, we'd like to hire a venue in the city centre.
We've heard that the London Transport Museum can be hired out for parties and receptions, and, as my fiancé is involved in the transport industry, we'd love to find out more.
Can you help?
DD, Fulham 
The London Transport Museum houses a fascinating collection of historic vehicles, and provides a unique setting for a party.
It can accommodate a reception for up to 400 guests and the museum recommends three catering companies for your convenience, although you can choose your own.
The London Transport Museum is at Covent Garden, London WC2E 7BB
BRIDAL BEARS
I'm having two bridesmaids, aged five and six at my wedding and would like to give them a present after the event.
They both love cuddly toys and I thought it would be a nice idea to have two teddy bears especially dressed in an outfit similar to the ones the two girls are to wear.
I've heard there are companies who could do this for me — do you know of any?
SG, Bath 
Yes, we've got two addresses for you to try.
Send a stamped addressed envelope to or ring the following for further details and a brochure: Edwardiana, Unit 1, 41 Church Road, Bexleyheath, Kent DA7 4DD or Kiss ‘n’ Cuddle, Handels Smithy, High Street, Edgware, Middlesex.
ORGAN MUSIC
My fiancé's brother plays the organ at his local church in Yorkshire and we'd love to have him play at our wedding next year in Poole.
However, I do not want to offend my local church organist by asking her to step down.
What should I do?
FB, Poole 
Although it is usual to use the regular church organist, there is no reason why you should not approach her and explain your situation.
However, you will be expected to pay her a fee, as weddings do provide part of the local church organist's salary.
It would also be advisable for you to arrange for your fiancé's brother to practise on the organ he is to play on your wedding day.
We regret that we are unable to answer your letters personally.
However we do have some helpful free fact sheets — on a range of subjects from headdresses to shoes, fabrics to flowers, music to make-up and if we have one that is relevant we will send it to you if you write enclosing an sae to; Wedding and Home, Maxwell Consumer Magazines, Greater London House, Hampstead road, London NW1 7QQ
ITALIAN FAYRE
I'm marrying my Italian born fiancé in London and I'm desperately trying to find a venue for the reception which can serve  our guests an authentic Italian meal.
I know there are lots of wonderful small Italian restaurants dotted around London but as we intend to invite around 100 guests, we are having trouble finding a venue large enough.
Can you help?
LR, London 
Yes, the Villa dei Cesari, located on the banks of the Thames would seem the perfect venue for couples like you.
Established for 26 years, the spacious restaurant can seat up to 112 people and serves delicious Italian food.
They have recently introduced a new three course menu which at around £19 per person is excellent value for money.
For further details contact .
ASK YOUR FATHER
My boyfriend has just asked me to marry him and we are just about to break the good news to our families.
I'd like my fiancé to do the traditional thing and ask my father for his permission to marry me, but he says that no one does this any more.
I'm sure my father would be really pleased if my boyfriend did approach him, though.
What should he say?
GF, Leicester 
The custom of asking for permission to marry has less significance nowadays; it harks back to the time when a father had control over his unmarried daughter's money until a husband came along.
Nevertheless, your father (and mother, too for that matter!) may well be very pleased if your boyfriend takes the time to have a chat with them.
Their meeting will probably be nothing more than a courteous request from your boyfriend for your parents' blessing and approval and it should get their relationship off to a good start!
dear doctor…
NIGHT SAFE
A friend has just told me that you should not wear tampons overnight as it can lead to toxic shock syndrome.
Is there any truth in this or is she just being alarmist?
SF, Doncaster 
It is probably much too alarmist.
Toxic shock syndrome is now extremely rare since the removal of  high-absorbency tampons from the market.
It makes sense though to ensure that your hands are clean when you insert a tampon because there is some evidence that tiny nail scratches on the vaginal wall can allow infectious organisms to enter the bloodstream.
Having said this, millions of women use tampons and the majority keep them in at night.
Clearly there can be no real risk or toxic shock syndrome would be very much more common than it is.
In general it makes sense to change your tampon several times a day and especially to insert a fresh one before going to bed.
TIME FOR SEX
When we first met my fiancé and I used to make love every day and often in really unusual places — in fields, on the beach, in the car and so on.
Now we live together we only seem to make love about once a week and always in bed.
Where did all the excitement go?
LB, Cleveland 
First of all there's simply the familiarity factor.
This tends to make most people somewhat lazy as they take one another for granted.
The next possibility is that this new once-a-week frequency is the level at which one or both of you unconsciously feels happiest with sex.
Intercourse, like most activities between lovers, tends to find it sown level, largely driven by the unconscious.
If this frequency doesn't suit you, now is the time to talk things through because otherwise you could end up in a longterm relationship in which sex is not what you thought it would be.
Novelty plays an important part in all of our lives yet there is always something of a balance to be struck between having so much novelty that life becomes unbearably unpredictable and wearing, and the opposite where sameness drives us mad with boredom.
Every couple has to find for themselves where this balance lies and, to be frank, this can be hard for some because one partner's idea of novelty is the other's perception of tedium.
This is exactly the kind of relationship work that we need to be doing when we are engaged.
BROTHER TROUBLE
Recently I have noticed my fiancé's brother is showing me rather a lot of attention.
I often notice him looking at me and paying me rather a lot of compliments.
Although it hasn't happened yet I'm sure it's only a matter of time before he makes a pass at me.
It's making me feel uncomfortable now, what can I do to discourage him?
SG, Huntingdon 
The very fact that you have written to me suggests that you really wouldn't mind taking things further with him.
Frankly, if you considered the proposition out of the question you would have politely put him off long ago.
So my very real question to you is, ‘Do you really, deep down, want to discourage him?’
Only you can answer this and you might need to talk it over with a close friend if you want to get to the heart of your feelings on the matter.
How much are you, knowingly, or unwittingly contributing to this situation?
Could it be, for example, that you fiancé himself is starting to take you somewhat for granted and that by comparison his brother's attention comes as rather welcome?
What do you know of the two men's relationship?
Have they been competing with one another all their lives?
Is your fiancé's brother jealous of him and out to make trouble?
What sort of relationship does he have with women at the moment?
All these are important matters for you to take into account if you are not to become embroiled in their, probably very old, business together.
PERSONAL HYGIENE?
I love my fiancé very much but his personal hygiene leaves a lot to be desired, and judging by the conversations I've had with friends, their men are just the same.
Despite suggestions that he should bathe every day, he still suffers from smelly feet and bad breath.
I don't want this to continue.
How can I broach the subject with some degree of sensitivity?
HF Luton 
What a common complaint this is.
There is still a huge minority of British men who feel that it is somehow sissy to be clean!
I notice that you ‘suggest’ that he bathes daily and cleans his teeth regularly but does he actually do anything with these suggestions?
When it comes to broaching the subject I don't think there's any sensitive way to do it.
The man who is so insensitive that he doesn't realise what's happening needs it spelt out to him.
Some young men never have really thought about personal hygiene very much and react very badly if the subject is mentioned.
Women, they argue, are always trying to make them stop doing things they most like doing (getting messy, drinking, staying out late and so on) just like their mothers used to.
Often it is a conscious rebellion against this sort of pressure which implies that such a man is only ‘acceptable’ to females if he is ‘nice and clean’.
Such men push the boundaries as far as they can to try to get their women to love them, dirt and all.
This silly and childlike regressive behaviour cannot be allowed to go on in a relationship in which a couple care for one another.
There is nothing clever or manly about being dirty and smelly and you have every right to withhold your physical dealings with a body that revolts you.
Dr. Stanway is the co-author of The Complete Book of Love and The Complete guide to Sexual Fulfilment (Century Hardback, £11.95; the former is available as a soft back for £7.95, the latter, £6.95).
Win a wonderful honeymoon in the Bahamas worth over £3,000 with New Beginnings, the wedding and honeymoon specialists
Lying in the clear aquamarine waters of the Atlantic ocean to the east of Florida are a cluster of idyllic islands called The Bahamas.
The Family Islands make up one of the groups of tiny islands within the Bahamas.
Miles away from it all they are peaceful, unspoiled and wonderfully romantic — the perfect retreat for a very special honeymoon.
Long deserted pink sand beaches pounded by the Atlantic surf and spectacular sunsets are what The Family Islands are all about.
Our winning bride and her partner will be heading for Eleuthera, a quiet unspoiled island of rolling green hills dotted with pastel villages of timber houses set amidst gardens of tropical flowers.
The proximity of the Bahamas to the States means that the American influence is very much in evidence, reflected particularly in the high standards of service, comfort and cuisine.
The Cotton Bay Club promises a very special experience for those in search of sun, sea and sand.
Guests stay in air conditioned cottage style rooms simply and elegantly furnished in Bahamian style.
For the fitness minded there are a wealth of activities to choose from, there's a freshwater swimming pool complimentary watersports, tennis courts, and bicycles as well as a superb 18 hole golf course.
THE PRIZE
Our lucky winner and her partner will win a wonderful week long honeymoon at The Cotton Bay Club on the lovely island of Eleuthera, one of the Bahamas' Family Islands courtesy of New Beginnings.
The prize will include return flights and seven nights on a room only basis at The Cotton Bay Club.
This fantastic prize worth over £3,000 is from New Beginnings, the weddings and honeymoon specialists.
HOW TO ENTER
To enter this competition — just study the three simple questions below and then call our 24 hour hotline — it will cost you not much more than the cost of a first class stamp.
You will be asked to leave your name, address and daytime telephone number after your answers.
Just call 0839 66 61 67 and enter this wonderful competition today!
The winner will be the first name to be pulled out of the bag after the closing date of 6 July 1992.
Calls will be charged at 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p per minute at all other times.
QUESTIONS
1
What is the capital of the Bahamas? a) Kingston b) Nassau c) Phuket
2
In which ocean can the Bahamas be found? a) Atlantic b) Indian c) Pacific
3
What is the currency of the Bahamas? a) Bahamian dollar b) Bahamian rupee c) Yen
THE RULES
This competition is open to all readers of Wedding and Home in the UK and Eire, except those in any way involved in the competition.
There is no entry fee.
Entries will be judged after the closing date of July 6 1992, and the winner will be notified as soon as possible after that date.
Any entries made after the closing date will be disqualified.
We regret that if, for any reason, the winners cannot accept their prizes there can be no cash alternative.
The Editor's decision is final in all matters relating to the competition and no correspondence can be entered into.
Question Time
He's done it, asked you The Big One, will you marry him?
You've thought about it — for maybe a whole five seconds — but before you give him the thumbs up, runs these ten questions by him — it's better to be safe than sorry.
By Leslie Dobson.
You love him, he's kind to animals, and is never more than half an hour late, but is that a good basis on which to plan your lives together?
What are his plans for the future?
Will he get apoplectic of you get overdrawn?
How does he really fell about your friends?
Of course, if everyone knew their partners inside out , there's a good chance no-one would ever plight their troth.
But we reckon there are ten major life-deciding questions that you should know the answers to before you order the flowers.
Of course, they aren't all questions you can ask directly, or if you do, you won't get an honest answer.
But there's more than one way of finding out what you need to know — start a conversation around the subject, use friends or people in the news as examples — you can find out how he feels about their situation, without relating it directly to you.
And your reward?
The knowledge you need to make your marriage the best it can possibly be.
1 Children
Does he want them?
It's astonishing, but it's often the last thing couples discuss when they get married’, says Jane Hawksley, a counsellor for Relate in Birmingham.
Ignorance may be blissful, but it could bring you both a nasty shock when the subject does come up.
‘You may not want them to begin with, but you shouldn't fix it, don't say ‘I'll never want children’, and don't put him in that position either.
People often change their minds — a woman's biological clock often asserts itself in her mid 30s,’ cautions Jane.
If you want children now, and he wants them in five years, or you want two and he wants six, you can probably reach a compromise.
But be careful if your man is adamant that he never wants children (unless, of course, you don't either).
There's no guarantee that he'll change his mind, and the older you get, the more critical it will become.
2 Dreams and Ambition
Does he have them, and do they include you?
Does he want to move from the city to a farm in Scotland?
This is something you really need to know, especially if you've always lived round the corner from your family, and couldn't bear to move.
If he is going to have to abandon a dream for the sake of your joint happiness, it's something you need to talk about.
In the same way, you need to know if he wants to be Prime Minister — would you be happy being a high-flier's wife, with all the pressures that can bring?
Or will his lack of ambition drive you to distraction?
Dreams are precious, and should be valued, even if you know that they are unlikely to come true.
But remember that dreams and ambitions change as you get older, by his forties your high-flier may have turned into a slippers and spaniel man, and who knows, by then you may want to be PM.
3 Money
Is he always in the red?
‘Attitudes to money are important’, explains Sarah Litvinoff, author of The Relate Guide to Better Relationships,(Ebury Press, £6.99).
‘In a way, it doesn't matter too much what that attitude is, as long as you both share it.
You may end up in the red, but as long as it's not by too much, you're less likely to have rows about it.’
If you do feel very differently about money — you're always overgrown, he knows where every penny goes — you need to work out practical ways of dealing with it.
Keep separate accounts, and a joint account for household bills.
You need to negotiate, and you need to be open about money, especially if you're running into financial problems.
Bear in mind that money is one of the main causes of marriage break-up.
Parents
How big a part do they play in his life?
Parents can have such an enormous effect on your lives together that you need to work out the boundaries right at the beginning.
Leave it for a year, and you'll have established a pattern which will be hard to break.
Does your man always have lunch with his parents on Sundays, and spend every Christmas in front of their TV?
Your first battle will be changing the routine, gently but firmly so that everyone knows that things will be different from now on.
You could suggest that you both pop around on a week-day evening, or you could take Mum-in-law shopping on a Saturday while he's at the match.
Don't try to cut his parents out of your lives, see if you can make visiting them a pleasure rather than a duty.
Housework
Does he know what a Hoover's for?
‘This (along with money) is at the top of the things we row about,’ says Sarah Litvinoff.
‘And it's far better to get it out on the table, and to discuss it, even if you disagree than to find yourself nagging later.’
Talk to the man about who did the housework in his childhood home.
If his Mum did the lot, and he thinks that's as it should be, you're going to have your work cut out persuading him to do his share.
‘Men often put a lot of energy into the courtship period’, warns Jane Hawksley, ‘never use that as a gauge for the future.
When he's trying to impress you or your family, he may do all sorts of things he wouldn't dream of doing after the wedding.
Your task is to let him know how you feel about housework — that you hate it just as much as he does, and if you do it together, you can go to the pictures — or to bed — twice as quickly.
6 Faithfulness
Does he know what it means?
This is a tricky area.
Ask him if he intends always to be faithful, and you've get a 99.9 per cent change of him saying yes.
Only the incurably honest would say no, and face the row that followed.
If you want to find out about how he feels about being faithful, try talking about it in abstract terms — talk about the latest celebrity scandal, or friends in this situation — and see how he responds.
If he's very good looking, and/or a terrible flirt, you have to face the fact that unless you're very self confident, sooner or later you may worry about him straying.
Can you cope with that?
If you can't talk to him.
He's unlikely to know how you feel, and until he does, he can't put your mind at rest.
And remember that often the situation changes.
Men who've had lots of girlfriends do settle down.
And people who set out to be faithful do fall passionately in lust with other people.
You can't guarantee the future.
7 Past Loves
Is there someone he's never got over?
There's an argument here for saying what you don't know won't give you sleepless nights.
On the other hand, if there is someone in his past who still has a place in his heart, you do need to know about it before you can deal with it.
‘You have to keep a sense of proportion,’ says Zelda West Meads.
‘You mustn't be retrospectively jealous.
It's a good sign if he has loved someone a lot, it shows that he has a capacity for love.’
And there are different types of love.
Don't be concerned if he has precious memories of a passionate affair.
‘Passion and long term love are two different things’ says Jane Hawksley ‘You don't often marry the passionate love of your life, you marry the person you feel most comfortable with.
And he has chosen to marry you.’
8 Friends
Can you keep them?
Now you're one of a pair, it doesn't mean that you have to do everything together, but the chances are that you will want to spend a lot of your spare time with each other.
So you have to set the boundaries for friends, in just the same way that you do for parents.
If he's been used to lads' nights out each week, and football practice on Sundays, you're going to have to reach a compromise.
Neither of you should give up your friends, but you do need to make time for each other.
If either of your dislikes the other's single friends, you'll have to put in far more effort to keep them.
‘The reality is that it's very difficult for couples to have single friends unless both of you like them,’ says Jane Hawksley.
‘You get sucked into the world of married couples, and it's hard to keep up with bachelor friends.
You have to work much harder to stay friends with them.’
9 Equality
Does he see you as a partner, or is he already the boss?
This is something that you may have already influenced.
For, says Jane Hawksley, you set the pattern early on in your relationship.
‘Don't think you have to be extra nice to him in the courtship period — it will be very hard to back-track later on.
Be quite clear about what you'll put up with — him being late, missing meals, giving you his laundry.
Do you want to iron his shirts for 50 years?
If not, then don't start.’
Of course, there are some men who will naturally regard you as an equal.
There are others who never will, and you'll have a constant battle to establish you right to have a share in making decisions, and knowing where the money goes.
But as Zelda West Meads explains, it may not bother you.
‘Some women want the man to be the boss, they want him to be Daddy.
You need to think about how you want it to be.’
10 Love
Does he love you, warts and all?
Men are notoriously shy of those three little words.
But even if your romantic beau whispers ‘I love you’ daily in your shell-like, it doesn't mean that he loves you in the way that you love him.
But that needn't be a problem — as long as you both expect the same from your love.
Is he prepared for your feelings for each other to change, from passion to contentment?
How does he see your lives in 20 years time?
And does he love you as you are, or as he wants you to be?
The man who constantly criticises may be trying to change you into the person he wants you to be, when he should be loving you for the person you are.
This isn't meant to be a test, a mental MOT for your man, but they are all topics you can talk about, which will help you get to know each other better.
‘You won't get 10 out of 10,’ says Zelda West Meads spokesperson for Relate, ‘and if you do, be suspicious — he's probably trying to please you.’
You need to ask yourself what you want, and what you can realistically expect.
Do you want a man who perfectly fits your fantasy (better cancel the church now), or a man you can love and live with?
It doesn't matter if there are differences between you, it's how well you cope with the differences that's important .
MARRIAGE RIGHTS
Marriage is for richer or poorer, a concept that's easy to swallow when there's money in the bank and no outstanding bills.
But when the red letters roll in and nerves begin to fray you may revise your opinion, so to stay quids in, make sure you know how your new status affects your finances.
By Amanda Pardoe.
Let's start with banking.
If you have a joint bank account, you are what is known as ‘jointly and severally liable’.
Basically, this means that if the account goes into the red, you are both liable for the whole amount.
This applies even if one of you, unknown to the other, has gone on a mad spending spree.
If, on the other hand, the debt is incurred on a sole account, then it is the account holder alone who is responsible.
However, if in addition to the sole accounts you operate a joint a joint current or savings account with the same bank or building society, you should check from the outset whether the terms and conditions include a right of set off, whereby funds on these accounts may be required to repay the debt on others held by you or your partner.
The responsibility for repaying an unsecured personal loan or a credit card debt lies with the person or persons who were party to the agreement.
A point to watch here, is where a credit card holder applies for an extra card on the same account.
In this situation, there is still only one account, and the original card holder is ultimately liable for any unpaid debts.
Just to get really morbid, it is worth pointing out that death does not automatically extinguish debts on bank accounts personal loans and credit cards, hence the offer of insurance which is usually incorporated in the relevant loan/credit card application form.
Where someone dies and leaves behind a debt which is not insured, this has a claim on his or her estate.
(Basically, your estate is your collective assets and liabilities.)
On the home front, there are several factors to bear in mind.
A primary consideration is whether you and your partner have opted to buy your home as ‘tenants in common’ or ‘joint tenants’.
In the case of the former, you and your partner can choose who gets your share of the property on the other's death.
In contrast, under a joint tenancy agreement, ownership automatically passes to the survivor.
Another difference, is that with a joint tenancy, the property does not form part of the deceased's estate; with a tenancy in common, it does.
So, with a joint tenancy, none of the deceased's creditors can make a claim against the property, whereas with a tenancy in common, they can.
Tenancy in common is usually preferred by couples who are living together and joint tenancy is favoured by married couples.
For those of you with stepchildren to consider, however, you may wish to opt for a common tenancy and leave half the house to them.
Clearly, this is a delicate subject and one which you and your partner should discuss at length, as it could mean that the survivor has to sell the property in order to fulfil the bequest.
As an aside, the need to drawn up a will becomes particularly pressing if there are children to be considered, and don't forget that marriage revokes the will of either partner, unless that is, it was drawn up in anticipation of the wedding.
Turning to the mortgage side of home finance, liability will be joint and several where the loan is in joint names.
If on the other hand, you marry a man who already has a home and a mortgage, both of which are in his name alone, you will not be responsible for repaying the loan if he falls behind with the payments.
It is usual when taking out a mortgage to arrange adequate insurance cover in the event of death.
This may, for instance, be in the form of an endowment policy or a mortgage payment protection plan.
So, if you take out an endowment mortgage which is described as joint payable in the event of the first death, this means that if either of you dies, the policy will repay the mortgage linked to that policy.
Insurance does not, of course, only cover death.
You can also take our a policy which pays up in the event of your losing your job through accident, sickness or redundancy.
Turning now to benefit payments, marriage can, in some cases, affect existing arrangements.
The two most basic benefits are income support and unemployment benefit.
Without going into the minutiae of the terms of these and other benefits, it is important to appreciate that the former is means tested, so depending on the financial circumstances of your spouse, marriage could result in your benefit being stopped.
Unemployment benefit, on the other hand, is not means tested.
If you are hoping to start a family soon and have already investigated the financial aspects, you will know that statutory maternity pay is determined by your length of service and requires you to earn on average enough to pay Class One National Insurance Contributions.
SMP can be paid for up to 18 weeks.
There are two rates of benefit.
Both are subject to deductions such as tax and National Insurance, but neither is means tested, so you marriage will not invalidate your claim.
Check with your employer for exactly how much you will be entitled to receive, and pick up a copy of ‘A Guide to Maternity Benefits’ from the DSS.
On the income tax front, both husband and wife have a personal allowance which is free of tax.
In addition to this, there is a married couples's allowance which is usually paid to the man in the first instance.
Both partners have their own Capital Gains Tax allowance, which means they can make a profit on the sale of assets such as shares or property up to this limit without incurring any liability of CGT.
Transfers of assets between a married couple are free of tax, even on death.
For a closer look at how your marriage will affect your tax position ask for the following booklets from your local Tax Office or Tax Enquiry Centre: ‘Income Tax: A guide for married couples’, ‘Independent Taxation: A guide to mortgage interest relief for married couples’, ‘Capital Gains Tax: A guide for married couples’.
For those of you who were wondering, married couples are jointly and severally liable for payment of the community charge (poll tax).
To be certain of your own position, you should talk to the appropriate expert.
NB This feature was written before the Budget and General Election 
WEDDING ALBUM
Fiona Hughes and Paul Boynton left London's Pimlico for the romance of a wedding in Jersey.
By Kim Jones
Fiona & Paul had been together for six years before deciding to tie the knot.
They have a lovely daughter named Katie who acted as one of their attendants on the big day.
Fiona chose a short dress in a pale pink shade called blush made of silk dupion decorated with pearls and sequins and with a bustle at the back, a creation by designer Marianne Jessica.
‘I didn't want something too fussy,’ said Fiona, ‘both because it's my second time around and because I wanted to be able to wear the dress again!’
Bridesmaid Katie wore a replica on her mother's dress and niece Emma wore a variation in the same blush colour.
Mark and Alexander, both nephews of the bridal couple, wore seersucker suits with cream silk shirts, and carried ring cushions.
All the outfits were by Marianne and she also made the bride's shoes and decorated the bridesmaids' ballet pumps.
The bride and Katie carried beautiful preserved flowers from Catkins.
The men in the wedding party wore navy blue suits and Paul and his best man, brother William, completed their look with matching colourful silk ties.
Arrangements for the ceremony at St Columbus Church of Scotland and celebrations afterwards at The Grand Hotel were made easier because Paul's brother, William, lives on the island.
About 70 friends travelled with the couple from their home in Pimlico, just north of the Thames, to help the happy couple celebrate in Jersey.
After the church ceremony, a horse and carriage waited for the newlyweds and took them to their reception, where an entertainer was waiting in the wings to take the children off the adults' hands.
Celebrations went on into the morning and Paul and Fiona, along with many of their friends, stayed on in Jersey for a week's holiday, before flying to Greece for their honeymoon.
Right: Just married
Below: Signing the register
Left: William, Paul's brother and best man, lends a hand
Right: Shady characters!
Right: The happy family
Right: About to cut the Jane Asher cake
Left: Photo call
FUJI WEDDING AWARDS
Your wedding photographs will keep the memories of the big da alive for you and your future family for many years to come, providing a permanent record of all those small details so carefully planned yet so easy to forget as the years roll by.
Some couples see their wedding photography as an eleventh hour item, or an area in which economies can be made, but poor blurred photographs or the wrong shots can prove a constant disappointment so it is wise to invest time and effort to ensure your photos remain a source of pleasure and joy.
A professional photographer's livelihood is dependent on getting it right the first time and most are members of either the Master Photographers Association or the British Institute of Professional Photography.
Fuji, world renowned for quality film and processing, are leaders in the field of professional photography and as well as running photography schools where professionals can learn to improve their technical and creative skills, every year host the Fuji Wedding and Portrait Awards, offering valuable prizes to both the photographer and their subject, which could be you and your future husband.
For the photographer there's a chance to win the coveted title of the Fuji Wedding Photographer of the Year, whilst for the featured couple the top prize is £1,000.
As well as these prestigious annual awards there are quarterly winners with prizes for the photograph and £60 compact cameras for their subjects plus merit awards with the subjects receiving £30 compact cameras.
With the chance of winning these prizes it's well worth booking a professional who is participating in the awards or suggesting that the photographer of your choice does so.
The best way to find someone is to look in your local directories, such as the Yellow pages but do remember to check their qualifications.
Alternatively the three organisations listed below will be able to advise you on qualified photographers in your area.
Helpful Hints
Book early, the best photographers are always in demand.
Discuss all charges that you will incur and check the prices of reprints and enlargements.
Ask to see the entire range of photograph albums together with any extras you may require such as pocket books and frames.
Make sure you have contingency plans for the photographer in case of bad weather and discuss these with your photographer.
Decide if you want reception photographs and ask the photographer if he or she will cover them.
Below: Andrea Dale, Stoke on Trent 0782 511909
Below: Keith Thompson, Reading 0734 560178
The pictures featured here are the first quarterly winners of 1992
WEDDING ALBUM
Jeanette Neely, a finalist in Home's Bride of the Year 1991 competition, weds her groom, Peter Holland.
By Kim Jones.
The venue for Jeanette & Peter's unusual ceremony was 14c St Giles' Church, Ickenham in Middlesex.
The Reverend Paul Kelly officiated, and, as the couple have been deeply interested in Buddhist philosophy and teachings for around five years, they invited the Venerable Seevli, a Buddhist monk from the London Buddhist Vihara in Chiswick, to perform a traditional Buddhist blessing after the marriage, with two minutes of meditation followed by a Pali good luck chant.
The bride's beautiful off-the-shoulder dress in slipper satin was made by her mother.
Jeanette knew exactly how she wanted to look on here wedding day, but couldn't find the right dress pattern.
So, her mother started working from three patterns — one each for the bodice, skirt and train!
Her headdress made from slipper satin and lace was trimmed with pearls and worn with a three tier long veil, both designed and made by Wizard of Goz in Kensington.
The bridesmaids, Jeanette's long-term friend Virginia and sister-in-law, Roz, brought a burst of colour into the proceedings wearing turquoise chiffon and satin full length dresses, made by the bride's friend, Susannah.
Jeanette's tow and a half year old niece, Sula, was a pretty flowergirl in a satin dress made by the mother of the bride.
Guests came from around the world — Peter's brother Jim flew from Zimbabwe to act as best man and his other brothers and sisters came from Australia.
Roz brought some dried gum nuts, eucalyptus and dried South Australian daisies from down under which were mixed with cream roses, and trailing ivy to make fabulous bouquets.
The reception was held at the Mansion House in Harrow Weald, where the couple spent a romantic wedding night, leaving for Mexico the next morning.
Below: East meets west
Below: Here's to us
WEDDING ALBUM
An Edwardian-style country wedding for Liz and Richard Gearing.
By Kim Jones.
On the weekend of their engagement, Liz Sykes and Richard Gearing were sightseeing at Warwick Castle when Liz spotted the ideal wedding dress — on a model of the Countess of Warwick!
When they arrived home, Liz quickly wrote to the curator of the castle's museum to ask for a pattern of the dress, only to be told that it had been copied from an 1898 issue of the London Illustrated News.
But which copy?
Liz spent hour pouring through hundreds of issues at the Illustrated News library and was finally rewarded with the original drawing of the dress.
A few alterations to the design were made — Liz chose silk dupion in a pale peach colour instead of the satin of the original and built leg-of-mutton sleeves onto the sleeveless design.
The final dress was made up by a family friend, Joan Craddock, using specially pleated silk chiffon, an 1890s antique flounce bought from Devon, and scraps of old lace bought from the Portobello Road in London.
An off-centre opening at the back was secured with over 50 covered buttons.
Liz carried a loose bouquet from Flitvale nurseries, incorporating flowers readily available in Edwardian England.
Her bridesmaids, friends Liz, Jane and Christine wore period style outfits too — long skirts with bustles in peach, and high-collared long striped jackets, fastened by toggles (not a zip, hook or popper was in sight!).
God-daughter Jessica looked pretty in co-ordinating colours.
A horse and carriage waited outside St Andrew's Church in Ampthill to take the newlyweds to their reception, held in a marquee in Liz's parents' garden.
After champagne, a buffet meal and the speeches, a jazz band played through the evening and the couple left for a Caribbean honeymoon in Grenada and St Lucia.
Right: The bride and her attendants
Left: The trusty steed…and the stylish carriage
Left: Cutting the wedding cake
Below: Honeymoon bound!
Above: Chief bridesmaid, Christine and god-daughter Jessica
homeworks by Marie Farquharson
GREEN FINGERS
Get your garden in full bloom with a handy new booklet from Shamrock.
Written by Gardeners World expert Nigel Colborn, ‘Summer Success With Bedding Plants’ is packed full of bright ideas for formal or informal gardens, hanging baskets, and window boxes.
We've 250 copies to give away.
Simply send your name and address on a post card marked Wedding and Home/Shamrock Booklet offer, to Welbeck Golin/Harris, 43 King Street, Covent Garden, London WC2E 8RJ.
Offer closes July 9 1992.
WALL TO WALL
This sunny panel is from the White Range of Corres Mexican tiles.
Handmade in their Mexican workshops, the patterned tiles cost around £64 per square yard and the plain white tiles around £50 excluding VAT.
STEAM POWER
Steam into the 21st century with the Surfline Electronic iron from Rowenta.
A soft touch button and a series of small lights have replaced the conventional circular dial and pilot light, while the electronic thermostat indicates not only when the iron is cooler than required but also when it is too hot.
Available from electrical shops nationwide it costs £49.99.
IT'S IN THE BAG
Does your vacuum cleaner seem to blow out more dust than it collects?
Then take a look at the Airstream cleaner from Electrolux.
Fitted with two filters together with a dust-bag made from a revolutionary fabric the Airstream's unique filtration system retains 99.9 per cent of all the dust it sucks up.
Available from all Electrolux retail outlets it costs around £209.99.
These pretty accessories (right) are from the Sanderson Gallery.
Shown here in Rose and Peony, the collection, bedroom and bathroom worked over five designs including the more masculine designs of Cambridge (a bold blue/green stripe) and Hurlingham (a dramatic paisley).
Available from Sanderson of Berners Street, London W1, selected Sanderson specialists and gift stores nationwide, prices range from £3.95 for a napkin to £45 for a china teapot.
Bunch of grapes wall bracket, £65, from Christopher Wray
Stainless steel kitchen tools from Heritage, around £3.49 per piece, are available from Tesco stores, hardware and cookware shops around the country.
MOW DOWN
As you put together your gift list spare a thought for your poor old garden which is invariably forgotten.
Qualcast, the makers of mowers in Britain for over 60 years offer a wide range of traditional and modern mowers to meet all your requirements and all their mowers come with a three year parts guarantee and a one year parts and labour warranty.
We've three of their best selling model to give away — the Concorde E30 De Luxe.
A lightweight electric cylinder mower with a rear roller for that perfect striped finish, it costs around £84.99.
Simply send your name and address on a postcard to Wedding and Home/ Qualcast offer, Greater London House, Hampstead Road, London NW1 7QQ before July 9 1992.
COOKING ON THE RUN
If you'd rather not spend your valuable evenings slaving over a hot stove take a look at Cosmopolitan After-work Cookbook.
Filled with recipes for quick, easy, yet substantial and delicious meals it may soon become your bible.
Published by Vermilion,(April 2) it costs £6.99 and is available from all good bookshops.
SWEET SLUMBER
Recapture the spirit of the Renaissance with this stunning bed linen from Sheridan.
Called Galileo, the collection comes in a reversible duvet cover, sheets, pillowcases and matching cushions.
In luxury percale, a double duvet cover costs around £47.99.
BRUSH STROKES
Inspired by early American works, artist Haydn Cornner has produced a collection of Country Primitive paintings of farmyard animals.
Working in oils and acrylics and made to order, they come in two sizes 5″ x 7″ or 7″ x 10″ and cost £35 and £45 respectively excluding postage and package .
blade runners
Steel or silver, clean cut contemporary or simply traditional, a good set of cutlery will stand you in good stead for years to come.
Join us in our quest for the classic canteen.
By Erica Miller.
blade runners
For stockist details turn to page 138 
crystal gazing
The pleasure of drinking from a good quality glass is like drinking tea from fine china.
Glass comes in many forms from hand engraved to cut crystal, clear, coloured or hand blown.
Whether it's everyday or special occasion glass that you desire we help you through the crystal maze.
By Eric Miller.
Summer fruits
Don't let this summer pass you by without trying one of these tempting deserts.
Using the best of the season's fruits we've put together a delicious array of puddings that are easy to make and won't pile on the pounds.
By Marie Farquharson.
fruity summer pudding
Serves 8 Calories per portion: 100–105
100g/4oz redcurrants
100g/4oz blackcurrants
100g/4oz gooseberries
100g/4oz raspberries
225g/8oz strawberries
6–8 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
8 slices granary bread, crusts removed
To decorate A few fresh raspberries and redcurrants, fresh fruit leaves, Sweetex Granulated to sprinkle
Place the redcurrants, the blackcurrants, and the gooseberries in a large saucepan with 2 tablespoons of water, cover and simmer gently for 10 minutes until just tender.
Add the raspberries and strawberries to the pan with the Sweetex Granulated to taste, then leave to cool.
Cut 2 slices of bread to line the base and to of a 900ml/1½ pint pudding basin.
Cut the remaining bread to fit the sides of the basin.
Strain the fruit, reserving the juice then soak all the break in the fruit juice in a shallow bowl.
Line the bottom of the basin with the small bread circle then arrange the bread slices around the sides.
Spoon in the remaining fruit then top with the large bread circle.
Cover the top with a saucer small enough to fit inside the basin and place a weight on top.
Leave to chill in a refrigerator overnight.
Turn out onto a serving plate and pour any remaining fruit juice over the pudding.
Decorate with raspberries and redcurrants, fruit leaves and sprinkling of Sweetex Granulated.
Service in slices.
candied citrus tart
Serves 8 Calories per portion: 240
200g/7oz plain flour
90g/3½oz butter
4 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
2–3 tbsp iced water
300ml/½ pint low fat
fromage frais 2 (size 3) eggs
Finely grated rind and juice of 2 oranges
Finely grated rind and juice of 1 lemon
4½ tbsp cornflour
6 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
For the topping
2 lemons
4 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
Strips of finely pared orange rind
Fresh mint leaves
Sift the flour into a bowl then rub in the butter until the mixture resembles fine breadcrumbs.
Stir in the Sweetex Granulated then stir in enough water to form a soft dough.
Roll out on a lightly floured surface and use to line a deep 21cm/8½ inch round fluted flan tin.
Cover and chill in a refrigerator for 30 minutes.
Line with greaseproof paper, fill with baking beans then bake blind in a preheated oven at 200°C/400°F/Gas 6 for 20 minutes.
Remove the paper and beans then return the pastry case to the oven for a further 5 minutes.
Cook until golden brown and crisp.
Remove from the oven and leave to cool completely.
Beat together the fromage frais, eggs, orange and lemon juice then strain into a saucepan.
Stir in the cornflour, Sweetex Granulated, orange and lemon rind, then cook over a low heat stirring constantly until the mixture boils and thickens.
Pour into the pastry case and leave to cool.
Pare fine strips of rind from the remaining lemons, and cut each lemon into slices.
Place the slices in a pan with enough water to cover.
Cover and simmer for 6–8 minutes until tender, then leave to cool.
Arrange the  lemon slices round the edge of the tart then refrigerate until well  chilled.
Decorate with strips of orange rind and mint leaves, then serve in slices.
morello cherry and almond pie
Serves 8 Calories per portion: 255
680g/1½ jar Morello cherries in light syrup
2 cinnamon sticks
1 tbsp arrowroot
2 tbsp brandy
2 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
For the pastry
150g/5oz plain flour
50g/2oz ground almonds
2 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
50g/2oz sunflower margarine
3–4 tbsp iced water
Skimmed milk to glaze
A little Sweetex Granulated to sprinkle
Strain the juice from the cherries into a small saucepan.
Break the cinnamon sticks into two or three pieces and add to the pan.
Boil rapidly uncovered until reduced to one third of its original quality.
Blend together the arrowroot and brandy.
Stir into the reduced sherry syrup.
Bring to the boil, stirring constantly until thickened and clear then remove from the heat.
Add the Sweetex Granulated, stirring until dissolved.
Stone the cherries if necessary and stir into the pan.
Remove from the heat and leave to cool completely.
Meanwhile sift the flour into a bowl.
Stir in the ground almonds and Sweetex Granulated.
Rub in the margarine until the mixture resembles fine breadcrumbs then stir in enough water to form a soft dough.
Cover and set aside until needed.
Spoon the cherry mixture into a 23cm/9inch pie plate, removing the cinnamon stick, if liked, before topping.
Roll out the pastry thinly on a lightly floured surface to a circle of about 2.5cm/1inch larger than the pie plate.
Cut off a narrow strip around the edge and use to line the dampened rim of the pie plate.
Brush the pastry rim with a little water.
Carefully lift the pastry lid over the pie using a rolling pin to support and arrange over the cherries.
Press down the edges to seal and trim off the excess pastry.
Flute the edges of the pie and decorate with the pastry trimmings.
Brush with milk and sprinkle with Sweetex Granulated.
Bake in a preheated oven at 200°C/400°F/Gas 6 for 35 minutes until golden brown.
Serve hot or cold.
fruity stuffed pears with chocolate sauce
Serves 8 Calories per portion: 215
8 ripe red skinned pears
2 tbsp freshly squeezed lemon juice
For the filling
50g/2oz amaretti biscuits or almond macaroons
175g/6oz ricotta cheese
75g/3oz no-need-to-soak dried apricots, finely chopped
4 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
1 tbsp Cointreau or Grand Marnier
Pinch of ground cinnamon
For the chocolate sauce
4 tbsp cocoa powder, sifted
1 tbsp instant coffee
250ml/8floz water
6 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
175g/6oz Greek strained yoghurt
to decorate
2 tbsp Green strained yoghurt
Using a small sharp knife starting at the base of the fruit cut the core out of each pear.
Brush the cut surfaces with the lemon juice to help prevent discolouration.
If the pears are quite firm simmer in a large saucepan for 20–30 minutes until tender.
Plunge into a bowl of cold water and drain well on kitchen paper.
Crush the amaretti biscuits or almond macaroons with a rolling pin and mix with the ricotta cheese, chopped apricots, Sweetex Granulated, Cointreau or Grand Mariner and ground cinnamon.
Carefully spoon filling into the base of pears.
Put the cocoa powder coffee and water into a small pan.
Bring to the boil stirring constantly then simmer for 1 minute.
Remove from the heat and add the Sweetex Granulated, stirring to dissolve.
Leave to cool then stir in the Greek yoghurt.
Spoon the sauce onto serving plates, so that the base is completely covered and stand a pear in the middle.
Thin the remaining Greek yoghurt with a little water and spoon into a piping bag fitted with a plain piping nozzle.
Pipe dots or yoghurt in the sauce around each pear and swirl with a cocktail stick or the tip of a pointed knife to give the feathered effect.
Serve well chilled.
fresh fruit platter with fruity fromage frais dip
A selection of seasonal fresh fruit
For the dip
225g/8oz low fat fromage frais 3 tbsp Sweetex Granulated
3 passion fruit
½ tsp finely grated orange rind
Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg
Arrange the fruit on a serving platter and sprinkle with Sweetex Granulated.
Chill for 30 minutes.
In a bowl mix together the fromage frais, Sweetex Granulated, passion fruit and orange rind and chill in a refrigerator along with the fruit.
Spoon into a serving bowl, sprinkle with the cinnamon and serve with the fruit platter.
Wedgwood plain white plates, black rectangular plate and black/gold bowl by Maryse Boxer, Athena small bowl by Dartington Crystal all from Heals.
sweet and fruity Banish all thoughts of guilt at once and set out to make this a summer of indulgence.
If the though sounds tempting but you fear the pounds will pile on, think again.
With the abundance of exotic summer fruits available and a little help from Sweetex, the UK's best selling non-sugar sweetener, you can serve your guests mouthwatering healthy treats.
Choose from a colourful array of mango, star fruit, kiwi and raspberries, to name but a few and add a sprinkling of Sweetex to bring out the full flavour, or use it in recipes for a sweet taste without the calories.
first home portfolio
Selecting items for your wedding list and first home together can be a bewildering experience with so much to choose from and so little time.
Before you take to the high street, it is worth spending time with your partner to think carefully about what you will actually need and perhaps more importantly what you both like: it is surprising how much tastes can differ over the smallest of items!
Brochures offer the easiest way to accomplish both, bringing the high street into the comfort of your front room.
sweet dreams
The bedroom is a very special room and choosing a look that you will both feel comfortable with is made easier by Dorma.
Specialists in beautiful bed linen and bedroom accessories, their new 64 page brochure is packed full of inspirational ideas, information and advice to help you create your own individual look.
For 1992 Dorma is offering the bride-to-be an exclusive bridal pack totally free.
The pack includes a useful wedding list, a copy of the new brochure plus a chance to receive their free wedding gift to you.
To receive your copy simply complete the coupon (below).
pressing matters
Ironing is probably one of the least favourite household chores so lighten the load with one of the latest irons from Philips.
The star of the Philips range is the new professional Iron HD 1833.
Thanks to its powerful steam generator, ironing has never been easier and even vertical ironing is made possible, perfect for use on hanging curtains and jackets.
Because the steam is generated in a separate tank and then passed at pressure through a pipe onto the iron's soleplate, drips, leaks, calcium and other nasties are prevented from staining your clothes and the life of the iron is prolonged.
The large steam chamber has a one litre capacity, allowing up to one and a half hours of continuous ironing with three times more steam per minute than a conventional iron.
For further information on the complete range of Philips irons, complete the coupon (right).
kitchen mates
Make light work of cooking with the help of Philips' electronic HR2898 food processor.
Just the friend you need in the kitchen, the processor, which comes complete with a blender attachment, is perfect for those mouthwatering mousses, spicy sauces and delicious sponges.
A special kneading attachment gives a perfect voluminous loaf of bread and an electric speed control and pulse gives a speed for every job.
The processor is high on design with the powerful 500 watt motor cleverly placed behind the bowl along with the controls, thus saving valuable space on the worksurface.
For further information on the complete range of Philips' Kitchen appliances complete the coupon (below).
Celebration Time
The king of sparkling wines, champagne, is the first choice for most couples to toast the bride and groom.
But a succession of bad harvests has sent the price of this most popular bubbly soaring.
So we decided to take a look at some of the alternatives available — with one proviso, they all cost less than £10.
By Marie Farquharson.
Choosing the right sparkling wine can be a bit of a minefield, especially if you're not clued up on the different brands available.
Take time to shop around; get to know your local wine merchant or investigate your local supermarket.
Also look out for special offers; many companies offer discount on bulk purchases, free glass hire and ice (see our key above right).
WINE SPEAK
While nothing quite beats actually tasting the wine, there are various terms on the neck of the bottle or the label that will help inform your choice.
The method of production is the first step in assessing the VXK of the wine.
All sparkling wine is made in one of three ways.
the first and most complicated is Methode Champenoise — this is used to make champagne and most other good sparkling wines.
It involves fermenting the wine twice.
The first fermentation produces the still wine that we are all familiar with, this is then bottled with some extra yeast and sugar, to produce a second fermentation in the bottle, and the resulting carbon dioxide trapped inside produces the bubbles.
NB:In 1993 the use of this term applied to any sparkling wine made outside the Champagne region will be outlawed.
So look out for equivalent terms such as Cava from Spain, Sekt from Germany and Methodo Classico from Italy.
The second Cuvée close/Charmat method is favoured by the producers of mass-produced sparkling wines.
Her the second fermentation takes place in sealed vats and the wine is then bottled under pressure.
The third and cheapest method, Carbonation, does not involve a second fermentation.
Instead the bubbles are produced by injecting carbon dioxide into the finished wine.
Other terms to look out for on the label refer to the dryness or sweetness of sparkling wine: ‘Brut’(very dry), ‘Extra Dry’, ‘Sec’ or ‘Dry’, Demi-Sec’or ‘Medium Dry’and ‘Doux’or ‘Sweet’.
If a year is indicated this means it is a ‘vintage’, made only from the grapes of that year.
If no year is shown, this may denote that it is a blend of grapes from different years.
A MATTER OF TASTE
Before tasting, all sparkling wines need to be chilled.
An hour or so in the fridge is generally enough.
Apart from the taste and freshness the test of a good sparkling wine is the length of time that the bubbles last in the glass.
Look for a continuous thread of bubbles, the finer they are and the longer they last, the better the wine.
But the bottom line to consider when tasting wine is whether or not you actually like it.
SIMPLY THE BEST
For those of you who still want the real thing on the day there are a number of champagnes available for under £10.
Look out for:
MARKS AND SPENCER
Monmousseau £5.99 A blend of Chenin grapes from the Loire this vintage sparkling wine was one of our favourites.
With a wonderful aroma and colour of the hay, it had a warm creamy taste.
The bottle also came high on our list for looks.
Crémant D'Alsace £7.99 From Alsace in North East France this lively wine had a wonderful sunshine yellow colour.
Young and fruity it was quite well rounded and pleasant to drink.
VICTORIA WINE
Veuve du Vernay Brut Described as a classic sparkling French wine with a fresh dry taste and fruity bouquet we found this quite pleasing.
It should all tastes — a good all rounder.
Mumm Cuvée Napa –8.49 A joint venture with Reims this Californian wine looked almost pink in colour.
Tangy and crisp with a fruity flavour we quite liked this one, although we were less than impressed with the look of the bottle.
WAITROSE
Clairette de Die £5.95 A French wine, Very pale and almost colourless this was sweet and perfumed.
A good example of sweet wine; if you like sweet wines you'll love this.
Cordorniu Chardonnay Brut £7.95 This Spanish wine was another one of our favourites.
With the texture and taste of honey it packed quite a punch.
We also gave it top marks for looks.
TESCO
Tesco Sparkling Saumur £5.49 A blend of Chenin Blanc and Cabernet Franc grapes this wine looked very expensive.
Almost colourless we found this very dry and a bit tart.
Tesco Australian Sparkling Wine £5.05 A blend of grapes and very pale in colour.
This wine was light and fresh with quite a sharp dry taste, but not bad for the price.
SAFEWAY
Henkell Trocken Brut £5.94 Described as a classic dry Sekt.
This wine tasted quite floral to start.
Despite the somewhat vinegary aftertaste we found it very easy to drink.
Gt Western Chardonnay Brut £7.29 A pale cold colour this wine bubbled nicely on the tongue.
Said to have an intense Chardonnay fruit character, we found it dry, smooth and very drinkable.
We liked the look of the bottle too.
MARTINI
Martini Brut around £6.49;A Cuvée Special, this wine received a bronze medal in the International Wine Challenge 1991.
We had mixed feelings about this one.
Comments ranged from tasteless, bland and bitter to very easy to drink.
However we all liked the matt black finish of the bottle.
Marques de Monistrol £5.59–£6.09 A Cava from southern Barcelona this wine has been endorsed by Decanter magazine and Which Wine and commended in the 1990 Wine Magazine International Challenge.
Although it looked quite smart and had a wonderful aroma of apples and pears, there were very few bubbles and it tasted a bit like dry cider or sparkling apple juice.
SAINSBURY'S
Sainsbury's Australian Sparkling Wine £5.35 Very pale with a fruity aroma, the bubbles on this one disappeared quite quickly.
However it was pleasantly dry and very drinkable.
Good value.
Sainsbury's Cava £4.99 Good for lovers of dry wine, comments range from very dry, bitter and harsh, to tannic and full bodies.
Quite good value for money.
Would make a good mix for Kir Royale or Bucks fizz.
UNWINS
Sparkling Chardonnay ‘Le Baron de Beaumont’ £5.85 Although the bubbles disappeared very quickly, this should appeal to those who like both sweet and dry wines.
A good all rounder with a very distinguished looking bottle.
Lindauer Brut £7.49 Made from the Pinot and Chardonnay grape this dry wine had a light golden colour.
We found its tangy citrussy flavour disappeared very quickly.
ASDA
Australian Pinot Noir/Chardonnay £5.99 A wonderful golden honey colour with lots of bubbles that kept on fizzing right to the end of the glass.
This was another one of our favourites.
With a distinctive Chardonnay tang the flavour was full and rounded.
Asda Crémant de Bourgogne £6.19 The bottle's design implied that this was a country wine rather than a special occasion tipple.
Very pale with very large bubbles it had a harsh aftertaste and was generally quite disappointing.
MAJESTIC WINE
Angas Brut £5.49 Described as a true non vintage style, bottle fermented sparkling wine this was another of our favourites.
A wonderful golden colour with a very clean taste, and not too dry we found this very drinkable.
Crémant de Loire — de Marcel Neau £6.59 Very pale with a good fizz, this lacked flavour and had a bitter aftertaste.
BIBENDUM
Lonsdale Ridge £4.98 We found this had a smooth rounded flavour that was very palatable and very easy to drink.
A good all rounder, although we felt that the bottle looked a little cheap.
Charnay Blanc de Blancs Brut £7.98 This one looked very expensive.
A pleasant floral aroma with woody undertones this tasted like a very dry pale sherry with bubbles which had a tannic aftertaste.
ODDBINS
Killawarra Rose £3.99 Described as an elegant Rose style and full flavoured this was another one of our favourites.
A warm amber colour with lots of bubbles, it had a smooth mellow taste with a fresh perfumed flavour.
Cuvée Napa Blanc de Noirs £8.49 A cool pink colour.
This was very lively and bubbly.
Dry with a slightly tannic aftertaste.
MORRISON SUPERMARKETS
Gratien & Meyer Brut £5.99 A French Saumur from the Loire we found this dry wine disappointing.
The bubbles disappeared quickly and it tasted quite tinny.
Freixinet Cordon Negro Brut £5.99 This Cava was another one of our favourites.
A wonderful golden colour and full of flavour — this was very drinkable.
The all black bottle was very distinctive.
THE WINE SOCIETY
Celebration Crémant de Loire £7.75 A 1988 vintage Cuvée we found this wine a little disappointing.
The bubbles disappeared quite quickly and the body was a little thin on flavour.
Omar Khayyam £7.25 From the upper slopes of the Sahyadri made from Chardonnay grapes we were a little disappointed by this Indian wine.
A wonderful pale gold colour we felt it tasted a bit like a dry sherry.
NB:To buy these wines you have to be a member of the Wine Society.
It costs £20 to join and all members are shareholders.
BERRY BROS & RUD
Extra Dry Sparkling Wine £6.90 Very pale in colour with a dry delicate flavour that disappeared quite quickly in the mouth.
Extra Dry Rosé AC Saumur £8.30 A beautiful golden rose colour, this one we felt was a little disappointing.
But it may well appeal to those who like very dry wine.
THRESHER
Raimat Chardonnay Brut £8.09 The colour of old gold and straw, this wine is the first Cava to be made from Chardonnay grapes.
With a wonderful smell of lemons and a tart/tangy flavour it was a dry and very pleasant.
Moscato Spumante, Frassino £3.99 A sweet white wine from Italy, it was described as having a low local alcohol content which makes it easy to drink on its own and as an aperitif.
With little or no bubbles to speak of, we didn't find this sweet and flowery wine easy to drink.
NOTE: MANY OF THE WINES LISTED HERE CAN BE FOUND AT MORE THAN ONE RETAILER.
ALL PRICES CORRECT AT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS.
GIFT LIST
There are two established ways of organising your wedding gift list: you can either do it yourself or you can place it with a shop.
Compiled by Marie Farquharson.
MAKING CHOICES
There are no hard and fast rules governing what you should ask for when putting together your wedding gift list.
Anything can be added, from the practical to the funny, old or new, valuable or cheap.
Obviously your personal situation will affect the choices you make but a sound principle to follow was laid down by William Morris who wrote ‘have nothing in your home which you do not know to be useful or believe to be beautiful’.
Magazines and window shopping are a good source of inspiration.
Get your financé involved too, so that you can begin to build a picture of the colours and designs that you both like or more importantly hate!
Think about your future life-style together; will there be a lot of formal or informal entertaining?
Do you both enjoy the outdoor life?
Divide your list into practical and decorative items, then go through each room in the house making a list of the things you both already have and will need.
BUYING POWER
Aim for a list that give the widest possible choice and price range; whilst there will be friends and colleagues who will club together to buy you a present, others will want to buy something on their own.
If a major item such as a dinner service is on the list, make it clear that you are happy to receive just one cup and saucer from the range.
Finally, try not to make your list too long — this will ensure that the items you really want are chosen first — and if necessary it can be added to at a later date.
GOING IT ALONE
If you are organising the list yourself, first draw up a master list of items stating their make, colour, price and where they can be bought.
Don't be embarrassed to be specific, especially if you want to co-ordinate different items.
Make copies and circulate them amongst your friends and family, asking them to check with you before they make their choice — to avoid duplication.
Alternatively, you can enlist the help of your mother or best man to co-ordinate events.
Keep a note of who has promised to give what, as this will be useful source of reference when it comes to writing thank you letters.
SHOP FLOOR
If you decide to place your wedding list with a shop, it will save time if you think about the kinds of things you want before hitting the shop floor.
It's also a good idea to arrange a list at one or two shops; one with a sensibly priced household store and another with a specialist more decorative gift-type shop.
The service is free, and you will find that most stores prefer you to place your list with them eight to ten weeks before the wedding.
You and your fiancé simply wander around your chosen stores or shops making a note of the items you want.
The list is typed; a master copy is held by the store and another is sent on to you.
Friends and relatives can either visit or telephone (if paying by credit card) the store where your list is held to make their choice.
As items are chosen they are crossed off the list to avoid duplication, and a note will be made of the donor's name.
Most shops will deliver gifts free of charge within a certain radius.
Some offer a gift wrapping service for a small fee paid by the donor.
Where one-off items have been selected some stores will reserve them for you, but you may have to buy them yourself if they aren't chosen.
There will always be friends and family who object to being directed by a wedding gift list; preferring to make their own choice.
In such cases it is best to leave them to their own devices.
However, do make sure that they see a copy of the list first.
This will avoid duplication, and if you are using a store to organise your list do remember to inform them so they can add it to their list as having been bought.
All gifts should be sent to the bride's home or the address she is living at before the wedding.
Any presents sent after the wedding should be sent to the new home and addressed to the couple.
Many guests will want to deliver their presents personally at the reception, so remember to have your bridesmaids or best man on standby to ensure that they are taken care of.
Listed here are some department stores and shops offering a wedding list service.
Some are more specialists than others.
If you're unsure of the kinds of things they sell or simply want to know more about the kind of service they provide, give them a call before paying them a visit.
Kitchen Make Design Price Shop Donor Colour
Barbeque
Casserole set
Chopping board
Coffee grinder
Coffee maker
Deep fat fryer
Electric kettle
Food Processor
Hand whisk/blender
Iron
Ironing board
Kitchen knives
Scales
Liquidiser
Microwave oven
Mixer
Oven gloves
Pedal/swing bin
Pressure cooker
Ramekins
Rolling pin
Salad bowl/servers
Salad dryer
Saucepan set
Sink set
Slow cooker
Storage jars/tins
Tea towels
Toaster
Trays
Vegetable rack
Wine rack
Wok
Wooden spoons
Yoghurt maker
Dining room
Beer glasses
Brandy balloons
Canteen of cutlery
Coaster/table mats
Champagne glasses
Cheese board
Coffee set
Coffee pot
Decanter
Dinner service
Egg cups
Ice bucket
Milk jug
Mugs
Salt/pepper mills
Sherry glasses
Soup tureen
Tablecloth/napkins
Toast rack
Tea set
Teapot
Wine glasses
Bedroom
Alarm/clock radio
Bedside lamps
Bedspread
Blankets
Blanket box
Duvet
Duvet cover
Eiderdown
Electric blanket
Mirror
Pillow
Pillow cases
Sheets
Bathroom
Bath mat
Bath sheets
Bath towels
Bathroom scales
Hand towels
Linen basket
Shower curtain
General
Books
Clocks
Garden tools
Lamps
Luggage
Magazine rack
Mirrors
Pictures/frames
Plant pots
Radio/Stereo
Television
Vases
Vacuum
Video recorder
Waste paper bins
rooms with a hue
We take a look at the latest trends in colour for interiors.
By Marie Farquharson.
This pretty bedroom uses a range of natural materials for a look that is soft and natural.
Bare plaster walls and terracotta floor give a rustic feel, while beautifully embroidered pure white bed linen from Sheridan adds a touch of luxury.
From their Empire Collection, Antoinette costs £69.99 for a double duvet cover.
The simplest white china displayed on white shelves achieves a puritan simplicity which is complemented by the warm tones of terracotta.
The sprig design wallpaper and co-ordinating curtains complete co-ordinating curtains complete the natural theme.
From Laura Ashley the Botanica wallpaper in terracotta multi white costs £8.95 per roll, the Physic Garden fabric for the cushion and curtains starts at £10.95 per metre and border costs £4.95 per roll.
Easy on the eye this room (right) was made to relax in.
Subtle shades of beige from the Crown Expressions range have been ragged to cleverly break up the colour which is picked up in the marble fireplace, pale loose cotton covers and unbleached cotton curtains.
Toast and Marmalade is the name of the simple cream earthenware breakfast set from Bridgewater.
Prices start at round £8.95 for an 8½ inch plate.
JUST WHITE
A return to nature is reflected in the use of natural materials co-ordinated with subtle shades of white
Muted tones can achieve an effect that is warm yet natural.
Stripped floorboards teamed up with rattan furniture and wrought iron gives a look that complements.
All paint is from the Crown range of matt emulsions, the window wall and ceiling are in Lilac Frost, the fireplace is in Forget Me Not and the alcove is in Country Beige, all at £8.25 per litre.
The woodwork is in Crown Solo magnolia gloss at £6.49 per litre.
Nothing quite beats the simplicity and elegance of rattan.
Team it up with calico for a truly natural look that complements almost any colour scheme.
This two seater sofa is called President.
From Global Village the chair costs £300 and the cushion £50.
The ultimate in natural flooring, sisal makes a hard-wearing alternative to natural wood floors.
The new ‘F’ range from Crucial Trading is a blend of 50 per cent sisal and 50 per cent wool.
In four natural shades it costs around £29.95 per metre.
Regency stripe, classical motifs and rich wood have been used here to achieve a formal style that is also very natural.
The Urns and Drapes fabric costs £24.50 per metre, and the porcelain plate costs £25, all from Timney Fowler .
GO BRIGHT
Strong, bold, and vibrant there's a new confidence with colour that reflects influences from the Mediterranean
Accessories are the quickest way to add colour to a room.
This vibrant rug from Annie Sherburne costs from £150.
Bright and sunny this Plain Coloured Ware from Bridgewater will brighten up your shelves and dinner table.
Prices start at around £5.50 for a baby mug and £6.10 for a 8½ plate.
Hot and spicy this room (right) dares to be different with bold, rich colours.
Using paint from the Crown Expressions range, the wall in the foreground and the shutters are in Carmolito F3–80 emulsion, the tongue and grooving and the fireplace is in Caribou K2–100 eggshell, whilst Ponderosa Pine has been used on the wall in the backroom and picked out in the berry stencil.
This sunny yellow room is instantly cheering.
Loose covers made from yellow/white ticking from Laura Ashley are good value at around £12.95 per metre.
Bright yellow walls and coordinating curtains in Peony in cowslip multi white, £12.95 per metre, complete the look .
Hand-painted in bright Mediterranean colours these pots are from Artisan.
Prices range from £12.90 to £33.
Stockist details on page 138
The vivid colours of this bed linen from Dorma will add a splash of colour to any room.
The purples are echoed in the colour wash on the wall and the oranges are picked up in the flowers.
From Dorma's Portfolio collection, it is called Mandrian.
In poly-cotton a double duvet costs £36.99.
Ceramicist Mary Rose-Young covers her work in a myriad of colour.
Her pieces, which are made to be used, are both decorative and functional.
Prices start at around £15.
Gone is the emphasis on whiter shades of pale, in their place are definite colours.
Green floortiles complement the walls and bathroom linen in a warm burnt orange picks up on the Mediterranean feel.
The walls are in crown Advance New Sea Jade silk emulsion, £14.99 for 2.5 litres, and the woodwork is in Crown Solo Satin Jade.
The interior of the cupboard is painted in a contrasting shade of blue in Crown Solo Satin Moonshine and the detail on the bath panel and beading are Crown Solo Satin Velvet Black, both at £7.99 per litre.
Buyer's Guide to BEDS
Essential for rest and relaxation of the mind as well as the body never judge a bed solely by its cover — it's what's going on inside that's more important.
By Christine Parsons
A bed is a bed is a bed…right?
Wrong!
Unlike almost every other item of furniture, a bed should never be bought on looks alone, nor should you try to economise.
Beds vary enormously in style and price, but you get what you pay for and a cheap bed will wear out faster than a quality style.
So always buy the best you can afford.
Bedding experts reckon that you shouldn't pay less than £400 or so, which may sound like a lot, but actually works out at under 20p per night over a 10–15 year lifespan.
All beds are made up of a mattress and a base which should ideally be bought together.
If you have an existing bedframe, always ask for advice, as the wrong combination may cause damage to the mattress.
DOWN TO BASES
Sprung bases are the most comfortable as the springs go right up to the edges.
Not surprisingly  they're the most expensive too and the only type suitable to use with a pocket-sprung mattress.
Firm-edge bases have a wooden framework with the springs inside.
They give better support at the edges than a sprung base so they're a practical choice if you tend to sit on the bed.
Solid bases give the firmest support so may need a springier mattress to compensate.
They are most often found on drawer divans.
Continental style bases have flexible wooden slats and are often contained within a traditional divan.
With more ‘give’ than rigid styles, the slats can be adjusted to alter the firmness of the bed.
Some beds also have a manual or motor driven mechanism to raise the foot and/or head area.
MATTRESS MATTERS
Pocket-sprung mattresses are the most luxurious with each tiny light spring individually encased inside a fabric pocket.
The comfort of the mattress is determined by the number of springs, which is generally a minimum of 900, while luxury styles may have two layers of springs and some 2000 springs in all.
More or less handmade, a pocket-sprung mattress is expensive but the best bet for couples of differing weights as it gives each sleeper individual support.
Open sprung mattresses are generally cheaper buys with the coil springs held together within a framework of wire.
The firmness of the mattress depends on the number of springs used and the heaviness or gauge of the wire.
Continuous or ‘posture’ springing is a mattress literally knitted together matures single length of wire.
Foam mattresses are made from layers of different density foam, but they don't offer the support of a sprung mattress and some people find them too warm to sleep on.
However, on the plus side, they're non-allergenic so ideal if you suffer from hay fever.
They are also light, and don't need airing or turning.
Spring and foam mattresses are a fairly new innovation, arguably combining the best of both worlds.
Most are rather like a sandwich with the steel springs embedded in a honeycomb of foam.
COVER STORY
While the springs or foam give support, it's the padding and upholstery that gives the mattress its softness.
Fillings used include natural fibres such as cashmere, lamb's wool, horsehair and felt and synthetic materials like polyester.
When buying look for the manufacturers' ‘cut-through’: a small section of the bed showing its construction.
Even the cheapest bed should have five layers of upholstery usually starting with a thick layer of padding over the springs and ending with the decorative cover.
Check out the cover: a high-quality damask is often the first sign of a good bed, as is deep quilting and tufting, a distinctive finish you'll find on all handmade pocket spring mattresses.
The cheapest beds have a non-woven fabric which wears through very quickly.
SHAPING UP
What size bed?
Mattresses come in a range of six standard sizes:
Compact single — 2′ 6″ by 6′ 3 ″ (76 by 190cm) Popular single — 3′ by 6′ 3″ (91 by 190cm)
Compact double — 4′ by 6′ 3″ (122 by 190cm).
Popular double — 4′ 6″ by 6′ 3″ (137 by 190cm)
Queen size — 5 ′ by 6′ 6″ (152 by 198cm)
If your bed base is an unusual size or you want an even larger mattress, you can have one made to measure.
Relyon can make mattresses up to 7′ (213cm) square while Vi-Spring will tackle almost any size.
Pocket sprung mattresses can cope with weight differences of up to four stone, but if you and your partner's weight differs by more than four and a half stone (30kg) your best bet is a pair of ‘zip-and-link’ mattresses.
With this arrangement, two small or standard mattresses and bases fit together to make a double bed.
BUYING TIPS
Always buy your bed with your partner, it's not a decision you can make alone
Shop around — compare prices and styles in a number of shops, and always choose a reputable well-known manufacturer
Never shop when you're tired as the chances are that you'll find any bed comfortable
Try the bed out — you can't judge it by gingerly sitting on the side, so slip off your shoes and lie down
Is the bed big enough?
It should be at least six inches longer than the tallest occupant for comfort
Put your hands behind your head.
If your elbows touch or overhang the edge, the bed is too small
Remember that the heavier you are, the firmer the bed you'll need.
Try this simple test: if you can easily slide your hand under the small of your back, the bed is probably too firm, but if it's difficult the bed is probably too soft
Bad back?
Experts agree that there's no such thing as an ‘orthopaedic’ bed — most are simply very, very firm which, far from curing a back problem, could actually aggravate it.
WEAR AND TEAR
Always remove the plastic covering before putting on a underblanket or mattress cover
Air the bed by flinging back the covers for around half an hour every morning
Turn a sprung mattress from side to side or end to end every six months
Don't vacuum the mattress which could dislodge the filling but instead brush it occasionally to remove dust and fluff
Regal Supreme spring edge divan set by Vi-Spring from £1,784
WIN £6,000 WORTH OF STYLISH BEDROOM FURNITURE FROM DUCAL
With 50 years of experience and a quality of design and finish that is second to none, Ducal Furniture have an excellent reputation for solid pine furniture.
Made from Scandinavian Redwood which has a distinctive warmth and grain, the Ducal range is made to very high standards which means that it looks good, works well and is designed to last.
We have two wonderful prizes of bedroom furniture to be won from the top of Ducal's range.
HOW TO ENTER
It's easy to enter this competition — just study the three simple questions below and then cal our 24 hour hotline and be ready to leave your answers, name, address and daytime telephone number.
Your call should not cost more than a first class stamp.
Just call 0839 66 61 68 and enter this fabulous competition today!
The first and second prize winners will be the first correct entries to be chosen after the closing date of July 6 1992.
Calls will be charged at 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p per minute at all other times.
QUESTIONS
1
Ducal furniture is made from a) Scandinavian Redwood b) Maple c) Ash
2
Ducal have been making furniture for a) 25 years b) 35 years c) 50 years
3
What's the meaning of the Italian word piazza? a) Wardrobe b) Square c) Church
FIRST PRIZE
Our lucky winner will receive a wonderful suite of Rosedale bedroom furniture from Ducal — a superb prize worth around £4,000.
The Rosedale collection, which has a timeless traditional style with a warm burgundy finish and burnished brass handles, is guaranteed to add a touch of class to your bedroom.
This excellent prize comprises no less than nine pieces to help our winner set up home.
A romantic four poster bed complete with drapes and a canopy, a large chest of drawers, two bedside chests, a handsome combi-wardrobe, a pretty dressing table with separate gallery mirror and stool and a bentwood chair are all waiting to be won.
SECOND PRIZE
Our second prize winner will win a fabulous suite of Piazza bedroom furniture comprising a double bed, two bedside chests and a tall chest of drawers — prizes worth over £2,000.
Piazza, which is one of Ducal's newest ranges is a fine example of their flair for design.
In a soft shade of bisque, this classic collection of painted furniture has been skilfully finished with a fashionable and authentic aged look.
THE RULES
This competition is open to all readers of Wedding and Home in the UK and Eire, except those in any way involved in the competition.
There is no entry fee.
Entries will be judged after the closing date of July 6 1992 and winners will be notified as soon as possible after that date.
Any entries made after the closing date will be disqualified.
We regret that if, for any reason, the winners cannot accept their prizes, there can be no cash alternative.
The Editor's decision is final in all matters relating to the competition and no correspondence can be entered into.
The Rosedale collection (above) and the Piazza collection (right)
HONEYMOONS
Here comes summer…time for the two of you to slip away for that special holiday, so sit back and enjoy those dream destinations that make you wish you were there…cruise the Caribbean's hot spots on Le Ponant and graceful and stylish luxury yacht…take time off a tour of the Greek Islands and enjoy the special mixture of sun, beauty and history…party 'till dawn on Majorca or discover more secluded spots on this and the other Balearic Islands…beat the crowds to the tiny Caribbean island of Anguilla and relish the silky feel of warm sand slipping between your toes…if time is short cross the Channel to France and the pretty countryside of Picardy …or rediscover England on a relaxing barge built for two…we also look at romantic hotels in Britain , perfect for first nights, short breaks or indulgent weekends…
HONEYMOON NEWS BY ERIC MILLER
PACIFIC PARADISE
Elegant Resorts can arrange weddings on some of the South Pacific islands and on some of the hideaway retreats of Queensland and the Barrier Reef.
But if it's an unforgettable honeymoon you are looking for they can also help.
Their Pacific brochure is full of the most wonderful resorts imaginable.
Take, for example, Vatulele (above); an exclusive Fijian island hideaway that takes just 24 guests.
Or consider Hotel Bora Bora where guests stay in overwater bungalows with steps down into a lagoon, or the Moana Beach where you can watch the fish below your bungalow through a glass coffee table!
Details on 0244 325620.
TROPICAL RETREAT
Jalhousie Plantation, a new luxury resort managed by Premier Resorts and Hotels open this June on the magical isle of St Lucia.
Nestled between the majestic Pitons mountains, Jalhousie has 115 cottages all with their own private verandah and plunge pool, and twelve hillside suits to choose from.
Jalhousie is an all-inclusive resort which means that when you arrive everything has already been paid for.
There are four restaurants, three bars, watersports, horseriding and spa facilities to enjoy.
Caribbean Connection, Happiness Islands, Harlequin and Elite Vacations all include Jalhousie in their brochures.
ELITE CHOICE
If you are investigating the possibilities for a truly memorable honeymoon then Elite Vacations brochure is well worth a browse.
As well as offering some superb honeymoon locations they can also organise weddings in many of their destinations.
Elite cover the full spectrum from adventure holidays in the Japanese Alps or Brazilian rainforest to leisurely holidays on the world's finest tropical beaches.
To request a brochure call 081 423 3131.
PRIVATE ISLANDS
Picture an island near Zanzibar ringed by a virginal coral reef where you stay in a thatched hut amongst palm trees on a pristine beach.
This is a description of Mnemba Club, one of the private island paradises featured in CV Travel's Different World brochure.
If this hasn't enticed you then consider the Caribbean isle of Petit St Vincent where guests stay in luxurious stone cottages.
To guarantee complete seclusion guests are encouraged to fly a red flag outside their cottage!
Details from CV Travel on 071 581 0851.
RUNAWAY BRIDES
Cosmos have introduced some unusual locations for couples wishing to exchange vows under foreign skies.
Bali, Sri Lanka and Las Vegas are some of the wild and wonderful destinations featured in the Distant Dreams brochure.
They can arrange to mary you in a hot air balloon or on the beach, they can even invite along some monks to attend the proceedings.
The Dream Weddings in Paradise fact pack is obtainable by calling 061 480 3929.
LUXURY LINER
A romantic alternative for your honeymoon is to cruise around the islands and sheltered sea lochs of the of the West coast of Scotland, Britain's last remaining wilderness.
The Hebridean Princess is a luxury liner offering the best in old fashioned service.
Just 46 guests can experience the Princess at any one time, staying in luxurious staterooms.
May of the rooms have canopied beds, the ship also has a bar, a library and even an open fire on board.
Prices start from £995 per person for 7 nights inclusive of gourmet food and excursions.
For details call 0756 701338.
BALEARICS
If you decide to honeymoon in the Balearic islands, beware, you may never come back.
Not that you'll be the first.
The Carthaginians were one of the first to set the trend when they founded Ibiza in 654 BC.
Since then the Romans, vandals, Moors, Normans, English, Byzantines and French have all fought over and left their mark on these pretty islands.
Situated in the middle of the Mediterranean, between Spain and Africa, the islands of Formentera, Ibiza, Minorca and Majorca that comprise the Balearic archipelago are now firmly part of Spain.
Yet Catalan and not Spanish remains their first language (the signposts have often two spellings), and Ibiza and Formentera — the smallest of the group — are still commonly referred to by their Roman name ‘Pituisas’, the Islands of Pines.
The largest of the islands, Majorca, has much more to recommend it than just beaches.
I arrived expecting high rise hotels and crowded shores, instead I was treated to pretty villages built in honey coloured stone and fields of poppies.
As our taxi made its way up the winding road to the north west of the island, we passed immaculate terraces filled with olive and citrus groves beneath which tethered goats grazed happily on the dry clumps of grass.
The Sierra mountain range which runs the length of the north west coast of Majorca, gives the island a dramatic scenery in contrast to the soft beaches below.
Our hotel, the Es Moli, was located in the heart of this range.
A grand building — complete with pool and wonderful terraced gardens — perched on the hillside just outside the picturesque village of Deya, it's the ind of place that people return to time and time again.
One guest (a Mrs Conway), has returned 52 times and her son even met his wife there.
Deya is a tiny little village, boasting a handful of bars and restaurants, a pretty church (housing one of only two examples of Christ on a crucifix wearing a skirt), an art gallery and a tiny museum.
Time seems to have stood still here and the only people who seem to be in a hurry are those passing through — driving in a typically Mediterranean style.
But in fact very few can resist the urge to stop and sit in one of the small road side restaurants and simply soak up the atmosphere.
To explore the island, hiring a car is essential, but this can be easily arranged through the hotel.
There are glorious walks to be found in the Sierra and although there is no proper beach to speak of in Deya, there is a small cove within walking distance and the town Puerto Pollensa — with a long sweeping unspoilt beach — is just a short drive away.
But with some 400 kilometres of coastline there are plenty of beaches to discover without every having to descend on the more developed resorts of Magaluf and El Arenal in the south.
Palma, the capital of Majorca and of all the Balearic islands is a bustling and cosmopolitan city.
Its huge sweeping bay some 20 kilometres long, is crammed with a colourful array of luxurious yachts and the sleek power boats of the rich and famous.
A town of surprises, the east is dominated by a dramatic Gothic cathedral and royal palace, while the old town is a mixture of narrow medieval streets and 17th and 18th century architecture.
If you look closely there's even the occasional town house designed by Gaudi (Spain's most eminent architect.)
Food, you will find, is treated with a gentle reverence.
Late breakfasts would end with an Ensaimada — a kind of sweet break dusted with icing sugar — and coffee only to be followed by leisurely lunches which, more often than not began with plates of olives, Minorcan cheese and ham and small bowls of alioli — a Minorcan speciality of garlic and mayonnaise — into which we dipped chunks of crusty bread.
To follow, thick slices of Tortilla sandwiched between slices of bread spread with the juice of fresh tomatoes and olive oil, steaming hot pans of saffron yellow paella or ‘trampo’ a Majorcan salad of pepper, tomato and onion were just a few of the ‘light’meals we dined on.
In the evening dinner starts late and is an equally unhurried event.
Fish is something of a speciality with restaurants offering everything from grilled swordfish and lobster, to baby eels in garlic butter.
But they are also big meat eaters and you will find suckling pig and rabbit offered on most menus.
Life in the Balearic islands moves at only one pace — slow.
And while you can, if you wish, party on into the night, by day you need to do no more than gently toast your body on sandy beaches or explore the pretty coastline.
Marie Farquharson 
TRAVEL FACTS
We travelled with Thomson Holidays.
Their A La Carte brochure features a wide range of hotels in Ibiza and Majorca.
Fourteen nights at the Hotel Es Moli Deya, Majorca starts form £ 814 per person half board.
For reservations telephone 081 200 8733.
For information on the Balearic Islands contact the Spanish Tourist Office on 071 499 0901.
CARIBBEAN CRUISE
Our cab from Guadeloupe airport turned into the harbour at Pointe-á-Pietre and we had our first glimpse of our brand new stunning sailing ship.
Le Ponant, named after a trade wind and a small group of islands off Brittany, is 88 metres of sheer grace and beauty, its three huge sailing masts making it a breathtaking sight.
Welcomed aboard by the young and good looking French crew we walked through the automatic glass sliding doors into the air conditioned reception room and through to the main lounge finished with luxurious mint green leather settees, a piano and cocktail bar.
Celebrating the start of our once in a lifetime holiday in style by sipping rum punches on the open deck we watched the sun beginning to set before being escorted to our cabin.
Not surprisingly on this exclusive floating hotel which accommodates just 64 privileged travellers, the cabins were well designed and spacious.
The en suite bathroom even had two white towelling bathrobes bearing Le Ponant's logo available for our use.
In the restaurant, where dress is smart, we had our first chance to meet and chat to our mainly French fellow passengers and sample French nouvelle cuisine.
One the first night our dessert of a white meringue swan floating on a sea of raspberry sauce with a scoop of rum and raisin ice-cream nestling between its folded wings, gives an idea of how beautifully presented the meals were.
Vegetarians should note that as every evening meal is a set four course dinner which is meat and fish orientated, they should arrange for special means when booking their cruise.
Buffet style breakfast and lunch on the ship's open terrace was delicious and always amid glorious surroundings.
My favourite lunches were a tasty creole chicken with kidney beans and rice and succulent fish kebabs with rice and salad.
it goes without saying that our glasses were constantly refilled with red or white wine by the attentive waiters.
Desserts included fresh fruit, delicious fruit flans, cakes, crème caramel and various cheeses.
We chose the southern route for our cruise and so our first port of call was the beautiful bay of Les Saintes.
Our morning walk along the cliffs gave us terrific views of the secluded white sand bays dotted along the coastline followed by a few hours on Pompièrre beach where the locals meet to picnic.
In the afternoon we went for our first ever dive with Patrick, Le Ponant's diving director.
I found the total silence at a depth of six metres interrupted only by the sound of my breathing quite eerie.
At first it was also quite disorientating but incredibly fascinating as we swam through the clear water amongst a tremendous variety of brightly coloured fish, anemones, coral and sponges.
After twenty minutes we returned to the ship, tired but amazed by our experience and looking forward to hoisting up anchor and heading for our next stop, St. Lucia.
Everyone was up on the sun deck in the early morning as we approached the magnificent twin peaks of this imposing looking island.
We were also very lucky to see dolphins in the distance playfully dumping out of the water as they swam past our ship, obviously for our entertainment.
Lunch and the afternoon was spent in the picturesque surroundings of the calm Marigot and Soufrière Bays, followed by a folk band and limbo show in the evening.
On Monday morning we were greeted by the view of Bequia, one of 32 islands which make up the wonderful Grenadines.
As we walked around this pretty little island we were charmed by the friendliness of the local people.
A short walk along the coastline past the few prettily painted small hotels brought us to the gorgeous bay lined with palm trees which we shared with the numerous shy crabs which intermittently popped out of the holes in the white sand.
In the afternoon we arrived at the truly beautiful island of Mayero which has no boutiques or roads and only a few hundred inhabitants.
The deserted caster sugar white beach lined with palm trees and conch shells surrounded by the clear vivid blue and emerald sea was perfect for snorkelling.
To really get in the swing of things we celebrated in the evening with a  Caribbean dinner followed by a rum punch party.
Your really are spoilt for choice for beautiful beaches on this cruise but our picnic  on the beach at Tobago Cays, a string of white sandy islands, was a taste of paradise.
In the evening we had a very enjoyable meal at the Captain's table and Captain Lemaire filled us in on the delights of Martinque, our next port of call.
Martinque richly deserves its nickname of ‘island of flowers’ and against the background of this lush tropical island I tried my hand at water-skiing for the first time.
Water-skiing, windsurfing and snorkelling equipment are all free.
Extras are diving, most of the excursions and all drinks not taken at mealtimes, so it's a good idea to keep a check on how your bill is running up.
Our first day on Martinque was rounded off with a great beach party with music provided by a local band.
If you are fit, really love testing yourself and are not afraid of heights then don't miss the Canyon walking excursion into the depths of Martinque's tropical forest.
This survival course led by three guides, has you clambering over rocks and streams filled with fish and crabs at the bottom of a huge canyon surrounded by rich green forest.
Hanging vines drip down into the canyon which resounds with the sounds of frogs and birds and the sweet smell of Madonna lilies.
Our first of six jumps was from a huge rock down into fresh cool water.
The next involved  abseilling down half a huge rock before dropping into a pool with a waterfall close by.
It really is exhilarating stuff and there's three hours of it.
Walking back through the jungle I thankfully didn't come across any trap-door spiders but as dusk fell I was entranced by a cluster of trees which were suddenly lit up like Christmas trees by the thousands of glow-worms out for a night of passion.
Our last evening was spent with a goodbye dinner and evening swapping addresses with our new found friends before departing for Guadeloupe and heading home, our minds full of wonderful memories of this amazing trip.
Carol Billington 
TRAVEL FACTS
Prices start at £1,050 per person for a week's cruise around the Caribbean inclusive of transfers, full board, wine with meals and watersports.
This price includes flights.
For a copy of Le Ponant brochure and full details contact Representation Plus, 375 Upper Richmond Road West, East Sheen, London SW14 7JG (081 392 1589).
ENGLAND
For a honeymoon with an unhurried pace why not chug through the serene Victorian waterways of England on a 60′ canal barge?
All of Bridgewater Boats' distinctive red barges are named after T.S.
Elliot's much loved cats.
Their honeymoon boat ‘Old Possum’ is the queen of the fleet, with carpeting, a fitted kitchen, a restful dining area and lounge and a plush pink double bedroom.
As well as a beautiful polished brass fire it has central heating, a shower and a flush toilet.
Based in the picturesque Hertfordshire town of Berkhamsted, Mike and Lindy started Bridgewater Boats 20 years ago.
Mike designs and builds barges and Lindy designs their comfortable and space conscious interiors.
From their boatyard you can travel down to London, through Colne Valley, Cassiobury Park, Regents Park and London Zoo to end up at Little Venice or Camden Lock.
or chug to Oxford or Shakespeare's Stratford up through the Chiltern hills, visit Stoke  Breurne Waterways Museum and if you're feeling really brave you could tackle the two mile long Blisworth Tunnel.
All the barges are of course self-catering, Berkhamsted has many well stocked supermarkets and delis, and Lindy was quite happy to look after our bags while we stocked up on provisions.
Once aboard, Roger our friendly tutor, introduced us to the art of running and handling a 60′ boat and coping with locks.
It really is quite simple, but there are a few basic rules you must adhere to if you don't want to flood the canal system or find yourself adrift in the middle of the night!
Armed with a canal guide and a confidence inspiring wave from Roger we set off on our gentle adventure.
Although a little apprehensive at first of steering such a large boat, we settled into it remarkably quickly.
The engine is deceptively simple, powering the propeller and through a generator, creating the electricity needed to run the waterpump, heating and lighting.
The waterways are incredibly peaceful with a wealth of wildlife and some incredibly beautiful scenery.
You can travel as many or as few miles as you wish, but    remember every lock you pass through you'll be tackling on the way back.
You can moor just about anywhere the bank will take an iron peg or where a mooring ring is available.
Mike and Lindy are full of suggestions as to where the prettiest spots are and which stretches of canal have the best pubs.
There are many inspiring sights on the canals and one not to be missed is Tring Summit with its leafy green canopy of tall trees and soft green light reflected from the water as the herons fly through this natural tunnel at twilight.
The canal map is easy to follow showing locks and numbered bridges, and at an average speed of two miles per hour you won't feel the need to hurry.
There are regular canal pubs and boatyards and if you moor up near a town you will usually find yourself half a mile to a mile from the town centre.
There are plenty of places to eat and pick up provisions, and watch out for watering holes to top up your onboard water supply.
We moored up near Bulbourne works with its Italianate tower, nearby was a pleasant Victorian canal side pub serving a variety of meals.
Around half a mile away was the small Hertfordshire town of Tring with shops and bakeries providing everything for a canal side picnic.
At night ‘Old Possum’ was warm and cosy with its own central heating, plenty of hot water and the homely glow of polished and brass.
We slept well in our cabin rocked by the gentle movement of the boat as she drifted in and out against her moorings.
Breakfast was quite a social affair as we were frequently visited by new found friends in the shape of two fat and very vocal geese, a young swan and a bevy of excited ducks.
Give yourselves plenty of time for your return journey as you'll be surprised just how far you can travel even at two miles an hour!
TRAVEL FACTS
Bridgewater Boats are located at Castle Wharf in Berkhampsted Hertfordshire.
The price for the honeymooners' barge ‘Old Possum’ ranges from £600 to £900 per week.
If you don't want to steer the craft yourself, Mike and Lindy will provide you with one of their own boatmen.
TVs, bedlinen and even life jackets are available.
Call Bridgewater Boats on 0442 863615 for further information and a brochure.
PICARDY
If time is of the essence then taking the car to northern France for a couple of nights is an attractive option.
The promise of pretty countryside, historical towns, exquisite food and wine all combine to make a very special break.
A map and directions from Calais had been provided with our travel documents and the 36 mile drive to Aire-sur-la-Lys where we were staying was remarkably easy.
En route we stopped off in St. Omer with its neat old fashioned square and impressive cathedral where we ate delicious crepes.
A genuinely warm welcome awaited us at Les Trois Mousquetaires, our hotel, which is run by the Venet family.
From the outside the hotel, which is set in beautiful gardens, looked very grand with its beamed exterior and red and cream brickwork.
Inside the public rooms were graceful and inimitably French in style, whilst the guest rooms were comfortable and modern.
The main focus of our stay was dining at Les Trois Mousquetaires, which can only be described as a heavenly indulgence.
Monsieur Venet, the proprietor's son is the chef and cooks with a passion, creating dishes with wonderfully rich sauces and flavours that we'd never savoured before.
The restaurant is also very popular with the local people who contribute greatly to the atmosphere.
North east France is largely agricultural and leisurely drives through the quiet country roads of Picardy were very pleasant.
The countryside around here is rather flat with expansive green fields that are easy on the eye.
Certain scenes were reminiscent of Constable paintings with quaint red brick farm buildings with smoking chimneys.
We pottered around the town of Aire, situated on the banks of the River Lys, and admired some of the 17th and 18th century architecture around its quaint cobbled marketplace.
The ancient town of Montreuil with its twisting cobbled streets and lovely old buildings is full of character and turned out to be a great favourite of ours.
Approached from the road below it appears as a hilltop fort enclosed by ramparts.
Montreuil has a fascinating history, it was once a port but it was abandoned by the sea years ago and is now 14 kilometres from the coast.
A good market patisseries and restaurants can all be found in this pretty town.
A trip to this part of France would be wasted without a visit to Le Touquet.
During the '20s and '30s Le Touquet was highly fashionable competing with resorts on the Cote d'Azur.
Le Touquet's identity today is a little ambiguous but it still has a nice feel about it.
It is a town of broad white sands, huge villas and exclusive shopping alongside neon signs, amusement arcades and burger bars.
Fighting against the wind we ran along the beach and watched a steel grey North Sea crashing in.
Erica Miller 
TRAVEL FACTS
We travelled to Picardy with Inn Travel 0439 71111.
A two night self-drive weekend break from their Winter-Inn programme staying at Les Trois Mousquetaires costs £181 per person high season.
This includes two nights accommodation, breakfast and dinner on each day and lunch on Sunday, ferry crossing, travel insurance and map.
GREEK ISLANDS
Like many visitors before me, I got my first taste of Greece on crete, the largest and most southerly of the Greek islands.
With its combination of beauty, beaches, culture and history, it has been long been a favourite holiday destination and its hot temperatures have drawn sun seekers form all over the world.
We made our base in the city of Rethymnon, set on a bay lying between the White and Idi mountain ranges.
A popular resort, its beaches stretch for miles and the city's particular charm lies in its past — we visited underground Minoan tombs and explored an old Venetian town, dominated by a well-preserved fortezza and mosques dating from as early as 1670.
The streets of Rethymnon's old town are narrow and cobbled, filled with intriguing shops and much of everyday Cretan life is concentrated on the old harbour front and promenade here.
This beach road is closed to traffic after 6pm and here the nightlife begins — be it a leisurely walk in the balmy evening air, a chat and drink with the locals in a taverna or a fresh fish dish in a typically lively Green restaurant.
Rethymnon has easy access to the south, east and west of Crete and, with so many charming towns and villages within easy reach, exploration is a must.
There are plenty of cheap buses to take, but journeys can be long, so hiring a car is a sound investment, although to do this you must be over 23 and have a full driving licence.
You wouldn't know it to watch the locals, but seatbelts are compulsory here and it really is advisable to buckle up as some of the mountain roads require skilful manoeuvring!
It's tempting to stop at every village you come across on your travels — at Spili, we paused to drink from a Venetian fountain where stone lionheads spouted clear spring mountain water; at Preveli we visited the famous monastery which looks out to the south coast; driving through the Psiloritis mountains we braved the wind to climb down the Kourtaliotiko Gorge and saw the tiny church of St Nicolas.
Built on the site of the old Minoan city, the town of Chania on the North West coast was our next stop.
The old part of the town is home to one of the most famous Venetian harbour promenades in Greece and the modern town is notable for its busy indoor market, and the only one in Crete.
We couldn't leave Crete without sampling an evening of typical entertainment, called Raki and Syrtaki.
Walking to the tiny mountain village of Axos, there was a friendly excitement in the air as locals waved us on our way to the open air taverna.
We were greeted with metaxa, the local brandy, and spent a wonderful evening sampling local cuisine and wines, watching and joining in with talented local dancers who wore full Cretan costume.
Eating in Greece has always been a great social occasion — it's normal to begin with meze, sharing from small plates of typically Greek food — taramasalata , tzatziki, dolmades, kalamari and Greek salad and it's customary to go into the kitchen to choose your main course.
House wines are often served straight from the barrel.
An early start the next morning found us on the ferry bound to the island of Santorini, around 112 kilometres to the north of Crete.
Also called ‘thira’, or ‘the most beautiful’, this unique island was originally circular in shape but, during a volcanic explosion 3,500 years ago, its centre sank into the sea, leaving a crescent shaped island, surrounding a huge bay which is the largest caldera in the world.
We stayed in the relaxed beach resort on the east coast of the island called Kamari.
The black sand beach here stretches for three kilometres and village life is centred around one main street, lined with bars and restaurants overlooking the seafront.
History lovers will be fascinated by the excavations currently taking place on the south of the island at Akrotiri — here much of the original Minoan city, dating back 3,350 years has been unearthed, revealing three storey houses, utensils and beautiful frescoes, preserved by the volcanic ash that covered the city.
Kamari Tours offer several interesting excursions and a visit to Santorini would not be complete without a boat trip  to the active volcano on Neo Kameni or New Burnt Island, which last exploded in the 1950s.
After climbing to the top of the largest crater, the boat took us to a small bay on Palea Kameni where you can swim to the hot springs and delve into the orange mud of the sea bed, supposedly wonderful for your skin!
Santorini's capital, Fira, is about 1,000 feet above sea level on the western coast of the island and provides wonderful views of the bay and volcanic islets.
Beautiful white, pastel pink and blue houses nestle in the cliffs and we took the funicular railway down the cliff side to the pretty harbour at Skala for a closer view and a donkey ride back up through the twisting mountain road.
Back  in the main town, we explored twisting alleys which eventually led us to the old Frankish quarter.
Shopkeepers beckoned us into their premises where we were tempted by sparkling silver jewellery and traditional greek hand woven mats.
We ended a perfect day sipping sangria at a cliffside restaurant, relaxing in the spectacular sunset.
Kim Jones 
TRAVEL FACTS
We went to Greece with Thomson Holidays, choosing from their Simply Greece brochure.
For details contact Thomson Holidays Birmingham, London, Manchester  or see your local travel agent.
ANGUILLA
This tiny island 16 miles long and three miles wide with a population of just over 7,000, has some of the most beautiful beaches in the Caribbean and the friendliest inhabitants I have ever met.
Anguilla (pronounced An-Gwil-a) is just an hour's flight from Antigua and with a mean monthly temperature of 80 degrees fahrenheit it is not surprising that this British Crown Colony is fast becoming the ‘in’ place for holidaymakers.
We visited Anguilla in the winter season which runs from December 15 to March 31 and were blessed with beautiful sunshine and very few tourists.
Accommodation was at The Mariners at Sandy Ground, an idyllic place which consists of 20 charming West Indian gingerbread style cottages which stand on the crescent shaped white sand beach shaded between palm, coconut and brilliant red flame trees.
The view from our verandah was heavenly: hammocks hung between sea-grape trees swayed in the gentle sea breeze, the deserted brilliant white beach contrasted with the calm turquoise sea dotted with yachts, catamarans and the occasional wind-surfer.
Pelicans flew about swooping suddenly into the water to dive for fish.
At The Mariners, Anguilla's only all-inclusive property, the package includes free use of sun beds, umbrellas, jacuzzi and tennis court, snorkelling equipment, sailing, windsurfing and boat excursions.
Remember that topless bathing is not allowed.
Food served at the Beach Terrace Bar and Restaurant is excellent and made all the more enjoyable by our visitors at breakfast.
While eating we watched a variety of cheeky small birds darting through the restaurant, picking up tasty crumbs of freshly baked bread and croissants or dipping their long narrow beaks around the lid of the sugar bowl when the waiters weren't looking.
One brave larger bird landed on our table and promptly stuck his bill into the butter!
At lunchtimes I couldn't wait to have my regular fix of Anguillan fish soup with rouille, a creamy fish soup with croutons and tasty garlic dip.
Other delicious lunch time meals included seafood salad, a selection of fresh local fish, scallops, prawns and lobster with salad and dressing and lobster salad, a fresh Anguillan spiny lobster with a spicy sauce, garnished with lettuce, tomato and egg.
The evening meal featured a regular à la carte menu with special dishes like chicken with coconut and ginger, seafood pasta in tangy tomato sauce and terrine of chocolate served with an apricot sauce.
Sunday was Anguillan night, Thursday we had a barbeque buffet and Saturday a West Indian dinner which turned out to be one of the best meals I have ever tasted.
This was served buffet style from huge urns by the head chef.
We started with breadfruit soup which was so delicious we went back for seconds, followed by samples of jack fish, curried chicken, cod fish salad and whelks and dumplings with black eyed peas and rice.
Dessert was a choice of heavily laced rum cake or banana crumble.
Sandy Island, which you can just see on the horizon from the Beach Restaurant, looks just like a cartoonist's typical desert island sketch.
Excursions can be arranged from The Mariners and you can book a tasty picnic to take with you.
Sandy Island is incredible — just two miles out from Sandy Ground it is a tiny mound of dazzling white sand with room for ten coconut trees and a bar run by Neville and his friends.
Here you can snorkel or  simply relax with a beer and enjoy the sounds of Neville's calypso and reggae music.
Back on Anguilla, it's worth hiring a car for the day to explore the island.
Travelling along the island's one main road and off on to the dusty tracks we were amazed at how friendly the locals were.
Everyone waved at us from the street and were ever ready to help with directions.
There is a strong contrast however between the tranquil beauty of the coast line and surroundings inland.
A few miles from the coast the landscape turns flat, drab and barren.
Poor shacks housing local families are interspersed with grand villas and there are lots of half built homes scattered around owned by Anguillans who live abroad and return to the island when they have earned enough money to add the next storey.
The Valley is the capital of the area but don't expect much — it simply consists of a few official buildings, shops and the island's only traffic light!
Travelling around I noticed an intriguing fashion trend amongst the local women who do their shopping, driving and general housework in luminous green or orange hair rollers.
Out of the 33 beautiful beaches on Anguilla, Shoal Bay is the most stunning.
Its two miles of almost deserted white sand and coral reefs make for excellent sunbathing and snorkelling.
We saw lots of jack fish, four eyed butterfly fish, parrot fish and cute trunkfish swimming among the coral and sea urchins.
Also worth a visit is Mead's Bay beach and Island Harbour lined by coconut trees and brightly coloured fishing boats from where you can get a free ride out to Scilly Cay and enjoy fresh seafood while listening to live music.
Until recently, fishing and boat building was Anguilla's main industries but since the ‘80s tourism has boomed.
This is not surprising considering Anguilla's tranquil beauty and its friendly people whose motto is simply ‘enjoy’.
Carol Billington 
TRAVEL FACTS
Prices start at around £80 per person per day double occupancy, for the all inclusive package — inclusive accommodation, breakfast, lunch, afternoon tea and dinner, open bar, house wines, and local entertainment.
Flights are excluded.
For reservations and enquiries contact .
With enough notice weddings can be arranged at the Mariners.
All prices and information correct at time of going to press 
HOTELS around Britain
CORNWALL
If your idea of a romantic retreat is a hotel with magnificent views and superb food then look no further than the Island Hotel on Tresco in the Scilly Isles.
It take just 20 minutes by helicopter to reach this semi-tropical island off the Cornish coast (2½ hours by ferry via St Mary's).
The island is only two miles long by one wide with seven miles of coastline, just over half of which is gleaming white sand.
There are miles of footpaths to follow and plenty of secluded spots to discover.
The Island Hotel itself is nestled between the rocky arms of Merchant's and Long Point, with its own beach.
We stayed in the Flower Wing, our room luxuriously furnished with soft floral prints.
As well as a large double bed and en suite bathroom we also had a sitting area complete with mini bar and huge TV and a private terrace with a wonderful view of the sparkling blue Atlantic.
Light lunches are served in the cool and spacious bar.
Relax in the large comfy sofas in sea shell hues or white Lloyd Loom chairs and admire the view of the two nearby islands Northewethel and Foremans Island.
Breakfast is served in the gentle atmosphere of the dining room with its panoramic views and an impressive mural by Marcus May, depicting Tresco complete with a naughty but much loved green parrot, until recently owned by the island's landlord Mr Robert Dorrien Smith.
Breakfast comes mainly buffet style and is ample enough for even the heartiest of appetites.
The dinner menu is interesting and varied with many dishes incorporating locally caught fish and shellfish and all the vegetables are locally and organically grown.
Vegetarians will need to request special dishes, but the chef and his staff are very helpful.
The Sunday evening buffet is not to be missed, with a fish course of half a small lobster and a whole dressed crab, followed by a carvery with every kind of meat from beef to venison, and fresh poached salmon with crisp salads.
It's lovely to take your nightcap in the bar or the gently lit Quiet Room.
Its walls are lined with old prints, bookshelves holding leather bound volumes and there is always chess available.
Away from the hotel there's plenty to discover as you ramble or cycle around this little island (cars are not allowed).
The north end is quite rugged with granite cliffs and hidden caves above the rough Atlantic ocean.
The south is gentler with soft, clean sands and cool blue waters; in spring the flower fields burst into vibrant colour and wild fowl swim on two small lakes.
Petra Manley 
FACTS:
Prices at the Island Hotel per person per day range from £68.50 to £117.50.
British International Helicopters operate a shuttle service between Penzance and Tresco twice a day; £74 return per person (0736 63871).
The Isle of Scilly Steamship Company run ferries between Penzance and St Mary's, for prices and information call 0800 373307.
For more information and a brochure on the Island Hotel or Tresco call 0720 22883.
LONDON
The Dorset Square Hotel is situated at the back of Baker Street in, as the name suggests, a charming old square, once the location of the first Lords Cricket Ground.
It has often been the haunt of famous cricketers (the West Indies team has stayed here), and the memorabilia of these visits adds an unusual touch to the decoration of the public rooms.
The hotel itself is in fact two Regency buildings which have been opened up into one, so there are lots f nooks and crannies, small staircases and quiet corners to be explored.
It was opened in 1985 by its owners, Tim and Kit Kemp, and it is Kit who has been responsible for the interior decor throughout.
Each of the 37 bedrooms have been individually decorated with a mixture of antiques and opulent fabrics.
The feeling is very much that of a country house hotel in the heart of London, a retreat from the busy streets outside.
Our bedroom was at the top of a winding staircase and afforded views of the square outside.
The bed, with its cream lace counterpane, was huge and comfortable, and the antique wardrobe, original fireplace and generous sofas piled high with cushions immediately made us feel at home.
Bowls of pot pourri scented the air, and the high ceilings gave a feeling of space and light The en suite bathroom was white marble with a luxuriously deep bath and lots of goodies to pamper yourself and it was with great effort that we dressed again for dinner, leaving our soft bathrooms and preening behind.
Drinks were served in the bar adjoining the ‘Country Manners’ restaurant, and we leisurely sipped our aperitifs whilst choosing from the menu.
The kitchen is the responsibility of Trevor Bains who has been with the hotel for three years.
The menu changes regularly and there are daily specials to choose from.
The wine list is not huge but is fairly comprehensive, featuring French, Australian, American and even some English wines.
We sat down to smoked salmon in herbs and large king prawns, followed by tender beef olives with a selection of the freshest vegetables.
To freshen the palate we finished with summer fruits in a delicate sugar basket with a strawberry coulis — a mouthwatering combination.
This is the ideal hotel if you are planning a small wedding reception.
They will quite happily arrange anything you want, but advise that 30–40 people is about the maximum for a seated wedding breakfast.
A menu can be arranged specially to cater for various tastes and requirements, champagne starts at around £35 per bottle and there is a charge of £150 for the room hire.
You can also arrange the use of the hotel's chauffeur driven vintage Bentley car to ensure that you arrive in style.
Location is fairly important to a hotel in London, and you really couldn't be in a more convenient spot.
Take an early morning stroll before breakfast in Regents Park which is close by or shop at leisure in the latticework of streets between the Marylebone Road and Oxford Street,(Bond Street is also near).
For the tourist at heart visit Madam Tussauds or the Planetarium (ideal for wet weather) which are literally around the corner.
Debbie Djordjević 
FACT:
A luxury double room starts at £135 and a coronet room at £155.
Dinner is around £20 per head for two courses, £24 per head for three courses and there is a special daily menu for around £14 per head.
The Dorset Square is a member of Pride of Britain Group of Hotels (026 476 444).
For further information contact .
SOMERSET
Even the drive on the A303 from London to The Castle Hotel in Taunton was a pleasant one.
Once out of the bustling grimy city and on our way we motored into the heart of rural England, through expanses of green rolling hills with the odd kestrel hovering by the roadside looking for prey, and just as the sun began to set we passed Stonehenge, the strange stone monoliths eerily silhouetted against the dusky pink horizon.
Our first view of The Castle Hotel in Taunton town centre was no less impressive.
Once a Norman fortress this huge stone building with  turreted towers stands in its own courtyard with the remains of the original moat dating from 1160 now a very pretty and secluded Norman Garden.
The Castle is steeped in history.
In 1685 Judge Jeffreys held his Bloody Assizes in the Great Hall and Queen Victoria, the Duke of Wellington, Coleridge and Disraeli are among the numerous historic figures who have stayed here.
Even the magnificent wisteria covering the west front of the hotel is around 150 years old.
The Chapman family who have run the hotel for the past 40 years have kept the decor in keeping with the atmosphere the building creates.
Tapestries hang from the huge stone walls, a deep red and gold carpet runs up the sweeping stairway and antiques decorate the floors.
Each of the sumptuous 30 bedrooms and five suites are differently decorated to create a relaxing English country atmosphere and all rooms command magnificent views of the garden and neighbouring Castle Museum.
The Castle is renowned not only for its service and hospitality but also for the excellent of its cuisine.
Dinner was simply superb.
Each dish came beautifully presented and tasted just as good as it looked.
I began with steamed fillet of black bream with pan fried avocado, red lentils and pine kernels while my partner chose chicken liver parfait with glazed oranges and warm brioche toast.
This was followed by roast salmon with noodles and saffron cream while my partner savoured ragout of seafish with saffron and cherry tomatoes.
To finish I had an amazing acacia honey cheesecake with caramelized satsumas and my gluttonous partner went for chef Vickery's selection which featured tasty samples of many delicious desserts.
We also had an incredible choice of over 500 wines.
The Castle is the ideal base for exploring the land of King Arthur, Lorna Doone's Exmoor, the pretty seaside town of Lyme Regis and Thomas Hardy country.
Carol Billington 
FACTS:
A double room including breakfast costs from £125, a suite from £180 per night.
Dinner costs from £22.50 per person.
The Castle is a member of the Pride of Britain Group of Hotels .
All prices and information correct at time of going to press 
next issue
GORGEOUS FASHION FOR SUMMER BRIDES
FIRST HOME STYLE
Honeymoons — from exotic India to upbeat New York
MEET OUR BRIDE OF THE YEAR
SLIP INTO SOMETHING DIFFERENT the best bridal shoes
WIN A HONEYMOON AND HI-FI
ON SALE JULY 9 1992                                          