

That will be Val.
Er I think they have changed contractors.
Again?
Again.
But anyway whether that's true or not the  this was a s s seems to be as a result of
criticism about them not turning up and this sort of thing.
Erm
Hi.
Sorry I'm late 
So I had a long chat with the, with the cleansing officer and the main point
I know, I know.
Liz, do you want a chair?
the main point that I made to him was that after such a superb beginning where, where they actually state how much rubbish we produce, there's absolutely no mention  even though there's space at the bottom  there's no mention of recycling at all.
And he said well it's a different, you know different department.
Mm.
I know yes 
And this was, this, that, that wouldn't have entered into  that brief but my argument was that, you know everybody would be much happier if there was less rubbish to put in the landfill sites  in the first place.
Now that was about two weeks ago and I've been sitting on it meaning to, to write to the press and say how disgusting it was.
Which I have just done today.
Aft , no
Yes, half way through I spoke to to the environ environment officer
Mm
who was much more  switched on.
He's a new environment officer, he's only been there for a month or something.
And he says that  erm.
He sort of agreed with me that it was a waste of an opportunity.
Erm but he did say that he's actually writing a leaflet which they can run to seven or eight pages.
A detailed one about recycling.
anybody will read so  eight pages.
Well I don't know.
I just don't know.
But I mean he was very interested and when I said that we'd actually done a recycling directory and that I was thinking 
 
redoing it.
Erm.
He was very interested and he would like to meet us and I said that if he's actually doing a directory 
all this all this about.
I thought Rob is doing a sort of recycling what do you call it  composium 
Rob has just done a green audit for the district council.
Yes.
Yes.
But we haven't had the opportunity to read it.
I mean he knows that we have a recycling d .
I was in touch with them.
I sent them the recycling.
Why do they pretend not to know?
I mean they should be fully a aware of of of our  
Val well this is a new guy.
is that Mr ?
Mr?
.
The recycling officer.
Is that, is the one, I wrote to  
Hold on .
There.
?
Yeah .
Is that the one you spoke to?
Tom .
Yeah.
That's him .
Only he said that they were gonna get an initiative through the schools on er  
Is is  
he's the one
Anyway that's that's my letter.
Draft letter which I have not got, it's very very rough, for the press.
Sorry I've only got four.
That's alright.
Actually some friends of mine were quite confused about what, why they shouldn't be able to throw their cooking oil away in their bin.
Because they said they'd always done it and they had nowhere else to put it.
Somebody else said oh you should throw it down the sink but I didn't think you were supposed to do that either.
What?
Cooking oil.
Cooking oil?
Yeah.
If you have got one of those deep  fat fryers you, you have quite a bit to throw away.
Well don't put it in water.
No, I don't.
I don't.
You put it in the bin.
No, they, they've said in there you mustn't.
Where?
No not cooking oil.
Er pet , car oil .
Car oil.
 
That's a totally different story.
I'm sure  
But I mean  the bottom bit obviously we've got to talk about whether we actually do want 
bifocals today new.
.
But this guy seems to be well worth nurturing.
Yes.
Here you are.
It says here oh that's waste oil cooking fat and other liquids.
I know it says fat collection but I
Well that only should only be because erm  the bin's going to be soiled.
In in in  in the end  terribly smelly that's the reason.
I mean why there shouldn't be cooking oil in in in landfill.
I mean 
Dad  
 
Dad's not in 
Mm
I can only think that  I mean it sticks to the sides of the bin  at the bottom  
Well if it's if it was very hot could it could it melt the plastic?
It could even melt the plastic yes.
Or could it ignite?
Yeah.
No I I definitely  foodstuffs out of the water.
I mean  into the bin first and then wash the dishes.
To keep the water clean.
Mm.
stuff you put in water.
Yeah.
Sorry?
Was it printed on new paper?
It doesn't say does it?
Well it doesn't say, no 
I think, I think they put recycled if it was don't you?
Well exactly that's
You seen that story, what is it, one paper er if you get the  letter of the week you can take part in the draw and get a flight to  from Stanstead to Dusseldorf.
Wh what paper's this then?
I  I got it last night .
There was the most horrible letter in  England or Britain joining the Common Market .
I'll get you one of those bags.
No  oh you did tell me about it 
Yeah I did tell you.
Do you, well do you then know why  doesn't, isn't Rob in touch with them any more?
Oh yeah, very much so.
I spoke to Trish, Rob's away at the moment
Yeah.
but I spoke to Trish  tonight.
And erm 
But  I mean he's also in the sub committee isn't he?
There was this working committee wasn't it and then the sub committee to the working committee on environmental matters.
No, yeah but I mean that leaflet very likely wouldn't have  you know I mean I think this this leaflet
No no but but that this Mr 
Mr , yeah but I mean 
didn't know  
Okay he should, he should have tapped us as a resource certainly.
Yeah.
But I mean  you know I I'm certainly gonna follow this up.
Mm.
And I think we ought to get him over to one of our meetings.
And  and he said he would.
And I think if we could make it get one of the Uttlesford  chaps to the same meeting  
marvellous thing they did.
Yeah.
Well what he did say was don't  you know  don't go over the top in criticizing that because
Yeah.
you know he he says that there's a lot of things which are happening.
He's got all sorts of schemes  a lot of schemes in the pipeline.
I suppose he doesn't want to be seen to be just reacting to your letter he's obviously started doing these things off his own bat anyway hasn't he?
Oh yes.
Yeah.
I mean and and he he feels that er  pressure groups like ourselves are very positive because it gives him a bit of  weight  when he's arguing for things.
Yeah 
Well they can't push it from the top  
But I mean  on a sort of wider thing  erm 
Yeah.
You know one of the things that we could do  is to do another directory.
Yeah.
I think  because I think I think 
But 
it's a real shame  we're so out of date.
Mhm  but I I you know we we're  can we actually do it?
I mean we would need  fifty people
No I would not distribute it 
to deliver 
er from door to door.
I would erm put it out in the library, put it out in in surgeries.
Put it out in public places and that's it because  I mean  the number of people  erm they went to these directories like hot cross buns.
I mean every week I supplied them with a new stack of  everybody wanted them.
What, the recycling directory?
Yeah 
They come through the doorstep, through the doors though.
Through the door they they just throw them away.
They didn't read them.
I said well don't you live in Stortford, didn't you have it delivered?
No.
And I'm sure they'll pick them up if they see them in the  
If they printed 
 
print them up and they do it on their own  will.
Couldn't we do it with him?
With him?
Well yeah pro 
I mean they could couldn't they sponsor us to do it or something?
Well yeah I I've I've  whether he  well I mean if, if he's gonna do this seven page thing then  I you know I  you can look at it two ways.
Either we can influence and help that to be  to be good or or  you know if that's a failure then  see whether they can help us to produce one for the town.
Mm.
I mean I'd much rather they do it  if we can influence him enough.
They've got the right information.
Well the thing if we did it with our  as they keep saying there's some, there's so much in the pipeline.
I mean it might take us another  two week two months before we get it out.
Three months.
Well 
I would say six months.
Yeah 
No I would just think of something really straightforward.
They do want stuff on local levels I mean if he's East Herts he's got a huge area, hasn't he?
Yeah.
It it might be a help to him to have little local groups that  helped him out with these things.
But I mean if we print something and then suddenly they instal all these new bottle banks which we didn't know about.
Then they are not mentioned 
Well 
in our recycling directory and we can do the next one
He should know about them shouldn't he?
Well we must  that's why, certainly have to, before 
Could you drag him along  to a meeting?
Yeah well that's what  they said we could do that.
I'll write that down.
Erm, is that okay for that I just have something that I read in New Scientist does everybody take it?
No
Oh well I'll give you one to look at  it's just a little article about
Thank you.
recycling in in Egypt.
And I just liked reading it so much that I thought you'd like to read it too.
Don't have to read it now cos it's quite long.
It's it's  it's really hot  .
Cos they they reuse absolutely everything.
And they make they're living out of it.
In East German they are now drowning in rubbish because  they used to have a perfect recycling scheme  everything was collected and recycled cos they just didn't have the materials.
Now they are flooded with the West European goods  their recycling isn't worth any more.
On the other hand they haven't got the landfills and the whole scheme that the west has developed and they   I mean it's a health  hazard meanwhile.
One of the major problems they have to face.
Far East  lots of guys sort of collecting cardboard boxes and that's all they did they flatten down cardboard boxes and then another one did newspapers and whole newspapers and
The whole town is composed of a
Yeah.
it's like a big .
I just thought it was  interesting.
Erm  I did write er as was suggested asking about  erm facilities for cyclists in the potential  shopping centre development in Bishop's Stortford.
And they are, they are interested in cyclists but from what I could make out reading this  they're not really going to help us a great deal.
If you want to pass it round and read it.
It's it's they're gonna use the green wedges that are already there and the existing footpaths which are already cycled along.
What, what good is that to me?
It's just  in Stortford it's not that easy for a cyclist is it?
No 
And they've got all the places  say don't lean your bicycle here and you're not allowed to take it into Jackson   
One girl nearly got knocked off going up Newtown Road.
It's really quite narrow as you're going up there.
What about the  all the cars all parked round corners everywhere like up at Havers.
Mm.
They could do something about that.
Have you every cycled up there?
Not round Havers,wh they park where those, those sort of shops are  they they park all around the corners so that you have to go out round them.
And of course you meet something coming the other way  wrong side of the road.
Oh yeah.
What annoys me is that everybody parks on the pavement as well.
Mm.
Seem to disobey all laws there are about parking.
It does, it doesn't really help us does it?
Do you wanna pass  these around as well if anyone wants to look.
All the replies  got eleven or so replies that I've had for that questionnaire.
There are a few people  willing to help  aren't.
But I  haven't gone really as I hoped cos I'd envisaged having the membership list with sort of names of who'll make cakes, who'll help on the stall and then know who to phone
Yeah.
when I wanted some help or  who to invite to meetings but  because I haven't got a reply from everyone  or most people, it can't work does it?
Is that all the replies you got?
sent more than fifty out.
I did sixty and Caroline copied even more .
She's a good girl.
Did Georgina reply?
Erm  did actually, yes.
Yeah, cos when I phoned she said she's still quite interested.
Mm.
Yeah I thought she was 
but she said if the baby .
And  I've got a local group summer questionnaire which I couldn't really fill in.
. Isn't it awful!
I thought I'm just as bad as you know everybody else really.
Cos I wasn't sure of some of the answers.
And that it it's saying which of the following days of action has the group participated in.
I mean cos we haven't really sort of really done a proper day of action have we?
We've done little bits and pieces.
I know we did the returnable bottles.
.
I mean cos and we did that stall on peat but we didn't really take part in the peat day of action did we?
.What do you think?
Fiona and I did the electricity 
What  at the supermarket .
Is that the global warming and electricity privatization?
That one?
Was it?
It was erm efficiency  of 
Oh fuel and efficiency.
Right that one then.
Oh we didn't, we didn't do the ozone layer one did we?
Did you do a stall  on that ozone layer?
We did do something.
With the
Oh we did, yes.
with the, with er snow remember?
That was Christmas last year wasn't it?
Oh yes that was 
That was ozone.
Yes it was we did 
Oh so I'll put down for that then.
Oh it looks quite good .
Right.
Have you written to your MP about fuel efficiency?
Yes I did.
We did.
I know erm  I thought I wrote to the electricity board in, I wrote to somebody  about erm how er things should be labelled about how efficient they are when using electricity.
You took part in the er electricity efficiency didn't you?
Yes.
Yeah but didn't, we didn't write to our MPs though.
I thought we were 
 
supposed to write to somewhere else  was it  the department of the environment or  now what would it be, energy?
We wrote, wrote to them cos I've got a reply to that letter somewhere with a great wad of information 
 
about various fridges and
Yeah, yeah
and things.
Yeah 
So I can't really say we've written to the MP can we?
We haven't found out about company car fleets have we?
We tried.
Well I tried and then I was let down by the group.
I don't remember anything about that one 
We arranged it  two days or three days and each was cancelled  
March ninety one?
. In March this year?
It was this year.
Last year.
Last year.
I didn't think we'd done anything about that this year.
But that was last year.
Yeah.
But we haven't done a march  ninety one then.
Scanned the local press for power station applications or authorizations  H M I P.
Written to Michael Heseltine about acid rain?
May ninety one.
Written to your MP to ask him her to press for strict E C standards for C O two emissions from vehicles May ninety one.
when was that?
Wasn't that on the talk?
Do you remember  this talk we had  that was last year.
Er
writing a letter to Chris Patten about the  protocol.
Yeah.
So that was, that was early this year.
Yeah  written something.
That  to do with the ozone layer.
I don't know.
It it's mostly sort of things about energy.
Isn't it?
Questionnaire.
That's definitely to do with the C F C's 
Yeah well this is C O two in in cars, private cars.
Yeah things to do with er emissions and 
written that?
In May ninety one?
Yeah  sounds about right.
Ask local car dealer to write to car manufacturers to press for the introduction of more fuel efficient cars?
May ninety one.
No.
Lobbied your local authority on peat use?
Not really did we?
Erm  joined the newsprint campaign?no.
Written up details of recycling campaigning experience for  and sent it to .
No.
Why me?
. Complained to your MP about the national road traffic forecast.
No.
Looked out for threats to S S I's.
Have we got them?
S S I's.
Sites of special scientific interest.
Have we got any in ?
Mm.
No.
No I didn't think we had.
No, I don't think so.
Sorry?
Do you own your 
No!
Do you?
We we have acquired a large chunk of the the  yes.
So you should, you should nominate that as a 
site of the interest shouldn't you?
Erm  it's valuable but not that valuable.
But it says here, written written to Linda Chalker about the I T P O.
Now I, I rang, I sent a postcard  which was ready written.
Do you think that counts?
Promoted the .
Well we did try.
Yeah, put that we did do that.
Didn't get very far though did we?
Actually that seems to have fizzled out.
Haven't heard anything about that for a while.
Erm  written to the government in U K  bank about the bank propose new foreign  policy.
I think we might have done that.
I think we might have done that.
I know that I've written to British gas.
And I think I wrote  world bank.
That was, thing is that was quite a long time ago.
I'm sure it wasn't this year.
 
This is February ninety one.
it's alright but you get to the bottom of those stairs and sometimes .
Er  check locally for claims of environmentally or sustainable tropical hardwood it's not really, I mean I do look when I go  to all these D I Y places to see what they've got.
Haven't really  
local wood guides ?
Well Rob's got two  
cos I'm just deciding on a new window frame.
And all the firms are claiming that they only get their hardwood from government  erm replanting programmes.
And one got a  stamp and a seal on that.
But whether that is acknowledged by our Friends of the Earth I don't know because I mean they have so many stamps and seals on 
They won't give you names now will they?
The Friends of the Earth .
They won't give you names of companies any more.
No but if this stamp, this acknowledgement.
Oh it's like a little  is it?
good government scheme or not.
Whether that is known  by Friends of the Earth as a good scheme or not.
I think  there's a day of action coming up on this sort of D I Y stuff.
so maybe we'll get some more information about that.
I'm gonna try and get the  book back from Rob.
Martin's an architect and  and it actually probably would be  you know it might be a good thing to actually sort of provoke a question with architects because they do specify these things and they're the ones who actually say  you know right we'll specify hardwood .
It's one of the decisions that are actually made by them in terms of what they use so  erm that could be something that is 
Yeah
round to architects just sort of provoking the question cos they, a lot of them have never thought about it
Mm.
and er  you know if they did erm I mean Martin asked about the, he asked about the good wood guide you know and I told them where they can get it but that they can have it in their office and put it in their library.
You know so that, that's quite a good idea.
Yeah 
But that's so quickly out of date again you see the good wood  cos I mean they they have new government schemes, schemes every year don't they?
Mm.
And new other schemes.
And
What, at least it will enable you to know what the tropical species are because some of them have got quite weird and wonderful names and most people don't know what some of them are.
Mm.
I know mahogany is  citello .
I noticed they had some Philippine mahogany doors in  Do It All
Mm.
on Saturday and yet, that you have to be careful because  they they have that I've forgotten what her name was on on Wogan saying next time you go into a D I Y store and you see a mahogany toilet seat  you know don't boy buy it think of the forest.
Well if you go into a D I Y store you'll find it's a mahogany stain  I don't know if they really make mahogany .
It would be very expensive  
Yes you'd probably gauge by the price I would think.
Yeah.
Plastic
plastic.
plastic one.
Erm  oh 
Yes actually  this cycle thing .
Cycle parking is actually  I wish they'd actually pay a bit more places to actually put your bike and you didn't have to sort of tie it up to some lamppost or something
Yeah, yeah.
There's hardly anything  
I mean they could give you a decent stand to put it in cos I hate those ones at Sainsbury's.
Cos if you've got anything heavy in the bag, the bike falls over.
The ones at the library  as well.
Er and they ought to have a little shelter over it to stop your saddle getting wet  if it rains .
I've got, I mean I've got my spots where I park it, I, it at Woolworth's and outside the post office  because it keeps it dry.
And out of the way.
All the roads into town are just awful.
I mean the Dunmow Road, Hockerill  
Oh yeah.
You know  really scary.
You know you get asphyxiated with petrol fumes and then you get the danger of being  thrown off your bike.
cycling 
Yeah  they squeeze you off the road if you go up that hill to Hockerill lights.
I  
You must to  cat.
Just walk  slowly in the middle of the road.
So that there's no way they can take overtake on the right or on the left.
That's the only way.
Our cat, and I've really watched her  makes a point of going and walking slowly in the road.
And I think that is exactly what we have to do as cyclists.
Not squeeze to the side because they might not see you there.
right  
Well you sh you're supposed to ride a fair way out from the gutter, never in the gutter so they can see you round the bends.
Yeah but 
And they often hoot you if you're doing it but that's the place  
That is their fault if they hoot.
Erm especially going up that hill at Hockerill lights.
They overtake you  and then they slow right down so that you have to go oohooh and stop.
You can't cycle that slowly up a hill can you?
They come in too quickly on, once they've passed you  
They don't they're in like that aren't they straight in front of you.
frightens me .
cycle underneath a car today .
Oh dear.
 Michael  's got  helmet.
That's a good idea.
Yes  idiot wearing it though.
If everybody looks like him!
Oh well.
I mean it looks alright if you've got all the gear on  you know cycling shorts and top and everything
 

make them like swimming hats with lots of little flowers all over them 
Yeah.
But if you do get one you have to be careful you get one that's done to the proper standard because some don't work apparently.
absolutely nothing.
Well that's what I thought it just seemed to say they were gonna have sort of cycle ways going through the green wedges along  where I cycle already.
Mm.
And that's no help at all is it.
we can't complain.
That should do quite well in trying to get the traffic away from the centre in Stortford anyway.
Mm.
They were talking  pedestrianizing 
I think that's been on, on the cards for a long time hasn't it?
Yeah.
Pedestrianizing and they've never done it.
Sorry!
Erm  Wh have we done anything about the environmental charter?
Because I  started doing it a long time ago 
Yeah, yeah Bob did that didn't he?
It vaguely Yeah and we presented it and then it fizzled.
The group  fizzled out because we presented the charter.
And that was the aim of  
It asks here have they adopted it?
Erm
wouldn't or we aim to still try.
Well  .
I I think, I've a funny feeling that  did  adopt it but quite how much that means I don't understand.
Well it's awful, having to do this  questionnaire we, we've done .
All these workshops that have been going on that we haven't been to.
Well they just kind of recognized the principles don't they but they don't ensure that they'll actually put them into practise.
That's what adopting means  it's not actually committing .
Yes I thought they had, yes.
How about these questions.
Does the group have a constitution?
No.
Does the group have an office?
No.
We've got our plastic box!
Plastic?
 
I know I know everybody will be disappointed but I couldn't get  cardboard ones, stick it all in.
We bought the storage boxes anyway to keep all the .
No but you can't really I mean that's what  supposed to have it like an actual proper office.
You can't have  all in cardboard boxes.
It's erm  not easy to organize.
You can't  and keep them open at the same time.
What is the most common problem you've experienced in your dealings with  Street?
It's phoning them up and the person I want to talk to isn't there!
I think.
Have you had any, anybody else  phone them up or written to them?
No?
No.
I think they're quite abrupt and rude whenever I've phoned them up.
Are they?
They're not terribly friendly.
Oh they're usually okay I, I mean what they don't know  .
I mean I just find it annoying cos you get through  to somebody who then passes you on to somebody else and then they'll talk to you and say well the person you want to talk to isn't here at the moment so you've had all this phone call and then you've got to ring again.
And you have to do it in office hours as well.
What has been your proudest moment this year?
Oh that was Rob.
When he was able er to enter the sub committee.
Oh yes.
He was really proud of that and he, he made a point of that being
I'll write that down.
for him  years of struggle  to get any influence to finally find himself 
Oh good one.
What sort of committee is it then?
Hearing aid!
Well I think one does speak a bit louder in public meetings, it's just .
And I I can only do this work I'm sorry.
Sorry I didn't hear 
Oh  I I didn't hear  either.
Turn that thing off.
 
I was asking what sub committee it was.
Er the environmental.
They had a working committee didn't they and a sub 
It's East Herts isn't it?
I think.
Was it East Herts?
East Herts, yeah.
Yeah East Herts.
Environmental sub committee?
Yeah.
He sits on it.
Well he had this environment mental officer, they they in inaugurated him  then at this meeting  meeting when  erm  the thing you handed over  
Charter.
The environment charter.
Why's it a sub committee?
What happened to the  proper committee as well.
Yeah.
reports then back to the proper actual coun the er 
The work's  committee 
district council meeting.
Well I know at district  council there was two environmental groups, was it the officers group and the  members group.
Oh.
I wonder which group
Herts county council.
Cos when I was on the Hertfordshire Environmental  of the group which has folded
I've got all this money in the Abbey National and there's no, no group any more, I think I'll have to keep 
Keep quiet.
I'll have to send it off to .
But anyway it transpired that there were two groups sort of working towards the same end and nobody could work out what sort of erm role each played and it was terrible.
Because you knew that they both had to agree before anything was done.
Oh.
I suppose that was one way of nothing being done.
Yes, they didn't communicate.
The officers group and the members group that was right.
Right.
Anyway.
Onwards.
Erm  there's going to be a sort of event at the Rhodes Centre.
Erm for one world week  on the twenty fourth of October and we've been asked to do a stall there.
Which I said yes to without asking anybody so I hope that's alright.
What date is it?
October the twenty fourth.
That's a Thursday.
We're doing a Traidcraft stall?
Oh yes 
You what?
Well  he wanted to know who the Traidcraft person 
Oh really.
And he said, he said he tried to phone you up and I said oh don't worry.
Cos any you always get the answerphone.
could leave a message .
is it?
It's at the Rhodes Centre Thursday October the twenty fourth.
Well if we do a stall I would  really like to have at least a leaflet on new recycling.
Yeah okay.
So that we have, I mean nothing of design or anything just  short information because I think it's so 
Right.
out of date.
Yeah.
I know, and he said you could sell things as well now.
I don't know what you think, I just wondered did we ought to order anything from  Friends of the Earth catalogue like  those sort of things  to sell.
Cos that, I mean they're always going to be useful I use them myself and I expect you all 
Mm.
The question is the quantity
Er  yeah
I've  no idea.
Well I mean I I know what Barbara feels about this.
She feels that  erm  at the, the level that we are working at it is really coun be counter productive to hold stock.
Because however hard you try stock deteriorates.
Yeah.
Erm but I you know I feel that that very often we don't sell stock 
Well couldn't we just have a few things  
and I feel that if we did have stock then  then we would erm  sell it.
So I mean that that's two ways of looking at it.
Certainly if  we've got some stuff in a box 
Well I mean we needn't buy the expensive things like sweatshirts  
Shall I try at erm Cambridge?
I mean it's October.
Yeah but they, will they, they won't sell you on at a discount will they?
Cos if we all  
But I mean I I just know that that Harlow tried stock keeping and selling, they gave up.
I know that er in Hertford they were quite desperate.
All came up with the same idea and they wanted to do it.
And in the end they came to Barbara's conclusions  so that its a an expensive thing.
But I mean if we only had like the  writing paper and the envelopes and re-use labels, small items of stationery  
the stickers and I mean  
they still do  yeah.
But I mean I I expect, I mean even we had some left over e eventually you could sell them to our own members because they'd all want to use it
Mm.
and it's cheaper than ordering it off the catalogue.
That's a good idea about Cambridge isn't it?
You could borrow there stock, is that what you're thinking and then take back what we didn't sell.
That's what  
I mean I've never talked to them so I I don't know yet 
Well if they would let us borrow it, that's a different matter to buying it from then because we then wouldn't make any money on it.
Well I don't, I have never heard of a local group that makes money out of this  selling.
Well you you buy it all at thirty three or twenty five percent discount so you can then sell it at a bit more.
But then you have then you have the stuff that doesn't sell and deteriorates and you still have to have paid for it so
I think it's possible to make a bit of money but at at at the rate  you know I feel we're all the time putting the cart before the horse.
Erm  you know if if we are going to try to keep going as a viable group then yes one of the things we should consider I mean I I don't I've come here sort of thinking  oh is this it, is this the crisis meeting or
is it  you know erm  I mean I feel so so passionately that that we should keep going but
Mm.
I also feel just that I am  able to contribute next to nothing in terms of time so and I think w we're almost all in that situation.
Erm  you know we sort of seem to limp from one meeting to another without  really committing ourselves to anything much.
And you know if we were able to commit ourselves to two public, two meetings, three meetings of some sort in a year  where we're actually gonna do something and present some sort of front  Par part of presenting some sort of front is to try to sell a few bits of pieces  if we're prepared to accept that we're going to lose money.
Yeah.
I mean if we, we're preaching you should use recycled products we, if we had a few to sell at least 
Mm.
Yeah.
I mean you you're be selling your Traidcraft stuff I mean 
Which 
why why does Barbara believe it's okay to sell that but not  
No, well we're, we're in exactly the same problem with Traidcraft.
You know  we we used to sell thousand of pounds worth a year and now we're down to  couple of thousand a year and we're s , we are losing money on that.
Mhm.
No  we're not actually losing money but I mean  with Traidcraft we are getting to the low point where we put  borrowed stock 
Well that's the recession isn't it?
Or 
Well, what I thought was with this one world week thing at least people that, who go might be more receptive  to what we have to say to show and sell .
Yes we've done really well with with Traidcraft 
because that is, that's the whole reason for the the the concert and they're gonna have this concert in there as well and people will be buying tickets to go to.
Yeah.
And I don't know an awful lot about it and there's going to be all these stalls.
Where they're coming obviously because they believe in that sort of thing so
Two or three years ago one world week was a full week of all sorts of different activities which were all very well attended.
It's sort of dwindled very rapidly
Has it.
down to, I d I don't even know what happened last year.
Mm 
We just had a stall didn't we?
But it 
Or was that last year what seven or eight of us wasn't it?
At St Michael's?
The church.
Yeah.
That was last year or was that two years ago?
Er 
There was something at St Michael's but I didn't know it was the one world week.
Yeah I have never been involved in a  one world week event at St Michael's.
I thought there was one there .
You certainly were there.
In the church 
No I don't I don't think  
Yeah.
Anyway I mean hopefully this this will be sort of you know if it's well publicized it it will be well attended because of the past.
I think we might as well get in a few things and anyway I want some envelope re-use labels .
I've run out completely.
There you are  so many packets already.
Well if you don't want Traidcraft's re-use labels I don't care!
Oh!
I didn't know you did them!
Well erm
Doesn't matter does it 
well apart from this leaflet on recycling facilities, what else shall we have?
On the stall.
Well who's gonna do the leaflet?
I will.
I think we ought to sort that out 
Well that will be, I personally think that's the only thing we can do.
And we should just sort of say what is necessary to find out and everybody gets a few telephone numbers or telephone calls  check out addresses  find out about new ones, get in contact with the district council erm what is in the pipeline.
Find out about Uttlesford possibly why there's is running and whether that is going to br breakdown.
Erm and if we then find money for printing it I would approach Barclays Bank, banks, local banks  and would it do it very modestly the same local the same style er and only hand it out to  places where people are likely to pick it up.
And not bother about .
I mean charity shops erm  library, hairdressers, surgeries  Boardman as I know 
I think that's a very sensible idea actually rather than er trying to do the whole town.
Because that was er you know  I mean it got the group together
Yeah
I thought because everybody had the same experience.
I liked the experience because I had never done it.
Mm.
what a waste of time.
The number of people I've talked to that  I definitely knew had got  and never knew they had got it.
Mm.
Yeah I mean but on the other hand the there's probably quite a few that  did read it.
I mean I know when we moved house  I had  folder and one of each had got in it the recycling directory
Mm
which is  quite a nice surprise!
I mean had they had they sold to someone outside Bishop's Stortford
Yeah.
then they could 
Yeah.
 

Erm
 
I think we have to have something if we have a stall.
We lost all the erm  cartoons   original cartoons.
Yeah.
Oh that's a shame.
Well I could photocopy that couldn't you.
Yeah.
The detail  
difficult to see what it is.
But erm
Oh that's a real shame.
Otherwise I will just do it in a different colour, a different 
I mean then 
then then reshape the inside.
Yeah.
Er something before I I always forget everything.
The German Friends of the Earth's people told me never to do the washing on Monday mornings.
I mean that's something to put there as well I think.
Because  it's a peak time for electricity and the Electricity Board  er produces according to peak demands.
That's got nothing to do with recycling has it?
No.
I know but 
No.
But you do you think honestly though that that really does still hold true because if everyone ha mostly having automatics now you just wash as you go you don't have a washing day or is it specially Monday they
 
Like I've got just automatically I wanted to do washing this morning.
Really?
I don't.
I just put it, when it gets too bad you know if haven't got any clothes to 
It's an interesting though.
I didn't know that they produced according to peak
Yeah, I think it's important to know 
It's very important to know, yes.
 
erm  whatever.
Don't do it Monday mornings.
I usually do mine at midnight when I get home!
Yes.
A lot of people do it overnight
Yeah.
but it's not really a good idea because if something goes wrong with your machine 
you're not there to deal with it.
I mean I've had mine flood and I've had its thermostat go and it boiled everything.
I mean that would have been a disaster I mean it's only because I was upstairs and I thought oh I can smell boiling.
You know it was like when you boil up hankies I thought what a!
. There was dye came out of everything it was awful.
And another time it was all pouring all over the floor  
The other thing  I mean to be healthy  it's more important  to dry things and keep them dry for a while than to boil them.
Bacteria survive heat for a short time.
Yeah.
But they don't a for the percentage of bacteria that survives drought  is is minimal.
So you don't need to boil  logically.
Er if you just keep your hankies  iron them, keep them dry.
Then they are, then they are sterile.
be bothered.
Anyway, back to the point.
He said pointedly.
Well  leaflet.
stall.
We've got to get back to the stall.
Yeah er the recycling leaflet.
Who's gonna do it?
It's not gonna be done if we don't get somebody to actually front you know
well
take it on 
The  thing is that I  I can do  revamp it on computer.
Because it w you can scan 
What ma manually?
No you just stick it on  a photocopier  
I see I wa before you do that I'll get in touch with the guy who drew it and if he  if he has got  an original copy he might be able to erm to er 
What, what you can do is you can then get basically you get the computer to type that out  type that out.
Ah.
And then you just do a run, you don't have to go on to print it at all you just print it off.
That's one option 
 
Then photocopy the rest of it. 
I've got a laser printer yeah so I mean that's what I use for my business.
I've got a Mackintosh and a laser printer.
So I mean
I've got some recycled paper but but 
Well Traidcraft's got loads to sell.
Not doing very well are you  
No!
because I have this  erm dilemma.
Whether to just photocopy off a very good  original
Yeah
or do we print the whole lot.
And we came to the conclusion it was cheaper to print
Oh
than photocopy.
What  it's a bit slow isn't it?
Yeah it depends, well you can get get it to run through copies but  the problem is that the cartridges for these printers they, they cost about fifty pounds.
Mm  
They're not cheap.
So if I can do one run and then photocopy it.
Mm.
It a is actually a lot better because you can get them usually get them down to about  five p a copy.
Well won't you lose, lose definition on the drawing though with a laser printer?
No.
No?
No it's even better  
Oh that's alright.
Okay, no it's, I'm just going by the one at school and it, because it's all made up of little dots you 
No, this is a laser printer.
This does it absolutely  it's not a dot printer it's it is a laser printer .
Oh, well he keeps calling it his laser printer!seen it in action we don't see that well.
So you, you said you could do it for five p a copy?
Well I r , I r , I reckon I reckon you can down to that, yeah.
That's printing both sides.
Yeah.
double sided printer and I I'll try and get that verified but  
I think we could sell it I think we could sell it for
Yeah.
ten p or twenty p.
Oh that that would be a different ball game, selling it in places wouldn't it?
Oh yeah.
Ho how many
That's our, I mean, you know you can go round in newsagents or doctor's surgery and dump them.
But to actually say right can you s can you collect the money for us!
Well one could put a  box next to it.
Well in some places, yeah .
Yeah but I mean, mm.
a copy's a lot.
It is, yeah.
Well although  
I mean it I'm not suggesting that isn't cheap but erm  to produce at five p a copy  
Oh yeah.
thousand it's gonna cost what's it gonna cost?
Er.
What's five thousands?
Five thousands.
Fifty pounds.
Mm.
Mm.
I mean I'm, I'm, I'm only going on the fact that I I tend to do everything on the cheap so I tend to get  if I can find somebody who does photocopying I can  do it then we'll do it.
For me to produce that'll cost me  basically  my time and my  my you know I, say my laser copies' paid for by my business  erm
copies.
So I mean if I, if I produced for instance si five or six masters  and then people can go and do copies here and there that's actually not a bad way of doing it.
And that'll be, I've got about a ream of, well it's only about a ream  paper.
Just pr producing new copies as you need them rather than produce five thousand and I think we we have sort of hundreds to throw away in the end.
But I  it to to er  recycling.
Yeah.
Well I'll get in touch with this  East Herts guy to get all his information.
Good.
Mm.
But erm 
You know, we need to find out where to take  
somebody needs to  collect somebody needs to be a contact for getting all the information to  by a certain date.
Well you can  get it through me, yeah.
Okay.
Tesco do they actually do   now?
No.
Has anybody been there?
No.
Well  they collect aluminium cans.
Oh do they?
Yeah, that's what I was told.
I acted on what everyone had told me I then asked my friend who had a contact in Tesco's about it she said well there is one.
It's just inside the doors, where you don't see it.
walk in like that and you're looking at all the things in the shop not where
It's not in the recycling centre.
Why don't they put it in the recycling centre?
I think it's cos, it looks like it's made out of cardboard.
It's, it's probably run by the scouts.
They're in charge of it like
Yeah, cos there's one at the swimming pool isn't there?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mm.
Does anybody know anything about, there's this little note in  about erm recycling paper, all sorts of paper magazines, cardboard er on the first Monday of the month.
Does anybody know anything about that?
Is this for Boots?
every first Monday of the mo month is the Birchanger scout  
scout  
and he gave me that information repeatedly and he's terribly involved.
It, it's fantastic.
Right, yeah.
I'm always worried that his enthusiasm is stretched to the limit 
No, no I mean the number of pe .
I've just passed my A levels I've got loads of papers  going what can I do.
Well I said, ring Birchanger scouts!
And as far as I know he always .
I mean the address is on there  anyway.
Yeah, oh right.
Is it?
Oh.
er
quite  pertinent actually if we are actually going to do one.
What?
To ask people  sorry in my, in the letter
Yeah.
to the press, ask  people to er  submit any information.
Yeah.
Oh what you mean you're gonna put at the bottom  of the of, the same letter or
Well, yes.
Yeah.
just write down all the information we've got now so there is  can recycling at the swimming pool and at Tesco privately run.
Swimming pool 
Erm  swimming pool 
who's going to get the information who runs that?
Who?
Mm?
Well I can do that I suppose.
Well who runs what?
The swimming pool 
Because I know the scouts do the Tesco one and whenever they are put in these cardboard boxes they have to be sorted so somebody must sort them.
Oh they're not, they're not asking  sorting, oh I see.
Erm  so there must be somebody responsible and I think if, if we write swimming pool and people take their cans there
Yes we'd have to check.
erm I should first check.
Check with them, yeah quite.
So I I do, you do Tesco.
I'll do the swimming pool.
I, I, I  would check who actually  is responsible for that  
.
But of course all paper now is 
All paper?
All paper.
What about this  chap then?
It's in the library th with his number.
Well, you ring him but if he, if he gets upset or, or
Oh I see.
it's it's strange  you can give that as an address.
Any Uttlesford  town of some size has got a comprehensive recycling centre now that takes any paper  
 
Do you have to sort it?
Do you have to take it sorted?
No.
No.
It's just a big skip?
And it says  
at Stanstead  
Do they then sort it?
the car park 
No, they it's  the council collects it and  in Uttlesford, that's why I said we should get at the same time  an Uttlesford councillor because I would 
Yes, yeah 
like to know a, whether their new scheme is only temporary, is about to break down.
Mm.
Or whether they actually get the disposals cost incorporated into this skip collecting cost.
Because the  money they can get for this  mixed paper must be a pittance.
Mm.
Almost hardly worth their while but  
If you look at the tonnage kept out of the landfill 
Yeah.
it might work.
Yeah, but I mean it it
So where's this place in Stanstead then, do you know?
Erm if you go  in, along Cambridge Road there's the turning to the right isn't there the first when you come up the hill.
At the monument,th th whatsit hill.
Chapel Hill.
Chapel Hill.
Chapel Hill.
You go down there do you?
And it's by the library isn't it?
Mm.
go down it's it's first left once you've turned right at
You know where the library is?
Opposite, opposite there isn't it?
Opposite the fire station?
Near the white house  round the back of the white house.
Where the health centre is.
Yes, round the back of those few little shops in London Road.
And you can take anything.
You can take erm any drink can unsorted.
You can take glass and you can take pa papers.
And in  Saffron Waldren 
suddenly thought  you still got to have a little holdall  membership forms in it, haven't you?
With all that peat and stuff.
they even take er pills.
With all that  
Do they?
Oh that's interesting to know 
Remember w we did that  peat they had a  box that had a  national membership forms in.
We could have that on the stall couldn't we?
Oh yes,w I mean we have got various leaflets  produce  still which is in reasonable condition.
I've got  Yeah.
Yeah we could take that  you know membership and our own membership forms as well.
What pub is that then?
Did you say a pub?
A pub, yeah, in front of the pub er  in .
Just before the 
Oh the one in .
Yeah.
Before you go to St Michael's school, the pub.
What is it called?
Oh yeah, it's The Oak isn't it?
The Royal Oak?
Yeah cos that's next door but one to me so, yeah.
Oh that's where you are.
Yeah.
Well anyway that is a new item on the recycling directory  
Right 
Oh they've got one near those shops in   Humana?
Could you  find out what happens to the ?
Yeah I know they come er there's a big lorry comes and collects them.
Yeah.
But whether they are sent to the third world or  torn into rags or
Yeah 
Well you've got the, I mean  industry uses rags.
wiping up oil and things like that.
I might c call .
If I see them collecting I'll ask  .
And then if you're collating 
you have to ring.
Yeah.
Erm  find out from 
Oh well I'll get the  
the charity shops  what they want 
Havers  shops 
Yeah.
address
Oh right.
Charity shops.
Ah  er the other item that we must mention is any extra plastic bags
Yeah, I'll ask about plastic bags.
are extremely welcome in any charity shop.
Now, what about engine oil?
Because oh actually we've got some in our garage now sitting there and waiting to go somewhere.
The council takes it.
The council takes it?
Yes I'm almost certain.
I mean a visit to the council to find out exactly what they do take would be
Mm.
But can you take it back to garages as well?
No.
No.
No.
Halfords  Halfords in Harlow is one that that that we found out took it.
But I  ce ce I'm almost certain the council takes it.
Yeah I remember  big bins  wasn't sort of sure what else 
They also take batteries.
I know that.
Car batteries.
Do they?
Car batteries.
The car batteries 
That's the council?
to get money at at 
Right.
But what about erm little batteries?
I I'm collecting those.
Yeah.
You are collecting them?
What happens to radio batteries?
Are  still doing it?
Yeah.
And they bring them up to me  
Ah  
I'm just waiting for a day of action on .
What do English  er what do the English do with batteries and then dump them!
In those letters Ursula th there's
Yeah?
a letter which says they they have stopped doing it.
Oh yeah.
That  Photostad have stopped doing it.
Oh.
About the second, quite early on isn't it?
Oh yeah I was  
I was gonna say it's about the last one!
Think you were reading them upside down!
Well they only, they only er  took the batteries over to me  before we left on holiday.
So they must still be doing them and that was two  huge boxes.
Oh.
Er
I know they are not very happy  
Well that needs a check that needs needs another check I I would guess.
Yeah.
And I quite honestly I don't 
I I'm going to say about back to this erm sump oil.
My brother-in-law said he read in the paper that erm  over a year sort of  the amount of oil tipped on our land and down drains which shouldn't be there is almost like equivalent to the disaster at Exxon Valdez.
I heard that.
Th erm  the amount of oil that people just tip on the ground, or down the drains or whatever
Mm.
over a year is equivalent to the disaster of the Exxon Valdez.
So really people ought to be trained to take their engine oil out 
There's this, there's this er out of sight out of mind principal  
You are fined you are heavily fined in Germany and for  decades already.
You were not allowed to wash your car on a normal street  because oil would automatically be flushed into into the guttering, into the
They must be going absolutely mad about East Germany mustn't they?
Well it's just so incredible that this oil has never been  I mean nobody focused on it did they?
No.
People just don't think.
They just tip it oh tip it down the drain.
Same with petrol stations I mean  the way they  spill the petrol.
I know!
There used to be safety catch mechanism 
Yeah.
but there isn't now is there it just comes splashing out.
Well really I mean with quite a few you really have to watch out which is 
they had a row at erm petrol station when that happened to her.
And they said it was our car.
and, and it went, cos it was quite a bit more worth petrol that went all over the place.
And she refused to pay.
And they  me up about it.
I, I sort of denied all knowledge .
I didn't know it had happened!
I think they were being most unreasonable.
We at the time the attendant said it was alright.
She didn't have to pay for it.
it could easily  I mean  will be shorter I think.
Sorry?
fewer localities now.
This will be shorter.
I think we can easily put erm pits for daily life or how to be environmental.
And then
Oh a few tips.
Oh
 
With respect I really think it ought to be recycling and nothing else.
Mm.
Well I just find these, I mean we had quite a few  now
Cos recycling sort of comes into the tips for daily life as well though doesn't it.
It's part of it.
Like protecting  people don't just save bottles they save their glass jars 
seem to be patronizing people when really you just want to give information.
as well.
People don't always think of.
Yeah.
Re-using things, re-using things is almost the same  as recycling isn't it?
Re-use?
Yes.
Yeah!
I suppose it's I mean  
Well it is really isn't it?
re-using is better than recycling.
Yeah.
Erm.
So.
Erm I take 
So it 
Reduce or re-use, recycling?
Has anybody got a con 
punchlines are much better than sort of er  .
Because people'll read those.
Well you can write save money across the top then
Well I, I wrote actually that article for the the Herald and Post that has appeared in Harlow but not here.
A  whole load of tips  like that.
Oh.
Now every week I open Herald and Post and think oh it's gonna be in there, it's gonna be in there but it never is.
It's only appeared in Harlow and she told me it would get in the Bishop's Stortford one but it hasn't so far.
It's a bit annoying really.
Who does all the schools?
As to recycling.
They must be checked.
What about asking Caroline?
School.
Well I mean somebody who knows the teachers or
Yes.
That's gonna be a difficult one cos they don't always want 
I will  I'll do the schools.
Yeah.
erm the general public walking into their
Yeah.
.
We ought to split the schools because there's quite a lot of them.
I'll do the primary you do the secondary.
I'll do the secondary.
What about that?
Okay.
Primary.
Well I think Boy's High  were active in between weren't they?
Whether they er  still are.
How about St Mary?
I I found that erm erm  littered all over the place!
St Mary is  wall!
The P E 
Do they still do it?
the P E teacher is supposedly collecting aluminium cans and  we've been through various daft schemes of stopping the children from throwing the cans everywhere because we've got this coke machine.
And we even had one where they paid a ten p deposit  on a can so they paid forty p instead of thirty or whatever.
And I got hardly any cans back.
Or they did was b buy them from the school canteen where they were still thirty!
And the coke machine wasn't used.
Well why not er encourage the canteen to charge forty 
They didn't  but then they had 
as well?
Well, they won't because they they they have to make money in order to survive.
The more money they make the better for them.
They have to run it as a business now.
For profit I'm afraid.
Er oh I did have one Polish lad who's now left who used to go round looking for all the cans and he'd  then collect the ten p's!
scheme folded.
Through lack of support.
So what else is mentioned here?
I think that  still holds.
And I can check, I will go and .
And car batteries is the same.
Other batteries I'll check.
Pills er  you check
Yeah.
.
Furniture erm  yeah I think that's.
Is there a second hand furniture shop now in Bishop's Stortford?
There is one isn't there?
Is there one down by the Causeway?
Yes there is.
Who is going to check that?
Well I can check it.
Yeah.
Yeah?
Whether they take 
Yes.
Yes.
I mean whether they want any .
Right.
Okay.
Could I just borrow your pen and I'll write that down.
Thanks.
Are Red Cross still taking furniture in Stortford?
Now where is Red Cross?
Erm  Well I think the furniture you have to take down to Ware  when I last phoned.
There's a number in the er  when I was   Church Street so that's a few years now so it needs to be checked .
Would you do that?
So it's whether they take furniture?
Okay.
Newspapers I think that is  normally isn't it?
Do you think people  are  
 
folded 
What's that shop in the Causeway near the sunbed erm  it it's a second hand furniture in there isn't it?
Is it?
But h I mean  are people in the habit of wanting to get rid of furniture?
I mean  I mean if it, if it's really grotty I mean 
Well you can get I mean, according to the leaflet you can just phone up and get the council to collect .
No .
Glass, we haven't got any bottle banks.
And that's where we need to  contact  what is in the pipeline  
Yeah.
bottle bank somewhere.
Yeah there's, there's one at Sainsbury's now isn't there which is  new since that.
Yeah  there is Thorley Sainsbury's.
Thorley Sainsbury's.
They have one now?
They do.
Yes.
Oh!
They suddenly found the room.
Yes  actually.
Well  in a parking block.
Er  would anyone like coffee?
No  thank you.
one, two.
Now what was it, I mean  or would you prefer anything else?
some tea?
Tea?
I'll I'll go and check .
 
One thing I  struck me this week there's a new regulation as regard punctures on tyres because I had this completely flat tyre and a whole new set of tyres and I said to him well can't you mend it, can't you put an inner tube in like I I've done before cos there was a nail in it you see.
Yeah.
And I said just get the nail out and re repair the inner tube he said no it's the there's a new regulation  this year that if the outer case of the you know the tyre has  
tea.
they're not allowed to repair it because safety regulations because  the whole expanse and then supposedly the actual puncture  comes off.
And I said well what happens to these extra tyres?
Right.
So he sa , I mean does anybody know anything about anything like that?
No, no.
Presum I mean I just lost four  
I know this  I just know about about a sort of friend of ours  is making money meanwhile in Germany .
He found  well  of course erm connections so he got the permission through the embassy.
He's now running lorry loads of worn tyres to Russia, to the Soviet Union and makes money  loads of money because the tyres, they couldn't ha get any tyres so  the tyres he saw there were totally without profile.
You know.
Yeah.
So the old tyres  he could erm find in Germany were a lot better.
He carted them over.
. Making thousands out of it.
Yeah.
Well people do that here though don't they?
Se sell them to Africa and places  yeah .
alright if it doesn't rain actually so it wouldn't matter if they didn't have treads on er  treads on the tyres if it's dry it doesn't really matter you just go round  slicks and 
I think could chop them up and use them to make road surfaces with.
Yeah but percentages is  
Mm.
At least you know they can do it!
Mm that's right.
Oh they can do quite a lot of it.
I mean even the, the su surface out of the play in playgrounds .
Mm.
I can never quite work out why that .
most roads  
 
So, so far I've got two coffees here and one tea.
Anybody else for anything?
I'll have a coffee please.
Coffee?
Black please.
Black coffee.
White.
White.
White.
So we've got about six weeks in which to do this.
So how many weeks
I mean there's no  excuse I   all the jobs are quite quickly done  aren't they?
Yeah.
So what  we ought to have a deadline for collect collecting the information.
And then get together
Yeah.
to put it together.
And then decide on
And how to
And how to get, how to get it  to put it together.
Shall we say three weeks?
Three weeks  Yeah.
 

probably for everybody just to do it and
Yeah.
and I don't think anybody has more  time in in four weeks time
So if you say six weeks by then you 
Yeah yeah.
It's too near.
So the thirtieth of September we'll meet here again.
meeting?
Can, can we meet at  house?
Yes.
It's more sensible for 
Meet where?
What's your address?
Forty two?
Thirty two.
.
Is that alright?
Or what?
Mondays is actually not very good for me but hopefully by then 
I don't think I can make that either but er
Val, can I have your phone number please?
Right.
erm  what did you say?
Thirtieth?
Well that's .
go through.
So plastics erm  ya I think that's  re-using is better than  recycling.
And erm  then mention the charity shops.
I mean we don't need to  imply anything there.
There's no new recycling centre nearby  for plastics is there?
So who mentioned this 
The what?
talk about  recycling  mention that.
I just remember it from the .
Now Bejam have become Iceland they haven't done the  plastic bags collection have they like the, a lot of the .
They haven't got a provision for plastic bags 
Is that worth checking out?
I know a lot of the Iceland  do have a  recycling
I I'll do that, if I'm doing plastic bags at charity shops I'll check 
plastic bag recycling  
What's happened to Sainsbury's one p back cos they don't actually 
Yes I was yes  
they don't actually give you one p any more.
No!
I think  supposed to, they are supposed to.
I I always make them give me three p
This  in the Friend of the Earth, Germany  she stayed with us, I really would have liked you to meet her.
She was fanatic!
You have cat f food in tins!
How dare you!you know .
What do they  
from the butcher and
Oh, really.
Locally, no transport.
Cut out  transport.
Only local foods and 
If it's available.
Yes well mm.
So who, who.
Are you doing the bottle bank ?
You doing the bottle banks?
who's doing the bottle banks?
Yeah.
Thanks ever so much.
Because er  Caroline  once wanted one in a school and we weren't allowed to have it.
No I won't thank you.
Well there's one at erm  .
The erm wine merchant.
You know erm the one down the bottom of Thorley Hill.
Well they were, they were sort of  advertising er  giving you money back.
. I don't know if 
 
Down in the er 
Yeah.
Can you find out more ?
And also we do  
 
quite a few we can write at the bottom  er for more inf if you have any more information or something in small print
Mm.
please contact and then  we can do the next few hundred  
The thing is you can, you can change them very easily.
Ya.
That means you can er pay for it easier.
I wouldn't print more than three hundred for a start.
So if we get further information we can always  if not we can just get printed.
That's very impressive isn't it?
That's that   council of environment .
No sorry.
Council's environment advisory committee.
Oh that must be that must be the one  er
Rob's on.
Thought this was good about the, buying the R S P C A that boat  oil spill.
Doesn't look very steady though does it!
 

Yeah they look like!
It's ever so tiny isn't it!
Yeah.
coracle .
Well they've got to keep their green image, green image going haven't they?
So Kath while you were coffee making we decided on er  three weeks for collecting information.
Oh right.
And another three weeks for production.
Which will make the thirtieth of September a meeting at Portland Road.
That's a
Monday.
Although for two of us Monday's aren't good.
So I don't know whether 
I would prefer another day.
Three.
That makes three.
Monday or Tuesday is no good.
You can't do Tuesday?
Wednesday?
Wednesday now Wednesday would be the 
Second of October.
Second of October.
It's at your house?
Is that all, that's changed then has it Wednesday the second of October?
Have we decided on Wednesday?
No I think we should 
thing is I don't think I can but er I mean I might be able to pop in for about half an hour.
Because I mean I can find out what goes on
Yeah and leave, leave the stuff 
Yeah 
beforehand.
I'll probably phone it in actually.
Yeah.
If that's okay.
Er  second at what ti .
Wednesday second of October.
What time?
Eight thirty.
Eight thirty.
And this is, this is about the leaflet is it?
Yeah.
Yes.
Get all the information.
Decide on how we do the  thing.
And erm do take it
To go into details of that it's probably much more sensible to do it with just two or three people.
But er  at least if we can  pull the information together that evening that'd be a start.
Form a sub committee!
Ooh!
sub committee with everybody present!
 

Well you can always divide up.
Thanks ever so much folks and I'll see you 
Oh you've got to go.
soon.
See you.
Bye Katherine.
See you then.
Thanks Katherine.
Your welcome.
I'll be in touch.
Bye.
So what's gonna be on this stall then?
Apart from the new leaflets and a few  
Some re re-use labels.
Yeah.
You're gonna buy, you're gonna buy some?
I'll send off for some stuff.
I'll just do it.
Okay.
Those Traidcraft ones.
We've got some money.
Money sitting round  accounts doing nothing.
How much money have we got?
Oh.
Probably loads.
Can't remember.
I'd better let you know what we have got in stock just in case there's anything there that you're
Yeah.
You haven't  have you?
No.
I I don't think so.
Are you gonna get leaflets and you know  Friends of the Earth leaflets?
I've got l , well they've got loads, I've got a big  wallet folder full of all the various leaflets.
You have.
Right.
Erm 
Car stickers and  
cakes or anything like produce or 
I don't know.
I mean it, it's up to you.
I don't know if it's that sort of a  do really.
Mm.
Hundred and sixty eight pounds thirty nine pence.
Oh gosh!
Is that their new catalogue or is that the one, the summer one?
This is spring summer.
It's it's the latest one isn't it?
I haven't had another one .
I mean  they may be just just just about bringing one out so
They're just about to bring one out aren't they?
The Christmas lot will be out  
that one.
Sorry?
August that one.
the R S P B  
Well I I've been sent a  local  
Oh that was  is that true?
No I've got a
No, it said it in there  
I've got a local group six pound order form autumn and winter ninety one.
But I don't think they change that much.
I think they just sort of it's the same thing in a different order.
And it's it's got a lot of sort of stuff that's left over from  
Christmassy things 
That'll do.
Yeah.
Erm.
 
But I mean do we want to have any  produce or anything else?
I'm just looking at this stall thinking there's gonna be next to nothing on it.
Mm.
Yeah.
I think if some cakes we need definitely.
Oh.
So we have to do 
To make it look right so
Good advertising!
What is the, what is the concert in fact?
Well I, I honestly don't know an awful lot about it.
I don't think he knows that much  
It was low cost through the 
No cos it's concert.
There's going 
Oh concert.
to be a concert there.
All Saints, they were going to have a concert weren't they.
No.
This is at the Rhodes Centre.
The Rhodes Centre.
The concert  at which we've got this stall.
Yeah.
The Traidcraft's  stall.
.
I mean he kept  he didn't know.
He said to me on the phone he didn't know a great deal cos he was just getting it all together.
And he said, today he phoned me just as I was going out and I didn't really sort of stop and talk to him very long.
He just asked me what we needed and I said well a table.
We don't really need anything else do we?
Like power supply or 
Oh no  quite 
something with flashing lights on it!
So what time of the day is that?
It's evening.
seven or eight o'clock.
He told me.
How long does it go on for?
No idea.
He said he'd phone me again you see.
I think if there's a concert there'll be a rush at the beginning and there'll be a rush at the end.
Possibly a rush at the, at an interval I suppose.
What concert is it then?
I mean
Well I don't know!
Sounds a funny, funny evening to me! bit of a mish-mash isn't it.
I mean 
But  he's he just 
The oth .
The other thing we could do.
Sorry.
Liz.
Is  is to see whether green consumer Rob and Trish want to, to to have something.
I guess that would be a  .
I mean I wonder who exactly you're attracting if you've got people coming to listen to music and then
Well I think  something to do with the church  isn't it.
I think he mentioned  the church
go through the church ?
I don't know what the one,the the there's usually a theme for every one world  week each year and I don't know what the theme is for this year.
.
Act together for tomorrow's world.
Yeah!
Fine!
Well.
Yeah.
There you go!
And he said we come under that heading so.
Good.
Right.
But all he
There's nothing else going on apart from this concert 
I don't know.
I'll ask him.
I'll ask him .
Erm we'd better get on to a few other things.
I've got erm  Greenpeace written to me.
They're having a family fun day on  what day is it.
Saturday the twenty eighth of September.
That's at Much Hadham  hall, village hall.
Two o'clock to five o'clock.
They want to know if we want to have a stall there?
Family fun day  Much Hadham village hall?
Yeah.
Do you know where that is in Much Hadham?
Opposite the Bull pub isn't it?
Right.
Er  he wants to know  do we want to have a stall there and that's gonna cost us five pounds.
If we have that.
Erm
Well you could get produce  for that.
And then if you  ordered now.
I bet they probably be really competing with them in a way won't we cos they've got all the same sort of stuff.
Won't they?
Yeah.
Greenpeace  sell them  mugs and  re-use labels and  sort of things like that.
I don't know what you think.
Erm  and there's er 
I would suggest
If it's a fun day why don't we do a game or something.
Why do, you know.
Well it's.
They're celebrating their twentieth birthday celebrations.
Erm  and then th in the evening there's an event.
Which starts at eight o'clock with two live bands, cabaret, disco and bar.
Tickets three pound fifty.
Does anybody want to go?
That's a good idea but it's  offer to do a game.
Well they've got  what they've got on here is they've got  whale watch talk and slides.
. Punch and Judy show.
Magic  and juggling with ka plate spinning.
Er Playbus painting competition.
Raffle, refreshments, tombola  and various merchandise stalls so I suppose  that's us.
Quite 
Mm.
Do they do fire eating act or
We can contortionism or   my legs up behind my neck.
An alternative might be to just to ask whether some of our membership forms could be  put out so that 
Well I think they're more interested in the five pounds!
Yeah alright well.
Yeah.
I mean to make a contribution.
No to be honest because that that's what Greenpeace do isn't it?
Don't you belong?
Yeah  start the Harlow one up
Yeah.
the whole of their effort really is devoted to  
Yeah they don't do it.
They're actually, they just do fund raising to their local groups and everything else is obviously sort of controlled by central office or 
That's right everything is central.
Ac action is central  or something.
Yeah but I mean
So they're probably just gonna have their  you know  merchandise and a few people sort of 
It's difficult really because I mean we're sort of striving for the same sort of things 
I know.
Yeah.
aren't we.
It's er  you don't want to be seen to be erm
Who's it actually run by?
competing with each other in any way.
Well.
I think his name's actually written out.
I'm not sure 
It's like trying to unite the churches.
Yeah.
It looks like somebody Plus  Plusky Oh yeah.
No.
Oh well.
It's signed by s .
Oh no sorry..
That can't possibly say .
Well it says Leslie  at the top.
But there's something else underneath.
I mean is that 
 
but is that a Greenpeace central office thing or is it erm
A local group.
a local group?
East Herts.
But does it, Pat  does it  doesn't he?
for Herts yeah.
He still does it now.
How do you know?
that have got so involved in that.
Yeah.
And and Bob  did it  here in Bishop's Stortford but I don't know whether he's still  I think he still does it because he was very committed.
But I I just  Pat was doing it for Bishop's Stortford on or thereabouts because he sent me all the details about the whale walk .
Cos I I gave his name to this guy organizing the one world week.
And he hadn't had any joy out of Greenpeace.
Can I borrow that a minute?
What this?
Yeah 
The problem we've got with Greenpeace they might not have so much in the way of merchandise and they just have the stickers and  
There's the   leaflets.
things and leaflets.
Yeah I think it just depends whether the local group want to take up the option or not.
I don't think there's anything  I've got to tell you.
Er except there's a day of action but it's right  that's right into November now so  you can hear about that .
So we  this next meeting at  
Yeah.
I I think we can sort out more about the st stall  I mean if we can  sell things  
Well  this this this er Greenpeace letter predates the  September.
Oh that is a pity.
I think that's actually a bit too soon to get ourselves organized  
Shall I shall I just write off and send them  like pound or  donation and a few leaflets could 
Yeah.
Say we're quite prepared to make a contribution, mm.
you put them out or  circulate them.
Yeah?
Yeah I mean don't think Rob would be interested.
Yeah.
He he ought to know about it though 
I'll ask him about it.
Cos he lives up the road from there doesn't he?
Oh  yeah.
Erm
And he could collect some money for the 
.
Alright I'll tell
Yeah.
I expect he, you know they're fairly busy but  you know they may well 
And I'll tell 
not want to go.
Yeah.
Anyway I'll see you all on Wednesday 
Thanks for coming.
Erm 
Bye Liz.
I'll  going in the afternoon  
There's a few other things 
that I've got to get through here.
I mean 
Erm  I've got here.
I've been sent some stuff by  Chris  who used to run Harlow group.
Oh yeah.
Chris who was that?
?
.
Not Christine!
Yeah that's right they cos   Erm so I've got a whole long list of all these people who used to belong to Harlow which is absolutely enormous.
Is that Friends of the Earth?
Yeah.
Masses of names  
loads of money and 
Well no, I 
No they've folded now  
They have folded.
Well  I think that list is the list that  what was his name, Chris?
quite a few  as well.
But if you look properly it's a, that is not only Harlow.
Remember he wanted to merge the groups?
Don't you remember?
Oh yeah.
Oh yes.
Of course.
And he had all the numbers.
Because he also works 
Yes.
Some of ou .
Yeah.
in a erm London.
Isn't it the national?
No it's it's all the 
No.
He wanted to call it Stort group or something.
Oh yeah 
Stort Valley or something wasn't it?
Stort Valley group .
Well there's a lo quite a lot.
It's mostly Harlow actually when you look through it.
But there are Bishop's Stortford ones too.
Yeah that's all the  
And the vast majority's Harlow.
That was his plan of having 
What, what do they do they want.
What do they want to do?
Do they want join our group or 
Nothing.
He said he he's apparently just moved and he's got involved with this other charity  erm to do with the United Nations  Friends of the Earth and just passed it on to me.
Cos the there  there must be useful contacts you see.
People who sympathize.
we've got the names.
Mm.
They were fairly enthusiastic when they started off.
Mm.
So I  
But I I mean  we  I don't know whether you think it's worth contacting  or not.
It might be.
Yes.
W either when we've got a reason to contact them
Yeah.
or with a specific letter  for them saying you know welcome if you  if you feel like it.
Actually just just quickly  er I just noticed on that list of your  questionnaires that we got back a couple  that they didn't actually know what was going on.
And that you know perhaps this is er erm publicity wise I wonder whether we're falling a bit short on our  publicity.
Well.
they didn't know  I mean  like first newsletter we've had in ages.
And it's something else that we need to get 
we can't just sort of 
No exactly 
We've got to get, we should get more publicity.
But it's ever so easy for somebody to sit at home and say well you should be doing this and you should be doing that
Oh yeah yeah.
and not doing
No I'm I'm not sa , I'm not saying.
I'm not saying you should be  doing anything I'm just er 
No I didn't mean you, I meant them!
No well .
I well really  I don't think you should say  you're not doing enough!
No  
I think last year more or less shows that we really have to concentrate on one thing.
Do it and then plan 
Yeah.
plan the next .
Because otherwise we just  
And then write about it if we want to.
Yeah.
So what what we'll do quickly  to write and inform them all that we're doing this stall and   won't we?
Yes.
We could even send them  a recycling sheet.
Yeah.
And the most recent newsletter.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And a, and a short letter I do don't know whether you said that.
Are you talking about this lot or 
Yeah.
or that lot?
Sorry?
Yeah sorry I was also tal we were talking about our own membership 
talking about Stortford  
Oh right!
and we passed on.
No I think they  I mean
They complain they don't get any information.
My first contacts with Friends of the Earth  in this region sort of what six years ago was Harlow.
Mm.
And they were all enthusiastic and  confident and 
Well what happened to them?
And  when  there was another friend who was still over here at that time.
And we went three times and they always planned and planned and planned and had ideas what they could do.
And they never pulled round to actually doing it 
No.
properly.
Right.
And I think the same happened as with us.
They wrote letters and they did didn't have the energy
Mm.
to  write again and again you know  And you never get a positive answer, clear answer first, first time round do you?
Mm.
You have to write and and write more details or put more pressure on and have more people write.
But if you just write a single letter  
Yeah but you should .
I know you two have been   
Yeah.
Mm.
I'm used to it.
I mean  it evaporates.
.
Didn't we have er a membership thing which said about  erm  membership form which actually explained what  what we did in  if you want to join return this sort of thing.
Yeah.
I've got loads of those.
Have you still got those?
Yes.
I've got all those.
We've still got those somewhere then.
Yeah.
Well I've go have got the .
I don't think I don't know if I've got a master.
But I know I've got lots that could be copied so we could send them out.
Well I've got the master still somewhere.
Well anyway it's something to bear in mind the fact that we've got that list anyway.
Erm 
Yeah how many.
Sort of what's the approximate number of people on it?
I don't know.
I'm not very good at estimating numbers.
One two three four 
Oh and then there was  there's it's it's it's not all Harlow it's all  just
Yeah it's Stort Valley.
Ya.
This Chris  what was his name?
I don't remember.
I don't, didn't even know his name was Chris.
Don't you remember he he then suggested th that walk along the Stort?
I do yeah.
I mean I'd forgotten all about him but I can remember  
Do you remember that.
That was a really silly thing wasn't it?
Can I just have a look Kath?
Yeah.
He organized it all and then I think was it a week before he suddenly said  well we can't possibly have two hundred people walking along  a nature trail  that we want to protect.
And he was really of the illusion that there might be  I think two hundred no six hundred people 
Two hundred people might turn up.
turning up.
In the end I think three people turned up.
Oh.
It was, it was  no it was 
This looks really interesting.
get it.
I had to write off
Yeah.
Er it was a nice  er display  thing to show to show the kids when you do talks in schools.
Yeah yeah.
Well I mean I'd certainly use it.
Is is that Greenpeace?
Yeah that's what I think is it's no  
It's a resources pack 
Mm.
It's his own is it?
Well he's obvious they've obviously the group has bought it and he's got it and he's gonna say do you want to buy 
Oh yeah.
Oh yeah.
for ten instead of twenty.
Originally cost twenty pounds and we could get it for ten it's er 
It's Chris  
it's erm   living forests  resources pack.
Looks good doesn't it?that I thought.
Erm  with all sorts of po posters and teacher's notes and things.
Well I firmly believe in building up a library .
So do I.
Good I'm glad 
I I mean there's 
you said that because I w I want to buy a book!
no  library because I think  er if you are contacted for information and you are able to say  okay we have a book  or we have books.
Yeah.
That's that's one of the things I I I ke , I've kept all my New Scientists.
I keep these.
Yeah.
I go through them gonna collate that cos there's loads of stuff in there good.
Yeah.
But I do get quite a few people phone me as you know asking for information.
I just photocopy relevant bits 
None of  none of them has got in contact with me.
Really!
No.
Aren't they funny.
I get the feeling 
Well I should give you er 
that they either phone in.
Phone me and then get it all given to them  just like that.
That yeah.
And no further effort involved cos
Well I should, I could .
No it isn't.
This woman who, who keeps phoning me up about all this oil pollution on her land.
She she.
I sent, I wrote off to Friends of the Earth, I got a load of information all about the law  and she still phones me up and say oh you know what the District Council's they won't do anything and the N R A wasn't doing anything.
And I said well when did you last contact them?
February!
Apparently she's got a problem that  the oil pollution is coming off this site where they're refurbishing the boilers.
It's gotten on to her land  and off her land and into the ditch, which is  you know the N R A  
Where is that?
Er  Roydon some way?
You know where all those nurseries are?
And because the oil is coming  to the ditch via her land they can't have a go at the primary source.
This is what she said and I, to me it doesn't sound right.
She said nobody'll  Nob they all say they haven't got the power to prosecute and I said well the N R A has.
They've got more clout than anybody else.
Mm.
More clout than the District Council.
And then she keeps saying but you know what these councils are like.
And I said I'm not talking about the council, I'm talking about the N R A!
And now she wants me  to find out how can er found out about a solicitor or somebody who specialises in this sort of thing.
To take the District Council to court.
So that she's more expensive to them  than this other lot will be.
Apparently they're causing quite te dreadful pollution.
It's all this oil  from the boilers leaking on to her  into her soil and out into the ditch.
Well  
Certainly is.
But erm  in the back of my mind there comes  that she's saying to me  don't get involved, don't get involved.
You know who owns all that land, it's the mafia.
And this could be why she's getting nowhere.
You could give her er erm er wr , give her the address of Friends of the Earth, London.
Oh she's already .
That's how she got in contact with me!
You see they refer everybody on and then I  
Well but they should give her a soli , the name of a solicitor.
There must be green solicitors about.
I  have to write to them and ask them and about a month later they reply to me and I pass it on to her.
Because I don't know off hand.
I've asked Jeffrey to ask a friend about it who's a  solicitor if he knows anybody but I c , I can't  I haven't got the in information.
I don't
Does anybody of you remember where Friends of the Earth England erm  analyze their expenditures.
Their income and  their finance for the last year?
I I  saw it somewhere and I got  lost track of it.
And I was appalled  as to how much they spend on publicity.
But I can't do anything with it because I lost the numbers.
Mm.
I don't know I'll have, have a look.
I don't remember seeing 
The thing is this .
Does anybody of you seen that or  remember?
No.
No.
No.
So  are we saying yes to that?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Erm  can I just ask you.
Does anybody wanna go on the energy campaign weekend?
No thank you.
And there's this  book.
Which I think we might like to  don't worry .
Erm  energy without aids.
Which I think would be  a good idea if we got it because I don't know about you but I'm always having arguments with people who say oh we can't have the whole country covered in windmills and
Mm.
things like that.
They all think nuclear powers okay.
 
So we really need to know our 
What's the energy thing weekend just out of curiosity?
And 
Good.
Right.
Go on 
I don't.
I don't know these things.
No.
Well you don't get them.
I do and I feel obliged to pass it all on.
I can't just sort of 
No.
But it, I, it's only six ninety five and I thought if we had  you know a few facts at our fingertips to say well that's all rubbish you know.
So what is that?
Is that er  booklet or something?
It's a book.
Book.
Just  talking about al you know alternative 
On erm  renewable yeah 
energy really I think.
Yeah.
Because  they keep saying oh what's gonna happen when the whole population of China wants a fridge and 
Mm god!
I haven't got an answer for things like that.
Mm.
There is no answer really.
Because  want to catch up with us and we're already using too much energy.
change your lifestyle.
I just thought  the more facts you've got at your fingertips the more easy it is to persuade people.
Yeah if we've got some money we might as well spend it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Educate ourselves.
An and the next day of action  as I said before is on tropical rainforests erm .
Connection with er tropical woods 
Oh we did actually do  
November the ninth.
for the architects.
Like Hertfordshire architects
Yeah.
for example.
Do something basically have a 
Yes  
mailshot or ring them up or.
They're a pretty depressed lot at the moment  
Yeah I bet they are.
They have nothing to do 
Not much to look forward to so they'll probably like a bit of excitement.
Nothing to do.
No I  I don't know what it's going to be about they haven't sent any information.
It's just that er I've got the date.
Right.
When when they say.
Is it an action day ?
It's an action day.
It's the next day of action and
What date?
That's a Saturday.
What date?
November the ninth.
It's only just after the one world week thing.
Well it's October.
Well if I if I get 
Well it's only two week's after.
Yeah.
and I don't know what it's going to be 
You know  know which would recommend  
Yeah.
This.
I mean I have been into this  window frame business.
Mm
Because we have to have sash and  sash  soft wood.
So anyway  various companies wrote.
Well they do use tropical rainforest wood but
Yeah.
it's government  er schemes.
Yeah it's like some sort of erm okay.
Yeah.
And I mean I have, I I remember that on some T V programmes they they said it's all  bogus
Mm.
I mean that it is not really government run er .
They reforest it but what they reforest is eucalyptus or 
Yeah palm erm they  oil palm plantations 
Mm.
Mm.
They just er .
Actually I've got a, I've got a brilliant picture that I took outside the train.
Erm we were travelling through Malaysia and erm  it's just one canopy tree standing on its own  in the middle of nowhere.
And there's all this sort of undergrowth.
And it's obviously that one wasn't, just didn't want it or it was dead or something and they just left it.
Mhm.
And it's just the one.
And then  I've got all the pictures of all the logs on the  train wagons and er that was really  it was a, it was a good picture actually cos I thought oh look at that poor old tree there it's
Yeah.
all its friends and then it was just standing there on the ground.
But really it's completely  it's completely wiped out Malaysia the whole of central Malaysia is just  just gone.
And all the soil's eroding cos it's sort of  sand and it's red.
And it goes into dust.
So it goes everywhere so I mean there's gonna be trouble with that in the future .
It's where they get all the flooding isn't it?
Oh yes.
Right.
Oh.
okay.
Thanks.
Thank you very much.