

Yeah erm  the other er  aspect of any discussion of Vienna  is the er, is discussion of the congress system itself.
Erm whether that was a a, a er a success  or failure.
Erm  the general response to this is that it was a failure.
There's an even more er perhaps er  pertinent er point on this that er  that did it  did the congress system  actually exist in any meaningful way.
Again erm perhaps we ought to refer  one, one of the  still rather good stuff on this is from er, is from Thompson's book.
And indeed I see one.


Thompson 
Nicking books eh ?
  
Yes there's  there's a rather good  I was recommending Thompson's book er last week.
Erm it does have a rather good section on the congress system.
And I'll, I will endeavour in, in a second to er find it.
I would say that erm  We could perhaps describe the congress system as a partial success.
A partial success.
It helped to keep the peace.
So in that sense again in the language of of the old old ten sixty six and all that it was a good thing.
However  you see a tendency in  erm after eighteen eighteen  to be perhaps more serving, to be serving the interests of  the er er east European powers.
And then it became perhaps  a troublesome er  entity.
Of course they had a problem at the outset  that being  all the powers had agreed on the need for joint intervention say er vis a vis France.
In eighteen, between eighteen fifteen and eighteen eighteen  er the great powers did intervene in France.
They had an army of occupation in some of France's north eastern departments.
France was on  in a sense France was on probation in eighteen fifteen to eighteen eighteen.
Erm  and and and we could take it back to the hundred days episode when the great powers have all er decided to er er to prevent Napoleon from making a comeback in France.
But the great powers had agreed upon the principle of joint intervention.
But of course as far as Britain was concerned, this could only be  intervention against France.
And what you tend to see happen  is not so much joint intervention  after eighteen  er fifteen or eighteen eighteen.
You tend to see individual intervention.
Erm Austria in Italy.
France in Spain.
Russia in Greece.
And of course, ironically  the western powers  Britain involves herself in Portugal.
Britain involves herself in Greece.
So Britain intervenes as well.
Even though she was hostile to intervention erm you know erm by by  say er France in Spain or whatever.
Yeah?
So we get a strange paradoxical situation developing.
So is it like, somebody could erm  I mean work against France in that situation  ?
In that well  yeah I mean in a sense er that's right because  if you think about it, in eighteen  in eighteen fifteen  er the great powers stayed in existence mainly because of a fear of a  of of fear of France.
Yeah?
Erm and er  that's what, that was the cement which held them together.
When when that's no longer perhaps valid, then the powers have got their erm, have got, have got their own interests to pursue.
Erm  It all gets mixed up of course because there's, there's there's erm  erm  Russia which is seen as a power, you know the reactionary power.
A power which is  concerned with the threat of revolution in Europe.
Russia intervenes to help revolutionaries in Greece.
So it's ironic, you know, you do get this paradox.
But wasn't that cos er it was only Turkey's revolt though?
Well yeah but it was still, it was, I mean don't forget  and it it it's perhaps a point you know, erm a valid point.
The Greek revolts which had been going on since the early eighteen twenties.
The Greek revolt was seen by European liberals who in a sense might be having a hard time of it  in in, in those years.
The Greek revolt was seen as a symbolic er event as well as just an anti Turkish er erm uprising.
Erm and that's why you do get erm  er European liberals going over to Greece to support the er er the Greek revolutionaries.
Yeah but Russia didn't  case Russia intervened as a pro-liberal thing.
It's like
No.
But nevertheless  the intervention was there.
Yes so
And I mean it was er  I accept that it's hardly that that Russia perhaps was intervening in the interests of er of  of erm of of of of er Russian policy in that area.
But erm  but the fact of the matter was,which whichever way you look at it, Russia was supporting essentially a liberal nationalist revolt.
Couldn't you say that about the British in Portugal?
Yeah but Britain  Britain ideologically at least well I'm I'm not sure about that.
I mean  er Britain, Britain was er er er Britain's concerns out there  were to maintain British influence in the area.
Yeah?
Erm it so happened that that the group that that Britain was supporting perhaps were constitutionalists although Canning was almost erm was always rather scathing about  how liberal they were and how constitutionalist they were.
So is it almost like this thing which is like  by  by chance?
.
Possibly so, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Erm  Okay so that's er that's some of the erm er  major aspects of er of  of the congress system.
By the way, just getting back to these interventions.
Erm  er the intervention of France in Spain.
Er France interv intervened in Spain initially to put down  a liberal revolt.
Ironically  because you know French public opinion was very hostile to that intervention.
Ironically in many respects the French intervention paved the way for the success of the liberals in Spain.
It's a strange you know.
It it it it's  it is paradoxical.
By the eighteen twenties perhaps the congress had become somewhat er  divisive.
Possibly it was increasing tension between the great powers, the congress system.
Was that in ?
I'm suggesting that by perhaps the eighteen twenties the congress system was becoming somewhat divisive.
Yeah  erm  course the other problem the congress system had I suppose a te a a technical problem.
There was no bureaucratic machinery erm er to support it.
There was no kind of permanent  congress house like you know, or congress building.
Er  and of course obviously  there was no congress army.
Perhaps it was over-ambitious.
And again I I suppose though its main problem was  the the the misunderstandings or the er different interpretations  er that the great powers had.
Notably of course between Britain  and the other powers.
Couple of other points about the erm er er about the er Vienna settlement in general.
Let me erm, let me refer to erm the holy alliance erm  people I'm sure will come across this in their  in their reading.
The holy alliance.
It was established in September eighteen fifteen.
Erm  it 
Sorry.
When was it established?
September eighteen fifteen.
It it it came from an initiative by Tzar Alexander.
It was signed erm  er it was signed er first by Austria, Prussia and Russia.
And in a sense  the holy alliance came to be seen as representing their interests.
ie  anti-liberalism  anti-nationalism.
Why it was called the holy alliance was because erm er the signatories agreed that they would er, that they would rule their states and treat er  er policy erm  er according to christian principles.
They would, they would rule their states and conduct policy according to christian principles.
Interestingly  all erm er most of the European powers came to sign this erm  It wasn't, it wasn't as ex .
It wasn't exclusive like the quadruple alliance of eighteen fifteen.
There's a couple of points er er perhaps worth making about it.
Er Britain didn't sign it.
Britain refused to sign it.
It would seem that  Tzar Alexander was sincere  in in his er in his notions of christian  brotherhood and principles.
Erm  it's been er  it's been suggested as well that in some extent it reflects the religious revival in Europe that that that that was taking place.
Erm  I think you know it's was one of the cliches of history that er that that intellectual movements developed counter-intellectual movements and even while  one intellectual movement is fading out like the er  er it's counter is rising.
And if we can put this into simplistic erm er  er nay almost Mickey Mouse terms that the enlightenment was based upon rationalism.
Erm er er cosmopolitan attitudes and such like and in the enlightenment was a strong  very very strong element of  of opposition to religion  erm and traditional religious beliefs.
Ironically erm er er erm even towards the end of the eighteenth century  you see some of the revival of  religion.
And and  and romanticism which is seen as the  as the movement which replaces the enlightenment in a sense.
There's a very strong religious tinge er er to this and it's argued that the holy alliance is perhaps an expression of  of a significant religious revival that's going on  erm in Europe in the early nineteenth century.
Erm amongst intellectuals er  Er there's one  there've been suggestions made about the holy alliance.
Britain was very suspicious of it.
Because of course erm ah well which European leader could not sign the holy alliance?
For a very obvious reason.
Don't forget that the holy alliance erm  enjoined it's signatories to to to conduct their affairs on christian principles.
Oh Turkey 
Erm obviously the, presumably the Sultan of Turkey as a, as erm as a Muslim could not be expected to sign the holy alliance.
And there was a suspicion in Britain  that it was all a bit of a plot to  er to kind of isolate Turkey.
And sort of exclude Turkey  from European er consideration.
It it would be, in a sense it was leading to a kind of psychological isolation of Turkey.
And there was this view in Britain that maybe it was some kind of Russian er you know that it was a Russian manoeuvre.
A tsarist manoeuvre to isolate Turkey.
Erm  Metternich interestingly  Metternich er later regarded the er holy alliance as meaningless.
Metternich said that he signed it to please the Tsar.
Erm and yet perhaps erm it's .
Perhaps it was important erm because as as as erm, as I'm I'm fond of saying that in history perhaps  what you believe is more important than what actually happened.
And the holy alliance became part of, in a sense, liberal demonology.
To European liberals the holy alliance was a sinister plot directed against the liberals.
Okay.
So er a few other little aspects of the er of of er  the  congr of of of the holy all of of of the er Vienna settlement which is sometimes underplayed.
Er  the Vienna settlements er contained  other elements.
For instance it agreed to abolish the slave trade.
At the Vienna settlement the great powers, all the great powers agreed to take no further part in the slave trade.
They agreed to abolish it.
Erm various trade agreements were made.
Er the river Danube was largely erm erm er largely became a kind of er  free trade river.
You know it was bombing through all these different boundar er different boundaries.
There was the freeing up of trade on the Danube.
Erm  So there were try er we we might describe some of the elements in the Vienna settlement as confidence building measures.
Erm attempts at international  a a greater international economic co- operation.
So maybe we shouldn't be er er so quick as to er just er erm  dismiss er the Vienna settlement  entirely.
Right I'll be back in a tick.
Just want to say a couple of 
Right.
Erm  if you check with the er, if you check with the  erm handout on you know er the the topic areas.
Erm  what we've been dealing with on Vienna is dealt with  in section  forty six reaction and revolution in Europe.
What I'll erm, what I'll do next week on  this is a rather problematic topic this one erm  it's in the general section.
And there's an overlap with with question twenty six, French history eighteen fifteen to seventy one.
Erm  er I'll try to deal with the erm  it's it's very very difficult to separate these topics out and and teach that one as a topic in, in a sense.
What I'll do next week erm  we'll perhaps through concentrating on France we'll do a quick gallop through Europe eighteen  erm about eighteen fifteen to forty eight.
And I'll focus in on the eighteen thirty and forty eight revolutions.
But that will involve erm erm er France.
Now erm more to the point  and I'll erm I'm reminding myself here.
I haven't set any essays on Napoleon have I?
No.
Erm Didn't you?
Oh 
No?
No.
You said you weren't going to.
Well why on earth should I say that.
I dunno.
It's, I thought it was odd when you said it .
It's a major topic.
It's question twenty four on the old er  topic list.
I will, I'll set essays on Napoleon on erm on er on  next time we meet on Monday.
Erm  And let me remind everybody  because I don't intend erm  erm er waiting for for people to cough up on this so I would like to remind people to get, it it's the thirteenth today.
So I want, I'd like everybody's erm  payment for the conference thing  next week if poss.
How much is it?
How much is what?
No the rail, I'll check that out today or tomorrow and I'll be able to say, to say on Monday.
But I'll let, let's imagine for the moment that it's still that six fifty.
So we're looking at  we're looking at nine fifty.
Let's call it ten quid.
if the rail fare's gone up as I expect it may well have done.
So do you want the rail fare money next week as well?
Erm
Might as well.
No I don't need the rail, I don't the rail money in er  Cos I presume if you pay the seven quid you'll be more or less committed then to paying the  I'll I'll get the rail money a bit later than .
Is it  a Wednesday?
Erm 
It's a Thursday.
It's Thursday the nineteenth of March.
Normal time.
What about five o'clock?
About fiveish.