

Architecture: Invisible buildings that reflect nothing: The subtopian, A-road design of many of our cities is destroying their character, Jonathan Glancey believes.
Most critics ignore the dreariness of our streets, but it is time for the public to demand better
By JONATHAN GLANCEY
THIS is the architecture that dare not speak its name.
It professes no particular architectural creed; it belongs to no recognisable school of design.
Tags such as Modern, Post-Modern, High-Tech or even Neo-Classical are wholly redundant when you stare at this subtopian, A-road architecture.
The specialist architectural press ignores this amorphous school of design, while even the Prince of Wales has nothing to say on the subject, reserving his spleen for imaginative buildings that he and so many of his future subjects profess to hate.
The current architectural debate has served to polarise popular opinion on modern architecture.
Richard Rogers and the bravura City of London headquarters he designed for Lloyds are presented as unmitigated villains.
The burgeoning Neo-Classical architects, such as John Simpson and Quinlan Terry, are, by nature of the style they choose to work in, a good thing.
Modern British architects worth their salt, or future knighthoods, can be counted on a few colour spreads of the Prince of Wales's bestselling book A Vision of Britain.
But a national debate on architecture at this level is as banal as it is unhelpful.
It is an easy trick to target controversial buildings and, in the mind's eye at least, to pull them down.
Of course the Lloyds building is hard for many people to swallow.
A highly crafted, hugely sophisticated building-machine that rewrites so many rules of conventional corporate architecture is inevitably hard to digest.
So were the great Victorian railway stations that we now profess to admire, almost uncritically.
Like the best wines, distinguished architecture matures over time: 50 years from now, Lloyds will be championed by as yet unborn conservationists, fought over in the media and ultimately listed Grade One.
Lloyds is no more outlandish or intrusive than Tower Bridge and much less so than the monstrous and melancholy Battersea Power Station, a sublime work of imperious architecture that Londoners once loved to hate but now admire.
But neither Londoners nor Mancunians, Geordies, Scousers, Brummies nor Bristolians appear to have anything to say about the almost invisible architecture that continues to destroy the character of British cities: the architecture with no name.
Take, for example, the Hammersmith Road in west London.
It links Hammersmith Broadway with the brutal concrete-and-steel Thirties exhibition halls at Olympia.
This clotted traffic artery is lined from one end to another with new office buildings of the type illustrated in the picture above.
No one looks at these buildings.
They have no remarkable features to catch the eye, nor, in tandem, do they form a satifying or picturesque group as a street of Georgian terraces does.
Each is different in mild degrees and minor sensations from its neighbours.
But because each refuses to acknowledge its neighbours, the net effect in terms of the streetscape is less than zero.
Some of the buildings are faced in a swathe of reflective glass that merely reflects other mundane buildings, some in brick, some with half-hearted Post-Modern details.
Because each has nothing to say, the mirrored buildings simply reflect a bigger nothing.
Each building along the Hammersmith Road is a mishmash of tired cliches, from mirrored wall glazing to low brick walls studded with small withered plants separating entrances from pavement.
Each is meant to be an improvement on the overwhelming developers architecture of the Sixties, of which Hammersmith is a shrine.
But the use of inexpertly laid and brightly coloured bricks, token pitched roofs and arched windows does not make for likeable architecture.
Nor does the fact that the latest buildings are uniformly low; they are simply low and boring rather than high and boring.
This new wave of anonymous buildings, designed to slip as quickly as possible through local authority planning procedures, has ripped the heart out of Hammersmith.
But the area is not unique.
In fact, Hammersmith Road might belong to any British city that has been silently raped during the past few years.
Hammersmith Road and its schlock architecture is proof that conservationists are not as powerful as the architectural profession likes to believe.
Those who design, develop and approve this marginally acceptable architecture must be delighted that its very banality keeps critics and hostile public opinion at bay.
These buildings are not so controversial that passers-by, princes or those who work in them feel moved to express an opinion, either positive or negative.
We continue to turn a blind eye to the architecture with no name, preferring instead to attack the buildings that future generations will admire.
What can be done to stop the spread of this silent architectural disease creeping through the veins and arteries of our cities?
First, it should he held up for critical inspection, pilloried when necessary.
Second, the British public needs to see exactly what good modern architecture is, to be shown what a city street such as Hammersmith Road could become if served by the best architects and developers.
Third, people should get hot under the collar when presented with dreary architecture.
When the designs for I M Pei's steel-and-glass pyramid at the Louvre were unveiled four years ago, there was a running battle between police and conservationists in the hallowed courtyards of the rambling museum.
Right or wrong, the incident showed that people cared about what would happen to the Louvre.
Pitched battles in Hammersmith Road, London's Docklands, Birmingham or Edinburgh are unlikely, but local people must express their opinions.
Architectural plans are not local authority or state secrets.
All have a right to see the new architecture planned for their town.
In Birmingham, local residents are struggling to stop, or at least change the nature of the giant new retail redevelopment, designed by Chapman Taylor & Partners for the developers London & Edinburgh Trust, which is planned to replace the infamous early Sixties Bull Ring.
In Leeds, local councillors have been sheepish about releasing plans to local people for what might just prove to be one of the most inspired and humane post-war city centre redevelopments masterminded by the architects Terry Farrell and Rob Krier for the Dutch developer MAB.
The more people get used to prodding, weighing and evaluating new planning proposals, the less likely it is that the Hammersmith effect will spread further.
Architecture: The eagle is landing in west London: Swedish architect Ralph Erskine has designed an office block in which Dan Dare would feel at home, should he wish to work in Hammersmith
By JONATHAN GLANCEY
HAMMERSMITH in west London, home of some all too visible faceless architecture, has been chosen as the site of what promises to be one of Britain's most remarkable buildings, an enormous office block designed on natural lines by the Royal Gold Medallist Ralph Erskine, Jonathan Glancey writes.
Developed by Talgarth Estates for the Swedish firms Ake Larson and Enator, the Erskine building will rise, like a submarine breaking the ocean surface, alongside the Hammersmith flyover and London Underground's Piccadilly and District lines.
It would be difficult to imagine a more unnatural site for Ralph Erskine to work on.
Erskine, long resident in Stockholm, is known for the warm, humane domestic, public and commercial buildings he has designed in Sweden over the past 50 years.
In Britain he is best known for the remarkable Byker Wall housing scheme in Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
At Byker, Erskine built some of the most likeable local authority housing of the 1970s behind a massive and sinuous brick wall designed to keep the roar of a proposed urban motorway at bay.
The motorway was never built, but Byker has become a model of how to build low-cost housing on a large, yet humane scale.
At Hammersmith Erskine's building will sit on an island site, doing its best to protect those who work in it from the surrounding aural and visual pollution.
In terms of context, Erskine is shooting in the dark.
He could hardly adapt the style of the building's closest neighbour, the Soviet-like Novotel Hotel.
Although large, the building will be no leviathan.
The nautical outline will reduce its bulk, while the periscoped roof will curve over a central atrium open at the edges to the elements.
On the flyover side, the building will be nine storeys high, declining to five storeys on its south side.
Designed unfashionably from the inside out(Erskine remains a committed Modernist), the building should provide some of the most relaxed office space in London.
Given its hostile setting, the office needs to pamper those who work in it with a range of leisure facilities, including restaurants, squash courts and a gymnasium.
The upper floors give on to stepped and landscaped terraces, some internal, some external protected by the umbrella roof.
Equally significant is the fact that the developers are providing a two-storey building alongside for use by the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham.
The borough plans to house its archives in this ‘lilla huset’(Swedish for ‘little house’), together with an urban study centre for local schools and a business studies centre for the borough's training programme.
Erskine's office will be faced in bronze between tinted glass, stand on a highly textured brick base in a sea of foliage and be topped by a copper roof.
Given its setting, the building is almost inevitably a little like a spaceship settling on the dangerous surface of an alien planet.
It is designed to cosset its crew.
Perhaps the nearest the British have got to a building like this has been in the pages of The Eagle.
Frank Hampson's brilliantly executed colour illustrations in the ‘Dan Dare’ strip of the Fifties and early Sixties often depicted futuristic buildings of the 1990s which bore a remarkable similarity to the Erskine block.
It is unlikely, however, that the 75-year-old Erskine has been influenced by Dan Dare.
The truth is that comic illustrator and award-winning architect have both been greatly influenced by the architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright.
From some angles it is clear that the Hammersmith building is a homage to Lloyd Wright's spiralling Guggenheim Museum in Manhattan.
On another level, the building can be seen as an ark bearing its precious human cargo through a decidely rough sea of bad urban planning and even worse architecture.
The London Borough of Hammersmith has previously rejected inspired schemes by at least two of Britain's most interesting architects.
Both Norman Foster, architect of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank headquarters, and Terry Farrell, designer of the new-look Charing Cross station complex, developed highly intelligent proposals for the reconstruction of Hammersmith Broadway.
Instead of Farrell or Foster, Hammersmith settled for a flashy Post-Modern office and retail development which, while providing the sort of covered spaces the borough wanted, led nowhere architecturally.
By voting for Ralph Erskine there is a chance — assuming that executive architects Rock Townsend and Lennart Bergstroms can reach the meticulous standards set by their Swedish master — that Hammersmith will point the way ahead for a new generation of user-friendly, environmentally soft commercial architecture.
Architecture Viewpoint: Redemption for the developer
By ROWAN MOORE
The author is an architect in private practice IN MODERN demonologies, property developers rank high.
While other ways of making money become more respectable and sometimes laudable, developers are still seen as the spiritual heirs of Victorian millowners and slum landlords, people who, even as they tear the hearts out of cities, simultaneously give then a fatal sclerosis.
It is not inevitable that this should be so.
Developers' ancestors include such admired figures as John Nash, the Adams brothers together with the builders of Bath, Bloomsbury and the New Town in Edinburgh.
The London we have now is predominantly the work of developers.
Such people are not all motivated simply by money, but by an interest in building and in architecture and, like everyone else, they have to live with their creations.
In theory, market forces ought to ensure that the consumer rejects inferior products and makes them unsellable.
Of course, distance lends enchantment to the work of developers of the past.
To Dickens, Georgian terraces were both barren and vulgar, just like modern suburban estates.
To a disenchanted eye, Nash seems not quite the genius he is generally thought to have been: he was a notorious jerry-builder who pillaged and cheapened classical motifs as does the builder of the modern executive home.
If he had had fibreglass Corinthian columns at his disposal, he would have used them.
Many of the spaces he created, such as those in the Mall or Waterloo Place, are distinctly dismal and void.
Yet the London we inherited from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries is more or less a success.
Today, with projects as large as Canary Wharf, Broadgate and King's Cross, the developer is once again a town planner.
Current proposals for Birmingham envisage that the centre of the city be privately owned, closed at night if necessary, and guarded by private security.
The rise of the speculative office block presents problems with which someone like Nash would have been unfamiliar.
With offices, the purchaser is not necessarily the user.
The people most affected by them — office workers and passers-by — have little or no influence on their design, and are dependent on the benevolence of the developer and on planning laws.
Commercial pressures are hostile to the creation of space, except in the most limited and functional sense, either inside or out.
The ideal interior is neutral and unobstructed, while the demand for floor area pushes buildings to the limits of their sites, making public spaces, or any but the thinnest facades, unprofitable.
As the creation of space is the primary concern, it is not surprising the interests of developers and of the well-being of cities are so often in conflict.
The struggle between commercial pressure and good architecture is an unequal one, on which many developers are not prepared to expend much energy.
They value their architects more for their business demeanours than for their designs, and choose them from a limited number of established companies, more valued for reliability than originality.
These architects are good at dissembling the bulkiness of their buildings to planning committees, less so to the passer-by when they are actually built.
The bulk of new buildings in Westminster and the City are by such firms, in styles ranging from corporate Modern to corporate Post-Modern.
An important challenge facing a developer is that of getting the most out of the planning system.
The more creative will experiment with less conventional architects if it will help them win planning permission.
At Richmond Riverside, an unpopular, over-dense office development was rendered quite acceptable when the developers brought in Quinlan Terry to redesign it.
There are developers for whom a building is not just another source of profit and who want to be good patrons.
At one extreme is Ian Pollard, creator of the Marco Polo building in Battersea.
His designs borrow freely from both ancient Egypt and modern architecture's greatest hits — Beaubourg, the Stuttgart Staatsgalerie, the Louvre Pyramid; he reapplies them to office blocks and shopping centres in Peckham with unabashed irrelevance.
At another extreme is Peter Palumbo, still struggling to realise his Stirling-designed scheme opposite the Mansion House.
If Pollard's architecture is so disposable and flippant that it is odd to call him a ‘patron’, Palumbo's patronage is so single-minded that he can hardly be called a developer.
He has yet, in fact, to get something built.
In the middle are figures such as Godfrey Bradman and Stuart Lipton who build a great deal.
Like Palumbo, they embody an image of developers both more friendly and more respectable: Bradman is a prominent Friend of the Earth; Lipton is a member of the Royal Fine Arts Committee.
Armed with Lipton's motto —‘Good architecture is good business’— they employ a wide range of architects, both established and up-and-coming, commonly thought of as ‘good’.
The main source and authority in selecting architects is the consensus created by the trade press.
The theory is that ‘quality architecture’ not only helps you get planning permission, but attracts tenants and employees.
Sometimes the buildings even function better.
The policy has been only an equivocal success.
Bradman's and Lipton's demands on speed, cost and high-floor areas are no less than other developers'.
In addition, they promote fast-track, prefabricated building techniques that further restrict the architect's freedom.
As a result, they have the knack of employing the best architects, but not getting the best out of them.
Given the requirements of speculative offices, it is perhaps inevitable that this should happen, but it is preferable to getting average work out of average architects.
More curious is the extreme catholicism of their patronage.
In an architectural world supposedly rent by stylistic conflict, Lipton and Bradman both employ architects ranging from the most modernist to the most traditional; from Foster and Rogers to Quinlan Terry and Leon Krier.
Their architects can be bland multinationals, such as the American SOM, to rampant individualists such as John Outram.
At Paternoster Square, Lipton was involved in the competition that led to the appointment of Arup Associates, whose scheme was promptly criticised by Prince Charles.
The architect John Simpson then produced a Neo-Classical counter proposal, which Bradman, Lipton's former partner, is now proposing to build.
The implication is that style is inconsequential and almost content-free, and that speculative buildings are not really designed by architects, but by commercial forces.
In this case, the stylistic promiscuity of an Ian Pollard or a Nash is simply an exceptionally accurate reflection of their culture.
On the other hand, extreme plagiarism, banality or cynicism still induce a certain queasiness in the beholder, which suggests there is some point in good architecture.
Given the demands of their business, it is improbable that developers will commission masterpieces, but it is in their power to avoid monstrosities.
Architecture Update: Pleasing for a fee
By ROWAN MOORE
OCTOGENARIAN American architect Philip Johnson once said: ‘Architecture is very much like the oldest profession in the world.
It has only one aim and that is to please for a fee.’
I wonder what Johnson might make of this press release from the British architects RMJM?
‘Architects/Engineers RMJM have been flying high recently, rubbing shoulders with royalty, not once but twice within a week.
First the Princess of Wales opened a new annex to Chelmsford College of Further Education…and secondly, HRH The Prince of Wales opened the exhibition ‘A Vision of Britain' at the Victoria & Albert Museum, which was designed by David Lloyd-Jones of RMJM.
What will RMJM's next royal project be?’
All suggestions gratefully received.
Architecture: Stairway to fashion: Joseph Ettedgui's latest emporium
By ROWAN MOORE
FASHION (Azzedine Alaa) and architecture (Eva Jiricna) fuse in a perfect match at the new Joseph shop in London's Sloane Street.
The centrepiece of Joseph Ettedgui's latest emporium is this complex glass stair held together by a delicate spider's web of steel rods, split pins and steel rings.
This is the latest and most daring in a sequence of dramatic stairs designed by Jiricna.
It links the three floors of the shop and makes for a glamorous, if vertiginous, catwalk.
It was as expensive as it looks, but then, Alaa bolero tops do not come at bargain basement prices and in any case who could resist the temptation to pirouette up stairs like this?