

TELEVISION /Trading places
By THOMAS SUTCLIFFE
THE promising first episode of The Paradise Club (BBC 1) turns out to have been, if not actually lying, then at least telling some fibs.
Or, as the characters would probably say, this being a series infatuated with villainous jargon, ‘You've bin telling porkies, PC — and in my manor we're strictly kosher’.
The promise was for an own-brand Minder; cocky and cockney like the original — low- or middle-brow entertainment with a high gloss.
Such programmes are sometimes dismissed as being merely ‘slick’, when slickness is anything but mere, or as if ‘sloppy’ were somehow preferable.
Three weeks on, The Paradise Club proves the contrary: it is now looking less like a showroom model than a motor on which the clock has been wound back and the polish is beginning to fade.
The problems with the vehicle are not so much with the engine (Murray Smith's script) as with the bodywork (Anthony Wilkinson's direction).
One symptomatic scene concerned the robbery of a petrol station by a young saxophonist considering a criminal career.
He was filmed prancing round the forecourt like a wayward member of a modern dance troupe; the witnesses in the passing cars wouldn't just have noticed his approach, they would probably have pulled up to watch, so bizarre and entertaining were his surreptitious motions.
The fact that this was credible only if the youth was retarded made the moral crux which followed rather pointless.
Elsewhere the errors were more elementary — during a scene which looked suspiciously like product placement for a Canadian lager there was a continuity error which would have been embarrassing in a home-movie.
If the BBC is to be persuaded to buy more drama from the independent street traders outside the building the merchandise will need to be a little better finished than this.
Despite the emetic title and glittering opening sequence, The Famous Teddy Z (BBC 2) turned out to be in control of Hollywood glitz rather than in thrall to it.
A comic fairy tale about innocence triumphant in the snake-pit of a Los Angeles talent agency, it has a likeable hero and a nice line in deflating humour.
‘What do they make at this place?’ asks the disapproving Greek matriarch when her grandson returns from work.
‘Telephone calls’ he replies hesitantly.
Teddy gets his promotion after punching the agency's biggest client, a sociopathic film-star, thus proving his honesty in a town of yes-men.
In real life he would have been sued for millions and his story turned into a mini-series, but it's nice to dream.
INTERVIEW /Industrious relations: Novelist David Lodge talks to Mark Lawson about the television version of his latest book Nice Work
By MARK LAWSON
THE MAKING of Nice Work, David Lodge's adapation for the BBC of his 1988 novel which divides between academia and industry, required extensive filming in both a foundry and a lecture hall.
On screen, the workers look convincingly swarthy and the students credibly dazed but two different levels of reality are involved.
The Equity rules demand the use of actors unless a special skill or talent is required.
Therefore, the background of the factory scenes features men doing their real work but the scarved and denimed wraiths seen taking lecture notes are actors, it apparently being the Equity assumption that to be a student requires no particular talent or skill.
Universities attract this kind of attitude, as, to some extent, does the campus novel, a brand of fiction which is probably the closest English departments have previously come to industrial production.
David Lodge, whose Changing Places (1975) and Small World (1984) are among the best of the Higher Education narratives, admits that Nice Work was the novel with which he consciously tried to lose the name of campus novelist.
His neat modern home — his study stuffed with the 100 or so original runners for the 1989 Booker Prize, whose judging panel he is chairing — is still close to the University of Birmingham, where he became Professor of English in 1976, but he took early retirement two years ago.
Completed shortly after he got out of the university, Nice Work retreated from academe to the extent of featuring a central character — Vic Wilcox, a dour Midlands MD — who, almost uniquely among his fictional creations, would not have read the novels of David Lodge.
Appropriately, the Wilcox narrative seems to be the book of his most widely read by the kind of people who have just put in a tough day at the office or have two weeks on the beach before clocking back on.
With paperback sales of 200,000 and rising, far more than any of his previous titles, the novel was jostling in the lists this summer with Jeffrey Archer and Wilbur Smith.
The television serial should return it there.
If Nice Work was the novel with which Lodge gave two of his keenest preoccupations the slip — the university, partially, and Catholicism, totally — it was also the book which should end the habitual conflation in some minds of his own career and output with that of Malcolm Bradbury.
Once colleagues and still friends, their similar redbrick-professor-writer lifestyles and largely campus subject-matter have made them a joined personality.
Typically, the Birmingham man's interest in writing for television coincided with the East Anglia one's.
Lodge was recently amused by the arrival from America of the first critical monograph about him.
Titled The Dialogic Novels of Malcolm Bradbury and David Lodge, it may yet turn out to be a joke played by Bradbury.
Lodge, an amusing and amiable 54, has previously enjoyed much flirtation but little consummation from film and television.
A work as early as The British Museum Is Falling Down (1965), about the Rhythm Method of Catholic-approved contraception, was conceived as a movie by Mel Frank but never born.
A different kind of period piece, Changing Places, was optioned for Hollywood by Otto Plaschkes but never reached the screen.
Subsequently, the apotheosis of Lodge's treatment of the comedy of Catholicism, How Far Can You Go?(1980) was bought for LWT by its then head, John Birt, a lapsed Catholic.
He left during pre-production and it is said on the South Bank that nobody even dared tell Birt's successor, the more ruggedly populist Greg Dyke, of the project's existence.
Small World, bought by Granada, did reach the viewers but also reviewers who had doubts as large as those of the novelist's most apostate Catholic characters.
When BBC Birmingham bought Nice Work, Lodge signed to write the screenplay himself.
One of the difficulties with interpreting Small World visually had been that, like many of his texts, it features extended literary pastiche.
Should you, for the screen, attempt to find some equivalent visual pastiche or try to carry the original concept through dialogue?
The writer acknowledges this difficulty but thinks that the most recent novel fits the screen more easily.
The original text cut in celluloid editing fashion between Wilcox's factory and Rummidge University, an invented Midlands campus, from which a feminist lecturer, Robyn Penrose, was despatched to observe Wilcox in action as part of a Shadow Scheme to mark Industry Year 1986.
Lodge, who had originally planned a potentially sombre first-person novel about the mid-life crisis of a Brummie businessman, invented the Shadow Scheme as his cover story while following around an executive for research.
‘It's a rather scenic novel, anyway, so that helps the adaptation,’ says Lodge.
‘Even so, there is a certain brutality involved in the adaptation of it.
The scene in the book where Robyn arrives at the factory for the first time and goes and has a conversation with Wilcox, that's four pages, which would take 15 minutes in playing time if you acted it out.
In fact, it's two minutes on screen.
What you leave out isn't bad dialogue, it's book dialogue.’
Within certain laws of the land, a novelist can do what he wants.
A television production is attended by many more restrictions.
A scene in the book singled out by many of its critical admirers — in which Robyn instructs Vic in the theories of metaphor and metonymy with reference to a Silk Cut commercial on a hoarding — is absent from the serial.
This is partly because of the speech's length but also partly because of the difficulty of showing the advert on the BBC; even if the corporation agreed, the manufacturers would not.
Equally, the key word in Robyn's deconstruction of what Silk Cut really means is one which could not be spoken on television.
Most of the sex in the original text survives but the producers are aware that fictional nipples are being counted by the kind of heaving bodies which consist of several men in suits.
One scene in the BBC Nice Work will present an interesting test-case for Lord Rees-Mogg.
Thoroughly modern Robyn is into non-penetrative sex.
His Lordship will need to assess whether the nudity involved in the depiction of this is more corrupting to young eyes than the safety of the encounter is exemplary.
Another ethical aspect of the passage of words into pictures is that of filming permissions.
The organisers of a Dusseldorf trade show for manufacturers withdrew permission to film there after reading a scene in which German businessmen try to trick Wilcox.
In a previous BBC serial about the moral bankruptcy and satanic drabness of a fictional new town, the polite credits' acknowledgment to the real modern conurbation which had admitted the cameras had an inadvertent satirical ring.
Accordingly, in the television Nice Work, Rummidge University is played by Birmingham University and fears that some may find the performance too convincing have prompted a closing caption, of conspicuously meticulous wording, thanking the real campus for its ‘good-humoured co-operation’.
‘Rummidge is a fictional construct,’ explains Lodge.
‘The fact that it has some kind of playful relationship with Birmingham is something with which readers of my novels can easily cope.
Television works with the literal image, so if you know Birmingham University as a bloody great clock tower, that's what you get…’
Even in book form, his novels have required the amused tolerance of colleagues.
‘In the Eighties, a lot of people felt, I think, that any satirical comment on the university was inopportune, some kind of betrayal.
I don't think novelists can be responsible for the PR consequences of what they write.’
In two other senses, though, Lodge has also operated as the enemy within.
He still attends Mass on Sunday although he must be, to some of the more conventional believers kneeling beside him, what Philip Roth is to orthodox Jews.
He admits: ‘I am a Catholic of a very marginal, demythologised kind…
I realised writing How Far Can You Go? how little of the conceptual faith I had grown up with I still retained…’
In the church of the new literary criticism, he has also prayed and mocked, publishing critical books of his own but satirising the gurus of metafictional inquiry in his novels: Nice Work's laconic demolition of Lacan has survived to reach the BBC.
A French lecturer at a symposium he addressed complained that he and Bradbury ‘let the side down, by mocking when there is so much philistine opposition’.
Neatly, for a writer whose work is characterised by the comic accomodations of the half-believer, the terms in which Lodge's defence is couched once again join them to beat them.
‘I think one of the functions of the novel is to offer a critique of the totalising claims of discourse to give a total explanation, whether the discourse be literary, religious or industrial.’
MUSIC /Some swan songs: Elisabeth Soderstrom
By MEREDITH OAKES
ELISABETH Soderstrom was ill the Monday before last, and had to postpone her recital in the Blackheath International Song Series by a week.
She was not particularly well last Sunday, when she gave it.
The programme had some good out-of-the-wayish music: notably songs by Stenhammar and Rachmaninov, and Prokofiev's brilliantly direct, inventive setting of The Ugly Duckling.
Everything was Nordic or Russian except the Lehar group that came at the end.
Jubal, by Sibelius, made the cruellest possible start for an unwell soprano.
It had bare, exposed recitative telling how Jubal killed a swan and learnt music from its dying song, and twanging, soft, oscillating piano octaves within which the voice was supposed to lodge with accurate purity.
Soderstrom — who later in the concert jokingly apologised for her scratchiness — was obviously miserable, more miserable than she needed to be, about the quality of the sound she was making, and her misery took the form of distinguished concentration on pitch, so that there were many small uncharacteristic faults in her intonation.
High notes were a bit of a nightmare too.
But Soderstrom, introducing the songs set by set, was good company; the recital hall at Blackheath, rescued from years of abuse by the government department that used to inhabit it, had a good sound and an airy Victorian grace; and Roger Vignoles, the accompanist, was as clear and gifted as ever; so the capacity audience wound up feeling happy, especially when treated to confident versions of Lehar's Vilja Song or My Lips They Kiss So Hot.
Soderstrom has been, in her distinguished career, much more than an operetta singer, but her virtues, solid attack, excellent diction, and a clear, fine voice appealing more through its silvery edge than through depth or human vulnerability, are essentially charming rather than thought-provoking.
In serious songs, when her voice is not working, there is not enough personal extraordinariness to make the lack seem unimportant.
But there is always intelligent communication.
Sibelius and Stenhammar were shown setting the same text (The Girl returned from meeting her lover) with Stenhammar providing a sharp, sweet, highly contrasted little folkloric scena complete with sad introductory Schubertian piano tune.
Sibelius only managed plump chords like swags of roses here, with the piano pounding more to match the betrayed girl's despair towards the end.
Nordic composers around the turn of the century were not immune from quasi-medieval minstrelsy, or from routinely voluptuous piano arpeggios like Mendelssohn's.
Two songs by Ture Rangstrom (1884-1947) have unusual chromatic colours in hypnotic repeating figurations around simple lines.
We got two Grieg classics — Spring and I Love You — and then the Prokofiev, a delight with its roaming tonalities, its incisive sketches and its shafts of psychological insight (like the thrilling high speeded-up waltz, with music-box runs all over the place, that played in the duckling's mind as he looked at his reflection and found he was a swan).
Among the four Rachmaninov songs, the oriental-sounding Never sing to me again the songs of Georgia was particularly dark, rich and poignant.
THEATRE /White wash: Alex Renton reviews The Struggle at The Gate
By ALEX RENTON
THE VILLAINS in the cop thriller Lethal Weapon II are South African, for a change: there's a very nasty-piece-of-work consul played by Joss Ackland, and a horde of elongated Aryan thugs all as ugly as their accents.
And, although you do get Patsy Kensit to show that not all Boers are boors, there can be little doubt that casting like this will in the long run do more to bring about the end of white rule in South Africa than Robert Royston's worthy but long-winded drama of apartheid horrors.
Or indeed the dozens we have seen like it.
It is sad how boring the reiteration of undeniable truths can become.
But a time arrives when you would rather do almost anything rather than sit in a stuffy fringe theatre on a Saturday night with a dozen heads all nodding aggrievedly in agreement on how South Africa is now really rather a nasty place.
Royston's play attempts (and fails) to do rather more than that.
He tries to concern us with the problem of liberals: ‘When I trained,’ says Gumede, an ANC guerrilla, ‘they said that the liberal was more dangerous than the enemy.’
The liberal in question is journalist Ruth, a South African who has ended seven years of English exile ostensibly in order to visit her elderly father.
In fact, liberal or not, she has come back to work for the ANC, though her exact capacity is not made clear.
But anyway she is arrested within hours of her arrival and successfully interrogated.
The chief lesson you gather is that the South African police are remarkably well-informed and the ANC recruitment procedure sadly lax.
Telling this are Ruth herself (Carol Been), her tragically decaying father (Alfred Hoffman), and a very nasty policeman (Saul Reichlin).
All three do their best under Penny Ciniewicz's rather heavy-handed direction, but they cannot beat a first play that has just got too much to say.
Cutting back and forward furiously, Royston tries to include the complex relationship between Ruth's father and his ageing ‘boy’, Tim (Ilarrio Bisi-Pedro); as well as a portrait of Gumede, a freedom fighter on the verge of lunacy — excellently played by Osei Bentil; and an analysis of a South African police Colonel who is affably stark mad.
There is not room for all of this.
Which is a pity, because one would have liked particularly to hear more of the ebullient Gumede, a sort of Mad Max of the townships.
‘White people!’ he spits disgustedly at Ruth, ‘you talk of life and death and other rubbish — because you have a future.’
In a finale the police colonel complements Gumede as he describes his ideal home: ‘Freedom, man.
Nice walls and a big sky to look at.’
What the two enemies share is a tragic and terminal separation from any conceivable reality, a theme that with a sharper editor's sense Royston might have usefully explored.
MUSIC /Steamed up about nothing: Boiler Room Suite -Cardiff
By STEPHEN WALSH
A PAIR of tramps in the cellar of an abandoned hotel lengthily airing their psychological underwear until evicted by a (superficially) heartless boilerman: we seem to have been here before.
But there is not much Pinter, and definitely no Beckett, about this solid piece of middle-class music theatre by the Canadian composer Quenten Doolittle, which began its short British tour by the Banff Music Theatre at the Chapter Arts Centre, Cardiff.
Doolittle has based himself on what seems a pellucidly consequential and intelligently written play by Rex Deverell (also the librettist); and though the piece is offered as ‘best suited…to alternative audiences’, it cuts an oddly respectable figure in the modestly louche surroundings of Chapter.
Two reasons strike me for this.
First, the work is dramaturgically polite; it consults its audience too much to be taken seriously as drop-out theatre.
And secondly, its music is too operatic — too Brittenesque — to excite us searching spirits who trek through gaslit suburbs in quest of aesthetic deprivation.
Like the artists in La Boheme, Aggie and Sprugg — Deverell's two winos -spend a good deal of time play-acting, in an operative sort of way.
Sometimes they speak, sometimes they break into song.
They tell each other stories (Sprugg is a poet, like Rodolfo); they flirt harmlessly, get quietly drunk, but they don't swear and they don't you-know-what — it's a family show, in fact, though any child would faint with boredom.
All this is followed meticulously if at a respectful distance by Doolittle's seven-piece band, written for with a sure ear for tonal balance and a strong sense of the orchestra's role as a virtual extension of the voice, but with little willingness to let the musical idea take over the action.
It remains background music, and not just because, in Keith Turnbull's tidy production, the players are neatly packed away behind Gavin Semple's wonderful, octopoid hotel boiler.
Stylistically it asks few questions, becoming quickly locked into a limited area of harmonic discourse.
The show is redeemed by its performance.
Fides Krucker and Chris Enns are superb as the two down-and-outs, using their voices with extreme cleverness to depict the alternate venality and heroic detachment of the trampish life.
Kevin Power has less luck with the gauchely conceived part of the boilerman.
But the playing, under Peter Stranger, is fluent and stylish, a tribute to the high musical standards of the Music Theatre programme at the Banff Centre in Alberta (where the piece originated).
Only the Centre's music-theatrical astuteness remains, perhaps, in question.