

BOOK REVIEW /Quiet flows the don: ‘Dick Crossman’— Tam Dalyell: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 14.95 pounds
By J ENOCH POWELL
WHAT A lucky man Dick Crossman was — and now he's gone and been lucky again.
He has had his portrait drawn by Tam Dalyell, who happens (though, parliamentarily speaking, an awkward cuss) to have the gift of deep and sympathetic insight into character.
It was just what Dick Crossman needed from a non-hagiographer.
I belonged to that great multitude who couldn't help liking Dick Crossman: he and I were always nice to one another, right to the day in 1974 shortly before his death when he came to the Birmingham Bull Ring in acute physical discomfort to hear me advise my fellow-electors to vote Labour if they wanted out of the Common Market.
(Times have changed.)
‘Was Crossman a snob?
My wife, who liked him and to whom he was always charming, thinks he was a snob.
I think he was not.’
Well, Tam has asked the question but answered it elsewhere, writing that Crossman's ‘sense of his own position in the elite of the nation never deserted him’, and that ‘he seldom if ever had any doubts about his place at the very epicentre of the British Establishment’.
That, in my opinion, is dead right.
But the important quality about Dick Crossman, which made him unique among Members of Parliament and made his testament to the understanding of British Government unique, is that he was the pure, 100 per cent archetypal don, a don through and through, albeit a don whose special subject was politics in practice.
‘Crossman tended to presume that all those he came across, at work or socially, liked nothing better than to have their intellectual sacred cows challenged, their arguments questioned and their assumptions subjected to loud investigation.’
That is the portrait of a don, a don in his supreme incarnation, a don going about the business that he was designed for by nature.
Of course, as should be the way with a don, he excited dismay -dismay more than dislike or distrust.
I can see now a typical speech of Crossman's from the back benches.
Before long, Members around him were spellbound, like disciples, by the dialectical and philosophical success with which he was defending their case and trouncing their opponents.
Then the same thing, as always, would happen.
Looks of admiration changed to signs of unease and bewilderment, and the chorus of ‘Hear, Hear’ was stilled.
Like some great vessel swinging at anchor, Crossman's argument had come round half circle, as he failed to resist the seduction of the alternative, opposite or incompatible theory.
He sat down at last to silence, but as a man fulfilled: the tutorial was over.
I believe it to have been factually true that Crossman's ambition to gain and retain Cabinet office was the aspiration to be in a position to observe what goes on as an academic or a philosopher observes.
Unlike Plato, from whom he never escaped, Crossman was not satisfied to ‘stand behind a wall out of the storm of wind and dust’.
The wind and the dust were what Crossman wanted to know about; and he went in search of them and found them, in Coventry, in the Commons and in the Cabinet.
What is good about this portrait and serves Dick Crossman's memory well is that Tam Dalyell is so candid with his reservations, despite the contrary pull of loyalty and affection.
‘I had the impression that unlike the principled left, Crossman did not ever quite make up his mind whether or not to crawl for office.’
Or again, in the matter of the Labour government's covert development of a British nuclear bomb: ‘Crossman, in my view, does not emerge from this controversy in a favourable light.
Almost alone among MPs he latched on to the truth.
He had the potential for massive press coverage.
Yet he kept quiet.
I am afraid it was because he did not want to get entangled with the left on such an emotional issue.’
I have italicised the words which, in my judgment, contain the solution.
The don in him could be satisfied and its conscience allayed by having intellectually broken into the truth.
Despite Dick Crossman's native love of a row, there was not sufficient of the political fighter about him to light the blue touchpaper regardless.
‘Crossman never, to my knowledge, considered resigning.’
That is a politician's saddest obituary.
Each for himself: David Blunkett on the Government's inconsistency over collective self-help
By DAVID BLUNKETT
THE Government has a clever knack of stealing other people's clothes, never more so than in its espousal of ‘active citizenship’ as a desirable virtue.
Of course, giving time and helping others is important: but it goes hand in hand with collective action to bring about wider change.
It therefore comes ill from this Government to appeal for people to accept greater obligation to each other, when its policies have accelerated the decline of mutuality and neighbourliness.
Collective self-help and co-operative ways of tackling problems go back a long way.
In the nineteenth century, the Goose and Burial Clubs were the forerunner of the social security system and the welfare state — the goose was for Christmas, the burial speaks for itself.
The right-wing ideologue Frederich Hayek wrote: ‘Obligations can only exist towards known and identifiable individuals.
They cannot exist to society as a whole’.
This view sums up the present Conservative philosophy, seen in government policies towards the welfare state, local government and taxation.
In many ways, the poll tax embodies the attitude which dismisses our interdependence, and therefore our obligations towards each other.
This is why the Government's present enthusiasm for volunteering is hard to stomach.
Making a political virtue out of cutting taxes to the better off, in order to encourage them to give money to charity to meet the needs of others, is, to say the least, contrary.
Voluntary help comes in all shapes and sizes, from large national organisations to simple individual kindnesses.
Whatever form it takes, it offers no personal recognition or status, and nor should it.
It is necessary, however, that society recognises the importance of caring for others as a fundamental part of living.
No one would deny that enterprise and competitiveness are important; but what we see around us today is the elevation of self-interest as something to be applauded.
If we are brought up to accept the doctrine of looking after number one, it is not surprising to find the result of that upbringing reflected in society.
This inevitably leads to a climate in which the likelihood of giving not only money but also one's time is reduced.
The sheer pressure of life pushes people into having less time for each other, rather than more.
To give time, you must have it — and to have it, you must either be out of work or able to spare valuable hours outside your job.
Recent calls by the Home Office Minister, John Patten, for those who are successful to give three hours a week to voluntary causes could be taken more seriously if overall government policy were not pushing people in the opposite direction.
In a world where money and material reward are held in far higher esteem than quality of life, their response will be predictable.
Government policy has pointed the direction — others have merely followed.
Yet there is hope.
Attitudes are changing and concern for others is re-emerging from the recent dark decade.
The Speaker of the House of Commons, Bernard Weatherill, has lent his name to a Commission on Citizenship in which the organisation Community Service Volunteers has taken a lead.
Aided by the Prince's Youth Business Trust and others, the intention is that the Commission should produce guidance to encourage greater active citizenship from our earliest school days through to our retirement.
The Prince of Wales's recent initiative forms part of this detailed consideration of options.
But for any good ideas to work, we have to restore a sense of decency, of caring and an understanding of shared concern for the fabric of our community.
Dependence on charity is just as debilitating as dependence on the state, if not more so.
Neither is desirable or necessary.
True independence and self-determination come from recognising that we not only have responsibility for ourselves, but also obligations to others.
This means that through the raising and spending of taxes, locally and nationally, we provide a fairer and more just society.
Through the development of community services and a decentralised, non-bureaucratic welfare state, we can lift people out of poverty and deprivation.
In this way, individuals can develop their full potential and contribute to their own well-being and that of others.
What the state can never offer, however, are befriending, time to talk and share, personal kindness and a spontaneous response to need.
So it is that we must also support voluntary action and volunteering as essential in a healthy democracy in a civilised society.
Still an Everest climb to power
By PETER JENKINS
BRIGHTON: ‘We are fit to serve our country,’ said Neil Kinnock, the Labour Party leader, in the peroration to the peroration of an epic speech to conference.
If that sounded a bit like the result of an army medical board it was appropriate enough: the chief purpose of this year's conference is to signal that the Labour Party is ready once more for active service.
Indeed, Mr Kinnock called for a modest celebration at Labour's recovery: it was an encouragement, an inspiration to see the party working together once more, he said.
This was his way of declaring that the battle for the Labour Party was won and the Battle for Britain about to commence.
Such declarations are of little intrinsic importance but they tell us something of how a politician sees the world and his own place in it.
This was the first year since he became leader of his party six years ago that Mr Kinnock was relieved of his preoccupation with an ungovernable party and was able to turn his attention properly to the government of the country.
Hence, this was the first of his conference performances which was aimed primarily at the nation.
It was a severe test for him, for it is a widely held view that his talents as a party manager are not matched by his capabilities as a potential Prime Minister.
How did he do?
Not badly at all, given the immense difficulty of restoring credibility to Labour as a party of government.
Mr Kinnock staggers under the additional handicap of having no ministerial experience which would equip him for the supreme office to which he aspires.
He is the child of Labour's crisis which resulted in his ideological credentials being preferred to the experience and qualifications of his rivals.
Today he has shed a good deal of that ideology — his speech yesterday was social democratic through and through — but he remains devoid of the work experience relevant to his next task which is to convince the country that he, and Labour, are qualified to form the next government.
The most successful feature of his speech was his recruitment of the future to Labour's cause.
All elections in two-party parliamentary systems are essentially about whether or not it is time for a change.
Yesterday Mr Kinnock presented a picture of a world changing so rapidly around the present government that the Prime Minister had become ‘out of touch, out of date and out of step with the British people’.
As she enters her second decade in power, this promises to be an effective line of attack.
Mr Kinnock has learnt that it is more effective to mock the Prime Minister as an anachronism in a brave new world than snarl the word ‘Thatcherism’ and present her as the personification of all evil.
He has grasped that it is more profitable to attack the Government for incompetence and negligence than to present it as a systematic and all-too-competent conspiracy against the people.
The theme he hammered in yesterday's speech was that here was an administration increasingly losing its grip, its miracles turning to dross, the ‘Thatcher Revolution’ shown up as a fraud.
It may be a mistake to allow the Prime Minister no credit at all.
Since around 1982 real living standards have risen continuously and substantially.
Prosperity twice swept Mrs Thatcher back to power.
People know the evidence of their pockets and are unlikely to be easily persauded that Mrs Thatcher's Britain has been, or has yet become, the economic disaster area which Mr Kinnock depicted.
Moreover, to predict that an incoming Labour government would surely be faced with a mess far greater than any previous inheritance by a new administration is a double-edged weapon.
Would such a mess be safe in Labour's hands?
Its record in economic crisis-management does not inspire confidence.
Voters do not instinctively turn to Labour in time of trouble.
They turn to it when conditions seem ripe for social advance.
When governments change it is also sometimes due to pressures to open and enlarge the elites of wealth and power.
In 1964, it was proverbially the white-coated technicians of ICI Billingham in Cleveland who typified the swing to Labour and the Wilsonian scientific revolution.
Mr Kinnock took a leaf from Harold Wilson's book — and coined a goodish phrase — when he declared that ‘education and training are now the commanding heights of the economy’.
That is the sort of talk which must find a response in a country in which acute labour shortage coexists with unconscionably high unemployment.
Foreign affairs are not often an important factor in British general elections.
But the rapid and dramatic changes which are taking place in the world today, changes of a hopeful and not a frightening kind, could help to make a long-serving government more vulnerable to the time-for-a-change mentality.
Everywhere today expectations of a better world are running high, excited primarily by Mrs Thatcher's friend Mikhail Gorbachev.
It was in the context of what Mr Kinnock presented as her increasing isolationism within this changing world that he pressed the charge that she was ‘out of touch, out of date and out of step’.
A speech is a speech is a speech — like one of Peter Mandelson's roses.
The hard reality of Labour's electoral predicament remains the same today as yesterday.
There is an Everest to climb to power.
Meanwhile, the Government is doing not as badly, nor Labour as well, as it can appear amid the heady enthusiasm of a conference.
City pundits see troubles for the economy in the coming months but are much more optimistic about prospects a year or more from now.
There is a lot of dying yet in Mrs Thatcher's administration.
For all that, party conferences are powerful image-making events and a good success like yesterday's will make Mr Kinnock a more confident and formidable contender.
The spectre at the birthday feast: Patricia Clough predicts a humiliating time for Erich Honecker at the GDR's 40th anniversary celebrations
By PATRICIA CLOUGH
One might almost pity the frail old man in East Berlin, seemingly helpless and uncomprehending as his life's work crumbles around him.
The fortieth anniversary of the founding of East Germany on Saturday could have been a crowning moment in Erich Honecker's career.
He could have boasted to world leaders of the model communist state he and his comrades have created, now widely recognised in the world, with happy contented people enjoying the highest standard of living in the Eastern bloc.
He could have basked in the illusion of being a benevolent father-figure to his people, actually loved and appreciated and secure in the knowledge that even after he went, things would go on along the tracks he had laid down.
Now he must be wondering how he is going to get through the week.
The thousands of East German refugees in West German embassies, the tens of thousands who have poured out to the West through Hungary are a terrible and unending indictment of his Stalinist regime.
Worse still, the embassy refugees manoeuvred him into an impossible corner.
They knew how desperately he and his comrades wanted to celebrate their day amid sweetness and light.
How could he receive Mikhail Gorbachev and other leaders while the world watched 4,500 of his people voluntarily submitting to horrific conditions in the embassy in Prague just to get to the West?
(Alternatively, how could Mr Gorbachev come?)
He has ‘temporarily’ imposed visa requirements for Czechoslovakia, the one place where East Germans could go without passports or permission.
That will make East Germans feel even more imprisoned and could heat up resentment against the government to explosion point.
Opposition groups are springing up like mushrooms, calling ever more boldly and openly for reforms — freedom of opinion, democracy, justice, freedom to travel.
Although Mr Honecker warmly supports the old men who crushed the uprising in Tiananmen Square, he seems to have no stomach for a brutal crackdown.
Demonstrators are being treated with restraint, and dissidents, although under surveillance and sometimes harassed, are still at the moment free to speak out.
No one seriously expects revolution in East Germany from below.
Troublemakers have been deported and the education system has trained the population to obedience.
But sheer pressure — from within, from the Soviet Union and other allies and from the West — could conceivably do the job.
The secret police will doubtless try to make sure there are no reformist demonstrators chanting ‘Gorbi, Gorbi’ in the streets on Saturday, as thousands did in Leipzig on Monday night.
The honoured guest will doubtless not be encouraged to take a crowd bath.
But Mr Gorbachev's very presence will be a reminder of how very wrong things have gone.
Mr Honecker and his men, boasting confidently that their economy was so well run it did not need Soviet-style reforms, were banking on the expectation that Mr Gorbachev would fail.
The Soviet leader is far from succeeding but he is still very much there, while the East German old guard is looking ever more like yesterday's men.
The more stubbornly East Germany's old men resist change, the greater becomes the danger that the whole edifice they have constructed will collapse around them, threatening stability in Europe and raising the question of reunification for which no one is prepared.
No one wants chaos in East Germany — not the West Germans, nor the internal opposition, nor the Russians.
Everyone is telling Mr Honecker what he should do, the East and West Germans openly, the Soviets more subtly: ask yourselves why people are leaving and save your country through reform.
Mr Gorbachev may refrain from saying it publicly on Saturday but he can be expected to press Mr Honecker all the more urgently in private.
But the East Germans, deaf to all advice, are lashing out in fury and bitterness, blaming everyone but themselves for their predicament.
Just as it did during the mass exodus in the weeks before the Berlin Wall was built, the state propaganda machine is claiming that the current wave of emigration is due to a campaign organised by West Germany to lure their people away.
Those who went have ‘betrayed’ their country.
Bonn's principle that East Germans have an automatic right to West German citizenship and protection is ‘revanchism’, its refusal to turn refugees away from its embassies is a ‘provocation’.
The decision to ‘expel’ the first batch of embassy refugees to the West was a ‘humanitarian act’done in the interests of the many children involved and to avoid epidemics.
The ‘expellees’ have in any case ‘isolated themselves’from East German society, they are ‘mindless strays’, many of them are ‘antisocial’and the country is better off without them.
A recent Protestant Church Synod, where speakers aired grievances and called for change, was a conspiracy ‘to prepare the way for reunification’.
East Germany has defeated the ‘class enemy’ and created a superior society where human beings can develop free of exploitation.
What do fast cars and travel count for, the party's youth organ asked, compared with the warmth of family, love, friendship, security and harmony?
The whole thing, of course, is being blown up out of all proportion by the Western media.
Absurd though it may seem, it is quite likely that Mr Honecker and his companions genuinely believe all this.
For the East German state is the realisation of the dreams of a young roofer as he grew up among the filth of the coal mines and steel mills of the Saarland in the Thirties.
He and his fellow communists, enraged by the poverty, the unemployment and exploitation of the workers, would fight with the Nazi gangs, their strident shawm pipe bands competing in decibel levels with the Nazis' drums and trumpets.
He dreamed of a society where there would be no capitalist bosses; no unemployment; with food; housing and medical services for all; where old women would not be thrown out of their lifelong homes to make way for richer tenants and children would never go hungry.
When the Nazis took power he went underground and worked in the communist resistance, was arrested and did eight years' penal servitude.
He was released when the war ended.
Immediately he joined the group of hard, inflexible German communists the Soviet Union had sent to set up a puppet government in the sector of Germany they occupied.
After the Western allies turned the western part of Germany into a sovereign state, the Soviets followed suit and the German Democratic Republic was founded on 7 October 1949.
As the hated capitalist rival, West Germany quickly took off with its economic miracle, for a long time East Germany remained poor, grim and repressive as the regime struggled to get a communist system working.
That much of the population could not see the superiority of their society did not deter them: a workers' uprising was crushed, the Wall was built, travel was extremely limited, all criticism rigorously suppressed.
But things did get eventually get better.
German ability and hard work made the economy the most efficient in the Eastern bloc, helped by generous injections from West Germany as relations improved.
Although reality never matched the propaganda, people were better off, they had plenty to eat, the housing shortage was less critical, the atmosphere more relaxed.
Once the shunned and despised puppet, East Germany was officially recognised by most countries.
Years of struggle for legitimation and equal status with West Germany were crowned by a state visit to Paris and a historic official visit to West Germany.
Two goals remain — a state visit to Britain (little hope there, but a visit by some crowned head to East Germany remains a burning ambition), and to the President of the United States in the White House.
East Berlin is being rebuilt and restored at vast expense as a full-scale capital and show-window.
Mr Honecker evidently felt that things were going so well he could afford to relax and give his people what they wanted most: more freedom to travel to the West.
That was a disastrous mistake.
Glimpses of the West whetted appetites and fuelled discontent at home.
Quickly it became clear that he had mistaken quiet and comfort for contentment.
The moment Hungary began to dismantle its part of the Iron Curtain, hundreds began to leave.
It looks as if Mr Honecker, 77 and only slowly recovering from a gall-bladder operation, is incapable of grasping the situation in his country.
He and the other leaders, at the pinnacle of the fossilised hierarchy they have constructed, seem isolated from reality.
They lead privileged lives in official residences, are driven everywhere in official cars, buy from special shops and, it is said, have unpleasant facts screened from them by fawning officials.
Last year, Johannes Rau, the Social Democrat Prime Minister of North Rhine-Westphalia, asked Mr Honecker why the mood among his people was so bad.
He replied, ‘the unity of the masses with the party was never so strong as now.
The people are behind the party.’
And he invited him to come to the Mayday parade to see for himself.
Nevertheless, as he began to recover from his operation, Mr Honecker clearly had to face the problem of the embassy refugees and the mass emigration, and the decision to let the first batch go was obviously his.
But drawing the consequences is something else.
How can a 77-year-old man with a mission admit that he was wrong all along?
Mr Honecker is up a pole and all the ladders offered him to climb down would be an admission of failure.
As the anniversary approaches, he seems bewildered and uncertain what to do.
That nobody else, including the West Germans, does either, is little consolation.
Meanwhile speculation is mounting in the West that hardliners are beginning to dictate what he should do, and he is no longer in full control.
As Saturday draws near, the communist dream he thought he had helped realise is in danger of turning to ashes in his hands.
Leading Article: The birth of a grand theme
By PATRICIA CLOUGH
ALMOST inadvertently, Neil Kinnock has stumbled on his ‘big idea’.
The Labour leader made formal obeisance to the language of socialism when he complained of the ‘neglect of the productive base’.
But his theme — that Labour would concentrate on supply-side deficiencies of the British economy -was one which would naturally appeal to non-political parents and teachers and to business people seeking literate and numerate employees.
In much the same way his reference to the rundown, dirty and potentially dangerous state of public transport would strike a chord with commuters who use our shoddy and dilapidated railways or who drive on potholed roads.
Education and training were, Mr Kinnock said, ‘the commanding heights of the modern economy’ and human skills were the nation's most precious resource.
An undertrained and under-educated work-force led inexorably to balance of payments problems.
The next Labour government would, therefore, as a deliberate choice of priorities, concentrate investment in these areas, on technical research and development and on the modernisation of the transport system.
This is a far cry from the days when increases in national income were committed by the conference before they were generated and the economy's commanding heights were deemed to be heavy, smokestack industries.
The debate within Labour's ranks was then about how far and how fast they should be brought under the direct control of the state.
The Labour leader yesterday intoned the word ‘socialism’ in a purely ritualistic sense from time to time.
More significantly, he redefined socialism as a marriage of ‘necessary regulation and the dynamic of the market’.
There is nothing in this phrase with which David Owen could quarrel.
There is growing, matter-of-fact, support for the proposition that significantly greater public investment in schools and colleges, in roads, railways and on the environment would be money productively spent, and that it is only the damaging and doctrinaire intransigence of Mrs Thatcher which obstructs such expenditure.
It is shrewd of Mr Kinnock to attempt to enlist this mood and to link Labour with such concepts as patriotism, efficiency and plain common sense, virtues which have more often been associated with the Conservative Party.
Similarly, it is shrewd of him to play for the internationalist vote after a prolonged period of sullen Little Englandism during which Labour threatened to withdraw from the Common Market and called into question this country's role within Nato.
Increasingly the Prime Minister is regarded by many swing voters as unconstructive and isolationist rather than a determined defender of British interests.
She, and not Mr Kinnock, is constantly at odds with the European Community and the Commonwealth.
A stance which was appropriate for the Age of Brezhnev and Galtieri now seems out of date and out of touch with the spirit of the times.
Mr Kinnock has yet to put flesh on his ‘big idea’.
Until he does so, his enemies will, somewhat unfairly, compare his dedication to the contemporary economy's commanding heights with Harold Wilson's more grandiose, though ill-focused, flirtation with ‘the white heat of the scientific revolution’, which came to nothing.
Ideas as well as money will be needed to improve education and training.
Science and technology need a focus for investment as well as funds.
Yet the Labour leader has finally found a theme which can appeal to traditional Labour voters and, more crucially, also to those voters from the political centre who now feel disenfranchised.
Letter: Overlooked genius in the twentieth century
From Mr GEOFF FOSTER
Sir: Your contributor William Rees-Mogg identified his list of 50 ‘mastersingers of Europe’.
He normally takes great care to keep us informed of the central part he plays in the worlds of affairs and ideas.
I was therefore surprised to see that he excluded his own name from the list.
What can have occasioned this sudden lapse into modesty?
Letter: Overlooked genius in the twentieth century
From Mr FRANCO GALGANI
Sir: As a Tuscan expatriate in Britain, I feel duty bound to point out that five out of the eight Italians included in the '50 mastersingers of Europe' were from Tuscany: Dante, Michelangelo, Leonardo, Machiavelli and Galileo.
Taking one of William Rees-Mogg's conclusions further, is it not logical to deduce that while ‘Italy is the cradle of European civilisation’, Tuscany is right at the centre of it.
Letter: Overlooked genius in the twentieth century
From Dr JONATHAN MILLER
Sir: Returning from a long stay abroad, it is depressing to find so much rubbish in the streets, but it is even more upsetting to find it deliberately included in the newspapers as well(2 October).
The frivolous folly of trying to identify 50 geniuses who have shaped European culture is matched by the failure to recognise the distinctive achievement of our own era.
Although Lord Rees-Mogg's confession that he is not a modernist can just about explain his neglect of artists such as Schoenberg, Proust, Kafka, Beckett and Auden, sheer ignorance is the only way in which one can account for the omission of Charles Sherrington, Alan Hodgkin, Lord Adrian and David Hubel, to name but four in neurophysiology; Rutherford, Bohr, Planck, Heisenberg, Dirac and Gell-Man in physics.
And since the image of life on earth has been virtually redrawn as a result of the rapidly developing science of molecular biology, how can anyone fail to mention Crick, Monod, Bragg or Delbruck; and since the picture of the human mind has to be radically reconstrued following the work of von Neumann, Turing, Shannon and Wiener, it is hard to understand how none of these people received a mention.
Chomsky is no slouch either.
And what are we to make of the claim that the twentieth century has seen no philosophical achievements on the scale of Locke and Descartes?
What about Wittgenstein, Frege or Russell?
Or Quine for that matter?
And let's add Godel for good measure.
Rawls?
But the most objectionable aspect of his article is the airy complacency with which he identifies the psychological morbidity of all but his chosen few.
Psycho-history is a derelict enterprise at the best of times, and who can be sure about the mental health of any of the great heroes of the past?
I wouldn't like to meet Caravaggio on a dark night and who can be sure that Darwin's life-long illness was really the result of Chagas' disease?
In any case, this type of speculation is a complete waste of time and anyone who seriously thinks that all is quiet on the western front as the twentieth century draws to a close must be dozing in his dug-out.
Leading Article: Life behind bars at Number 10
From Dr JONATHAN MILLER
NUMBER 10 Downing Street is not Buckingham Palace.
Nor is it the Forbidden City or the Kremlin.
Margaret Thatcher is Prime Minister of an ancient and still fully functioning democracy.
Despite her occasional lapses into the royal ‘we’ and her desire to give comfort to victims of disaster, she is not monarch, head of state, nor dictator.
Why then must the street in which she lives, in a row of handsome but not very grand Georgian houses, be protected by gates and railings which can without hyperbole be described as neo-palatial?
Let's be fair.
If Mrs Thatcher is touched by paranoia, it is not without reason.
She knows the IRA would like to get her.
They murdered her friend and political ally, Airey Neave.
They tried to kill her and her Cabinet, and nearly succeeded, when they blew up the Grand Hotel, Brighton, during the 1984 Conservative Party conference.
That assault claimed five lives and injured many others.
Only this August, an Arab extremist thought to be a member of Hizbollah died in a London hotel while strapping a bomb to his body.
Was his target political, or ‘merely’ literary?
A certain nervousness on the Prime Minister's part, and on the part of those obliged to protect her safety, is in order.
All due precautions must be taken.
No reasonable person could have objected — nor did they — when, shortly after the death of the Hizbollah bomber, an impressive steel anti-terrorist shield was installed close to No. 10.
It lies flat in the road about half-way down the street, and can swiftly be raised to block the progress of an unauthorised vehicle.
Since August, it seems, official minds have been working.
One day the inspiration came: why not block off any such potential assault vehicles, as well as bomb-laden or armed individuals, before they get half-way down the street?
The waist-high barrier which has limited public access since 1981 was — doubtless correctly — judged to be too flimsy to block a suicide mission.
One of its virtues was that it looked temporary: these may be abnormal times, it seemed to proclaim, but one day terrorism will be beaten, and once again doting parents will be able to photograph ambitious children on the steps of No. 10.
The message from the proposed new gates and railings is that bad times are here to stay.
Equally regrettably, they suggest that she who (presumably) approved them is not so much a Pharisee as a Philistine: one, moreover, who has been impressed by too many drives down The Bishop's Avenue, where Hampstead's temples to new money are built, en route to the Finchley constituency.
It is not surprising that the Royal Fine Art Commission should have considered the design inappropriate.
Its efficacy may also be questioned: the RFAC's chairman, Lord St John of Fawsley, has pointed out that gates which must be opened and shut will merely attract attention to the Prime Minister's movements.
She and her security advisers should go back to the drawing board.
Answers to silence a smart-ass
By MILES KINGTON
YOU'RE having a conversation about traffic problems.
You're waxing lyrical about the M25 and the hopelessness of building more roads.
Suddenly the man next to you says: ‘Of course, you realise that more than 50 per cent of all road journeys are less than three miles long?’
What do you do?
If you are at all normal, you bypass the urge to throttle him, or to shake him by the head and shout: ‘What's that got to do with anything?’, and find yourself nodding in agreement as if he has just proved something.
That's because we are all impressed by authoritative statements spiced with statistics.
We cannot help it.
He might just as well have said: ‘It's all very well asking for more money for the railways, but if the volume of rail freight were doubled, it would still be only a mere 16 per cent of the rail-and-road total.’
You would feel equally unnerved and change the subject just as fast.
I actually heard a minister say that on the radio last week.
The interviewer was unnerved and changed the subject quickly.
The statement does not have to be true or relevant, of course— it just has to sound true and relevant.
And as luck would have it, I just happen to have a list of apparently germane truths which I have been maturing during the last month or so, after being worsted in various conversations.
Here are a few for you to use.
I hope they work.
TRANSPORT ‘Did you know that lorry drivers who pick up hitch-hikers have 73 per cent fewer accidents than those who don't?’
‘The average train may leave 10 minutes late, but it has been proved that the average car journey sets off at least 40 minutes after the announced time.’
‘Black cars are involved in 83 per cent more crashes after dark than during the day.’
‘What people never take into account about the M25 is that it is also designed as a defence barrier against an invading force.
Apparently no known tank force could break through a six-lane snarl-up, so the authorities have to be able to whistle up a traffic jam within minutes.
That's why there are so many jams on the M25.
They're practising.’
CRIME ‘The prison population of the USA is bigger than the civilian population of seven member states of the United Nations, and better behaved than four of them.’
‘Yes, but in more than three-quarters of the murders committed in the UK, the murderer knew the victim already — and quite liked them.’
‘The figures for drug usage are highest among people who are actually already in prison convicted of drug offences.
Drug usage is lowest among drug-dealers.’
‘If you say that capital punishment is a deterrent, how do you explain that 87 per cent of all murderers convicted over the last 10 years thought there still was capital punishment?’
AMERICA ‘Latest estimates show that by the year 2010, the USA will be a Japanese-owned country speaking Spanish.
That's why more than 43 Japanese universities have started Spanish courses this year.’
‘The reason that Hollywood keeps selling all its film companies to the Australians, the Japanese, and so on, is to prevent them falling into the hands of people from New York.’
‘Psychologists now think that America has never recovered from the traumatic blow of introducing baseball into the Los Angeles Olympics and then losing in the final to Japan.’
SOCIAL ‘Sociologists apparently have come round to the belief that 50 per cent of middle-class parents who send their children to private schools would be happy to put them in the state system if dinner money was renamed lunch money.’
‘No famous athlete has ever gone into politics by joining Labour.
Nobody is more capitalist than the amateur athlete.’
‘The only place where all classes of British society mingle on equal terms is the motorway service area.
Did you realise that 43 per cent of all sociological surveys are carried out on the M1, M4 and M6?
By people disguised as waitresses or RAC recruiting officers?’
‘Fifty per cent of all people in Britain are educationally below average.’
If none of these works, you can always try throttling your interlocutor, crying as you do so: ‘Did you know that 63 per cent of all smart-ass know-alls meet a violent and hideous end?’
Letter: The future of Uppark
From Mr CHARLES BLACKETT-ORD
Sir: Surely with building as with anything else there is a distinction between maintenance and renewal.
The reconstruction of the interior of Uppark cannot reasonably be described as maintenance.
Complete renewal, while providing a stage for experts to display their knowledge would deflect this limited resource from the true maintenance of historic houses, which is clearly a more valuable outlet for their talents.
One of the important aspects of country house building that is rarely demonstrated is the basic structure — your photograph shows, in admirable clarity, the arrangement of load-bearing walls (and, incidentally, a precarious water tank in the roof) which are the bones on which the skin and organs are built.
If Uppark is stabilised and retained as a ruin, as it should be, the basic structure can be seen as an education itself.
Most of what is now visible internally is important historically but would be covered or damaged if the building were to be reconstructed as a modern pastiche within an original veneer.
The National Trust has already betrayed its trust, albeit accidentally, by allowing the building to burn down.
It should not betray it any further by building new architectural history.
Letter: The future of Uppark
From Lady JANE HOWARD
Sir: Professor Gomme (letter, 3 October) argues the case for the exact recreation of the interior of Uppark most cogently; and certainly, careful and committed reconstruction, such as can be seen at Chatelherault where Hamilton district council has faithfully, and against all the odds, achieved a marvellous reproduction of William Adam's hunting lodge for the fifth Duke of Hamilton, is not to be jeered at.
But Anna Pavord's recognition (27 September) of the opportunity for the twentieth century boldly to turn Uppark's tragedy to advantage, is a more compelling argument.
Why not create an exhibition centre inside a perfectly restored exterior for exhibitions of all that is best in furnishings in National Trust ownership -a Burrell within a Claverton?
There could be exhibitions of the best tapestries and textiles, the finest portraiture, the most outstanding silver; or the best of a certain period drawn together from National Trust houses; and perhaps linked displays on craftmanship, techniques, restoration and conservation.
It was said that the ‘Treasures of Britain' exhibition could not be seen in England for lack of somewhere suitable to mount it.
Uppark could fill that gap.
Letter: Green circle
From Professor RICHARD MACVE
Sir: Your special report on the green revolution and how the investment industry is now wearing an ecological heart on its sleeve (27 September) was timely.
The following day I received a mail-shot from the Friends Provident promoting the merits of the ‘ethical investment policy’ of the Stewardship Savings Plan.
They offered not only to plant a tree in my name, if I applied for a policy, but also the choice of a free radio alarm clock or a telephone.
I could only speculate whether the industrial activity required to produce the clock radio and the telephone they wanted to give me, and all the ongoing activity to service those industries and their customers, would not cause more pollution, lead to more acid rain, and so destroy more trees than the one they planned to plant for me.
This raises two important issues.
First, is it an ethical investment policy to encourage people to try to have their cake and eat it?
Second, isn't there an urgent need for a fundamental rethinking of the accounting conventions by which company performance is measured, if would-be ethical investors are to know how environmentally friendly the companies in which they invest really are?
Letter: Future of Germany
From Dr CHRISTOPHER HILL
Sir: Timothy Garton Ash ('The sickly child of the cold war', 29 September) speaks for himself when he talks of ‘our ideal — a larger European Community’.
His preference for a free vote in East Germany, enabling that country to join its western neighbour, is excessively sanguine even in the medium term, in its assumptions about the consequences for the international system as a whole.
Quite apart from the destabilising effects of such a precedent on (say) Yugoslavia, and the echoes of the Anschluss and Sudetenland issues of 50 years ago, the creation of a large, united Germany would make consensus-building far more difficult inside the European Community, and reinforce the hand of the security lobby in the USSR.
A much safer route to travel is that which Mr Garton Ash approves only as a means to an end, namely that of encouraging urgent reform in the German Democratic Republic, but as a separate state with a future of its own.
This would take the steam out of the refugee crisis and help us on towards the relaxed and variegated community of states across Europe as a whole which is likely to be the real guarantee of security.
Letter: Over the shop
From Mrs HILDA M. HAGGIE
Sir: Gail Counsell's article ('When living over the shop pays dividends', 30 September) gave me nostalgic memories of the advantages of this way of living 50 years ago.
From 1935-39 I lived in a flat on the top floor of number 45 in the ‘high street’ in Knightsbridge.
My job gave me awkward hours and frequent short-notice travel both at home and abroad.
Security and my creature comforts were cared for by a dry-cleaners on the street level; a cafe on the first floor that would send me up something on a tray when I came home late and tired; a retired beautician on the second floor who would revive me with an evening ‘facial’; while the grocer round the corner saw to it that my larder was replenished for my homecomings.
The unfurnished rent for a bedroom looking through the tree tops to Wilton Place, a long-windowed living room overlooking Hyde Park, and access to my own flat roof, was £2 per week in those halcyon days.
Letter: The real Pharisees
From Rabbi JOHN D. RAYNER
Sir: While tending to agree with the Archbishop of Canterbury's social critique as reported in your paper ('Runcie attack on ‘Pharisees’ revives rift with Tories', 2 October), I find his reference to the Pharisees more than a little unfortunate.
For about 100 years Jewish and Christian scholars have demonstrated over and over again that the stereotype of the Pharisees found in the Gospels is a distortion which reflects the animosity of the Evangelists rather than the historical truth or even the attitude of Jesus himself.
Far from being inclined towards self-righteousness, the Pharisees taught ‘Be humble before all men’, and revered their teacher Hillel for his extreme humility; and far from being judgemental, they urged ‘Do not judge your fellow man until you are in his position’ and ‘Always judge others by the scale of merit (that is, charitably)’.
Surely the Pharisees themselves should be judged, if not charitably, at least fairly: from their own literature (which the Jewish and Christian scholars referred to above have taken the trouble to study) rather than from the taunts of their opponents.
It is high time to abandon that caricature, too long perpetuated by dictionary definitions such as the one you quote from Chambers, both for the sake of historical justice and because, in the present as in the past, anti-Pharisaism and anti-Judaism have a nasty way of feeding on each other.
Letter: Pressure for federalism in Europe
From WILLIAM CASH, MP
Sir: Robert Hughes and Alan Haselhurst (letters, 29 September and 2 October) have avoided my main point about the future of democracy in Britain and Europe.
Those of us who support the European Community and the Single European Act (which I voted for as it stands) reject his misleading allegation that we think ‘democracy is at risk through our continued membership of the European Community’.
Mr Haselhurst clearly thinks it is ‘absurd’ to be concerned about prospective federalism in Europe.
He prefers to allow this ‘journey’, as he puts it, to continue on the principle of wait and see.
It is wholly unreal for anyone to imagine that such an issue, which he merely describes as ‘adjusting the democratic framework to suit new circumstances’ can be so lightly put to one side.
There is no blank cheque.
The real problem is that, unless resisted, the vigorous pressure for federalism by some leaders in Europe will become an assumed part of our involvement in the European Community.
We did not agree to this on accession in 1972, nor again in 1975 in the Referendum, nor in the acceptance of the Single European Act in 1986.
Mr Haselhurst claims that he is ‘not aware of any preconceived plan’ but seems unaware that Michel Rocard, Prime Minister of France, describes himself as ‘a complete federalist’and of the recent advocacy by the five Christian Democrat leaders in Europe of a Single European Government and a Single European Parliament.
That is what convinces me where they would like to take us.
This would inevitably imply the end of our Westminster Parliament in any real sense and the loss of our freedom to decide our political, economic and social priorities and, with it, the loss of our hard won democratic system.
He does not seem to have noticed that the United States federal system is inherent in the constitution which those who joined the federation accepted on clearly defined terms.
He misunderstands events in the Baltic, Eastern Europe and East Germany.
Theirs is a bid for freedom of choice and democracy.
They are accused of nationalism but they would be, wouldn't they?
Letter: Student fees
From Dr JOHN SLOBODA
Sir: Peter Wilby's endorsement of the vice-chancellors' proposal to charge undergraduates full fees (29 September) confuses two quite different issues; expansion and access.
It is likely that the Government will not fully fund the required expansion in overall student numbers.
That being so, the vice-chancellors are acting responsibly to explore alternative sources of funding.
However, a widening of access requires that the universities attract and support under-represented groups, such as working-class school-leavers, black and Asian students, parents and mature workers.
Simply increasing the number of university places will not in itself increase access.
Without a major programme of ‘affirmative action’ in recruitment, admission, teaching, and assessment, any expansion of higher education will result in more privileged middle-class young people gaining degrees.
The majority of British people do not find universities attractive or accessible.
If the current proposals are not informed by an accurate assessment of the attitudes of a representative sample for working-class school leavers and their families, then their relevance to the issue of access is unproven.
Letter: The price of advice
From Dr E. D. IRVINE
Sir: The internal market advocated by the Government for the NHS (in particular for the hospitals) may not be as new an idea as may be thought.
When I was a junior doctor in hospitals in the late 1920s, I had under my care a doctor, then over 60, who told me that when he was young in London, he knew of a doctor's plate which conveyed this message to prospective patients: Medicine and advice fourpence, superior ditto sixpence.
Letter: Virgin independence
From Mr RICHARD BRANSON
Sir: Your Outlook Column (3 October) ended with the statement: But the question must remain as to whether a Japanese giant with five times the turnover of the Virgin Group will be content to stay a minority player.
I believe your correspondent forgets we are a private company still in absolute control of 75 per cent of it.
Our Japanese partner has no right to increase its shareholding.
We value our independence as much as you do.