

Talk of the Trade: Autumn price fall
By PETER DUNN
PETER FRASER, owner of the Classic Bookshop and opponent of the Net Book Agreement, has complained to Michael Joseph and the Booksellers' Association about The Sunday Times's special autumn offer of Edith Holden's The Nature Notes of an Edwardian Lady, published tomorrow.
He is aggrieved because, although it is being sold at the NBA price of £15.95, purchasers are also receiving special prints with the book.
Michael Joseph says there has been no breach: ‘The Sunday Times's promotion is theirs, not ours.’
Mr Fraser, with bookshops in Sherborne, Bristol and Bath, says he will probably sell the book for £13.
Talk of the Trade: Victims' voice
By PETER DUNN
PEOPLE savaged by the tabloids are banding together to fight back.
On last week's Hard News on Channel 4, Linda Joyce, the Princess Royal's former maid, announced the formation of an organisation called Response, through which victims of the yellow press can compare experiences and seek redress.
When letters were stolen from the Princess Royal in April, Miss Joyce was questioned by police and some newspapers jumped to the wrong conclusion that she was responsible.
Joint founder of Response is Josephine Hunt, whose long-running battle with The Sun, which called her handicapped son ‘the worst brat in Britain', was also featured.
Talk of the Trade: Chamber chat
By PETER DUNN
A SATELLITE channel transmitting the proceedings of the British Parliament and overseas legislatures has been suggested by the Astra satellite company, Marketing Week reports.
Rupert Murdoch's Sky Television, which transmits four channels on Astra, would participate but would not own the channel.
Astra has already been talking to officials of the Commons about its planned service, based on the American C-Span cable network, which performs a similar function.
Apart from Westminster, the channel could relay reports from the European Parliament, the US Congress — and one day even the Supreme Soviet in Moscow.
Talk of the Trade: Floodtide for TV listings
By PETER DUNN
A FLOOD of new weekly television listings magazines will hit the market when what the Home Secretary calls the ‘dotty’ restriction on advance use of programme schedules is lifted in the next parliamentary session.
Not all will survive.
Rupert Murdoch's TV Guide could be in the strongest position, to scoop a lion's share of the market, since it is already established, listing all satellite channels and as much as it is allowed in the way of BBC and ITV previews.
It will be able to draw on material and expertise from Murdoch's American TV Guide, which has a stranglehold on the US market.
Radio Times and TV Times will start to print all terrestrial and satellite television listings.
Quite how the BBC will continue to ‘advertise’ the expanded Radio Times, exploiting its advantage of free airtime but implicitly promoting its rivals, remains to be seen.
Media: Return of the six-gun saga: Modern actors cannot ride and young viewers do not understand the cowboy code, but a revival of the western looms on the horizon, John Lichfield says
By JOHN LICHFIELD
Where are the TV westerns of yesteryear?
What happened to Ben Cartwright, Hoss and Little Joe?
Where is the Wagon Train that seemed permanently to be circling its wagons waiting for a drunken pioneer's wife to have twins in the last of them?
The TV western seemed to fade into the sunset some time in the mid-1970s, victim of a narcissistic age that preferred to look at prosperous, smart-alecky or violent images of itself (Dallas, Cheers, Miami Vice).
It was a time when children were encouraged to fantasize about machines and outer space rather than marvel at the open spaces where the deer and buffalo roamed.
Now, however, it seems, the wheel has turned full circle.
The western is being revived, reinterpreted for the 1990s.
One of the most successful Hollywood TV producers, David Jacobs, the creator of Dallas, believes the western also fell victim to late 1960s iconoclasm.
‘The John Wayne stereotype was rejected, along with his conservative values,’ he said.
A series of spoof or obsessively realistic 1960s westerns (Cat Balou, Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, Soldier Blue, The Wild Bunch) stripped the mask from the Lone Ranger's face.
The legend could not be taken seriously any longer in what had been, admittedly, a threadbare form.
Howard Rosenberg, TV critic of the Los Angeles Times, said: ‘Just look at the re-runs of the old western series.
You had heroes scotch-taped to their horses and lightly sprinkled with dust.
You can't get away with that any more.’
John Mantley, producer of Gunsmoke for CBS for 11 years, says elements of the old story began to fall apart.
‘We all read Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee.
We knew that the US Government had signed 453 treaties with the Indians and broken every one.
A part of the myth just didn't work after that.’
At their peak in the mid-60s, there were 39 western series on the three American TV networks — almost two a day on each channel.
In the US weekly audience ratings in 1965, there were three westerns in the top five, and seven in the top 10.
By the mid-80s they had all gone the way of the buffalo: extinct save for preservation in the national park of permanent re-runs.
Gene Autry, the first TV cowboy, now 82, says westerns dominated the early days of TV partly because they had lively, cheaply produced visuals, but mainly because early TV was starved of feature films by the studios.
Westerns were a handy substitute.
There are encouraging signs, however, that the TV western is struggling back into the saddle.
Paradise, launched on CBS last season and shown on BBC1 this summer, was the first new western serial for a decade.
It was the only new drama series in US network TV to be allowed a second series this year, despite a relatively lowly 49th ranking in the ratings.
Its creator and executive producer is, perhaps surprisingly, David Jacobs.
Why did he follow J R Ewing, the epitome of 1980s TV, with a western about a gunfighter turned foster father?
‘I believed the genre was still an important and powerful one.
It's something I've always had an affection for.
I found it was possible with Paradise to talk about individual and personal responsibility, something which if set in a contemporary context would have had a preachy feel about it.’
Lonesome Dove, a five-part story of a Texas-to-Montana cattle drive, also shown on CBS last year, was the best-watched TV mini-series of any kind in America for five years.
It won substantial critical acclaim and will show in Britain next year.
The 1989-90 season, which started this month, brought another new prime-time western series, ABC's Young Riders, which tells the story of the Pony Express.
It also says a lot about modern American TV.
Because the networks believe westerns appeal mainly to middle-aged men, Young Riders has a cast of five pouting young male actors, in an attempt to make a western with ‘good demographics’.
The effect is rather like an extended advertisement for Marlboro Lights.
Westerns are no longer a cheap option.
The classic western TV series were filmed in back-lots, or in the semi-desert 20 miles from Los Angeles.
Modern audiences no longer accept plastic bushes, and the southern Californian suburban sprawl means the production companies have to take their horses and cows to locations far away in Arizona or Montana.
David Jacobs also points out that the cost of hiring a stage-coach is now prohibitive.
‘At one time there were dozens of companies which specialised in renting out western paraphernalia.
Now there are maybe two.
The cost has gone through the barn roof.’
And actors can no longer ride.
They have to be sent to ‘cowboy school’.
Westerns, by their nature, demand more time on location.
As a result, Mr Jacobs says, it cost nearly as much to make an episode of Paradise, with relatively unknown actors, as an episode of Dallas, with its big stars.
Will the western ride again?
John Mantley is cautious.
‘Westerns have a gladiatorial, timeless quality.
On the other hand you have a whole generation of TV watchers that doesn't really know the rules.
A western is like a Japanese Noh play.
It is a stylised drama with understated dialogue that depends on recognition of key words and concepts.
Many of the young people today haven't the first idea of what's going on.’
In the inert 1950s the western represented a troubled, adventurous American past.
In the anxious and eventful late 1980s and 1990s, they may come to represent, like All Creatures Great and Small in Britain, a less confusing past with simpler, deeper values.
Maybe.
On the other hand The Young Riders came 51st in the ratings in its first week, trailing far, far behind all the modern myths about modern times such as The Cosby Show, Roseanne, Golden Girls, Cheers and Matlock.
It is premature, then, to say that the western has galloped back to centre screen.
But there is a puff of dust on the horizon.
Media: A discreet facelift for ‘Le Monde’: Sarah Lambert greets the relaunch of France's august paper of record, now aiming at younger readers
By SARAH LAMBERT
THE LAST 10 days or so have not so much shaken the world as utterly changed it.
Le Monde, France's daily newspaper of record, has been redesigned and relaunched with the help of a Fr25m advertising campaign which proclaims: ‘Le Monde is changing.’
Le Monde is not just a newspaper but an institution.
Founded after the war with de Gaulle's blessing, its official brief was to recreate a national consensus and rekindle public faith in the Press which the collaborationist ‘newspapers’ of the war years had almost extinguished.
That it is now required reading for the French Establishment and for anybody involved in business or education is a measure of how successfully it fulfilled its task without compromising a reputation for unbiased reporting.
Because the country has a very strong regional press, Le Monde is not France's bestselling paper but is unique in that 85,000 of the 385,000 copies bought daily are sold abroad.
For many readers, Le Monde's view of the world is France's view of the world.
That view is presented in a classical French, rarely illustrated, and then only with the smallest photographs or the occasional line drawing.
It follows an editorial policy that believes foreign news should lead the first three pages, that matters of national interest should be philosophically debated in the newspaper's columns, and that half a page of sport either side of the weekend is enough.
Having survived a financial crisis in the early 1980s, thanks to support from the banks and from a staff prepared to agree to a voluntary wage freeze, the paper is now making money and putting on readers, so why has the management now decided to modernise the title?
On first sight it might seem a case of plus ca change, plus c'est la meme chose.
The differences are minimal: cleaner print, a slightly smaller format somewhere between tabloid and broadsheet, the masthead underlined in blue and, the most striking development: the appearance of separate sections.
But, as the editor Andre Fontaine explains: ‘It is not so much a new layout as a new presentation.
Newspaper readers are very conservative — the changes are not supposed to shock.’
As in Britain, French newspapers are having to respond to the growing demand for advertising space by adding extra pages.
Le Monde, one of the country's most profitable publishing concerns producing special supplements and books while printing other publications, has invested a sum conservatively estimated at not less than Fr350m in a state-of-the-art printing press.
The press, at Ivry, a suburb south-east of Paris, is the most technologically advanced in Europe and will enable Le Monde to print in colour and to produce 64-page newspaper, a third as much again.
With so many pages, the decision to divide the paper into separate sections: home and foreign news, society and culture, economics and business news with special supplements, books and ideas on Friday, arts and listings on Thursday and a radio/television guide at the weekend, has been dictated by the problems of readability as much as anything else.
‘The paper was just getting too unwieldly, we needed to give our readers some help in finding their way around the paper,’ says Mr Fontaine.
He also hopes the new format will attract new readers, both those who do not regularly read a daily newspaper and converts from the rival Liberation -which has won an extraordinary success among younger readers with its mix of lively writing, news features and bold use of photography and design.
Mr Fontaine admits that the society and culture section of the new-look Le Monde has been inspired by Liberation's treatment of similar subject-matter.
‘So many stories — drugs or immigration, for example— are international stories and should be written from a point of comparison, set in their international context.
That takes time to research, and space to display.’
That so-called ‘soft’ subjects like health are now valid areas of inquiry and sport merits better and more detailed coverage has now been realised.
The colour-printing facility, initially to be used only for advertising, may be used to produce a weekend ‘leisure’ colour supplement early next year.
‘I don't believe in the fatal decline of the written word,’ says Mr Fontaine, ‘but we are competing all the time — not so much against television, because the screen image and the printed word complement each other, as against magazines, and against the time people spend getting to work and then their leisure time — against music and the cinema.’
Not all the Le Monde journalists support the change, which is the result of two years' market research and several dummy editions.
A professional designer, Jean Bayle, with a track record for breathing new life into tired titles, was hired but the changes he favoured were deemed rather too radical and, in the end — as is often the case on Le Monde where the staff hold a significant stake in the company — the consensus view prevailed.
For the chief sub-editor, Daniel Vernet, it has not been an easy transition: ‘We had to make sure that the paper read as a single publication, but that each section stood up on its own, while avoiding undue repetition,’ he explains.
All this disruption coincides with preparations to move to a new offices early next month, when all editing and layout will be done on computers.
Meanwhile, there are plans to change the management structure so as to divide responsibility for editorial content, day-to-day management and the business side of the Le Monde publishing empire more logically.
The task will undoubtably fall heaviest on Andre Fontaine, who with the death earlier this summer of the newspaper's founder Hubert Beuve-Mery, has to shoulder the burden alone.
‘I look around,’ he says, ‘and there is no one there behind.’
The differences he and his production team have introduced may be ones of detail, but are no less revolutionary for that.
Whatever the readers' perception, Le Monde is changing and will go on doing so for some time to come.
Media: Women's monthly magazines: circulation figures
By SARAH LAMBERT
WOMEN'S monthly magazines are battling it out in an extremely competitive market.
Sales were hit by the drop in retail spending during the first half of 1989.
Prima remains the bestseller but is down 17 per cent.
Essentials fell even more sharply, but is above target.
Marie Claire is below projections.
The explosion in advertising space has not been matched by demand.
Battles wage over display in newsagents.
Some magazines are responding to the new hard times by raising prices.