

Rugby League: Brawlers fined by League
By PAUL WILSON
(First Edition) THE LEAGUE'S board of directors yesterday found Castleford and Hull guilty of bringing the game into disrepute by brawling in their Wheldon Road meeting 10 days ago, and fined each club £3,000, writes Paul Wilson.
As is customary, only £500 of each fine was payable, the rest suspended for 12 months and enforcable only if either club appears on a similar disrepute charge within that time.
Castleford were one of the clubs fined two seasons ago when an outbreak of brawling at several matches led to the League imposing new, stiffer penalties.
Batley and Sheffield Eagles received a severe reprimand yesterday for the fighting which took place during their first-round Yorkshire Cup tie.
Brent Todd, the Kiwi prop forward who plays with the Canberra Raiders in Australia, will not appear in his club's World Club Challenge match against Widnes tonight at Old Trafford.
Todd, who played briefly at Wakefield Trinity last season, is in the New Zealand touring squad currently in this country, and was refused an exemption to take part in the showpiece game.
Todd did appear in the Raiders side who beat Balmain in the Sydney Grand Final, but was replaced in extra time by Peter Jackson, who went on to score the winning try.
Jackson again deputises tonight.
Oldham have transfer-listed Keith Atkinson, a utility back, for £10,000 at his own request.
Robert Myler, a 19-year-old half-back from the Widnes St Maries amateur club, has joined Warrington.
Sheffield Eagles, still homeless after being banned from the Owlerton Stadium, have brought forward their home match against Leeds from 29 October to Wednesday, 25 October, to enable it to take place at Wakefield.
The Eagles entertain Widnes at Bramall lane on Sunday, a venue arranged before the start of the season.
Widnes and Fulham are the season's first winners of the Stones Bitter Team of the Month awards.
Widnes are unbeaten in their first six matches and have amassed 238 points.
Fulham have registered four victories and are second behind Ryedale York in the Second Division.
Boxing: Biggs cut out to advance Mason's career: Ken Jones on the fragility a Briton aims to exploit tonight
By KEN JONES
THERE are two things to remember about Tyrell Biggs, the 28-year-old Olympic gold medallist from Orange County, California, who stands between Gary Mason and the rest of his career.
One is that he has been in the ring with Michael Gerard Tyson.
Two is that it would be extremely unwise for Biggs to engage in serious pugilistic activity without first retaining the services of an attendant unlikely to panic at the sight of a badly lacerated brow.
It is safe to assume that these were prominent factors when Biggs was considered as a possible opponent for Mason who will go to his corner at the Royal Albert Hall in London tonight with a record of 31 professional victories, 30 inside the distance.
Matchmaking is a precise art and never more so than when practised by Terry Lawless and Mickey Duff whose most notable achievement so far was to manoeuvre Frank Bruno into a hugely profitable contest against Tyson for the world heavyweight championship.
As Mason, the British heavyweight champion, has been brought forward along similar lines, his career nourished mainly by opponents who showed little inclination to remain upright, it should be clear that Biggs is thought to represent an ideal opportunity for advancement.
An impressive amateur, the 1984 super-heavyweight Olympic champion, Biggs had won all 15 professional contests and was reckoned to be a considerable prospect in the division until he was overwhelmed by Tyson in Las Vegas on 16 October, 1987.
As a result of that demoralising experience Biggs was inactive for more than a year, a cut eye then leading to a stoppage against Francesco Damiani, the Italian he defeated in the Olympic final.
More than 60 stitches have now been inserted in fragile brows but it is probable that Biggs will never recover from the beating he took from Tyson.
‘Fighters who have been in with him are never the same again,’ he said last week.
This is certainly borne out by the World Boxing Council ratings.
Tony Tucker, Tony Tubbs, James Smith and Trevor Berbick have all tumbled out of the top 10 and Biggs is now ranked 27th.
Bold assertions are what we have come to expect from visiting Americans of dubious pedigree but they come to Biggs almost as an afterthought.
‘I am not here to lose,’ he said, never far from the negative response.
A stand-up, straight-backed style has proved to be less effective against professional opponents although Biggs claims that attempts to make him more aggressive were counter-productive against Tyson.
‘It was in me to beat him but not the way they wanted me to fight.’
He was referring to Lou Duva, his former manager, and George Benton, then trainer.
It remains to be seen how much Biggs has got left and even Duff has made mistakes.
But this is not a fight Mason imagines he can lose and much of the interest tonight will focus on his ability to handle a taller opponent who has been in with better men.
It has been suggested that Biggs does not possess the heart but when so badly cut that he could not be allowed more than one more round he went back out and stopped David Bey.
Cus D'Amato, the famed trainer who shaped Tyson's career, was dismissive of teachers who believe that tall boxers were made to jab and move, relying mostly on their reach and mobility.
It is the way Biggs fights and he can be expected to steal the early rounds.
There remain doubts about Mason's stamina but encouraged by greater attention since Bruno's career was put on hold, he is fitter than at any other time in his career and is undoubtably the heavier puncher.
He is fancied to win inside the distance and the American's cut man can anticipate a busy night.
John Morris, secretary of the British Board of Control, has commended Bolsover's Ian Bulloch for helping to quell crowd problems at Hanley on Monday night.
Bulloch was knocked out after 53 seconds of the second round, in a challenge for the British cruiserweight title, by the champion, Johnny Nelson of Sheffield.
Some of his fans became involved in fighting and Bulloch had to return to the ring to appeal to them to stop.
Skydiving: British team ‘MO’ join World Skydiving Championship in Gerona, Spain
By KEN JONES
The British team ‘MO’ join high society for the World Skydiving Championship in Gerona, Spain.
The Kent-based team finished fourth out of 15 nations in the eight-way event.
They comprise Pete Allan, Sarah Brearley, Rob Colpus, Pam Duncan, Kevin Hardwick, Timothy Mace, Geoff Saunders and Andrew Woodmansey.
After a linked exit at 11,000ft there are 45 seconds of free fall when a maximum number of relative flying positions are attempted.
The sport is hoping to gain Olympic status 
Sport in Short: Tennis
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Table Tennis
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Rugby Union
By KEN JONES
WALES' B international against France on 12 November will be played in Lateste near Bordeaux.
The Welsh side's coach will be Stan Addicott, with Charlie Faulkner, the former British Lion, as assistant.
Sport in Short: Ice Skating
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Golf
By KEN JONES
WENDY RUSSELL became the first woman to hole in one twice during a top-class event yesterday when she sank two tee-shots in the opening round of the British Women's Seniors' Championship at Wrexham.
Russell, 51, produced the shots with a seven-iron at the 127-yard fourth and the second with an eight-iron at the eighth which measures 118 yards.
Sport in Short: Football
By KEN JONES
FOLKESTONE had four players sent off but still 1-0 win away to Redhill, who also had a player dismissed by referee Steve Coffin, of Peacehaven.
In the 68th minute Folkestone's Phil Hancock, Lawrence Ward and Mickey Wells were sent off along with Redhill's Mark Hemsley.
Later Folkestone's Andy Allan was also ordered off.
On Saturday, Dunstable's match at Staines was abandoned after they walked off after three of their players were dismissed.
They later withdrew from the competition.
MATLOCK TOWN, the HFS Loans League team, are still in the FA Trophy -despite having been defeated in the first round.
Matlock, who won the Trophy in 1975, lost 1-0 at home to Stalybridge Celtic, but Celtic's centre half Micky Kilduff had signed for the club only six days before the game, instead of the seven laid down in the rules, so the match has been awarded to Matlock.
Sport in Short: Cycling
By KEN JONES
COLIN STURGESS, Britain's world pursuit champion, has pulled out of the final round of the McEwan's LA professional series in Manchester on Sunday because of tendinitis.
Sport in Short: Cricket
By KEN JONES
THE WINNERS of the Nehru Cup one-day tournament in India later this month will collect nearly £25,000, but could lose money, too.
Each country will have three hours and minutes to bowl their 50 overs.
Falling one over short in any of the preliminary round games will cost £775 and every over after that, £1,080.
Both figures double for the semi-finals and rise to £2,000 and £3,000 in the final.
The winners will receive £24,850, the runners-up £15,500, and the losing semi-finalists £7,750.
IMRAN KHAN will captain Pakistan on their four-Test tour of India beginning on 9 November and in the Sharjah Cup and Nehru Cup one-day tournaments.
Javed Miandad will be his deputy.
DEREK RANDALL, Nottinghamshire's former England batsman, is recovering from a cartilage operation to cure knee trouble that hampered him in the closing stages of the season.
Randall, 38, who hit more than 1,000 first-class runs for Nottinghamshire, said: ‘I've had a bit of cartilage trimmed off, but it feels fine now and shouldn't cause me any problems at all next season.’
PETER RAWSON, Zimbabwe's former captain, will be banned for life after signing to play in South Africa.
The 32-year-old fast bowler has signed a two-year contract to play for Natal in South Africa's Currie Cup competition.
SUSSEX have created a fund to help their young players find coaching jobs overseas — except for South Africa — during the winter.
Any contracted player under the age of 22 will be eligible.
Barclays Bank have donated £500 to the fund.
Sport in Short: Boxing
By KEN JONES
ROCKY GRAZIANO, the former world middleweight champion, is in a stable condition in hospital after collapsing at his home on Monday.
Graziano, 68, won the world title in 1947 with a sixth-round knock-out of Tony Zale but lost it to the same fighter less than a year later.
He finished his career in 1952 with a record of 67 wins, including 52 knockouts, six draws and 10 losses.
Sport in Short: Basketball
Sport Page 39
Sport in Short: Australian Rules
By KEN JONES
TWO LEADING teams will meet at The Oval this month in the final of the Foster's Cup.
The semi-finals, featuring the Melbourne Demons, the Geelong Cats, the Essendon Bombers and the Hawthorn Hawks will be held in Toronto (13-14 October).
Hawthorn beat Geelong in this year's Grand Final on Sunday.
Sport in Short: Athletics
By KEN JONES
SAID AOUITA, the 1500 metres, 3,000m and 5,000m world record holder, has criticised what he called lenient treatment of the disgraced Canadian sprinter, Ben Johnson, saying that athletes who take drugs should be banned from competition for life.
The Moroccan said that athletes might still take drugs if they thought being caught would mean only a temporary ban.
TERRY TULLETT, of Brighton and Hove, and Reading's Peter Sugden, both former winners, will run in the annual London to Brighton Road Race on Sunday.
Hilary Walker will defend the women's title.
Sport in Short: American Football
By KEN JONES
MIKE TOMCZAK, the Chicago Bears quarterback, threw for three touchdowns and Neal Anderson rushed for another as Chicago staved off a fourth-quarter rally by the Philadelphia Eagles on Monday night to win 27-13.
The Bears, with four wins this season, are one of three unbeaten NFL teams.
The New York Giants and the Los Angeles Rams are the others.
Amateur Rugby League: Uphill battle for armed forces
By PAUL WILSON
A MAJOR step in the development of the game in the ranks of the Services took place at St Helens on Sunday, when, in a curtain-raiser to the first match of the New Zealand tour, an RAF team defeated an Army XIII by 22-14.
The prize for the RAF players may be a match against the French Army when they arrive later this year for a short tour.
Notoriously strong, due to enforced national service, and generously funded for the same reason, French Army sides of the past have launched international careers like that of Eric Vergniol, who this year switched to rugby union.
Nothing could be further from the home life of our own Combined Services Sports Board, which has yet to recognise the 13-a-side code.
The efforts of Merlyn Rees, the former Defence Secretary, and Tom O'Donovan, the British Amateur Rugby League Association's national development officer, have failed to persuade Services officials to accept rugby league as a sport like any other.
‘We are up against a substantial amount of red tape,’ O'Donovan said.
‘The last official reason we received was that the Treasury was unwilling to approve any more sports.’
In a shining example, the rugby union club at the Coningsby base in Lincolnshire agreed to accept league devotees and change its name to Coningsby rugby club.
New ground is also being broken in Wigan, where 15 women have enrolled in a coaching course at the Leigh school of excellence.
Most of the women are primary school teachers with responsibility for sports lessons, anxious to give all their budding Andy Gregorys the best possible advice.
Rugby Union: Moon shines to light North Midlands' path
By BARRIE FAIRALL
Leicestershire.... 26 North Midlands.... 28 WITH the County Championship due for another facelift, this winter's finishing order will have a new significance and judging by last night's lively encounter at Welford Road, North Midlands are well up with the situation.
Next season, the old competition will be run on a national league basis -and on the same dates as the divisionals — with early rounds settled in two areas, the North and Midlands and London South-East and West.
While those selected for the divisionals will not be available for these matches in future, the County Championship, according to Sandy Saunders, the Rugby Football Union's president, plays an important part in the calendar.
Here, Leicestershire scored first, with a penalty from Paul Pugh, but North Midlands took most of the positive steps before reaching the break with a lead of 16-3.
Initially, there was a close range try from Tony Keegan and then a superb handling move involving sleight of hand from Martin Smith — an Old Edwardian who bears a striking resemblance to the Leicester maestro, Les Cusworth -resulted in Rupert Moon plunging over.
Then, just after the half hour, another sweeping exchange resulted in a try for David Curwen and John Watkins — enjoying a late call for this game -landed two conversions.
When Pugh closed the gap with his second penalty, the North Midlands' response soon followed with another try from Moon.
The best rugby, though, was yet to come stemming from a tigerish rally inspired by a local lad.
Three times the ball was spun out to the right and three times Claude Gerald left the North Midlands defence for dead with a stunning hat-trick of tries.
What appeared to be the last rites were then administered by Kevin McDonald, whoise storming try was converted by Pugh, but with three minutes to go Moon, not to be eclipsed, cut loose for his third try and Watkins landed the match-winning conversion from far out on the left.
Rugby Union: Linguistic hitch halts Neath case
By ROBERT COLE
THE WELSH Rugby Union's inability to interpret a communique from their French counterparts has given Neath a stay of execution following their pitch walk-off in France two months ago.
The Welsh Cup holders' departure at half-time led to their match against Brive being abandoned.
One Neath player had been sent off, another threatened with dismissal and, as a result, the Welshmen passed a vote of no confidence in the referee.
After Pontypool took similar action a decade ago, against California Golden Poppies in San Francisco, they were banned from touring for three years.
Neath could suffer a similar fate, but any punishment will be linked to the severity of the report.
‘We have attempted to translate the report we requested from the French, but because of our linguistic inability it hasn't made complete sense,’ Edward Jones, the acting secretary of the WRU, said.
‘We have sent it back and asked for a translation.’
The special general meeting called by the Union for Friday will be held in camera following a general committee vote to exclude the press.
There will also be no chance for delegates from the 203 member clubs to probe the background to the South African Rugby Board centenary tour.
The only subject open for debate will be the Union's motion advocating a complete severance of links with the Republic.
The Union's case will be set out by their senior life member, Ken Harris, who said this week he will relinquish his post as a trustee.
That role will be taken over by Glanmor Griffiths, the WRU treasurer, who has been elevated, with Denzil Lloyd, to the International Board, Home Unions and Five Nations committees.
Rugby Union: Hesketh starts landslide
By PAUL STEPHENS
Lancashire.... 49 Cumbria........ 0 AFTER fluffing most of their lines in Saturday's matinee against Northumberland, Lancashire, with little time to rehearse their act, put a significantly more emphatic performance together against Cumbria.
It remains to be seen whether they will still be in business to take the show to London in April; it looks as if the outcome of the Northern group may rest on the Roses game later in the month.
Unfancied Cumbria were disappointingly unable to reproduce the form that produced that remarkable upset at Aspatria when they beat the title holders a year ago, and they were swept aside in a second-half torrent of scoring.
With full-back Ian Hunter not appearing Cumbria were in doubt about their line-up until a few minutes before kick-off, but showed no signs of uncertainty when the action began, winning a penalty from their first attack.
Andrew Harrison missed a straightforward chance from 25 metres.
He missed with two other attempts, one from longer range and a sitter from 20 metres, failing to reward the efforts of his pack, who were considerably outweighed by the Lancashire eight.
Cumbria threatened to fall apart when they lost their hooker, Derek Dougan, just before the interval, as Lancashire's Mark Hesketh finished off a surge by Shaun Gallagher, initiated by the lively Dewi Morris, to give Lancashire a 9-0 lead at the break.
Within moments of the restart, Simon Langford burst through the remnants of the Cumbrian midfield, Nigel Heslop getting the try.
Bob Kimmins heaved open the floodgates and Mike Fielden, Hesketh with a second, Brendan Hanavan, Allan Wyllie and Charles Cusani allowed Lancashire to pour through unopposed.
Three more conversions by Strett completed the rout.
Rugby League: Enduring gifts of a gilded wing: Paul Wilson reports on an unlikely ‘superman’ of rugby league whose longevity has become legendary
By PAUL WILSON
THE FERGIE expected to swell the gate at Old Trafford tonight is not Manchester United's wallet waver, nor even the creator of Budgie the Helicopter.
John Ferguson, the Canberra Raiders wing who lines up against Widnes tonight in the Foster's World Club Challenge, is little known outside rugby league circles, but within the game he commands a whispered respect his more famous namesakes might envy.
Ferguson is flawless, a folk hero in two countries.
In Australia, his try-scoring ability, self-effacing modesty and amazing longevity have set him apart.
In a competition renowned for its ferocity, where even forwards can be burned out in their twenties, a 35-year-old winger is most unusual.
Yet no one was in the least surprised when Ferguson scored the try which earned the Raiders extra time in the Sydney Grand Final, and subsequently a trip to Manchester.
His reputation in this country rests on 25 appearances for Wigan in the 1984-85 season.
He scored 24 tries, two of them in the epic Challenge Cup final victory over Hull.
The statistics are impressive enough, but they hardly tell the story.
Some of Ferguson's tries had to be seen to be believed.
Not endowed with remarkable physique (5ft 9in, 12st 2lb), or blessed with exceptional speed, Ferguson simply has a precious gift for going past defenders.
Deceptively strong, he can surprise opponents by riding heavy challenges.
But usually he manages to pre-empt the tackle by sleight of foot.
The classic example of his footwork was the first Wigan try in the 1985 final.
Dane O'Hara probably still wakes up at night and sees Ferguson oscillating in front of him.
The Hull man appeared to have the angles covered when Ferguson rocked back on his heels to accept Ian Potter's pass, but despite a standing start and only inches in which to operate, Fergie whisked past on the outside.
Alex Murphy's incredulous comment —‘that's the best winger in the world he's just gone past’— nicely captured the audacity of the moment.
Hull supporters, who have never seen their side successful at Wembley, have a list of what went wrong on each occasion.
‘In 1985,’ a Boulevard fan told me last year, ‘Wigan had superman on the wing.’
Some superman.
Even in 1985 Ferguson was being asked unkind questions about his age, and then, as now, he was partial to the odd pack of cigarettes before a game.
The first thing he did on arriving in Manchester at the weekend was pop over unannounced to Billy Boston's pub in Wigan, where his likeness jostles for space with the owner's on the tap room wall.
‘I'll always have a soft spot for Wigan, my memories of 1984-85 are priceless,’ Ferguson said.
‘Wembley and everything was like a dream, but even before that people treated me as a cult figure.
I was just an honest guy who wanted to get on with what he did best, scoring tries, and I think the supporters responded to that.’
There will be a few moist eyes at Old Trafford if Fergie finds himself in dreamland again tonight, in what will surely be his last appearance in Britain.
Then again, retirement was mentioned after Wembley.
‘People said I was too old in 1985, but I had confidence in my own ability,’ he said.
‘I still have, but now my legs aren't quite as young as I feel.’
Rugby League: Sherlock solves problem
By PAUL WILSON
Castleford..... 20 New Zealand.... 22 A TRY five minutes from the end by Kurt Sherlock, the former All-Black centre, brought New Zealand the first victory of their tour at Wheldon Road last night.
Castleford, who, like Hull, were fined £3,000 yesterday for brawling in a League match, were in control for most of the game, but their young side was caught by a Kiwi revival in the second half.
The introduction of Gary Freeman, a former Castleford player, helped settle the tourists, who prevented any home score in the second half.
A rampaging break by Kevin Iro brought a try for Wayne Wallace, and Phil Bancroft's fifth goal took New Zealand to within two points, before Mike Kuiti, a second-row forward bound for Leeds after the tour, laid on Sherlock's saver.
Many of the Kiwis were playing their first rugby for several weeks, and in the early part of the game it showed.
Their first set move broke down through an elementary forward pass, and throughout the first half they were plagued by basic errors.
An unnecessary penalty conceded in front of their posts brought Castleford the first points.
St John Ellis, making his debut after signing from York, kicked the goal after Brendon Tuuta went high on Kevin Beardmore.
Tuuta and Morvin Edwards then allowed Gary French to claim the opening try, and an astute pass by John Joyner then brought Andy Clarke a second.
Iro, the only Kiwi of undoubted international calibre, made scoring look easy when he received his chance, but in a splendid move between the forwards, Castleford carved the tourists open again before half-time, 19-year-old Paul Crabtree taking a Beardmore pass to give the home side a 20-8 interval lead.
Ice Skating: Eldredge overtakes on merit
By PAUL WILSON
TODD ELDREDGE, the 18-year-old former world junior champion, skated superbly to take the overall lead after the original programme at the Skate Electric UK International at Richmond Ice Rink last night.
The American, who had been lying second after the morning's compulsory figures, was placed first by all nine judges for both technical merit and presentation.
Eldredge's performance took him past Grzegorz Filipowski.
The Pole was first in the compulsory figures but could finish only third in the original programme, behind both Eldredge, and Vladimir Petrenko of the Soviet Union, in a nine-strong field.
Britain's two skaters, the Welsh-based Steven Cousins and John Martin, the Scottish champion from Ayr, were both outclassed.
Cousins was eighth in both figures and original programme, with Martin last in each.
Boxing: Sky lines up for a classic TV fight: Neil Wilson on the big battle of the small screen and growing threat of the extra terrestrial to the conventional channels: ‘We're not averse even to putting major sport on our movie channel..
There's no area which isn't open to us’
By NEIL WILSON
WIMBLEDON restricted to a pay-to-watch satellite television channel?
Test matches from Lord's live only to those with a dish on the roof or a cable through the wall?
The spectre was raised yesterday.
Rupert Murdoch did not say that his Sky company and its associate Eurosport channel were ready yet to go head-to-head in rights fights with BBC when he announced a joint contract with them for England's Test series in the West Indies this winter.
But he left the possibility open.
Sky, he confirmed, are in the market for big sporting events.
‘World title boxing,’ he suggested.
But traditional British classics?
‘If it was big enough, attractive enough and our viewers would like it,’ he added.
‘We're not averse even to putting major sport on our movie channel, as HBO (a US cable company) do with Wimbledon.’
Already ‘one or two phone calls’ have been made to the Test and County Cricket Board, according to Dave Hill, the Australian whose production of World Series Cricket for Channel 9 (remember floodlights, yellow balls and pink shirts?) ruffled so many establishment figures and who is now Murdoch's man running Eurosport.
‘There's no area which isn't open to us.’
For now, BBC sport and Britain's fledgling satellite companies are the best of friends.
Eurosport frequently puts out the BBC's own pictures simultaneously, and showed more of them live from the Ryder Cup last month than the Beeb itself.
It receives them automatically as a member of the European Broadcasting Union, a privilege granted to it because 15 member stations of that cosy cartel own the half of Eurosport which Murdoch does not.
In its first year Eurosport has enjoyed access to live transmissions of the athletics, motorcycling and Formula One Grand Prix circuits and acres of European football, an advantage which British Satellite Broadcasting, the ‘squarial’ company hoping to transmit next year, claims is unfair.
BSB itself went into partnership with the BBC to negotiate jointly with the Football Association for exclusive rights to England football and FA Cup matches, and Sky first got into bed with BBC to win exclusive British rights to the Mike Tyson-Frank Bruno world heavyweight title fight.
But how long can the honeymoon last?
BSB has its satellite in space but is not on the air, and Murdoch laid claim yesterday to reaching only 509,000 households in Britain.
Yet ITV regards its competition so seriously that it refuses even to allow Sky the traditional news access to its exclusive sponsored events or permit the EBU to pass on its pictures from events such as athletics' European Cup.
‘I am not so complacent that I would say they won't become a formidable competitor but for now they are not,’ Jonathan Martin, head of sport at the BBC, said.
‘We are complementary.
There's enough sport for all of us.’
He agreed to share the costs of the West Indies series because ‘our service is complementary’.
Sky will transmit live in its peak hours from 3pm to 11pm.
The BBC, who did not wish to go live, will take recorded highlights, the two companies agreeing on the same commentators.
The same is true of the BSB deal for football.
‘No way would we transmit an FA Cup replay on a Tuesday evening live,’ Martin said.
‘Our partnerships make sense, and our viewers will not lose out.’
Martin, of course, is not unaware that Eurosport and Screensport, the WH Smith-owned channel which shares the Astra satellite with Sky's four stations, are insignificant still in audience terms.
Eurosport claims a potential audience of only 800,000 in Britain.
It is different on the Continent.
Satellite is more established because there cable companies take the service from the satellite and pipe it to customers.
There is no need to buy a dish, as most British viewers must.
Five million West Germans can already receive Eurosport, and 17 million Continentals in all, and this week the company will announce its first simultaneous commentaries in languages other than English.
Indeed West German satellite companies are so stong that one bought exclusive German rights to Wimbledon this year, just as a similar Swedish company did there, each denying the traditional terrestrial stations access.
Money seems little object, and one German satellite station has spent $25 million buying the rights to ATP's new tennis tour for the next five years.
How long will it be before Britain's three satellite companies are in that league?
‘At present they are only alternative television,’ Martin said.
‘Sport's interest must be in exposure and numbers, and for the foreseeable future that means BBC.
There is also the nitty-gritty of money.’
But the satellite companies will not only have a rising income from subscriptions and a need to invest it in their struggle for a credible share of the viewing audience.
They also have a willingness to accept sponsored programming, something still denied the BBC by its Charter.
Many Eurosport programmes are sponsored already, and by major companies such as Volvo, and that offers it an edge.
‘Of course we know they are going to get stronger but when are we looking at?’
Martin asked.
‘Think how long BBC2 and Channel 4 have been on the air and they still have barely 10 per cent of the British audience.
We are talking of them being competitive a long way down the road.’
Yesterday, it was not how Murdoch was talking.
Equestrianism: Skelton is too wise for Boysie
From GENEVIEVE MURPHY at Wembley
NICK SKELTON'S refined skill on the mare Burmah Serenade was rewarded with a £2,300 first prize in last night's Rover Classic at the Horse of the Year Show.
It was one of those rare occasions when neither of the Whitaker brothers reached the jump-off, but Skelton still had 11 to beat.
They included this year's Dubai Cup winners at Hickstead, Robert Smith and Brook Street Boysie, who threw down their usual serious challenge only to be bettered by 1.05sec.
Joe Turi, the first to go clear in the jump-off, was pushed back to third place on Country Classics Vital.
Emma-Jane Mac had earlier given Coomes Bookmakers a chance to recoup money given in sponsorship when winning their contest on the 14-1 Everest Gringo.
Her trainer, Ted Edgar, was on hand to give her advice, despite breaking his shoulder in a hunting accident last Saturday.
‘I wasn't sure about making the sharp turn into the fifth fence, but Ted told me I had to go the fast way everywhere otherwise I had no hope of winning,’ Mac said.
Having done just that half way through this contest which was judged on time in the first round, she had an agonising wait to see whether anyone would catch her.
Only Nick Skelton was faster, but he had a single error with Burmah Grand Slam.
Mark Todd, who finished fourth on Double Take II, had a miserable ride in yesterday's Working Hunter Championship, which was won by Jean Harpham's Bootleg.
Todd was on Seabrook, who lowered three fences and had a refusal, leaving the New Zealand Olympic three-day event gold medallist without the slightest enthusiasm for this type of contest.
In the afternoon, William Halliday achieved his first Horse of the Year Show victory some 12 months after leaving his long-term employment as Harvey Smith's stable jockey.
He had been runner-up on several occasions during his 20 years with Smith, but it was Sheelagh Boon's six-year-old Smart Move who gave him his first win when taking the Senior Newcomers Championship.
‘I'm 43 now and just peaking,’ Halliday said, with a self-deprecatory grin.
He now earns his living as a lorry driver, so he had taken a week's holiday to compete at Wembley.
His riding is otherwise confined to the evenings and show jumping contests to the weekends.
As first to go in the nine-horse jump-off, Halliday had seemed to be handicapped by the draw.
But Smart Move was fast and clear, leaving the others to chase his time in vain.
Keeley Durham came closest, just 0.77 of a second behind the winner, to be runner-up on Welham.
Joanne Atkins won yesterday's second leg of the National Grade A Championship but Andy Austin, the victor with River Hill on Monday, remains the overall leader in this three-part contest which will be decided today.
Tennis: Lendl lost in life's labours
From JOHN ROBERTS in Stuttgart
FACIAL expressions made it difficult to guess who was the man on a working honeymoon here yesterday.
In tennis terms, the differences in demeanours of the newly wed Ivan Lendl and the newly awakened Henri Leconte was that of one player whose year has ended and another whose may be about to begin.
Lendl, still trying to push the disappointment of his United States Open defeat by Boris Becker to the back of his mind and impatient for another crack at the elusive Wimbledon title, appeared to be going through the motions during his round-robin match at the Stuttgart Classic.
Leconte, by contrast, hit the ball with the joy of a player savouring rare moments free of physical pain and won, 6-4, 7-6.
‘This has been the worst year for me,’ Leconte said, recounting his six months out of the game with back trouble.
‘This match is going to help me.
To beat the World No. 1, even in an exhibition, gives me confidence for the future.’
Leconte had reason to be pleased.
The mere fact he had been invited to the eight-man special event represented progress.
His computer ranking would not get him into a 42-man field.
Lendl has never found it difficult to look sullen, and while blaming his lack of form on the fact that this was his first match indoors since the final of the Nabisco Masters in New York last December, lack of motivation was perhaps a greater factor.
Asked if he was bored, he replied: ‘I'm a little bit tired, I wouldn't say bored.’
But the mere mention of his commitment to the new Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) Tour, which starts next year, caused a grimace.
In common with several top players, Lendl is less than enamoured of the delays in promulgating a set of rules for the Tour which meet the desires of the competitors.
In response, certain players are procrastinating over signing their contracts — the deadline was on Monday — with the tour organisers.
‘I don't know what the position is,’ Lendl said disdainfully.
‘I've told Peter Johnson (his agent) to do what everybody else is doing.
I'm really sick of it.’
he added.
‘I don't agree with many of the things that are going on.’
He refused to elaborate, but is known to have expressed dismay at a proposed increase in prize money for doubles which would give singles only a 70-30 advantage.
It probably did not help Lendl's mood that the net posts were adorned, in large letters, with the words ‘ATP Tour’.
He has been asked to commit himself to 10 of the new Grand Prix tournaments next year, aside from the four Grand Slam events.
‘Ten, including the Grand Slams, would have been fine for me,’ he said.
The apparent indifference seems to have spread to Lendl's attitude to the remainder of this year.
‘I just have to play out what I'm committed to,’ he said.
Happily Lendl's humour resurfaced when he was asked what difference marriage had made: ‘Before I could do everything I wanted to do, now I have to ask.’
Carl-Uwe Steeb, a local resident who defeated Leconte in three sets on Monday, gave John McEnroe an unfriendly welcome, beating the New Yorker 7-5, 7-6.
Becker then pleased the locals by defeating Argentina's Alberto Mancini 6-2, 6-3.
Sailing: Nautical and nice for Nauta
By STUART ALEXANDER
EQUITY & LAW, The Netherlands' 60ft yacht skippered by Dirk Nauta, yesterday became the first of the smaller boats and 15th so far to finish the first leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race to Punta del Este in Uruguay.
As the only boat in Division C she wins that but is also expected to take the joint C and D prize.
Leading the remaining eight and due to finish today is Bob Salmon in the old maxi, Liverpool Enterprise, formerly Atlantic Privateer.
France's Esprit de Liberte leads Division D just eight miles ahead of Belgium's Rucanor Sport.
These two, and the first cruising division entrant, Creighton's Naturally, are forecast to arrive tomorrow.
The all-women crew on the British 58-footer, Maiden, skippered by Tracy Edwards, has now slipped to 70 miles behind Rucanor, but is expected to lead in Friday's trio followed by the second cruiser, With Integrity, the old GBII, and the West German yacht, Schlussel von Bremen.
Bringing up the rear is the smallest yacht in the race, the 51-footer La Poste, which is due to arrive on Sunday.
The fourth-placed British maxi, Rothmans, became the first to use the hoist at Montevideo sent by Whitbread as a gift to Uruguay.
She is to undergo repairs following the crack which appeared in the deck.
‘We are treating this like a medical problem,’ Mike Pavitt, the project manager, said.
‘The boat will be examined, diagnosed and treated.
It is not terminal.’
Squash: Beeson casts asides aside
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
BRYAN BEESON and Jason Nicolle, two members of the England team whose make-up has caused so much controversy, created sensations yesterday when each of them brought down members of Pakistan's defending world title team at the World Open Championships here.
Beeson, the England captain, scored his first victory over the world No. 9, Zarak Jahan Khan, with one of the finest performances of his career, and then complained about the remarks he claimed his opponent had been making during the rallies.
‘I told him that was quite unnecessary,’ Beeson said.
‘It made me angry, and that sort of thing makes me get stuck in.’
These results caused Jonah Barrington, the former world No. 1 who has waited an age for signs of Englishmen who might become world beaters in the way that he did, to make an interesting boast.
‘At last we are getting the reward for our hard work and we will be challenging for the world title ourselves in a couple of years,’ he said.
There was another major upset when Ross Norman, the sixth-seeded New Zealander who won the world title in 1986 by ending Jahangir Khan's 51 2 -year unbeaten run, was also eliminated from the first round.
Norman lost 15-14, 15-11, 5-15, 15-13 to Anthony Hill, the Australian who was runner-up in the world junior championships to England's Del Harris.
Another Australian, Tristan Nancarrow, had a harder time.
Nancarrow, who has only just finished a ban for venting his anger by making an obscene gesture to a referee during the British Open, was reported to the tournament director for abusing match officials, his opponent, and the court.
He was also warned three times and docked a penalty point before losing to Pakistan's Sohail Qaiser.
Tennis: Wood leads the revenge
From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
JO DURIE, Clare Wood and Anne Hobbs did their best to banish a nine-month-old nightmare yesterday when they defeated Indonesia 3-0 in some style in the first round of the Federation Cup here.
Even though Durie and Hobbs were thousands of miles away at the time of Britain's demise at the hands of the Asians in Melbourne last December, the pair nevertheless felt the pain their colleagues were suffering.
‘I was very upset and felt for those players who played,’ Durie said.
Wood experienced the feeling first hand, and judging by the way she crushed the Indonesian No. 2, Suzanna Kusuma, in the opening match yesterday, she was not taking any chances.
The Sussex youngster was on court for only 52 minutes for her 6-2, 6-1 triumph.
‘We wanted revenge and I think we all felt the pressure because we wanted to win so badly,’ said Wood, who looked more like she was enjoying herself.
In contrast, at times Durie looked ready to scream, especially when the errors started creeping in during the second set of her 6-2, 7-6 win over the promising Yayuk Basuki.
Indeed, it was something of a typically topsy-turvy but none the less gritty performance from Durie, who missed a match point at 5-3 and then had to wait an hour to complete the encounter after rain fell at the end of the ninth game.
She completed victory by taking the tiebreak 7-5 but not before she lost her serve to 5-5 and then saved a set point at 5-6.
Such was the importance placed on the result by the players themselves that team manager Sue Mappin felt she was able to describe the win as a ‘huge boost’.
Durie then teamed up with Hobbs to complete the whitewash with a straight-sets doubles win to earn Britain a second-round confrontation against Austria, the eighth seeds.
Chris Evert was another player thinking of revenge yesterday.
The last time she played in this competition she suffered a disastrous defeat and is keen to make amends.
Two years ago in Vancouver Evert was partnering Pam Shriver in the deciding doubles match against West Germany in the final.
The American pair built a seemingly impregnable 6-1, 4-0 lead, only to lose in three dramatic sets.
After opening this campaign with a 6-0, 6-1 win over Greece's Christina Papaduka, Evert said: ‘I feel I let the team down in that match two years ago.
I felt really devastated that we lost and for that reason I have been looking forward to playing in this event again.’
Schools Football: Latymer Upper downed by Walshe's double
By Our Correspondent
THE HAPPY knack of winning, despite occasionally playing badly, has been the cornerstone of many a well-built team.
The boys of Cardinal Vaughan Memorial School — four wins in four matches — are catching on to it.
Tom Conway, the London school's master-in-charge, felt such sympathy for the Latymer Upper side, who outplayed his own team and lost 2-1, that he popped his head around the visitors' dressing-room door to say ‘Sorry’.
Latymer had taken the lead after 10 minutes but, despite playing the better football throughout, were beaten by two scrambled goals from Rodney Walshe, one just before half-time and the other 30 seconds from the end.
Scrappy success has not been typical of Cardinal Vaughan's start to the season.
Under the mature captaincy of Stephen Flannery, they have been far more convincing in victories over Sutton Manor (2-0), Hampton (2-1) and Dr Challoner's Grammar School (4-1).
In Blackburn, when Queen Elizabeth and Clitheroe grammar schools meet for their annual contests, the fierce but friendly local rivalry is as intense as at any of the better-known great North-western derby matches.
In front of a sizeable crowd at the weekend, Clitheroe, the visitors, won 2-0.
David Booth took 30 seconds to give them the lead, taking advantage of a defender's clearance which deflected freakishly off an onrushing forward and into his path.
More than an hour of cut-and-thrust football followed, and both goalkeepers, especially Simon Taylor of Clitheroe and Lancashire, were kept busy before David Mason sealed his team's first victory of the season.
Strangely, it coincided with Queen Elizabeth's first defeat.
The first round of the English Schools' Football Association Under-15 competition is now complete, and there has been some spectacular scoring.
South Nottinghamshire, 1-0 ahead against North-West Derbyshire with 15 minutes left, suddenly moved into overdrive and finished 10-0 winners.
In potentially the most exciting tie of the second round, they will meet Hull, who beat Lindsey 8-1.
A second-half penalty enabled West Lancashire to eliminate last year's winners, St Helens.
Other particularly successful sides were Portsmouth (8-1 winners at Banbury) and Coventry and Middlesbrough, who enjoyed 6-1 wins over South Birmingham and Darlington respectively.
The final of the Inter-County Under-16 competition will be between Berkshire, who came from 2-0 behind to beat Essex 4-2 at Wokingham, and Greater Manchester, who won 2-1 against Nottinghamshire at Meadow Lane.
Basketball: Giants cut down to size
By DUNCAN HOOPER
Giants, trailing by seven points after the first leg, took an aggregate lead as early as the fourth minute, but their game never flowed as missed shots and tired, sloppy defence allowed the Finns to stay in touch through their prolific three-point shooters.
The brothers, Ron and Gerald Lee, the latter a former professional in the NBA, controlled the tempo and Ron shot the Finns back in front on the night at 24-23.
Apart from Jason Fogerty, Giants' tallest players offered little threat inside, while playmaker Jerry Johnson spluttered in the first half.
But it was Johnson who so nearly turned the game in the second period as Giants clawed their way back from an aggregate deficit of 16 points at 46-37 behind.
Johnson hit the first of four second-half three-pointers, 6ft 7in Chris Kearney began to use his muscle while England international Dave Gardner found his range.
Giants went ahead at 69-67 through Johnson and as the momentum swung away from the Finns, overall victory suddenly seemed a possibility.
Johnson's fourth three-pointer and two shots from Gardner put Giants 80-75 ahead, but then Baskerville Holmes found Gerald Lee unmarked under Giants' basket and the home team needed to find another four points.
Keith Ramsey supplied three of them with a long-range shot 15 seconds from time, but Gerald Lee marshalled his team through.
American Football: Shanahan fired by Raiders
By DUNCAN HOOPER
THE Los Angeles Raiders, who have lost three of their first four games, yesterday fired their coach, Mike Shanahan, and replaced him with Art Shell, their offensive line coach who becomes the first black head coach in the NFL since 1926.
Shell, one of the League's top offensive tackles for 15 years, made the Pro Bowl eight times as a Raider.
He joined the team's coaching staff after retiring in 1983.
Shanahan, who joined Los Angeles from the Denver Broncos in February 1988, guided the Raiders to an 8-8 record last year in his first season as an NFL head coach.
This season, the Californians have thrown away two fourth-quarter leads and fallen behind 28-0 to Denver in another game.
The Raiders are last in both rushing yards allowed (653) and penalty yards committed (307).
The team have also been called for 11 holding penalties in the last two games.
If the Raiders lose to the New York Jets at the Meadowlands on Monday night, it will be their worst start since 1964.
The only other black head coach in NFL history was ‘Fritz’ Pollard more than 60 years ago and for years the NFL has been repeatedly criticised by American civil-rights groups for its failure to name a black head coach from its ranks of qualified assistants.
Kevin Mack, the Cleveland full-back and two-time Pro Bowl selection, was yesterday sentenced to six months in prison after pleading guilty in August to using cocaine.
Racing: Ratings added to the service
By DUNCAN HOOPER
THE RACING service of The Independent has been improved with the introduction of individual ratings to the form guide.
The horse with the highest rating in each race is deemed to have the best chance on form, though other influences will be discussed in the guide.
In theory, a horse with a rating two points higher than his rivals is considered to be 2lb — the equivalent of a length over a mile and a half -superior.
Each day's race cards will indicate which meetings are to be shown live in betting shops by Satellite Information Services (SIS).
In addition, where necessary there will be notification of horses ‘out of the handicap’, and who are therefore at a disadvantage.
These horses have a Jockey Club official handicap rating that merits carrying a weight lower than the minimum weight allotted for a race.
Other innovations include a comprehensive presentation of results from the previous day's principal meeting, featuring the breeding of winners, the successful trainer and owner, extended distances, and details of the first six finishers.
Racing: Haines takes reins for sweet surgery
By JOHN KARTER, Racing Correspondent
THE much-maligned men of the Jockey Club have found a ‘sugar daddy’ to boost their image with a little cosmetic surgery.
That has been the typically cynical reaction to the appointment of Christopher Haines, a high-flyer from the sugar industry, as the Club's first ever chief executive.
Constructive criticism is a healthy thing, particularly where a self-electing body like the Jockey Club is concerned.
However, the type of cynicism greeting the arrival of Haines, who was officially introduced to the media yesterday on his second day in office, smacks very much of a ‘Pavlov's dogs’ response which assumes every move the Club makes is anachronistic and autocratic and therefore automatically to be shot down in flames.
Haines himself admitted that as an outsider his preconception had been that the Jockey Club was ‘An old-fashioned, creaking organisation of part-timers.’
However, he added: ‘On my few visits prior to my appointment, and in my short time here since, I have found it very far from that.
I have been extremely impressed by the professionalism of the Jockey Club.’
Haines, 50, should certainly know exactly what it takes to run a multi-million-pound industry, having climbed through the ranks to become chairman of the United Sugar Merchants Association.
Cynics may scoff that he is yet another stiff-upper-lip, old-soldier type, having come like so many of the august men of the Club from a military background before moving on to sugar.
And, as he admitted yesterday, he has little knowledge of the racing industry, apart from having been ‘a very amateur rider’.
Furthermore, the fact that Haines must report to the Jockey Club Stewards and has no authority to act unilaterally has inevitably led to suggestions that his is merely a token appointment.
However, despite the fact that Lord Hartington, the Chief Steward, appeared to bolster this view by saying: ‘We are not forfeiting any power to Mr Haines.
He will be advising us on ways and means forward’, Haines subsequently made it clear that he will not be an impotent lackey.
‘I will certainly not be an intellectual ‘hands-off’ guru merely thinking up schemes,’he said.
‘The Jockey Club are looking for action and I hope what I devise will be practical and can be implemented.’
Haines's main tasks are to produce a ‘strategic plan’ for the Jockey Club, focusing on its role within the racing industry; ensuring that the needs of racing are effectively understood in Whitehall and Westminster; responsibility for the Club's financial planning and maintaining close liaison with the Levy Board and the Horseracing Advisory Council.
Possibly, Haines's public ‘unveiling’ should have been left for a while as he felt unable at this early stage to give firm views on major issues, such as racing's finances and Jockey Club justice.
In fact, the most eye-opening statement came from Lord Hartington in response to a question about Alan Meale, the Labour MP who has proposed legislation to abolish the Jockey Club.
‘If Haines recommended the Jockey Club should be abolished we would have to consider it and if we felt it was for the benefit of racing we would do it,’ Lord Hartington said.
In this case the cynics might be right to say that pigs will fly.
However, the overall feeling is that the Jockey Club is genuinely concerned with helping the industry move forward and Haines should at least be a given a chance to show what he can do.
Racing: Cumani to steal the Thunder
By HYPERION (RICHARD EDMONDSON)
SUPPLEMENTARY benefit beckons for seven fillies today in Newmarket's Cheveley Park Stakes, the early 1,000 Guineas trial that has become more valuable than the Classic itself.
Connections of seven of the 11-strong field have persuaded themselves that their chances merit the late production of a £10,000 entry fee, beliefs that have pumped up the penalty value to over £133,000.
Two of the new participants, Chimes of Freedom and Dead Certain, look set to dominate the betting.
Chimes of Freedom, who came out a short-head in front when the pair met over course and distance in July, should emphasise her superiority judged on a recent defeat of Pharaoh's Delight at The Curragh.
However, she may not cope with another supplemented runner, LINE OF THUNDER (nap 3.10).
The daughter of Storm Bird has enjoyed a formative career typical of Luca Cumani's juveniles, having been heavily nursed on her debut, over course and distance, before showing the benefit on subsequent outings, at Yarmouth and Goodwood.
Cumani, unlike many of his counterparts in the vanguard of British trainers, has not given the Cheveley Park saturation coverage in the past.
His last runner, in 1985, was Embla, who won in the hands of Angel Cordero.
The man entrusted with the steering this year is Ray Cochrane, who proved that 20 days on the sidelines had not dulled either his skills or competitive edge when driving home a double at Wolverhampton on Monday, his first day back, and adding another winner yesterday.
The Bedford House team could hardly be in better form either.
Llanfranco Dettori, who completes a swift graduation from the apprentice nursery school to the academy of retained riders next season, won on all three Cumani runners at Brighton yesterday.
The destiny of another big race at this course, the Cesarewitch on 21 October, may become clearer after the performace of Beekman Street (1.30).
Victory for the colt who caught a diminishing view of Cesarewitch favourite Travelling Light at Ayr could see another shuffle in the ante-post market.
While Newmarket's competitive card will examine punters' emotions, there will be advice for the excitable at Cheltenham racecourse, where the Chest, Heart and Stroke Association will give visitors a ‘Human MoT Test’.
Rugby Union: A French test for the Home Unions
From STEVE BALE in Paris
IF THE Home Unions XV are tempted — as they may be after all the disruptive absentees and injuries — to go into tonight's Parc des Princes Bicentenary bash less than seriously, they should consider the way the French are treating it.
For Jacques Fouroux, France's coach, the 1991 World Cup starts here.
Caps are to be awarded but after two Test defeats in New Zealand Fouroux has had a clearout which brings in four newcomers and creates a largely unfamiliar pack designed to take on Australia next month.
The French team have been together since Sunday — and even that was not enough for Fouroux.
He wanted them to gather last Friday and be absented from their weekend round of Championship matches, but even Albert Ferrasse, the autocratic French Federation president, would not stand for that.
In fact it worked out well for Fouroux, since most of his players ran into the sort of form which, if reproduced tonight, will make the Home Union's players wish they were just that — at home.
Philippe Sella, for instance, scored three tries for Agen against Ussel, and his co-centre Marc Andrieu two for Nimes against Lavelanet.
Unfortunately for the Lions, as the French persist in calling them, they will have had nothing like the preparation time of their opponents.
Having made what they hope will be their final change, David Egerton for Phil Davies at No. 8, they had a light run-out at a ground next door to Parc des Princes last night and will have another this morning.
It hardly augurs well — especially as none of them have won an international in Paris.
However, the Lions believe British Isles rugby to be on the way up after their win in Australia and at least feel they have something to prove.
‘We need to uphold the growing reputation of British rugby,’ said Rob Andrew, who would confess to being third-choice captain (after Finlay Calder's non-availability and Donal Lenihan's withdrawal).
‘We need to show this generation of British players that France are not unbeatable in Paris.
It's especially important for the seven England players because we have to come here in the Five Nations in the New Year.’
Andrew might also consider it a useful opportunity to further his England captaincy claims, for which he has a growing number of supporters — although he expresses no such wish, since his old school-mate, Will Carling, currently holds the job.
Athletics: British athletics may be torn apart by ITV contract
From STEVE BALE in Paris
BRITISH athletics may be torn apart by a £7m four-year exclusive contract the sport is about to sign with ITV.
A separate deal may be offered to the BBC by disgruntled factions.
The Southern Counties, the most powerful area within England's Amateur Athletic Association, has written to the AAA president Arthur McAllister protesting about an ITV deal which will eliminate cross-country and road running completely from its screens, as well as meetings in Edinburgh and Northern Ireland.
The South may withdraw their grand prix meeting from the ITV deal, and team it with the rejected meetings as an alternative package for ITV's rivals.
The South claim there is a lack of concern for the interests of the sport in the widest sense from TV negotiators.
Football: ITV ready to drop the Anfield spectacular
By DEREK HODGSON
LIVERPOOL against Manchester United, one of the brightest jewels in ITV's Barclays League programming, will almost certainly not be seen on television this season.
Definite confirmation of ITV's withdrawal from the fixture can be expected today.
This First Division match, always one of the most emotional, fiercely fought contests of the season, was originally scheduled for last Saturday.
As this date did not come within ITV's planned winter programme of Sunday afternoon games a new date was proposed, December 22, a Friday night with a kick-off at 8.05, prime-time viewing guaranteed to capture a huge audience in holiday mood.
Neither club was pleased, supporters were furious and Liverpool were reported to have protested strongly.
There was much concern expressed on Merseyside about the safety aspects of a match kicking off that late in the evening on the day when all the tradtional pre-Christmas parties are held in offices and factories.
In the past it has taken great efforts by the Merseyside and Greater Manchester police to keep supporters apart in what is widely thought to be the most intense antagonism in the League.
Granada's Head of Sport Paul Doherty ruled out any likelihood of a Saturday afternoon fixture being screened: ‘We have contracted events, notably indoor athletics.
If the match isn't played on the Friday night then it's difficult to see when it could be scheduled.’
A Football League spokesman admitted: ‘The fixture is still under review and we are aware that some concern has been expressed about playing on the Friday night.’
Meanwhile the League has written to Sunderland, demanding an explanation for their refusal to admit cameras from Tyne-Tees Television to Roker Park for the game against Newcastle.
ITV is understood to be concerned about what it sees as a weakening of its expensive agreement by individual clubs.
Sunderland asked for a £50,000 facility fee for admission to their match with Middlesbrough.
John Barnes and Gary Gillespie are misssing from Liverpool's squad to play Wigan in the Littlewoods Cup tonight, putting their participation for England and Scotland in World Cup qualifying games next week in doubt.
Both have hamstring injuries.
Mark Aizlewood, Bradford City's midfield player, has pulled out of the Welsh squad for their World Cup game against The Netherlands next week after having an operation on a fractured cheekbone yesterday.
He will be out of action for a month.
Tommy Wright, the Newcastle United goalkeeper, has withdrawn from the Northern Ireland squad for the World Cup qualifying tie against the Republic in Dublin.
He is suffering from an ankle injury and a virus infection.
Newcastle have signed 37-year-old John Burridge from Southampton for £25,000 as cover.
Manchester City are making a new attempt to sign Colin Hendry, the centre-half who has not played for Blackburn Rovers since failing to agree personal terms with City and Chelsea a month ago.
Both clubs were prepared to pay the £700,000 Rovers wanted for the 23-year-old, but withdrew when they heard the player's wage demands.
After four weeks without a game Hendry is prepared to moderate his terms, and City contacted the Second Division club on Sunday to resurrect the deal.
West Bromwich Albion hope to sign Chris Coleman, Swansea City's 19-year-old left-back, for a fee in the region of £200,000.
Dave Smith was confirmed as the new manager of Fourth Division Torquay United yesterday.
He succeeds Cyril Knowles, who resigned on Monday.
Alan Curtis, the former Welsh international striker, yesterday signed for Swansea after being given a free transfer by Cardiff.
Football: Robson back in the swing
By DEREK HODGSON
Manchester United.. 0 Portsmouth......... 0 (United win 3-2 on agg) THE NEWS for England is excellent.
Bryan Robson, doubtful for the World Cup match against Poland 24 hours ago, returned for United last night to cruise for 20 minutes before erupting into Captain Marvel, never shirking a tackle and being denied two goals only by the crossbar and a brilliant diving save from Alan Knight.
The news for United's vast following is less euphoric; a subdued crowd of 26,698, the backlash to the Derby defeat, saw them fail to add to the three goals of the first leg.
Portsmouth must take some of the blame for the stalemate for they came defensively formed and defensively minded, and content to rely on breakaways to snatch an equaliser and, faintly possibly, a winner.
They almost achieved the former on the stroke of injury-time when Kevin Ball headed against the underside of Jim Leighton's bar.
In a bright opening, Mark Hughes, 10 yards out, hit a cannonball that flew off Knight's legs.
In the second half, Paul Ince, running on to a free kick, beat Pompey's wall to see the ball deflected off Knight's body.
Ince and United's other huge investments, Mike Phelan and Danny Wallace made spasmodic contributions, Gordon Pallister looked considerably more settled but United's growing concern must be in the form of the striking partnership of Brian McClair and Hughes.
Both played well last night, infiltrating Pompey's blue barriers with speed, strength and footwork but again neither scored.
The suspicion is that they are too similar in style and are both playing the same game.
Afterwards Alex Ferguson had some heartening words for England manager Bobby Robson on the availability of his captain.
Ferguson said he would back the United and England skipper if Robson said he was fit to play.
Ferguson said: ‘I'd be happy to let him go because it is important for England and I don't want to seem obstructive.’
Football: Drinkell steps up for Coventry
By DEREK HODGSON
(First Edition) KEVIN DRINKELL, Coventry City's record signing from Rangers, is set to make his debut for the Sky Blues in the Littlewoods Cup tonight, against Grimsby Town, the club where he spent the first nine years of his career.
Drinkell will be joined by Cyrille Regis, the former England striker, at Highfield Road tonight.
Coventry, who have not won in the three matches Regis has missed with a calf-muscle injury, trail 3-1 from the first leg, but Drinkell was optimistic, saying: ‘It's not irretrievable.
All is possible in football.’
Coventry are likely to be without three regular players: Brian Kilcline, the captain and centre-half who is still suffering from a leg injury, midfielder Dean Emerson (knee), and Micky Gynn (bruised shoulder).
Steve Bull, Wolverhampton's England striker, has a hamstring injury and may miss tonight's Littlewoods Cup tie with Aston Villa at Molineux.
Bull, who has scored four goals in the last two games, did not train yesterday after picking up the injury during Saturday's 5-0 win over Portsmouth.
Bull's absence would be a big disappointment for Wolves as his fellow striker, Andy Mutch, is almost certain to be sidelined for the third game in a row with a groin injury.
However, defender Nicky Clarke and midfielder Mick Gooding should have recovered from knee injuries in time.
Football: Whitton leads the rout
By JOE LOVEJOY
Aldershot.............. 0 Sheffield Wednesday.... 8 (Wednesday win 8-0 on agg) RON ATKINSON'S blue and white army marched down Ordinance Road, past the Cannon pub and fired the Shots out of the Littlewoods Cup with a devastating display of firepower which brought Steve Whitton four goals and Dalian Atkinson three.
Atkinson (the manager) says his bottom-of-the-table team were so bad in one of the five defeats they have suffered in eight First Division games that he found himself joining in with the cries for his dismissal.
Like Terry Venables calling for a pre-match arsenic, the old trouper knows that the best way to disarm your critics is to make ‘em laugh, but the joke has been wearing a bit thin, and it was with some relief that he swopped his sheepish smile for a satisfied one.
Wednesday may have started the season like a Second Division side, but for all the shortcomings exposed in the League, they are still much too good for opponents from the Fourth.
Aldershot's defence were as square and ragged as a new intake of squaddies having their first stab at the right dress, the gifts they distributed coming like manna from heaven to a team who had managed just two goals in their first nine games.
A goalless first leg at Hillsborough had left the whiff of an upset mingling with the burgers and Bovril, but Wednesday cleared the air ruthlessly with four first-half goals in the space of 23 minutes.
The first, after 22, saw Whitton dispatch Atkinson's cut-back from the byline on the right.
The second, seven minutes later, came courtesy of a ludicrous back-pass by Ian Stewart, which left Atkinson one on one against the unfortunate David Coles, who picked the wrong night to return to the Aldershot goal after injury.
Whitton's second, in the 38th minute, must have warned the crowd nearly 1,000 below the Recreation Ground's 5,000 capacity that they were in for a dispiriting night.
There was no challenge as the former West Ham and Birmingham forward buried Craig Shakespeare's corner with an emphatic downward header.
Atkinson, matching his attacking partner goal for goal, belted in the fourth from 20 yards, and the only question remaining after the most one-sided of first halves was which of them would be first to his hat trick.
Atkinson shaded it, but both were home and dry by the 53rd minute.
Whitton pulled ahead five minutes later when he cantered through a demoralised defence to shoot home unopposed, but it was Shakespeare (who else?) who had the last word, breaking the strikers’ monopoly with the eighth goal, 10 minutes from the end.
Would ‘Flash’ be breaking out the champagne?
Would he heck.
‘We'll enjoy our fish and chips,’ he said, adding enigmatically ‘we're not that far away from Liverpool.’
Football: Allen takes strain for City return
By JOE LOVEJOY
(First Edition) CLIVE ALLEN, the Manchester City striker, may be back in contention for the visit to Arsenal on 14 October.
City feared Allen would need an operation after the groin strain he sustained against Queen's Park Rangers, one of his former clubs, on 10 September.
Allen, who has missed the last four games, said: ‘I must admit I was a little concerned and went to see the same specialist that did the operation on my groin before.
He told me I could be back in a fortnight.’
Garry Parker yesterday signed a new four-year contract with Nottingham Forest.
The midfield player, bought from Hull 18 months ago for £250,000, scored 10 goals last season, including two in the Simod cup final against Everton.
Brian Clough, the Forest manager, said: ‘His contract was not expiring but he deserved a rise for the contribution he has made over the last 12 months -so he earned himself a new deal.’
QPR explained yesterday how Kenny Sansom, their former England left-back, was left behind after the goalless draw against Stockport County on Monday.
Sansom, capped 86 times for England, was still talking to friends in the players' bar at Stockport County last night when the rest of the squad left on the team bus after their 2-1 aggregate victory.
‘I don't know what all the fuss is about,’ Clive Berlin, QPR's managing director, said.
‘Kenny had been given permission to fly up to Stockport later than the rest of the lads because one of his children was ill.
‘It was always planned he would come back on the bus, but when the usual head count was made for the return journey we, of course, had the same number as when we started out — without Kenny.’
The bus had gone only 150 yards before the mistake was realised.
‘Stories about him having to get a taxi home are complete nonsense,’ Berlin said.
Goalkeeper David Seaman damaged a shoulder against Stockport but is expected to be fit to report to the England squad tomorrow.
The Sheffield United winger, Alan Roberts, is on the verge of moving to Fourth Division Lincoln City if the clubs can agree on a fee.
Roberts, on the transfer list at his own request, cost United £15,000 from Darlington last year.
The United manager, Dave Bassett, now values him at £70,000, but his Lincoln counterpart Colin Murphy will not go above £50,000.
‘Just because he wants to leave is no reason for us to strike a bargain price,’ Bassett said yesterday.
Marco van Basten, the European Footballer of the Year, gave European champions Milan a timely boost by returning to the squad for training this week for the first time since a cartilage operation on 1 September.
The Dutch striker, whose scoring touch has been badly missed, hopes to play for part of next Sunday's away game at newly promoted Cremonese.
More importantly, Van Basten has his sights on the European Cup second round, first leg tie on 18 October with Real Madrid.
Van Basten scored twice in last season's 6-1 aggregate semi-final victory over the Spaniards.
Milan, who faltered at the weekend with a 3-0 defeat at the hands of the current league leaders, Napoli, have slipped to seventh place, partly because of the absence of van Basten and his compatriot, Ruud Gullit, who is seeing a doctor on Monday about his cartilage injury.
Football: Motherwell climbs to top of the Scottish Premier Division
By JOE LOVEJOY
MOTHERWELL climbed to the top of the Scottish Premier Division for the first time since League reconstruction 14 years ago with a 1-0 win over Rangers at Fir Park last night.
Davie Cooper and Bobby Russell conspired against their old club, Cooper creating the opening for Russell to score after six minutes.
Football: Maskell's show of extra spirit extends Forest
By PATRICK BARCLAY at Leeds Road
Huddersfield Town.... 3 Nottingham Forest.... 3 (aet; score at 90 minutes 3-3; Forest win on away goals) NOTTINGHAM FOREST, the Littlewoods Cup holders, stayed in the competition by the skin of their teeth last night at Leeds Road, where it took the League's away goals regulations to defeat the otherwise indomitable spirit of Huddersfield in a stirring tie.
‘Almost like old times, Denis,’ as a happily departing season-ticket holder remarked to Mr Law of the BBC, while in the directors' box Mr Boycott, a guest of Brian Clough, was unsure whether to smile for his friend or sigh for his county.
Forest, held to a 1-1 draw at the City Ground, were 3-1 ahead with 17 minutes of normal time left, and deservedly so; they had come out for the second half bristling with determination to make quality tell.
But Huddersfield refused to let them coast.
Craig Maskell scored his second goal, and when the 21-year-old striker helped Mike Cecere to bring the teams level even the deserted Cowshed, with its condemned roof, seemed to shake with emotion.
Huddersfield were more than resilient.
Some of their football was remarkably composed for a Third Division side in adversity.
But further heroics in extra time were beyond their weary limbs and so Stuart Pearce, the Forest captain required by England for next week's World Cup tie in Poland, completed a victorious return from injury.
It had been a fair old fitness test.
Forest had been comfortable enough for most of the first half.
They went ahead in the 30th minute when Tommy Gaynor skipped away from a couple of tackles and let fly from 25 yards: no sign of gratitude there for Eoin Hand, Huddersfield's manager, who had helped along his fellow-Irishman's career in the early days at Limerick.
Hand's team, however, replied impressively seven minutes later when Maskell, transfer-listed at his own request after scoring 33 goals last season, scored his first of this, Cecere laying the ball off to the ambitious young man whose crisp drive was a powerful argument for a rise in status.
Forest regained the lead four minutes into the second half when Gary Crosby, chasing Nigel Clough's clever pass, swept past Chris Hutchings and poked the ball between Steve Hardwick's legs.
It seemed all over in the 63rd minute when Clough, a few yards outside the penalty area, volleyed a headed clearance instantly into the roof of the net before Hardwick could move a muscle.
For Clough, too, that was the season's first goal, and a corker.
But Maskell was not finished.
His free-kick went through the Forest wall, and Huddersfield were in full cry.
Their football was a credit to Hand, and Cecere ensured that it would at least be rewarded by an extra 30 minutes when he collected Maskell's pass and tucked the ball behind Steve Sutton.
Kevin Ratcliffe, the Welsh international captain, was takenoff with a groin strain as Everton drew 2-2 with Leyton Orient in the second leg of their Littlewoods Cup tie, going through 4-2 on aggregate.
Ratcliffe, who is in the Welsh squad for next week's World Cup qualifier against The Netherlands was carried off after a fifth-minute collision with Geoff Pike.
He joins Neil Pointon and Martin Keown on Everton's injury list.