

Propaganda victory for Cambodian guerrillas
From TERRY MCCARTHY in Bangkok
CAMBODIAN guerrillas have captured a number of Phnom Penh government outposts in the north-west in the last week, but they have yet to mount an attack on a major town, according to a resistance spokesman and Western intelligence sources in Bangkok.
The offensive has slowed, and there are doubts whether the guerrillas can hold on to their recent gains for long.
But the resistance has already scored an important propaganda victory against government forces, only a week after Vietnam said it had withdrawn all its troops from Cambodia.
Last weekend about 1,000 troops of the non-communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) attacked military outposts along Route 69, which runs parallel to the Thai border about 20 miles inside Cambodia.
They overran a number of small outposts but, according to the spokesman, heavy artillery fire from government troops prevented an advance on the provincial capital of Sisophon.
The town, with 36,000 inhabitants, would be an important strategic loss.
The acting commander-in-chief of the KPNLF, General Dien Del, said yesterday his men had taken control of 24 government posts, although this cannot be verified.
Casualty figures are low, indicating that neither side is prepared to engage in heavy fighting.
Government troops seem to have abandoned some positions quickly, while the KPNLF has avoided key garrisons.
The KPNLF, which has about 7,000 men, had until recently been dismissed by military analysts as a badly organised force more interested in black-market activities across the Thai-Cambodia border than military operations.
Diplomats in Bangkok say the movement is attempting to boost its credibility at a time when the US Congress is debating policy on Cambodia.
The United States provides the KPNLF and the other non-communist resistance group of Prince Sihanouk with non-lethal aid and is considering a programme of covert lethal aid.
PHNOM PENH — The Cambodian Defence Minister, Tea Banh, said yesterday that government troops repulsed an offensive by mostly non-communist resistance forces last week near Sisophon, AFP reports.
He denied charges that Vietnamese troops participated in the fighting.
Zimbabwe university shut down after clash
From TERRY MCCARTHY in Bangkok
HARARE (Reuter)— The Zimbabwean government ordered the indefinite closure of the country's only university yesterday after a day of violent clashes between police and students protesting against the arrest of two of their leaders.
The Vice-Chancellor, Walter Kamba, announced the immediate closure after meeting President Robert Mugabe and his ministers.
He said that all 10,000 students would have to leave the campus with their belongings by last night.
Helmeted riot police fired tear gas and chased students across the campus of the University of Zimbabwe after they boycotted classes and wrecked Mr Kamba's car when he refused to meet them.
Students said police entered the campus around 3am and arrested the left-wing president of their representative council, Arthur Mutambara, and the general secretary, Enoch Chikweche.
There were no reported injuries in the clashes.
Mr Mutambara tried to escape by jumping from a second-floor window, but he was caught and taken to hospital with unspecified injuries.
Police indicated that they would charge him under Zimbabwe's Law and Order Maintenance Act for a statement he issued on Monday accusing the government of ‘state terrorism’ against students.
The statement accused President Mugabe's Zimbabwe African National Union government of using riot police last week to suppress a student seminar to mark the first anniversary of an anti-corruption demonstration.
A total of 478 students were arrested at the time and held for several days.
The statement accused the government of ‘brute neo-fascism comparable only to that of South Africa’.
It added: ‘This university is the last island of democracy in this country,’ and said that during Ian Smith's time as Prime Minister, students had the right to hold meetings on the campus without prior official approval.
This was no longer the case.
President Mugabe aroused the students' anger last weekend with a speech accusing them of drinking and smoking too much and misbehaving rather than studying.
Thatcher maintains firm anti-sanctions stance
By JOHN BULLOCH, Diplomatic Editor
MARGARET THATCHER said yesterday she intends to maintain Britain's opposition to sanctions against South Africa at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference later this month.
Answering questions from black South African journalists, Mrs Thatcher said the British attitude on sanctions would not provoke any break with countries such as Zimbabwe or Zambia.
‘We played the leading role in bringing Zimbabwe to independence and have given a great deal of help to Zimbabwe since independence,’ she said.
‘The neighbouring countries would be the first to suffer from more general sanctions against South Africa, and for very understandable reasons have not imposed them themselves.’
Mrs Thatcher said economic sanctions did have the effect of depressing an economy and depriving people of jobs, but rarely if ever had the desired political effect.
‘I do not believe that making people poorer will stimulate change,’ she said.
Britain had played a positive role by supporting the Namibia settlement and by talking to South Africa rather than trying to ostracise it, she added.
‘We believe we have some results to show for our efforts and if anybody in South Africa, white or black, believes that opposition to sanctions represents support for the status quo, they are deluding themselves.’
Setting out the philosophy which guides her policy, Mrs Thatcher said: ‘I oppose absolutely political violence and terrorism from whatever quarter.
Nor do I believe in deliberately making people poor: that is why I oppose sanctions.
Nor do I believe in obstructing democracy: that is why I oppose repression and the state of emergency.
You cannot influence people without talking to them, and that is why I saw President (FW) de Klerk and Mr (Barend) du Plessis.
I impressed on them the need to bring independence to Namibia and progress in South Africa.
I frequently see Helen Suzman and Dr (Frederik van Zyl) Slabbert, whose efforts I admire.
I want to meet Nelson Mandela when he is free.
I want to help South Africa become democratic and prosperous and avoid descending into further violence and poverty.’
Aquino warns of ‘malignant power’ of Marcos corpse
By JOHN BULLOCH, Diplomatic Editor
MANILA (Reuter)— President Corazon Aquino of the Philippines said yesterday that the body of Ferdinand Marcos still had a ‘malignant power’ that could be used by her opponents to seize power.
Justifying her decision to bar the return of the former president's body for burial, Mrs Aquino told judges and legal workers that there was ‘a clear and present danger of the ambition of some to destabilise the government…’
Mrs Aquino's spokesman, Adolfo Azcuna, said the cabinet unanimously endorsed her decision to bar the body of Mr Marcos, who died in exile in Hawaii last Thursday.
Marcos supporters have asked the Supreme Court to reverse the ban, but Mrs Aquino, who ousted Mr Marcos in a ‘people's power’ revolt in 1986, said: ‘The return of this man and his minions poses a greater threat to the democratic constitution he ironically invokes than denying him entry would tend to subvert the fundamental law.’
The Defence Secretary, Fidel Ramos, briefed the cabinet and senators yesterday on an alleged plot to assassinate Mrs Aquino, which came to light in February.
She has survived five coup attempts, two of them linked to Marcos loyalists.
Hong Kong angers Peking by letting swimmer go West
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
PEKING yesterday bristled at a decision by Hong Kong to allow a top Chinese swimmer, Yang Yang, who sought political asylum in the West, to travel to the United States.
It said the move was ‘certain to cast a shadow on other aspects of co-operation between Hong Kong and China’.
Yang Yang, 20, a self-confessed member of China's pro-democracy movement, had been detained in Hong Kong for 10 days after being arrested for overstaying his visa.
His request for political asylum in Hong Kong was not granted.
The case became a hot potato for the government when Mr Yang was offered political asylum by Taiwan, China's old foe.
Peking said it would not persecute Mr Yang if he was returned to the mainland, a clear sign it would strongly disapprove of Hong Kong not returning him.
On Tuesday evening the US consulate issued a visa for Mr Yang to travel to San Francisco.
Hong Kong's decision to free him is understood to have been made after talks involving the governor, Sir David Wilson, and the territory's political adviser, William Ehrman.
Pressure on the authorities not to send Mr Yang back to China grew on Tuesday when Amnesty International requested all its members telex John Major, the Foreign Secretary, urging him not to allow Mr Yang to be returned ‘under any circumstances’.
The US appears willing to take Mr Yang, but he may choose to live in Taiwan.
Xinhua News Agency, China's unofficial embassy in Hong Kong, yesterday released a statement regetting the government's decision as ‘an extremely bad precedent’.
But it took pains not to criticise Whitehall.
The Foreign Office said it was not closely involved as Mr Yang had requested asylum in Hong Kong.
Whitehall did not ‘view too tragically’ what China had said.
The government, while praised by local politicians for letting Mr Yang travel to the US, was criticised after police on Tuesday raided two television stations to seize films of a clash between police and demonstrators last Friday Police stopped protesters from marching to the World Trade Centre, where Xinhua was hosting a celebration to mark Communist China's 40th anniversary.
Journalists' associations compared the seizing of the tapes to China intercepting satellite transmissions to track down ‘counter-revolutionaries’.
LONDON — Margaret Thatcher said yesterday it was impossible for Britain to take in millions of refugees from Hong Kong and urged China to take steps to restore the colony's confidence, AP reports.
Answering questions at a meeting with foreign journalists, Mrs Thatcher said: ‘We are looking at a scheme to have some people from Hong Kong, but it couldn't be anything like the total number.’
Disneyland date
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
LOS ANGELES (UPI)— The jury which convicted a confessed devil-worshipper, Richard Ramirez, of 13 ‘Night Stalker’ murders has recommended that he be executed.
‘Big deal.
Death always went with the territory.
I'll see you in Disneyland,’ the defendant said as he left the court.
Stalinist crimes
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
WARSAW (AFP)— The Polish government is to take legal action against those responsible for torturing and murdering thousands of people in Poland during the Stalinist era.
SA gallows
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
PRETORIA (AFP)— Three blacks sentenced to death on murder charges were hanged yesterday while a white man, condemned for rape, was granted a last-minute reprieve.
Bishop shot
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
BOGOTA (Reuter)— The Catholic bishop of the Colombian town of Arauca has been found murdered with several bullet wounds in the head.
The army blamed a leftist rebel group, ELN, led by a renegade Spanish priest known as Ayala.
Peace moves
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
CAIRO (Reuter)— Egypt named 12 Palestinians, approved by the PLO, to negotiate with Israelis in a proposed face-to-face meeting.
They include Mohammed Milhem, and Akram Haniyeh as non-resident Palestinians, and Hanna Siniora, editor of the Palestinian paper al-Fajr.
Rebel attack
Foreign News Page 12
Paraguay fraud
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
ASUNCION (Efe)— Paraguayan judges signed an extradition request for the former French information minister, Jacques Soustelle, accused of swindling £62.5m from the state-owned cement industry during the regime of the former dictator, Alfredo Stroessner.
Vigilantes kill 22
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
COLOMBO (Reuter)— Pro-government vigilantes hunting left-wing rebels shot dead 22 people and dumped their bodies on roadsides in central Sri Lanka.
Hijack sentence
Foreign News Page 12
Lebanese accord
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
TAIF (AFP)— Lebanese MPs agreed in principle to shift power from the country's traditionally Christian president to the Muslim-headed cabinet.
The 62 MPs reached a consensus ahead of their fifth day of talks on ending Lebanon's confessional political system.
But Christian MPs held firm to their demand for a programmed Syrian military withdrawal, brushing aside repeated verbal assurances from Arab countries that such a withdrawal would take place.
Angola meeting
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
WASHINGTON (AP)— Zaire's President, Mobutu Sese Seko, and President George Bush met to try to prevent the collapse of an agreement between Angola and the US-backed Unita rebels, reached through Zairean mediation in June.
Unita's leader, Jonas Savimbi, and the Angolan Foreign Minister, Pedro van Dunem, were also in Washington.
Pilots relent
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
SYDNEY (Reuter)— Australia's airline pilots said they were withdrawing the 30 per cent pay claim at the heart of a dispute that has disrupted domestic air services and were seeking instead an unspecified rise based on a 25 per cent increase in productivity.
Peugeot deadlock broken
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
PARIS — The five-week deadlock between striking Peugeot workers and their employer was broken yesterday when the management obtained a court order to end a 10-day sit-in at one of the two factories in eastern France, Sarah Lambert writes.
The workers occupying the Mulhouse forge were told that unless they left the premises immediately they would be ‘forced to do so’.
The workforce at France's most successful car manufacturer has rejected an earlier management offer of a 1.5 per cent pay rise and, in the face of what is widely seen here as management intransigence, the government reluctantly got involved in the private sector dispute yesterday evening, announcing that it would appoint an official conciliator.
Gorbachev again the reluctant guest of honour: Rupert Cornwell, our Moscow correspondent, who accompanied Mikhail Gorbachev on his momentous trip to Peking in May, considers the possible parallels with East Berlin
From RUPERT CORNWELL
MIKHAIL GORBACHEV must feel himself a man cursed.
As on his visit to Peking in May, the Soviet President this weekend risks finding himself an unwilling player in a domestic political drama which eclipses the notional reason for his presence.
Five months ago it was tens of thousands, quickly to become millions, of Chinese invoking his name as a symbol of the political reforms which their own rulers would not give them.
Amid the tumult of Tiananmen Square, the end of 30 years' estrangement between the world's great Communist powers went almost forgotten.
This time the setting will be cooler, more ordered East Berlin, the occasion the 40th birthday of the first socialist state on German soil.
But like the Chinese students, crowds of East Germans — with chants of ‘Gorby, Gorby’-may vent demands for liberalisation which their aged leader will not permit.
And, just as in May, Mr Gorbachev seems trapped.
However much he might like to duck out, he cannot.
Deng Xiaoping could not tolerate the loss of face of postponement.
Nor can Erich Honecker now ask the most important guest not to come to his party.
Outwardly, Moscow has reacted with remarkable calm to the great human flood from East Germany to the West, and the convulsions it has caused in relations among its allies.
But the Soviet Union's predicament is real enough.
Either it permits an obdurate East Berlin leadership to continue, at the risk of deeper disaffection among the population and growing isolation among its allies, or it encourages reform, and risks destroying the fragile foundations of East German statehood entirely.
Mr Gorbachev knows full well that, unlike his counterparts in Poland and Hungary, Mr Honecker cannot replace doctrinaire communism with appeals to nationalism.
His state is built on ideology; to replace it with a more liberal system might only hasten Moscow's nightmare — irresistible momentum towards a reunited Germany.
But there are consolations.
First, Mr Gorbachev knows that most of the West regards the prospect of a swift unravelling of his country's front-line Warsaw Pact ally with almost equal alarm.
Fears for the stability of central Europe so bluntly expressed by Pravda this week are shared in Bonn, London and Washington.
Second, he has a chance to assess the realities on the ground: East Germany's internal political balance, and the prospects for the Honecker succession.
The important words this weekend will not be the public proclamations of East Germany's ‘inalienable place in the socialist community’.
They will be Mikhail Gorbachev's private discussions with Mr Honecker and his colleagues.
These are unlikely to be easy.
Pravda may write that the refugee mess has been caused by ‘provocations’ and ‘revanchist propaganda’from Bonn.
But Moscow knows that is not the case.
Mr Gorbachev could be forgiven for wishing he could plead a diplomatic cold, and steer clear of celebrations where a wake would be more apt.
East Germans board trains to freedom after long, wet wait
From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague
ALMOST 24 hours late, the first of several chartered trains left Prague for the West last night, carrying some of the 12,000 East German emigrants who had spent another night and a day on the chilly pavements around the West German embassy or in the embassy's increasingly squalid grounds.
About 1,000 Czechoslovaks gathered to watch and applaud the departure, which had been delayed by crowds of would-be emigrants in East Germany who had jammed railway stations in the hope of hitching rides as the trains passed through.
Thousands blocked East German rail lines and crowded into stations to try to board the trains en route to Prague, and thus qualify for the trip to West Germany.
The trains were not allowed to pass until the East German authorities were certain that they could prevent such attempts.
In Dresden police removed about 3,000 people from the station and sealed it off.
For the Germans in Prague, gloating over the latest humilation for the East Berlin leadership on the eve of its birthday party seemed to compensate for the conditions of near-vagrancy.
For the first time in the saga of occupation and exodus, the organisational skills of the Red Cross began to succumb yesterday to the sheer magnitude of the task facing it.
By mid-afternoon many people were evidently hungry, and long queues formed at a field kitchen dispensing cabbage soup and rolls.
More than a thousand people had spent the night out of doors.
Many said they had not slept but had spent the night moving around to keep warm.
The prolonged delay, coupled with low spirits caused by cold, squalor and exhaustion, naturally gave rise to some suspicions that East Germany might, incredibly, have reneged on its deal.
But the news, later in the day, that the first of at least 10 chartered trains had at last crossed the border into Czechoslovakia revived the East Germans' spirit of solidarity in the face of inconvenience and discomfort.
There were few new arrivals at the embassy.
Although many East Germans will in future be able to go to Czechoslovakia with official permission, applications must now be made four weeks in advance.
The emigrants' discomfort was aggravated by tantalising radio reports of the steaming soup tureens, hot water and clean clothes waiting for them at the reception centre in Hof, West Germany.
Asked what she would do once she had satisfied her immediate needs, one emigrant said, pensively, ‘I shall watch the East German anniversary celebrations, but I don't know if I will be laughing or crying.’
Belgian Jew killed by ‘professional murderer’
From DAVID USBORNE in Brussels
BELGIUM launched an anti-terrorist investigation yesterday into the murder of a leading member of its 30,000-strong Jewish community, Joseph Wybran.
Professor Wybran, 49, the director of the Co-ordination Committee of Jewish Organisations in Belgium (CCOJB), died early yesterday after being shot in the head on Tuesday night outside the Brussels University Hospital, where he headed the Immunology Department.
The professor was closely involved in a series of benevolence programmes for Israel, including the B'nai B'rith charity organisation, and was recently in Poland to negotiate a settlement in the row over the presence of a Catholic convent on the site of the former Auschwitz concentration camp.
Although no one had claimed responsibility for the attack by last night, it was apparently being treated as a terrorist incident by the Belgian police.
‘It is impossible to determine the precise motive,’ a spokesman for the Brussels prosecutor's office commented.
‘But given the nature of his activities it cannot be excluded that this was a political attack.’
Professor Wybran was shot in the hospital car park.
Police sources said the shooting had the hallmarks of a ‘professional execution’: a light handgun was used that would only ensure death if used at point-blank range.
The hospital, moreover, is perfectly located for a swift getaway, just yards from the Brussels ring road and the motorway to Paris.
Officials said four units of the national police had been assigned to the case, including two specialist terrorist squads.
Although there was a tacit assumption among the Belgian authorities that the attack must have been anti-Semitic in nature, no one could speculate as to its source.
The Israeli embassy in Belgium denounced the attack last night.
‘It is clear that Professor Wybran has been assassinated in cold blood because he was a Jew,’ it said.
‘Fifty years after the Holocaust, a Jewish leader is killed in the heart of the capital of Europe.’
The Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, expressed his shock at the incident.
‘The government and the people of Israel share in the grief experienced by Belgian Jews,’ he said.
Similar expressions of grief and outrage were made by Jewish organisations around the world, as well as by the European Commission and the Belgian Prime Minister, Wilfried Martens, who called the act ‘revolting and wretched’.
Czechs may share peace prize
By JOHN BULLOCH, Diplomatic Editor
THE NOBEL PRIZE committee is expected to give a boost to the drive for political freedom in east Europe when it announces the winners of the Peace Prize in Oslo today.
It is expected that two Czechoslovak dissidents, spanning a 20-year period, will be chosen as joint winners to emphasise the durability of the movement towards liberalisation.
A former Czechoslovakian Foreign Minister, Jiri Hajek, one of the architects of the ‘Prague Spring’ of 1968, has been nominated, along with Vaclav Havel, the imprisoned playwright who helped to found the Charter 77 human rights group.
Unlike Western governments, which have been careful to avoid giving the appearance of fomenting unrest in eastern Europe, the Norwegian Nobel committee is thought to be ready to try to advance the cause of democracy in a country which has shown only the most rudimentary signs of change.
In 1983, long before the West felt able to give aid to Poland, the committee chose Lech Walesa for the Peace Prize in a gesture which embarrassed the Polish government and focused the attention of the world on the changes taking place in Warsaw.
In Oslo yesterday, diplomats warned that the Nobel committee had a reputation for security and the leaked forecasts might prove wide of the mark.
Even so, the committee is unlikely to match the surprises of the ‘alternative’ Nobel prizes, awarded yesterday by the Right Livelihood Society, which singles out ecologically-sound solutions to problems.
Among the winners: a society of Japanese housewives which distributes environmentally sound products; an Ethiopian agronomist who has built up a seed bank of plants for use in time of drought, and Survival International, which campaigns for the rights of tribal peoples.
‘Red Caliph’ carves out an acceptable communist face: Tim McGirk, in Madrid, interviews Julio Anguita, Spain's popular Communist Party leader, a month before elections
From TIM MCGIRK in Madrid
JULIO ANGUITA, the leader of the Spanish Communist Party, is looking for the thief in Madrid who smashed his windscreen and broke into his car for the third time.
‘First, I'd re-arrange his face a little with my fist,’ remarked the burly Communist chief recently.
‘Then I'd talk to him about the socio-economic roots of poverty.’
Mr Anguita has also been re-arranging the face of Spanish Communism recently — with notable success.
Elections are less than a month away, and Mr Anguita is probably Spain's second most popular politician after the Socialist Prime Minister, Felipe Gonzalez.
The ‘Red Caliph’, as he is called, wears a beard shaped like a crescent moon.
Mr Anguita has knocked some discipline into a coalition of quarrelsome, microscopic Communist parties and renegades from the Socialist Party.
This Leftist Unity party may steal enough votes from the ruling Socialists in the 29 October elections to threaten the comfortable majority predicted for Mr Gonzalez's party, which seeks its third term in office.
Described by one writer as a cross between ‘a sultan and a bandolier, a caliph and an ascetic, and a rural schoolmaster and a guerrilla’, Mr Anguita, 48, is the kind of politician who carries his own revolver.
Even so many years after the Spanish Civil War, the Communist tag brings reactions of fear and violence to many of his countrymen.
While Mayor of Cordoba, he received many death threats from Fascist groups.
He also earned the nickname of the ‘Red Caliph’ by trying to give back to the Muslims a grand old mosque which the Catholic church had converted into a monastery 500 years ago.
Ramon Tammames, an economist and ex-communist, explained: ‘Many Spaniards are still mortally afraid of the hammer and sickle.
The Leftist Unity party is, in effect, led and controlled by the Spanish Communist Party, but Mr Anguita has wisely realised that this new name is less dangerous.’
But Mr Tammames, who once was one of the leading intellectuals of the Communist party, is no admirer of the ‘Red Caliph’.
‘Julio is nostalgic over Marxist-Leninism.
He doesn't realise that Gorbachev doesn't feel that way any more, and neither does the vast majority of Spaniards.’
Leftist Unity is targeting its campaign on the big industrial cities, such as Madrid, Barcelona and Valencia, as well as the region of Andalucia, where centuries of serfdom to the local noblemen have left the working class with a strong streak of radicalism.
The biggest task of the Leftist Unity party will be to lure away the working class from the Socialists.
So far, Mr Anguita's party has failed to do this.
Spanish workers voted heavily Socialist in the European parliamentary elections even though Mr Gonzalez's tight economic policies has led to a 17.3 per cent jobless rate and running battles with the trade unions.
In the Euro-elections, the Leftist Unity party only gathered 6.5 per cent of the vote, far behind the Socialists, the Conservatives and the Centrists.
A party spokeswoman, Lourdes Ortiz, remarked: ‘It doesn't seem possible, but the workers may vote again for the Socialist machine.’
Mr Tammames said: ‘The Socialists have set up a client state where the pensioners, the people on the dole, are all sucking sustenance through government tubes.
Under Felipismo, Spaniards have come to depend on the state again, as they did for so long under Generalissimo Franco's regime.’
Explosion blamed for DC-10 disaster
From PATRICK MARNHAM in Paris
INVESTIGATORS have determined that an explosion destroyed the UTA DC-10 which crashed in the Sahara Desert on 19 September, killing all 171 people on board, but there is no evidence that a bomb was responsible.
Contrary to reports in Paris last week, government investigators working at the central police laboratory here have ruled out the presence of the Czechoslovak-made explosive Semtex, which caused the Lockerbie disaster.
They are now certain an explosion was caused by Pentrite, a plastic explosive which requires much less skill to handle than Semtex and has been used by a far wider range of terrorist groups.
Had the explosion been caused by Semtex, suspicion would have centred on terrorists allied to Hizbollah, the pro-Iranian Lebanese group.
But there have been no credible claims of responsibility, and the use of Pentrite suggests to secret service investigators that it may not have been aimed at French national interests but at someone on the aircraft.
Among the passengers was Mahamat Soumaila, Chad's Minister of Planning, seated next to Jacques Renaudat, a French arms dealer.
Mr Renaudat is believed to have been arranging a deal for a large supply of arms captured by Chad during the war with Libya to be sold to the Lebanese Christians, through intermediaries in Tunis and Iraq.
He had a colourful past.
In the 1970s, when he was known as ‘Jacky des Halles’, he was prominent in the world of organised crime.
He turned to arms dealing in Africa and claimed, with some plausibility, to be an unofficial emissary of the French secret service.
The presence of Pentrite in the wreckage, especially in the remains of the forward hold, does not necessarily mean it was destroyed by a bomb.
It apparently blew apart when the Pentrite formed a fireball of 3,000C and 10 ft in diameter.
But the investigators said yesterday that the explosive could have been illegally packed into the hold as part of the cargo, without a detonator.
Pentrite can explode without a detonator if it receives a severe blow or strong friction.
It has been suggested that the presence of an arms dealer and a minister engaged in selling arms, makes such an illegal cargo less implausible.
US move to double aid for Poland
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
UNDER intense pressure from congressional Democrats to increase aid to Poland and Hungary, the White House announced yesterday that President Bush will ask Congress for an additional $200m (£125m) grant for Poland, almost doubling his previous request.
The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the aid would be contingent on completion of an economic stabilisation plan between Warsaw and the International Monetary Fund.
Mr Fitzwater added that Mr Bush has invited both the Polish President, Wojciech Jaruzelski, and Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiescki, to meet him in Washington.
The decision to increase American aid reflected the ‘dramatic changes in Poland over the past two months’, said Mr Fitzwater.
Previously, Mr Bush had asked Congress for $120m in economic and environmental aid for Poland and $100m in food assistance.
He also asked for $25m for Hungary.
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee has approved a $1.2bn aid package for Poland and Hungary to be spread over three years.
The Democrats have been calling Mr Bush's aid plan ‘grossly inadequate’ and have been determined to produce an alternative that would increase the aid to the eastern European countries.
Mr Fitzwater said the White House is willing to negotiate with Congress ‘on the amount and the nature of the package…the numbers are all negotiable.’
Soviet villagers ‘prepare to fight’
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
MOSCOW (Reuter)— Armed insurgents were reported yesterday to be setting up camps in the hilly terrain of Nagorny Karabakh as tensions between the Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan threatened to erupt into full-scale confrontation.
A report in the weekly Moscow News did not make clear if the insurgents were Armenians or Azerbaijanis.
It said villagers were forming detachments, many of them equipped with automatic rifles and home-made explosives.
Nagorny Karabakh, which has a predominantly Armenian population, became part of Azerbaijan in 1923 after the consolidation of Soviet power in the Transcaucasus region.
It is now the subject of a bitter dispute between the neighbouring republics.
The camps were spotted by pilots flying supplies to Nagorny Karabakh, which has been sealed off from the rest of Azerbaijan for several months.
‘There is a firm basis to say they are training camps for insurgents,’ the report said, ‘and the number of dead among the civil population and the military grows every day.’
Last month Arkady Volsky, head of the Kremlin commission which has administered the province since January, told Moscow that Armenia and Azerbaijan were ‘on the brink of war’.
On Tuesday the Soviet parliament approved special measures allowing the military to take over rail links to get supplies through to Nagorny Karabakh and Armenia.
But the action was swiftly denounced by the radical Popular Front movement of Azerbaijan, which has supported the two-month blockade aimed at starving Armenia into capitulating on the issue.
‘There will certainly be a strike across the republic if the military takes over the railway,’ said the movement's spokesman, Nazim Ragimov.
Efforts to resolve the conflict, which has caused more than 100 deaths since February last year, have so far been fruitless.
An Armenian Foreign Ministry spokesman said yesterday there was no fresh food coming in from Azerbaijan.
Food was being sent in along the republic's only rail link with Georgia.
‘We are getting trainloads of rotten food -full of worms.
People are wearing gas masks to unload the wagons,’ he said.
Moscow News quoted an Interior Ministry colonel as saying it was impossible even for convoys with a military escort to cross into Nagorny Karabakh.
Out of the West: Fast Icelander set to speed up the Bush image
By PETER PRINGLE
WASHINGTON — Like the whiting in Alice in Wonderland who wanted the snail to go faster because of the porpoise on his tail, Americans are constantly worried about the pace of their lives.
Should they be speeding up because someone is behind them?
Or, should they be slowing down because sooner or later their hectic pace will do them in?
Many studies have been made in an effort to assess the correct national speed, and to warn those in the fast lane of their ultimate folly.
For example, this month's issue of Psychology Today contains the result of a study of the pace of life in 36 American cities.
Researchers stood on street corners, checked the clocks in banks and the speed at which tellers cashed cheques and shop assistants gave change.
They watched how fast people walk and talk.
Not suprisingly, people in the north-east of the country, where the work ethic and the climate push the pace of life ever upward, reside permanently in the fast lane.
North-easterners generally walk faster, give change faster, talk faster, and are more likely to wear watches so that they can make every second count.
How much people are worried about time means a lot, of course.
For example, in the fastest city of them all — which turned out to be Boston, not New York, which was third after Buffalo — the researchers noted that to get the exact time of day the telephone company requires you to dial N-E-R-V-O-U-S.
(Something going on here, clearly.)
In the laid-back city of Fresno, California, the time-clock number is P-O-P-C-O-R-N.
(Well, naturally.)
The study concluded that Los Angeles had the slowest pace of all, and the West was generally slower-paced than the rest of the country.
In Massachusetts, for example, pedestrians walked 60 feet in an average of 11.1 seconds, 3.6 seconds faster than they do in California.
And Columbus, Ohio, postal clerks spoke 40 per cent more syllables per second than their colleagues in Los Angeles.
Unfortunately, the researchers missed out Washington DC, where many Americans have been worried recently about the pace of the Bush presidency.
Many would love to know, for instance, whether there any clocks in the White House which show the time in Moscow, or Warsaw, or Budapest, because people wonder why Mr Bush and Company appear to be falling so far behind in their reaction to the pace of life in those cities.
In short, after promising to hit the ground running, people wonder why the President has become the leader of the Slow Is Beautiful Movement.
Mr Bush has been having trouble with his speed, no doubt about it.
After nine months in office he still is uncertain whether to go fast or slow on any issue from the Russians to oil slicks.
The result is a presidency with an image of blandness much different from the glitzy campaign Mr Bush waged to win the White House from Michael Dukakis who, it is worth remarking, is governor of the speedy state of Massachusetts.
But it could be that President Bush is aware of this, and it could be that things are about to change because of the return to Washington this week of one Sig Rogich.
This untypically flashy Icelander, who has lived most of his life in Las Vegas, and worked on Mr Bush's election campaign, has recently been in charge of polishing the images of Frank Sinatra and Donald Trump, the New York city real estate person.
No one ever accused Old Blue Eyes or Mr Trump of being behind the times.
Supposedly, Mr Rogich arrived in the White House yesterday to re-style the President's image; to bring back razzmatazz to what he calls ‘the beautiful people’ in the Bush cabinet.
‘Please don't portray me as some flashy Vegas gambler who's plopping into the White House in Italian suits and expensive watches,’ Mr Rogich told a reporter from The New York Times from his car phone.
(Apparently his life is so fast-paced that he was unable to talk from his office).
Well, flashy is exactly the word that fits the image Mr Rogich portrays.
He was the one who helped produce the Bush campaign's dirtiest — and most effective — commercials during the 1988 campaign, including the ones hitting Mr Dukakis on his liberal prison furloughs and filthy Boston harbour.
Mr Rogich is a ‘handler’ par excellence.
His arrival suggests that Mr Bush will appear more often on television, spend less time at his Maine seaside retreat, and less time playing with his dogs.
The Rogich plan is to sharpen up the focus, as well as the pace.
Does Mr Bush foresee some sort of crisis during which his image will suffer unless boosted?
Economic troubles, perhaps?
Or is he really planning to speed up his reaction to Gorbachev and Eastern Europe?
Or is he looking to 1992 and re-election?
Mr Rogich says, unhelpfully: ‘I look at everything from the historical point of view because I think that gives greater impact to the message.’
Tell that one to the White Rabbit.
US doubted coup attempt in Panama would succeed
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
THE US Secretary of State, James Baker, hinted yesterday that the US withheld military support for Tuesday's failed coup in Panama because it believed it had little chance of success.
Mr Baker said that Washington was prepared to use military force to oust General Manuel Noriega, but on America's own terms and timetable.
‘You do so based on your own plans, at a time of maximum opportunity and advantage.
You don't do so on the basis of someone else's plans,’ Mr Baker told the US Senate finance committee.
But Panamanain exiles in the US complained that a small show of force by the US might have been enough to tip the balance in the rebels' favour.
Juan Sosa, former Panamanian ambassador in Washington, said that, if the US had been ‘more active’, several battalions of wavering Panamanian troops would have joined in on the rebel side.
Administration officials said that an emergency meeting of the National Security Council (NSC) considered deploying US troops to back the rebels on Tuesday, but decided against it.
In the final weeks of the Reagan administration, State Department plans for a ‘surgical strike’ against General Noriega were scotched by the Pentagon, which estimated that any use of US troops would cause several hundred military and civilian deaths.
The Defence Department is believed to have strenuously opposed use of US forces, once again, during Tuesday's meeting.
It remains unclear to what extent the rebels thought they were operating with America's blessing.
The Washington Times reported yesterday that senior US military officers in Panama gave the rebel officers ‘tacit’ assurances of American assistance.
This was firmly denied by the Bush administration.
US officials admit that they knew about the coup plans as early as last Saturday, but say they were given little time to judge its chances of success or to plan any US involvement.
Mr Baker's comments yesterday implied that the US government would be prepared to use its troops to back a Panamanian coup, but not this coup.
This is, in itself, a shift in the US position.
Washington had previously stated that the 12,000 American troops in Panama would be used only to defend the Canal and themselves.
The Baker explanation was dismissed by some members of Congress as a lame attempt to deflect complaints, from both right and left, that the administration bungled a chance to remove General Noriega.
The arch-conservative, Senator Jesse Helms (North Carolina), complained that the administration should have mobilised the US troops, based less than a mile from the Panamanian Defence Force headquarters, to help the rebels.
‘Once again, we snatched defeat from the jaws of victory,’ Senator Helms said.
The view on the left was that the Bush administration was more involved in the coup than it has admitted, but decided against a visible or military role for fear of the political consequences of failure and a heavy loss of American lives.
‘Anyone who doesn't believe the White House was was deeply involved…doesn't understand the magnitude of the President's obsession with Noriega or the way Washington works in these areas,’ said Larry Birns, director of the respected liberal think-tank, the Council on Hemispheric Affairs.
He said the operation had the characteristics of the ‘plausible deniability’ approach, used by Washington in the Iran-Contra affair.
The rebel officers had probably been given US blessing on the understanding that it would not bail them out if things went wrong.
After two failed coups in 18 months, the US view is that the general is more entrenched in power than ever.
Royal Navy arrives in Colombia to join drugs war
From SIMON FISHER in Cartagena, Colombia
THE ROYAL NAVY frigate HMS Alacrity arrived in the Colombian port of Cartagena yesterday, in the first stage of a British aid effort to combat drugs trafficking in Colombia.
Britain will carry out a joint naval operation with Colombia in the Caribbean aimed at intercepting cocaine shipments.
The aid package is designed to support a crackdown against drugs by the Colombian government which was launched after the assassination of a leading presidential candidate weeks ago.
But Alacrity's high-profile visit comes as international response to the Colombian offensive is being criticised inside Colombia.
Alacrity was in Cartagena, Colombia's main naval base, on a preliminary visit to discuss strategies for future co-ordinated action against drugs shipments in the Caribbean.
Her captain, Commander Colin Fearbrache, described the talks as positive, although he would not say when the operations would begin or how often they would take place.
This visit is as much a political as a practical gesture.
Alacrity was scheduled to call in Cartagena before Virgilio Barco, Colombia's president, announced the crackdown.
After taking on water and supplies, she returned to regular duties within 24 hours.
Alacrity is the Navy's West Indian guard ship, on routine patrol duties in the Caribbean.
The international community, which has expressed overwhelming support for President Barco's offensive, is under pressure to be seen to be doing something to help, and quickly.
But so far, efforts have been focused on purely military solutions.
The United States sent $65m (£40m) of military aid to Colombia, but this has been called inappropriate and is alleged to be more suitable for fighting Colombia's left-wing guerrillas than the cocaine mafia.
Evidence of infiltration of the army by the drugs cartels has added to reservations about how effective the American aid can be.
Britain has offered several million pounds of aid, which includes communications equipment, bullet-proof vests, naval patrol craft, police training and the joint naval patrol.
Embassy officials insist British aid will provide practical means of combating the drugs trade.
Colombians, however, are sceptical.
There is a strong feeling in the country that Colombia is footing the bill for what is really an international problem, and is paying a high price, in violence, in murders and the breakdown of state institutions.
Critics say that the real battle against drugs can only be won by international co-ordination and the development of a long-term growth strategy.
This would guarantee higher international prices for Latin America's produce and would free resources to fund social programmes, including a vital land reform.
They say help is needed to combat the poverty that has left peasants growing traditional crops in many parts of Latin America unable to survive.
The drugs barons often win the support of the poor because they provide the means for entire communities to make a living.
While most people strongly condemn the drugs traffickers, critics point to the recent drive by international markets to drive down the price of coffee, Colombia's main export — and to the continuing drain of resources into debt payments to Western banks — as evidence that the international community is not willing to make the kind of sacrifices needed to confront the social and economic roots of Latin America's drug problem.
Meanwhile, on the deck of HMS Alacrity, the crew are determined to do whatever they can to fight the drugs traffickers.
‘I despise them,’ says Stuart Ellroyd, a seaman from Liverpool.
‘They are making fortunes out of taking children's lives.
All they are doing is making a lot more money out of a lot more misery.’
Court upholds traffickers' extraditions to US
By SIMON FISHER
CARTAGENA — The Colombian Supreme Court has upheld the extradition of drug traffickers, decreed by President Virgilio Barco as part of his offensive against the cocaine cartels, writes Simon Fisher.
The decree prompted the cartels to declare ‘total war’ on the Colombian government and led to a wave of bombings throughout the country.
At least 10 people were killed and 150 injured in bomb attacks last month.
The US administration has requested the extradition of 80 traffickers, but the drug barons have said they would prefer to die in Colombia than spend the rest of their lives in US jails.
The Supreme Court has, in effect, given President Barco the go-ahead to wage all-out war in reply.
Its decision, which was reached a week earlier than expected, came despite threats to kill 10 judges for every trafficker extradited.
The court also upheld a series of decrees allowing the seizure and confiscation of suspected traffickers' personal property.
Since 1981 at least 50 judges and about 170 judicial employees have been killed, mainly by cartel hit squads.
Another 500 judges and 5,000 court employees have resigned out of fear or in protest against inadequate protection.
Judges are receiving firearms training from police but have threatened to go on strike as promised protection has not materialised.
Since the government's offensive was launched on 19 August, more than 12,000 people have been detained and at least 1,000 luxury homes and farms seized.
US says Russians might put rouble on gold standard
By JOHN LICHFIELD
THE US Secretary of State, James Baker, yesterday raised the possibility that the Soviet Union might put the rouble on the gold standard as part of its programme of perestroika, writes John Lichfield.
US officials insist that Washington is not pushing the idea, but confirmed that it will be a topic of conversation when the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, visits Moscow this weekend.
Speaking to the Senate Finance Committee yesterday, Mr Baker said that a rouble convertible with other currencies was ‘necessary’ to generate market competition within the Soviet Union and to integrate the country's economy with that of the rest of the world.
He said that as the world's biggest gold producer, the Soviet Union might consider using its gold stocks to guarantee the value of the rouble and of Soviet government bonds.
Future gold production might be used as a regulator for the Soviet money supply.
US officials said this did amount to a description of a rouble gold standard, but emphasised that Mr Baker was not prescribing or even recommending policy to Moscow.
They said Mr Baker was simply listing one possibility among a number of other courses open to Mikhail Gorbachev in his restructuring programme.
Mr Baker's comments came, however, a few days before Mr Greenspan starts a four-day visit to Moscow.
This will be the first time that the chief of the US central bank, effectively head-keeper of the capitalist conscience, has visited the Soviet Union.
According to US officials, the technical problems involved in making the rouble a convertible currency will be among the issues discussed by Mr Greenspan during his trip.
Wayne Angel, one of the five governors of the Federal Reserve, visited Moscow last month and strongly endorsed the concept of a convertible rouble, backed by gold.
Federal Reserve officials declined to discuss Mr Greenspan's agenda yesterday.
But other US officials said they believed the subject of the convertible rouble, and the gold standard, would arise in Moscow.
One senior official said: ‘It's not uppermost in Soviet thinking at the moment.
On the other hand, things can change rapidly there.
The Soviets said to Greenspan, ‘Look, you're an expert in currency matters, and wouldn't it be interesting for us to chat about these things?’
' In his comments on the Soviet economy to the Senate Finance Committee yesterday, Mr Baker rejected the idea of early Soviet membership of international economic institutions such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Mr Baker said it would be ‘exceedingly difficult’ for Mr Gorbachev to revitalise the Soviet economy but it was premature to predict failure.
In any event, the introduction of market pricers, and competition, was the key to success, he said.
And he added: ‘There is a reasonable case that price reform cannot proceed until the Soviets have stabilized the value of the rouble…a convertible rouble…is necessary for effective competitive interaction by the Soviet economy with the rest of the international economy.’
Call for new inquiry into plane disaster: Marc Champion in Washington explains why some investigators suspect the US and Canadian governments hushed up the reasons for a 1985 plane crash
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
ALMOST four years after the 1985 crash of an airliner in Gander, Newfoundland, in which 248 US servicemen were killed, a group of congressmen are pressing for a new inquiry into the disaster.
Inconsistencies in the initial report on the crash have led some investigators to suspect that the US and Canadian governments took part in a cover-up.
The report concluded that the Arrow Airlines DC-8 crashed soon after take-off from Gander because of an accumulation of ice on the wings.
But that theory has since been discredited, and many critics, prompted by similarities between the Gander crash and the explosion of Pan Am flight 103 over Scotland last December, believe that the aircraft was blown apart by a terrorist bomb.
The White House, critics argue, failed to follow up the bomb theory because of the risk that it would have posed to negotiations with Iran for the release of US hostages in Lebanon.
The crash, on 12 December 1985, occurred before the Iran-Contra connection became public, and in the midst of sensitive negotiations between the White House, the Iranian government and Islamic Jihad, which claimed responsibility.
A judicial review by the Canadians dismissed the ice theory and, prompted by angry relatives of the dead soldiers, Representative Robert Tallon of South Carolina and 10 other congressmen have requested an investigation into the crash.
The House Armed Services Committee has turned down his request, but Mr Tallon yesterday sent a letter to all members asking them to petition President Bush.
The chartered jet was carrying 248 US servicemen home for Christmas to Fort Campbell, Kentucky, from their stations in the Sinai desert, where they formed part of the Multinational Force and Observers designed to monitor implementation of the Camp David accords between Egypt and Israel.
Four of the nine officials on the Canadian Airline Safety Board (CASB) panel which investigated the incident dissented from the report when it was issued in December last year.
They said that the computer models used to support the ice theory were ‘fabricated’.
The evidence, including autopsies and eye-witness statements, pointed to a fire on board the DC-8 before it crashed, they said.
The fire could have been caused either by sabotage or the accidental detonation of a bomb being carried home by one of the soldiers as a souvenir.
‘There were so many similarities between the Pan Am crash and this one that now I lean towards sabotage,’ said Les Filotas, one of the four Canadian dissenters.
‘In both instances witnesses saw the glow of fires.
Both departed from West Germany.
Both carried US military personnel just before Christmas, and in both cases there was a terrorist claim of responsibility.’
Marc Laframboise, an investigator for the Canadian Liberal Party, emphasised that Islamic Jihad in Beirut claimed responsibility between four and eight hours after the incident.
Even though it had detailed knowledge of the flight's route so soon after the event, the US government dismissed its claim out of hand hours later, and never explained why.
There were other strange omissions.
‘There was no investigation of a possible explosion…no explosive experts to look for traces of Semtex,’ said Mr Laframboise.
The Canadian dissenters also said that information was withheld from them during the investigation.
One witness at the crash site said the US military commander there wanted to bulldoze the area immediately.
And the FBI said it had participated only to help fingerprint the victims; yet there is an FBI report on the incident with over 200 pages blacked out for national security reasons.
Arrow Air itself appears to have been involved in the Iran-Contra air supply operation.
Don Ewing, director of operations for Arrow, has acknowledged that the company carried arms from Portugal to the Nicaraguan rebels on at least two occasions in 1984.
And one of Arrow's pilots, Jacobo Bolivar, was one of the three principals of Sur International, the company which flew weapons from the US to Iran for Lieutenant-Colonel Oliver North in 1985.
‘We need some people to be made to testify under oath so we can find out what went wrong with that investigation,’ said Mr Laframboise, stressing that, at this point, it does not matter that most of the physical evidence has been destroyed.
Neither Mr Tallon nor the families of the crash victims claim to know what occurred.
‘But we know it wasn't ice,’ said Zona Phillips, who founded ‘Families for Truth about Gander’.
Evidence of 66AD Jew's revolt found in desert caverns
By DAVID KEYS
(First Edition) DRAMATIC evidence of the First Century AD Jewish revolt against Rome, which led up to the famous siege and mass suicide of Masada, has been unearthed by Israeli archaeologists in the desert to the east of Jerusalem.
A detailed exploration of the area has succeeded in locating the headquarters of the rebel leader who led the revolt of 66-70AD and who fought alongside the Masada rebels for several years.
Archaeologists have discovered the Jewish headquarters located in a complex of hitherto unexplored caves in the Wadi Phara, six miles north-east of Jerusalem.
The complex, of some 20 caves, was the main base for rebels led by Shimon Bar-Giora, the chief commander of the Jewish revolt, who was captured in 70AD, taken in chains to Rome and executed outside the Capitol.
The site suggests that considerable preparation was made for the uprising.
The caves are man-made, hewn out of the rock by hand.
All of them, which are located 50ft up the side of a cliff, were equipped with plaster water-storage cisterns.
The complex included one particularly large cave -33ft by 16ft — which may have served as Bar-Giora's personal accommodation.
The existence in the area of a cave complex which functioned as a rebel base is referred to by the First Century AD Jewish historian, Flavius Josephus.
Bar-Giora is thought to have used his desert headquarters not only in his struggle against the Romans but also while he was in conflict with rival Jewish rebel movements, including the Zealots.
Israeli archaeologists have also discovered two caves used by other Jewish anti-Roman activists, including a priest.
Inside the man-made cavern, located 100ft up the side of a cliff, an archaeological survey team found a hastily-written message recording that ‘Joezer (the priest) has just been killed (or wounded).
The (Roman) guards have entered (our hiding place).’
The note was written in charcoal on the side of a plaster water-cistern, along with two drawings — also in charcoal -of the Jewish menora, the traditional seven-branched candlestick.
Also drawn in charcoal were two other features of religious importance: a group of five-pointed stars and a mystical two-line formula, each consisting of all 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet — the ultimate anagram which, when rearranged, could quite literally be used to express all human knowledge and all experience.
The cliff hideout also possessed its own ritual bath, a mikveh, which would normally have been used by the priest for religious purification.
Besides the First Century cave, the archaeologists have discovered a group of other man-made caverns believed to have been used by the Second Century anti-Roman Jewish rebel, Bar-Kokhba.
The desert valley in which the complex is located, known as the Wadi Qelt, is referred to in ancient rabbinical sources as having been ‘flooded by the blood’ of the rebels.
The newly-discovered sites are of particularly great importance for Jewish history because the Roman repression which followed the revolts of Bar-Giora and Bar-Kokhba mark the beginning of the Jewish diaspora.
The rebel hideouts were discovered during a survey of Judean desert caves headed by the Haifa University archaeologist, Joseph Patrich, in association with the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
So far more than 150 caves have been explored and surveyed.