

Court Circular
By DAVID KEYS
BALMORAL CASTLE 4 October: The Queen was represented by Admiral of the Fleet the Lord Lewin at the Funeral of Field Marshal Sir Richard Hull which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this morning.
The Duke of Edinburgh was represented by Admiral Sir David Hallifax.
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 4 October: The Duchess of York today opened the new terminal at Kent International Airport and later, as Patron of Museums Year 1989, visited the Minster Agricultural and Rural Life Museum, Thanet, Kent.
Her Royal Highness was received by Brigadier Maurice Atherton (Deputy Lieutenant of Kent).
Miss Lucy Manners was in attendance.
4 October: The Princess Royal, President of the International Equestrian Federation, this morning gave a Press Conference at Wembley Conference Centre.
Her Royal Highness, President of the Save the Children Fund, subsequently visited the Lifechance Project, Cricket Road, Cowley and the Barton Community Centre and was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Oxfordshire (Sir Ashley Ponsonby Bt).
The Princess Royal this afternoon attended the Annual General Meeting and Conference of the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux at the University of York and was received on arrival by Major-General H. Woods (Vice-Lord-Lieutenant of Yorkshire).
Her Royal Highness, Patron, Universiade ‘91 World Student Games, afterwards visited Sheffield to view facilities relating to preparations for the World Student Games and was received on arrival by her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for South Yorkshire (Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh Neill).
The Princess Royal travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
Mrs Malcolm Wallace was in attendance.
4 October: The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, President of the Girl Guides Association, attended a Meeting of the Executive Committee of the Council at the New Cavendish Club, Cumberland Place, this afternoon.
The Lady Juliet Townsend was in attendance.
Her Royal Highness, Grand President of St John Ambulance Association and Brigade, was present this evening at a Gala Evening at Garrard, Regent Street, in aid of the Order of St John.
The Hon Mrs Wills was in attendance.
The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon was represented by Major The Lord Napier and Ettrick at the Funeral of Field Marshal Sir Richard Hull KG, which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this morning.
4 October: The Duke of Gloucester this evening attended a Gala Concert and Dinner hosted by The National Trust at Osterley Park House, Isleworth.
Major Nicholas Barne was in attendance.
YORK HOUSE 4 October: The Duchess of Kent, as President, this morning presided at the launch of the Appeal for the Royal Northern College of Music, Manchester, and this afternoon, opened Skelton House at Manchester Science Park, and attended the South Manchester Health Authority's Annual Nurse Prize Giving at the Armitage Centre, Fallowfield, Manchester.
Her Royal Highness, who travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight, was attended by Mrs Peter Wilmot-Sitwell.
The Duke and Duchess of Kent were represented by Lieutenant-Commander Sir Richard Buckley at the Funeral of Field Marshal Sir Richard Hull KG which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, today.
Miss Mona Mitchell was in attendance.
Her Royal Highness, Colonel-in-Chief, 17th/21st Lancers, was represented by Colonel MC Watson, President of the Regimental Association, at the Funeral of Field Marshal Sir Richard Hull which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this morning.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Prince of Wales opens the Lintrathen Water Treatment Works, Kirriemuir, Angus; as President, Scottish Business in the Community, visits the Dundee Enterprise Trust and the Whitfield Estate, Dundee; Patron, The Renaissance Theatre Company, attends the Premiere of Henry V at the Odeon Cinema, Leicester Square, London WC2.
The Princess of Wales visits London Lighthouse, 111-117 Lancaster Road, London W11.
The Princess Royal, President, Riding for the Disabled Association, visits the Abingdon Group, Longworth, Abingdon; attends the Annual General Meeting of the National Association of Victim Support Schemes at Central Hall, Westminster, London SW1; and as President, Royal Yachting Association, attends a Racing Rules Committee Meeting at the Royal Thames Yacht Club, 60 Knightsbridge, London SW1.
Princess Margaret, Patron of the Friends of St John's Smith Square, attends a concert to be given by Dame Joan Sutherland and Mr Richard Bonynge, at St John's.
The Duchess of Kent, as Patron of the Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Festival, attends their French Festival Concert, Norwich, Norfolk.
Prince and Princess Michael of Kent attend a film premiere of New York Stories in aid of the Sharon Allen Leukaemia Trust and Variety Club of Great Britain at the Odeon, Haymarket, London W1.
Woodland Trust buys Moncreiffe Hill Wood in Pertshire
By JOANNA GIBBON
Moncreiffe Hill Wood in Perthshire, which the Woodland Trust has bought from the Forestry Commission.
The 333-acre wood, the largest the trust has bought in Scotland, opened this week, writes Joanna Gibbon.
It stretches up a steep hill and overlooks the rivers Tay and Earn.
The trust plans to replace some of Moncreiffe Hill's conifers with broadleaf trees, to provide a balance between the two that will encourage wildlife.
The Woodland Trust was founded in 1972 and is the only charity in Britain which aims to safeguard native trees such as oak, lime, beech and ash.
Today's agricultural and forestry methods have caused a decline in broadleaf woodlands and coppices, affecting the animals and birds that inhabit them and the general landscape.
By buying woods and planting out broadleaf trees to create new woods, the Trust now owns 11,500 acres of woodland across 56 counties in Britain.
In addition it has encouraged other landowners to create 460 acres of new woods.
Almost all the trust's properties are open to the public.
Obituary: Dorothea Ramsey
By FRANCES M. BIRKETT
DOROTHEA RAMSEY was a pioneer in work for old people and one of the leading figures in establishing residential homes for the elderly during the Second World War.
From 1929 to 1939 Ramsey — trained as a classicist at Cambridge and fired with an enthusiasm for ancient Greece — had taught Greek and Latin in London.
As a voluntary worker in 1941 for the Bristol Council of Social Service in the War Emergency Bureau, she helped form the Old People's Welfare Committee of which she then became Secretary.
This committee set about establishing a small residential home for old people, the second of its kind in the country, and, by July 1942, thanks largely to her drive, West Town House in Bristol was opened.
Back in London in 1943, Dorothea Ramsey served on the Advisory Case Sub-Committee of the National Council of Social Service.
Pioneered by Miss Alice Green in 1941, this committee placed old people who needed care and attention, but not evacuation, in homes and hostels.
By 1943 the group of three full-time and three part-time workers were dealing with 2,000 requests a year from hospital almoners, social workers and individuals, placing 523 and advising 986, besides visiting homes to see if they were suitable.
Requests poured in, principally from London but also from other parts of the country.
The work was heart-breaking because of the shortage of homes and it showed that many old people were living in distress.
Not only was there physical weakness but also intense loneliness and sometimes mental anguish due to lack of occupation in the ‘workhouse’ and the chronic sick wards.
In 1940 the National Council of Social Service called together the chief national voluntary societies that were concerned with old people and invited as observers the government departments involved by statute in their care, of which the most prominent were the Ministry of Health and the Assistance Board.
The National Old People's Welfare Committee, later called Age Concern, sought to promote the welfare of old people throughout the United Kingdom and relieve the conditions which were revealed by the war.
In 1945 Ramsey became its Secretary and because of her past experiences was able to throw herself wholeheartedly into the work.
She proved to be a remarkably good co-ordinator in uniting the different societies in their drive to improve conditions and by touring the country, set up local Old People's Welfare groups to promote homes, clubs, visiting and other services.
She initiated training for matrons of residential homes, pressed for the chiropody service which is now available and urged that pensioners should have their own pocket money when they were in residential care.
During her time a remarkable change came over the attitude of authorities towards the care of the elderly.
This was largely due to the fact that Ramsey took every opportunity to ask that old people should retain their dignity and as much independence as possible.
‘How would you like to have to ask for a penny to buy a stamp if you wanted to write a letter?’ she would ask.
‘Measure the service you provide against what you would like in similar circumstances.’
By 1952 the contacts Ramsey had made in the US led to her being awarded a Smith-Mundt scholarship and she toured the country speaking as an authority on what was then pioneering work being done in the UK.
While there she spoke at the International Gerontological Congress.
A pupil of Gustav Holst at St Paul's Girls School, Ramsey was devoted to music and as a flautist she played in the Cumberland Symphony Orchestra when she went to live in Cumbria.
She became chairman of the orchestra and later became a member and chairman of the Keswick Music Society.
But her chief work for music in Cumbria was as Secretary for 20 years of the Cumbria Rural Choirs.
Largely due to her courage and drive she enabled them to grow in stature so that the choirs were able to perform the major choral works drawing an audience of over 1,000 at a performance of the Dream of Gerontius and be broadcast with the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra on three occasions.
Ill-health dogged Dorothea.
Arthritis crippled her hands so she had to give up, most reluctantly, the flute and then a series of eye operations ended in virtual blindness.
She had to face the handicaps of severe diabetes but, true to Greek ideals, she endured them with stoicism; only on four occasions in 30 years did she break down under these cruel burdens.
Somewhat forbidding socially because of shyness, Dorothea had an absolute integrity which made her stand up for what she believed should be done.
Obituary: Helen Mason
By DEIRDRE CHAPMAN
IN THE LATE Fifties when news-gathering was still a soft-hat and trenchcoat job, Helen Mason became a reporter with the Daily Record.
Real life was then a male preserve but Helen had no interest in the usual option of the women's pages.
She became one of those women reporters whose listening ear and less judgemental approach to people in trouble helped to make the distillation of news the more respected practice it is today.
She was also fun.
For a memorable period she kept a pet monkey which travelled on her shoulder until its erratic behaviour had it banned from the newsroom.
In 1960 she joined the Sunday Express in London, where her news experience and personality quickly singled her out and in 1962 she was appointed the paper's chief American correspondent, choosing to cross the Atlantic by Cunarder.
This characteristic delight in style was balanced by a Scots impatience with the ritual of the career spiral.
Summoned to Lord Beaverbrook's presence on her departure for the US she listened to him develop a one-sided Scottish conversation which included the listing of many ancestors and their places of burial.
‘And where will you be buried? 'said Helen.
Her American years encompassed the Kennedy period, the Cuban missile crisis and the dawn of the beautiful people.
Back in London in 1966 she married Hugo Young, the political columnist, biographer and broadcaster, in a ceremony conducted by Cardinal Hume, then Abbot of Ampleforth.
The bride wore a mini-dress.
The birth of the first of their four children signalled a complete change in her life as, lacking convincing models for the successful media personality and mother, she created her own.
She had no doubt that her children were too important to be brought up by anyone else and, as others went on to become household names, she became a full-time mother, writing occasional children's books as well as a storybook-guide to the handling of epilepsy based on experiences with her own son.
These experiences led her to become a member of the Council and Executive Committee of the British Epilepsy Association.
Later she also campaigned for a better understanding of anorexia.
With her children grown up, Helen returned to journalism, writing with humour but more particularly with balance and concern for the under-canvassed areas of life.
At the time of her death she was working on a novel.
In a profession often noted for self-promotion and expediency she had become a trusted friend, hostess and shoulder to lean on for many.
Over the months of her battle with lung cancer her unfailing humour and concern that others should be able to handle her illness without awkwardness were an example to all who knew her.
Her friends in Scotland will miss her most at Hogmanay when her feelings of nationhood tended to erupt satirically.
Shortly after midnight we would answer the phone to hear Helen in her Hampstead drawing room leading a massed choir of bemused MPs, writers and journalists whom she had coached in the proper rendering of ‘A guid new year tae een an’ a'.'
Holborn Law Society
Gazette Page 34
Appointments: Judicial Studies Board
By DEIRDRE CHAPMAN
The following appointments have been made to the Judicial Studies Board: Mr Justice Johnson, in succession to Lord Justice Butler-Sloss,(and will also serve as co-Chairman of the Civil and Family Committee); Judge Oddie, in succession to Judge White,(and will continue to serve as a member of the Civil and Family Committee); Mr Registrar Angel, a Family Division Registrar,(who will also continue to serve on the Civil and Family Committee).
Anniversaries
By DEIRDRE CHAPMAN
On this day: the Gregorian calendar was adopted in Italy and Spain and today became 15 October 1582; Spain declared war on Britain, 1796; Italian troops occupied Tripoli, 1911; the first air battle took place between German and French aircraft, 1914; the Allies landed at Salonika, 1915; Sir Arthur Lee presented the estate of Chequers as an official country residence for the Prime Minister, 1917; the Locarno Conference met and the great powers guaranteed frontiers and agreed to put disputes to arbitration, 1925; unemployed shipyard workers started to march from Jarrow to London, 1936; the Cominform (Communist Information Bureau) was set up to aid European Communist parties, 1947; tea rationing ended in Britain, 1952.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 34
Bridge
By ALAN HIRON
IT IS CURIOUS how an intervening bid, even if it does not have any great pre-emptive value, can throw a spanner in the opponents' works.
For example, suppose that a partnership is holding three low cards in the same suit.
Given a clear run, with plenty of other values, they would almost certainly have played in 3NT, but if an adversary has overcalled in that suit they will be apprehensive of the no-trump game in case there are five immediate losers.
On this hand, consider the problems that West's overcall seemed to set North-South: Game all, dealer West North 8 4 3 A A K 9 3 K Q 8 7 3 West A K J 10 6 5 2 10 4 J 10 9 4 East 7 2 10 8 7 J 7 6 5 2 A 6 2 South Q 9 6 5 K Q J 9 4 3 Q 8 5 West dealt and passed, North opened One Club and South responded One Heart.
Now West overcalled with One Spade.
It looked a pointless exercise, facing a passed partner, but West had his reasons.
North reversed with Two Diamonds and now it was up to his partner to make a descriptive bid.
South's hand did not look right for a rebid in no-trumps so, rather than explore with an ambiguous bid in the opponent's suit, he decided to stress the quality of his own suit with Three Hearts.
Now North had the problem -would Three Spades be taken as a probe for no-trumps (denying a guard in the suit) or some sort of control-showing bid agreeing hearts?
Overlooking the point that if it were the latter he could clarify the matter on the next round, he settled for a direct raise to Four Hearts.
This was not at all unreasonable but, looking at the full deal, you can see that Three No-Trumps would have been easy.
Four Hearts, on the other hand, was not a success although the play did not go quite as you might think.
West started with top spades and followed by giving his partner a spade ruff.
The ace of clubs would have defeated the contract out of hand but East mysteriously returned a diamond.
Understandably thinking that he had achieved an odd escape, declarer gleefully played off three rounds of diamonds to discard his losing club, but now it was West who took the setting trick when he was able to ruff.
You can see my point — that even the simplest of overcalls can steer opponents into strange misjudgements.
In case you think that I am advocating a policy of lunatic aggression, no, I am not.
Sometimes it will prove expensive.
At least here West's spades were good, if few in number.