

BMA accuses Clarke of reneging on drug pledge
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
RELATIONS between the British Medical Association and Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Health, reached a fresh low last night, as doctors' leaders accused him of appearing to renege on promises that patients' drugs would not be cash-limited under the Government's National Health Service plans.
Mr Clarke retorted that the BMA was being ‘absurd’ in trying to reopen the issue.
The new row follows talks last week at which Mr Clarke said that the ‘firm’ drug budgets to be given to regional health authorities and family practitioner committees would not operate, as the BMA feared, as cash limits.
A joint statement to that effect was issued afterwards.
But the next day Mr Clarke insisted that nothing had in fact changed from the NHS White Paper because it had not talked of cash limits, only of firm budgets.
What had changed, he said, was that the association had finally accepted his assurance that patients would get all the drugs they needed under the new system.
Yesterday Dr John Marks, the chairman of the association's council, said the crucial phrase lay in a working paper accompanying the White Paper which said there would be legislation ‘to require’ authorities to keep to their drug budgets.
The BMA's understanding when it left last Wednesday's talks, he said, was that that no longer applied.
Mr Clarke, however, had since said nothing had changed.
‘If there is to be legislation for health authorities to keep to drug budgets, then cash limits must apply,’ Dr Marks said.
Dr Ian Field, the association's secretary, said it was prepared to accept there had been a misunderstanding.
But Mr Clarke's statements since the meeting ‘give the impression that he reneged on his promise to us.
We just don't know whether his assurances stand or not.
He gives us the assurance one day and the very next day seems to retract or contradict it.’
If the legislation did contain a requirement for authorities to keep to drug budgets, ‘we shall be shouting ‘foul’ loud and clear,’Dr Field said.
Mr Clarke said last night: ‘What I said after the meeting was exactly what I said at the meeting and exactly the same as I have been saying since the White Paper was published.
‘I told the BMA at our meeting that I was not changing my ground, and after my explanation of the position they accepted my assurance.’
No objection had been raised at the time, he said, and ‘it is absurd that they should start to quibble a week later and try to reopen the issue’.
Sotheby's lent Bond 15m pounds to buy ‘Irises’: Australian entrepreneur hopes to pay off debt to auctioneers by selling important Manet painting
By GERALDINE NORMAN, Art Market Correspondent
THE WORLD'S highest auction price for a work of art, the £30.2m paid for Van Gogh's Irises, was achieved after the auctioneers, Sotheby's, had advanced half the money to Alan Bond, the Australian entrepreneur, it was revealed yesterday.
Michael Cross, speaking on behalf of Mr Bond, who bought the picture at Sotheby's in 1987, confirmed to The Independent that ‘Sotheby's approached us and offered us a loan facility against the picture.’
The loan covered 50 per cent of the purchase price, he said, and the amount outstanding was now ‘significantly less than 50 per cent’.
Mr Cross is managing director of Dallhold Investments, Mr Bond's private holding company through which he owns shares in Bond Corporation, Bond International Gold and other companies, as well as an extensive art collection.
‘There is not a default.
We have met the terms of the loan,’ Mr Cross said, answering widespread speculation that Mr Bond, whose commercial empire is troubled, had been forced to hand over the painting to Sotheby's for resale.
Mr Cross also denied that Mr Bond was trying to sell the painting himself.
The sale of Irises was the first important test of the art market's resilience to Black Monday, the stock market crash of 19 October 1987.
The record price caused a revolution in market sentiment.
Many sales had been left with high unsold percentages over the previous two weeks, though some had been successful.
The sale of Irises sparked a boom which has still not run out of steam.
Sotheby's would not comment on their approach to Mr Bond yesterday.
They would not confirm the loan — on the ground that they never comment on arrangements with clients.
‘All loans that we have outstanding would appear in the balance sheet under the loan portfolio,’ a spokeswoman said, but she would not confirm that this item currently includes the Bond loan.
She denied that the company's approach to Mr Bond had artificially inflated the price.
‘The decline of 19 October had no noticeable affect on the art market,’ she said.
‘It was followed by a number of record-breaking sales such as jewellery, American paintings and silver.
The Impressionist sale, which contained the Irises, was very successful all through.
There were several bidders around the $40m level.’
The identity of the under-bidder has never been revealed.
Sotheby's stated categorically yesterday that the under-bidder had no association with the company.
John Payson, who sent the picture for sale at Sotheby's, said yesterday that the bidding had gone well past his minimum.
‘Our reserve was way below the sale price.
I started breathing hard some $15m before that.’
He said he had been paid for the picture, but admitted that ‘in order to entice bidders’ he had agreed with Sotheby's that payment would be spread over three instalments.
Mr Bond is hoping to pay off his outstanding debt to Sotheby's through the sale of an important painting by Manet, La Promenade, a study of a woman in black, in New York in November.
Sotheby's have estimated its value at $10m-$14m, but this may be on the low side to ensure a sale.
‘This is one that Alan has had for a long period of time,’ Mr Cross said.
‘He wishes to capitalise on its appreciation and to use the funds for reducing or completely repaying the debt.’
An exhibition including the Irises and six other Impressionist works has travelled round the capital cities of Austrlia over the past two and a half months, ending in Perth.
The Irises was left on show for an extra fortnight but removed last week for security reasons, according to Mr Cross.
It is now in the private gallery on the fifty-first floor of the Bond Tower in Perth.
There has been a flurry of colourful rumours over the sale of Irises in the past ten days.
According to one, Sotheby's had foreclosed and were seeking to sell the painting themselves in Switzerland at a price around $35m, a substantial reduction on the auction price — a private sale being preferred to the public ignominy of auction.
According to a second story, Mr Bond had offloaded his entire collection on a Japanese businessman closely associated with the Hong Kong Shanghai Bank, Mr Bond's principal backers.
The Bond collection contains 350 paintings, most of them Australian of the Impressionist and Post-Impressionist vintage, Mr Cross said.
Exodus spreads to heart of East Berlin
From STEVE CRAWSHAW in East Berlin and PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
AS THOUSANDS of East German refugees began leaving Prague in special trains last night bound for the West, the dramatic struggle for emigration reached the streets of the East German capital itself.
Berlin police sealed off access to the US Embassy after 18 sought refuge there, and arrested at least 12 more who tried to enter.
The 18 later left the building after being assured they would be considered for emigration.
The escapers' sense of urgency was intensified by Tuesday's decision by East Germany to end visa-free travel to Czechoslovakia.
An unknown number of East Germans were believed to have entered the West German mission in East Berlin, which was officially closed to the public, and others to have gone to the West German Embassy in Sofia, Bulgaria.
In Dresden, East Germany, some 3,000 police seized the local railway station, kicking and clubbing crowds.
Other stretches of railway track were sealed off.
The actions were taken to prevent thousands more emigrants jumping on to a series of trains bound for the West, which last night began carrying out 11,000 East Germans who had found sanctuary in Prague.
The first of the 10 special East German Reichsbahn trains finally left Prague at 5.30 local time, almost 24 hours late, reflecting the difficulties encountered by the East Germans in clearing the tracks.
West German officials said they understood the trains would be sealed from the inside, and would take roundabout routes to evade jumpers-on.
Another 500 East Germans came out through Hungary in the 24 hours to yesterday morning, bringing the total who have left since Hungary opened its borders on 11 September to 26,500.
Dozens more East Germans have been going to the West German Embassy in Warsaw, where by yesterday evening more than 400 had collected.
Some of them had swum the border rivers, the Oder or the Neisse, despite the knowledge that more than a dozen had drowned.
The Polish government has promised not to send them home, but no deal has been reached for their resettlement.
Arrivals spoke of arrests by East German patrols on the border.
The West German newspaper Bild Zeitung cited East Berlin sources as saying 3,000 people had been imprisoned for attempted ‘flight from the Republic’.
East German opposition leaders said the atmosphere was becoming explosive, and appealed to the public to avoid violence during East Germany's fortieth anniversary celebrations at the end of the week, which President Mikhail Gorbachev is due to attend.
One non-Communist politician, Winfield Wolk, said he feared ‘things could happen like in China’, where Mr Gorbachev's arrival in May provoked a hunger-strike on Tiananmen Square.
On the verge of tears, Mr Wolk went on television to appeal to people to refrain from taking to the streets, and urged them instead to keep a lit candle in their window.
Neues Deutschland, the GDR party daily, displayed a declaration by Erich Honecker, the country's leader, that ‘the existence of the Socialist German Democratic Republic is good fortune for our people, and for the peoples of Europe’.
US ‘missed the chance’ to get rid of Noriega
From CHRIS MCGREAL in Panama City
GENERAL Manuel Antonio Noriega yesterday accused the US of planning and supporting Tuesday's failed coup to topple Panama's resilient military leader.
But Washington said that while it had prior knowledge of the plot hatched by three disaffected officers, it did not actively back it.
The US was yesterday sheltering on its bases at least two participants in the coup attempt who were among the few to escape death or capture.
A speculative report in the daily Critica said Major Moises Giroldi, the head of the elite Urraca battalion who spearheaded the coup attempt, had been killed in the dawn attack on the Defence Forces Headquarters.
The failure of the second coup attempt against General Noriega in less than two years has disappointed and enraged some Panamanians who felt the US missed a golden opportunity to use its troops to dispose of the general, indicted by the Americans on drug-smuggling charges last year.
Military sources said the key flaw was the plotters' mistaken belief that General Noriega was in the barracks as the rebels attacked.
They had planned to hold him hostage to secure the resignation of the strongly pro-Noriega General Staff.
Without him, they were unable to consolidate the uprising and were trapped by loyal troops.
The situation was further confused because the rebels were led by Major Giroldi, whose battalion is charged with guarding the barracks and who presumably should have known whether the general was inside.
Many of the coup participants surrendered to General Noriega personally, and more than 200 soldiers who backed the uprising were arrested after nearly five hours of fighting.
General Noriega went on television to say he had been aware of the rebels' plans for about three weeks.
His hand-picked President, Francisco Rodriguez, said the government had ‘all kinds of proof’ that Washington was behind the coup attempt.
He said US soldiers had sealed off roads leading to the Panama Canal before the coup attempt, and that US aircraft had circled the combat areas.
The US Southern Command called the accusations ridiculous, declaring: ‘We had nothing to do with the coup.’
The White House admitted it had known of the plot for days and had not discouraged the rebels.
The US military source said while there were no promises of specific US military help, it was made clear the rebels would be welcome to send the general to stand trial in the US.
Many of the ordinary Panamanians who gave the general such a stinging defeat in May's annulled elections were astonished that the US allowed the coup to collapse when it had 12,000 troops stationed around the canal.
Yet US officials were dismayed that there was only one short-lived public demonstration in support of the rebels.
The pro-Noriega Press, the only newspapers permitted to publish, gloated over the general's suppression of the coup.
But the rebellion was further evidence of a military divided.
The rebel officers had been passed over for promotion as General Noriega strengthened his control of the military's two key policy-making bodies, the General Staff and the Strategic Military Council.
Strike curb in essential services is postponed
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
THE GOVERNMENT has postponed any attempt to curb industrial action in essential services and make unions legally liable for unofficial action.
Margaret Thatcher had sought to have new laws on the statute book this autumn, but the Government is now more likely to publish a consultative Green Paper towards the end of the year.
No final decision has been made on whether there will be legislation, but it would be unlikely to be tabled before next autumn, according to Department of Employment sources.
Norman Fowler, the Secretary of State for Employment, may announce the Green Paper at next week's Conservative conference in Blackpool.
Whitehall officials have encountered difficulties in deciding which essential services to include.
The favoured strategy so far has been to introduce a cooling-off period before industrial action could be taken.
Mrs Thatcher has been advised that a complete ban on strikes is not a practical proposition and may entail a high degree of political risk.
The Government, however, is likely to press ahead with legislation this autumn which will tighten up the law on secondary action.
The new statute will stop trade unionists trying to persuade workers in unconnected companies to take sympathy action.
The new Employment Act will also make it unlawful for organisations to refuse to employ a job applicant on the grounds that he or she is not a union member.
The plan to make unions responsible for unofficial action arose out of the strikes in the summer on the London Underground, where an informal group of drivers and guards led a long series of stoppages over pay.
Opponents of the Government have criticised the policy because it makes unions responsible for disruption which they have not organised and in some cases may oppose.
Labour Party leaders, meanwhile, saw their plan for new industrial laws overwhelmingly endorsed at the party conference in Brighton.
Some important planks of the policy have yet to be clarified, however.
The party has not decided what would constitute a legitimate trade dispute under the law and precisely what forms of secondary action would be sanctioned.
Michael Meacher, the shadow Secretary of State for Employment, said that such definitions would have to wait until the party formed a government and the details were worked out between ministers and officials.
‘We cannot be expected to draft legislation at this stage,’ he said.
The Government is likely to snatch at this vagueness in an attempt to discredit the new image of moderation Labour is keen to promote.
Mr Meacher said the exact form of a new tribunal system for trying industrial cases had to be worked out within the next three to six months.
Delegates approved a policy which would seek to give workers the freedom to organise effective industrial action.
Employees would be given the right to belong to a union and to take industrial action, and strikers would be protected from dismissal.
Under the legal framework employers would also be prevented from winning interim injunctions to stop disruption backed by lawful ballots.
This clause was introduced following the abortive national docks strike this summer.
Despite the TUC's call for complete immunity in tort for unions, under a Labour government there would be no return to the pre-1979 position where unions arguably enjoyed a privileged position.
Any controversy over the new legal framework would give ammunition to Mr Meacher's critics within the party.
Labour's employment spokesman was blamed for much of the confusion which arose at the TUC on the issue.