

Island killings
Foreign News Page 12
Minister to quit
Foreign News Page 12
Rebels give up
From MR HENRY ROE
BOGOTA (Reuter)— Colombia's M-19 guerrillas have agreed to lay down their arms and form a political party, taking two steps envisaged by a peace accord signed with the government.
Savimbi offer
Foreign News Page 12
Bush operation
From MR HENRY ROE
WASHINGTON (Reuter)— President Bush will undergo minor surgery today to remove a small growth from the middle finger of his right hand.
Elephants die
Foreign News Page 12
Standards lower
From MR HENRY ROE
SYDNEY (AFP)— Civil Aviation Authority officers accused the Australian government of lowering safety standards in an attempt to maintain a domestic air service during the seven-week-old pilots’ strike.
Ransom paid
From MR HENRY ROE
RIO DE JANEIRO (AP)— Luis Sales, head of a Brazilian advertising agency, was freed unharmed after being held by kidnappers for two months.
His family is believed to have paid a ransom of up to $1m.
Sailor jailed
Foreign News Page 12
Cocaine haul
By MARC CHAMPION
WASHINGTON — Federal agents seized nine tons of cocaine at a house near the Mexican border and six tons from a ship off the Yucatan peninsula yesterday, writes Marc Champion.
Moon eclipsed
By MARC CHAMPION
SEOUL (AP)— The Rev Moon Ik Hwan, 71, who made an unauthorised trip to North Korea in March to discuss reunification, was sentenced to 10 years in prison for aiding an enemy power.
Leader acquitted
By MARC CHAMPION
MASERU (UPI)— The chief magistrate in Lesotho ruled that the killing last December of a student by Lesotho's ruler, Major General Metsing Lekhanya, was justifiable homicide.
General Lekhanya said he shot the man in an attempt to rescue a woman in distress.
Sri Lanka deaths
By MARC CHAMPION
COLOMBO (Reuter)— Eighteen young Sinhalese men were beheaded or shot dead and their naked bodies placed around a pond at Peradeniya University, Kandy, in apparent retaliation for the killing of the university's assistant registrar.
Embassy attack
By MARC CHAMPION
SAN SALVADOR (UPI)— A band of human rights activists, apparently armed with hand grenades, stormed the Costa Rican Embassy and took several people hostage in an attempt to draw international attention to human rights abuses.
Blockade goes on
By RUPERT CORNWELL
MOSCOW — Azerbaijan is showing no sign of bowing to Moscow and calling off its month-old rail blockade of Armenia, despite a Supreme Soviet decree empowering the government to send in troops to get trains moving, writes Rupert Cornwell.
For the six days up to and including Wednesday, no trains had reached Armenia from Azerbaijan.
Strike ends
By SARAH LAMBERT
PARIS — The wave of strikes that has gripped France for a month showed some signs of abating yesterday as prison officers agreed to go back to work, writes Sarah Lambert.
But — to the government's continued chagrin — striking tax workers marched through Paris yesterday, and at the Peugeot factories in eastern France the employment ministry has appointed an official conciliator in a last-ditch attempt to bring the unions and management to the negotiating table.
Estonians retreat in voting row
By SARAH LAMBERT
MOSCOW (Reuter)— The Estonian parliament has suspended clauses in the local election law which had deprived thousands of immigrant Russians of the vote.
All those with permanent residence in the republic are to be allowed to vote in a 10 December poll.
The law provoked a wave of strikes by immigrant Russian workers after it was passed in August.
It was also rejected by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet in Moscow as contravening the Soviet constitution.
Shut campus a sign of wider rifts in Zimbabwe
From KARL MAIER in Harare
STUDENTS carrying their luggage and books queued solemnly as they waited for lifts home yesterday morning, a day after the University of Zimbabwe had been shut down indefinitely.
It was the latest example of the increasing conflict between President Robert Mugabe's government and voices of opposition.
The unprecedented closure, following a day of violence on Wednesday between students throwing stones and riot police firing tear-gas grenades, drew expressions of shock from church officials and union leaders.
It came just three weeks before the students were due to sit their examinations.
The registration of students and all grants and loans have been suspended.
‘The authorities responsible have developed so much uncertainty in themselves that they cannot even show tolerance and rationality in dealing with our children,’ the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU) said.
It accused the government of engaging in ‘the naked use of brute state force and the suppression of individual rights.’
Four bishops representing the Catholic Church and the Zimbabwe Council of Churches yesterday met the university's Vice-Chancellor, Walter Kamba, to urge that the campus be reopened and to learn the fate of the estimated 40 students arrested following the protests.
They hoped to arrange a meeting with Mr Mugabe, who in his capacity as Chancellor of the university was believed to have taken the decision to close the campus.
A police spokesman said yesterday that the Student Representative Council's president, Arthur Mutambara, and its secretary, Enock Chikweche, whose arrests early on Wednesday prompted the violence, could face charges of organising an ‘illegal meeting’.
The student leaders had written a statement accusing the government of practising ‘state terrorism’ and comparing it unfavourably with the white minority rulers of South Africa.
The document was a riposte to the government's refusal to permit a campus commemoration on 29 September of the first big student protests against corruption a year ago.
It led to a cabinet decision on Tuesday to arrest Mr Mutambara and Mr Chikweche under Zimbabwe's 24-year-old emergency powers regulations, which were inherited from Ian Smith's Rhodesia.
Soon after police arrived to carry out the order, violence spread, as students smashed and set fire to Mr Kamba's Mercedes car, and police responded with tear gas and baton charges.
The university was the birthplace of the first serious protests against reports of increasing corruption in Mr Mugabe's nine-year-old administration, when students clashed with riot police.
Since then, the ‘Willowgate’ scandal over the illegal sale of cars has brought down five cabinet ministers, one of whom committed suicide.
A former adviser to Mr Mugabe, Edgar Tekere, has formed a new opposition party, the Zimbabwe Unity Movement, and the government, armed with the emergency powers, has suppressed a number of strikes.
The ZCTU warned the government yesterday that ‘its attempts to suppress the growing disenchantment of the masses…will certainly plunge the whole society into complete turmoil sooner rather than later’.
Rumours of releases preoccupy S Africa
From JOHN CARLIN in Johannesburg
IN THE relative absence of pressing political news, the South African press has returned to predicting the release of famous political prisoners.
The idea of an imminent release for Nelson Mandela has been dropped.
The new word is that South Africa's second most famous prisoner, Walter Sisulu, will be out soon.
One day, if only by the laws of probability, the rumours will be proved right.
The word here — many talk but few are willing to be quoted — is that Nelson Mandela will be the last to go, and that he is working closely with the government in arranging a timetable for the releases.
Those on the list are: Mr Sisulu, sentenced with Mr Mandela to life imprisonment in the ‘Rivonia Trial’ of 1964; four other Rivonia triallists -Raymond Mhlaba, Elias Motsoaledi, Andrew Mlangeni, Ahmed Kathrada, Wilton Mkwayi and the oldest of them all, 80-year-old Oscar Mpheta, a trade union leader who has been behind bars since 1980, and whose whose sentence runs out next year.
His son Themba, who is studying at Liverpool University, said yesterday on the telephone that his family had been reliably informed that he and Mr Sisulu would be out this month.
According to sources close to Mr Mandela himself, the first two men out will be Wilton Mkwayi and Elias Motsoaledi, a very influential member of the ANC old guard with positions of leadership both in the union movement and in the ANC's military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe.
Money is being raised at the moment to provide houses for those who come out first.
Mr de Klerk's main criterion, as far as one can tell, in deciding who is released first is to attempt to minimise the chances of mass political gatherings giving way to violence and, the great nightmare, loss of government control.
This is why Mr Mandela will not come out first, why the initial idea will be to test the waters with the lesser-known prisoners.
Which would suggest that it might be rash to release Mr Sisulu, who has been secretary general of the ANC since 1949, at this stage.
Abu Nidal link to Wybran murder
From ROBERT FISK in west Beirut
A GROUP claiming to represent Abu Nidal's Palestinian assassination organisation claimed yesterday that it had murdered a leader of the Jewish community in Belgium because he was ‘one of the main leaders of Israel's Mossad secret service’.
Dr Joseph Wybran, the head of the Belgian Auschwitz Committee, who had campaigned for the removal of an order of Carmelite nuns from a convent just outside the perimeter of the former Birkenau extermination camp, was shot in the head outside Brussels University Hospital on Wednesday.
A typewritten statement in Arabic delivered to a Western news agency in west Beirut said that the ‘soldiers of justice’— a name previously used by Abu Nidal's organisation when it kidnapped the Belgian doctor, Jan Cools, in southern Lebanon last year — had ‘executed the death sentence’ against Dr Wybran, adding that this was done to encourage the Palestinian intifada uprising against Israeli rule in the West Bank and Gaza strip.
Given the propensity of Abu Nidal (whose real name is Sabri el-Banna) to embarrass the Palestine Liberation Organisation's chairman, Yasser Arafat, the statement -which was not typed on Abu Nidal's ‘Fatah Revolutionary Council’ notepaper -appeared to be timed to coincide with the attampts of the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, to involve the Israelis in talks with pro-PLO Palestinians.
The statement said that Dr Wybran's murder had been perpetrated ‘in support of the Muslim Palestinian people…and in response to the generation of ‘the children of the stone’ '.
The killing, it said, was also carried out ‘in response to the crime of assassination of the martyr, Neman Refat’.
It did not clarify who Neman Refat was.
The murder was also revenge, the statement went on, for ‘the suspicious calls for co-existence and normalisation of relations with the entity of the Israeli enemy’— a clear reference to President Mubarak's desire to talk to the Israelis about a Palestinian state.
Israel defers decision on Egypt's talks proposal
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Jerusalem
ISRAEL'S inner cabinet yesterday deferred a decision on whether to accept Egypt's invitation to convene Israeli and Palestinian delegations for talks designed to lead to a resolution of the dispute in the occupied territories.
The inner cabinet is to meet again today.
The aim of the Egyptian proposal was modest: to hold preliminary discussions on conditions for elections among Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip for a team to negotiate arrangements during an interim stage.
This could last several years and might eventually lead to more talks to determine the final status of the occupied territories.
Labour ministers presented their resolution to accept the Egyptian proposals.
The Israeli Foreign Minister, Moshe Arens, of Likud, who had just returned from America, detailed the proposal of the US Secretary of State, James Baker, for three-way consultations on the composition of the Palestinian delegation.
The debate has again underlined the paralysis of a government made up of two parties which hold such opposing views on the resolution of the the occupied-territories question.
The inner cabinet meeting had been billed as being vital for the search for a settlement in the region and the future of the national-unity government.
Many in the US were keenly awaiting the outcome: Mr Baker had made several statements expressing Washington's desire for Israel to reach an agreement with the Palestinians on elections.
Two of the most influential US newspapers called for decisions.
‘This is a great opportunity here — and the Israelis should seize it,’ The Washington Post said.
The New York Times recommended ‘gentle persuasion’ on Likud to make Yitzhak Shamir, the Prime Minister, budge.
Government officials habitually deny US ability to pressurise Israel.
‘They are shrewd enough to appreciate that the appearance of pressure from outside is counter-productive in Israel,’ one official said.
But that pressure might not be quite so counter-productive.
That is the most obvious explanation for the apparent keenness of Mr Arens and Mr Shamir to consider Washington's proposal that Israel, the US and Egypt should hold consultations on the composition of any Palestinian delegation for talks with Israel.
It appears Mr Shamir, as with his original peace initiative, is keen to get the Americans off his back by showing willing.
It is well established that any Palestinian delegates must be acceptable to all parties: if this were not already the case, the Palestinian delegation would be made up of PLO members.
The composition of any Palestinian delegation remains one of two crucial issues at the heart of Likud's opposition to the 10 points put forward by President Mubarak of Egypt and devised as clarifications of Israel's own initiative.
More particularly, the question is over the association the delegates have with the PLO.
There is a government consensus that rejects talks with the PLO or the establishment of a Palestinian state.
However, Labour ministers accept that Palestinian delegates must inevitably be authorised by the PLO and they see these delegates as a channel to the PLO.
The nationalist camp in Likud argues that such contrivances will lead eventually to dialogue with the PLO and to the establishment of a Palestinian state.
Likud seeks an alternative to the PLO.
It refuses to consider the participation of outside Palestinians, whether US professors of Palestinian origin, or deported West Bankers.
Likud has consistently argued that it wants to deal only with local inhabitants of what it calls Judea and Samaria (the West Bank and Gaza).
‘Once you accept outside Palestinians, you validate the concept of their right of return to their former homes in what is now Israel,’ a Likud source said.
Likud sources are confident the disagreements over how to respond to the Mubarak proposals will not break up the government.
‘It's in no one 's interests to have a government crisis.
The US doesn't want one for three reasons.
First, it will postpone any movement towards a peace process.
Second, because if there were elections in Israel, there would be no guarantee that a more flexible Labour government would get in.
Thirdly, because they regard the elections as basically a viable process.
So President Bush is anxious not to have a crisis.
The Egyptians are anxious too: that's why Foreign Minister Abdel Meguid is coming here.
And Shimon Peres is eager to avoid a showdown which may lead to his ouster as leader of the Labour Party.’
Much now depends on how active a role the US is prepared to play to chivvy Israel along to respond to the Egyptian proposals.
Buthelezi steps into Commonwealth flurry
By JOHN BULLOCH, Diplomatic Editor
THE ZULU leader, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, held talks with Margaret Thatcher in Downing Street yesterday as the Prime Minister prepared to withstand attacks over her southern Africa policy at the Commonwealth Heads of Government conference in Kuala Lumpur later this month.
It was also announced yesterday that Britain was giving £500,000 to the Urban Foundation in South Africa, a private group backed by South African businesses, to help finance homes for low-income black families.
At the same time, William Waldegrave, the Minister of State at the Foreign Office, met a delegation from the Southern Africa Coalition, an umbrella organisation linking all anti-apartheid groups.
Chief Buthelezi, one of the few black leaders inside South Africa who has been consistent in opposing sanctions, will address a fringe meeting at the Conservative conference in Blackpool next Tuesday.
What has become a round of South African diplomacy in London began earlier this year when FW de Klerk visited London as President-in-waiting.
Another official visitor was Barend du Plessis, the Finance Minister, while Helen Suzman, the best known of all the critics of the system in South Africa, met the Prime Minister a week ago.
Other callers have included Albertina Sisulu, wife of the jailed ANC veteran, Walter, representatives of the United Democratic Front and a leader of one of the nominally independent homelands.
Then, at the beginning of this week, the ANC and a group of South African academics and businessmen chose London as the scene of the latest in the series of black-white encounters which have become a regular feature of South African political life, while Mrs Thatcher gave interviews to four leading black journalists.
The support given to the Urban Foundation showed British recognition of the acute shortage of housing for blacks in South Africa's urban areas, a move welcomed by Nthato Motlana, chairman of Soweto's civic association.
Whitehall officials said there was no planned campaign behind all the activity linking London and Johannesburg.
‘A number of invitations have been outstanding for some time, and people just chose to take them up at this stage,’ one said.
At the same time, it was accepted that all the talks, petitions, donations and arguments had been brought about by the imminence of the Commonwealth Conference, where the Secretary-General, Sonny Ramphal, has warned that Britain may find itself in a minority of one over South Africa.
Mrs Thatcher has made it clear that Britain remains as adamantly opposed as ever to sanctions and has no intention of joining in new measures against South Africa.
The latest argument deployed in Whitehall yesterday was not only that sanctions hurt the worst-off sections of the South African community — the ones they are designed to help — but that financial measures against South Africa might induce the country to default on its international commitments.
Mrs Thatcher has emphasised that to avoid the troubles which have afflicted other African countries, a majority-ruled South Africa must be based on a sound economy.
The British line has been that there is a huge difference between the image of Britain accepted in South Africa and the reality.
Officials said that President de Klerk was severely shaken by his meetings with Mrs Thatcher and Sir Geoffrey Howe, then Foreign Secretary.
‘There seems to be an idea in South Africa that Britain will protect the country in the Security Council and fight against the imposition of sanctions.
That may be true in general, but the other side of the coin is that Britain expects change in return, and puts on tremendous pressure to get that change,’ one official said.
Commonwealth countries take the view that it is the limited sanctions so far applied which have done much to bring about the new climate represented by the de Klerk administration, and believe a turn of the screw would effect more change.
It is because Britain will resist that idea in Malaysia that Whitehall is so anxious to build up a record of consultation, commitment and sympathy towards the majority in South Africa.
Peking scorns the God King's Nobel prize
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
SHORT of selecting a dead student, the Nobel Prize Committee could hardly have made a choice more calculated to embarrass and enrage the Chinese leadership.
By awarding the Dalai Lama the Nobel Peace Prize, it has strengthened what is the one real threat to Peking's rule of Tibet, the one source of dissent that cannot be silenced by guns: the international prestige of Tibet's exiled ‘God King’.
Officials in Peking last night refused to comment on the award.
But the Chinese embassy in Oslo, where the prize is awarded, reacted with accusations that it was meddling in China's internal affairs, the stock response to any foreign commentary deemed hostile to China's rule of Tibet.
For years, China has used a combination of strong arm diplomacy and shrill rhetoric to try to deny the Dalai Lama international recognition as a legitimate representative of Tibet's aspirations as something other than a part of China.
The tactics have largely worked.
Most governments, including that of Britain, have shied away from receiving the Dalai Lama as a political as well as spritual leader.
But with the Dalai Lama, who fled to India in 1959 after a failed uprising against Chinese rule, now honoured with a Nobel Peace Prize not merely for his religious work but for ‘his struggle for the liberation of Tibet’, China's efforts to keep him and his cause in quarantine will be all the more difficult.
The award also challenges China's long-held view that Tibetans sheltering abroad are no more than terrorists bent on disrupting the ‘unity of the motherland’.
For Peking, Tibet has been an inseparable part of China since the 13th century, although direct control was not established until 1950, when the People's Liberation Army invaded the region after the revolution.
China therefore regards any challenge to its sovereignty over Tibet as intolerable interference and any threat from inside Tibet as treason.
In Peking's eyes, the Nobel Peace Prize could not have come at a worse time.
With China's international reputation already badly tarnished by its bloody suppression of protesters in Tiananmen Square, the Nobel Committee decision focuses attention on the use of equally brutal, though largely ignored, methods to silence opposition in the Himalayas.
It was in Tibet, after an outbreak of separatist rioting in March, the 30th anniversary of the 1959 revolt, that Peking first tested the use of martial law and indiscriminate gunfire.
They worked.
Troops continue to patrol the streets of Lhasa and police continue to make arrests — as they do in Peking.
The embarrassing parallels between the party's response to discontent in Peking and Lhasa also embrace rhetoric and ideology.
Tibet has been the testing ground for China's propaganda organs.
When it came to explain why millions of ordinary people had joined in student-led unrest in the capital, the Communist Party resorted to the line already used to explain away outbursts of discontent in Tibet — the masses were deceived and manipulated by a ‘tiny handful’ of ‘evil-doers, ruffians and counter-revolutionaries’.
While the award of the Nobel Prize will, if anything, only strengthen Peking's resolve over Tibet, it challenges Peking to honour what it says is its readiness to open dialogue with the Dalai Lama.
China has so far refused to give any clear response to an offer he made last year to open talks on the basis of new proposals.
In what was seen as an important concession to China and condemned by more militant Tibetans as a sell-out, the Dalai Lama effectively acknowledged China's overall sovereignty and suggested that Tibet become a self-governing region in association with China, a relationship that would leave Peking in control of both foreign policy and defence.
Apparently caught off guard by the proposals, Peking threw up a host of pre-conditions and challenged the Dalai Lama's ‘sincerity’.
The oubreak of violence in March and China's subsequent military crackdown in Tibet seem to have extinguished even the faintest hopes of a negotiated settlement in the near future.
As China's reaction to Western sanctions over the events in Tiananmen has shown, further international pressure on the Dalai Lama's behalf may only reinforce Peking's siege mentality and strengthen its conviction that the West is conspiring to undermine socialism in China.
China's new rulers boosted by Deng
By ANDREW HIGGINS
PEKING — Having dumped two heirs apparent in under three years, Deng Xiaoping yesterday moved to buttress the shaky position of yet another set of hand-picked successors by announcing that they, not he, were now running China.
Speaking to Yasser Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organisation leader, who is visiting China, Mr Deng announced that the Prime Minister, Li Peng, and the head of the Communist Party, Jiang Zemin, were ‘now in charge’ writes Andrew Higgins.
‘If there is anything you want to talk about, just talk to them,’ Mr Deng, China's paramount leader, told his guest.
His remarks follow a media campaign to build up the prestige of Mr Jiang, who was party boss in Shanghai before moving to Peking to replace his disgraced predecessor, Zhao Ziyang.
Mr Deng has repeatedly promised to retire in recent years, but yesterday was the first time he had reissued the pledge since the Tiananmen Square massacre and a shake-up of the party leadership.
Precedent, however, suggests that his comments will offer only cold comfort to Mr Jiang and Mr Li.
None of Mao's or Mr Deng's heirs has survived long enough to assume fully their designated role as successor.
Disinformation reigns on the Cambodian front
From TERRY MCCARTHY in Bangkok
THAILAND'S Foreign Ministry yesterday suffered a public relations fiasco when it failed to produce five Vietnamese soldiers it claimed had been captured inside Cambodia after Hanoi's much-publicised troop withdrawal from Cambodia last week.
Thailand claims the Vietnamese withdrawal was not genuine, and on Monday a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Prachyadavi Tavedikul, said reporters would be shown five Vietnamese in Cambodian Army uniforms who had been taken prisoner by Khmer Rouge resistance guerrillas after Hanoi's withdrawal deadline of 26 September.
About 30 journalists turned up at the Thai border village of Pong Nam Ron, about 200 miles east of Bangkok, yesterday morning, but were told by the local Thai military commander that he knew of no Vietnamese prisoners.
‘As far as I know, no Vietnamese have been captured since 26 September,’ said Marine Colonel Chumphon Chotiyothin.
This propaganda flop is only the latest in a stream of disinformation and contradictory statements emanating from Cambodia since the Vietnamese said they were finally withdrawing all their troops from the country.
Reports of military gains by the Cambodian resistance have almost certainly been exaggerated in the last week, and estimations by the Thai and Chinese military intelligence agencies of the number of Vietnamese troops supposedly left behind in Cambodia appear little more than fanciful.
The non-communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) said earlier this week it had captured 24 Phnom Penh government positions on Route 69 in the north-west of the country.
But military analysts in Bangkok pointed out that casualty figures are low, many of the positions along the sparsely-populated Route 69 are little more than bamboo huts sheltering two or three soldiers, and no big towns have been threatened.
Phnom Penh government troops in some small outposts appear to have simply surrendered when they realised they were outnumbered, said a Western intelligence source in Bangkok.
‘The KPNLF is anxious to put on a show of force at a time when the US Congress is debating future aid to the non-communist resistance factions.’
There has also been some hasty back-pedalling over the fate of the Cambodian border town of Pailin.
Thai military sources had been predicting the imminent fall of Pailin, saying that the Khmer Rouge were bombarding the town with up to 1,000 shells a day.
But reporters who visited Pailin last week found the area quiet, and saw little evidence of artillery damage to the town.
‘Tibet faces elimination’
From TERRY MCCARTHY in Bangkok
NEWPORT BEACH (Reuter)— The Dalai Lama, on a visit to California, said after winning the Nobel Peace Prize yesterday: ‘Tibetans today are facing the real possibility of elimination as a people and a nation.’
He added: ‘The Chinese students have given me great hope for the future of China and Tibet.
I feel that their movement follows the tradition of Mahatma Gandhi which has deeply inspired me ever since I was a small boy.
‘I hope and pray that the decision to give me the Nobel Peace Prize will encourage all those who pursue the cause of peace to do so in a renewed spirit of optimism and strength.’
‘Russians must have an honest rouble’
By JOHN LICHFIELD
WASHINGTON — The Soviet Union risked an ‘inflationary disintegration’ of its economic reforms unless it moved rapidly to a convertible rouble backed by gold, according to Wayne Angell, a governor of the US Federal Reserve, writes John Lichfield.
‘It is my belief that, without an honest money, Soviet citizens cannot be expected to respond to the reforms, as they do not have a meaningful incentive,’ said Mr Angell.
‘A gold-backed rouble would be seen as an honest money at home and would immediately trade as a convertible currency internationally.’
The call for a Soviet gold standard was made in an interview between Mr Angell and a representative of the Soviet central bank, Gosbank.
It was echoed this week by the US Secretary of State, James Baker.
The subject is expected to be on the agenda when the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, becomes the first US central bank chief to visit Moscow this weekend.
The interview, in Moscow last month, is to be published in Izvestia.
Extracts appeared yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.
‘I have offered a prediction to several officials of the Soviet government that, on the present slow course, the reforms run a very high risk of being set back by a general collapse of confidence in the rouble — an inflationary disintegration,’ Mr Angell said.
A convertible rouble was the essential foundation-stone for perestroika, Mr Angell said.
‘You cannot address the apparent ills of the Soviet economy without first introducing a monetary standard of value.’
The Gosbank official said Mr Angell was advocating a policy for the Soviet Union which the US abandoned with the collapse of the Bretton Woods agreement in 1971.
Mr Angell responded that it would not be feasible for Moscow to leap from the present unconvertible rouble to the complex Western system of floating exchange rates, or to a dollar or yen-backed rouble.
On the other hand, Moscow was one of the world's largest holders of gold bullion.
Around the World
By BRUCE PALLING
No respite for leftist cows IT IS not just the peasants who are revolting in Romania — the few remaining kulaks are also playing up.
They have raised the ire of President Ceausescu by letting their cattle die of old age or starvation both because fodder is extremely scarce and the miserable prices offered by the state.
According to exile sources in Vienna, cows are now being treated like Romanian women — ie, subjected to a monthly gynaecological examination just to make sure their fertility is not being interfered with because population increases are the order of the day.
In Ceausescu's Romania, making your cow miscarry is a crime subject to imprisonment.
Habsburg dynasty Dr Otto von Habsburg, son of the last King-Emperor of Hungary, has politely turned down an offer to stand in next month's Hungarian presidential election as the candidate of the Smallholders party.
The 76-year-old Euro-MP, who currently lives in West Germany, said he would of course not rule out a run some time in the future but for the moment he feels he can do more to promote his country in the European parliament.
‘Mr’ Habsburg may not have a throne to sit on, he does have a leg to stand on.
Although the Hungarians chased the hapless Habsburgs out of town more than 70 years ago, in the confusing Fifties, the comrades were too preoccupied jailing and executing social deviants to strip the pretender of his nationality.
Libya-Venice axis Venetian politicians have decided against accepting a Libyan offer to annex their city to prevent it from sinking any further into either the sea or debt.
Jana, the official Libyan news agency, had earlier claimed that Libyan control would be a'logical and historical' move because of the considerable early Arab links with the city.
Jana contended that the Phoenician empire was Arab and therefore Venice was once part of a Pan-Arab civilisation, not to mention the other claim that many Venetians have Arab roots from ninth-century traders.
Venetian historians promptly discounted the claim, although Italian writer, Alberto Ongaro, thought that the move could have a positive effect after all.
‘Let's hope that the prospect of becoming Libyan citizens will frighten Venetians into swiftly solving the problems that Gaddafi wants to take over.’
First or steerage?
There is something a little distasteful about the head of the biggest international refugee organisation preferring to travel first class to solve the problems of the worlds dispossessed.
However, Jean-Pierre Hocke, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, is hardly the first person in the job to prefer the pointy end of a jumbo jet.
The real problem is that he is Swiss and not Danish.
The previous incumbent, Poul Hartling — a former Danish Prime Minister — was provided with a special fund inside the ‘education budget’ by the Danish government for him to upgrade himself on his international travels.
However, a shocked Danish bureaucrat blew the whistle on Mr Hocke as that ‘refugee education fund’ was only supposed to be for Mr Hartling and not any old non-Danish High Commissioner.
Mr Hartling's predecessor, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, avoided such pitfalls by simply chartering private jets and paying for them out of his not inconsiderable private coffers.
Turning new page From the beginning of next year, two of the lesser-known journals of the Central Committeee of the Soviet Communist Party, with the titles of Political Education and Agitator will cease to exist.
Instead, they will be replaced with a magazine with a less strident and more caring title -Dialog.
Rebels ‘would not hand over general’
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
IN THE dying hours of Tuesday's Panamanian coup, rebel officers refused a ‘face-to-face’ request from a US military officer to hand over General Noriega for trial in America, the US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, said yesterday.
Shortly afterwards the rebels asked for US troops to help them to defend the routes to the military headquarters they had seized.
The US gave no answer to their request, said Mr Cheney.
He said Washington decided against helping the rebels because they refused to hand over General Noriega and because the US doubted their democratic good faith.
The coup was not to restore democracy, he said, but a ‘power struggle within the Panamanian Defence Force’.
Other US government sources said both the rebels and the US army Southern Command, based in Panama, had been startled by the swift recovery of the pro-Noriega forces on Tuesday.
The ‘loyal’ forces air-lifted a company of troops to an air-strip near the military headquarters held by the rebels.
Their arrival swung on to General Noriega's side a battalion which had previously declined to commit itself.
Earlier, Mr Cheney appeared on television to rebut criticism of the Bush administration's actions — or inactions — during the coup.
He confirmed that General Noriega was briefly in the hands of the rebels but said the US had no time to make use of this fact.
‘It wasn't until late in the coup activities that it became clear that the coup plotters did, in fact, have him,’ Mr Cheney said.
‘Shortly after that the coup collapsed.’
When approached ‘face to face’ by a senior US officer, two rebel officers said they wanted General Noriega to retire within Panama, rather than face drug trafficking charges in the US.
Although Washington was notified of the rebellion last weekend, Mr Cheney said there was ‘considerable reason’ to be cautious.
US doubts were redoubled by news that the coup was to be led by Major Giraldi, a close associate of the Panamanian military dictator.
‘There was the possibility that it was an effort to draw the US into some kind of an embarrassing incident,’ Mr Cheney said.
The incident has become deeply embarrassing for the Bush administration, precisely because of its caution.
Criticism of the White House by both Democrats and Republicans grew yesterday.
Comparisons were made with the Reagan administration's more robust attitude during the Grenada invasion and Libya bombing raid in 1984 and 1986.
Democratic Congressman Dave McCurdy said ‘there is a resurgence of the wimp factor’ and Republican Congressman William Broomfield said: ‘We blew it…
It's a major setback for our foreign policy.’
Other politicians complained that the failed coup had exposed the unaccustomed weakness of US intelligence and undercover activities in Latin America.
Panama cracks down on opposition
From CHRIS MCGREAL in Panama City
PARAMILITARY police fired shots and sealed off Panama's opposition headquarters yesterday, locking former presidential candidate Guillermo Endara inside for two hours after opposition leaders held a press conference to deny involvement in prior knowledge of Tuesday's failed coup attempt.
Minutes earlier, General Noriega, the military dictator, urged supporters at a rally to ‘defeat the indecisive ones’— presumably a reference to dissent within the military after the second failed rebellion against him in less than two years.
Mr Endara, looking drawn from a 16-day-hunger strike in protest at the government refusal to recognise his victory in May's annulled election, was unharmed but two aides at the Liberal Party office, which serves as the opposition coalition headquarters, were arrested.
The incident appeared to be part of the continuing harassment of the opposition, similar to the brief arrest of the Christian Democrat leader, Ricardo Arias Calderon, earlier this week.
But it was the challenge from within the Panamanian Defence Force (PDF) that most concerned General Noriega yesterday.
The PDF issued a ‘war communique’ saying three senior officers, including the head of military intelligence, were among 37 arrested after the coup attempt.
Ten soldiers were killed, including the coup leader, Major Moises Giroldi Vega.
The list of dead and detained suggested that the conspiracy against the general ran wider than initially thought.
But at the same time it showed that there remained a solid contingent of the defence force loyal to General Noriega, who is wanted in the US on drug-trafficking charges.
The Defence Force's account raised doubts about the circumstances of the deaths of some of the rebels.
Only officers and NCOs were among those listed as killed, whereas dozens of lower ranking soldiers were involved in the fighting.
The US Senator Jesse Helms said in Washington yesterday he had reports from Panama that General Noriega had personally shot dead Major Giroldi, the commander of the ‘Urraca’ company charged with defending the Defence Force headquarters from where the uprising was launched.
US defence officials could not confirm the claim.
General Noriega detained two of the five colonels on his General Staff, both until now thought to have been loyal senior officers.
Colonel Guillermo Wong headed G-2 military intelligence, the General's post until he took control of the Defence Force.
Colonel Julio Ow Young was in charge of military administration.
The Chief of the Combined Staff, Lieutenant-Colonel Armando Palacios Gondola and the head of the Navy, Jose Sanchez, were also among those accused of participating in the rebellion.
The dead officers were drawn from a number of battalions, revealing that the coup attempt was not confined solely to rebels within the ‘Urraca’ company.
Those killed included Edgardo Sandoval, the leader of the Dobermann riot squad who signed the communique demanding General Noriega's resignation, and three officers from the elite 2,000 Battalion.
Military sources said some those arrested may not have direct knowledge of the coup.
They suggested Colonel Wong may have been detained because, as head of military intelligence, he failed to uncover the plot.
Sources also pointed to the swift response of troops loyal to General Noriega, especially the 7th Infantry, as evidence that he can still count on important parts of the military to back him up.
Nevertheless the implications of senior and middle-ranking officers drawn from an array of army units suggests that the General is less secure than he is prepared to admit.
General Noriega tried to isolate opposition within the military after a similar coup attempt last year by promoting loyal officers to the important Strategic Military Council and General Staff, and retiring those thought to be less enthusiastic in their support of him.
But the promotions appear not only to have brought resentment among officers who were passed over but also failed to overcome unrest at hardship caused by US sanctions.
While officers within General Noriega's inner circle continued to benefit from their various illicit businesses, the majority of the military has not been paid in three weeks.
Mr Arias, the Christian Democrat leader, said yesterday: ‘Noriega and the defence force are at their weakest moment.
This illustrates that the regime is profoundly divided against itself.’
Mr Endara said he planned to continue his hunger strike to support a civil disobedience campaign to press General Noriega to step down.
‘Praise The Lord’ Bakker found guilty on all counts
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
JIM BAKKER, the fallen televangelist, was convicted yesterday of swindling followers of his Praise The Lord ministry out of more than $150m (£90m) and syphoning off part of the money to fund his extravagant lifestyle.
Mr Bakker and his wife, Tammy Faye, took the news calmly in the courtroom, although the 24 counts of fraud and conspiracy carry a maximum penalty of 120 years in prison and a $5m fine.
Mr Bakker was released on bail pending his sentencing, on 24 October.
He appeared briefly outside the courthouse in Charlotte, North Carolina.
‘At this moment my faith is still in God…
I went into the courtroom innocent of the charges against me, and I am still innocent,’ he said.
Mrs Bakker sang, in chorus with her supporters, ‘On Christ the solid rock I stand/ All other ground is sinking sand’.
She then added ‘It isn't over until it's over’, confirming that her husband intends to appeal against the decision.
The case against Mr Bakker revolved around one central charge, that he defrauded PTL's followers of $158m by deliberately overselling time shares in the hotel at PTL's ‘Heritage USA’ Christian theme park.
In exchange for $1,000, each ‘partner’ was promised a three-night stay at the hotel every year for the rest of their lives.
Mr Bakker sold more than twice as many shares as ‘Heritage USA’ could accommodate.
Mr Bakker also took $3.7m of that money for his own use.
With it he decked Tammy Faye in expensive jewellery.
He bought four estates, and a string of cars, including Rolls Royces and three Mercedes.
Mr Bakker is the fourth PTL official to be convicted in connection with the scandal, which began after it was revealed that he had an affair with a former church secretary, Jessica Hahn, using PTL funds to pay her hush money afterwards.
Of the other three former executives, one was sentenced to eight years in prison and the other two to 18 years.
The jury deliberated for only 10 hours before convicting Mr Bakker on all charges.
The foreman, Ricky Hill, said afterwards that the only problem they had was in deciding exactly when Mr Bakker began the pattern of fraud.
‘I kept looking for something that would tell me (the PTL managers) kept it from Bakker himself…but it never came.’
Mr Hill said Mr Bakker displayed some of the persuasive powers in the courtroom that he had used to raise money on television.
‘He kind of mesmerised you,’ said Mr Hill.
‘Most honest man in US’ accused of lying
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
DAN RATHER, the CBS News anchorman, once regarded as the most trusted person in America, has yet to answer charges that he aired faked battle footage and false news accounts of the war in Afghanistan in the mid-1980s.
Despite a curt denial by the President of CBS News, David Burke, that the company knowingly broadcast faked combat film, Mr Rather's reputation for being the soul of integrity in the increasingly make-believe world of American television news has been damaged.
A 12-line, three sentence denial of the charges made by the tabloid New York Post, failed to satisfy Mr Rather's critics, who had been promised a ‘point-by-point’ rebuttal of the accusations.
To add to Mr Rather's discomfort, the BBC's Foreign News Editor, John Simpson, told the Post that he had rejected the same piece of film, narrated by Mr Rather, as false when CBS News offered it to the BBC in August 1987.
The report later won an award.
Mr Simpson said that he rejected the footage, which purported to depict ‘the greatest single-day defeat for Soviet troops since World War II’, as untrustworthy after reviewing it frame by frame.
‘There wasn't a single dead body.
If we'd seen loads and loads of Soviet bodies, we would have felt it was true.
It simply had no feeling of reality,’ he said.
Essentially the Post charged that in a 1984 report, Mike Hoover, a freelance news cameraman with a reputation for providing theatrical footage, recreated scenes of Afghan rebels sabotaging electricity pylons — days after the real action had taken place.
The paper also said CBS identified refugees walking on the Pakistani border as Afghans evacuating villages following fighting, identified a Pakistani jet as a Soviet fighter and used film stolen from another cameraman.
Thousands reach the West and more follow
From EDWARD STEEN in Prague and PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
THE EXODUS from East Europe continued unabated yesterday, with thousands leaving and many would-be emigres defying attempts by the Communist authorities to prevent their crossing into Czechoslovakia, from where most refugees are fleeing to the West.
The last of eight special trains bringing 7,600 refugees from the West German embassy in Prague arrived to a warm welcome in Bavaria, while a train with more than 600 East Germans left Warsaw, also bound for West Germany.
It was delayed because extra carriages had to be found for the unexpectedly large number of emigres.
About 100 emerged from the embassy and another 500 from holiday homes on the outskirts of Warsaw, where they had been temporarily housed.
Dozens more East Germans appear to be crossing into Czechoslovakia, despite East Berlin's ending of visa-free travel across the border.
Between 200 and 300 East Germans were yesterday camped in the mudbath which was once the majestic garden of the West German mission.
There were a lot of policemen in surrounding streets and in the park adjoining the embassy from which the refugees have clambered into the grounds.
Some refugees in the embassy gardens said they had been there for days, but had not boarded the sealed refugee trains travelling through East Germany to Bavaria.
‘We came here to register, then we'll go home,’ said a man from Halle.
A woman said: ‘I'm going back too and then I'll return with my four children.’
Both said they had decided not to put their families through the ordeal of the embassy occupation and appeared to believe the assurance of Wolfgang Vogel, special envoy of Erich Honecker, the East German leader, that they would all be allowed to leave for the West with their dependents within six months.
Miroslav Pavel, the Czechoslovak Foreign Ministry spokesman, denied yesterday that Prague had insisted on the closure of the border with East Germany.
Various ideas had been suggested to the two Germanies to try to resolve the problem.
He declined to give any official view on the situation except to say: ‘Any Marxist must say it's a good thing that nobody has been hurt and we should give thanks to the police.’
Jan Urban, a former spokesman for the Charter 77 rights group and co-ordinator of a joint East European information service, was among numerous Czechoslovaks who befriended the refugees.
He said the debacle had been very important in Czechoslovakia: it had shown that ‘people can make a difference’.
Living in a totalitarian system, he said, ‘you are taught all the time that it's unbreakable.
It has no weaknesses, it's impossible to fight.’
But in less than a year Poland and Hungary had proved otherwise ‘and now you have the strongest of the strong, the East Germans, jumping out like water from a bucket with a hole in it.
It's very clear to anybody that the system is cracking.’
The determination of the refugees, despite the freezing and insanitary conditions, had opened people's eyes.
In East Berlin yesterday officials turned away many would-be visitors from the West and gave warnings to opposition leaders in an attempt to avert demonstrations during the 40th anniversary celebrations today and tomorrow.
The head of the West German mission in the city, Franz Bertele, protested against the semi-closure of the seven crossings in the Berlin Wall.
Many Western visitors with day visas were refused entry.
Werner Kratschull, a pastor and dissident, said he had been told that East Berlin would crack down on the opposition ‘in the Chinese manner’ if there was trouble.
Barbel Bohley, a founder of the New Forum reform group, said on West German television that ‘one has the feeling that it only needs a spark for everything to blow up here’.
A group of East German trade unionists complained yesterday to the main trade union federation that the official media dismissed or ignored ‘fundamental political problems that are upsetting the workers’.
And a new Dresden reform group, Initiative for Democratic Renewal, published an open letter to President Gorbachev, saying their leaders' rigidity was destabilising the country, and urging him to press them to reform.
But East Germany's old guard was defiant.
‘We do not need any lessons in human rights and socialist democracy,’ said the Prime Minister, Willi Stoph, in Berlin.
Czechoslovakia's opposition acquired a colourful new facet yesterday, when a group calling itself The Ladybirds launched its manifesto.
The founder, Ladybird 1 (membership involves abandoning one's name), introduced nine demands.
He thought the first would be the most popular: all power to the STB (the secret police).
Other demands included replacement of the currency by ration coupons, extension of military service from two years to 10, compulsory uniforms for all citizens and penalties for looking gloomy.
Cry freedom, as sealed trains reach the West
By PATRICIA CLOUGH
BONN —‘Freedom!
Freedom!’ shouted men, women and children, hugging each other ecstatically as they poured out of the trains.
‘We've done it!’
This was not the climax to a corny B-film.
It was Europe on 5 October 1989, where a vast human drama which could provide scenes for a thousand films is in progress, writes Patricia Clough.
Seventy-two years ago, the Germans shipped Lenin in a sealed train, like a dangerous bacillus, from Switzerland to Petrograd to make a revolution.
Now East Germans are shipping their own people in sealed trains through their own country to the West, and police fight back thousands who block the tracks and want to jump on board.
Hundreds gather on the platforms at Hof station, Bavaria, holding sheets of paper with names aloft on sticks, anxiously scanning the faces of the crowds pouring out of the trains, just as Germans did when millions fled before the advancing Russians or the avenging Poles and Czechs at the end of the war.
Loved ones from whom they have become separated, relatives who have disappeared — have they managed to get out or are they in some jail?
Many arrivals rush to the telephone.
‘We are here in Hof.
Frank was arrested as he tried to cross into Czechoslovakia.’
'The Czechs shot at us.’
Six-year-old Robert, clutching a small brown teddy bear, will remember how he missed school to go on a sudden ‘holiday’.
‘We told him it was a holiday in case he blabbed at the border,’ his parents explained.
Only amid the mud and chaos of the West German embassy in Prague did they try to explain where they were going.
He still does not quite understand.
Civil-defence workers serving hot soup from their mobile kitchens on Hof station have tears streaming down their faces.
They are used to all sorts of emergencies, but there has never been anything like this: their own people, prepared to face appalling hardships, possible arrest or even death to get out, arriving exhausted but so happy to be free.
‘Unless your country has been divided too, you just cannot imagine what we feel like,’ says a middle-aged secretary.
Far to the East, a young man emerges dripping from the river Neisse on the border between East Germany and Poland.
He has swum across, although he knows that more than a dozen escapers have drowned there in recent weeks and East German border guards are patrolling.
A Polish farmer fits him out with a complete set of dry clothes and sends him on to the West German embassy in Warsaw.
Three children, aged between four and seven, scream as uniformed East Berlin police drag them and their mother off and push them into a lorry as they stand outside the US embassy in East Berlin, hoping desperately to get inside.
One day, West German diplomats from Budapest, Prague or East Berlin will relate how they did business in cafes and restaurants because refugees were crammed like sardines on mattresses in their offices and the corridors.
Then there is the story of the man who, as a young law student, fled across the border from the East and now, some 40 years later, has woven the deal which brought another 15,000, many of them the age he was then, to the West.
He flew to Prague to convince the embassy refugees it was not a trap.
Their delirious joy at his announcement, said Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the West German Foreign Minister, was the most moving moment of his life.
Only the canny Mr Genscher, who knew the East Germans' minds, could have thought of letting the regime save face by ‘expelling’ their own people across their own territory.
But millions of Germans will not forget the voice of Winfried Wolk, a leader of the hitherto tame East German Christian Democrat party, almost breaking as he warned over Western television on Wednesday night that East Germany's ferment could end like that in China.
Out of the USSR: Evil is out of the closet as Moscow copies the West
By RUPERT CORNWELL
MOSCOW — Quite possibly, it is the event of the week here.
Forget about the thrills (and more numerous spills) of the great parliamentary debate on strikes, and most certainly forget the dreary speech of the Prime Minister, Nikolai Ryzhkov, on the utopia of the ‘socialist market economy’.
Much more important, the interior ministry has let it be known that it is dropping its draconian controls on the use of photocopying machines.
We Westerners may take them for granted as part of the furniture of any self-respecting office and available to all on every high street.
Not so in the Soviet Union, where some 60,000 are reckoned to be installed.
In the companies and enterprises fortunate enough to possess one, access to these necessary but — so it seems — fundamentally evil items is limited to a favoured and closely monitored few.
The machines are kept in small locked rooms.
Every document that goes through them is recorded.
Each copy is numbered and registered.
To make sure the rules are observed, and that photocopiers do not fall into ‘undesirable’ hands, 1,000 inspectors attached to the second section of the ministry's Chief Directorate for the Maintenance of Public Order have been patrolling the nation.
The official pretext for such precautions has been the need to prevent illicit production of passes, travel documents or pornography.
The true reason, of course, is a secretive state's ancestral suspicion of its own citizens, and its desire for absolute control of information.
The cost in terms of technological advance and the dissemination of fresh and stimulating ideas, is incalculable but colossal.
That the restrictions are at last to be lifted in part reflects universal acknowledgement that terror of the communications revolution has been a prime contributor to the technological backwardness of the country.
Above all, though, glasnost and greater contact with the West have brought about a fait accompli.
Like it or not, high-tech communications have arrived in the Soviet Union, and the King Canutes of the interior ministry have become an absurdity.
The bridgehead has been the small Western community, which now has the use of a state-of-the-art office services joint venture to be found at 50 Gorky Street in central Moscow, as well as‘Reprotsentr’, in which Rank Xerox is a partner.
This latter has the inestimable advantage for Soviet citizens of accepting roubles.
In truth, however, humble photocopying has been overtaken by the wonders of the fax and personal computers complete with printers.
Whatever the price of these latter (up to 20 times their cost in the West) and reinforced customs procedures for their import, they are finding their way in.
The controls in any case are surely doomed to fail.
The government has admitted it is seven to 10 years behind the West in PC technology.
Earlier this year it spent $1bn (£620m) on ordering 300,000 personal computers from West Germany.
Go to any demonstration worthy of the name these days, and you are swamped by offers to buy from an intimidating array of news sheets, statements or appeals published by informal associations.
Even 18 months ago, the material would most probably have been in the form of near-illegible carbon copies of an original laboriously produced on a manual typewriter — devices which until recently had to be registered with the authorities.
Now they are run off computers by the crisply-produced hundred.
Then there is the facsimile machine.
No self-respecting republican popular front is without one.
A month or two ago I was on the phone to the Baltic, to obtain some bloodcurdlingly seditious statement from the local nationalists.
‘Fine,’ came the reply.
‘What's your fax number?’
Sheepishly I had to admit that I did not yet have one.
Mercifully, a colleague upstairs did.
In a few minutes, six pages of Russian text had travelled from Riga to Moscow.
Rather more officially, Radio Moscow has started to sell a faxed information service of its own, using leased Japanese equipment.
So the interior ministry is about to haul up the white flag.
In communications, too, the Soviet Union has realised it must modernise or die, whatever the risk.
Beyond the slightest doubt the new technology is helping reshape politics here far more dramatically than pious talk of the ‘socialist market economy’.
The old fears of Russia's autocratic, ultra-centralised state were surely right.
Today, though, it is too late.
Hungary's old guard attacks reformers: ‘Stone Age’ conservatives are set to clash with ‘monetarists’at the party congress starting today, Imre Karacs writes from Budapest
From IMRE KARACS in Budapest
AS DELEGATES were preparing for the congress of the ruling Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party which begins today, two of the most conservative factions yesterday issued an open challenge to the party's reformist leadership.
‘The socialist order is in danger in Hungary because internal and external reactionary forces have launched a counter-offensive aimed at restoring capitalism,’ warned the manifesto of the party's ‘Marxist Unity Platform’which was read out at a mass rally in a Budapest stadium.
‘In full awareness of our responsibility, we reject the policies of the present leadership which are diverting our country from the socialist path and leading it into catastrophe.’
At another rally in Budapest, the ‘Unity Platform’ led by the former hardline ideologist, Janos Berecz, was stressing ‘Bolshevik values’and condemning the ‘monetarist policies’of the government.
But the reformists have not kept completely silent.
Yesterday's government daily, Magyar Hirlap, carried extensive interviews with two of their leaders, Imre Pozsgay and the Prime Minister, Miklos Nemeth.
In the continuing war of words between reformers and hardliners, Mr Nemeth conjured up the best insult of the day when he referred to his opponents as ‘Stone Age conservatives’.
With such an inauspicious start to the congress which is meant to be a demonstration of unity, the organisers have had to take precautions.
Three halls have been hired, just in case the split which nearly everyone expects occurs.
The event also breaks with past practices in other respects.
There will be no representative of any foreign communist party at the event, not even Moscow's man, because they have not been invited.
And no time limit has been set for the congress, simply because no one knows how long it will last and how it will end.
All the indications are that the outcome will not be the crushing reformist victory Mr Pozsgay has been predicting.
The reformist politician has already been forced to make compromises in the new party programme he has drafted, and has even had to put up with seeing the dreaded word ‘Marxism’ inserted into the version he will be proposing to the delegates today.
Less than a week ago, he said that this congress would strip the party of its ideology and change its name, but it now looks likely that he will have to settle for the second half of the forecast.
Polls taken among party members indicate an even split.
In the Budapest district of Zuglo, 47 per cent of party members said they supported the reformers, while the conservative groups of Mr Berecz and Robert Ribanszki, who have agreed a tacit alliance, obtained 33 per cent and 19 per cent respectively.
Zuglo, a mish-mash of high-rise estates, factories and prosperous suburbia, is the archetypal ‘average district’ which usually reflects national opinion.
But while the verdict of party members there was inconclusive, more than 80 per cent of them supported moves to abolish the present hierarchical structure which distinguishes communist parties from their Western counterparts.
An overwhelming majority were also in favour of the mixed economy, suggesting that the reformers are opposed not because of their policies, but because of their image.
The most sensitive issue facing congress delegates is the future of the party after next year's elections.
Mr Pozsgay wants the party to leave the factories and to allow managers to manage.
But the party's only contact with its members is the workplace, and after the elections they will be their only source of power.
For similar reasons, conservatives are also reluctant to disband the discredited Workers' Guard.
Delors implies EC might be widened
From DAVID USBORNE in Brussels
JACQUES DELORS, President of the European Commission, told West Germany that its hopes for reunification would best be served by working for a more federal Community, implying that this might one day embrace East Germany.
He also hinted that a conference expected next year to amend the EC treaty to achieve monetary union should be used for a more fundemental rewriting of the EC constitution.
Mr Delors is expected to develop the theme when he gives a speech to the College of Europe in Bruges in 10 days.
His remarks, made last night in Bonn to cabinet ministers and public servants, will enrage Margaret Thatcher and enliven the Europe debate in the Tory party.
Officials close to Mr Delors said he was convinced the pace of change in Eastern Europe had made the need for a more federal EC all the more urgent.
In his speech, he said the Twelve were providing a model of democratic co-operation and freedom that East European countries could follow.
Although he hinted, without saying it explicitly, that German reunification could mean East Germany becoming part of the EC, he argued that this depended on the Twelve prospering and developing.
‘We will not achieve this without institutional changes.
We must reflect on this now.
The creation of an economic and monetary union is, in fact, at the heart of economic integration and of political integration.’
That would mean overcoming shortcomings in the democratic answerability of the EC institutions by making the the Commission ‘more strong and more effective’.
The Commission is planning a last-ditch battle to defend tax proposals which it considers essential for completion of the 1992 internal market programme.
Aspects of its scheme to align indirect tax rates and scrap border checks face a concerted attack from national treasury officials, who have drafted a paper for consideration at a meeting of finance ministers on Monday.
Soviet threat ‘eased by troop reductions’
By MARK URBAN, Defence Correspondent
THE IDEA that the Warsaw Pact would be able to mount a surprise attack on Nato will shortly be ‘barely plausible’ because of the unilateral troop cuts started nine months ago by the Kremlin, according to experts at the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies.
John Cross, speaking at a press conference to mark the publication yesterday of The Military Balance 1989-90, the institute's authoritative annual survey of world armed forces, said that the cuts under way in the Warsaw Pact ‘do tend to support Soviet claims of new thinking’.
Conservative Western military analysts have expressed scepticism about Soviet statements that they are removing from their armed forces both the capability and the doctrine of a large-scale attack on western Europe.
Francois Heisbourg, the institute's director, said that growing tensions between different members of the Warsaw Pact are undermining its ability to act as an alliance.
Although the east European states individually retain strong bi-lateral links with Moscow, he said, the differing attitudes to reform mean that ‘there is clearly a group of countries who are no longer in alliance with another group’.
The director said that it would take between one and two weeks for the Soviet Union to send the forces it is currently pulling out, back into eastern Europe.
This would increase the warning time of any possible surprise attack.
Figures in this year's Military Balance have not been revised to take account of the reductions of 500,000 troops and 10,000 tanks announced by Mikhail Gorbachev at the United Nations last December.
Experts at the institute say that this year's figures, which include 6,700 more Warsaw Pact tanks than were previously thought to exist, mark the high tide of eastern bloc military might.