

CONFERENCES /Blackpool receives a blue rinse: Conservative Party highlights selected by Lesley Abdela
By LESLEY ABDELA
10,000 representatives, press and lobbyists will proceed to Blackpool for next week's Conservative conference which begins on Monday.
Since their poor vote in the June Euro-elections, the Conservatives have lagged well behind Labour in the polls.
Poll Tax, the Environment, the fate of the health service and the ITV licences sale will be some of the high profile issues on the agenda.
Shoals of bustling, professional lobbyists will be in Blackpool to make their voices heard.
These professional persuaders will spend an estimated two million pounds to bend the ears of the governing party.
Visitors are welcome to the fringe meetings at venues outside the Winter Gardens and Imperial Hotel.
The latter are open to pass holders only.
Events (below) in the Winter Gardens, unless otherwise stated.
JOLLIES The social life is a traditional ingredient of Conservative Party conferences — balls, receptions and parties abound, from a Lancashire hot-pot reception to Stinging Nettle And Fool's Parsley — an ‘Organic Revue’ with sketch by Conservative wit, Hornchurch MP Robin Squire, on winners and losers in the recent Cabinet reshuffle.
Info on ‘Stinging’: 01-976 5711.
INNOVATION A creche from The Party of the Family.
For the first time there will be a creche for children of representatives at the Conservative conference.
Free.
Sponsored and operated by the World of Children Organisation.
CONFERENCE HOTSPOTS CHILDCARE Childcare Crisis Fringe meeting with John Patten MP.
The Leader of the Ministerial Group on Women leads discussion on the lack of affordable quality childcare available to working parents.
Pressure is mounting for tax allowances on childcare.
Organised by National Childcare Association, National Out of School Alliance, National Childcare Campaign, Childcare Now, Working Mother's Association, Gingerbread, Workplace Nurseries and Pre-School Playgroups Association.
Queen's Theatre Monday 5.30pm.
CENTRAL OFFICE An Assessment Of Central Office Performance Charter Movement ‘To whom does Central Office Account?
Is it too much the fief of the Leader?’
The Conservative Party is the only major Party in British politics where the Party Chair, Vice Chair and Treasurer are appointed by the Leader.
Could be lively.
Expect lots of coded speeches.
Carlton Hotel Tuesday 5.30pm.
PARTY POLICY Debate on Policy and Organisation Motion 854 on behalf of Harwich Conservative Association proposed by Elizabeth Rex.
Chance for grass-roots to criticise presentation of health service policy, community charges, and the Party's June European election campaign.
Reply Speaker: Rt Hon Kenneth Baker MP.
Friday morning.
South Africa: International Freedom Foundation (UK).
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, George Gardner MP.
Tuesday 1pm Pembroke Hotel.
Europe Sir Leon Brittan, European Commissioner.
Bow Group.
Thursday 7pm Pembroke Hotel.
ENVIRONMENT 153 motions on the Environment and Planning have been submitted.
The main Environment debate (Wednesday) has been extended to two hours.
Our Environment — A Safe and Clean Future.
Virginia Bottomley MP, Parliamentary Under-Secretary for the Environment.
Conservative Women's National Committee.
Tuesday 12.45pm Blackpool Parish Church.
TORY REFORM GROUP TRG meetings are the traditional shop-window where aspiring Party Leaders display their wares: A Fourth Term — Why Re-elect the Tories?
Michael Heseltine MP.
Tuesday 1pm Grand Theatre.
East-West Relations Hon William Waldegrave MP.
Wednesday 1pm Grand Theatre.
HEALTH Health debate.
A sturdy 62 motions on Health have been submitted by Constituency Associations.
Reply speaker: Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP, Secretary of State for Health.
Tuesday 2.20pm.
Facing The Future — Health Care In The ‘90's Royal College of Nursing.
Christine Hancock, General Secretary of the RCN.
Rosalynde Lowe, Deputy General Secretary of the Health Visitors Association, Baroness Cox (herself a qualified nurse).
Thursday 12.45pm St John's Church, Cedar Square.
A Drug Free Environment Peter Lloyd MP, Junior Home Office Minister.
Conservative Women's National Committee.
Thursday lunch-time Cliffs Hotel.
WEDNESDAY Morning: Social Security and Pensions; Environment and Planning.
Afternoon: Law and Order; Education; Local Government and Community Charge.
NEW BOOKS Rt Hon John Biffen MP will be signing his new ‘everything you wanted to know about the proceedings of the House of Commons’ Guide.
Thursday afternoon CPC bookstall Julian Critchley MP The Palace Of Varieties has shot straight into the best-seller list.
Rt Hon Kenneth Baker MP Faber Book of English History in Verse, now in paperback.
A Tory Seer: Writings of TE Utley.
Edited by Simon Heffer of The Telegraph and Charles Moore of The Spectator.
Launch at The Spectator Party Thursday 10pm Imperial Hotel.
Press/passholders only.
Film News
By LESLEY ABDELA
London doesn't have a corner on film festivals: in Newcastle, the twelfth Tyneside Film Festival begins tomorrow — with free tickets for Independent readers.
The opening film, at 8.00, is Kenneth Branagh's much-hyped, much-praised Henry V. Between this, and the closing gala on 15 October (the equally hyped and praised new Peter Greenaway film The Cook, the Thief, his Wife and her Lover), the varied programme features previews of Jim Jarmusch's Mystery Train (Sun, 8.45); the spicey, very black high-school comedy Heathers (Tues, 6.15); and Bert Rigby, You're a Fool (Wed, 7.00), a comedy about musical comedies, starring Robert Lindsay.
Other highlights include mini-seasons of new Spanish cinema (for the fourth time at the Tyneside) and ‘blaxploitation’ films; plus a small Fellini retrospective.
We have two pairs of free tickets for the following screenings: The Rachel Papers, based on the novel by Martin Amis (Mon, 9.00); Scenes from the Class Struggle in Beverly Hills (Tues, 8.30), a farce about sexual imbroglio among the smart set of Bel Air, by Paul Bartel, the director of Eating Raoul; My Left Foot (Wed, 9.00), starring Daniel Day Lewis as disabled Irish writer Christy Brown; New York Stories (Thur, 8.30), the eagerly-awaited compendium film with vignettes by Scorsese, Coppola and Woody Allen; more tales from Manhattan in James Ivory's adaptation of Tama Janowitz's novel Slaves of New York (Fri, 8.30); Great Balls of Fire (next Sat, 8.45), in which Dennis Quaid pounds the ivories as Jerry Lee Lewis; and the closing gala of Greenaway's The Cook…(next Sun, 8.00).
To claim your goodies, you need to arrive at the box office after 10.00am on the date of the film you want to see, bearing a copy of that day's Independent.
More details from the Tyneside Cinema, 10 Pilgrim Street, Newcastle Upon Tyne (091-232 8289).
For dedicated Trekkies, this Sunday sees an unmissable event: the screening of all five Star Trek films, including the latest one, Star Trek V: The Final Frontier, directed by no less an authority than Captain James T. Kirk (William Shatner).
Lift-off is at 11.00am with Star Trek — the Movie, followed by Parts II, III IV and V; the programme will end at around 10.00.
Tickets for the whole event are on sale, price £10.00, from the box-office of the Empire Leicester Square, and we have pairs of free tickets for the first five readers to arrive at the cinema on Sunday morning bearing a copy of The Independent.
If you can't make this date, Star Trek V opens on 20 Oct.
FILM /Wired
By LESLEY ABDELA
Though subtitled ‘the laughs and times of John Belushi’, this ill-starred biopic is woefully short on the former component.
The story begins in a morgue, with Belushi (honourably played by Michael Chiklis), dead from drugs at 33, hopping off the slab to review his life with a guardian angel (Ray Sharkey).
This ill-advised conceit casts a pall on the piece from the outset, and it doesn't help that the skits (rewritten and reconstructed for copyright reasons) are crushingly unfunny.
But the trouble, you feel, lies with Belushi.
It may be that his gifts lay in the thrill and risk of live performance, losing their savour in aspic; or, more likely, that his genius was always overrated.
FILM /Play Me Something
By LESLEY ABDELA
In a small airport on a Hebridean island, a group of passengers await their plane.
A dapper stranger (John Berger) hoves into view and launches into a long, rather tedious yarn about two Italian peasants who meet at a Communist Party dance.
Timothy Neat directs tricksily, mixing colour and black-and-white, 35mm, 16mm and still photography, narrated and direct action; the aim is to reflect on different ways of telling stories.
But its insights rarely exceed the banal.
FILM /K-9
By LESLEY ABDELA
Yet another pair of mismatched cops, with the disposable novelty of one of them being a dog (James Belushi has the supporting role).
This tends to restrict opportunities for verbal sparring, and, with the mangy dialogue and Belushi's lack of manic spin, it seems the mutt has all the best lines.
This dog-eared plot premise will shortly resurface in Turner & Hooch.
FILM /Henry V
By LESLEY ABDELA
It's astonishing that Shakespeare's Henry V should become, except at a time of national emergency, a resonant figure.
He has so few doubts, and his objectives are so suspect.
The England he represents is not so much irrelevant as antithetical to any modern image of Britain.
Nevertheless, Kenneth Branagh, actor, director and entrepreneur, has saddled up the old warhorse and given it new colours.
The film appears to query the notion of heroism in its battle scenes, muddy, bloody, in marked contrast to the sunny patriotism of Laurence Olivier's wartime version.
But it's ultimately about winning: Henry V offers Branagh, better than any other play in the repertoire, what might be called a yuppie dynamic, a mythology of success and entrepreneurial self-definition.
FILM /Cookie
By LESLEY ABDELA
This ‘mob comedy’ is an especial disappointment, for the credentials look promising on paper: it's directed by Susan Seidelman (Desperately Seeking Susan) and co-written by Nora Ephron (Silkwood, Heartburn).
The cast, too, is strong, but Emily Lloyd (Wish You Were Here), issued with a thick Brooklyn accent, is charmless in the Madonna role, as Peter Falk's sassy, streetwise daughter.
Dianne Wiest has her moments, though, as a fluffy gangster's moll with claws of steel.
FILM /Ariel
By LESLEY ABDELA
This is the first of Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki's films to open here, but not the last: two more are lining up for release in the next six months.
It betokens a substantial talent.
In it, a miner who has been made redundant heads south to Helsinki and falls in love.
Dispensing with longueurs (the film runs 74 minutes, B-movie length), Kaurismaki traces the man's unsuccessful search for work and inevitable lapse into petty crime with clipped, deadpan comedy.
The cool narrative economy and unforced style recall early Fassbinder.
And, while none of the industrial townscapes could be described as pretty, he has a terrific eye.
FILM /A-Z of films for the capital: The programme of the 33rd London Film Festival was announced this week: We give complete details and Owen Slot picks out some of the highlights
By OWEN SLOT
In the space of sixteen days from 10 November, the London Film Festival will show some 170 films.
Such a huge number might appear to be excessive but Sheila Whitaker, the Festival Director, assures film-goers that the quality never wavers.
‘While there are good films, they should be screened,’ she says, describing the festival as an ‘embarrassment of riches’.
Top of the bill is a run of London premieres in Leicester Square cinemas beginning with Parenthood, a comedy with Steve Martin.
Other highlights include Field Of Dreams, another American baseball movie, this time starring Kevin Costner; A Dry White Season, Marlon Brando's long-awaited comeback; Last Exit To Brooklyn, a portrait of city low-life, based on the controversial banned novel and directed by Uli Edel of Christiane F fame; a good selection of American independent cinema and new films from Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The annual ‘Thames Silent’ features the classic Harold Lloyd comedy, Safety Last.
Thu 9, Fri 10 7.45 Dominion Safety Last Classic Harold Lloyd vehicle, with new score by Carl Davis, who will conduct Live Cinema Orchestra.
Fri 10 8.00 Empire Parenthood Ron Howard's comedy with Steve Martin as a beleaguered father.
Sat 11 10.30am NFT2 Making of a Legend: Gone With The Wind David Hinton's behind the scenes look at ‘the moviest of all movies’; 10.45am NFT1 The Music Teacher Belgian portrait of a distinguished opera singer; 1.00 NFT1 Fellow Traveller Philip Saville's intriguing picture of two Hollywood friends victimised under MacCarthyism; 1.15 NFT2 Journeys Inland Documentary on the Swiss; 3.30 NFT1 Icicle Thief Italian parody on the confusion between films and commercials; 3.45 NFT2 Malpractice Australian account of medical malpractice; 6.15 NFT1 The Woman From Rose Hill Alain Tanner's examination of Swiss mores; 6.30 NFT2 Where The Sun Beats Joaquim Pinto's restrained dissection of a Portuguese land-owning family; 7.45 Dominion Safety Last See above; 8.45 NFT1 Too Beautiful For You!
Gerard Depardieu in unorthodox love triangle; 8.45 NFT2 James Baldwin: The Price Of The Ticket Karen Thorsen's tribute to the black writer; 8.30 MOMI Motorist/3 Cars Auto-culture.
Sat 25 11.00am NFT1 Waller's Last Walk Christian Wagner's elegiac treatment of an eldery railway inspector's life; 10.45am NFT2 In Fading Light Gripping docu-drama on the dying North Shields fishing industry; 11.00am Curzon West End Romuald and Juliette Coline Serreau's comedy about an affair between an exec and his black cleaner; 11.00am Screen on Green Island Paul Cox's elegant three-hander; 2.15 NFT1 Guardian/AIP Seminar; 1.15 NFT2 Martha Jellneck Kai Wessell's story of an old woman's relationship with her meals-on-wheels deliverer; 3.15 NFT2 I Am Living Portrait of contemporary Indian women; 4.30 NFT1 The Thief of Bagdad Restored version of Korda's sumptuous Arabian Knights fantasy; 5.45 NFT2 I Went to The Dance Documentary by Les Blank on the Cajun music of Louisiana; 7.30 LFMC Programme 7: Interior Monologues; 9.00 NFT1 The Kill-Off Maggie Greenwald's look at a sleazy East Coast seaside resort; 8.30 NFT2 Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit Beeban Kidron's interpretation of Jeanette Winterson's autobiographical first novel, with Geraldine McEwan; 8.45 MOMI Smoking Mirror Funereal British comedy, with Beatie Edney; 11.15 Rio Chicken and Duck Talk See above.