

Tense East Germany awaits Gorbachev
From STEVE CRAWSHAW in East Berlin
EAST GERMANY battened down the hatches yesterday on the eve of Mikhail Gorbachev's arrival in its capital, Berlin, for the fortieth anniversary of the country's creation.
The border from West into East Berlin was closed for part of the day.
No explanation was given to those who were turned back, other than the Foreign Ministry's declaration that this was a ‘sovereign decision’.
In Dresden, witnesses reported violent clashes between police and would-be emigrants desperate to board trains to the West.
Police used water-cannon and truncheons against the crowds.
East German television, by contrast, focused on ponderous wreath-layings and other ceremonial events in advance of the official birthday, which falls tomorrow.
The front pages of official newspapers have been filled with tales of glorious national triumphs, offset by with a smattering of gloom from the West — unemployment in the US, drugs in Britain, and so on.
But despite all the authorities' attempts to pretend that all goes well, the birthday celebrations are moving forward in the shadow of a public mood of national crisis, dramatised by the tens of thousands of East Germans struggling to flee to the West in recent weeks.
Their millions of compatriots follow the details on West German television, day by day, while the domestic media have confined their reports to abuse against the authorities in Bonn, and sometimes against those who have left.
‘We should weep no tears for them,’ one commentator said.
Ordinary people talk constantly of the continuing exodus.
Opposition groups grow bolder.
Crowds have demonstrated in growing numbers in recent weeks -up to 20,000 in Leipzig on Monday night, chanting ‘Gorby!
Gorby!’ in the largest protest since the suppressed workers' uprising of 1953.
Many East Germans say that, though they themselves do not want to leave, there is almost universal resentment at the official lies and the unbending attitudes of the authorities, who, by cancelling visa-free travel to Czechoslovakia this week, made it even more difficult to escape what one person called ‘our cage’.
East Germany's first organised opposition group, New Forum, its aims far from radical by comparison with those now being voiced in Poland and Hungary, was established last month even as the mass exodus began.
Jens Reich, one of its founders, said yesterday: ‘There is much anger that the reality and the portrayed image are so different…
. I think we have been silent too long, we've tolerated too much for too long.’
He said that support for the opposition was growing, but many were still afraid — not surprisingly, as opposition leaders have already had officially-inspired warnings that, when the weekend's official jubilation is over, there could be a new clampdown.
The hopes of many East Germans now rest with Mr Gorbachev.
And yet he seems unlikely to bring them much comfort.
Pravda, the official Soviet newspaper, has positioned itself unambiguously on the side of the East German government's authority.
And if the Soviet leader kept silent in Peking in May, as hundreds of thousands shouted his name during the demonstrations at Tiananmen, he seems the more likely to say nothing which might inflame passions so comparatively close to home.
Winfried Wolk, leader of the East German Christian Democrat party, an ally of the government but a critic of the anniversary celebration, warned against confrontation.
Do not go out on the streets, he begged his compatriots — instead, put a lighted candle in the window for reform.
Game warden ‘most likely murderer of Julie Ward’
From STEVE CRAWSHAW in East Berlin
SIMON MAKALLA, chief game warden of the Masai Mara game reserve in Kenya, was named in court yesterday as the man most likely to have murdered Julie Ward.
Byron Georgiadis, counsel for the dead Englishwoman's family, making his closing submissions to the inquest in Nairobi, said: ‘He had the mobility and authority to drive around the reserve after dark and an intimate knowledge of the area — his kingdom.’
That should have prompted the police to question him closely, but they never did.
‘Mr Makallah had a charmed life.
He should have been the principal suspect.’
Miss Ward's charred and severed remains were found in a remote part of the game park last September six miles from her abandoned Suzuki vehicle.
Mr Georgiadis said much of Mr Makallah's evidence to the inquest had been lies — particularly details on three important issues: Mr Makallah claimed he could not drive, yet other witnesses claimed to have been driven by him; he denied telling a camp site proprietor that Miss Ward was definitely not killed by wild animals; and he covered up how he knew her jeep did not have four-wheel drive.
Mr Georgiadis said: ‘This murder has nothing to do with poachers, Ugandans, Somalians, Tanzanians or little green men from Mars…
The key to it is with Simon Makallah, who lied to us on three occasions.’
The evidence at the inquest had vindicated the struggle by the dead woman's father, John Ward, to make the authorities accept she had been murdered.
Any other explanations were bizarre, Mr Georgiadis said.
‘The police will have you believe that on the night of 12 September, after consuming half a tin of pilchards, she decided life was not worth living and hacked off her left leg with a non-existent sharp instrument.
Then she lopped off her head and finally decided to douse her mortal remains with petrol and set fire to herself.’
Labour turns down move towards electoral reform
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
THE LABOUR conference voted by a 3-1 majority yesterday to reject moves to commit the party to changing the voting system at parliamentary elections.
The strength of opposition to calls for a working party to consider the options for electoral reform delighted the party leadership.
During the debate Roy Hattersley, the deputy leader, argued that it would be ‘historic folly’ for Labour to back proportional representation; inevitable coalitions would mean that ‘we would never again have a Labour government that was able to carry out a Labour programme’.
But advocates of PR said afterwards that the issue would not go away: Labour has yet to decide its preferred method of electing its proposed regional assemblies and its replacement for the House of Lords.
Jeff Rooker, the MP for Birmingham Perry Barr, who retired from Labour's front bench last year partly to campaign for PR, said: ‘A lot more people went away from this conference convinced of the merits of the argument than is shown in the vote.’
Gavin Laird, the general secretary of the Amalgamated Engineering Union, said that it was the last ‘burning issue’ Labour needed to resolve before the next election.
Mr Hattersley said during the debate that he and Neil Kinnock were more determined than ever to resist pressure for Labour to back PR, because voters would suspect that the party lacked confidence in its ability to win under the present system.
Mr Hattersley, however, looks set for defeat in a vote over reducing the age of homosexual consent from 21 to 16.
Voting will not be announced until this morning — but gay campaigners were cheered by delegates when they protested that the party's policy review had replaced a commitment to ‘full equality’ for gays with ‘greater equality’.
Base rates hit eight-year high: Rise to 15% will lead to increase in mortgage payments, lenders say
By PETER TORDAY and PATRICK HOSKING
MORTGAGE borrowers face an increase of at least 7 per cent in their monthly bills after a widely-feared 1-point rise in base lending rates yesterday.
The Bank of England was forced to signal an increase in base rates to 15 per cent— the highest for eight years — after the Bundesbank lifted its own key rates by a full point to clamp down on West German inflation.
The Bank was tipped off by the West Germans shortly before the decision was announced, and evidently decided it would have to follow suit or risk a damaging run on the pound.
Because of West Germany's dominant economic position in Europe, nine European countries, including Britain, felt obliged to lift their rates.
After the Bank's signal to the money markets at about 2pm yesterday, Barclays Bank announced an increase in its base rate, and was quickly followed by the other clearing banks.
As a result of the increase, some banks and building societies said they expected to raise mortgage rates by between 1 and 1.5 per cent, probably from 1 November.
But they are likely to delay formal announcements until mid-October.
The increase is almost bound to have a further depressing effect on the housing market.
Although average prices across the country are rising moderately from their levels of a year ago, in the South-east they have slid by 10 to 15 per cent in the past 12 months.
The increase in rates initially sent London share prices tumbling.
The FT-SE 100 index of leading shares lost 42.0 points within an hour of the announcement.
But by the close, it had recovered slightly to finish 30.5 points lower at 2281.6.
The pound, which has been under intense selling pressure for most of the past seven trading days, rallied 2.4 pfennigs to close in London at DM3.0342.
It also finished firmer against the dollar, rising 0.57 cents to $1.6102.
The Bank of England is thought to have spent between $2bn and $3bn defending sterling against the heavy selling which developed 10 days ago after the August trade figures were released.
These revealed a deficit of £2bn in trade in goods and services — the third worst on record.
City economists welcomed the decision to raise rates and defend the pound's value, which they expect to subdue inflation more effectively.
But before that happens, inflation is expected to accelerate towards 7.5 per cent late this year because of the impact of higher mortgage rates on the retail price index.
There was also concern that a renewed upturn in inflation could inflame wage claims in the forthcoming pay round.
Abbey National said a rise of between 1 and 1.5 per cent in early November was inevitable.
The Leeds Permanent building society expected to increase rates by at least 1.25 per cent.
By yesterday evening the largest lender, the Halifax, which held out a glimmer of hope earlier in the day that it could stick with its 13.5 per cent rate, acknowleged a rise was inevitable.
The impact will not immediately be felt by the millions of borrowers on semi-fixed mortgages, whose rates are changed only once a year.
Eighty per cent of Halifax borrowers are on such ‘budget’ schemes.
Although yesterday's increase in rates intensified fears that the economy could come perilously close to recession next year, the instant judgement of most economists was that the worst would be avoided.
Ian Harwood, chief UK economist of Warburg Securities, said: ‘I'm not convinced that consumer confidence or business confidence is going to take a dramatic knock.
The economy has been so strong in the last few years it's going to take a lot to bring it down.’
This week, reductions in National Insurance contributions worth £2.8bn over the next 12 months go into effect.
The cuts, equivalent to a 2p reduction in the basic rate of income tax, are expected to replenish some of the consumers' depleted ammunition.
However, there were lingering fears yesterday that Nigel Lawson might yet be forced to raise rates even higher if another run on the pound develops because of poor trade figures.