

Bookshop Window
By MISHA DONAT
IF THIS WAS HAPPINESS by Barbara Leaming, Weidenfeld & Nicolson £14.95 Barbara Leaming wrote a biography of Orson Welles almost as fat as its subject.
This is a suitably slimmer volume on one of his wives, Rita Hayworth.
She was a professional dancer at 12; her father partnered her on stage and, according to this book, did far worse to her off it.
Screen-tested four years later, she did something nasty to her hairline in the interests of personal sultriness, and was soon starring with Fred Astaire in You'll Never Get Rich and You Were Never Lovelier.
She proved both wrong, getting richer and lovelier by the hour.
This led her into masterpieces like Gilda and The Lady from Shanghai, plus a fistful of failed marriages.
Ms Leaming tells it all with vim, though the gossip turns her on far more than the movies: ‘Aly practised an Eastern art of love known as Imsak, which allowed him to exercise indefinite control…’
With a bit more Imsak, this could have been a great book.
POETS AT WORK, ed.
George Plimpton, Penguin £6.99 So far we have had eight collections of interviews from The Paris Review.
Now the editors have picked out some plums to make up a poets' special -from Eliot and Auden, through Allen Ginsberg ('I think it was about the same time that I was having these Blake visions') to John Ashbery and the delightful Elizabeth Bishop.
Although some of the questions are dippy, the volume is an inimitable record of poetic opinions and conversational habits.
Where else could you learn that Pound threw Robert Frost over his head in a restaurant?
BOOK REVIEW /A buried treasury of wicked wits: Claire Tomalin on surprising riches in a book which traces the ancestry of women's poetry.
‘Eighteenth Century Women Poets’— Ed.
Roger Lonsdale: Oxford, 20 pounds
By CLAIRE TOMALIN
IN 1730 or thereabouts Hetty, the naughty sister of John and Charles Wesley, wrote some verses on the subject of marriage.
They ended with lines which leave the reader in no doubt as to her view of the condition: That wretch, if such a wretch there be Who hopes for happiness from thee, May search successfully as well For truth in whores and ease in hell.
Hetty, the child of a clergyman and one of 19 siblings, had been taught, as a child, to cry softly for fear of being beaten; ‘by which means,’ she wrote, ‘the family usually lived in as much quietness as if there had not been a child among them.’
Hetty could read Greek by the age of eight; not surprisingly perhaps, she was in full rebellion by her twenties.
She refused to marry the first husband proposed by her father, and ran away more than once with lovers of her own choosing; when she came home pregnant she was sold off with a dowry to a plumber called William Wright.
The couple had little in common, and her children died in infancy, one after another, a loss she attributed to the lead works Wright ran on their premises.
She was described as elegant, with great refinement of manners, and beautiful in her youth; later she had ‘the appearance of being brokenhearted’.
Although her satire on wedlock was not published for more than a century after her death, its composition elicited an immediate rebuke from her brother Samuel, who admonished her thus: Repent, renounce all wicked wit:…
So may the world your flights forget, And God forgive, and Willy pardon.
Willy, thus bracketed with the Almighty, was of course her husband.
We, however, may think that Hetty's wicked wit was the best thing about her.
This fascinating story is one of many such in Roger Lonsdale's anthology of Eighteenth-Century Women Poets, not just a marvellous piece of scholarship but as richly entertaining and original a book as I have come across for some time.
Out of the dust of the Bodleian, Dr Lonsdale has resurrected more than a hundred witty women and set them glistening and pulsing with life and spirits before us; and through their fresh and often subversive eyes, the Augustan age seems much closer than it did.
How many women poets of the eighteenth century can most of us name?
I was stuck after Anne, Countess of Winchilsea, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, Joanna Baillie, Mrs Barbauld and Helen Maria Williams.
Lonsdale's ladies are by no means all aristocrats or the daughters of schoolmasters and clergymen; they include washerwomen, milkwomen and servant girls; the disreputable and the priggish, the contented spinster and the erring Duchess; loving wives, bluestockings, governesses, actresses and invalids are all represented.
Their biographies contain material for a dozen books.
The number of women poets swelled through the century, not least because they learnt they could speak to one another in this way.
The discontents and aspirations of each individual woman found an answering voice; joined together, they became a chorus of inspiration for feminism.
They were helped by provincial publishers who saw money in the subscription system and the growing market of women readers.
Some were encouraged by Richardson, and by Dr Johnson, a fervent believer in the abilities of women.
Many of the poems naturally have feminist themes — complaints about lack of formal education, domestic duties and brutish husbands: ‘Wife and servant are the same /But only differ in the name’.
One bold woman, Miss W-, takes on Swift.
Her answer to the Dean's famous poem on Celia's dressing room ‘is not recommended to readers of a nervous disposition (ed)’; in parts it is more disgusting than the original.
It is also devastating.
‘Of course the poetry's no good,’ grumbled a friend to whom I was praising this volume.
He has not read it yet, but in any case he is wrong.
There may be no single poem in it to equal Pope's Eloisa to Abelard (1717), Gray's Elegy (1751) or Coleridge's Frost at Midnight (1798); but one of Lonsdale's intentions is to encourage us to extend our definition of what constitutes poetry.
As in his earlier anthology, The New Oxford Book of Eighteenth Century Verse (1984), he sets out ‘to question some of the deeply ingrained preconceptions about what it was possible to feel, think, and write in the eighteenth century’.
The most striking vein he mines is that of conversational and epistolatory poems; they run through the century, offering character sketches, rural and city scenes, drawing-room and marital exchanges.
One of the finest, by one of the finest poets, the Cumbrian Susanna Blamire, is ‘Wey, Ned, Man’, recording a conversation she overheard about Tom Paine's ‘Reets o'Man’.
Lonsdale also includes Blamire's enchanting epistle, written to friends and describing a day which included doctoring the local children with her own medicines.
She apologises for her simplicity, giving a busy woman's reason: ‘Tis true I write in shortened measure, Because I scrawl but at my leisure; For why?— sublimity of style Takes up a most prodigious while…
Blamire also wrote songs and lyrics of great beauty, including the well known ‘And ye shall walk in silk attire’.
The century also delivered a few gorgeous formal feminine odes: the Countess of Winchilsea's address ‘To Spleen’ and Henrietta O'Neill's ‘Ode to the Poppy’, with its almost Keatsian languor.
Lonsdale finds that, as the century progressed, increasing refinement of taste led to a loss of the informality, humour and immediacy that he prizes most; and it was precisely the strained and highflown verse that was eclipsed by the success of Lyrical Ballads.
‘Ladies’ verse' became a phrase of scorn; anthologies ceased to include any, readers forgot its existence, and Elizabeth Barrett Browning was able to complain that she had no poetic grandmothers.
Feminists will want to thank Lonsdale for restoring Mrs Browning's poetic ancestors, but not feminists alone.
Historians will find rich material, and so will the general reader prepared to browse and surrender to the many different idioms, rhythms and personalities revealed here.
A review of this length can only touch on its range.
The book has more than one useful index, notes and an informative introduction.
For a taste of the verses see the paragraph (left) from Elizabeth Hands: a servant has published a poem on the biblical story of the rape of Tamar, and here imagines the conversation in the drawing room about it.
Like so many of Lonsdale's ladies she is surprising; yet she speaks to us with a directness that wipes out the centuries.
‘Lonsdale's ladies are by no means all aristocrats.’
The actress Sarah Siddons by John Downman, 1787.
From ‘The National Portrait Gallery Collection’(NPG, £14.95) a lavish selection of paintings with useful historical essays.
Quotation from: On the Supposition of an Advertisement Appearing in a Morning Paper, Poems by a Serving Maid having been Published (1789) by Elizabeth Hands.
‘You've read it, I find,’ says Miss Harriot Anderson; ‘Pray, sir, is it anything like Sir Charles Grandison?’
‘How you talk,’ says Miss Belle, ‘how should such a girl write A novel, or anything else that's polite?
You'll know better in time, Miss.’
— She was but fifteen: Her mamma was confused — with a little chagrin, Says, ‘Where's your attention, child?
Did not you hear Miss Rhymer say that it was poems, my dear?’
Says Sir Timothy Turtle, ‘My daughters ne'er look In anything else but a cookery-book: The properest study for women designed.’
BOOK REVIEW /Thanks to the Universe: ‘The Temple of my Familiar’— Alice Walker: The Women's Press, 12.95 pounds
By JILL NEVILLE
‘A ROMANCE of the last 500,000 years’ is how Alice Walker describes her latest novel.
It is tricked out with a handsome jacket and contains the standard acknowledgements, including the author's thanks to the Universe for her participation in Existence.
Fatal signs of weakness in American women's fiction, these earnest references to ‘cheerful support’, ‘gracefulness and skill’, ‘sensitive criticism’ and ‘inspiring example’are no doubt useful as emotional blackmail to inveigle the reader into the moist sisterhood of approval.
Alas, this book need all the blackmail it can get, for it cannot stand up by itself to disinterested scrutiny.
Almost everything is wrong with it, in particular the tone, which is enormously soppy: hard to credit from the author of The Color Purple.
Most modern black writing (read largely by white readers) constitutes a Literature of Blame, and it is certainly our turn to bow the neck and bear the blows.
Once more we have the horrors of the slave-trade: the vicious overseer; the destroyed African communities; the black women endlessly raped, their backbones scraping along the ground, their smothered screams.
But, with its lack of paradox, its sonorous and sentimental prose, The Temple of My Familiar reads like one enormous gospel-chant of reassurance for blacks, devoid somehow of truth.
In fact it something called the ‘Gospel According to Shug’, which is meant to be taken seriously: ‘HELPED are those who love the lesbian, the gay and the straight, as they love the sun, the moon and the stars.
None of their children, nor any of their ancestors, nor any parts of themselves, shall be hidden from them.’
Walker retells the history of the world from the black perspective with a series of symbolic vignettes.
These ‘fireside’ monologues emerge from an assortment of inter-related characters and jump back through time to poor white Adam,(Nature's mistake).
Old Miss Lissie not only remembers her previous lives, but changes physically when she does so.
Hence photographs of herself taken by a lover look like lots of different women.
Readers who believe in reincarnation will probably not find all this such tough going.
(Sometimes the discussion of rebirth sounds like Shirley Maclean's writings on ‘channelling’, though one suspects it is not meant to.)
But it would also be helpful to believe in some paradisal previous age of matriarchy and goddess-worship, to believe in astrology and to believe in the rightneousness of each feminist reflex.
There is one scene in which the straight-guy Suwelo refuses to push a cart to the shops, he would rather go by car; pushing a cart makes him feel un-manned.
His wife Fanny is appalled by this unreconstructed maleness which is called a ‘little murder’.
Fanny is mystical and tends to go away on her own, so Suwelo has an affair with Carlotta, who wears three-inch heels.
Carlotta is just comforting herself.
Her husband, the all-wise singer Arveyda (named after a bar of soap) has run off with his mother-in-law (a terrific story, this, and well-told).
But they all end up happily together in orgasmic reconciliation.
In contrast to the melodramatic historical memoirs there is a poignant moment when Suwelo faces the memory of his parents, who were killed in a car accident.
Often the wonderful natural natural story-teller in Walker breaks through the marshmallow and has us on the edge of the chair, but finally and lamentably this is a failure.
It would be insulting to someone of Walker's stature to pretend otherwise.
BOOK REVIEW /Tales of true suffering in Eritrea: ‘Towards Asmara’— Thomas Keneally: Hodder & Stoughton, 12.95 pounds
By JEREMY BROOKS
WE HAVE become used to seeing Thomas Keneally centre his novels on well-researched historical events, from the charge of Joan of Arc (in the extraordinary Blood Red, Sister Rose of 1974) through the convict settlement of Australia, the American civil war and the negotiations that ended World War I to his Booker Prize-winner, Schindler's Ark, set in Poland at the height of the holocaust, an unforgettable and moving book.
In his new novel, Towards Asmara, Keneally is writing about the present; or, more accurately, about a historical event that is not yet over.
Eritrea's struggle for its independence from Ethiopia has gone on, first against Haile Selassie and then against the Soviet-backed Mengistu regime, since 1952, when the UN feebly handed over control of its Trust Territory to Addis Ababa.
The suffering and the slaughter have been almost unbelievable.
It is a largely forgotten war in which, as Soviet enthusiasm has waned, and Mengistu has been deposed, the Eritreans have increasingly gained the upper hand.
As I write there are a few small, unexcited newspaper reports about the progress of peace talks taking place, under the aegis of ex-President Jimmy Carter, in Atlanta, Georgia.
The Eritreans are described, as usual, as ‘the rebels’.
It is not possible to review this novel without such a background sketch, however flimsy.
The narrator of the book, Darcy, a lawyer-turned-journalist in flight from a failed marriage, is inspired by a thinly-disguised Bob Geldof figure to question his ignorance about these matters.
He makes contacts with Eritrean representatives in London, and then the professional lure of a scoop brings him, bumpily, to the front line in the mountains, with Asmara, the capital, only a 100 miles away.
Keneally himself, researching the book, trod this same hazardous path in 1987, and one may suppose that much of what Darcy describes, Keneally saw, that much of what Darcy feels, Keneally experienced.
But it is into the mouth of one of Darcy's travelling companions that the heart of Keneally's emotional response to the Eritreans is put.
This is an elderly Englishwoman who has ‘inherited’ from an aunt her engagement with ‘the struggle against the mutilation of girl children’, or female circumcision.
She is the widow of a life peer but is referred to throughout as ‘Lady Julie’— the author indulging here in a little Pom-teasing.
Lady Julie observes, as Darcy has been observing with increasing awe, the extraordinarily civilised behaviour of the Eritreans; their exemplary treatment of prisoners ('We will insult you with our compassion'); their well-organised aid programmes; their balanced egalitarianism and their passion for educating their children even under the most appallingly adverse conditions.
Finally she is forced into exclaiming, with almost bewildered amazement: ‘These people are it!
The link!
A new level of moral being!’
You may think this is way over the top, but by the time he gets there the reader, if he believes (as I do) in Keneally's veracity, will have experienced the same emotion.
Darcy focuses his own feelings on an Eritrean woman, a ‘splendid bureaucrat’ now based in Frankfurt but currently visiting the front line to renew her networks of information, and dreams hazily of a future sexual relationship with her until he discovers that she had once undergone, at the hands of the Dergue, such stomach-churning extremes of physical torture that ‘my distance from such a height of anguish disqualified me.’
Of course it would.
It is such universal perceptions as those of Darcy and Lady Julie that mark out Keneally as a major novelist.
One might, as I usually do with one of his novels, quarrel mildly about his formal devices; but that would be an irrelevant vanity.
He makes the world stand up and speak to one.
You can't niggle about detail after that.
Recommended Books
By JEREMY BROOKS
A New Path to the Waterfall by Raymond Carver, Collins Harvill £11.
A moving collection of poems by the late American storyteller, with an important introduction by his widow.
Reviewed by Hugo Barnacle, 23 September.
London Fields by Martin Amis, Cape £11.95.
A typically startling, ambitious novel of murder and other threats.
Reviewed by Wendy Steiner, 23 September.
The Trick of It by Michael Frayn, Viking £11.95.
A novel about novel-writing, which handles its tricky subject with a light touch.
Reviewed by Mark Lawson, 23 September.
Europe, Europe by Hans Magnus Enzensberger, Hutchinson £14.95.
A lively tour of continental culture, seeking for signs of unity and predicting a grim future.
Reviewed by Anthony Burgess, 30 September.
BOOK REVIEW /Sisson: poet and commuter analyst: C J Fox welcomes the scorn and vigour shown by the memoirs of C H Sisson: ‘On the Look-Out’— C H Sisson: Carcanet, 14.95 pounds
By C J FOX
C H SISSON — poet, translator, novelist, critic, polemicist, former Whitehall mandarin and the candidate who should have won Oxford's Chair of Poetry — has finally unveiled his life's story, most of it told, with typical unconventionality, backwards.
It begins in 1964 and works back to the author's birth.
‘If anything can be concluded from this book, it is that I was born,’ writes Sisson after touching on that event, which occurred 75 years ago in a building since occupied by the Bristol Rovers Supporters Club.
The author notwithstanding, many conclusions can be drawn from this steel-trap of a book; about Berlin in Thirties turmoil, for example, as observed by a keen-eyed young loner from Bristol.
Certainly it can be concluded that the circumstances of Sisson's early life fuelled his salutary hatreds and helped form the outsider's perspective which now makes him a scourge of the age's insidious orthodoxies.
So it's with added comprehension that a reader of On the Look-Out can approach the taut ferocity of Sisson's early poems and the sombreness of those more recent, the jarring plainness of his Divine Comedy and other such translations, the savagery of his two gaunt novels, and the war against fashion-induced mediocrity waged by Sisson the literary critic.
More comprehensible too are his Seventies revolt (fatal to his Whitehall career) against the trendy refurbishment of the Civil Service and his scorn for Official Culture and for further dilution of the Anglicanism he cherishes.
Sisson's background, as now revealed, was the stark world of an artisan family stuck in down-at-heel Bristol.
‘The whole country was hostile…its shabbiness I took for granted,’ Sisson recalls about his school-age surroundings.
‘I must have gone to and fro in great concentration of spirit, always anxious to get on.’
The ‘concentration of the spirit’ enabled this solitary youth to achieve a prodigious amount of literary self-education.
He thus arrived at his city's University in the Depression, well primed for encounters there with the suspect notions of Eliot, Pound and T E Hulme.
But Bristol wasn't Oxbridge, which compounded his sense of alienation from the left-wingery of those high-flying Young Gentlemen, Auden, Spender & Co.
Still, Sisson managed a ‘Herr Issyvoo’ sting of his own in the Nazified Berlin of 1934 and watched ideological street-squads slanging one another in Paris the next year.
The German sights in particular— torchlit orgies of Nazi triumph, Hitler ranting in Stuttgart, storm-troopers stamping out the last flickers of academic freedom in Freiburg — showed him what lay in store for Europe and are vividly recounted here.
Though he took his professional plunge into the Ministry of Labour soon afterwards, Sisson also began writing, taking the outsider's route by contributing to obscure journals of the heterodoxy.
His subsequent Wartime lot was equally offbeat though hardly agreeable, contending against boredom and filth along the northern marches of India.
Re-immersion in the Ministry followed this prolonged servility, but a breakthrough came with the Fifties publication of An Asiatic Romance, a satirical fantasy explosively pointing up bureaucracy's absurdity and irrelevance in a world reduced to violence and cannibalism.
By 1960, Sisson was a top Civil Servant ('civil to everyone, and servant to the devil') and had published a treatise called The Spirit of British Administration, memorable for its irony as well as its broad view of the subject.
(Of Pontius Pilate: ‘The steps he took to still a particular local clamour were more or less what the service required, and he washed his hands with a civilised regret.’)
The collections of his poetry began to appear, notably a searing logbook of life as a commuting careerist, The London Zoo.
The floodgates were now open and it is from here that the reverse sequence of On the Look-Out commences.
This ‘partial autobiography’ bristles satirically.
Manchester, for instance, is deemed ‘one of those disgraces by which the human race advertises the squalor and turpitude of its mind.’
Of parish-pump politics in his old suburban nesting place, Sevenoaks: ‘While everyone would pretend that a solution was what was wanted when there was a problem, in fact what most people wanted was trouble…
The fatal addiction of the human race to trouble is something which, even at 50, has not ceased to amaze me.’
The technique of reverse narrative is nothing new for Sisson.
His novel, Christopher Homm, took its forlorn hero from septuagenarian death back to his doom-shrouded entry into life.
On the Look-Out derives extra momentum from this eccentric procedure.
But Sisson, in addition to bringing his story up to date with a final chapter, interjects halfway through a lengthy segment on his war.
With its subject-matter mainly the crushing ennui of that experience, this section hampers the flow of the overall narrative somewhat, despite the crispness of its recollections.
Much more telling as a crystallization of the Wartime ordeal is ‘In the Raj’, included in that lynchpin volume of Carcanet's big Sisson list, the 1984 Collected Poems.
But as if to prove his powers of condensation in the autobiography, Sisson exercises remarkable reticence on matters of personal and family sentiment.
Yet throughout he brandishes a fearless and confident individuality of judgement.
There is exhilaration to be had from his fresh vistas, vigorous assertions as they are of a truly independent mind.
BOOK REVIEW /The cause without a rebel: ‘The Pale Companion’— Andrew Motion: Viking, 11.95 pounds
By MARTIN PACEY
IT WAS unfair of Auden to suggest, in his ‘Letter to Lord Byron’, that a poet's ‘sense of other people's very hazy’.
But the vaporous presences that float through this slender and anaemic first novel by a notable poet would appear to support the claim.
The book — which opens a projected sequence of novels that will cover the period from 1968 to the present day — aims to explore what the blurb describes as ‘the painful transition from youth to adulthood’.
This, of course, is a popular subject: it seems particularly attractive to the poet-turned-novelist because of the scope it offers for the tremulously sensitive probing of feelings.
Sensitivity, though, is not enough.
What Andrew Motion presents us with here is a static and humourless mood-piece filled with over-elaborate imagery.
The hero, Francis Mayne, is suffering from the adolescent's emotional confusion and acute self-consciousness.
He finds it hard to communicate with people, not least his separated parents.
His father is a faceless figure: a retired brigadier, reserved and taciturn.
His mother, by contrast, is the most vividly realised character in the book: nervy, flirtatious and selfish, already on her third husband, she thinks primarily of her appearance, even when visiting her dying daughter, Francis's twin.
The first half of the novel is dominated by the girl's death from leukaemia.
There is a refreshing simplicity and tenderness in Motion's account of the way Francis nurses her, but she herself is too sketchily drawn for the episode to carry much weight.
Meanwhile, at his public school, Francis is conducting a love-affair with an older pupil named Keith Ogilvie.
He is finally rejected by the devious, arrogant Keith, who informs him that he is ‘obsolete’ because he does not ‘know how to make things happen’.
His response to this rejection is as flat as his reaction to the massive demonstration which Keith has earlier persuaded him to join against the Vietnam War.
This violent event, described at length in hysterically colourful terms, is the only piece of history to be woven convincingly into the plot.
Other broad hints as to the date are inserted with a comical lack of subtlety: ‘My God, darling, have you heard?’ exclaims Francis's mother one day as she greets him, ‘Czechoslovakia.
It's been invaded.’
Motion will have to do better than this if he seriously intends his series of novels to capture the feel of a period.
But the book's principal defect remains the vacuity of its protagonist.
In his eagerness to depict the cloudy psychology of an adolescent, Motion has forgotten to give the boy a personality.
He has, however, given him a psychotic compulsion to formulate fanciful similes.
Hardly a page goes by without the hapless Francis noticing something which reminds him, improbably, of something else.
Sometimes he is reminded of several things.
One moment an avenue of chestnut trees looks ‘like a child's drawing of ghosts’; the next it appears ‘frightening but derelict, like extinguished chandeliers’; and finally the chestnuts ‘prance at him, holding up their gleaming branches like hysterics.’
Such writing rapidly palls, and I hope that in the novels to come, Motion can curb his reckless passion for it.
BOOK REVIEW /The tooth and the socket: ‘The Bellarosa Connection’— Saul Bellow: Penguin, 3.50 pounds
By ANTHONY QUINN
A TITLE like The Bellarosa Connection tends to imply two things: first, that the book will be a jacket-straining 600 pages; and second, that its author will be Robert Ludlum.
Neither is the case.
Saul Bellow's new novella, his second in six months, is a mean 100 pages.
Coming from a writer whose reputation is built on large, expansive, improvisatory novels, these two miniatures seem a bit of an anomaly, or maybe just a diversion.
A Theft was exhilarating, but it faded very quickly; this new one, too, suffers a slight anticlimactic wobble at its turning point.
The story is recounted by the unnamed founder of the Mnemosyne Institute in Philadelphia, an elderly widower who has recently retired after making his millions as instructor to ‘executives, politicians and members of the defense establishment’.
His theme is memory, a faculty with which he has been prodigiously blessed, though his origins as ‘the child of Russian Jews from New Jersey’ are held rather as a noble refusal to forget.
This same impulse leads him to recall the life of Harry Fonstein, a distant friend who miraculously escaped the Nazi holocaust, thanks to an underground operation masterminded by the Broadway impresario Billy Rose, or ‘Bella Rosa’ as his name sounds when whispered in excitable Italian.
Having arrived in New York via Cuba, the immigrant Fonstein seeks out Rose in order to express an entirely natural gratitude, but is shunned at every turn.
His letters are sent back, and when he tries to approach Rose in a restaurant he is ignored, then ejected.
The narrator identifies a larger issue behind this slight: it is the conflict between two kinds of Jewishness, between the embattled, coarse-grained immigrant from Europe and the wordly, go-ahead American, who rates business acumen and individual assertion over the value of community ties.
Billy is a thoroughly American creation, a Broadway mogul, dandy and gossip columnist with a ‘bug-like tropism for publicity’.
His bloated self-aggrandisement is punctured, however, by the formidable intervention of Harry's ‘tiger wife’.
Sorella, an enormous woman who brings out Bellow's near-parental tenderness for physical peculiarity.
Her obesity also represents a spiritual condition extended into bodily metaphor: hers is an immensity of soul.
Confronting Billy with his unworthy behaviour towards her husband, she exposes this ‘legend’ as a cheap fake.
When Sorella recounts this face-off, it's also intended as a moment of recognition, an anagnorisis, for the narrator.
Yet her candour and self-knowledge —‘I am built like a Mack truck.
My flesh is boundless’-hardly qualify as a testament to a ‘major force of personality’.
Does Bellow think we should be amazed?
These insights look rather small when set next to his previous books of revelations.
If there has been a diminution in the voltage, however, there are compensating pleasures of wit.
Even the minor characterisations in this book bristle with prickly detail; the narrator's unloved Aunt Mildred ‘had a powdered look, like her own strudel’; Wolfe, one of Billy's ghost-writers, ‘builds up his reputation as a weirdo nihilist.
He wants to become the Thomas Mann of science fiction’.
This dry contempt strolls out even when its target is invisible: the narrator telephones the Fonsteins' house years after they have lost contact and is answered by a young man, on whom he forms an immediate image —‘a thick head of hair, a beer paunch, a T-shirt with a logo or slogan.
Act Up was a popular one.’
The conversation which follows is the last in the book, and the weakest, too, a stagey means of imparting some crucial news for Bellow to fulminate against all that is rotten and cynical in American youth.
It's passionately felt, for sure, but perhaps not adequately dramatised.
When that news hits him, the narrator seems to crumble, even though a premonitory dream the night before has readied him for the shock.
Shadows have lengthened stealthily in the course of The Bellarosa Connection, gathering for what Martin Amis described in later Bellow as ‘last things, leave-taking, and final lucidities’, and at the close there is a quietly affecting image of the narrator setting down his story, alone.
‘At times I feel like a socket that remembers its tooth’, he writes, trying to retain some sense of the world even as he prepares to leave it.
BOOK REVIEW /Alpine village idioms: ‘Once in Europa’— John Berger: Granta Books, 10.95 pounds
By HUGO BARNACLE
THIS STRONG collection of stories is the second in a trilogy about the peasants of the French Alps, where John Berger lives.
He produces the stories at a craftsmanlike rate, no more than one a year, so it is some time since the appearance of the first volume, Pig Earth.
The cover photograph shows Berger gone native, in dark suit, stiff collar and homburg hat, for all the world like a French shepherd (a berger, in fact) on his way to a wedding.
‘In our village, as in many villages in the world at that time, there was a souvenir shop,’ one story goes.
‘You could buy there skiers in glass bottles…clockwork marmots, goat horns…sunglasses, imitation butter-churns, my books.’
It is part of Berger's purpose that he be seen as a village artisan.
Pig Earth dealt with the traditional pattern of Savoyard life.
This book is set against the breakdown of the pattern in recent times, the next will concentrate on peasants who have moved to the city.
But the stories have a universal appeal simply as stories, and it is good that the underlying programme seldom obtrudes as badly as in the gift-shop passage above, where the helpful aside about tourism affecting rural culture worldwide strikes a primary-school note.
The gift-shop used to be a farmhouse, one of several owned by the skinflint farmer Boris who made his fortune by never paying bills.
The house now belongs to a buxom blonde from Lyon, wife of a driving instructor.
When Boris began sleeping with her, villagers who wondered what would happen if the husband found out were told by wiser villagers: ‘If you'd lived in a big town you'd know that the husband knows.’
Boris showered the woman with presents, eventually including the house which was what she (and her husband) really wanted.
Realising that she had not loved him, Boris then starved himself to death.
Berger sets this story up by saying: ‘Sometimes to refute a single sentence it is necessary to tell a life story’: one villager mistakenly claims that ‘Boris died like one of his own sheep, neglected and starving’, whereas the admittedly ill-tended flock was in fact killed by lightning.
Here Berger's roundabout, local-storyteller manner seems laboured.
It works better in another piece, beginning: ‘If every event which occurred could be given a name, there would be no need for stories.’
A young girl discovers that the old shepherd across the valley, her only friend, is passionately in love with her.
Disturbed, she at once falls for a kind, handsome Italian woodcutter, becomes pregnant and elopes.
Years later, in Bergamo, she still teaches the old shepherd's phrases to her talking blue-rock thrush.
As Berger asks, what was the old man's relation to the girl's baby?
Not quite the godfather.
There is indeed a certain nameless truth to this one.
It is a pity that Berger inserts passages told by the girl, which do not fit.
In contrast the title story is narrated entirely by the heroine, and from mid-air too.
Her son has taken her up in his hang-glider (can you carry two on a hang-glider?), and she recalls her life and loves as she sails over the old family farm and the nearby manganese factory where it all happened.
Berger impersonates her to a fault, both in the superb egotism of female love —‘It is painful for us to judge the man we've taken, for he's already ours, like a son’— and in the certitudes of peasant thinking: ‘I will tell you which men deserve our respect…
The rest are pigshit.’
The best stories, though, are perhaps the first, about a middle-aged bachelor farming alone after his mother dies, and the last, about a member of the village brass band picking up a woman on a bus trip to Venice.
These are the most simply told, and they have a nicely judged lack of any obvious point.
Berger's writing is wonderfully clear: once the book is opened it just reads itself out.
Toil, weather, human character and the quirks of animals are all graphically rendered, as well as the way in which newly-lifted potatoes glow ‘like children's shoulders after a day in the sun’, or in which the voice of a once-active young man now crippled by an accident becomes ‘far-away, like a priest's voice at the altar’.
Whether as social document or as fiction the completed trilogy could be, if fashion permits, a minor classic.