

Leading Article: Hopes of better times deferred
By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
THERE is a certain symmetry in the evolution of the fortunes of the two major political parties in the past week.
At its conference in Brighton, the Labour Party showed that it is on the way to becoming an electable party.
The best hope of it actually achieving power would be a prolonged demonstration by the Conservative Government that it cannot run the economy competently.
Thursday's raising of base interest rates to 15 per cent in the wake of the Bundesbank, although unavoidable, has embarrassingly reinforced that impression.
Coming on top of a worryingly high inflation rate and a sequence of record-breaking trade deficits, Labour will be working hard to demonstrate that ordinary people are paying dearly for mistakes which the once super-abundantly confident Chancellor has made in economic management.
The latest interest rate rise will also cause some genuine anger at next week's Conservative Party conference in Blackpool, since it hits both mortgage-holders and entrepreneurs.
Mr Lawson will be hard pressed to convince delegates with his perpetual refrain: that all is under control and better times are not far ahead.
For Labour, it has been a good week.
At last it has achieved a respectable measure of unity at most levels of the party.
For once attention could be focused not on its divisions, but on its policies.
Some of these remained conveniently imprecise; but in his keynote speech, Neil Kinnock sketched an angle of attack with high potential appeal to the large floating centre of the British electorate.
In language which sounded convincingly like a social democrat's, he indicated that Labour would concentrate investment on the new commanding heights of the modern economy — education and training — and on technical research and the transport system.
With that emphasis, Labour could hope to appeal strongly to a wide spectrum of the middle classes, from parents who are desperately worried about their children's schooling to commuters fed up with the run-down public transport services and clogged roads.
Their votes will be vital if seats long since lost to the Conservatives are to be regained.
The irony is, however, that the economic crisis which might clinch their switch to Labour at the next election — with continuing balance-of-payments problems, punishing interest rates, a sinking pound, inflation and recession — would by definition preclude the heavy public investment required to implement the Kinnock programme.
It must be said, however, that this is a nightmare scenario which the Government does not subscribe to.
Ministers are, significantly, confident that an upturn can be achieved in good time before the next election.
Relations between the Prime Minister and Nigel Lawson may still be strained (she blames him for the present difficulties).
But there is no division over what needs to be done, or any question of ditching Mr Lawson.
Interest rates will have to remain painfully high for some months, and departmental spending will be made to stay within the current planning totals: even the big-spending ministers recognise they are involved in bidding against each other, rather than against the Treasury.
The Conservative case is that the present economic situation does not amount to a crisis.
The balance-of-payments deficit is not as bad as it looks, partly because it stems from private sector choices rather than public sector profligacy, and is thus inherently less inflationary as individuals cannot resort to the printing press to ease the burden of their debt; and partly because much of it may be imaginary, since the figures omit the ‘balancing item’ of unrecorded net receipts from overseas assets.
On this analysis, the economy remains fundamentally sound.
The most critical period will be this winter's round of wage negotiations.
If it can be weathered without undue damage, interest rates should fall sharply in the latter half of next year.
The Government's accumulated fiscal surpluses will then be available both to revive an economy which has had the excess heat taken out of it during 1989/90 and to restore its electoral fortunes.
The danger for the Government is that it may all come just a bit too late to expunge the memories of our current travails and of too long a period of neglect for the supply-side of the economy to respond.
In such circumstances, the new Kinnock approach — as long as he can show that it is not irredeemably inflationary — might appear quite attractive to people who would not otherwise have considered voting Labour.
Quote Unquote
By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
THE days must go when they can wake up a judge at dead of night, give him a drop of brandy, show him a headline in The Sun, and get him to sign an injunction.
Ron Todd on anti-strike laws.
During the period we were watching, we counted between 2,200 and 2,300 going into the launderette.
Only 217 took in washing.
Chief Supt Richard Stacey on surveillance at Broadwater Farm The curse of drug addiction, which hovers like a dark cloud over entire nations, is surely one of the most serious menaces to freedom in our time.
Pope John Paul.
I refuse to stand by and do nothing.
Abe Nathan, Middle East peace campaigner, jailed for six months in Israel for meeting Yasser Arafat The existence of the Socialist German Democratic Republic is good fortune for our people, and for the peoples of Europe.
Erich Honecker.
Who wants to celebrate on 7 October (fortieth anniversary of the GDR)? resident of East Berlin The successful are always tempted to regard their success as a sort of blessing or reward for righteousness.
This can lead to judgements being made about the unsuccessful, the unemployed, the poor and the unintelligent which are both uncharitable and untrue.
Archbishop of Canterbury.
With that skirt, you could see everything she had.
She was advertising for sex.
Ray Diamond, foreman of jury in Miami which cleared a man of rape.
I cannot give you a firm promise that this is the turning point.
Nigel Lawson after raising the base lending rate to 15 per cent.
There will be an orange lily growing there next year.
Rev Ian Paisley at the roadside where he answered a call of nature.
I am not Lord Longford in drag.
The Princess Royal on her prison visits.
It looks like a scene set from Beau Geste or one of those biblical epics.
We are the extras.
Dennis Skinner on Labour's conference rostrum
Profile: The stirrer in communism's kitchen: Imre Pozsgay, Hungarian reformer
By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
He has Hungary's second highest academic title in Marxist philosophy, has spent half his life teaching and disseminating the official ideology, and is one of the leaders of the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party, which calls itself the ‘vanguard of the working class’.
But the enthusiasm which burned inside Imre Pozsgay when he joined the party at the age of 17 has been extinguished by the bitter experiences of the past 40 years.
He now describes communism as an ‘abstract concept’ and is this weekend busily exorcising the ghosts of Marx, Lenin and Stalin from his party, which opened its congress yesterday in Budapest.
Mr Pozsgay has become what all religions fear most — a renegade.
Born 56 years ago into a moderately well-to-do family in the village of Konyi in southern Hungary, Mr Pozsgay had no personal motivation to espouse revolution, unlike many of his contemporaries who were driven to the party by abject poverty.
He was one of the army of young idealists who believed that ‘scientific socialism’ held all the answers for their war-ravaged country.
‘We shall overturn the whole world by tomorrow,’ they chanted with earnest conviction.
This they very nearly achieved.
By the time Mr Pozsgay joined up in 1950, the communists had strangled all other parties and executed many ‘class traitors’ within their own ranks.
But for Mr Pozsgay and his fellow thinkers, the end always justified the means.
To strengthen his beliefs, Mr Pozsgay enrolled at Budapest's Lenin Institute to study history and Marxism-Leninism.
He was a final-year student there when he went down to the provincial town of Kecskemet to earn some pocket money by delivering lectures.
The date was October 1956 and in Budapest anti-communist demonstrators and the Hungarian army were clashing with Soviet tanks.
Mr Pozsgay did not rush back.
By consequence of his inaction, he is the only leading communist of his generation today to be completely untainted by the 1956 uprising and its aftermath.
At the end of his studies, Mr Pozsgay was sent back in 1957 to Kecskemet, to become director of the county party committee's Marxism-Leninism evening school.
In 1965, at the age of 32, he became an apparatchik, first as a department head of the county party committee and then, in 1968, its secretary.
This was the year of the first wave of reforms in Hungary, when thinking communists were beginning to realise that something had gone awfully wrong.
Economic decentralisation was coupled with political liberalisation, and regional party bosses were allowed to experiment.
Mr Pozsgay's contribution was his support for ‘populist’ writers who drew their inspiration from rural Hungary and championed ‘national values’.
Their concern for the Hungarian minority in Romania at a time when relations between Budapest and Bucharest were excellent frequently landed them in trouble with the authorities.
This period marks the beginning of his life-long friendship with a group of writers and intellectuals who now dominate one strand of Hungary's political life.
From Kecskemet, his path led to the party headquarters in Budapest.
Gyorgy Aczel, the liberal-minded ideology chief, spotted the talented regional boss and took him under his wings.
In 1970, Mr Pozsgay joined the Agitprop department — the party's watchdog on ideological purity and the media.
A year later he moved again, to become deputy editor of the party's turgid theoretical review, Tarsadalmi Szemle.
Whatever Mr Pozsgay thought of the hardline backlash which began around 1973, he kept it to himself.
There is no point in looking for any improvement in the journal while he was second in command — there was none.
Mr Pozsgay kept rising.
In 1975, at the peak of the conservative onslaught, he was appointed deputy minister of culture, and a year later was put in charge of the ministry.
The Pozsgay era there was as unremarkable in Hungary's cultural life as his tenure at the party review had been.
His literary proteges were allowed to publish more and the film industry also prospered.
But there was a limit to what Mr Aczel, the party's ideologist, could tolerate and the gradual thaw was frequently punctuated with repressive measures against those who fell out of line.
Nevertheless, Mr Pozsgay did at least emerge from his six-year stint at the head of the ministry as a man who deserved credit for trying.
Though he was clearly the more liberal half of the Aczel-Pozsgay tandem, he lost his job because of personal differences with his boss and not, as he claimed, for political reasons.
Mr Pozsgay was simply fed up with playing second fiddle, a characteristic that was to re-emerge later.
The ‘impertinent Pozsgay’, as party leader Janos Kadar called him, was made boss of the party's powerless umbrella body, the Patriotic People's Front, in 1982.
As head of this embodiment of pluralism in a one-party state, his job was to ensure the communists got the required 99 per cent vote at elections and to maintain some semblance of a dialogue with people in the grey area between loyalty and opposition.
But then the unthinkable happened.
Mr Pozsgay, the soft-spoken intellectual who had loyally served the party all his life, rebelled.
Instead of submitting his organisation to the will of party bureaucrats, he turned it into his own power-base and started bombarding the party with his own initiatives.
He used ceremonial occasions to launch scathing attacks on conservatives and took on the role of the spokesman of all Hungarians, inside and outside the country.
In the forest of intellectual midgets with whom Janos Kadar surrounded himself, Imre Pozsgay, the powerful orator, became a star.
Reformists, closet-reformists and non-party intellectuals gathered in his home, feeding him their ideas and plotting against hardliners.
In 1987, the conspiracy stepped out of his living room into the limelight with the founding of the Hungarian Democratic Forum, now the largest opposition party.
The Forum's programme, which Mr Pozsgay helped to publicise, very closely resembled his own ideas: democracy, an autonomous society, freedom of expression, a proper constitutional order and radical economic reforms.
Other people and think-tanks had come up with a similar recipe before and never had much impact.
What they lacked was Mr Pozsgay's eloquence, access to the media and the ability to relate these lofty ideas to the man and woman in the street.
This is where Mr Pozsgay's training as the people's spokesman became useful.
By linking Hungarian national aspirations, in a language reminiscent of the country's greatest writers, to the general yearning for democracy, he struck a chord.
By the time Kadar realised what was happening, it was too late.
At a party conference in May last year, Kadar was replaced by Karoly Grosz and Mr Pozsgay was swept into the Politburo on the crest of the reformist wave.
But the comings-and-goings at the Pozsgay household did not stop.
He and his friends were already planning to oust the new boss and seize the party.
There are many people in Hungary nursing stab wounds in the back who can testify to Mr Pozsgay's first-class conspiratorial skills, but few have caught him wielding the knife.
Lacking the stomach for open combat, Mr Pozsgay unleashes terror on his opponents by proxy, when they least suspect it.
When one quiet weekend this February Mr Grosz left the country on a short trip to Switzerland, little did he know what would await him on his return.
For on that Saturday Mr Pozsgay organised a radio interview to tell the world that a party committee working under him had come to the conclusion that 1956 had been a popular uprising, thus ensuring that the terms of reference in Hungarian politics would never be the same again.
A hastily convened Central Committee meeting fudged the question of 1956, but not before Mr Pozsgay extracted the greatest concession possible: the green light to the multi-party system.
By then the Pozsgay bulldozer was rolling ahead at full speed.
Reform circles were springing up all over the country, calling for Mr Grosz's dismissal.
True to style, Mr Pozsgay claimed only to be a sympathiser of the movement and not its instigator.
All these schemings take a lot of energy, and Mr Pozsgay has plenty.
He darts around the country in the same blue pin-stripe suit, delivering variations of the same speech.
He frequently gives interviews, and has got television performances down to a fine art.
His boyish smile and double chin are now instantly recognised by Hungarian and — increasingly — by foreign viewers.
In his spare time he reads social science journals and contemporary Hungarian literature, or cooks for his family or friends.
His spicy fisherman's soup is legendary.
Mr Pozsgay has been written off many times.
A television commentator once said he stood no chance of becoming Hungary's leader because he was too fat.
Well, a little thing like that should not be allowed to stand in the way of such a great man, so Mr Pozsgay now spends one hour a week in the gym.
He has one great ambition: to be leader of a democratic Hungary.
Even six months ago, that seemed an impossible dream, but now, who knows?
If the final hurdle of this party congress is cleared, Hungary will be on the threshold of multi-party democracy.
The other half of his ambition has never been in doubt.
Mr Pozsgay's popularity ensures that if he stands, no one will defeat him in the presidential election.
He feels no need to conceal his personal ambition.
Deep down, he is convinced that he is the best thing that has happened to his country since the invention of goulash.
He may well be right.
Whatever the future holds for him, Mr Pozsgay has already ensured that his name will for ever be written in Hungarian history books.
Closed world of the potato harvest
By DUFF HART-DAVIS
ON FARM after farm around us the potato harvest is coming in — but the lifting of spuds is not what it used to be.
Gone are the days when women and children scrabbled along the furrows in the wake of a plough or simple digger collecting the fruits of the earth by hand.
Now the job is done by vast machines, which, with their great bulk and ponderous gait, resemble elephants travelling in reverse, the chute for the reject stalks hanging at the back like a canvas trunk.
To observe modern methods, come aboard this red monster, which, if new, would cost about £25,000.
One tractor pulls it, another keeps a trailer moving alongside to receive the crop.
The farmer and his younger son are the drivers.
The crew of the harvester consists of five men, one woman and a sure-footed terrier called Benson.
We humans stand facing each other, three and three, high in the body of the machine.
Were it an elephant, our feet would be in its midriff, our heads just under its rib-cage.
Instead of ribs, the machine has a canvas roof to shield us from the weather, and although one can peer out through slits here and there, the effect is of travelling in a closed world, like an outsize gypsy wagon.
Overhead is a communication cord, as in a train.
A tug on it sounds a buzzer in the driver's cab and brings him to a halt.
Here we go, then, at a good half-mile an hour.
Far down below us, out of sight, a scoop burrows through the earth, lifting a single drill at a time.
This autumn the ground is so dry that most of the earth falls away through the gaps in the conveyor-belts, but the digger cannot distinguish between potatoes, stones and potato-sized clods of mud, and the whole lot are delivered aloft, along two belts made of metal rods.
At the back of the machine, on our level, an ingenious device separates out most of the stones: a circular rubber pad revolves below brushes, which are stiff enough to sweep the potatoes off into their special channel, but not rigid enough to dislodge the stones until later.
The idea works well, but it is not infallible.
This is where we humans come in.
As soon as the monster is in motion, twin tides of spuds and stones come pouring along the two channels, potatoes on one side, rocks on the other.
But in the potato channel are lumps of earth and a few stones masquerading as vegetable, and in the stone channel a few potatoes pretending to be mineral.
The noise is formidable, for the rocks clatter and bang away down a steel chute that dumps them back on the ground.
Our job is to sort everything out: to snatch the rocks and clods from the potato channel, and whip rogue spuds from among the stones.
The job demands intense concentration; even with six pairs of hands grabbing, the flow is almost too fast to be dealt with precisely.
At the end of each drill, as the tractor turns, the flood dwindles, the noise dies away, and we get a break.
The relaxed atmosphere breeds bantering conversation.
In the old days it needed a team of 20 women to do the equivalent job — and even then they did it less than half as fast.
‘Couldn't get ‘em now,’ says the farmer's wife scornfully.
‘They don't want to know.
If you do get somebody, one day of it about kills her.’
‘Yes,’ says my neighbour, who sports a white linen cap.
‘And the rest of ‘em tell you where to go.’
We are rolling again.
The noise builds up to a shattering roar.
Gossip is impossible now.
Go for the clods, spot the rocks.
Lurching along in this enclosed space, one loses all sense of direction.
The field is on a slope, so that there is a difference between going up and going down — but that is all.
These potatoes are round and white, a new Dutch strain, being grown in Britain for the first time this year.
They have been bred specially for chipping: they are not good for boiling because they tend to explode, but they cook fast and — hideous thought — absorb fat quickly.
The small ones will be kept back for seed, and anything damaged by worms or excavation will become cattle fodder; but all the rest go for chips.
Towards the bottom of the field the stones lie thicker.
An absolute torrent of them comes pouring through and down the junk-chute.
‘Bring your wheelbarrow!’ yells the man in the white cap merrily.
‘You can have a few of they.’
The volume passing grows too great to be sorted properly.
‘Stop him!’ somebody yells.
The man opposite me yanks the communication cord, and we lurch to a halt.
AS WE turn, discussion falls on the possibility of getting rid of the stones.
They could, in theory, be collected in another trailer and taken away, instead of being put back on the field.
But if you did that (the farmer's elder son reckons), the plough would simply bite deeper next time round, and bring another few hundred thousand to the surface.
Back at the top of the hill, the trailer alongside is full.
Eight tons of spuds: how many chips will that make?
How much salt and vinegar will this one load take down with it?
Better not think about it.
If things continue to go well, the day's work will produce three times that amount.
But now it is one o'clock, and I, being only a volunteer, can step down for lunch without loss of face.
The rest will do a nine-hour day — after which, I imagine, they will be seeing potatoes in their sleep and grabbing at phantom clods of earth for half the night.
Compared with that heavyweight operation, our own domestic harvest seems small beer.
Yet in the garden digging proceeds amid no mean excitement, for this year we have grown, for the first time, that exotic variety, the pink fir apple.
It must be admitted that these potatoes look obscene.
There is no other word for them.
Pink (as their name suggests), elongated, covered with nobbles and excrescences, they might be anatomical specimens: barely mentionable organs, far gone with some disgusting disease.
There is something of the artichoke in their irregularity, something of the pork sausage in their shape and colour.
Their appearance deceives.
One of their advantages is that they are an early potato which comes to maturity in autumn.
Even now they do not need peeling: a wash is enough.
Yet easily their greatest asset is their flavour: they have a marvellous, meaty texture and more taste than any other spud I know.
Hot with butter, cold with mayonnaise, they are excellent at any meal.
When Sainsbury's introduced them into their supermarkets two years ago, people hit them hard.
Pink fir apples became, in the words of a spokesman, ‘one of our most popular speciality lines’.
This week they went on sale again, at the ludicrous price of 92p for a 608-gramme punnet, or about 70p a pound.
Now I have a dire suspicion that pink fir apples are being kept down artificially, that a cartel is operating.
One hears odd whispers to the effect that the production of seed is limited, and that only a few growers are allowed to handle them.
The secret — which I now divulge — is that they are dead easy to grow.
There is no mystique about their cultivation.
Put them in the ground, and up they come.
So I urge anyone with a garden to visit Sainsbury's, keep back a few potatoes at the end of the season, before Christmas store them carefully and plant them in the spring.
If you do that, 92p should give you not a punnet but a bucketful.
My Week: Conjuring tricks with a sewing basket
By WILLIAM DONALDSON
The spectacle last week of 400 officers in riot gear running round the Broadwater Farm Estate and finding little or nothing in the way of drugs reminded me of Sir Robert Mark's definition of a good police force as one which employed fewer criminals than it caught.
He went on to say that the Met failed in this respect, and it is certainly the case that in the late Sixties some policemen would have taken the evidence with them, later, with a conjuror's flourish, producing sackfuls of cannabis from behind the furniture with cries of ‘Hullo John!
What have we here?’
Times change, I suppose — which is not to admit that fat generalisations about the Sixties, Seventies or Eighties are less problematic than statements about any other logical fiction, be it the nation, a salad, the MCC or whatever.
The activities of politicians, pop stars and policemen notwithstanding, life for most people is much the same, obviously, whatever decade it is — more or less endurable if you are young, that is, and quite the opposite if you are not.
Thus, when my boy Charlie says, ‘What were the Sixties like, Daddy?’
I always reply, ‘It's the Sixties for you now, dear, so you get out there and make a wally of yourself’— and he has never let me down in that respect, I am glad to say.
Even the fact that disappointed old toss-pots — unable to grapple with the idea that people once enjoyed themselves without getting drunk, vomiting and hitting one another— still react to the Sixties, as a notion, with comical indignation has never convinced me that there was anything special about that time.
Now I'm not so sure.
In the past week I have seen an exhibition of photographs by Lewis Morley — billed as ‘Photographer of the Sixties’— at the National Portrait Gallery and I have reviewed elsewhere Paparazzo!, a collection of pavement snaps, taken during the Thatcher years, more or less, by someone called Richard Young.
The contrast between the images is quite extraordinary.
Morley's subjects were delightful, talented young people, clearly, who got on with the job and threatened no one.
Young's victims, on the other hand -silly old men and odd little tarts on their way home from Tramp and Langans -looked utterly mad, their faces contorted with rage and disappointment.
What are they on, I kept asking myself, booze or cocaine?
It must be booze, I think.
Cocaine is a very nasty drug, causing people to talk too much and to stay up too late, but it does not, in my experience, make you violent.
All these people want to do is hit someone before the lights go out.
It was not like that in the Sixties.
In the Sixties people worked hard and behaved themselves — except the police, of course.
Excluded, naturally, from the better parties, some of them would attempt to get on terms with their social superiors by bursting in with a search warrant in one hand and evidence in another, which they would produce from nowhere like cabaret artists plucking doves out of the air.
When they did this to me I was quite startled, in spite of Sir Robert's warning.
It happened during one of Mrs Mouse's musical evenings.
One minute a well-behaved group of us — writers, intellectuals and so forth— were contentedly watching Zelda Plum dancing with the chinchilla on her head while Ken the Australian Horse Player offered odds ('Six to four the rat,’ he used to say, I do not know why, and on this particular evening the rat escaped and tripped up Robin Fox, London's most distinguished theatrical agent, who fell on top of Wales's friend, the actress Susan George) and the next a squad of hooligans were pushing people around and conjuring a piece of pot from Mrs Mouse's sewing basket.
I had to laugh, was still laughing an hour later while being finger-printed in the nick.
‘Look,’ I said to the arresting officer, whom I will call Mr Pilcher, because that was his name.
‘You know that I know that wasn't my piece of stuff.
What's your game?’
‘Actually,’ he said, ‘I was looking for something else.’
‘In that case,’ I said, ‘why didn't you bring it with you?’
Which I still think was quite quick in the circumstances.
‘Don't be like that,’ said Mr Pilcher, and he then gave me to understand that for an unspecified weekly consideration I could purchase his protection, allowing me and Mrs Mouse to continue with our musical evenings without their being gate-crashed by him and his colleagues.
Finally, he showed me off the premises with the injunction, accompanied by a theatrical wink, that I should get straight on to him if I ever had any bother.
I was never able to take him up on this kindness, alas, since he and half the drugs squad were themselves arrested a few days later.
He got four years and later emigrated to Australia, whereas I was fined £30 and am welcome on Wogan, except that I am not.
I was banned, however, not because I am a convicted criminal, I think — like the unfortunate Simon Hayward — but because I wanted to wear a false nose out of consideration for the feeling of my associate, Mark Chapman, who, as I explained last week, has just had an inch and a half lopped off his.
I have no idea what Sir Robert Mark is up to.
In America: The crack in the anti-drug facade
By KEITH BOTSFORD
This week, Jefferson Morley, the Washington editor of the Nation, wrote in the New Republic about his experience, one night, of smoking a couple of $25 rocks of crack, an experience he justified with the following words: ‘I wouldn't argue that you have to smoke crack to understand the war on drugs…(nor) that crack isn't hazardous or that anyone should try it.
Having been through the experience, though, may facilitate a certain realism about the conflict in question.’
Realism?
In the same week in which President Bush appeared on national television brandishing $3,200 worth of cocaine (coercively obtained from a dealer who was dragged a block or two nearer the White House) to raise the air-time mileage he earns on drugs, it did not take long for outrage to be expressed.
Correspondence was mountainously adverse.
Anti- drugs tsar (suppressor of those latter-day boyars, the drug lords) William Bennett thundered before Congress that the New Republic's article was ‘not very helpful’.
To say that ‘if all you have in life is bad choices, crack may not be the most unpleasant of them is irresponsible to an astonishing degree’.
Nor was he alone.
On CNN's chat show, Morley was accused of peddling ‘garbage’, of ‘disgraceful journalism’ and worse.
Morley's article was, in fact, largely descriptive.
It described the high that ensues from smoking crack ('Crack is both spacey and intense') and the downs that follow; it told his readers how he bought it and what the morning after was like.
One night trying it.
He lived to tell the tale.
Was Morley wrong to try the stuff?
Reporters have tried smack, they've spent voluntary weeks in jail or among lepers, on the same principle that Orwell worked in Paris as a plongeur.
It's called learning about life.
Where Morley offends the gangbusters is in saying that crack doesn't invariably kill or addict, and that, if what you need is a change of mind, it can be fun while it lasts.
As the New Republic succinctly put it, ‘Kids tempted by crack don't need the New Republic to tell them the drug isn't invariably fatal.’
Unfortunately, Morley contradicted the government's message — a form of Nancy Reagan-like intellectual reductionism: just say no.
He highlighted a classic phrase by Peter Jennings, ABC's anchor-man wrinkle-brow: ‘Using it even once can make a person crave cocaine for as long as they (sic) live.’
Yeah?
Do all pleasurable experiences produce life-long addiction?
A good Richebourg gives a better buzz than inferior plonk, but there are constraints to the pleasure principle: economic, moral, social, physical.
‘Just say no’ doesn't say much, no more than it means much to say to a slave, ‘Enjoy your slavery’or to the poor, ‘Shut up and accept your lot.’
Alas, every lie told about drugs simply reinforces the potential crack-head's conviction that the government line is garbage.
Governments should educate, not lie; to lie is to diminish the efforts of propaganda that, based on truth, shows signs of succeeding.
Even in an era of Aids there is a difference between saying ‘There is no safe sex’ and saying that unsafe sex is a form of Russian roulette.
Ultimately only peers or experiment can effectively deny the wish to try a drug.
As with all drugs, even aspirin, it is generally abuse, not use, that kills.
It was what Morley's reportage implied that aroused such ire, especially the bit about bad choices, and crack perhaps not being the worst of them.
Morley's hypothesis obviously worried the anti-drug establishment.
‘What if there were a drug,’ he asks, ‘that could induce feelings of upper middle-classness?’
Such a drug, he suggests, would be not unlike crack, and the poor shmucks who weren't UMC would love it, while those who'd worked so hard for their privileges would despise the short-cut: you're either UMC or you aren't, simulacra won't do.
Death is a potent dissuader, to the promiscuous as to the drug abuser, but the least-educated and the most-deprived have less to live for.
In Morley's words, ‘The drug can make sick sense to demoralised people.’
When we suffer unbearable pain, we too anaesthetise.
For us, that is all right; our pain is physical.
For them, crack is wrong, because the pain is generalised and life, not physical pain, is what they cannot face.
Enter the Puritan Ethic.
In much of this there is the deepest kind of hypocrisy.
The vast majority of us don't do crack.
We get our highs from other forms of self-gratification.
The poor get theirs in ways of which we disapprove: consider nineteenth-century attitudes to working-class drinking.
The New Republic controversy is about prohibition: of the use of drugs which, though extended to all, essentially affect only the few; and now an attempted prohibition of the very discussion of the issues involved.
Morley's ‘sin’ was to acknowledge the short-term attraction of crack and to seek to explain, from his own experience, how the drug might alleviate social alienation.
That latter fact is as true for drink and cigarettes as for any one of a dozen ‘mood-altering’ drugs.
In his zeal, Bennett and his allies are asserting that the pleasure is so obvious (otherwise people wouldn't use crack) that it should not be mentioned; and that crack is so dangerous its pleasures should be suppressed lest others follow Morley's example.
Thus is the reporter put in a classic double bind.
Hush, not in front of the cameras
By ANTHONY HOWARD
Almost the first political article I had published was one called ‘The Goldfish Bowl Mentality’.
Written as a result of attending a Labour Party conference, it was the product of shock at what then seemed to me the amount of time and energy politicians and journalists spent chasing each other 's tails on such occasions.
It was very much a brash young man's piece — I was 24 when I wrote it.
When I came across it the other day, I was slightly embarrassed.
The fact, though, that I discovered it not in any yellowing vanity book of my own but among the vast volumes of newspaper clippings maintained by Dick Crossman was marginally encouraging.
That meant, or so I like to flatter myself, that it must have struck some chord with at least one practising politician.
If it did, it was not perhaps all that surprising.
One of Crossman's cardinal convictions was that Britain was run not as a democracy but as an oligarchy — and that view of his was perhaps partially reflected in my own youthful outburst against the essentially incestuous relationship between politicians and journalists that I thought I had discovered even within the people's party.
Probably, in those days, I was a bit of an ideological innocent — shamingly, I even singled out for praise the ostentatiously populist action of one member of the national executive.
Her name was Bessie Braddock and she had publicly refused that year to stay in the headquarters hotel, insisting on going to a boarding house instead.
Yet the central thrust of what I was trying to say still strikes me as having some validity.
There is a sense in which there is a secret, collusive relationship between politics and the media which the outside world rarely glimpses.
Curiously, I have become even more strongly persuaded of that since I began dabbling in the making of political television programmes.
Here the degree of complicity is, and perhaps has to be, far higher than the viewer ever suspects.
The best analogy is probably with the methods of the legal profession.
In the preparations for any civil trial, potential witnesses give written statements to solicitors of one side or the other beginning with that revealing phrase ‘I, so-and-so of such-and-such an address, will say…’
Much the same procedure, shorn of its formality (and often of its reliability, too) is followed in the early stages of making a political programme for the box.
There is nothing wrong with that — in fact, without such precautions it would be hard to get a coherent programme together at all.
But the end result still runs the risk of leaving the viewer with a totally false impression.
Part of the trick of a successful television documentary is to make each comment delivered within it sound spontaneous: they are rarely anything of the sort.
The likelihood, indeed, is that they would have been repeated and rehearsed many times ('now that's a very good point you're making there — I wonder if you could conceivably contrive to put it a little more precisely').
I am not seeking to suggest that there is anything sinister about such a process.
But it is surely silly to deny that it has thrown politicians and television journalists together in an association that remains totally invisible to the public.
In fact, thanks largely to Sir Robin Day —‘the Grand Inquisitor’, as he calls himself in the title of his new book — the impression that the average viewer probably has of politics on television is that it is predominantly adversarial.
That may still be true of the set-piece studio interview — though even there the prior indication of ‘lines of questioning’ is by no means unknown (and the viewer would probably be astonished at the general closeness of the atmosphere that prevails in the green room afterwards).
Of course, television is a performing trade — and the very element of show business involved for both the interrogator and the victim was bound to have its effect on what Lord Beaverbrook used to proclaim as ‘the armed frontier’ between politics and journalism.
Like a lot of Lord Beaverbrook's phrases, that was probably more colourful than accurate — but if such a frontier ever existed then the imperatives of current affairs television have certainly modified and adjusted it.
The layman's reaction is probably ‘and a good thing, too’.
Who, after all, is in favour of conflict for its own sake?
But the dilemma, at least for the television journalist, is not quite as simple as that.
The one position he or she should avoid is of being a kind of co-conspirator with the politician against the legitimate interests of the audience and that, it has seemed to me lately, is an increasingly easy trap to fall into.
Perhaps I should explain.
For more weeks than I care to remember I have been working on a Panorama programme designed to look at the future of the Tory Party, even beyond Thatcherism.
The experience has taught me a lot, not least about Margaret Thatcher's single achievement in changing the class contours of British politics.
But another lesson I have learnt has been a good deal more unsettling.
In ridding the Tory Party of its old aristocratic embrace, the Prime Minister has entirely failed — or perhaps has not even tried — to banish oligarchic mores that went with its former upper-crust outlook.
Time and again the Conservative politicians we approached would talk in private frankly and openly about the problems they foresaw for their party.
Wire them up with microphones and start the camera rolling, however, and all candour vanished.
We were immediately back into the ambience of the nursery where, if anything even vaguely indiscreet was in danger of being said, it would instantly be muffled by the warning whisper: ‘Hush, not in front of the children’.
No doubt I shall be briskly told that there is nothing new about that — and, of course, there is not.
Generations of lobby journalists at Westminster have had to tussle with the challenge of reconciling the remarks Tory politicians are prepared to make off the record with the ringing declarations of total loyalty and conformity they deliver in public.
(The Labour Party, to be fair, has never observed quite the same double standards when it comes to private and public speech).
The difference, and the difficulty, for the television reporter is that he inevitably becomes a partner in this process of suppression.
Any television documentary is entirely dependent on what its participants are prepared to say on camera — the winks and nudges of written journalism can have very little place in it.
In that sense, if in no other, I have felt these past weeks rather like a dentist.
Getting a Tory to say what he believes — and, to make it worse, what he knows you know he believes — is about as daunting as drawing teeth.
Perhaps the only mistake I made all those years ago was not realising what an anti-democratic medium television would prove to be.
Letter: Conservative economic record
From Professor MEGHNAD DESAI
Sir: As the Conservative Party gathers for its annual conference, it would be appropriate to ask the question which must be on everyone's mind.
Can we trust them with the nation's economy?
Since the war, each time the Conservative Party has come into power it has extolled the virtues of the market.
The specific policies and rhetoric have been different as the occasion demanded.
It has had three chances to cure the structural problems of the UK — abolition of rationing and freeing the interest mechanism from the Dalton experience in the 1950s, the Selsden Man competition and credit control in the 1970s, and the deregulation and monetarism of the 1980s.
There has been a promise that prosperity will be permanent.
In the course of these policies, one or the other restrictive practice has been singled out as the root cause of our ills — resale price maintenance, clearing banks' cartel, trade unions — the cry has been for their removal.
The result has been the same each time.
After a boom, inflation has gone up and there has been a disastrous showing on the balance of payments.
Maudling, Barber and now Lawson — the consistency of the disastrous outcome is hard to equal.
The only difference is that in the 1950s and the 1980s the Conservatives had more than 10 years to cure the ills of the economy while in the 1970s they had but four.
The structural problems of the economy remain — inadequate saving, uncompetitive industry and insufficient investment in human capital.
After all the boasts of supply-side miracles under one slogan or another from 1951 to 1989, the British economy remains sick.
The size of the trade deficit towards the end of each episode of Conservative government is a sure sign of this.
The issue is a simple one of economic competence.
The evidence is one of gross lack of it.
Letter: Mugabe over-reacting to student ‘threat’
From Mrs DORIS LESSING
Sir: I have just returned from five weeks in Zimbabwe, mostly at village level, and your leading article (6 October) was right.
Mugabe is over-reacting to the ‘threat’ of the students' rebellion as the symptom of great disunity.
I did not once hear Zanu (PF) mentioned outside Harare.
People seem to take the party for granted, as they now do the unity accord, which they were talking gratefully about in November last.
What they discussed is policies and personalities — is he, is she, a good administrator, a good person.
No one said a word about Edgar Tekere until I asked.
The replies were versions of, ‘He is a brave man for talking out about corruption, but he is too unstable to make a leader,’ and ‘We village people are all stupid, we know that, but we don't want another war.’
These are shrewd, calm, humorous, balanced people and Mugabe is luckier than he seems to know.
It is generally agreed that he has mishandled the students, who have been threatened, bullied, fired on with tear-gas grenades; and now the university is closed which means that these cynical and angry students are all over the country spreading disillusion.
Mugabe exhorts them to remember the sacrifices made in the war for the sake of Zimbabwe, but young people are seldom interested in a previous generation's sacrifices — as he could have learned from history.
People say: ‘Students are by definition idealistic and impatient — would Mugabe really want them to be any different?
He should have talked to them as reasonable people, not shouted at them.’
Letter: European security and a reunited Germany
From Mr DAVID HABAKKUK
Sir: One may or may not share Christopher Hill's apprehensions about the destabilising potential of German reunification (letter, 4 October).
But can we be so confident that it can be stopped?
The ‘half-way house’ of a reformed GDR is very attractive.
But the initial effect of economic reforms there could very well be, as in the USSR, to worsen economic conditions, and thus to make more people want to leave.
Could a reforming East Berlin government then maintain a shoot-to-kill policy on the Wall?
Or are we expecting Bonn to recognise East German citizenship?
If East Germans have the freedom to choose, can we really be confident that they would prefer to face the difficulties of establishing a capitalist economy and democratic system on their own?
Might they not think it more sensible to throw in their lot with their fellow Germans west of the Elbe, who know as much about running a liberal capitalist society as anybody, and have abundant reserves of capital, not to speak of generous welfare benefits?
Today a main thrust of Moscow's security policy is to eliminate the possibility of crises escalating; pressing economic priorities push it towards cutting defence spending and integrating with the world economy.
Military intervention in Germany would be a disaster for the Russians, so it is no longer clear that the threat of this will continue to be a bar to German self-determination.
If we make ourselves the bar, if we suggest that self-determination is the right of every people on earth but the Germans, we risk creating resentments in Germany which could be quite as destabilising to the European order as reunification.
We cannot take it for granted any longer that the division of Germany is sustainable; in consequence, the whole European security order may be unstable.
Taking into account that over the past year changes in Europe have proceeded vastly faster than almost everyone predicted, it is imperative that we start thinking now about what a new ‘European security order’, without vast Soviet and American armies on German soil, might look like.
Letter: Urban housing
From Councillor SIMON RANDALL
Sir: Chris Patten's new draft guidance on planning for housing and his rejection of a new town in Hampshire are both very encouraging.
The Government is rightly giving more responsibility to local authorities for planning and decision making, while still providing the necessary framework.
The London Boroughs Association firmly believes that much more housing is needed, but that it must be provided in the right locations.
With increasing concern for the environment, the need to recycle urban land becomes even stronger.
London expects to provide 31 per cent of the additional dwellings needed in the South-east between 1991 and 2001.
Mr Patten's decision and guidance are a clear boost to planning, local government decision making, and the environment.
Letter: Doctored fees
From Dr HAROLD EDWARDS
Sir: The doctor's plate offering two grades of medical advice (letter, 4 October) goes back to the end of the nineteenth century.
In 1933, I saw a notice in a doctor's shop window stating ‘Examinations one shilling and sixpence; with stethoscope two shillings’.
Letter: Dialect and poverty
From Mr DAVID KNIGHT
Sir: I must take issue with Janet Daley's article on a supposed connection between poverty and language (4 October).
She suggests that the offending Geordie dialect ‘might equally well have been Liverpool or Sheffield’-could it not also have been from Norfolk, Suffolk or Dorset?
Throughout Britain there is a wide range of rich and varied dialects which enhance our cultural diversity.
She holds up the American education system as an answer to the supposed link between language and class mobility.
Anyone who has heard the dialect of the Bronx, New Orleans or Albuquerque will be able to affirm the failure of those techniques.
We should not aim at levels of US poverty as goals for our society.
I am saddened that the article uses the spurious connection between dialect and poverty as a means of attacking English teaching in this country.
Those of us who have worked within the education system, in social priority areas, since the Sixties, can assure Janet Daley that these children have not been abandoned to a type of educational apartheid.
It is views such as those expressed in the article which are the foundations of all forms of apartheid.
Letter: Schools evidence
From Mr CLYDE CHITTY
Sir: Where is the evidence for Terry Coleman's vicious and stupid remark (5 October) that one of the results of the Labour Party's abolition of the grammar schools is the presence of ‘incoherently illiterate’ younger delegates at this year's Brighton Labour Party conference?
Apart from any other considerations, it was, in fact, during Margaret Thatcher's period as Education Secretary (1970-74) that more schools became comprehensive than at any other time either before or since.
It really is about time that journalists stopped mouthing the myths of modern-day Thatcherism.
There are many reasons why, sadly, too many of our youngsters still leave school without the skills of literacy and numeracy, but comprehensive reorganisation is not one of them.