

Free Speech 3: No cause for panic over risks on site
By JOHN RIMINGTON
Director General since 1984 of the government-funded Health & Safety Executive responsible for industrial safety and inspectorates.
Nobody with the job of managing the nation's principal safety agency could be complacent.
As industrial processes become more complex, the energy applied to them greater, substances and compounds more subtle and control processes more remote, the potential for serious accidents increases.
So does the vulnerability of people at work, or moving through the transport networks, or living near large industrial plants.
But are we becoming too worried?
Does the recent rash of serious accidents affecting people jammed together in small spaces mean that Britain has become the glass jaw, as well as, allegedly, the dirty man of Europe?
Let us put the record into perspective.
Every year in Britain about 5,000 people die on the roads.
About the same number are killed at home.
More than 600 people are murdered.
Rather fewer are killed at work, a low figure by international comparisons, though the number of those whose lives are abridged by industrially contracted ill-health is not known or included.
Yet the applied energy, constant movement of people, heavy loads and handling of what are sometimes the most dangerous substances imaginable make many industrial environments intrinsically dangerous.
A reasonable question might be, why is the safety record so comparatively good?
Do not mistake me.
The general record on accidents at work deteriorated between 1981 and 1986; the improvement since then is not enough.
No one could think that improvement is not necessary to safety, especially in quarrying, construction, diving or works transport.
But things could be a great deal worse.
What has happened in the past half century, apart from the advance of technology, has been the erection of a firm framework of regulation, the appearance of specific safety technologies, such as industrial hygiene, and the advance of the idea that safety can and must be managed.
About 800 plants are scheduled in the UK as presenting serious hazards.
There are more than 40 nuclear reactors and 22,000km of gas pipeline passing through built-up areas.
The Siberian pipeline disaster, Chernobyl and Bhopal illustrate the potential risks.
But the continuous scrutiny demanded and enforced by regulation of the high-risk cases and (for nuclear reactors) the designs of these installations are considerable forces on the side of safety.
One day there will be a serious industrial accident; there are occasional near misses and worse; but it usually takes a good measure of folly, inattention and misfortune to overwhelm good plant and a safe system.
Relatively few members of the public have been killed in Britain by industrial accidents in recent years.
People expect risks they did not ask for and cannot control to be much lower -by 10 or 100 times — than those which they run willingly.
People may smoke, drive at 80 miles an hour through fog on a motorway, go in for hang-gliding or rock climbing at the weekends.
Yet they see nothing inconsistent with objecting to a well-engineered nuclear waste disposal plant which is clearly necessary to dispose safely of irradiated material already created; or to properly regulated high-combustion chemical waste disposal plants that are the only alternative (unless we get rid of the chemical industry) to toxic wastes being dumped surreptitiously in some field or on some beach.
In a democracy we are entitled to choose not to die for someone else's benefit or profit.
The high general standards applied to industrial safety affect expectations.
But we do need to remember the great cost of exercising our right to have double standards and also to ask ourselves whether expenditure to make us extremely safe from one form of risk may not sometimes make us more vulnerable to others.
After the Midlands air crash, I asked Eddy Ryder, the Chief Nuclear Inspector, what safety lessons he drew.
He said: ‘If it had been us, we'd have demanded 10 engines.’
After a pause for calculation, he added: ‘And then I'd have tethered it to the ground.’
In fact, we know that if we get into a confined space with the intention of defying gravity we are running a risk and have decided to tolerate it.
In short our national standards are high and we can largely choose what they should be.
But it takes resolute, technologically aware safety management and regulation to maintain them.
Where people are crowded together, particularly when public order is in question; where hazardous materials are being moved; where traditional industrial disciplines and organisation are breaking down, as in parts of the construction industry, there is real reason for anxiety.
In serious hazard regulation, too, the stakes are high and the so-called ‘human factor’ in accident causation is an issue.
But there is no kind of crisis going on, except perhaps in the environmental or ecological area and in our own minds when we try to secure for ourselves what we cannot have: namely a zero risk.
Free Speech 2: Safety sacrificed at the altar of profit
By JAMES TYE
Director-General of the British Safety Council since 1968 and author of several books on safety, he is a leading authority on accident prevention.
During the last 23 years I have looked at thousands of so-called accidents in many countries.
I cannot remember a single one where the risks which gave rise to the accident could not have been measured and prevented with effective safety training, management commitment and — above all -sufficient funds.
It saddens me that, while most annual reports say ‘…we will do our utmost to preserve our most important asset: the skills contained in our workforce’, when I visit the workplace I see the tell-tale signs of accidents in the making — blocked exits, unguarded machines, untrained work people.
Go to any firm and ask to see their written safety policy — legally required under Section 2 (3) of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 — and those without a single word on paper will make their excuses (and this includes nearly every UK Football Club).
This year, in its Plan of Work for 1989-90 and Beyond, the Government's Health and Safety Commission identified management failure as the main cause of accidents at work.
It was four years since the last Plan of Work was published — an indication, surely, of how low on the Government's list of priorities is the place of safety at work.
The ‘enterprise culture’, the opening up of markets and the need to survive competition all place businesses under great pressure.
The scale and pace of technological change mean that the public as well as employees are crucially at risk.
It is of course the string of public transport disasters that has brought such a widespread public reaction — six in three years, with 193 lives lost on Herald of Free Enterprise at Zeebrugge; 31 deaths in the Kings Cross Underground fire; 35 deaths at the Clapham rail crash; 270 lost in the Lockerbie bomb blast; 47 claimed in the M1 air crash and most recently, 51 in the River Thames from the Marchioness.
When the chairman of the inquiry into the King's Cross Underground fire made his report he was strongly critical of London Underground's management (the two top men quit hours before the report was published): ‘An inward looking approach fostered by the organisation's narrow horizons undoubtedly led to a dangerous, blinkered self-sufficiency which included a general unwillingness to take advice or accept criticism from outside bodies.’
In short, safety warnings were ignored and cutting costs came first.
The disaster at sea which took the lives of 165 oilmen is still the subject of inquiry.
However, the Interim Technical Report on the Piper Alpha explosion, published last October, raised the strong possibility that the incoming shift were unaware that a vital valve had been removed.
Why are safety standards in the UK inadequate?
Because it is the manufacturers who make the standards, with little or no input from the users or consumers.
This means that only the 20,000 readers of British Standards Institution publications hear about them: so much for public comment.
Remember — profit before safety.
It was only my individual objection which stopped an unsatisfactory standard for smoke masks being introduced 10 years ago.
Now a perfectly good internal sprinkler system has been developed which for £500,000 could be fitted to an aircraft and would put fires out within 10 seconds.
It is not being fitted because of the cost: but in the meantime talks about the £25 smoke mask are proceeding.
Any debate on the conflict between safety and cost cannot overlook the Government's unwillingness to provide adequate funds for its health and safety at work agencies.
The fight put up by the Health and Safety Commission to get more money saw niggardly extra funding at the end of the last year.
According to the commission chief: ‘We have always said very forcefully that more inspectors will be the prime claim.’
The inspectors, through their union, say they are underfunded and understaffed (to which I would add the problem of incredibly low morale).
Regrettably, too many inadequately trained, ignorant and uncaring managers in too many workplaces believe they can beat the cost of unsafe practices and systems and take a chance on the consequences.
With a visit from a Government safety inspector likely only once in five years, the safety/cost conflict is all too easily settled by sacrificing safety to the god of profit.
Criminally negligent directors in the UK are not sent to prison as in other countries — the worst that can happen is a fine — and even that can be insured against and paid by the company.
As long as health and safety at work is seen as an optional extra more so-called ‘Acts of God’ are in the making, and more workers and members of the public will pay the price.
Is safety being sacrificed for profit?
Of course it is — at work, on the road, in the air, at recreation, in the home.
In the UK in the year to come, Joe Public will continue to pay the price (perhaps with his life) until he is a better citizen and stands up and protests enough about it.
Free Speech 1: Danger: men at work: This week: Are Britain's safety standards good enough?
By ANGELA LAMBERT
WE ALL have a schizophrenic attitude towards safety.
On the one hand we know that drinking, smoking, driving and overwork involve risks to our health, and we apparently accept them.
Yet we expect the much smaller risks incurred when travelling by train or air or sea to be non-existent, and express outrage and condemnation when accidents happen, Angela Lambert writes.
It is largely a matter of cost.
We could all fly to Paris in perfect safety if we were prepared to pay £1,000 for a ticket, since we would then travel with the same cast-iron safety precautions as do heads of state.
But in paying fares amounting to a tenth of that, we incur — and do implicitly accept — a low level of risk.
The recent series of disasters from The Herald of Free Enterprise onwards, has led us to believe that Britain is particularly unsafe.
Certainly our industrial safety inspectorate is nowhere near large enough, and there are blackspots — such as construction — where the casualty rate is far too high.
Nevertheless, as the table shows, we rank among the safest countries in the world.