

Shares escape new crash but face uncertain future
By LORNA BOURKE
IF THE rise in bank base rates is bad news for homebuyers — now facing the inevitability of a hike of at least 1 per cent in the mortgage rate — it is not exactly good news for investors either.
Many were just beginning to see shares and unit trusts — bought two years ago before the crash of 1987 — regain those levels.
This week was a setback.
The FT-SE 100 index of leading shares dropped 42 points to 2,270 on the announcement of the base rate increase to 15 per cent, but rallied and closed on Thursday only 30.5 points off at 2,281.6.
And the outlook for investors is not bright, according to Brian Tora, of stockbroker James Capel.
‘The basic problem is that everything has been pushed out, and we can't see the light at the end of the tunnel, which is bad for shares.
‘There is no certainty that the Chancellor will be able to hold base rates at 15 per cent.
The trade gap looks appalling and it may take some time before we see a significant drop in consumer spending.
If we stick with 15 per cent rates until the Budget, the prospects for positive growth in the economy do not look too good.’
The August trade gap was £2bn, the third worst on record.
‘A few more trade figures like that and we will see the market fall further.’
The last time base rates hit 15 per cent was in 1981 but, as Mr Tora points out, ‘in real terms this is the highest the base rate has ever been.
Inflation was running at 11 per cent in 1981, but it's only around 8 per cent today.
Unless something happens swiftly, the market is going to be uncertain for some time.’
So how far is the market likely to fall, and should unit trust and investors in shares consider selling?
‘I would be surprised if it doesn't test 2,200,’ says Mr Tora, a view shared by others.
‘I would not be surprised to see Footsie (FT-SE 100 index) off another 50 points,’ says Fred Carr of fund manager Capel-Cure Myers.
Chris Tracey, investment director at fund manager Save & Prosper, is even more pessimistic.
‘I wouldn't be surprised to see the Footsie at around 2,000 to 2,100.’
However, nobody is predicting a repetition of the crash of 1987.
‘America is doing very well, there is a lot of liquidity in the market — and what might happen to the market if Hoylake succeeds in its bid for BAT?’ asks Mr Tora.
What happens to share prices in the US inevitably affects prices in the UK.
In addition, fund managers such as the big pension funds have a constant flow of cash from employee and employer contributions which has to be invested somewhere, and they are currently sitting on a pile of money on deposit.
‘The excess of investible funds over the supply of securities looks set to remain for at least another financial year.
This may not help the market go up, but it could well ensure that any setback is only modest,’ says Mr Tora.
And if Hoylake wins its takeover battle for BAT, he believes that other companies will embark on the acquisitions trail, giving the market a boost.
‘We have heard a lot about Salomon Brothers’ multi-billion pound war chest for acquisitions.’
Some sectors of the market, however, will take longer to recover than others.
The high street shops will feel the draught most keenly.
Homeowners will have less money to spend in their pockets after making higher mortgage repayments and will be even less inclined to borrow at today's high rates.
While nobody is recommending investors to indulge in wholesale selling of shares and unit trusts, equally nobody is suggesting a massive buying spree either.
‘Interest rates are in the driving seat for the time being and it is still too early to buy,’ says Mr Tora.
‘The scene does not seem right for a 1987 style crash, but the more cautious will be dusting off the chartist's recommendations to see which shares can still be sold.’
Time bomb ticking away under ‘budget’ borrowers: As the base rate rises 1 per cent both homeowners and investors look set for troubled times ahead
By MARTIN BAKER
BRITAIN'S 7.6 million homebuyers face another rise in mortgage repayments following this week's one per cent hike in bank base rates to 15 per cent.
This is its highest level for eight years and will result in an increase of at least one per cent on home loan rates, possibly more.
The average borrower with a £30,000 25 year loan will see monthly repayments rise from £278 a month to £298 if the mortgage rate goes to 14.75 per cent as expected.
But many borrowers — nearly 3 million on ‘budget’ repayment schemes — won't feel the draught immediately because their monthly repayments are adjusted just once a year.
While annual adjustments are popular with lenders, they can create unexpected problems for borrowers who fail to make financial provision for the higher repayments.
More important, buyers with 95 per cent loans who may have seen the price of their property slide in recent months could end up with a debt greater than the value of the property.
More than 80 per cent of the Halifax's borrowers pay their mortgages on an annually adjusted basis, which is the society's standard practice.
These budget or fixed payment schemes are good for lenders.
The mortgage rates may fluctuate, but the administration and the repayments remain the same until the time comes to adjust.
But are budget schemes good for borrowers?
The Halifax argues that borrowers benefit from certainty, but does concede that some people — who will not pay any more if rates do rise, until next April — may be seduced into ‘a feeling of false prosperity’.
When the Halifax last readjusted, it had to accommodate a rise in mortgage rate in 1988 from 10.3 to 13.5 per cent.
The average rise was £55 per month, but some borrowers were hit hard.
‘We only get complaints when rates move down,’ says the Bradford & Bingley.
‘Borrowers can pay more when rates move up, but they must come to a branch to make a specific request to do so.’
The Cheltenham & Gloucester's approach is typical of the big lenders' attitude to budget schemes.
Its own scheme was implemented three and a half years ago, and now 85 per cent of its 250,000 borrowers pay this way.
The Leeds Permanent has converted 90 per cent of it members to fixed payments since last year.
Not everyone loves budget schemes.
The Woolwich insists that it has no plans to introduce them, while the Abbey National believes that fluctuating payments ‘show their value in weeks like the one we've just had’.
‘The short term benefit of certainty in household budgeting can be more than offset by a nasty shock when the rate is revised,’ said the Abbey, which adds that its research reveals no demand for budget schemes.
The National & Provincial's experience contradicts this.
The society implemented its scheme ‘in response to strong consumer demand’.
There are three important potential effects of the growth of fixed payment mortgages.
First is the drastic effects for the borrower who fails to save up ahead of a re-adjustment when rates rise three or four times in a year.
The new monthly payment will accommodate not just the backlog but also the new, expensive rates.
Some fear that big rises could precipitate mass defaults next year.
This year's adjustment saw some Halifax borrowers experience a sudden rise in mothly payments of ‘more than 30 per cent in many cases’.
The Bradford & Bingley had a similar experience.
‘We treated hardship cases sympathetically, and we feel they have almost all been honourably resolved on both sides.
There's no doubt that to operate these schemes you have to be a sensitive lender.’
Some commentators feel that budget schemes blunt the effectiveness of interest rates as an economic tool.
Britain still has the highest debt to income ratio in Europe and the appetite for credit may not be blunted until the review date comes and with it the monetary day of doom.
The ‘feeling of false prosperity’ may help to fuel demand and inflation.
Third is the special tax position of budget scheme borrowers.
Income tax relief will fluctuate as levels of interest fluctuate.
Borrowers who underpay tax if interest rates rise must give any unpaid interest to the Revenue in the subsequent 12 months.
What budget borrowers can expect for next year will depend on when their review date falls.
The Halifax and C&G expect to have just one rise to cope with.
Others, who caught the February increase in mortgage rates, will be giving their borrowers an unpleasant start to the new year.
The Midland launches banking by telephone
By MARTIN BAKER
INSOMNIACS bored with counting sheep can now organise their financial affairs at any time of the day or night, seven days a week with the launch of Firstdirect, Midland Bank's telephone banking service.
Customers can call Firstdirect at any time of the day or night at local call rates and be immediately connected to a banking representative who will carry out instructions on the computer.
The range of services offered includes cheque and savings accounts, personal loans, mortgages, insurance, bill payment and travel services.
‘Because it has no branches, Firstdirect can offer attractive rates of interest on both savings and borrowing,’ claims Midland.
All cheque account customers will be given an automatic guaranteed overdraft facility, and an all-in-one £100 cheque guarantee, cash machine and Switch debit card.
Cash can be withdrawn from the usual Midland Bank, NatWest, and TSB machines.
News Round-Up: Investors' safety net
By MARTIN BAKER
AFTER being ill-served for many years by the investment industry, the small investor at last has a choice of funds which follow share indices.
If there is not quite an embarrassment of riches, there is enough to make the small investor blush at the choice.
The latest vehicle to track the UK market comes from Skandia Life.
Skandia's Performance Bond guarantees the return of 95 per cent of capital invested, plus 100 per cent of any increase in the FT-SE 100 index at November 1994.
Getting in costs 5 per cent of the amount invested.
News Round-Up: A preference for plastic
By MARTIN BAKER
MOST of us prefer to pay for things with plastic rather than paper.
According to a Midland Bank survey published this week, only 10 per cent of those questioned said they preferred to use a cheque rather than an electronic debit card.
The main perceived benefit was the lack of need to carry cash or cheques.
Meanwhile, Barclays has announced plans to more than double its network of wipe-through machines.
Its PDQ terminals can read Visa, Access, American Express and Diner's Club cards as well as some store and fuel cards.
If Barclays application to join the Switch network — started by Midland and Royal Bank of Scotland — is successful the electronic direct debit network will expand by at least 30,000 terminals over the next year and a half.
News Round-Up: More PEPs take a bow
By MARTIN BAKER
THE MARCH to popular capitalism proceeds apace.
After last week's Revenue announcement that more than £1bn had beep taken by Personal Equity Plans, two new PEPs have been launched this week by stockbrokers Credit Suisse Buckmaster & Moore and life insurance giant Norwich Union.
Both offer a choice of direct equity investment and unit trust investment up to the maximum £2,400.
Minimum investment for the Norwich Union PEP is £500 into unit trusts or £1,200 into shares.
Charges are 6 per cent initially and 1 per cent annually for unit trusts, 5 per cent plus VAT initally and 1 per cent, again plus VAT, annually for shares.
News Round-Up: Investing in the Far East
By MARTIN BAKER
‘YOU don't need to outperform the market to make spectacular returns in South-east Asia,’ says Jonathan Custance Baker, of James Capel Unit Trust Management, introducing yet another entrant to the index fund market.
Just over 18 per cent of the Tiger Index Fund will follow each of the DTI approved markets such as Hong Kong, Singapore and Malaysia and half this percentage will go into others.
News Round-Up: Winning loans from Lloyds
By MARTIN BAKER
TAKE OUT a personal loan now and you will have landed yourself with a debt which is, at the most charitable interpretation, expensive.
Some might say that typical annual percentage rates of around 24 per cent are crippling.
But anyone taking out a loan from Lloyds Bank between Monday and 31 December may win one of five first prizes worth £7,500 each, 20 smaller ones valued at £1,600, or an Olympus camera.
The minimum loan is £500, spread over as long as five years.
The APR is 23.8 per cent.
News Round-Up: Teddy Bear protection
By MARTIN BAKER
MONEY, of , is no substitute for the loss of life or limb.But it does help.
Norwich Union's child insurance policy, the ‘Teddy Bear’ contract, costs an annual £25 per child.
The new scale of payouts makes somewhat grisly reading.
It will provide £75,000 for the loss of one or both eyes, hands or feet.
Permanent disablement from any profession or occupation entitles a claimant to £100,000, while loss of hearing in both ears is compensated by £30,000.
The policy caters for children from three to 18 years of age or when they start work, whichever is the sooner.
News Round-Up: Teenage pregnancy
By MARTIN BAKER
THE MYTH that teenage girls become pregnant to qualify for a council house or flat, has finally been exploded.
A survey, Young Single Mothers Today, by One Parent Families, ‘shows that teenage pregnancy results from a complex set of circumstances and motivations, of which housing is only a minor factor, if considered at all,’ explains Sue Slipman, of One Parent Families.
News Round-Up: Young savers
By MARTIN BAKER
THE ABBEY National has started an Action Savers Club for children.
Young members receive a pennant, a plastic identity card and a comic.
The comic is somewhat idealised.
It carries edifying tales of four children and a dog finding an old shed and doing it up as a clubhouse.
Not an estate agent, a valuer, a lawyer or a property slump in sight.
To open an account, children need just £1.
There are no notice restrictions on access.
News Round-Up: New rate for savers
By MARTIN BAKER
NORWICH & Peterborough Building Society is offering 10.75 per cent net of basic rate tax, fixed for six months.
Minimum investment is £5,000 with a maximum of £250,000.
Only one deposit may be made and up to £300 a day withdrawn in cash from branches.
Larger amounts may be withdrawn by cheque.
The pros and cons of fixed rate offers
By MARTIN BAKER
NOT QUITE all hope is lost in this week's interest rate misery.
With loan rates virtually certain to move up over the next month to around 14.75 per cent, a line of credit fixed at 12.95 per cent suddenly seems rather attractive.
The desirability of the loan is enhanced by the dangerous charm of deferred interest payments.
Borrowers can chose to repay with 3 or 5 per cent pared off their monthly repayments.
Simon Tyler, of Chase de Vere, says that by taking the 5 per cent deferment ‘borrowers can take out a loan for £84,000 and it will cost what a £50,000 repayment would with the Halifax’.
The danger, of course, lies in the fact that the deferred interest payments will be rolled up into the capital debt.
As long as house prices rise this will present no problem.
But if the market is still stagnant or even falling the prospects are worrying — a higher debt and a lower property value.
It is possible to switch out of the loan if interest rates fall, but this will cost a penalty equivalent to one month's interest payments.
The Cheltenham & Gloucester has produced a £50m fixed rate loan priced at 13.25 until the end of 1991.
The penalty for early redemption is three months' interest.
The C & G has £50m to lend which it calls ‘a very limited issue’.
Chase de Vere (01 930 7242) have a credit line of just £5m.
Another entrant to the market is Prolific Life, which is offering short-term loans pitched at 12.45 per cent for a standard loan and 12.95 per cent for the self-certified loan.
The loans are fixed until April 1990 to get over what was at the beginning of the week ‘the current period of uncertainty’ and has now become a gloomy fact.
Prolific say that intermediaries do not like the more usual two-to five-year period for fixed rate loans, as these lock borrowers out when interest rates fall.
If rates do fall about the time of the next Budget these loans appear to offer reasonable value.
However Prolific's strategy seems absurdly short-term.
With a typical conveyancing transaction taking at least two months, thanks to the archaic system of conveyancing prevalent in England and Wales, borrowers will be lucky to have the benefit of the fixed rates for more than three months.
News Round-Up: High interest cheque account
By MARTIN BAKER
TYNDALL, the fund manager, has released a high interest cheque account aimed at the upper end of the market.
Minimum investment is £1,000, and net interest rates are good for cheque accounts at 10.25 per cent for balances below £10,000 and 10.44 per cent above that figure.
The account comes with a £100 cheque guarantee card, standing orders, direct debits and free personal accident insurance worth up to twice the outstanding balance on the account.
The High Interest Money Account is available both offshore — through Tyndall's Isle of Man subsidiary — and onshore through its Bristol office.
Offshore accounts offer gross interest.
Covering yourself against the expense of going to law: Sue Fieldman describes schemes that insure a policyholder against the risk of legal expenses
By SUE FIELDMAN
FREE legal protection insurance is on offer to all new and existing Bank of Scotland Premier Visa cardholders from this week.
Bank of Scotland has joined forces with the legal insurer Allianz Legal Protection to provide legal fees cover.
The plan, known as Lawclub, provides protection up to £50,000 a claim.
However, Lawclub is not the panacea for all the legal bills of the affluent Premier Visa cardholders.
They have to earn £20,000 a year to qualify for the charge card.
You only get cover for the cost of legal fees if you have problems with consumer goods and services bought with the card.
If you bought your car with cash you have to foot your own legal bills.
There is also cover for legal fees for personal injury suffered in an accident.
However, the pursuit of an accident claim as a car driver is excluded.
The advantage, with Lawclub — and all other legal fees insurance — is the free 24-hour telephone helpline.
If you need a legal eagle at midnight, there is one perched at the end of the telephone ready to answer questions on everything from probate to personal accidents, divorce to drink-driving.
Furthermore, legal fees insurance undoubtedly gives you legal muscle if you become embroiled in a courtroom battle.
Derek Bluston, of the solicitors Malkin Janners, says: ‘To get involved in litigation you either have to be very rich or very poor.
‘Most people are in between, and this is the niche that should be filled by insurance.’
However, legal expenses insurance generally tends to be full of small print and exclusions.
The insurers will not cover disputes that arose before the policy was taken out and will not meet legal costs incurred without their approval.
Furthermore, the insurers are judge and jury rolled into one — if they do not think that your case has a reasonable chance of success they will not indemnify you.
However, the insurance usually covers not only the insured, but also the pursuit of legal claims by other members of the family.
Janet Pressley, of the Legal Protection Group, legal insurers, says: ‘In one case our client, his family and their dog were crossing the road, reached a traffic island and the dog went completely berserk — screaming, writhing and foaming at the mouth.
‘Our client touched the ground on the island while he tried to control the dog and received a very strong electric shock.
‘It was then that he realised that the whole island was alive.
The dog had received a massive electric shock, his children also received shocks and his wife, in trying to comfort the dog, received a nasty bite to her hand.
‘Eventually the council concerned made an offer of £1,000 in compensation, but counsel's opinion is that damages in the region of £5,000 are appropriate.
A writ for damages has been issued.’
There are two basic types of legal expenses policy available for individuals.
Cheap add-on policies, such as the supplements to your motor insurance policy, cover legal fees for ‘uninsured loss recovery’.
These include pursuing a claim for policy excess, car hire charges and loss of the use of one's vehicle.
Premiums vary, but typically range from £8 to £10 a year.
Add-on policies are also sold as supplements to household insurance.
They typically provide cover for consumer disputes, personal injuries and employment matters.
The premium is again relatively cheap, depending on the extent of cover, and varies from about £3 to £10.
This type of cover is on offer from Allianz, Legal Protection Group, DAS, IRPC and Hambro Legal Protection.
There are also more expensive stand-alone policies.
But some insurers do not offer this wider cover.
The reason for their non-availability will not surprise anyone who has dealings with an insurance company — the policies apparently attract people who make claims.
Brian Knight, of Hambro Legal Protection, says: ‘We do not offer a stand-alone policy to the public.
Basically our belief is that it is not possible to make a profit.
While it (profit) is a nasty word we are all here for one reason.
‘Stand-alone policies are bought by people who are going to use them.
It is far better to provide low-priced cover which you can add on.’
DAS no longer markets its stand-alone policy.
‘The experience we had was that the only people who bought it more or less were the people who used it,’ says a spokesman.
‘You do not get a good spread of risk and it kept putting the premiums up.
But we do expect to reintroduce a contract next year.’
Allianz, Legal Protection and IRPC offer stand-alone policies.
Typically, they cover consumer disputes, personal injury claims, employment matters and inheritance problems.
Property disputes are included, but conveyancing costs are not covered.
Legal Protection is the only company that provides cover for divorce costs.
It is not available in the first year of the policy and in the second year only £250 — about two hours' worth for a top London matrimonial lawyer -will be met for each party.
From year three the maximum is £500.
Legal Protection also provides cover for a flat owner in a block of more than four flats to pursue a claim against a freeholder.
Allianz and IRPC do not cover divorce or flat disputes.
However, Allianz does have a £50,000 limit for every claim.
The premium for Allianz's Personal Law Plan is £68 a year by direct debit.
IRPC's Personal Legal Assistance Plan costs £70 a year, although it is shortly to rise to £80.
There is a £25,000 limit of indemnity per claim, but IRPC excludes one of the biggest areas for disputes — major building works.
Society fined for loan adverts
By SUE FIELDMAN
WITH THIS week's hike in interest rates, homebuyers should be more careful than ever about advertisements for mortgages with seemingly low rates of interest.
Last week, Cheltenham & Gloucester Building Society was prosecuted at Exeter for breaches of the Consumer Credit Act in connection with its mortgage advertising.
The case was brought by Devon's trading standards officers.
C & G was prosecuted for advertising displayed in branch windows at Exeter and Okehampton.
Ken Ellis, county trading standards officer for Devon, said: ‘C & G was convicted on three charges of giving more prominence to a flat rate charge rather than the annual percentage rate, and three charges of not including an example in those advertisements.
‘There was a fine of £3,000 for these six offences.
C & G was also convicted of omitting an invitation to ask for further details in two further advertisements.
C & G was fined £250 on each of those offences.
The total fines were £3,500 and C & G also had to pay £356 in costs.’
A spokeswoman for C & G said: ‘We were prosecuted for a technical infringement as the APRs on our posters were not printed boldly enough.
‘We are amazed to be prosecuted when currently there are many brokers, other mortgage advertisers, and major building companies who are running ads contrary to the Act which do not mention APR at all, and they are getting away with it.
‘C & G, like any building society, is an easy target for trading standards officers compared to other smaller, less well known lenders.
It makes a good example for them.’
If one big building society can fall foul of the rules, then you can not assume that any lender will get its advertising right.
Always check that the interest rate quoted is the annual percentage rate (APR).
It is the only true yardstick for comparing different mortgages.
‘In an advertisement for a mortgage which contains interest rates, then the APR must be more prominent than any other rate,’ said Mr Ellis.
The advertisement must also contain an example of the details of payment and the total cost.
‘If it does not contain interest rates, then it must include an invitation for readers to get full written details of the terms.’
In the C & G advertisements an interest rate of 12.75 per cent, which was the annual flat rate, was more prominent than the APR of 13.7 per cent .
However, the worst culprits are those advertisements offering deferred rates.
‘A deferred rate mortgage is one where the mortgage is charged all the time at the normal APR, but the consumer only pays at a reduced rate during the early years,’ Mr Ellis explained.
‘Unpaid interest is added to the balance, so the consumer ends up paying more when payments revert to normal.
Anyone who advertises the deferred rate may only do so provided that the APR is more prominent, and they explain all the terms.’
In February next year, further changes to mortgage advertsing will be introduced.
A spokesman for the Department of Trade and Industry said: ‘The changes are generally to make the advertisements clearer and easier to understand.
The advertisements must also specify that the loan is secured on the home.
Foreign currency mortgages must specify that repayment is affected by fluctuations in exchange rates.’
Meanwhile, if you see any advertisements that are misleading, contact your local trading standards officers.