

Racing: Prix de L'Arc de Triomphe: Britain's faith in Class value: Europe's richest race brings another opportunity for Britain's most fearless trainer to tilt at a top prize.
John Karter examines Clive Brittain's ambitious aims for Top Class and runs the rule over his Arc rivals
By JOHN KARTER
FOLLOWERS of Clive Brittain are once again marvelling at bookmakers' largesse over their assessment of tomorrow's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe.
The Newmarket trainer runs Top Class in the Longchamp spectacular and the faithful backing Brittain will expect to be laughing all the way to the bank as they help themselves to the generous 40-1 on offer.
Like many in the sport, the men who make the odds view the bold Brittain as racing's version of Don Quixote.
What the cynics overlook, however, is that when Brittain tilts at windmills, it is the windmills that frequently come off second best.
Perhaps Brittain has been the chief contributor to his reputation by running horses in events in which they appear out of their depth.
However, he has bagged an enviable collection of major prizes, including two Classics, the 1,000 Guineas and St Leger.
Those who have cottoned on to the streak of genius in Brittain's seemingly eccentric modus operandi have struck a rich vein of gold as the stable's horses are often priced a good deal longer than they should be.
Helping punters outwit the bookies is something that gives Brittain real pleasure and he recalls with pride how an acquaintance made an exceptionally nice profit when the trainer's Terimon took second place to Nashwan in this year's Derby.
At odds of 500-1, Terimon became the longest-priced horse ever to be placed in the Epsom Classic.
‘A man I know who works in a tailor's shop in London backed Terimon in a forecast with Nashwan at 2,000-1,’ Brittain explains.
‘He won enough to set himself up in his own business, so if you see a ‘Terimon Cafe’ on the outskirts of London you'll know how it got the name.’
Brittain categorically denies that he is merely ‘having a go’ when he flies in the face of the form book.
‘I think a lot more about it than people realise,’ he says.
‘And I never run a horse unless I think it's got a real chance.’
Rarely on the defensive when questioned about his charges — unlike so many of his tight-lipped contemporaries — his attacking policy has reaped a particularly golden harvest overseas.
Boldly going where no man has gone before has brought Brittain success on an unprecedented scale.
His victories with Pebbles in the Breeders' Cup Turf and Jupiter Island in the Japan Cup — the only successes by a Briton in the events — were superb feats, but perhaps even more laudable was his achievement in saddling Bold Arrangement to take second in the Kentucky Derby, a unique venture the know-alls told him was not even worth attempting.
By comparison to what Top Class undertook earlier this year, the trip to Paris will seem like a canter up the road.
In March he provided Brittain with another sizeable slice of foreign currency by finishing second in Australia's Tancred International.
The fact that he travels well is not the only thing in Top Class's favour, as Brittain explains.
‘Like so many of High Top's stock, Top Class is developing late.
He's fit and ready to run for his life.
It's the race of his life and he should get the result of his life.’
Top Class ran a fine Arc trial when third to Nashwan and Cacoethes in Ascot's King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes, the same position filled by Tony Bin last year before he went on to win the Arc.
Brittain believes that Top Class would have caused Nashwan and Cacoethes a lot more problems had he not gone to the front so early.
‘I've told Michael Roberts to come a lot later this time,’ Brittain says.’
That will take some nerve from the South African jockey, whose final flourish on Mtoto last year failed so narrowly.
Racing is often cruelly unfair, however, and while Top Class looks marvellous each-way value, Brittain's dreams of victory could be wrecked by Golden Pheasant, a horse he trained in the early part of the season.
A disagreement with Golden Pheasant's American owner over the sale of the colt after he had finished second to Old Vic in the Chester Vase, led to Brittain asking her to remove all her horses.
Golden Pheasant was sold to a Californian millionaire, Bruce McNall, despite Brittain offering to buy the horse himself.
Now in the care of a young Englishman, Jonathan Pease, at Chantilly, Golden Pheasant inflicted Nashwan's only defeat when he took the Prix Niel over the Arc course and distance three weeks ago and, being lightly raced, he looks capable of improvement.
French Glory, who deprived Nashwan of second in the Niel, has the assistance of Pat Eddery, who will be trying for a record fifth Arc win.
Khalid Abdullah's colt must be respected, as must the French filly Young Mother, winner of the Prix Vermeille over the Arc course and Brittain's fancy.
Before the Arc, Luca Cumani's Statoblest may maintain the successful run of raiders in the Prix de l'Abbaye, in which there are five other British runners.
The British also make a strong challenge for the other big prizes at Longchamp, with Light Of Morn in today's Prix Dollar and Dancing Tribute in tomorrow's Prix de l'Opera our best chances.
Judo: White remains the stylist in a world of brute force: Philip Nicksan meets a fighter on the mat after throwing his weight around on behalf of the British judo team
By PHILIP NICKSAN
EVER since Neil Adams retired, Densign White has been the spokesman and leader of the British men's judo squad.
This is partly because he has become the man most likely to win medals in the top competitions abroad — including the World Championships in Belgrade which start on Tuesday — notwithstanding his curiously fragile physique.
Far from the rugged nature of most combat sportsmen, he has been sidelined by injuries only too often during his career, though, in his eight-year period as Britain's top middleweight, he has won two European silver medals, a world bronze medal, and two Olympic fifth places.
His captaincy is partly due to his quiet, controlled manner and a confidence and authority that unnerves his opponents — on and off the competition mat.
Last month he was hauled before the management committee of the British Judo Association to explain a series of criticisms he had made in The Independent after the poor British results at the European Championships in Helsinki last May.
He stands by what he said, and, sadly, many of his criticisms are still valid: the team have still not bought a video camera despite a large injection of cash from the Sports Council and no one could say that the preparation training for the world championships — one weekend in the Kendal Judo Club — has been anything but derisory.
White duly came down to London from his home in Wolverhampton — he is the senior member of a remarkable quartet of Elvis Gordon, Dennis Stewart and the banned Kerrith Brown who have all won medals at world level, yet all train in the back room of an Edwardian bath house.
White faced the official carpeting, defused the attacks with a firm but polite dignity, and went off to catch the next train unaffected by the experience.
He went straight back on to the mat to work with his judo partner of a decade and more, Brown.
Characteristically, he refuses to make any secret of his work with Brown, whose Olympic drugs ban has one more year to run; nor, in loyal fashion, does he have any doubts that Brown will return to competition and go straight to the top.
‘There isn't a man in Britain who would be able to touch him at lightweight or light middleweight,’ he said.
Brown has been important to White because he provides the top-level training practice that has been so lacking in the build-up to this world championships.
Ten years ago, they toured the domestic junior competitions as gangly, gawky youths, winning most of them, and riding the knocks with humour.
White was a stylist then, and remains so.
He is the only middleweight to have beaten Austria's double Olympic champion, Peter Seisenbacher twice -and convincingly too.
When in peak condition, White is one of the most stylish throwers in a game which only too easily breaks down into brutishness.
His range alone is impressive: he can spring into a left uchimata (inner thigh throw) then twist right into a seoi-nage (shoulder throw) and still retain sufficient balance to produce a sparkling footsweep which will send his opponent crashing to the ground.
Even on a bad day he is worth watching, for a few seconds of his lightning, elegant attacks eclipses an evening of mauling aggression.
‘Judo has always been a technical sport for me — it must be the most complex of any in the Olympic Games,’ White said.
Sadly, there are no points for style in judo competitions.
To win, you must throw your opponent, ideally on his back; or dispose of him on the ground with an armlock, strangle or 30 second hold.
It is a tough uncompromising business, and one where a man like White seems curiously out of place.
Not so.
‘If I don't go on the mat for a few days, I get withdrawal symptoms,’ he confesses.
He shrugs off his legacy of injuries — a fractured bone in his back, ripped Achilles tendons, the deep bruise on his face which he picked up on the way to winning a bronze medal in Poland.
That was four weeks ago but it is still evident.
There is scarcely a useful middleweight in the world whom he has not beaten with the one exception of the world champion, Fabien Canu of France.
Twice, White lost European finals to him;, on the last occasion, in 1988, he lost on a rather harsh penalty, but knew that at last he had the measure of the Frenchman.
White is not making any rash predictions for this coming affair.
‘My main fault in the last few years, is being too laid back.
I didn't get thrown very often, but that is no good if you still don't win a medal at the end of the day.
‘Now, I have decided to fight in a more open style.
I am getting thrown a little more, but I feel stronger and better with a lot more aggression.’
He declines to comment on the chances of the rest of the team, saying only that all have lacked the intensive training, with a sojourn in Japan, which they really needed.
‘British men's judo is not in a very good state,’ he said, more with honesty than pessimism.
‘I don't feel there are any young players coming through to threaten my position which is not good for me.
‘But we will all go and make the best of a bad situation.
We are not a rubbish team, but frankly any medal will be a bonus.’
Basketball: Glorious Celtics take the honours
By DUNCAN HOOPER
BRACKNELL Tigers and Livingston are Britain's survivors in Europe following their wins in the Champions Cup on Thursday night, but the week's honours went to Oldham Broadway Celtics, who made a glorious exit from the Korac Cup with a 98-91 win over Monaco in France.
Oldham trailed 91-85 with one minute and 50 seconds to play in their first-round, second-leg tie, but outscored the wealthy French 13-0 to win 98-91.
They lost 203-186 on aggregate, and on the long cost-saving coach drive back to Lancashire the players had ample time to contrast their status with that of Monaco.
Prince Rainier finances most of his team's annual budget of £800,000.
His opposite number in Oldham, the mayor of the metropolitan borough council, had the best value this week, however, after the authority topped up Celtics' annual budget of £35,000 to finance short-term contracts for two extra players, Dip Donaldson and George Branch.
Both will play tomorrow at Gateshead for the defending National League champions, who cannot afford too many more domestic slips following their opening-day defeat at unbeaten Brixton.
Oldham's task at Gateshead may have been eased by the Tynesiders' dismissal earlier this week of their American guard, Darryl Thomas.
In the Champions Cup, Bracknell and Livingston now face the two most powerful teams in Europe.
Livingston play title-holders Jugoplastika Split, of Yugoslavia, while Bracknell face the 1987 and 1988 champions, Philips Milan.
Bracknell defeated Keflavik 106-91 in Iceland on Thursday for a 250-196 aggregate win, and are at home to Milan in the first leg on Thursday 26 October.
The Week in Review: Sport
By DUNCAN HOOPER
SUNDAY: Mark Calcavecchia's single-stroke win over Japan's Hajime Meshiai at St Andrews secures the Dunhill Cup and a measure of Ryder Cup consolation for the United States.
There is some consolation, too, for Formula One world champion, Ayrton Senna, for last week's crunch with Nigel Mansell in Portugal.
He takes first place in the Spanish Grand Prix at Jerez, although Alain Prost comes third to keep him on course for Senna's title.
MONDAY: With the qualifying match against Poland imminent, England's World Cup aspirations are raised when Bryan Robson, out with a fracture in his leg for 10 days, is unexpectedly named in Manchester United's squad for Tuesday's Littlewoods Cup tie against Portsmouth.
Nashwan, his trainer, Dick Hern, announces, will not be racing in Sunday's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp, the scene of his only defeat.
TUESDAY: Robson comes through unscathed against Portsmouth, as United go through on aggregate.
Steve Whitton scores four goals and Dalian Atkinson three as Sheffield Wednesday increase their goalscoring record this season by 500 per cent, beating Aldershot 8-0 in their tie.
Third Division leaders Tranmere knock out Ipswich Town of the Second.
There is a minor triumph for British tennis when Jo Durie, Clare Wood and Anne Hobbs beat Indonesia 3-0 in the first round of the Federation Cup in Tokyo.
WEDNESDAY: Success is brief for Durie, Wood and Hobbs when they are knocked out 2-1 by Austria.
It emerges that Michael Knighton, the man who would be Manchester United chairman, is seeking help to salvage his attempted £20m takeover.
Eddy Shah, the former national newspaper proprietor, is one of his contacts.
In the Littlewoods Cup, Scarborough, two goals down to Chelsea, score three times in seven minutes to go through 4-3 on aggregate.
A bright future — or at least a possible meeting with Mike Tyson — beckons for British heavyweight champion Gary Mason after he knocks out Tyrell Biggs in the seventh round of their Albert Hall bout.
THURSDAY: As the Old Trafford soap opera unfolds, Martin Edwards, United's chief executive, begins legal proceedings against Knighton for alleged breach of confidentiality in their dealings.
Ajax join English clubs in European exile, as UEFA bans the club for the next two years they qualify for Europe, as punishment for the previous week's crowd trouble, when the Austria Vienna goalkeeper was felled by a metal spike.
FRIDAY: The good news of Robson's call-up to the England squad is tempered by the withdrawal of Liverpool's John Barnes with a hamstring injury.
Knighton is reported to be ready to abandon his takeover bid.
Rugby League: Whitehead ‘off lightly’
By PAUL WILSON
CRAIG WHITEHEAD, a Nottingham City forward, was yesterday banned for eight matches for the elbow tackle which smashed Jason Ramshaw's jaw, nose and cheekbone, and also may face a private prosecution on behalf of the 20-year-old Halifax player.
Halifax are considering legal redress after dismissing Whitehead's sentence, lengthy by normal standards, as ‘extraordinarily lenient’.
‘We were looking for 12 matches or even 16,’ David Brook, the club president, said.
‘The League saw a video which clearly showed the elbow raised in an unprovoked attack on an inexperienced and defenceless opponent.
Anywhere other than a rugby pitch it would have been common assault.
Ramshaw is in a terrible mess, he will not play again this year, and he deserves better protection.’
Brook's concern was compounded when Dick Fairbank, a Halifax forward dismissed in the same match for a transgression described by his president as ‘mere retaliatory fisticuffs’, received a five-match ban.
‘Either Fairbank's punishment is disproportionate, or Whitehead got off lightly,’ Brook said.
‘The League appear to be saying that the difference between scrapping and cynical wounding is just three matches.’
The other club to fall foul of the disciplinary committee yesterday was St Helens, who travel to Wakefield tomorrow without Roy Haggerty and Stuart Evans, both banned for four matches.
They were dismissed against Oldham last week, Evans in the final minute of a 36-6 defeat, after missing the start of the season through injury.
Evans, like Haggerty, is not in the Saints side for his cerebral contribution, though there was evidence against New Zealand last week that the giant prop is at last gaining an understanding of his league potential.
The Kiwi tour continues at Wigan, where after the Oldham upset, the home side need a confidence booster almost as badly as the visitors, whose efforts so far have been disjointed.
Jonathan Davies, almost disjointed in a literal sense in the act of try-scoring on Wednesday, will get a run in his favoured stand-off position if Tony Myler misses the new world champions' next challenge, Sheffield Eagles at Bramall Lane.
This afternoon, Kevin Tamati, last seen demonstrating an ability to talk fellow television commentators into submission, finds himself the object of Granada's broadcast as his new charges look for first points from Leigh.
Tamati has taken on a lot but life from here should not be dull for Salford's long-suffering support.
Hockey: Ealing's chance
By BILL COLWILL
EALING can take advantage of England squad calls and move to the top of the Typhoo Women's National League today as two games involving teams with three or more players in the squad have been postponed, writes Bill Colwill.
England play the Soviet Union at Luton and Leicester's game at Sutton Coldfield was an early postponement.
Slough's home match with Clifton has also being called off following Sue Chandler's call to the colours.
Slough already had Karen Brown and Kate Parker, their captain, on duty at Luton.
With Slough absent, Ealing should take over the leadership when they travel to Ottery St Mary to play Exmouth.
The Devon side went down only 2-1 at Leicester last week, but Ealing are a different proposition.
Sports Diary: Rugby Union: Andrew says it with flowers
By BILL COLWILL
THE FRENCH love to lay on the style and their over-the-top preliminaries -world's biggest scrum, Un Show Laser — to this week's Bicentenary match against the Lions in Paris gave the evening a sense of occasion which the rugby itself also justified.
But the pomp and splendour did not go down so well with Craig Chalmers.
The Scottish stand-off, who was among the Lions replacements, was forced to parade, bouquet in hand, from behind one set of posts to the red carpet on the half-wayline as chaperone to Mireille Mathieu, the French songstress who had just rendered all three verses of the Marseillaise (with the chorus repeated each time).
The anthem, flower-presentation, long walk and interminable announcements all took place after the teams had taken the field, where they were forced to kick their heels in a neat line for nearly a quarter of an hour during which the chanteuse and the French Army choir six times exhorted the crowd: ‘To Arms!’.
Mireille eventually met Rob Andrew, the Lions captain, and he too ended up with a bouquet, which he was still wondering how to dispose of as his players began to line up.
Andrew did most horribly revenge.
The game afoot, he vented his embarrassment by scoring the Lions' first try after 64 seconds.
Cry God for Rob.
Sports Diary: Football: Disguised price rise for Stoke programme
By BILL COLWILL
THE POTTERY kilns adorning Stoke's programme for the derby with Port Vale -‘Special Edition, £1’— looked a nice local touch.
They were actually there to obscure the original price of 80p…no wonder The Oatcake fanzine sold well at 30p.
We trust Vale chairman Bill Bell enjoyed his pen portrait.
‘Dedicated to making Vale No. 1 team in the Potteries, Bill also wants to find the Lost City of Atlantis, be first man to walk the Channel, and skateboard up Everest.’
Sports Diary: Quotes of the Week
By BILL COLWILL
I am not touting the club around.
Michael Knighton, on Manchester United.
We have now got him down to 10 pints and a bucket of chips.
Ken Roberts, Eccleshall manager, on dietary habits of 20st goalkeeper Sid Kelly.
I've told my son that I am going to get him a forged passport that will get him into the opposition penalty area.
Brian Clough, on striker Nigel.
I did not ask for the job, it was offered to me.
I am not willing to be interviewed only to be compared with the chief executive of some Midlands council.
Gordon Taylor, candidate for Football League's chief executive.
We have to accept this is showbiz now, not a sport.
John Watson, on punishment imposed on Nigel Mansell.
People said I was too old in 1985, but I had confidence in my own ability.
I still have, but now my legs aren't quite as young as I feel.
John Ferguson, Canberra Raiders wing, recalling ‘85 RL cup final when playing for Wigan.
Favourite food: 32oz steak-with-everything.
Hucknall Town FC programme feature on left-back Phil Towle.
It will take a little time for me to forget the hurt and the disappointment…
I am not sorry I undertook the captaincy again — I genuinely wanted to do it successfully.
I am just sorry it has all ended in this way.
David Gower.
Even a repeat of Hawaii Five-O will get more viewers than most sport.
Derek Brandon, of sports producers Grandslam.
Anybody who swears allegiance to United must share the same sense of dismay at what has happened, and what is still going on — for me, it's almost a sense of revulsion.
No more shabby deals.
Pat Crerand, on Manchester United.
Sports Diary: Football: Crystal Palace's Lifeline winner
By BILL COLWILL
LOOKS thrilled to bits, doesn't he?
Maybe Crystal Palace's Lifeline winner had no need of £1,000, or there's something unpleasant in that handshake.
Perhaps he wanted second prize; not Jim Rosenthal's Book of Banal Alliteration, but two tickets to the US and £300 in cash.
Was third prize a round-the-world trip plus £500?
Sports Diary: Lookalike: Muriel Gray /Monica Seles
By BILL COLWILL
THE MONICKER'S different but Monica's very much alike, claims Steve Tivey, from Wellingborough, after watching Muriel Gray, ScotNat television presenter, and Monica Seles, expat tennis pretender.
‘Or could they be, in any way, related?’
Sports Diary: Football: Statue of liberties
By BILL COLWILL
NOT many football clubs have had 27 martyrs on their books and beaten Real Madrid.
The Jesuit College of St Alban, an English seminary in Valladolid, this month celebrates the 400th anniversary of its foundation, the programme including Mass in Westminster Cathedral but, sadly, no return of the 1907 fixture with Real which the college won, though the result seems to have been lost in some priest-hole of history.
St Alban's never had a player capped, though many of their lads have gone on to be decapitated, especially in internationals.
The club mascot, a statue of Our Lady Vulnerata (the wounded Maradona?) was hacked about in 1589 by some (Lord) Essex supporters on their way back from Cadiz, but still stands in the chapel, a focus of prayer.
Perhaps Manchester United should borrow it.
Sports Diary: Football: Millwall quivers
By BILL COLWILL
‘FORGET your worries, take up archery’, advised an item in a programme last week.
‘Archery is a great tonic — quiet, non-polluting and you get your ammo back!’
This last attraction may have special appeal to the article's audience, since it was published in the Millwall programme, raising the spectre of the League's most feared supporters tooled-up on the terraces, humming the William Tell theme instead of‘No one likes us.’
Millwall's achievements are now chronicled in the Far East.
Erith?
No, Bangkok, from where a Lions fan on a business trip (!) reported a ‘Millwall Unfashionable But Dangerous’ headline in The Nation.
‘I've been a Lions fan for about 15 years and it's great to see the look on the tourists’ faces when I walk around Bangkok in my ‘No One Likes Us We Don't Care’T-shirt,’wrote Mr Barrett.
Sports Diary: Tennis: Chris Evert's latest bulletin on whether she intends to retire
By BILL COLWILL
FORTHRIGHT and unambiguous, that Chris Evert.
Take her latest bulletin on whether she intends to retire, issued from Japan, where she is playing in the Federation Cup.
‘I'm not going to say that I stake my life on the fact that I'm never going to play another tournament.
But I would be surprised if I did after this year, although, at this stage, I am still playing well enough and I am enjoying it enough so that if I want to play another tournament, I can.’
That should stop the gossip.
Football: Toshack confronts his Real test: Shankly's protege carries the Liverpool creed to Madrid in a relentless pursuit of the European Cup: Patrick Barclay on the British manager putting the nice on ice in the hotbed of Spanish football
By PATRICK BARCLAY
THEY SAY nice guys finish second, in which case John Toshack must have every chance of winning the Spanish championship for Real Madrid.
Though it is rare to find consensus among footballers and the media, few on either side had a good, or even printable, word for Toshack in Wales while he was marching Swansea to the top of the hill and down again.
In the Basque country, too, his successes as manager of Real Sociedad were somewhat grudgingly accepted; locals contrasted his surly manner with Howard Kendall's affability along the coast at Bilbao.
Well, I take as I find, and can only say that I was happy to do Toshack a favour a few years back when a friend, an international fixer with contacts in Portuguese football, rang to ask if anyone might be available to Sporting Lisbon.
Toshack was out of work at the time, so I passed on the offer.
Some days later the telephone rang.
It was Toshack, in Lisbon, gushing with gratitude as he rustled his contract.
He has not looked back since.
Perhaps we shall renew our acquaintance in Barcelona tonight, where Real Madrid have their first major test under his management.
I fear not, though.
Last week Toshack, back in character, directed inquiries to an agent in England, who firmly pointed out that his client was exclusively tied to The Sun.
Such style!
And such a change from that of Leo Beenhakker, the urbane Dutchman from whom Toshack took over at the Bernabeu last summer.
But then managers are not paid to be nice.
Toshack has a two-year contract worth £600,000 (figure courtesy of The Sun) and an awful lot to do if he is to see it out.
Real have won the championship in each of the last four seasons, so that is almost taken for granted; his job is to win the European Cup, which the club last lifted in 1966.
Three times in succession they have fallen in the semi-finals, and Beenhakker's departure became a formality when they were thrashed 5-0 by Milan at San Siro last season.
Now the clubs are to meet again, in circumstances that could scarcely be more favourable to Toshack.
The European champions, who host the first leg in 11 days' time, have lost Ruud Gullit and Marco Van Basten and are struggling for form.
So are Barcelona under Johan Cruyff, as if participating in a benign conspiracy: two good results for Real and the Toshack era takes off.
Thus far his press has been ambivalent.
The general opinion is that Real are tighter in defence, but less interesting and inventive.
As one observer put it after goalless draws with Castellon and Mallorca: ‘Under Beenhakker, the little teams were slaughtered.’
Beenhakker, in his more candid moments, went close to admitting that senior players were in charge at the Bernabeu.
Toshack has wasted no time in putting his stamp on the side, moving the West German midfielder Bernd Schuster to libero, Michel from the right flank to central midfield, and giving the striker Emilio Butragueno a slightly withdrawn role.
And those with their ears to the dressing-room wall have yet to report rumbles.
Toshack has taken pains to play down the hard-man image he brought from San Sebastian, swearing that the extra training ordered after the poor performance at Castellon was not a punishment.
While Real are unbeaten, the relative honeymoon will continue for a man whom the late Bill Shankly, with characteristic caution, once said was destined to become ‘the top manager in the game’.
Toshack's admiration for Shankly, who signed him for Liverpool from Cardiff in 1970, is unquestionably deep: still the overwhelming influence on his career.
As a centre-forward, tall and crafty, he formed one of the great Anfield partnerships with Kevin Keegan.
As a manager, initially player-manager, at Swansea, he leant heavily on former Liverpool club-mates: Tommy Smith, Ian Callaghan, Ray Kennedy, Phil Boersma, Alan Waddle and Colin Irwin all went to the Vetch Field.
But there was more to it than that as Swansea soared from Fourth Division to First with only a season's rest.
The club have never had a better side.
With Leighton James on the wing and Bob Latchford up front, they finished sixth in the League in 1982.
It was early in that season that Shankly died.
Liverpool's next match was at home to Swansea, and shortly before kick-off the mourning Toshack appeared before the Kop in his old red No. 10 shirt.
There were later rumours that the gesture, however sincere, cost Toshack the Liverpool management when Bob Paisley retired; he had certainly seen Swansea as his apprenticeship.
The truth is that some members of the Liverpool board had misgivings about the way Swansea were run and wondered if Toshack might have picked up bad habits.
Perhaps they were too cautious.
But, sure enough, when Swansea's money ran out, so did the players.
Relegation followed, and the hopelessly over-stretched club were sliding back towards the Fourth Division when Toshack resigned in 1984.
He made a brief, unsuccessful return, but his future was overseas: Lisbon first, and then San Sebastian, where the club's policy of using only Basque players (recently broken by the arrival of John Aldridge from Liverpool) limited his use of the cheque book.
Only those with short memories would subscribe to the notion that he guided a hick club to new heights — Real Sociedad were twice Spanish champions in the early Eighties — but his record was more than respectable.
They won the King's Cup in 1987, and the next year finished second to Real Madrid in the League.
Few were surprised when the champions turned to him.
The Liverpool connection remains hard to break.
‘Everything I've achieved has been due to what I learned there,’ he said upon arriving at the Bernabeu.
‘Being made manager of Real Madrid, I hope, projects the name of Liverpool Football Club more than ever.
Yes, I'm laughing at that because I know Kenny Dalglish will laugh when he reads it.
Bill Shankly will be laughing somewhere up there as well.
Because when one laughs we all laugh.
When one cries we all cry.
That's why we are what we are.’
Well, he has always had a way with words.
He even had a book of ‘poetry’ published during his playing career.
It was called Gosh It's Tosh and, gosh, it was.
A sample: We're coming in to land at Speke My legs are feeling very weak We've just returned from Barcelona And now I'm going for a sauna Toshack is of Scottish descent, and there is certainly a bit of McGonagall in there, though not the best bit.
But the man is no fool.
He has kept his day job.
He has proved himself as a coach, and any doubts harboured at Anfield about his judgement have long since been swept away.
If Dalglish ever left, Toshack would be a powerful candidate to take over.
Let Madrid and a mission near-impossible bring what it may; he has friends where he wants them.
Tennis: Letter from West Germany: Becker boom beckons the masters
By JOHN ROBERTS
MENTION big-time tennis venues round here and folk let you prattle on about Wimbledon, Roland Garros, Flushing Meadow and Flinders Park and then press a few claims of their own.
How could we possibly overlook the Schleyer Halle, the Festhalle, the Rothenbaum and the Rochusclub?
The West German boom, which started with Boris Becker's success at Wimbledon four years ago and was echoed by the prodigious achievements of Steffi Graf in winning the Grand Slam and Olympic gold last year, is developing into a national industry.
This year Becker and Graf, who were born six miles apart in small towns near Heidelberg, cornered the major prizes at both Wimbledon and the US Open.
In December, Stuttgart will host the Davis Cup final, in which the West Germans will defend the trophy they won for the first time by defeating Sweden in Gothenburg, and in the coming three years Frankfurt will stage the ATP Tour World Championship, which will supersede the Nabisco Masters in New York.
Here in Stuttgart today we shall see the final of an unofficial mini-Masters, the masters having taken a lucrative detour away from the pressures of the circuit.
Ion Tiriac, Becker's manager, devised the show last year as a maverick tournament to demonstrate that he deserved an opportunity to promote a fully fledged grand prix event.
His wish has been granted.
In February, the Stuttgart Classic takes its place along with Hamburg as one of the $1m (£625,000) stops on the ATP Tour, adding to a growing list of reasons why West Germany is rapidly becoming the focal point of world tennis.
The ATP Tour Championship next year offers a prize of $2m to be divided between the top eight players in the rankings.
A private West German television company, SAT 1, will pay more than $5.2m per year to broadcast the tournament and other ATP events in Germany, and the mayor of Frankfurt, Dr Volker Hauff, has promised to ‘showcase’ the event with a week of concerts, exhibitions and international symposiums.
Tiriac is still miffed that the ATP final did not come to Stuttgart: ‘The ATP told me to join the auction, but I am too good to have to do that.’
He expresses scepticism about Frankfurt's boast of being able to fill their stadium for every session: ‘I don't think they will get 9,000 every day, but I would have achieved that here, where we have developed an audience for the game.
Frankfurt is not a traditional tennis city.
It is not like Hamburg, where they have had a tournament for a hundred years and people would go out and watch tennis at 7 am, even in the freezing cold.’
Tiriac is also concerned that the Germans are beginning to take their success for granted.
‘Imagine what it would mean to Britain if you had a player in Manchester and a player in Liverpool who won Wimbledon and the US Open,’ he said, boggling the mind.
‘In Germany they are becoming blase.
They expect it.
Becker and Graf won Wimbledon and the US Open and did not get their pictures on the front cover of any non-tennis magazines here.’
Becker's photograph was in the German newspapers yesterday, accompanied by lamentations about his physical condition after a knee injury had caused him to abandon the Classic on Thursday.
They were not taking the hero for granted, but missing him madly and praying that he would be fit to return for the Davis Cup.
The feeling was mutual.
‘The Davis Cup is definitely the biggest highlight of the rest of the year for me,’ Becker said.
‘The Masters is important also, but if I have to choose I would prefer the Davis Cup to be the next big thing to win.’
This time last year Becker still carried the label of a one-surface player, two Wimbledon triumphs being the sole major achievements on his record.
Since then he has won the Masters, inspired his country to their first Davis Cup victory and added the US Open to a third Wimbledon title.
‘It astonishes me, to be quite honest,’ he said, showing that it is not all swagger on the courts over here.
Tennis: Graf is upset by nervous second
From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
FOR THE first time in three years Steffi Graf was yesterday reminded what it feels like to leave a tournament a quarter-final loser when West Germany were beaten 2-1 by Czechoslovakia in the Federation Cup here.
Clearly Graf was not amused by the experience as she quickly booked herself on the next flight home leaving her team-mates behind without telling them.
The world No. 1 gave the tie her best, however, but even that was not enough to make up for the shortcomings of her second in command, Claudia Kohde- Kilsch.
The latter player, once a top-10 performer but now languishing at No. 31 after a series of injuries and a great loss of confidence, was a bag of nerves.
First, she lost the opening singles match 6-3, 6-3 to Jana Novotna then she dithered far too often in the deciding doubles after Graf had, as expected, levelled the score by crushing Helena Sukova 6-2, 6-1 in the other singles match.
To call Graf and Kohde-Kilsch a team on this showing is a misnomer.
They were in total disarray from the start.
Indeed, the only good thing about their confrontation against Sukova and Novotna is that it took just 50 minutes to complete, with the established Czech combination sweeping to a 6-2, 6-2 victory and a place in the semi-finals against the United States.
It was a lesson not lost on Klaus Hofsaess, the West German team captain, who said: ‘It is absolutely necessary that Steffi plays doubles three or four times a year with a German player.’
At the moment Graf spends most of her time partnering Gabriela Sabatini.
Indeed, this week was the first time that Graf had joined up with Kohde-Kilsch since the Olympics.
‘If she is not prepared to play with another German player sometimes on the circuit then the German team has no chance in the future to win the Cup,’ Hofsaess added.
Fishing Lines: Bated breath leads to web of intrigue
By KEITH ELLIOTT
PREVIOUSLY uncatchable fish are being suckered into grabbing baits and flies attached to a new ‘invisible’ line.
Out of water, Krystom Multistrand looks like a length of string.
In water, it splits like a spider's web into gossamer strands while retaining its basic strength.
Many anglers are hailing it as the most significant advance in fishing tackle during the past 20 years and Dave Chilton, the man who has popularised its use, believes that the line, made from the world's strongest man-made fibre (Lancia uses it to strengthen the internal bodywork of its cars), may revolutionise all branches of the sport.
In many parts of the world, fish are still being caught by bow and arrow and it was a bowstring which first put Chilton, a Bolton lorry driver, on to the potential of the high-performance polyethylene fibres.
He had been experimenting with dental floss, which was multi-stranded but then broke when rubbed against rocks or weeds.
‘I was delivering to industry and kept a constant look-out for a suitable material.
Then someone tipped me off about a US material used for bow and kite strings.’
But bow strings are highly waxed and far from suitable for fishing line.
Chilton and his wife scraped together £250 and persuaded the manufacturer to produce an unwaxed batch.
The results exceeded his wildest hopes.
As soon as the line came in contact with water, the fibres separated.
Instead of one strand as thick as string, there were dozens of fibres three times thinner than a human hair.
A fish will often reject a bait because the line's weight makes a maggot chunk of bread or artificial fly move unnaturally.
A fish can also see or sense the presence of a line.
With Krystom, it is an entirely different matter.
‘The fish don't seem to associate it with danger because of the very fine diameter of each strand, but also because of its weightlessness and extreme softness.
Initially, Chilton has only been able to persuade the makers to turn out spools of line with a 70lb breaking strain, strong enough to tow a boat.
Even that wasn't an easy job.
‘Their marketing people had already said that the product had no future in angling,’ Chilton said.
Now he is churning out line with a 15lb breaking strain and it is proving so popular that he has now got rid of the old banger he had been driving around in for years and bought his first executive saloon.
Krystom cannot be used in the same way as traditional nylon line.
Because of its softness and weightlessness, it is best in lengths up to a yard long.
This means that at the moment it is being used closest to the hook, where presentation and visibility are vital factors and, because it is so different to nylon, many users have problems knotting it.
‘It requires a totally different technique,’ Chilton said.
Krystom's main impact so far has been in catching carp, the Independent readers of the fish world.
It has brought outstanding success on waters where anglers were quite happy to catch a single fish in the course of a whole season's fishing.
Enlightened dry-fly anglers, too, have already been taking some tremendous catches with it and it will surely prove devastating for dapping, the earliest form of fly fishing, a method still used extensively in Ireland at certain times of year.
Krystom, and its inevitable rivals, is not an instant route to success.
‘It is not simply a matter of buying a spool and catching millions of fish,’ Chilton said, ‘but the more skilful and forward-thinking anglers are developing its use all the time.
‘I'm just pleased I had the idea and that anglers with a lot more skill than me are showing what can be done with it,’ he said modestly.
The former lorry driver is now busy exporting Krystom throughout Europe and his only regret is that he no longer has time to go fishing.
Racing: Free to go for Guineas
By KEITH ELLIOTT
FREE AT LAST entered 1,000 Guineas calculations after her victory in the Somerville Tattersall Stakes at rain-soaked Newmarket yesterday.
Gerald Leigh's filly, who is quoted at 25-1 for the Classic, was recording her third successive win.
‘Her dam, Brocade, preferred cut in the ground, but Free At Last likes it fast.
She won't run again this season, and will take her chance in the Guineas next spring,’ said Guy Harwood, the filly's trainer.
Tony Clark struck the front on Free At Last with a quarter of a mile to cover, and his mount held off Qui Danzig by a neck.
Racing: Cumani's Career to take the low road to success
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
LUCA CUMANI, who built his reputation on success in big handicaps, complicates a cavalry charge of a Cambridgeshire Handicap at Newmarket today by saddling Shellac and Splendid Career, the two best-backed runners in the race.
Neither horse will have the benefit of their usual riding partners as Cumani's stable-jockey, Ray Cochrane, last night gave up his weekend rides as he was in pain from the shoulder injury sustained in the Doncaster pile-up three weeks ago.
So Lanfranco Dettori takes over from Cochrane on Cullinan at Phoenix Park today and on Legal Case and Statoblest at Longchamp tomorrow.
Choosing between Shellac and Splendid Career is made more difficult by the draw, as both colts will run up the stands rails from low numbers.
This could prove a significant advantage over their chief rivals — Blue Orca, Hard As Iron and Red Paddy, who are all drawn high on the far rails.
Last year's winner, Quinlan Terry, would not have beaten the second horse, the subsequent Group One race winner Ile De Chypre, had that rival not been drawn on the far side.
The heaviest betting this year has been for Shellac, a six-length winner from Sudden Victory at Ayr last time out, but the deciding factor is that Dettori originally chose to ride SPLENDID CAREER (nap 3.35), who may have been unlucky when beaten at Newbury by yesterday's Goodwood winner Monastery.
Some high-class fillies contest the Group Two Sun Chariot Stakes, including Tessla (3.00), who was winter favourite for the Oaks but has yet to win this season.
Her sire is Glint Of Gold, so she should not mind the rain that has eased the Newmarket going.
The rain should also help the chances of Pinctada (next best 5.10), for whom Rod Simpson has booked Willie Ryan, and Stoneythorpewonder (4.40).
The draw could also be decisive in the Cartier Million, run on the dog-leg straight at Phoenix Park, and Cumani has again been fortunate with Cullinan (4.0), drawn 16 of 20.
He may have the measure of the John Gosden-trained Anshan, running from stall 15.
Fitness should be crucial at Chepstow, the jumping season's first televised meeting.
Following horses with a run under their belt may be the best advice for armchair punters retreating from an unprofitable Flat campaign.
Gavin Pritchard-Gordon's Peer Prince (3.10) has already won twice this season and could make that advantage tell over Josh Gifford's Zamil.
Over fences, Marshlander (2.35) takes a big step up in class after a hat-trick of recent victories.
But this front-runner has always battled with gameness and gets plenty of weight from Midnight Madness, a previous winner of this race.
Toby Balding gives Folk Dance (2.0) his seasonal debut over the sticks, but this gelding had a pipe-opener when finishing ninth on the Flat at Sandown last month.
Sport in Short: Tennis
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Table Tennis
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Squash
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Rugby League
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
LEEDS are to play their Stones Bitter Championship game against Warrington at Headingley on Thursday, 2 November.
The game has been brought forward from 5 November because Headingley has been chosen to stage the John Smiths Yorkshire Cup final on that date.
DARRYL PITT, the 23-year-old centre from Brisbane who arrived in England on Thursday, has signed for joint Second Division leaders Fulham.
Pitt, who played for the Valleys club in Australia, will make his Fulham debut at Whitehaven tomorrow.
Sport in Short: Motor Racing
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
THE ORGANISERS of the Portuguese Grand Prix, who fined Nigel Mansell $50,000 for allegedly breaking the rules during the race at Estoril on 24 September, said yesterday that their case concerned only the motor racing authorities and is not a civil action as previously thought.
Mansell's appeal, which involves only the fine and not his subsequent ban from the Spanish Grand Prix, will be heard on 18 October.
Sport in Short: Ice Hockey
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Hockey
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Golf
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Football
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
MARK ROBSON, the winger signed by Tottenham from Exeter for £50,000 in July 1987, has signed for Watford on a month's loan with a view to a permanent transfer.
Cardiff City have signed Leigh Barnard, the Swindon midfield player, for £25,000, while Bury have borrowed Gary Kelly, the Newcastle goalkeeper, also for a month.
Sport in Short: Equestrianism
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Commonwealth Games
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Boxing
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
MICHAEL WATSON'S World Boxing Association world middleweight title challenge against the Jamaican, Mike McCallum, has been brought forward to 29 November and switched to Alexandra Palace.
The same promoter, Barry Hearn, is to stage Jim McDonnell's World Boxing Council world super-featherweight title fight with Azumah Nelson of Ghana at the Royal Albert Hall on 5 November.
Sport in Short: Basketball
Weekend Sport Page 63
Sport in Short: Baseball
By HYPERION (CHRIS CORRIGAN)
THE Chicago Cubs scored six runs in the first inning as they beat the San Francisco Giants 9-5 at Wrigley Field on Thursday to level the National League championship series at 1-1.
The Giants' starting pitcher, Rick Reuschel, was driven from the game after only 18 pitches as the Cubs' lead-off man, Jerome Walton, had two first-inning hits and Mark Grace three hits and four runs batted in.
The series moves to Candlestick Park tonight for the first of three games on the West Coast.
Sport in Short: Badminton
Weekend Sport Page 63
Motor Racing: FIA find road free
By MAURICE HAMILTON
(First Edition) THE ORGANISERS of the Portuguese Grand Prix, who fined Nigel Mansell and Ferrari $50,000 for allegedly breaking the rules during their race at Estoril on 24 September, said yesterday that their case concerned only the motor racing authorities and was not a civil action, as previously reported.
The Portuguese officials said they would hear the appeal on 18 October and confirmed the appeal only involved the fine and not the ban, which actually took effect at the Spanish Grand Prix last Sunday.
This will clear the way for the International Automobile Federation (FIA) to reach a conclusion on Mansell's appeal against his exclusion from the Grand Prix at Jerez.
The FIA court of appeal did not make a final decision in Paris on Thursday after a three-hour hearing to consider Mansell's evidence.
The three-man tribunal did allow, however, that the exclusion appeared to be too harsh for the alleged crime.
Rugby Union: NZ undercurrent running at Stradey
By STEVE BALE
RUGBY at Stradey Park when Neath are the visitors is as red-raw as Llanelli's scarlet jerseys.
It is an acquired taste for sensitive palates but a lot of hungry people are only too happy to tuck in.
For this afternoon's rematch of the Welsh Cup finalists — Neath won that one 14-13 before 58,000 people at the Arms Park — Stradey has an upper limit of 18,700 and, if last season's equivalent is anything to go by, every available space may be needed.
That exhilarating game, which Llanelli won 27-21, attracted 20,000 to Stradey even though the official limit was some 5,000 fewer.
Since then safety work has pushed up that capacity and when the (New Zealand) All Blacks play there in three weeks it will be helped to 21,000 by a temporary stand erected over the Tanner Bank wall on the outfield of the adjacent cricket field, adding 2,300 spectators who need not be counted in the official figure.
The Welsh All Blacks, too, have an imminent engagement with their NZ counterparts, three days before the tourists play the Scarlets, and for both sides today's game is vital preparation.
These are the best teams in Wales and as such given the best chance — better, for sure, than Wales — of upsetting the New Zealanders.
Llanelli field seven internationals, Neath six, and both are well enough endowed to relegate a recently capped player — Carwyn Davies and Rowland Phillips — to the bench.
Neath's outside-half Paul Williams, who scored 268 points last season, is out for a fortnight with a rib injury and replaced by Jason Ball, who is the son of the club coach, Glen, and was once on Arsenal's books.
If Williams's injury drags on to threaten his participation against the All Blacks, Neath will be allowed to recall Adrian Davies from Cambridge University.
Lloyd Isaac, the outstanding reserve hooker to Kevin Phillips, is a longer-term casualty; a knee injury against Bath last Saturday required surgery and he will not be involved against New Zealand or for two months afterwards.
England, meanwhile, has another of the non-league, partly Anglo-Welsh club days which — with occasional exceptions such as Bath's visit to Neath — have been rendered peripheral by the coming of Courage.
There is also the diversion of a county programme in the North and West, where the competition still has more than passing meaning.
A Swansea visit to Twickenham would once have been a highlight of Harlequins' season but an almost-empty HQ will be an eerie sort of place this afternoon and we may rest assured that the Quins players already have their attention on next Saturday's First Division visit to Bedford.
The All Whites, incidentally, have their own All Black date in a fortnight.
Quins need Paul Ackford fit to face Bedford far more than they do today.
He picked up a groin injury during his heroic performance in Lions colours in France and, with exhaustion probably exacerbating his condition, he makes way for David Thresher in the second row.
The prop Andy Mullins, like Ackford and Thresher an England squad member, is another absentee, with a twisted ankle.
Brian Moore, the Lions hooker, makes his first appearance of the season -having rested since the tour of Australia — for Nottingham at Northampton.
Moore's England props, Paul Rendall and Jeff Probyn, belatedly return for Wasps, at home to Blackheath, after being left out of the first two First Division games.
Oxford begin the build-up to their Varsity defence with a bigger overseas influence than they had even last season.
Ian Williams (Australia) and David Kirk (New Zealand) have gone, but the freshmen who face University College Cork include two US internationals, Gary Hein and Don James, Toshiyoki Hayashi of Japan, and two South Africans, David Curtis and Willem de Klerk.
Football: Team News
By STEVE BALE
Blackburn v Middlesbrough Undefeated Blackburn name full-back Sulley, who has had a trapped thigh nerve.
Boro's captain Tony Mowbray has a foot injury, so Coleman, a £400,000 buy from Mansfield, starts for the first time.
Bradford City v Brighton Adcock, City's £190,000 striker from Northampton, makes his debut.
Left-back Chapman, who has missed three matches with a twisted ankle, is in Brighton's squad, and Curbishley makes his 400th League appearance.
Hull v Swindon Hull, without a win, hope to have Whitehurst back in attack.
Galvin, Swindon's Irish winger, has recovered from injury, while Parkin returns to defence for the suspended Gittens.
Ipswich v Newcastle Ipswich's ex-Norwich winger Donowa makes his full League debut for his home-town team.
Newcastle restore 10-goal Quinn, unfit for the Littlewoods win over Reading.
Brazil, a scorer as substitute at Hull and in midweek, keeps his place at Kristensen's expense.
Oldham v Barnsley Dobbin, the Barnsley midfielder carried off at Blackpool in midweek, has made a good recovery from a knee injury and may play.
Oxford v Portsmouth The home side have dropped Greenall, so Evans, a New Zealand international and Oxford University student, will partner Slatter in central defence.
They face Gilligan, Portsmouth's new £215,000 striker from Cardiff.
Plymouth v Stoke Plymouth are unchanged — despite the 6-1 home defeat by Arsenal in midweek.
Stoke, still searching for a League win, recall £250,000 front-man Biggins, fit after knee surgery.
Port Vale v Leicester The 1,000th competitive fixture at Vale Park.
The Burslem side await fitness reports on Glover, Porter, Jeffers and their captain, Earle, though forward Cross is ready to return.
For Leicester, the bottom club, teenager Kitson is likely to retain his place in attack.
Sunderland v Bournemouth Sunderland will be unchanged if Gates (toe injury) and MacPhail (stomach upset) pass fitness tests.
Watford v WBA Hodges (ankle) and Wilkinson (knee) are doubtful for Watford.
Injury-hit Albion — 12 players unavailable — hope to have winger Ford back and include Barham, the former Norwich and England player who is on trial at the Hawthorns, much-travelled reserve-team coach Allardyce, plus teenagers Foster and Whitehouse.
West Ham v Leeds West Ham, who give fitness tests to Parkes, Gale and Ward, have added Strodder and restored cup-tied newcomer Foster to their 16.
Jones, substituted in three consecutive games by Leeds, makes his first London appearance since leaving Wimbledon.
Fairclough, a scoring substitute in the Littlewoods Cup defeat by Oldham, returns at centre-half.
The match is an all-ticket sell-out.
Wolves v Sheffield Utd Bull and Mutch are reunited up front for Wolves, the former having recovered from concussion sustained in scoring against Villa, when Mutch was absent with a groin strain.
United, the unbeaten leaders, are unchanged.
Brentford mark their centenary at home to Bristol City…
Bristol Rovers (second in the Third) make their first change this season against Fulham (fourth) because of Alexander's suspension, with striker Sealy set to face one of his old clubs…
Cardiff's goalkeeper Wood has broken two bones in his right hand, so Ward, who began the season with Droylsden, deputises at Huddersfield…
Fourth Division leaders Southend may face Scarborough without Bennett, who broke his nose in a two-goal display against Tottenham.
Football: Tough test for MacLeod's men
By DON LINDSAY
SCOTLAND'S national bard, Robert Burns, awarded Ayr the epithet of a town populated by ‘honest men and bonnie lasses’.
As a gentleman of sincerity Ally MacLeod, now enjoying his third spell as manager of Ayr United, has few equals in the world of football.
MacLeod has toughened up the side during a close season which saw the club turn full-time following a flirtation with relegation last year.
One of the former Scotland manager's old teams, Airdrie, visit Somerset Park today — on a day when the Premier Division clubs have no matches as Scotland play on Wednesday — lying third in the First Division and keen to maintain form which has helped them overcome an uncertain beginning.
as if to celebrate the move into their brand-new all-seater stadium, St Johnstone have advanced to the leadership of the division.
Astutely managed by Alex Totten, the former Rangers coach, the Perth men have their recent signings from Dundee United and Hearts, Harry Curran and Allan Moore, looking to increase an already impressive striking rate against Morton at McDiarmid Park this afternoon.
Sandwiched between Saints and Airdrie are those mercurial inhabitants of Maryhill, Partick Thistle.
The Jags have unearthed a highly unusual talent in Chic Charnley, a forward with a feel for the unexpected, but he will face a physical examination against Falkirk, who have already had three players sent off in one match this season.
Cricket: England to enjoy a one-day stand in India: Martin Johnson finds grounds for confidence as England's touring party leave for the limited-over thrash on the sub-continent
By MARTIN JOHNSON
THE FIRST of England's three winter tour parties leaves Heathrow this afternoon, bound for Delhi and a six-nation one-day jamboree described as the Nehru Trophy.
As (on the evidence of last summer at any rate) there is no one to match them in the art of swishing across the line and bowling not to take wickets, England are probably favourites to win it.
In terms of preparation for the New Year Test series in the West Indies it is a bit like getting ready for an army assault course by taking the dog for a walk around the block.
However, with 12 of the 14-man squad destined for the Caribbean, it does offer the opportunity of forging (under the new triumvirate of Graham Gooch, Allan Lamb and Micky Stewart) the kind of unity that will be essential when the flak is flying at the Queen's Park Oval and Sabina Park.
There is also the chance of picking up a not inconsiderable amount of loot.
The winners, for example, will collect only around £5,000 less than the £30,000 total prize money that was on offer for the sub-continent's 1987 World Cup, which is doubtless why Australia and the West Indies were eventually persuaded to join the party after originally blowing it a loud raspberry.
As is the case with most tournaments of this kind, there has to be a peg to hang it on, and this one is to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the birth of Jawaharlal Nehru.
It could just as well have been the 20th birthday of the Eden Gardens tea urn, and as far as the Indian government is concerned, there is nothing like an international cricket tournament for persuading the electorate that, with polling day just around the corner, Rajiv is the boy to vote for.
The proliferation of one-day cricket — there were 227 limited-over internationals played between the last two World Cups — is a reflection of modern-day audience demand, and, overseas anyway, is what brings in the cash.
Even in a country like India, Test cricket no longer generates massive appeal, and on the last full tour there — by the West Indies — a 12-match international programme was split 8-4 in favour of the instant thrill.
It is, of course, mere coincidence that Gooch's passage to India is considerably smoother for World Cups and Nehru Trophies than for a full England Test tour.
Could it be, so to speak, that all cricket will be one-day one day?
Heaven forbid, but the urge to shoehorn into the calendar as much of it as possible continues unabated, leading at times to brain-numbing events such as the three-match Pakistan versus England knockabout immediately after the World Cup — which was a bit like lighting the cigar after a five-course a la carte dinner, then having the waiter arrive with a tureen of porridge.
As for the Nehru, England's first match is on 15 October, while India and Pakistan do not get under way until the 22nd.
The reason for this is that the sub-continent's representatives will still be competing for a one-day pot in Sharjah until the 20th.
However, while returning home with the Cup might not quite be an occasion for breaking out the ticker tape and launching into an orgy of street parties, it would be nice to see England do well, and there is no reason why they should not.
They might have mislaid the formula for operating over five days — December 1986 is the last time England beat anyone of any consequence when asked to bat and bowl for longer than 55 overs — but there is no getting away from their ability to play the negative stuff as well as anyone else.
They will go, for example, into their final qualifying match against the West Indies in Gwalior on 27 October with the record of having beaten them in nine of their previous 10 one-day meetings.
With the usual premium on daylight, which in the sub-continent disappears like a power cut, there will not be much of a gap between the breakfast gong and pavilion bell, and heavy over-rate fines have been written into the regulations.
West Indies have answered speculation about Viv Richards's health by naming him captain for the Champions' Trophy tournament in Sharjah and the Nehru tournament in India.
Golf: Embarrassment of choice after Faldo's harvest
From NORMAN DABELL in Stuttgart
IT IS apt that much of this German Masters course is set amid fruit trees, because the tournament leader Nick Faldo was talking cherries yesterday.
After harvesting six strokes in the second round with a 66 to be nine under for the tournament, Faldo digressed on US Tour players coming over to find pickings in European Tour events — particularly pertinent as his nearest challenger is the American, Payne Stewart.
Asked if he thought Americans would now want to play more in Europe, Faldo demurred on their behalf.
The US Masters champion said: ‘To be the best in the world you've got to play around the world, but I don't expect to see Americans playing over here.
And Deane Beman (the US Tour commissioner) doesn't want us to cherry-pick on their tour.’
This was a topical point as Faldo is currently ‘up in the air’ on whether he will play in the American Nabisco Grand Prix or the last European event, the Volvo Masters.
Faldo will want to defend his Volvo Masters title if he wins here because he could then still clinch the European Order of Merit.
However, the Nabisco first prize is £280,000, whereas the Volvo top purse is only £66,000, although that could be doubled if he is also the order of merit winner.
Here Faldo's latest swing — which makes him stand taller — made his short game easy.
Three birdie putts were from three feet and one from only a foot.
He also had an eagle putt from six feet.
Stewart's 67 left him a stroke ahead of his playing partner Rodger Davies and two in front of the overnight leader, Bernhard Langer.
The defending champion Jose-Maria Olazabal, five places above Faldo in the order of merit, ended with an eagle to be a shot behind Langer.
He is five under with Keith Waters.
Seve Ballesteros followed up yesterday's quadruple-bogey seven by plummeting out of bounds at the par-three 15th and out of the tournament with two 75s, six over par.
Squash: Jahangir beaten by Dittmar
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
JAHANGIR KHAN'S attempt to extend his record of world titles to seven ended in exhaustion, annoyance and a surprise semi-final defeat in the World Open here yesterday.
His conqueror, by 15-9, 12-15, 15-9, 8-15, 15-13 was Australia's Chris Dittmar and his tiredness was also partly caused by the extra pounds of weight that have been expanding around his middle in recent months.
Jahangir's irritation was with the refereeing which, he reckoned, had hindered him throughout the tournament and yesterday he said it ‘made it hard for me to catch up a couple of points’.
But Jahangir admitted Dittmar had never played better.
It was the red-haired left-hander's first win over the squash legend, the first time he had played a match lasting an hour and 50 minutes at this level and won, and the first time he can ever have gambled so audaciously as he did at 13-13 in the final game.
Dittmar, incredibly, tried a backhand volley return of serve into the side-wall nick.
‘It was the most ridiculous shot selection I have probably ever made,’ he admitted.
‘If I had missed it, it might have destroyed me.’
But instead the ball whipped unplayablly along the floor and in another moment the man from Adelaide was celebrating with a grim, pale smile one of the biggest upsets of recent years.
Jahangir's defeat will increase speculation that the man who once went more than 500 matches unbeaten, may sometime next year retire.
He was fatigued even before the start of the fourth game when he was late back on to court.
He then gained some extra seconds of recuperation by tying up his laces.
The Pakistani fought with characteristic courage, but was unable to utilise his fearsome steamrolling style, except in bursts.
Well before the end his shirt was hanging like cling-film, his hair separating into rats' tails, and his body movements winding down.
Dittmar's wife, Lyan, was in tears at the end, but the Australian was mostly impervious to emotion, already concentrating, as he said, on today's final against the other great Pakistani Khan, Jansher, the 1987 world champion.
Cycling: Fignon's positive drug test
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
LAURENT FIGNON, the double Tour de France winner, failed a dope test after a race in The Netherlands last month, the president of the French Cycling Federation, Francois Alaphilippe, confirmed last night.
Fignon, who won the Tour de France in 1983 and 1984, and finished just eight seconds behind Greg Lemond this year, failed the test after his team, Super U, placed second in the Grand Prix de la Liberation in Eindhoven on 17 September.
Alaphilippe did not name the drug involved, but a Dutch newspaper claimed that the test had revealed traces of amphetamines.
‘Fignon was informed in time to have a second test done,’ Alaphilippe said.
He said the cyclist was ‘very shocked’ that he tested positive.
Fignon said in a statement that he had asked for a second test at a different laboratory but his request had been turned down.
He faces a one-month cautionary suspension during which he would be allowed to race.
The Frenchman, who protested his innocence when he failed a drug test after winning the Tour of Wallonia in 1987, is one of a number of leading riders to have failed a test, including Pedro Delgado, the Spaniard who was allowed to complete and win the Tour de France last year after a test revealed a substance banned by the International Olympic Committee but not by the International Cycling Union.
Football: Robson's tact is strained by Barnes blow
By JOE LOVEJOY
BOBBY ROBSON tried his best to be diplomatic, but his face is too expressive to play that game, and the fight to conceal his true feelings was well and truly lost.
The England manager was surprised and disappointed by Liverpool's decision to withdraw John Barnes from Wednesday's decisive World Cup qualifier in Poland — and it showed.
Barnes has been suffering from a hamstring strain, but he was able to train on Thursday and yesterday, and Robson had expected him to be fit for Chorzow, where a point will be enough to take England to Italy as winners of Group Two.
The manager thought his lunchtime call to Anfield was no more than a formality.
He was confident that Barnes would have trained without discomfort before being dispatched to join the squad at their Buckinghamshire headquarters.
Instead, Robson replaced the receiver after the briefest of exchanges with Kenny Dalglish, and announced: ‘Barnes is out.
Kenny told me he trained this morning, but was still feeling the injury, and that there was no point in him coming.
I am very disappointed.
I was always optimistic and thought he would come through.’
Robson looked upset.
Was he unhappy about Liverpool's decision?
‘We have got another 48 hours before we leave and John could have had treatment here, but Liverpool are ruling him out.
It is very unfortunate because we want all our best players for such an important match, but I am not going to embroider it.
That is up to you.’
The implication was that when it came to embroidery, the stitching up had been done on Merseyside, if Barnes had been fit enough to train for the last two days.
Had Liverpool been playing Arsenal next Wednesday would Dalglish have ruled him out a full five days before the game?
In an era when pre-match fitness tests are commonplace, surely not?
Robson decided against summoning a replacement, explaining: ‘With Chris Waddle, David Rocastle and Steve Hodge here, we have the best players of Barnes's type with us already.’
Waddle will be the one to benefit from Barnes's absence.
The two wingers were, in the manager's words, ‘brilliant against Poland at Wembley’, but tactical considerations had already precluded their selection in tandem next week.
Robson is anxious not to fall into the trap which ensnared Alf Ramsey in 1973, when England sought a draw in Poland with a team packed with defenders and lost 2-0, but sensible precautions will be taken.
Until yesterday, these would have seen Barnes deployed on one flank with Rocastle's defensive awareness earning him a ninth cap at Waddle's expense on the other.
The loss of Barnes has brought Waddle a reprieve, and a switch to the left to accommodate Rocastle on the right.
Robson, who watched Rocastle last Saturday, said: ‘He has made a good start to the season.
When he got on as a substitute against Sweden he was first class; in Albania he was one of our best players.’
Steve McMahon, who is to deputise in midfield for the injured Neil Webb, missed England's workout at Bisham Abbey yesterday along with Gary Stevens, Tony Adams, Paul Gascoigne and Gary Lineker, but their injuries are slight.
Polish police said yesterday that they had called in army commandos to help control English fans.
A spokesman said 1,500 police and commandos would escort the fans when they arrived in Poland.
Paul Ince of Manchester United has pulled out of the England Under-21 squad for Tuesday's European Championship match in Poland with an ankle injury.
Steve Sedgley of Tottenham and United's Lee Sharpe have also withdrawn.
David White and Andy Hinchcliffe of Manchester City and Ipswich's Jason Dozzell have been called in.
Fulham defender Jeff Hopkins has been recalled to the Welsh squad for the World Cup qualifier against The Netherlands as a replacement for Kevin Ratcliffe.
Tony Norman, the Sunderland keeper, also withdrew after suffering a reaction to a hand operation.
Paul McStay and Jim Bett, who have been doubtful with injuries, yesterday reported fit for Scotland's World Cup qualifying match against France on Wednesday.
Hockey: Kerly's trick
By BILL COLWILL
England...... 5 Argentina.... 0 SEAN KERLY scored three times in England's workmanlike victory in their opening game in the Lada Classic at Kenilworth Road, Luton, last night against Argentina.
Nick Thompson, with his first goal for England in the 17th minute after a good move down the right by Steve Batchelor, started England off.
Within a minute Kerly had latched himself on to a Robert Clift free hit to score his first goal.
In the 28th minute Potter scored from a penalty stroke.
Kerly, exchanging with his captain Richard Leman, slotted in No. 4 in the 48th minute and completed his hat-trick in the last minute after Thompson had set him up.
Earlier, Australia overcame The Netherlands 2-1.
Football: Midani set to buy out Knighton
By FRANK KANE
MICHAEL KNIGHTON will this weekend contact Manchester United's chairman Martin Edwards to seek a way out of the financial and legal impasse caused by his £20m bid for the club.
Knighton is ready to offer the Manchester United boss a new deal on the 50.6 per cent shareholding which he sought to buy from Edwards for £10m, and which is now the subject of a damaging legal wrangle in the High Court.
It is likely that the outcome of the talks, after a suitable period to allow the club to recover, will be a new takeover bid for the club, made by the Lebanese-born businessman and United director, Amer Midani.
Midani, said to be a member of one of the richest families in the world, would install one of United's favourite sons, Bobby Charlton, as chairman.
Speaking from the offices of his Manchester travel business yesterday, Charlton would only comment: ‘There is a legal case pending, and it is a very, very dicey situation.
Until all that has died down, I will only say that the only thing I'm bothered about is the well-being of the club.
I will not speculate on anything that would upset things.’
Knighton declined to comment ahead of the talks with Edwards, but it seems he is keen at all costs to avoid a court case.
A friend of Knighton said: ‘It is very unlikely he would go to court.
I imagine they will sort it out between them.’
The appointment of Charlton would be seen in Manchester as the perfect solution to the damaging public wrangling that has made the club a public farce over recent weeks.
Apart from his family riches, Midani is a wealthy man in his own right, with interests in property and leisure developments in the United Kingdom and Spain.
He has a 15 per cent stake in United's shares.
A financier in the Manchester broking community said yesterday: ‘It is more than a possibility that he will make an offer to get Knighton out of his hole.’
Speculation was rife in the city that the Edwards-Knighton talks would agree to tear up their disputed agreement.
It has been suggested that the club would pay Knighton £1m as compensation, which would then be added to the price-tag Midani would put on the Edwards stake.
The going rate for Edwards's 50 per cent has risen rapidly since the affair began in August with Knighton's £10m offer.
Last weekend it was offered to Eddy Shah, the former national newspaper proprietor, for £16m.
Midani would be able to afford at least that, and a general offer would be cheaper for him to fund because of his existing stake.
He would also be expected to pay a premium to put an end to the chaos.
Other players could still enter the contest, but it is increasingly unlikely that any would be acceptable to the United board.
Robert Maxwell, the Daily Mirror publisher who once offered to buy Edwards's shares, was rumoured yesterday to be still interested, but his family's interest in other football League clubs — Derby and Oxford — would face problems from the Football League's limitations on club ownership.
These were underlined yesterday by the League's decision to bar Owen Oyston, the radio station owner who has said he would be willing to back Knighton's offer, from an interest in United.
Oyston, along with his wife, Vicky, has a controlling stake in Blackpool football club.
A League statement later spelt out that ‘League Regulation 86 quite unequivocally prohibits an individual, a member of his family or any other associate including a nominee from holding more than 10 per cent of the shares in more than one League club’.
The statement also expressed ‘grave concern about the recent uncertainty’ surrounding Manchester United and Blackpool and hoped the matters would be ‘brought to an early conclusion’.
Shah is also out of the United running.
‘I am not interested,’ he said.
‘I am a Spurs supporter and my kids would never forgive me.’
There is also speculation as to why Edwards initially accepted an offer of £10m, which subsequently turned out to be way below the market price.
Football: Manchester's resources stretched
By FRANK KANE
(First Edition) MANCHESTER police will be at full stretch for the next round of the Littlewoods Cup — because of the demands of television.
The two Manchester clubs have been drawn at home and the police originally wanted one to play on Tuesday, 24 October, and the other 24 hours later.
United's match against Tottenham is scheduled for television highlights on the Wednesday, so the League suggested that City play Norwich on the Tuesday.
However, City have a live televised match against Aston Villa at Maine Road on Sunday, 22 October, and they were unhappy about playing two games in three days.
It has now been decided that both clubs will play on the Wednesday with 7.45 kick-offs.
Oldham, policed by the same force, are also at home on that night, against Scarborough.
Meanwhile, Nottingham Forest yesterday unveiled plans to make the City ground the leading stadium in the Midlands over the next five years.
They are likely to develop the Trent End and/or the Bridgford Road End, the only uncovered part of the ground.
Maurice Roworth, the Forest chairman, said: ‘We have a duty to our supporters and the team to provide a ground worthy of the success the club has had.
Work would already have started on improving what we already believe to be one of the country's most modern and safe grounds.
‘But we cannot do anything until we know what will be expected of football clubs in the future in terms of all-seater grounds or any other issues.
Until we get the full implications of the Taylor Report and discover what happens over the identity-card issue, we will have to sit tight.
But feasibility studies have been carried out and we should be in a position to act when we know what is expected.’
Forest also announced a pre-tax loss of £7,000 for last year.
Ron Atkinson, the Sheffield Wednesday manager, yesterday promised the shareholders' AGM that the team will not be relegated and will climb from the bottom of the First Division by Christmas.
Joe Ashton, a Labour MP, narrowly failed to gain election to the Wednesday board.
The Welsh FA have signed a sponsorship deal with Welsh Brewers Ltd which could net them more than £100,000 over the next three years.
The 105-year-old Welsh Cup will be renamed The Allbright Bitter Welsh Cup.
Rugby Union: Welsh sever SA links
By ROBERT COLE
WELSH RUGBY was united for the first time in the last few stormy months when the 203 member clubs of the Welsh Rugby Union decided to sever playing links with South Africa last night.
In becoming the first country to shun the Springboks, the Welsh not only turned about face from their decision of five years ago, but also brought the advent of a professional rugby circus in the Republic that bit closer.
At the Union's special general meeting, held at the Civic Hall in Port Talbot, delegates voted 276-113 in favour of a strongly-worded WRU motion proposing a complete cut-off of playing links with South Africa.
‘I think this should be the end of it.
I certainly left the meeting feeling that way,’ Clive Rowlands, the president of the WRU, said.
‘We left the meeting united.
The clubs have looked at the situation and felt it was time to change.
We gave the whole matter a fair airing on everything involved in South Africa and that's why the result is as such.
It's all right to build bridges with South Africa, but if bridges are falling down in Wales something must be done about it.’
Although Rowlands, who resigned his presidency for seven days in the bloody aftermath of this summer's centenary tour to South Africa, was happy to lay the issue to rest last night, the debris of the affair is still apparent throughout Welsh rugby.
The secretary, David East, is now a figure of the distant past following his decision to resign his post over the way 10 Welsh players were recruited for the celebratory tour, and the Union still have to find a candidate to replace Rhys Williams as the junior vice-president.
The vote will be seen as a victory for the local authorities, who put so much pressure on the clubs, and many of the delegates were relieved that the vote had taken away the threat of possible punitive action from their local councils.
‘It takes all the pressure off us and we can now start to play rugby again,’ a representative from Ebbw Vale, whose ground is owned by the local authority, said.
What the repercussions will be in South Africa — where the ageing president, Danie Craven, has threatened to support rebel tours — only time will tell.
Craven has said that Welsh players will still be chased by South Africa in spite of this vote, but the WRU is confident that they have shut off the avenue to the Republic.
Last night's resolution from the WRU committee read: ‘For as long as any rugby player living in the Republic of South Africa is the victim of racial discrimination under the laws of that country, neither the WRU nor any of its member clubs will become involved in any matches organised under the authority of the SA Rugby Board.
Nor will the Union nor any of its member clubs permit teams under the jurisdiction to play in Wales.’
Equestrianism: Whitaker's Milton in paradise
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
JOHN WHITAKER scooped his sponsor's pool at the Horse of the Year Show for the second time running on the spring-heeled Next Milton, when winning last night's Next International Masters, writes Genevieve Murphy.
He collected his winner-takes-all prize of £27,000 after a dramatic finish.
After clearing the five fences in the fifth round, Whitaker had an agonising wait.
Nick Skelton, on Burmah Serenade, and Germany's Franke Sloothaak, on Walzerkoenig, could have taken the prize, for the rider clearing the highest course, but each made one error.
Michael Whitaker survived one drastic moment with Next Tees Hanauer to snatch the Everest Championship from the sponsor's stable.
Whitaker's partner slipped while turning tight into the penultimate fence, but the horse managed to jump clear and win from Emma-Jane Mac on Everest Oyster.
Tennis: Becker names his six of the best
From JOHN ROBERTS in Stuttgart
TOWARDS the end of a week of stocktaking at the Stuttgart Classic, in which some of the world's leading male players have expressed mixed feelings about the way professional tennis is moving into the next decade, Boris Becker was asked to name his player of the 1980s.
The West German shook his head.
‘I name Borg, Connors, Lendl, McEnroe, Wilander and myself,’ he said.
‘In 10 years things change so much, and it is difficult to name one player.
Five years ago nobody knew Boris Becker.’
Bjorn Borg vacated the courts long ago, and though the 37-year-old Jimmy Connors will continue to swing his racket with gusto when the new Association of Tennis Professionals Tour gets underway in January, Lendl, Wilander and McEnroe remain to test the 21-year-old Becker as he endeavours to convince the rankings computer that he is the top man.
Lendl, the current No. 1 and the winner of more than $14m in official prize-money, guaranteed himself another $60,000 at least last night by defeating Argentina's Alberto Mancini, 6-2, 6-3, to reach the final of this exhibition event.
He has surprised Becker by announcing that he will forgo the French Open next June in order to prepare for Wimbledon, the one major championship to have eluded him.
‘He's put too much unnecessary pressure on himself,’ Becker said.
‘If I was him I would probably skip the French, but I wouldn't talk about it so far ahead.’
Lendl smiled and countered: ‘It would be laughable if I didn't say it because it's obvious that Wimbledon is my main goal — to pretend otherwise would be wrong.’
In today's final he plays Miloslav Mecir a 6-3, 6-4 winner against Stuttgart's Carl Uwe Steeb.
Wilander was No. 1 a year ago.
He has since lost the Australian, French and US Open championships.
Becker, who expects to encounter the 25-year-old Swede in the Davis Cup final here in December, cannot understand why he has drifted so long.
‘I am very surprised about Mats.
I thought he would get it back together.’