

Angry Tories round on Lawson
By ANTHONY BEVINS and COLIN BROWN
NIGEL LAWSON conceded last night that the hike in interest rates was extremely ‘awkward’, ‘uncomfortable’ and ‘embarrassing’so close to next week's Conservative Party conference.
But the Chancellor said in a series of television and radio interviews that he did not believe in ‘trying to play silly games, political games’— and he would not rule out a further increase if it became necessary.
Mr Lawson said he had always played straight with people, which was why the Government was so respected, ‘even if it is not always loved by all the people’.
Rank-and-file party representatives, when they debate the economy in Blackpool next Thursday, are bound to reflect the strong reaction of high-level mortgage holders in the Conservative heartlands of the South.
Mr Lawson, who has never found it easy to win the affection of the party conference, now faces the trickiest political test of his career in attempting to avert unseemly attacks on his competence from the Conservative grassroots.
Tory MPs were last night angry about the rise in interest rates and expressed fears that a further rise might be necessary.
But ministerial aides said it was better to get the increase out of the way this week, rather than have it happen during the conference.
Party leaders will be making efforts to ensure that Mr Lawson is not openly attacked at the conference.
Although the terms of the motion to be debated are supportive of government economic policy, a significant number of constituencies have criticised over-reliance on interest rates as an instrument of economic regulation.
Ministers are also determined to use the Tory conference to counter-attack Labour's successful conference week and lift the Conservatives' sagging spirits.
Neil Kinnock said last night that the rise in interest rates was ‘a shattering blow both to households right across Britain and also to industries, and it's even worse because it's a blow that has been gathering ever since the first day that this Government decided its one and only economic policy would be a reliance on interest rates’.
But Mr Lawson refused to rule out what John Smith, Labour's Treasury spokesman, described as ‘the unthinkable’— a further increase.
The Chancellor said on BBC television: ‘I can't give a firm promise that this is the turning point, that they won't go up any higher.
But I would very much hope that it won't be necessary for interest rates to go up any higher than necessary.’
He accepted that mortgage-holders would face difficulty, but said it was necessary to curb borrowing, and mortgages accounted for 85 per cent of household borrowing.
Mr Smith said: ‘This is the price of Mr Lawson's economic mismanagement and complacency.’
Labour, he said, would curb borrowing through credit controls.
Michael Latham, an executive member of the 1922 Committee of Tory MPs and a former director of the Housebuilders' Federation, condemned the rise as unnecessary and warned it could lead to a recession.
He said: ‘This is an extraordinary decision.
This rise will send some industries, especially construction, spinning into deep recession and will force up unemployment.’
‘Independent’ sales
By ANTHONY BEVINS and COLIN BROWN
The Independent, which celebrates its third birthday today, achieved a record circulation in September of 419,000 copies a day.
That unaudited figure compares with a previous peak of 413,000 last March.
The comparable figure for September 1988 was 397,000.
Recruits for Sunday paper
By ANTHONY BEVINS and COLIN BROWN
Two of Britain's best-known journalists are to join The Independent on Sunday, which is to begin publishing on 28 January next year.
Neal Ascherson, the award-winning writer, will be a columnist on the new newspaper.
He leaves the Observer, where he is an associate editor.
Blake Morrison will be literary editor; he also leaves the Observer, where he held the same position.
The appointment of other leading journalists will be announced over the next few weeks.
Nuns' thin black line repels chicken-killers
By LIZ HUNT
SHORTLY AFTER 8am yesterday six elderly nuns slipped from their living quarters at the Our Lady of the Passion Monastery near Daventry, Northants, and made their way to the hen-house.
‘You've heard of the thin red line; we are the thin black one,’ said one before disappearing inside.
They were prepared for an unyielding defence of their two flocks of 10,000 battery hens against the Ministry of Agriculture and the 10 burly ex-miners who form the ministry's chicken-killing squad, ever-ready to wring a feathered neck.
A little after 8.30am, Chris Williamson, a ministry veterinary officer, arrived.
He had come to supervise the slaughter of one of the nuns' flocks which had been found to be infected with Salmonella typhimurium.
The hen-house door remained firmly shut.
Mr Williamson was reduced to fruitless trips between the car and the telephone.
The mobile slaughter unit came, saw, and was repulsed.
Miriam Warburton, a divisional veterinary officer, arrived, and was in turn refused entry to the hen-house.
The nuns claim that they were exploiting a loophole in the Zoonoses Order 1989, which allows the slaughter of any infected flocks.
It might permit the slaughter, but it did not permit entry of Ministry of Agriculture officials, the nuns said.
Mother Catherine, the mother superior, a spritely 85-year-old American, said there had never been a case of food poisoning associated with eggs from the monastery, which had kept flocks for 20 years.
‘We eat eggs all the time; we'd be the first to be affected.’
She said there was no direct evidence linking their eggs with an isolated case of food poisoning that had occurred nearby in Bedworth in June, which was due to Salmonella enteriditis, not typhimurium.
There was ‘vague information’ that the person concerned might have eaten an egg which may have come from the monastery, Mother Catherine said.
‘If we thought for one moment that the health of the public was at risk we'd stop selling eggs.’
Last night, a ministry official delivered a notice to the monastery, stating that officers intended to return this morning to carry out the order to slaughter the birds.
Mother Catherine said the nuns' action had highlighted the plight of egg producers in the wake of the salmonella controversy.
Gorbachev on Berlin tightrope: Encouragement for reform in the East coupled with warning to the West to respect post-war borders
From STEVE CRAWSHAW in East Berlin
IN ONE of his most difficult balancing acts to date, Mikhail Gorbachev, who arrived in East Berlin yesterday, urged the hard-line East German leadership to discuss economic and political reform with ‘all groups in society’, while warning West Germany against any attempt to realign post-war borders in Europe.
In a speech marking the country's fortieth birthday, which is today, he said East Germany, like all countries, had problems stemming from the reform movement elsewhere in the East bloc and that these difficulties ‘required thought’.
It seems unlikely that the East German leaders feel much threatened by his tone.
If anything, they may be relieved to have got off so lightly, given that East Germany's aversion to a local brand of perestroika and glasnost has long been clear.
‘We do not doubt that the (East German Communist Party) is able through co-operation with all forces in society to find answers to all those questions which arise through the development of the republic and which interest its citizens,’ he told the huge audience gathered in the Palace of the Republic.
Mr Gorbachev then warned against ‘voices…being raised in West Germany demanding the re-establishment of Germany under its 1937 borders’.
He said he did not ‘idealise’ the European order, ‘but until now, it is precisely the recognition of post-war realities that ensures peace in Europe.
Today we are being repeatedly asked to take steps to eliminate this division,’ such as breaking down the Berlin Wall, he said.
Arriving in East Berlin at the height of the country's most serious political crisis for more than three decades, Mr Gorbachev had earlier in the day, in a brief encounter with enthusiastic East Berliners, spoken of the need ‘not to panic — that's the most important thing’.
‘We're staying!’ shouted one man in the crowd that greeted the Soviet leader when he laid a wreath at the Eternal Flame.
There were scattered cries of ‘Gorby!
Gorby!’ which became louder and more prolonged when he emerged from the war memorial.
Several thousand people, including many wearing the blue shirts of the official Free German Youth, were waiting to see Mr Gorbachev on his first ‘meet-the-people’ detour of the day.
In an impromptu press conference outside, Mr Gorbachev said: ‘If states don't react to impulses of the times, they are in danger.’
He then delivered a heavy hint of the need for reform: ‘We know the Germans, we've known them for a long time.
They look at problems, and change.’
The truth is that the East German leadership has so far shown all too few signs of wanting to change.
Erich Honecker, the country's 77-year-old leader, continued only to talk of the need for ‘the further development of socialism’, in his speech in the Palace of the Republic.
‘We will solve our problems ourselves, with socialist means.
Proposals intended to weaken socialism will not blossom here,’ he told the audience.
But the optimistic platitudes are sounding more hollow than ever before.
It is not just a matter of the tens of thousands who have streamed out of the country in recent weeks, via Budapest, Prague and Warsaw.
The opposition at home is growing ever stronger.
Every night the Gethsemane Church is packed with mostly young East Germans who come to light candles in protest at the regime's refusal to accept reform.
Several thousand have signed a petition demanding more change.
Last night, another church — the Church of the Saviour — was packed for what was described as ‘a workshop’, entitled ‘East Germany's Future: What Now?’
The theme of many of the leaflets plastered over church walls is the same: ‘The police state methods must change.’
The East German authorities do not seem to agree.
In East Berlin, members of Stati, the secret police, were much in evidence at and near yesterday's church meetings.
More ominously, a ‘reader's letter’ in a Leipzig paper yesterday spoke of ‘counter-revolutionary’actions.
The letter in the Leipziger Volkszeitung called for the use of ‘weapons, if need be’.
If that really is the way the authorities are now thinking — and ‘readers’ letters' have long been notoriously close to official thinking in East Germany — then the government could find it is courting unprecedented disaster.
When talking of what is much discussed in East Berlin as ‘the China solution’, an elderly woman at the Church of the Saviour expressed a widely-held view when she declared: ‘The authorities just couldn't do it.
Then things would get even worse.’
I speak for Britain, Kinnock says
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
NEIL KINNOCK yesterday declared himself fit to be Prime Minister, by claiming in an end-of-conference message that he now speaks for the British people.
The Labour leader told an ITN interviewer that he felt fit to govern partly because he loved his country.
But he added: ‘That's not enough by itself.
I'm fit to be Prime Minister because I truly represent the people of this country — their hopes for economic success and social justice, and their aspirations, because I'm from them.
I'm not detached, remote, in the way this government certainly has become.’
He went on: ‘I know that I'm tough.
I know that I can see objectives and drive after them.
I think that kind of tenacity is required too.
I've got it.’
Kenneth Baker, the Conservative Party chairman, has made it clear that he intends mounting an attack on the Labour leader's personal qualities.
But Mr Kinnock dismissed the Tory tactic as ‘pathetic’, and predicted that the Tory conference next week would be a gathering of marionettes.
‘The British people will say to themselves: ‘Well here's a government that's got a majority of 100, they've been in office for 10 years, they've had all these opportunities, and at the end of 10 years all they can think of to do is to make individual attacks on the Leader of the Opposition.’
' Mr Kinnock's confidence was bolstered by an NOP survey in last night's London Evening Standard, which gave his party a 9-point lead over the Conservatives (46 per cent to 37).
The same poll found that his satisfaction rating with voters now runs at 48 per cent, compared with 39 per cent for Margaret Thatcher.
Mr Kinnock said that this week's conference had been a landmark for his party.
‘It's not just that the objectives have been achieved, of getting the policy reviews endorsed, and conducting ourselves in a way that will attract the British people.
But it's been done because people wanted it to happen, not because it's been imposed upon them.’
Labour will now enter a phase of trying to popularise its reviewed policies, while refining details in some areas.
The successful delivery of the party's policy review this week was capped when the conference agreed yesterday to the next major change Mr Kinnock intends to carry through: a diminution in the overwhelming dominance of the union block vote.
He is also keen to press on with modernising the party's policy-making machinery, a process which took a jump forward yesterday when delegates approved an executive consultation paper on the block vote and reform of the conference.
Consultation will be completed in February.
Some rule changes may be voted on next year, though extensive change is not likely before 1991.
The move towards greater equality between the unions and individual party members will ‘evolve’ over time, according to party officials, an indication that Mr Kinnock would prefer the union vote to shrink gradually as the party's membership rises.
But the Labour leader will move faster on indicating his preferred options for increasing the size of the national executive and making it more representative.
As delegates left Brighton in self-proclaimed unity and amity, party officials reflected that the week had been, electorally, the most effective Labour conference since the early 1960s.
It is certainly the first time since Mrs Thatcher was elected in 1979 that Labour has ended its conference with the Conservatives on the defensive.
Labour has doubled its lead over the Conservatives to 6 per cent in the past month, according to a poll of polls conducted for the BBC programme Newsnight.
Rebels ‘shot dead after Panama coup attempt’
From CHRIS MCGREAL in Panama City
MOST OF the rebel officers who led this week's abortive coup in Panama were shot after their rebellion failed, not killed during the fighting, as the military contends, according to a senior source who was permitted to see the bodies.
The source added yesterday that there were 14 bodies and not 10, as the government claimed.
Another witness had earlier reported seeing four hooded and shackled men under arrest at the military section of the airport during the coup, but there was no way of identifying them.
The source said the families of the victims were not allowed to view the bodies or bury them.
They appeared to have suffered only one or two shots to the head, not to the rest of the body, as might be expected in a gun battle.
He said the killings had shaken some members of Panama's Defence Force, but that in the aftermath of the uprising, when suspicion of complicity ran wide, no one was prepared to plead for the lives of the coup plotters.
General Manuel Noriega, the man they failed to overthrow, is now turning his wrath to civilian opponents, saying he intends to present emergency legislation to purge the bureaucracy of ‘treasonous’ government employees who tacitly backed the uprising.
He called on civil servants loyal to him to denounce subversive colleagues.
Those who did not were also traitors, who would be replaced with his supporters.
One source said the general was closely scrutinising the list of telephone calls of support he received from senior officials during the coup to see who called, and whether it was before the rebellion was known to have failed.
Julie Ward inquest told ‘no evidence of murder’
From ROBERTA MULLINEAUX in Nairobi
THE JULIE WARD inquest ended yesterday with counsel for the Kenyan state still maintaining she might have committed suicide or been killed by animals.
‘We do not have evidence of murder,’ Alex Etyang concluded.
Joseph Mango, the chief magistrate who has heard evidence from 38 witnesses since the hearing began in August, reserved his verdict until 27 October.
Byron Georgiadis, counsel for the dead woman's father, has insisted she was murdered.
The charred and severed remains of Miss Ward, 28, were found a year ago in the Masai Mara game reserve in Kenya, in an out-of-the-way spot, six miles from her abandoned vehicle.
Mr Etyang said: ‘It was death by misadventure.
We do not have evidence of murder.’
He questioned the evidence given by Professor Austin Gresham, a Home Office pathologist and Professor of Morbid Anatomy at Cambridge University, who conducted a second post-mortem examination on Miss Ward's remains after they had been flown to Britain by her father, John Ward.
Mr Etyang said: ‘Professor Gresham may be an eminent pathologist in the UK, but he is a human being — could he have made a mistake?
Just because he is a professor of medicine at Cambridge does not make his findings unquestionable.
He admitted he has no experience of animal bites.
He does not know what a hyena can do to a human body.’
In his evidence Professor Gresham had said he had experience of bites by dogs and foxes, and had studied wild animal injuries in books.
In his opinion there was no doubt that Miss Ward's head had been cut off with a single blow from a sharp instrument.
Mr Etyang said the evidence making the game reserve's head warden, Simon Makallah, the man most likely to have murdered Miss Ward was just speculation.
He suggested instead that perhaps one of the two white men to see her alive last may have had something to do with her death.
Neither man arrived in Kenya to attend the inquest.
In earlier evidence the court heard that both the detective in charge of the investigation, Superintendent Muchuri Wanjau, and the dead woman's father had cleared of blame Stephen Watson, an English safari leader, and an Australian marine biologist, Glen Burns.
Outside the courtroom, Mr Ward said: ‘I have considerable qualms about what the verdict will be.
The Kenyans have gone to enormous trouble to make this not a murder.’
An Irish poet not going gentle into that good night: Peter Dunn tells the bizarre tale of how family feuding, jealousy and assorted shenanigans has left Patrick Kavanagh with two graves
By PETER DUNN
Civil war has broken out among the poets of Ireland, which is why Patrick Kavanagh, bohemian and rural bard, now has two graves in Inniskeen, the County Monaghan village where he was born 85 years ago.
Father Peter McGuinness, the parish priest and a man of gentle understatement, says this is going to be very confusing for tourists who want to pay homage to Inniskeen's most famous son.
The conflict, in which men of letters are now burying each other in eloquent abuse, is over the possession of Kavanagh's soul and the legacy of his poems.
Ownership of the copyright to Kavanagh's work, a virulent family side-issue, could be resolved in the High Court this autumn.
The emotional dust over Kavanagh's two graves could, as Father McGuinness is the first to admit, take much longer to settle.
The first is in the village's neat cemetery, where fields run up to a distant hedgerow and a sign by the gate says ‘Fast Food Service’.
Kavanagh was buried there in the family plot after his death in 1967.
Signs point the way along a twisting path towards the site but give no warning of what is to come.
Apart from a pile of fading wreaths and evidence of recent digging, the grave of Ireland's most revered poet, spoken of today in the same bated breath as W. B. Yeats, is unmarked.
The second grave is behind a roadside fence in the garden of the poet's pebble-dashed birth-place in Mucker a mile away.
It has the wooden cross and deck of old stepping stones which, until six weeks ago, identified Kavanagh's final berth in Inniskeen.
A notice, its spelling primly corrected, hangs on the fence and says: ‘This was the arrangement on the grave of Patrick Kavanagh from 1967 to 19th August 1989 when the grave was forcibly opened and the arrangement scattered.
These flag-stones and other memorabilia were salvaged from the detritus and are preserved here.’
Both the Mucker shrine and its indignant notice are the work of Kavanagh's younger brother, Dr Peter Kavanagh, now 73, one-time Professor of Poetry at Wisconsin University, who has spent the past 25 years in New York promoting and publishing Patrick's work.
Dr Kavanagh's monumental landscaping is visible evidence of the tumultuous row which took place around Patrick's other grave in August when 100 members of Dublin's literary set turned up at Inniskeen to bury the poet's widow Katherine.
The funeral was delayed for three hours after members of Katherine's family complained that the wrong grave had been opened for the ceremony.
Katherine, a niece of the Irish patriot Kevin Barry who was shot by the English in 1916, married Patrick six months before his death in Dublin from lung cancer.
The two had lived together on and off in London for 10 years.
Katherine, a book-keeper who shared Patrick's passion for horse-racing, adored the poet who was 20 years her senior.
‘There goes all I will know of God in life,’ she once said of him.
Her last wish, to be buried in her husband's grave, was vociferously opposed by Dr Kavanagh, who had neither known of the relationship nor been invited to the wedding.
He said after the funeral that his brother's marriage had been a shot-gun affair never consummated.
His clumsy rage scandalised Dublin's academe.
Its members saw it as further evidence of his obsession for being Patrick's Sacred Keeper, the title of the biography he wrote on the poet in 1979.
Kavanagh's book makes no mention of Katherine's name.
She has even been snipped out of a photograph taken after her wedding.
Dr Kavanagh, who wears a beret above fierce eyebrows and is known in New York as Frankie the Mechanic because he fixes the neighbours' cars, is on permanent red alert over his brother's reputation.
He complained once about Kavanagh's poems being read on Irish radio in a vulgar Monaghan accent; he saw his brother as a poetic giant among Dublin's envious literary pygmies who filled the helpless bard with whiskey and made him the instrument of their Communist-homosexual conspiracies.
‘The situation is this,’ Dr Kavanagh said last week.
‘The resentment against my brother was like Galileo said: ‘There's no hatred like the hatred of ignorance against intellectual belief.’
Great poets speak from a position of morality, of authority and that's the one thing these people can't abide.
The hugger-mugger that's going on today concerns the same anti-morality.
I chose the moral ground and don't care about the results.
‘When some of these smart Alecs in 1974 put up a venomous plaque to my brother in Soho, outside the Plough tavern in Museum Street, I went over there, in the winter, and tore it down.
It was jeering at him, saying ‘Patrick Kavanagh Pissed Here’.
They'd done it in Gaelic to cover up the vulgarity.
Very crude people.
I couldn't allow that kind of thing, otherwise we slip into barbarism.
‘It's not me that didn't recognise the marriage.
Patrick himself made a statement to my sister which I've got on tape, saying he'd been discarded by the woman he married.
There's a lot of politics involved.
It's very hard to explain, but these people are all on the extreme left and were seeking a poet to give them some sort of standing.
As for homosexuals, as Pilate said, ‘You've said it.’
(Dr Kavanagh is inclined to scatter quotations and leave them to the imgination.)
I don't think I'm prepared to make a public statement, but I think you're very close to the truth there.
‘I wasn't even told about the wedding because he was largely under pressure, in a corner d'you see.
He'd no place to live and they'd ganged up on him.
You probably know that the person who introduced Patrick to this woman was the head of the Communist Party in Ireland.’
Peter Fallon, owner of the Gallery Press and Katherine's literary agent, says of Dr Kavanagh: ‘Because he'd devoted certain energies to Patrick, he acted as if the man were entirely his.
Then suddenly into the picture came a woman Patrick clearly loved enough to marry.
Peter's an extraordinarily cranky man with a venom that became directed towards Katherine.
‘I read the letters between him and his brother and it became clear he couldn't even buy petrol on the New Jersey turnpike without writing to the petrol company about being over-charged.
People do live in a certain fear of him and anxiety about how he'll respond to anything done up there in Inniskeen.
‘I do think in the last couple of months he's gone too far.
He's committed a libellous slander, based on heresay, making the most obscene remarks about Katherine and the marriage not being consummated.
Basically people are sick of him.
The community of Inniskeen, including his surviving sister, is bored with his carry on.’
In the circumstances, no member of Katherine's funeral cortege was particularly surprised that there was trouble at the graveside, though they were relieved Dr Kavanagh had stayed away, the line from New York to Inniskeen quivering with warnings that opening Patrick's grave would be regarded as desecration.
There are two perceptions of what actually happened in the village that day.
One of them, drawn from metropolitan Dublin, laced the scandal with a smile and simply blamed the Svengalian influence of Dr Kavanagh; the other, more parochial, gives the impression of a little country funeral spinning quietly but inexorably out of control.
Peter ‘Penny’ Murphy, a local farmer who acts as curator of the birthplace when Dr Kavanagh is in America, is like a man savouring a dream.
‘When Katherine died, no one contacted me whatsoever except Peter Kavanagh in America,’ he said.
‘He told me there was no one to go in that plot except Mary, who's the surviving sister.
Katherine's remains were coming on the Saturday and on the Friday I slipped up to the cemetery and saw the grave diggers digging Mary's grave.
‘I said to the grave digger, in conversation with him, ‘Look, are you in the right plot?’ and his answer was the priest told him to dig the grave opposite Patrick's but when he came along he'd seen there was already a burial there, who was the sister Annie, but had seen this vacant plot next door, so he had dug the vacant one.
‘Well,’ I said, ‘I think there'll be trouble about this, but if that's the position, carry on.’
‘Then the remains arrived next day and the sister Mary, who is 89 and on a walking aid, objected to her grave being dug and being used by Katherine at that stage.
She accused me of instructing them to dig the wrong grave, which I didn't and I immediately defended myself and said: ‘Mary, I did not.
I had nothing whatever to do with it.’
In fact I pointed that out to the grave-diggers, but they were already 4ft 6ins down at the time.
‘What I'd like you to know is that when it was all over and Peter was back from America, the grave-diggers were down here on their bended knees begging him for forgiveness because they knew it was a nasty business and said had they known at the time they'd have had nothing to do with it.’
Katherine Kavanagh's lawyer, John Jay, a Joycean figure with a handsome beard, was among the mourners from Dublin.
‘God help you, it's the most exciting thing which has happened there since the man was buried,’ he told me in his comfortably-scuffed office in Dublin.
‘They seemed convinced a whole lot of people had come up from the big city to show off, to be grandees, which was far from the truth.
‘When the cortege arrived a grave ear-marked, I think, for one of the Kavanagh sisters had been opened two doors down from Patrick's, which at this stage had a wooden crucifix made and erected by Peter and crazy pavings which I gather were stepping stones from a stream on the homestead and mentioned in one of the poems.
‘I was standing by the graveside and one of the Kavanagh sisters had said to Helen Moloney, Katherine's sister: ‘It's perfectly all right to use Patrick's grave.
We own the plot.
Peter doesn't’ And it was at this stage that someone else said, ‘But Peter wouldn't like it,’and some little woman, who I'd thought until that moment was a nun, said, ‘Oh, fuck Big Petie.’
‘Katherine's sister, a pleasant, sensible woman, said to the priest, ‘This is the wrong grave,’ and the priest said, ‘That's the grave I was told to open,’at which stage he started the funeral service and Helen said ‘Stop!
This can't go on.
You're burying her in the wrong grave.’
Whereupon I produced the will out of my pocket, because I tend to take wills to funerals, and said, ‘Perhaps this will refresh your memory.’
‘The priest didn't seem terribly concerned, being a pragmatic man.
He said we couldn't ask the grave-diggers to dig another grave.
We said, ‘We'll take our jackets off and do it.’
He said, ‘You couldn't do that.
There'll be union trouble.’
Then the priest said, ‘But the grave-digger isn't well.’
He certainly fought a stout rearguard action.
When the sister was summoned up and said it was her grave had been dug, he realised there was nothing more he could do and the whole thing was adjourned to the community centre for a couple of hours while big men with shovels rather grudgingly got to work.’
John Montague, the Cork poet, who was also at the funeral, later described the shenanigans as ‘a brutal Irish business, and anti-woman’.
He says he once told Peter he had ‘the ignorance of his brother without the excuse of his genius’.
The fact remains, however, that the poet probably has more friends now, 20 years after his death, than when he lived in poverty in Dublin and London during the forties and fifties.
A big-shouldered, coarse-tongued drinking man, thumbs looped in his braces, black-shirted to save the washing, he was often derided as a rough country boy, the son of a rural cobbler.
‘The literati had never seen one of them things before,’ Montague says today.
‘They were writing about the country, but they weren't from it.
So here was this extremely awkward young man who'd actually ploughed, had worked with horses, owned 40 acres and was anxious to write.
They were amused by him for a while but he didn't keep his place.
He didn't think they were very good and said so.
He wrote Paddy, published in Cyril Connelly's Horizon about 1946, and let them all have it, which meant he'd even less chance of getting a job after that.
‘The place that did give him a job was the Irish Catholic paper The Standard, which had a very funny editor who just liked to drink most of the day and was amused by Patrick and hired him as film critic.
After 10 years he worked for The Farmers Journal.
He was always trying.
‘It's perfectly clear that Peter made a spiritual takeover bid for his brother.
He seems to think he has the moral right to usurp him, completely ignoring the woman who nurtured him through his last worst year.
‘The truth is that Patrick was partly terrified of Peter, who came up behind him and thought he knew better what he should do.
Patrick was a bully, a Hibernian savage, an ex-heavyweight champion of Trinity who struck people.’
The scuffling over Patrick's soul may soon move to a more prosaic level, that of his modest estate and, in particular, the Irish copyright to his writings.
Dr Kavanagh, Patrick's Sacred Keeper, has already published The Complete Poems, first in America and then, in 1984, in Ireland through the Goldsmith Press, whose proprietor is the Kildare poet Desmond Egan.
Dr Kavanagh sold his brother's papers, including letters from Katherine to Patrick, to University College, Dublin, three years ago for £100,000.
Royalties remain a dynamic issue in the wake of the great funeral fiasco.
In July, a few weeks before she died, Katherine started High Court proceedings against Mr Egan and his publishing house for breach of copyright.
Her will has directed that the income from Patrick's work, estimated at £10,000 a year, should be used to support a middle-aged poet, to be chosen by the estate's trustees.
Apart from that, Peter Fallon, her agent and proprietor of the Gallery Press, says there are plans, approved by the estate, to republish Kavanagh ‘to correct the many errors that appear in many published books’.
Desmond Egan, an ebullient man known in the enemy camp as Desperate Ego, is confident that he and Dr Kavanagh will win the day.
‘A lot of people fell around the place laughing when they heard about the middle-aged poet bit,’ he says.
‘I certainly did.
One's sense of the ridiculous should not abandon one, even at this moment.
‘Peter Kavanagh supported Patrick for 40 years.
He's devoted his life to the cause and if Patrick came back there's no question as to who he'd want to control the show, because it was he that called Peter ‘The Sacred Keeper of My Sacred Conscience’.
We're not in any doubt that morally we've all the rights and we believe we're going to prove it.
There's a fellow called Peter Fallon who's behind this thing.
I've been told he paid the widow money.
There will be a few people, beginning with Mr Fallon, looking for their own McGoolies when this is over.’
John Jay is equally certain that the court action will be won.
‘Copyright should theoretically have belonged to Katherine and now to the estate,’ he says.
‘Peter keeps uttering things over the years saying copyright has been given to him, that there was a letter, a document, but they've never been produced.’
Dr Kavanagh, who is a director of the Goldsmith Press, promises to be in Dublin to fight his Sacred Keeper's corner in court.
‘Ultimately I couldn't care less what happens,’ he says.
‘It's outside my control.
Mrs Kavanagh's claim cannot be, because I've spent 25 years editing, arranging and completing his work.
There's no other authority outside of me.
I'm never defeated.
One can never be defeated if one stands on a matter of morality.’
Dr Kavanagh's views are not shared by many villagers of Inniskeen, whose placid good manners have been affronted by the churchyard barnies and people trundling grave-stones from one side of the parish to the other.
Father McGuinness has decided, for the time being at least, to keep his profile low.
‘Sometimes you're just as well in the wings for a while,’ he says.
‘I don't want to be a dictator over the whole thing, to tell them what to do.
Peter's not going to live for ever.
I think that the stones will go back one day.
I knew there wasn't any point in asking him to return them at this stage.
He's got a long memory and can be rather spiteful.
‘Apart from that, he's a good enough man, a nice man to talk to.
When he comes here he always visits the children in the school.
But he seems to have this antagonism towards the local people.
He feels they don't appreciate Patrick, who was not really likeable because he drank rather too much and insulted people and all sorts of things.
‘And people were afraid of him of course.
He was rather ignorant sometimes.
He would look at people and they normally would walk on the other side of the street.
The Irish were always afraid of the local bard, that he might record their names in some of his work.’