

DANCE /Court in a trap: Judith Mackrell reviews Ashley Page's Piano at The Royal Opera House
By JUDITH MACKRELL
ONE of the great achievements of Ashley Page's new ballet, Piano, is its creation of an elusive but powerful atmosphere that completely over-rides its lack of plot.
Without over-stating the case Piano recalls some of Ashton's work in the rich allusiveness of its world, mysteriously intimating other ballets, other stages and other lives.
The ballet is set to Beethoven's First Piano Concerto and Page and his designer, Howard Hodgkin, have responded to the ‘formality and intimacy’ that they find in the score by conjuring a kind of post-modern Court.
Hodgkin's magnificent swathes of green and blue paint suggest towering columns and arches, and as sections of the set rise during the ballet two grand staircases are revealed on either side of the stage.
That certain entrances evoke the descent of a Prince or ruling couple is no accident either.
For Page has deliberately divided his dancers into the traditional hierarchy of principles, soloists and corps, and in so doing reminds us of all the great courts of 19th century ballets.
The time and place for this palace is not fixed, though — the women's hats and swirling frocks remind us both of Dior and Watteau, the men are in chic, futuristic black chiffon.
And this shifting between the past and almost- present is equally felt in the choreography — it contains some of the cleanest, most authoritative classical dance Page has produced while simultaneously suggesting modern bodies and modern mores in the way the dancers loll negligently on the floor or challenge each other 's strength.
On first viewing, the movement is too enjoyably dense to take in fully — in old Page-style the head, torso and arms work in radical counterpoints to the legs, but their opposition is much less clamorous and wilful than before.
Where the eye often used to be bruised by hectic entrances and exits, Page now keeps his dancers on the stage, shifting them around in complex patterns or gathering them up in long architectural phrases.
Above all there is a new humanity in the work.
When a head whips round to complete a phrase, it is also a man seeking out his lover; when two dancers incline their faces together, it is in playful talk.
The one flaw is Page's abiding fondness for clever-clever partner work — his determination to find new means of supporting bodies, new ingenuities in the way the dancers intersect.
Certain duets thus feel like tortuous workshop explorations, with manoeuvres hard to do and awkward to watch, and it is these moments where Page seems to come adrift from the music.
The dancers, however, get an obvious and infectious thrill out of performing Piano, and apart from its minor longeurs, it is an equally fresh and exhilarating experience for the audience.
On Friday night Piano faced stiff choreographic competition from Rubies, Requiem and Robbins's Other Dances, danced by Sylvie Guillem and Laurent Hilaire.
Their interpretation lacked soul, the dying fall of nostalgia and the abandon of passion being supplanted by a more relaxed air of complicity.
But at the same time they looked sublimely elegant.
The precision of Hilaire's placing was constantly astonishing and in an air-borne rond de jambe Guillem's long lean line was as breathtaking as I've seen it.
Some of the dancing in Requiem was way below this standard yet the ballet still came across as one of MacMillan's most monumental works.
Its tableaux of suffering and benediction are on a scale that easily matches Faure's score and its concluding lifts are exquisite — the women floating high above the men like angels breast-stroking through paradise.
ROCK /For Pete's sake: Still crazy after all these beers: The Who — Birmingham NEC
By JIM WHITE
WHILE The Stones appealed to the students, and the Beatles to the girls and their mums, The Who were always the lads' band.
As representatives of the ranks of the great unfashionable made their way to their seats weighed down by crates of lager, it was clear, at the band's first British appearance for seven years, that paunches may come and full heads of hair may go, but times don't change.
The first thing the lads noted when the stage lights came up was that the previewers' obituaries for Pete Townshend are about as wide of the mark as a Birmingham City attack.
Dressed in beard and pigtails, black Armani suit and spanking new blue jogging shoes, Pete looked mean, lean and young by book editing standards.
His tinnitus did not, as we had been led to believe, oblige him to spend the concert inside a perspex box; he leapt across the stage, knees at 90-degree angles, for much of its three hour span.
True, some of the filling-in was performed by a young guitarist in patched jeans, whose contribution was generously acknowledged, but Pete has no trouble playing the guitar.
And, most importantly for the lads, judging by the roar which greeted its first appearance, he can still windmill his right arm.
Indeed during the finale, at the rate his arm whirled over his Fender strings, it looked as though he had caught the tail end of Hurricane Hugo during their US tour.
Roger Daltrey, all Shirley Temple curls and inflated biceps, swung his microphone dutifully and John Entwistle, in a tatty spiv's blouson and shock of white hair, stood characteristically immobile, but it was Townshend who looked most chirpy.
He was delighted, he told us, to be back in England and, most particularly, Birmingham.
(Big cheer.)
‘You awight?’ he asked.
‘As soon as we've had some valium, we'll be awight too.’
All of Who life was here, the progression from R'n'B ('I'm a Man') through pop ('I Can See For Miles') and pretension ('The Overture' from Tommy) to Dinosaur Rock ('Sister Disco').
At least a third of it could have been cheerfuly excised: the highlights from Tommy, for instance, merely served to show how few there were; and there was a serious lapse of taste in resurrecting their ‘Laughing Gnome’, ‘Boris the Spider’(presumably performed to give nice John Entwistle his turn in the spotlight).
But, against a huge backcloth of mod images, bold arrows and No Entry signs and Union Jacks, beautifully executed songs like ‘Can't Explain', ‘Substitute’ and ‘Magic Bus’served to remind us how innovative a songwriter Townshend could be.
The three best moments of his career were, appropriately, the concert highlights: ‘Won't Get Fooled Again', ‘5.15’ and, despite the easy jokes, ‘My Generation’, whose lyrics still have some pertinence even when sung by a 45 year old.
By the encore the chubby middle-aged chap in front of me, like many in the hall, had lost all touch with decorum, and, during ‘Summertime Blues’ was standing on his seat, windmilling his arms over the strings of his air guitar.
No doubt he will be booking for the 30th Anniversary Tour in 1994.
THEATRE /Storm in a tea-house: Yukio Ninagawa's productions merge western approaches with eastern ritual.
Sarah Hemming met him
By SARAH HEMMING
SIX o'clock on a Friday night and, in the Lyttleton foyer, groups of people cluster noisily round the bar; others, waiting for companions, finger books in the bookshop.
But no-one gives a second glance to a frail Japanese man, who stands, cupping his hand over a cigarette, looking a little lost amid the general traffic.
Offstage Yukio Ninagawa and his 100-strong company seemto melt into the background.
At the National the only clues to their presence are the dozens of shoes neatly paired around a huge makeshift dressing room and the scarlet signs in Japanese on every backstage door.
Onstage, though, it is a different matter.
So far Britain has hosted three of Ninagawa's productions of western classics — Medea, Macbeth and The Tempest.
Each of them combined eastern ritual with western realism.
In his Macbeth, the Scottish warlord became a Samurai warrior in 16th century Japan, bludgeoning his way to power beneath a cherry tree that rained white blossom down on him.
Medea, first performed at the Edinburgh Festival in the outdoor courtyard of the Old College, ended with Medea in a chariot on the college roof, battered by the howling wind and rain.
The audience, transported with her, sat open-mouthed, oblivious to the rain pouring down their necks.
This time, though, Ninagawa has brought over a Japanese classic.
Suicide For Love is adapted by Matsuyo Akimoto from three plays by the 17th century writer Chikamatsu Monzaemon and Ninagawa's production involves 73 actors, a swirling snow storm and a river on stage — the company, with true Japanese courtesy, provide plastic macs for the first two rows of spectators.
Ninagawa explained: ‘We have done classic tragedy with new eyes — now we have to do Japanese classics with new eyes.’
Ninagawa is now in his fifties.
Dressed in faded black cords, a black pullover and black trainers, he carries no sign of his international status except a double-faced watch giving both Tokyo and London time.
Curled up on his armchair, thin as a wood shaving, he looks far too slight to carry this immense spectacle.
Yet there is a tense energy about him — and it was precisely this that struck Tadao Nakane, when he discovered Ninagawa directing angry underground productions in the early Seventies.
Nakane, then a producer for the renowned Coho company, was desperate to stage radical Shakespeare in Japan, where productions tended to be absurd, academic affairs.
He got Ninagawa to join him and they have since produced an extraordinary row of classics, welding the individual psychological realism of European theatre to the formality of Kabuki theatre.
Ninagawa feels that this may be easier for a Japanese director.
‘The Tempest, for instance, has many local European elements and many universal ones.
We were able to respond by making a play within a play, setting it on a remote Japanese island and doing a Noh play.
For an English director it might be very difficult to imagine getting it out of the traditional setting.’
Conversely, Ninagawa had trouble applying the combination of eastern and western styles to a traditional Japanese piece: ‘It is much more difficult to bring realism into stylization than the other way round.
It is a constant battle to stop actors slipping into style — my stomach aches all the time!’
The Chikamatsu dramas on which Suicide For Love is based were originally puppet plays.
Their subject matter, though — suicides committed by ordinary people under economic pressure — was of contemporary urgency, based on reports Chikamatsu read in the papers.
Nowadays they are usually performed in an ossified Kabuki style and for Ninagawa the task was to throw all this off and recover their original spirits.
His production opens with a darkened stage, lit only by a spotlight on a tiny, fragile rod puppet.
Suddenly, behind her, the stage explodes into life -50 people milling about in the bawdy chaos of a red light area.
It is a characteristic Ninagawa coup — spectacular, yet suggesting the vulnerability of human nature.
At the technical run-through it looks perfect.
But Ninagawa stops the action every few minutes to make tiny adjustments.
This is where he comes alive, slithering lizard-like over the Lyttleton seats to issue instructions in a voice that brooks no argument.
The impression is of final polishing after many months of gradual rehearsal.
In fact, Ninagawa takes just one month to direct a production and rehearses only five hours a day.
He admits that he is a hard task master, on himself and his cast.
‘Actors say working with me is far more exhausting than with other directors,’ he says, grinning.
‘I tell them that acting is the burning of life — and the inner conflict lasts for a month…’
They are expected to come word perfect and to research their part, however tiny.
In the crowd scenes every character has a history — the chaotic spontaneity is deceptive, and improvisation is out.
‘He attacks every actor,’ says Nakane, chuckling.
‘They have to walk along a very narrow ridge with a valley on each side: one side Stanislavski and the other stylization.
I remember it was very difficult for Arashi, who played Medea.
Every day Ninagawa tried to destroy Arashi's Kabuki education and every day Arashi ended up crying, saying ‘If it continues like this I shall die.’
'Die then'.
Ninagawa would say.’
Yet, Nakane adds, actors queue up to work with him and audiences flood to his shows.
Ninagawa points out that his style, combining East and West, ritual and freedom, in many ways mirrors life in Japan: ‘I get up and listen to Bach on my compact disc and have Japanese rice for breakfast.’
But, more importantly, his productions' stark expression of human vanity perhaps touches a pressurized Japanese audience.
‘I feel there are too many people who cast no doubt on today's prosperous Japan.
Japan is twisted and warped.’
For his next production in Britain he hopes to work with British actors at the National on a contemporary Japanese piece.
But is there another classic he would love to tackle?
Ninagawa, still coiled on his chair, gazes at the ceiling.
‘King Lear’, he says, finally.
‘While I still have the energy.’
Suicide for Love has eight performances at the Lyttleton between 9th and 14th October (Box Office: 01 928 2252).
TELEVISION /Certified excellence: Mark Lawson on Ashcroft's second childhood
By MARK LAWSON
HEAVY with prizes from Venice, She's Been Away (BBC1) was, superficially, one of those pieces in which a major star offers what might be called a Complex Simpleton performance.
Reigning in their verbal and facial expressiveness to play a character so damaged that a big speech is possible (if at all) only at the end, they subsequently receive an award from a jury awed that they were clever enough to play so dumb.
Peggy Ashcroft duly got her gong for playing Lilian, 50 years in the bin, but She's Been Away was considerably more than a kind of Rain Woman; a vehicle for acting technique.
The tough, unsettling, adult script confirmed Stephen Poliakoff's status, alongside Potter, Rosenthal and Griffiths, as a major small-screen author.
Poliakoff had his first playwrighting success at the age of 19 but he has always been, to put it gently, a more grown-up dramatist than many of the pack of hairy, scary stage writers whose careers coincide with his.
This script began with Aunt Lilian's release from the shabby asylum in which she had been held for decades.
The ward had been closed by cuts but Poliakoff was only subliminally concerned with the politics of this.
What animated the screenplay was the question of exactly how other members of Lilian's family, past and present, had escaped similar restraint.
The incarcerated aunt lodged, on her release, with her nephew Hugh (James Fox) and his wife Harriet (Geraldine James).
Hugh was a City prig of exemplary emotional repression.
His faintly dazed demeanour was perhaps attributable to having fathered Dominic, a monstrous kind of pre-yuppy who, when Lilian demonstrates her unfamiliarity with domestic appliances, lisps: ‘Daddy, are we insured for any damage she does?’
This was a small performance of emetic perfection by young Jackson Kyle.
If the Greens ever form a government, they should use him in the commercials advocating population control.
Comic leavening though Dominic was, he also fitted the script's careful patterning of parent-child relationships.
Lilian was in her second childhood and Harriet was expecting her second child, which she secretly despised.
Both women were treated as infants by Hugh, while Harriet was forced to play stern mother to her husband's aunt.
(If the film had a serious weakness, it was that there was too much Naughty Little Sister stuff for Lilian in supermarkets and car parks.)
Another childhood — Lilian's first, vouchsafed in flashback — was revealed to be the key to her incarceration.
Her adolescent rebellion, seemingly involving immoderate sex and the moderate occult, was clearly supposed to be viewed as a stand against the social codes of her English middle-class tribe.
Back in society five decades on, Lilian joined (or perhaps led) Harriet in another such break-out, involving the trashing of a Jag and a hotel.
Appropriately for what was a non-communication, middle-class-prison piece, Sir Peter Hall, an infrequent visitor to this medium, adopted the look of those Losey-Pinter films of the Sixties; the domestic made menacing.
Hall's most obvious technical reflex was the use of Lilian's viewpoint to establish her childish fear of our everyday: a tree, a plane, traffic.
This extended a nice Martian strain in the script, examining how Hampstead life might look to a spectator who had missed the first two acts.
The main performances were significant for their denial of sentimentality.
A cute crone part can be as wearisome as a cute kid one but Ashcroft held an edge of menace, a tension about how much of Lilian's mental absence was pretence.
Produced by Kenith Trodd, She's Been Away was a distinctive achievement to match Poliakoff's and Ashcroft's Caught On A Train nearly a decade ago.
In a Don Featherstone South Bank Show (LWT) of high quality and unusual form, the novelist Thomas Keneally recreated in 1989 a research trip through Eritrea which he made in 1987 while gestating his new book Towards Asmara.
It is fascinating to speculate on the reactions of the Eritreans to the spectacle of a man asking to have again the same conversations and introductions, this time with four or five other men holding cameras, lights and recorders.
To what extend would they understand the western methods of book promotion?
There need, however, be no PR qualms about this documentary.
The new Keneally treats the unlovely, unpluggable subject of the politics of famine, and Feather stone, far from hyping Towards Asmara, made a detailed case for the book.
In the same way as Keneally is using fiction to bring a forgotten conflict to an audience which might shrink from it as fact, the arts programme admitted material — reportage and politics — which it usually would not.
A football match with a one-legged goalkeeper and all of the crowd bearing arms was one of many memorable scenes.
THEATRE /Contra flow: Michael Church reviews the RSC's Kissing The Pope at The Almeida
By MICHAEL CHURCH
IF THERE is one political lesson which recent events have underlined in Africa, South East Asia and Latin America, it is that peasant armies waging guerilla wars all end up committing the same sort of brutalities, whatever the flag they fight under.
Marxist ideology was no better guarantee of Vietcong decency 20 years ago than it now is for Swapo; nor has it preserved the Sandinistas from endemic corruption in their civil war against the American-backed Contras.
In Nick Darke's Kissing the Pope, however, the Sandinistas are given unequivocal white-hat status: a visit to Nicaragua apparently convinced him and his director Roger Michell that that unhappy land was ‘one of the world's few areas of moral black and white’.
So his Contras behave like homicidal lager-louts, and his Sandinistas like palely scrupulous members of the SDP.
The production is cowboys and Indians first and last, with a buddy-movie section in between.
The audience file in to discover three actors sitting ragged and disconsolate under the eye of a fourth who is reading the Bible and shouting ‘Shut up!’ at intervals.
After 10 minutes of this the action begins: a jungle-skirmish in the wings, then an interrogation, with the Contras jeering and their victims rigid with fear.
There follows an atrocity off-stage, an American military adviser (Edward Peel) watching with horribly convincing sexual excitement.
Then come some ear-splitting explosions (don't sit near the entrance) after which most on stage are dead.
This is the cue for the survivors — a young Contra (Mark Hadfield) and his prisoner (Christian Dixon)— to embark on an odyssey in the course of which the psychological balance of power gradually shifts.
Hadfield's violence- crazed adolescent is a brilliant feat of characterization, to which Dixon's peasant youth offers a sweetly endearing foil.
Finally they are ambushed and taken prisoner by the enemy (the former lager-louts risen from the dead and now wearing masks); Hadfield goes catatonic with terror, and is solicitously carried off to re-education in the jungle.
The first laugh of the evening came with the phrase ‘non-aligned countries like Nato’; the second with the observation that killing for the first time is ‘like sex’: Darke's audience of true believers was easily pleased.
Back to back with Howard Brenton's HID, this simplistic piece of agit-prop suggests that the RSC's Almeida season will have decidedly limited appeal.
MUSIC /Leaving early: Anthony Payne reviews Ileana Cotrubas's farewell recital at Covent Garden
By ANTHONY PAYNE
AT WHAT point in his or her career should a singer decide to quit the stage and concert platform?
It is certainly not unknown for artists to sing on until well past their best and to put considerable strain on even their most sympathetic listeners, expecting them to weigh charm of manner and artistic experience against failing vocal powers.
Ileana Cotrubas is not of that ilk, and many of her devotees must have been shocked when it was disclosed last weekend that her Covent Garden recital with Geoffrey Parsons on Thursday evening was to be her farewell British appearance.
Here was a lady who at the age of 50 had certainly decided to quit while she was ahead, and her moving and musically thoughtful recital confirmed it.
It was a mark of her artistic intelligence and independence that she did not choose to dish up a pot-pourri of well tried favourites for the occasion, drawing attention to herself rather than the music.
True, in a first half devoted to the song repertory she allowed herself a Wolf group which included Mein Liebster ist so Klein and Ich hab' in Penna.
But she effortlessly avoided that exasperating coyness with which some seek to engage their audience, and the group also included the angelic Wir haben beide lange Zeit with whose chiming repetitions she wove an enchanting spell.
To frame this more familiar fare, she presented songs by Enesco and Marx, bringing to them the skill of a dramatic singer without ever overstepping the bounds of intimate communion required by the genre.
Enesco is a major force in twentieth century music whose almost total neglect at present is quite astonishing, and if his little Poemes de Clement Marot show a limited aspect of his art, they still breathed an engaging wit and charm in Miss Cotrubas's heart-warming performance.
No less devotion was brought to four songs by Joseph Marx, and although the rather overheated style of Nocturne elicited a few smiles (Parsons performing prodigies in representing the burgeoning June night) there was a touching ecstasy in Hat dich die Liebe beruhrt which was delivered absolutely from the heart.
It could perhaps be said that Miss Cotrubas came truly into her own with the operatic excerpts that provided the second half of her programme.
Actually, she opened with Mozart's scena Misera, dove son which tested her somewhat at the top of the stave, but there followed arias from Manon, Don Pasquale and La Forza del Destino which she gave with commanding conviction, variety and characterisation.
Towards the close there was the feeling that she was forcing a little at the top, and that the middle voice was tiring.
But as she responded to the audience's affectionate plaudits with both Mimi's and Violetta's farewells it was the natural sweetness and dramatic presence of this fine artist that carried the day.