

Court Circular
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
His Royal Highness afterwards presented The Duke of Edinburgh's Awards at St Pius's Secondary School and gave an interview to BBC Radio Scotland.
The Prince Edward visited Callendar Park and was received by Captain William Forbes (Vice-Lord-Lieutenant of Falkirk) and later visited Stirling Castle, Strathallan Games Park and subsequently attended a dinner at the Forum Hotel, Glasgow.
His Royal Highness, attended by Major William McLean, returned to London in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
7 October: The Princess Royal, Patron, British Nutrition Foundation, attended the British Nutrition Foundation's Conference for Teachers of Nutrition at Exeter Court Hotel, Kenford, and was received on arrival by Lieutenant Commander JA Holdsworth (Vice-Lord-Lieutenant of Devon).
Afterwards Her Royal Highness, President of Save The Children Fund, visited the Save the Children Fund Shop, Paris Street, Exeter.
The Princess Royal, attended by Mrs Richard Carew Pole, travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
Her Royal Highness, President, The British Academy of Film and Television Arts, this evening attended the Julie Andrews Tribute Award at the Odeon, Leicester Square, London.
The Hon Mrs Louloudis was in attendance.
8 October: The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh left Heathrow Airport, London this afternoon in a British Airways Tristar for Singapore and Malaysia.
Her Majesty and His Royal Highness were received upon arrival at the Airport by the Earl of Airlie (Lord Chamberlain).
The following were present and took leave of The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh: Field Marshal the Lord Bramall (Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant of Greater London), Mrs Mary Seet-Cheng (Acting High Commissioner for Singapore), Dato AW Omardin (Acting High Commissioner for Malaysia), the Lord King of Wartnaby (Chairman, British Airways), Sir Norman Payne (Chairman, British Airports Authority Plc) and Mr Alan Proctor (Managing Director, Heathrow Airport).
The following are in attendance: The Lady Farnham, Mrs John Dugdale, the Right Hon Sir William Heseltine, Rear-Admiral Sir Paul Greening, Sir Robert Fellowes, Mr Robin Janvrin, Surgeon Captain Norman Blacklock, RN, Air Commodore the Hon Timothy Elworthy Lieutenant-Colonel Blair Stewart-Wilson and Mr Brian McGrath.
By command of The Queen, the Lord Reay (Lord in Waiting) was present at Royal Air Force Northolt this afternoon upon the departure of The Duke of Gloucester for Portugal and bade farewell to His Royal Highness on behalf of Her Majesty.
Mrs John Dugdale has succeeded the Lady Susan Hussey as Lady-in-Waiting to The Queen.
KENSINGTON PALACE 8 October: The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, Patron of the Halle Concerts Society, was present this evening at a Performance by the Halle Orchestra of Benjamin Britten's War Requiem held at the Free Trade Hall, Manchester.
Her Royal Highness was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Greater Manchester (Colonel John Timmins).
Mrs Jane Stevens was in attendance.
8 October: The Duke of Gloucester as President of the British Consultants Bureau left Royal Air Force Northolt this afternoon to visit Portugal in an aircraft of No 32 Squadron, Royal Air Force.
Upon arrival at RAF Northolt, His Royal Highness was received on arrival by Manuel Corte-Real (Representative for the Portugese Ambassador) and Mr Peter Smith (Representative for the Department of Trade and Industy).
Major Nicholas Barne was in attendance.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh visit Singapore.
The Princess Royal attends a lunch at the Enmore Hotel, Kirn, Dunoon, Argyllshire; as President, Riding for the Disabled Association, attends a Show given by the Dunoon and Cowal branch of the Association at Dunoon; attends a sheep show at the European Sheep and Wool Centre, Lochgoilhead, Argyllshire; and opens the Drimsynie Holiday Village.
Princess Margaret, as Patron, visits the Northern Ballet Theatre in Manchester.
The Duchess of Kent attended the launch of Tears and Smiles: the hospice handbook by Martyn Lewis, at BT Tower, London W1.
Obituary: Bette Davis
By GILBERT ADAIR
THE VERY first line of Edward Albee's Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?-‘What a dump!’— is spoken by the play's feminine protagonist in a parody of the classic Bette Davis manner: an (imaginary) cigarette held imperiously at eye-level, eyes blazing like the headlamps of an automobile, bee-sting lips enunciating each word (including the ‘a’) for absolutely maximum effect, almost as if they had been snipped out of a newspaper headline by a writer of anonymous letters.
Paradoxically, though, when one sees the film from which this line was borrowed, a gloriously overheated melodrama by King Vidor entitled Beyond the Forest (1949), one is rather startled to hear Davis deliver it with a quite unstudied, unfussy brusqueness and without any of the intonational posturing that Albee has attributed to her.
Yet, in a sense, the dramatist was right and the actress wrong.
As a star, Bette Davis was of the type commonly designated ‘inimitable’, which tends to mean (as it did in her case) that she eventually became the butt of countless imitators; and these imitators merely accentuated symptoms of self-parody that were already detectable in her own screen presence.
Though she was a performer of indisputable talent, one was none the less left with a nagging impression that overarching each of her individual characteristics was another role, one she played to the hilt: that of the grande dame, the First Lady of the American cinema, the Duse of the double-feature.
At her worst — which is to say, when her performances, all crust and no bread, seemed little more than a rash of mannerisms — she could strike one as impossibly tic-ridden and implausible.
At her considerable best — when her physical angularity, her fluttery, melodramatic flounces and her inclination to treat the most unpretentious line of dialogue as a conversation-stopper were tempered either by a real affinity with the role in question or else by a witty, self-deprecating sense of her own absurdity in it — she remained one of the most consistently spell-binding of Hollywood stars.
Before the phrase became fashionable, Davis was, on-screen, the epitome of the castrating female, her appeal as a cinematic icon being thus largely confined to the feminine (and, by a probably logical extension, homosexual) portion of her audience.
She excelled in playing ruthlessly calculating bitch-goddesses, clawing their way to wealth, security and power: eg as Mildred, the sluttish Cockney waitress who enslaves sensitive Leslie Howard in John Cromwell's adaptation of Somerset Maugham's Of Human Bondage (1934), the role in which she made her reputation; as Jezebel, flouting the decorous conventions of the antebellum South in William Wyler's 1938 melodrama of that name; and as the indefatigably scheming Regina, one of her most memorable creations, in Wyler's 1941 film version of Lillian Hellman's The Little Foxes.
And though, once she hit her formidable histrionic stride, it was possible to feel that a little of Bette Davis went a long way, her excesses were surely preferable to the homogenised blandness of those mass-produced Hollywood sirens of whom a lot went a very little way indeed.
Such stoutly-defended independence of character was no less typical of her off-screen conduct.
When Warner Bros, the company with which she had signed an exclusive long-term contract, squandered her potential during the Thirties in a series of amusing but, for her, unfulfilling potboilers (eg Fashions of 1934, The Big Shakedown, Jimmy the Gent, Fog over Frisco), she took the unprecedented step of departing for England, where she could continue working outside of American jurisdiction.
Then, when Warners sued her for breach of contract, she reluctantly agreed to return to the studio corral while making certain that the trade press was fully apprised of her frustration.
As it happened, the gamble paid off handsomely.
The studio almost immediately cast her in a cycle of prestigious (if often meretricious)‘women's pictures’, including Edmund Goulding's Dark Victory (1939), which had her, in its famous climactic scene, walk upstairs to die in solitude with all the dignified serenity of an elephant trundling off to its ancestral graveyard; Michael Curtiz's The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex (also 1939), in which she flaunted the Virgin Queen's (and her own) baldness as the ultimate emblem of great, self-abasing character acting; and, of course, Irving Rapper's sudsy, multi-Kleenex tearjerker Now, Voyager (1942), in which her repressed, plain-Jane spinster blossoms overnight into chic, radiant, cigarette-tapping womanhood.
Of this last film the Argentinian fabulist Jorge Luis Borges laconically wrote: ‘The vigorous message of Now, Voyager is: When Bette Davis is disfigured, she is less beautiful.’
In the late Forties, just as her career was sinking to its lowest ebb, and an English critic commented of her notorious egomania that ‘only bad films are good enough for her’, she returned in triumph with one of her most brilliant performances, as the ageing but feisty actress Margo Channing who, to her emotional and professional cost, learns All About Eve (directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz, 1950).
And a decade later, when the term ‘has-been’ seemed almost an understatement, she not only gratefully accepted but gleefully flung herself into the high camp, Low Gothic shenanigans of Robert Aldrich's Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?(1962), in which, with a gloating relish that neither her baby-doll fright wig nor her impenetrable pancake make-up could conceal, she set about tormenting her immemorial screen rival and alter ego(or egoist), Joan Crawford.
In a career spanning half a century Davis appeared in numerous major films but practically no great ones, a distinction that, in truth, may have been irrelevant to an actress for whom the role, rather than the film encompassing it, was primordial.
Yet, of the several factors distinguishing the cinema from other art forms, not the least significant is the amazing durability of its ephemera.
And if a work as trite, foolish and offensive to women as Now, Voyager should, after 40 years, remain as watchable today as on its initial release, when equally feeble plays and novels from the same period have vanished into a limbo of neglect from which they can never be retrieved, it is a tribute less to the very questionable ‘artistry’ of its writer and director than to the enduring fascination of its leading actress.
Bette Davis was charisma incarnate.
Obituary: Milton Goldman
By DEREK GRANGER
MILTON GOLDMAN was probably the world's most famous theatrical agent.
He had the most stars on his books, he had the most friends and he gave the most renowned New York parties.
In a notoriously tough profession he had the most deservedly celebrated career.
If Norman Rockwell had ever painted an American theatre agent the result would have been a portrait of Milton.
With his burly, four-square stance, his ruddy colouring, his handsome strong-featured face, he radiated energy, warmth and good nature.
The strong rich voice and the ready deep-throated laugh completed the impression of almost invincible benevolence.
Milton Goldman had been an actors' agent for nearly 40 years.
By the time he became vice-president of International Creative Management, one of the largest talent agencies in the world, he represented not only a host of illustrious American stars — Helen Hayes, Mary Martin, Arlene Dahl, Maureen Stapleton, Ruth Gordon, Carol Channing, Lillian Gish — but most of the leading actors of the British theatre, including Laurence Olivier, Ralph Richardson, John Gielgud, Rex Harrison, Peggy Ashcroft, Albert Finney and Vanessa Redgrave.
In the early Sixties, on my first visit to America, I was introduced to Milton by Coral Browne.
‘You don't realise what I'm giving you,’ she said.
‘This is the key of New York.’
Typically, one call to Milton would inevitably elicit the immediate response, ‘Where are you?
We're having a party.
Come on over.’
In his Sutton Place apartment overlooking the East River, with ships' lights nosing past the windows and the walls hung with a splendidly eerie collection of Magritte paintings, there was a permanent welcome on the mat.
There you could meet the likes of Orson Welles, Norman Mailer, Lillian Hellman, Virgil Thomson, Martha Graham, Ethel Merman, and Anita Loos — as well as almost every star in American showbusiness.
With his partner of 38 years, the lawyer Arnold Weissberger (who died in 1981) Milton had created a genuine New World salon.
From Monday to Thursday every week Milton and Arnold were at home to friends from 5pm to theatre time.
Some evenings it would be a small group of half-a-dozen close friends, on red-letter nights a gathering of 100 or more to greet a visiting celebrity.
For such occasions Milton had perfected an immaculate form of rapid-fire introduction in which he would give his guests both their potted biographies and list of credits.
Only occasionally, in the heat of the party, did this formula go amiss as when he blithely introduced Robert Morley (playwright, actor, racanteur and wit) to his own son Sheridan.
For years 45 Sutton Place became a meeting place and home-from-home for the entire British colony in New York — a place where British actors, writers and directors, great and small, knew that they had not only a constant refuge but a friendly shoulder to lean on and a sympathetic ear.
The kindness was unbounded.
Milton would get you theatre tickets, special hotel rates, restaurant reservations and still wonder if you needed anything more.
His friends used him shamelessly.
You didn't have to be a client or a famous face to be on the receiving end.
The obscure and the struggling got just the same treatment.
Rather than use his apartment as an extension of the office, Milton did things the other way round.
The salon was continued during daylight hours at the ICM building in an atmosphere which succeeded in being simultaneously both frenetic and relaxed and in which a mood of party time was seldom absent.
While Milton grappled with two telephones hung from a sort of yoke around his neck and into which he alternately spoke in a staccato mixture of best Variety showbiz-patter, friends, clients and droppers-in gathered to laugh and gossip in his office while Milton imperviously went on with his wheeling and dealing.
Offers of hospitality were engagingly pre-emptory.
‘You're coming to the theatre tonight.
I'm taking Hermione Gingold.
Your date's a wonderful new actress.
Odd name.
Meryl Streep.’
And Miss Streep duly arrived on her bicycle which she chained confidently to the theatre railings.
A call for lunch could come at noon.
‘Be at the Four Seasons at one.
It's Rex Harrison and Mrs Bing Crosby.
Wrap up, it's going to snow.’
Every summer, for the month of July, the Goldman caravanserai would come to rest in London, where Milton would refresh his contacts, burnish new friendships and influence even more people.
Against the onslaught of that pounding geniality English reserve melted.
In the old days, with Arnold Weissberger, most of London's theatre and social worlds were bidden to a suite at the Savoy overlooking the Thames.
Latterly it was to a flat in Eaton Square where the army of friends, constantly replenished, continued to gather.
For Milton Goldman was truly one of those people who, for their friends, make the world go round.
Nothing was too much trouble, no call left unanswered.
Bringing people together, tirelessly fixing up dates and appointments, putting in just the right word at the crucial moment, helping to forge new partnerships, Milton conducted both his life and his business with an extraordinary degree of caring.
Not long ago at the theatre in New York he stood beaming with understandably possessive pride between Jacqueline Onassis and Edna O'Brien.
Early the next morning he would probably be back in his office thinking of ways to help an unsuccessful actor.
He will leave a huge gap in the theatrical life of Broadway; for his friends in England, New York and the London summer can never seem quite the same again.
Obituary: Professor Michael Akehurst
By CHRISTINA LYON
MICHAEL AKEHURST was amongthe leading international lawyers of his generation.
A legal scholar of considerable merit, he was a very private man, difficult to get to know and to describe.
After a distinguished student career at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, he went on to study at the University of Paris under Suzanne Bastid.
The work he did for his Doctorat de l'Universite, awarded with the citation ‘bien’ in 1965, formed the basis for his first book, The Law Governing Employment in International Organisations (1967), which remains a source much used by courts and tribunals including the Hague International Court of Justice.
Akehurst was early in understanding the importance of administrative and employment law in international organisations and, although others have carried this work forward, his contribution during the 1960s can properly be regarded as pioneering.
He was awarded the Diploma of the Hague Academy of International Law in 1965 and his experience of the practice of international law with the United Nations Relief Works Agency (Unrwa) in Beirut, with the Hague Unification Conference and with the European Commission marked him out as exceptional.
His work, in his British Yearbook of International Law articles on customs, reprisals and jurisdiction, and ‘Intervention in World Politics’ are described by fellow international lawyers as classic.
The article ‘Jurisdiction in International Law’ is one of the most widely cited, and is extensively relied upon, most recently before the court of the European Community in the landmark Wood Pulp case.
In 1982 the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee asked him to write a paper on the Falklands, which was considered a most notable contribution to the debate in this area.
Akehurst's passion for the subject of international law led him to embark on the writing of what became a standard student textbook, A Modern Introduction to International Law.
This demanded skills radically different from those displayed in his earlier highly specialised work.
Now in its sixth edition in English it is used extensively throughout the world, but has also been translated into Spanish, Portuguese and Japanese.
To write a really successful ‘introduction’ to a subject like modern international law, demands a quite unusually catholic and thorough knowledge and experience of the whole subject.
As a fellow international lawyer has put it, Akehurst is one of the few who succeeded.
Although entitled an ‘introduction’, the work had an authority all of its own and was often quoted.
His dedication to the subject was complete and he continued to write and give high quality papers at various conferences.
His first academic appointment was as a lecturer in law at Manchester University.
He was in the Department of Law at the Keele University for nearly 20 years and the university was his home.
Although a private man and somewhat of a loner, he worked tirelessly for the department both in a teaching and administrative capacity.
His love of international law he communicated to his students both at an undergraduate and a postgraduate level.
Keele University acknowledged Michael Akehurst's position as one of the foremost international lawyers of his time by awarding him a personal chair in February 1989.
Obituary: Patricia Cockburn
By RICHARD INGRAMS
PATRICIA COCKBURN was the widow of the journalist Claud Cockburn and a remarkable and resourceful woman, an intrepid traveller, an inspired gardener and latterly a creator of shell paintings.
She was born in County Cork in 1914, the youngest of the six children of Major JB Arbuthnot and his wife Olive Blake.
Her father, who served in the Brigade of Guards, was the original Beachcomber columnist on the Daily Express and also guarded Sir Roger Casement when he was a prisoner in the Tower.
Patricia enjoyed the kind of Anglo-Irish childhood so well described by her lifelong friend Molly Keane.
She had no formal education at all and was brought up by her paternal grandmother at Myrtle Grove, Youghal, which had been the home of Sir Walter Raleigh when he was the Governor of Ireland.
‘As a child,’ Claud wrote, ‘Patricia hunted half the day and in the evenings, supine on a board for reasons of deportment, lay drinking Madeira wine and reading The Golden Bough.’
Her family was well off and at the age of 18 she was presented as a debutante.
Shortly afterwards she married Arthur Byron, a Lloyd's underwriter and cousin of the travel writer Robert Byron.
With him she rode across the Rockies and made two expeditions, in the Far East and Africa, on behalf of the Royal Geographical Society, to study tribal languages.
As a result of a visit to Ruthenia in 1939 on behalf of the Evening Standard during which she was briefly imprisoned, she met and married the then notorious journalist Claud Cockburn who was at that time producing his one-man newsletter The Week.
Her family was appalled and her father told her she would never be allowed into the Royal Enclosure at Ascot again.
Certainly her marriage involved financial sacrifice and for the rest of her life she was almost always short of money.
In 1947 Claud decided to make a complete break with his past and they settled near her family home in Youghal in a derelict Georgian mansion belonging to an American policeman which they rented for £150 a year.
Claud however found it increasingly hard to earn because of his Communist past and it was left to Patricia to keep the various wolves from the door.
For a time she became a pony-dealer, buying horses from tinkers and selling them on to English buyers.
Then in 1965, inspired by an eighteenth-century folio which she discovered in Leixlip Castle she revived the art of making pictures (usually floral designs) from different shells mounted on a black velvet background.
Encouraged by the Irish artist Norah McGuinness, she exhibited her work with great success in Dublin, London and New York.
She published two books: The Years of The Week (1968), an account of Claud's periodical, and a memoir, Figure of Eight (1985).
Her three sons Alexander, Andrew and Patrick all became successful journalists.
Obituary: Supt Mhoira Robertson
By PC MICHAEL B. S. CASEY
I DO NOT feel, writes PC Michael B. S. Casey, that Mhoira Robertson would have been happy with an obituary (by Joan Burnie, 3 October) that was used as a platform to criticise her colleagues (antiastunomologists — thank you, Anthony Burgess) and the male species in general: ‘and Scottish policemen do not like women much at all .’
This particular police officer does and wants Superintendent Mhoira Robertson to be remembered for a glittering career and not a weary struggle as recorded by Joan Burnie.
Mhoira was and is a symbol to WPCs throughout the country that the ladder can be scaled.
Go into the CID, the Identification Branch, the Women and Child Unit and ask the women police officers about the influence of Mhoira Robertson.
In the end she proved, and many women police officers are proving, that it is now the men who are holding on to their apron strings.
Obituaries
By PC MICHAEL B. S. CASEY
HJ (Mudi) Stieger, aircraft designer, died Brough East Yorkshire 1 October aged 87.
He developed the monospar system of wing construction in 1927 and also founded the Gloster Aircraft Company, General Aircraft and the Monspar Company.
Darlington Hoopes, politician, died Sinking Spring Pennsylvania 25 September aged 93.
A leader of the US socialist party, he twice ran unsuccessfully for President, in 1952 and 1956.
Arnold Johnson, American Communist leader, died New York City 26 September aged 84.
A leader of the US Communist Party in New York from the late 1940s, he was imprisoned in 1953 for two years for violating the Smith Act, which made it a crime to advocate the violent overthrow of the Government.
August J. Busch Jr, brewer, died St Louis 29 September aged 90.
Head of the Anheuser-Busch brewery for 28 years and owner of the St Louis Cardinals since 1953.
Geoffrey Sumner, actor, died Alderney 29 September aged 80.
Best known for his portrayal of Major Upshot-Bagley in the television series The Army Game.
Anniversaries
By PC MICHAEL B. S. CASEY
On this day: Louis XII, King of France, married Mary Tudor, sister of Henry VIII, 1514; the first Luddite riots against the introduction of machinery for spinning cotton started, Manchester 1779; Hobart, Tasmania, was founded, 1804; the Universal Postal Union was founded, Rome 1875; the first petrol-driven motor bus began operating in London, 1899; the Labour government fell, 1924; King Alexander of Yugoslavia and Louis Barthou, French foreign minister, were assassinated by a Croatian terrorist, Marseilles 1934; the first London production of the musical show Porgy and Bess was presented, 1952; the breathalyzer test came into force in Britain, 1967.
Today is the Feast Day of Saints Andronicus and Athanasia, St Demetrius of Alexandria, St Denis or Dionysius of Paris, St Dionysius the Areopagite, Saints Eleutherius and Rusticus, St Ghislain or Gislenus, St Louis Bertrand, St John Leonardi, St Publia and St Savin.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 19
Obituary: Jacques Doniol-Valcroze: Correction
By DAVID SHIPMAN
A transmission error resulted in a misspelling throughout Saturday's obituary by David Shipman.
The name of the subject should have read Jacques Doniol-Valcroze.
(Erroneous spelling: Jacques Doniol-Volcroze).