

Kisses from a glamorous old trouper: Shirley Bassey tells Jim White of her determination to survive in an era when showbiz is run by yuppies
By JIM WHITE
HANDS coquettishly on hips, like a girl in the playground sneering at her friends, Shirley Bassey is defining her raison d'etre.
‘EastEnders, Coronation Street, Emmerdale Farm.
Who's interested?
I don't want the kitchen sink.
Give me Dallas and Dynasty.
I want glamour.’
The setting is the tea-room of the Ritz and the dress is slinky — a tight black jersey number, split at the side to allow a long, black-stockinged leg to be flourished with full drama.
‘I want escapism.
I want Showbiz.’
Everybody knows who Shirley Bassey is.
They may never have heard one of her records, but when Joe Longthorne, or any of those impressionists who have made a career perfecting the quiver of her lip, does his Shirley Bassey everyone knows who he means.
The two elderly Americans who squeezed past her chair ('Hey Harry, have you signed the bill? ') knew who she was.
Even the waiters were excited, and they've seen everyone — Clement Freud had just vacated the table next door.
Shirley knows that everybody knows who she is.
‘They are sitting in the lobby of my hotel now, waiting for me.
And that frightens me.
Not physically, I don't think they want to hurt me, but your life is not your own.’
She wears big dark glasses and insists on sitting with her back to the throng, coincidentally facing the mirror.
But when the time comes to leave, she can't help going in a showbiz way, negotiating the steps of the Ritz in her towering leopard-skin stilettos like she's on the set of a Busby Berkeley musical.
We may be a grandmother, but we can still walk across the tea-room with a girlish flick of the bottom.
Britain's most successful entertainer ('I'm not a pop singer, I hate that word.
I'm, I'm, I'm…an Entertainer') was born in Tiger Bay, Cardiff, some time before the war, the seventh child of a mother from northern England and a father from Nigeria.
At the time, in a cosmopolitan place, racism was not on the agenda.
‘The odd kid at school would call me names, but not for long, boy.
There was a fighter at the time called Joe ‘Kid’ Bassey and people used to think we were related.
And there was prejudice once when I went for a job.
They made out I wasn't any good at arithmetic, which I wasn't, but that wasn't the reason.
It was the colour of my skin.
But it was not enough to give me a complex, not as it would have been in America.
I was glad I was born in Wales.’
It was only when she went to America, headlining for the first time, that she came across the curious racial classification with which music there is compartmentalised.
‘When I opened in Vegas and I sang ‘Goldfinger’, they all said, ‘Why is this black girl singing a white girl's song?’
They had never seen me so they thought I was white.
They said I had a white voice.
I never thought of that.
I thought I just had a voice.’
Her voice was first noticed in choirs in her home town.
It was not long before she had left home and was on the road.
Living first in Switzerland and now in Spain, she only really sees Britain when she is here to work.
This early departure, she thinks, explains the lack of attachment she has for home, for her Welshness.
She doesn't go dewy-eyed when the Marbella orchestra strikes up ‘Land of my Fathers’.
‘I'd like to be able to say yes I do, but I left so long ago.
I'm not really Welsh by blood and I don't speak the language.
I love to play Cardiff though, I'm at my very best there.’
One thing she does go dewy-eyed about, however, is the old show business days.
The constituency to which she appeals, the family audience aged from eight to 80 seeking a big-production glamour night out, has contracted.
For this she blames the record companies, run by yuppies with no feel for showbiz.
‘It's all gone downhill.
It's all geared to the kids, the teenyboppers.
Nobody's thinking that there are middle-aged people, grannies and mums and 20 to 30-year-olds who want to be entertained.
Fortunately I still have an audience, otherwise I would be redundant, I would be a pensioner.
A 29-year-old pensioner.’
Except for Sting and George Michael ('wonderful voice, writes great songs'), she has little time for most modern pop.
‘On television they are miming.
And these kids spend money on it.
Are they aware that they are miming?
Which for me, an old trouper, is fraudulent.’
Particularly, she has little time for a group called Yello, the Swiss electro-band with whom she collaborated on a single last year, much in the way Liza Minelli and the Pet Shop Boys or Gene Pitney and Marc Almond have.
Sadly, it was not as successful a partnership as these others.
‘I loved the song, and I think it should have been a hit, but there again the record company did nothing to promote it.
The video was too contemporary.
It should have been very sophisticated.
I mean people saw it and said, ‘That's not Shirley Bassey.’
Shirley Bassey is glamour, sophistication, sex.
But they (Yello) didn't want that, and they were in on everything.
They wouldn't let me plug it by myself.’
Pop may have disappointed, but she has no ambition to move into a more refined orbit.
‘No.
Why disappoint yourself?
I am a singer.
I would like to do something classical but I can't.
It's too late to train.
I was once introduced to Sir somebody, David Webb I think, who was in charge of the Opera House.
‘God, I see you as a Carmen,’ he said.
‘If only you could sing opera.’
And madam in all innocence said, ‘Well why can't I do Carmen?’
And he said, ‘The key is not your key.’
'Well couldn't we change the key?’
And the man had a mouthful of champagne and I thought he was going to have a heart attack.’
It was an innocent remark, because for her act songs are tailored to her range.
‘I hear a song and I tell my musical director what tempo I want it in, and how it's going to end.
The ending is very important.
The Bassey end.’
She had been rehearsing a new song on the way to the Ritz, but didn't know who wrote it.
‘I don't know, all I know is Johnny Mathis did it, and it's a lovely song.
It doesn't matter who wrote it, I like it.’
Frank Sinatra always mentions the writer when he introduces a song, but it is not through generosity, she believes.
‘Well, Americans do that.
They mention everyone who's had anything to do with the song.
It's to rest the voice, you know.
Americans love to talk.
I just want to get on and do it.
You notice how few songs they do.
I mean my act is all songs, songs, songs.’
Then, after Earl Grey tea and cucumber sandwiches and no holding back on the cake and scones, the perfectly maintained Bassey chassis repaired to the Ritz's dining room for a photo session.
It was a wonderful performance, a feast of perfectly choreographed poses and pouts.
‘I think I was a stripper in my previous life, or will be in the next,’ she said, curling her leg round an opulent red curtain.
‘I'd love to take my clothes off on stage.
Everyone goes on about Cher's dresses, showing her navel.
I was wearing dresses that showed more than she ever would dare, before she was born.
Or perhaps not before she was born.’
At the end, the photographer kissed her on both cheeks.
‘I've wanted to do that all my life,’ he said.
As she left, I shook her hand.
‘Have a kiss.
Don't let the photographer get all the perks.’
Shirley Bassey's 20-date British tour culminates in an appearance at Wembley Arena on 4 November accompanied by the London Symphony Orchestra.
Muddling along with Stalinism: Marlies Menge visits an East Berlin family which has not joined the exodus to the West
By MARLIES MENGE
THE SCHRODERS live on the fourth floor of a house in East Berlin.
On the last flight of steps to their flat they have stuck posters on the wall, mostly landscapes: a colourful picture of Provence, an advertisement for southern Sweden, the Caucasus mountains, St Mark's Square in Venice.
The posters are intended to cheer up the staircase, which is in urgent need of renovation.
Elke Schroder opens the door for me.
She is 37 years old, a teacher.
She invites me into the living room, pours me a coffee, sits down beside me, slips her shoes off and groans about the working day she has just been through.
Two of her colleagues have gone to the West in the past three months.
The others have to cover their work.
‘And of course the children ask why everyone is going.
In my class four pupils were missing after the holidays.
What should we tell the children?
They are no longer content to swallow the cheap arguments our politicians and newspapers offer.’
Had she, then, not thought of going to West Germany?
‘Obviously I think about it, every East German has at some time thought about it, or still does.
But no, I like my work, and there are many unemployed teachers over there.
And we have no relatives there, so we cannot even travel to West Germany to see uncles and aunts.
On the other hand, when you see thousands climbing over the embassy railings as if the Devil were at their heels, you think you must be stupid to stay.’
Eight-year-old Claudia hears the last sentence.
She is on the floor playing with the family dachshund.
‘Could he come with us to the West?’ she asks.
‘No, you are probably not allowed to leave the country with dogs,’ her mother says.
‘Then I'll stay here,’ decides Claudia.
Seventeen-year-old Fabian comes home.
An argument develops between mother and son about a rock concert which Fabian desperately wants to go to.
His mother would rather he studied.
Fabian is studying at secondary school for the abitur or school-leaving certificate (equivalent to English A-levels), and also learning to be a construction worker.
To study for the abitur is a privilege in East Germany.
Usually only two out of 10 classes get that far.
Two others are taking the path chosen by Fabian.
After the exam he will study at the building academy to become a building engineer like his father.
He had wanted to be a vet, but all his plans had come to nothing.
Fabian grumbles: ‘Ah, why didn't I just go to Hungary as well…
‘Going to Hungary has become a synonym for going to the West.
He slams the door behind him.
A few minutes later music drones from his room.
The Schroders are lucky with their flat, four fine big light rooms, kitchen and bathroom, for 100 marks rent a month.
They had swapped it for a modern flat in a concrete skyscraper.
They had gas heating installed, and claimed most of the cost back from the communal housing authorities.
Father and son did the painting.
‘What's keeping Jochen?’ asks Elke.
‘He only wanted to go to the out-patients.
He had a splinter in his nail that had become inflamed.’
Jochen, two years older than his wife, came in quite late.
He had had to wait four hours in the out-patients department, he said.
Only one doctor was there, three had left the country.
If this goes on any longer, he was going too, the doctor had told him.
This just wouldn't work, Jochen said.
Something had to happen eventually.
Never had the commitment of those who wanted to stay been as strong as now.
At his workplace a list for the ‘New Forum’ campaign was going round.
Jochen had signed it.
‘We cannot keep muddling along like this forever.
Everywhere Stalinism is being reformed and openly discussed, in Hungary, Poland, the Soviet Union.
Only we are behaving as if it's nothing to do with us and that only the West is to blame for the thousands who turn their back on us.’
Elke has laid the table for the evening meal and fried the eggs.
The family sits down to eat.
Elke says she has tried once more in vain to buy a decent pullover for Fabian and tells how unfriendly the saleswoman in the shop was.
She could well understand how women in particular wanted to get away to the West where daily life was so much more convenient.
For the daily chores fell mainly on the shoulders of the women: shopping, running around to find particular things.
Jochen and Elke warn Fabian not to go out on the streets on 7 October for the 40th anniversary of the formation of East Germany, and for God's sake not to demonstrate.
That the state would certainly not allow.
Otherwise he could forget his abitur and his studies.
The anniversary was to be celebrated with a torchlit procession, military parade and fireworks.
For weeks the newspapers had been full of stories about it, with, over and over again, people describing how well they lived in this country, how much they loved their homeland, how they did everything to strengthen East German socialism — as if there were not several thousand people leaving the country in a panic at the time.
‘I think of it as a stuffy old family that wants to celebrate the birthday of an aged aunt.
Everyone has it impressed upon them that on the day there will be no discussion of any problem.
Everyone has to join in the charade: ah, what a good family we are!
And when a problem cannot be brushed aside, then a scapegoat must be found.
In our case it's the reform groups, and of course the bad, bad West.’
The author is East Germany correspondent of Die Zeit.
The interview took place before this weekend's demonstrations.
Four men on an upturned boat
By DAVID BARBER
IT WILL probably be a month before the results of an official inquiry are published and sceptics silenced, but experts in New Zealand are already calling the voyage of the Rose-Noelle one of the most remarkable stories ever told of survival at sea.
Doubts remain about the saga of four men who spent 118 days drifting atop their upturned trimaran after it had been flipped by a huge wave before being washed up on an island near Auckland.
Investigators, astounded that the four could survive such an ordeal in the southern hemisphere winter, are puzzled by a number of details.
But there is nothing to support the theory that the crew made up the story, and no apparent motive for them to do so.
The craft's owner-skipper, John Glennie, a lifelong seafarer who survived a previous shipwreck, shrugs it off.
‘There are always sceptics.
They are people who never do anything, who never go sailing or climb mountains.’
Captain Mel Bowen, a Ministry of Transport investigator, seems to have made up his mind after interviewing Mr Glennie and the three others.
‘Suspicion will be laid to rest by fact rather than hearsay and rumour.’
The facts as related by the Rose-Noelle's crew are that the 41-foot trimaran left Picton, on New Zealand's South Island, for Tonga on 1 June and capsized in a storm about 125 miles off the North Island on 4 June.
The boat drifted in a north-west semi-circle, covering at least 1,000 nautical miles, until hitting Great Barrier Island, north of Auckland, on 30 September.
The crew said they had survived on the upturned hull, sleeping huddled together in a compartment the size of a double bed.
Scepticism arose with the first television interviews.
The four, who had trimmed each other 's hair, did not fit the popular image of castaways, and their mental state appeared sound.
Flames of doubt were fanned by the crew's insistence that they had activated the emergency radio beacon for a week, though it was not picked up.
In addition, the last radio reports purportedly from the Rose-Noelle had been received on 6 and 9 June — days after its capsize — the latter giving its position as near the Kermadec islands, en route to Tonga and 620 miles north of Auckland.
This prompted a fruitless air search at the end of June when the yacht had not reached Tonga.
Another mystery is how the yacht drifted north-west when prevailing conditions would normally have sent it towards South America.
The Rose-Noelle was well-equipped as Mr Glennie had set off to start a new life cruising the South Pacific.
The crew salvaged some food and had a barbecue on which they grilled fish and birds using timber from the boat.
Rice and crates of soft drinks survived the capsize and a system was rigged up to collect rainwater.
The fish and fruit diet sustained them well, though a doctor diagnosed Mr Glennie, who lost 22lb, as being malnourished, and he showed reporters folds of skin hanging off his buttocks.
Captain Bowen said it was possible commercial aircraft did not pick up a signal from the emergency beacon, and the radio messages could have been confused with another vessel.
Meteorologists have confirmed that, for the first time in years, the prevailing winter winds were easterly, and a navy hydrographer said the surface area of the submerged craft would have been enough to act as a sail and counter the current.
The final stroke of luck was a strong north-easterly which sprung up to wash them ashore on Great Barrier Island.
‘We needed a miracle, and we got one,’ said Mr Glennie, whose yacht, valued at about £87,000 and uninsured, represented everything he owned.
‘And I never doubted we would.’
Investigators are feeding weather and tide charts into a computer to trace the voyage.
Mr Glennie and crewman Rick Hellriegel wrote diaries during the trip.
They would have been invaluable to the inquiry — and to the crew, as book and movie offers pour in — but were lost when the wreck was smashed to pieces on the island's rocks.
It is apparent that the voyage provoked conflict which the four are reluctant to talk about.
Mr Hellriegel says he does not care if he never sees Mr Glennie again.
Another crewman, Jim Nalepka, recalls bitter arguments over half a biscuit and confesses to having thoughts about slitting the throat of one of his friends.
Four months at the mercy of the weather taught Mr Glennie to enjoy the moment.
‘I was free and in a way I was happy.’
But the others found his apparent calm hard to take.
‘All they wanted was to get home.
They thought there was something wrong with me.
We all changed.
I know I'm new, and I've lost everything.
Now I have nothing, I am free.’