

East Berlin protesters beaten up by police
From EDWARD STEEN in East Berlin
AT LEAST 10 people were arrested as up to 2,000 demonstrators began a sit-down protest last night in Schonhauser Allee, in the centre of East Berlin.
Large numbers of soldiers and police were brought in to seal off the entire area.
In another part of the city, near the Gethsemane church in the run-down Prenzlauer Berg district, police attacked a candlelit procession by about 1,000 young people, beating them about the head with truncheons, as the crowd chanted ‘no violence’.
Fears were growing last night that the enforced departure of almost all foreign journalists from East Germany by midnight would signal the beginning of a sharp crackdown on all dissent.
The fifth decade of the German Democratic Republic had dawned with many hundreds of its citizens behind bars after the brutal suppression of demonstrations throughout the country which continued late into Saturday night.
The West German government expressed its concern at the police violence against protesters on Saturday, and political leaders in Bonn urged East Germany to bring in political and economic reforms.
East Berlin remained virtually sealed off for the fourth successive day yesterday, but in Poland a further 300 East Germans took refuge with the West German embassy in Warsaw.
In East Berlin alone, the state's fortieth anniversary on Saturday was marked by 7,000 protesters marching through the city chanting ‘Gorby’, ‘We're not afraid’ and ‘We're staying here’.
But the worst trouble was in Dresden.
At least 2,000 people pelted security forces with cobblestones during the fourth consecutive night of often bloody fracas.
The unusual violence was blamed by Lutheran church sources here on the frustration of a trainload of young people prevented from crossing the now-closed border to Czechoslovakia, and the chance of clambering into the West German Embassy in Prague.
Yesterday an edgy calm reigned in the capital for most of the day.
Uniformed Volkspolizei and hordes of plainclothes Stasis, state security men, almost outnumbered ordinary Berliners on the central Alexanderplatz, where Saturday's march began.
In side-streets, special Stasi units and paddy-wagons waited at the ready.
Checkpoint Charlie was reinforced to stop any possible charge of demonstrators from West Berlin; tourists and all but accredited journalists were refused entry.
In Leipzig small groups of protesters again gathered yesterday outside the Nikolaikirche in the centre of the town, where water-cannon were used against demonstrators on Saturday night.
No one is clear where the situation can now lead; they are only aware that the blanket of fear is suddenly not so suffocating any more.
After the failed June 1953 uprising, crushed by Soviet tanks, ‘people shut their eyes and looked away’, said Heiko, a 19-year-old factory worker, after a packed service in the Gethsemane church, in recent weeks a centre of opposition.
‘Now there's a certain unity.’
Last week six opposition organisations, including the largest, New Forum, agreed ‘to examine mutual political activity’ and demanded free, secret elections under UN auspices.
Yesterday the formation of an East German Social Democrat party was announced.
The ominous atmosphere in East Berlin contrasts sharply with the anodyne official picture presented by the GDR media.
It is of a more than usually splendid birthday party, of jolly music, beer and sausages, goose-stepping, displays of rocket transporters and President Gorbachev saying (without mentioning his loaded off-the-cuff remarks, or those by his spokesman, Gennady Gerasimov) all the right things about West German revanchism.
Birthday demonstrations; Opposition church service; West German reaction, page 10 Those who stay behind, page 18 Leading article, page 20 
Berlin Philharmonic opts for amiable Abbado
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
THE 120 musicians of the great Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra shut themselves up in a secret conclave yesterday and elected a conductor who is almost the exact opposite of the late Herbert von Karajan: the Italian Claudio Abbado.
Abbado, 56, who is already said to have inherited the mantle of Toscanini, was chosen out of a large field which included such names as Lorin Maazel, Bernard Haitink, Seiji Ozawa, Daniel Barenboim and Zubin Mehta.
He was doubtless selected because he not only commands a vast classical repertoire, essential for one of the world's great orchestras, but has also worked hard to popularise modern music.
There seemed to be an element of ‘never again' in the choice of a man whose whole personality and way of working are in dramatic contrast to the distant, dictatorial von Karajan, who died on 16 July.
The orchestra, extremely democratically-run and independent-minded, was bruised, strained and a little anxious about its standards after clashes with the great maestro, who at the same time had spent less and less time with it.
In a first round of voting during the summer, and then during their closed-doors assembly at a secret spot in Berlin yesterday, the musicians came out in favour of a likeable man who has worked well with all kinds of orchestras, and who is diplomatic rather than autocratic.
While von Karajan created his own personality cult — which added greatly to the orchestra's prestige and earnings — Abbado is modest, unassuming and hates publicity.
Von Karajan had been a member of the Nazi party, and saw no reason publicly to mourn musicians who had been persecuted; Abbado by contrast is a left-winger whose mother was imprisoned by the Nazis for hiding a Jewish child.
Curiously, Abbado is succeeding the man who gave him his first big break.
In 1965 von Karajan spotted his talent and invited him to conduct the Vienna Philharmonic at his Salzburg Festival.
He then rose rapidly to become chief conductor at La Scala, Milan, and later became musical director of the London Symphony Orchestra and, for the past three years, of the Vienna State Opera.
Tory leaders hope to sell softer image
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
MINISTERS HAVE opened a concerted campaign to sell a softer government image in a belated attempt to pre-empt rank-and-file revolt at this week's Conservative conference in Blackpool.
Kenneth Baker, the party chairman, said yesterday that Cabinet ministers would play a stronger role in government than they had done over the last decade, and there would have to be public spending increases in the 1990s to pay for an improved quality of life.
He also said Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, had made a mistake when he pumped too much money into the economy after the 1987 stock market crash.
Those three points are bound to be read as concessions to public opinion, given a series of weekend polls putting Labour as far as 11 points ahead of the Conservatives.
Last week's successful Labour conference, which coincided with the 1-point increase in interest rates, will have further dented Margaret Thatcher's confidence in the run-up to Blackpool.
But the ultimate test of government credibility will be taken after this week's conference, when backbench Conservative dissidents decide whether to put up a ‘stalking horse’ challenger to Margaret Thatcher's leadership of the party next month.
Some senior party sources believe that a ‘kamikaze’ candidate could attract as many as 70 votes from disaffected MPs — paving the way for a fully-fledged contest next year.
An Observer/Harris poll said yesterday that 58 per cent of its sample thought Mrs Thatcher should retire before the next election, including 15 per cent of Conservative voters.
On the economic front, the latest Dun and Bradstreet survey of UK business, carried out before last week's increase in interest rates to 15 per cent, warned that the British economy was on the brink of a ‘major slowdown’ as high-interest policies produced a dramatic downturn in confidence.
Moves to monitor use of statistics by Government
By ROSIE WATERHOUSE
THE ROYAL Statistical Society is to consider setting up an independent council to monitor the Government's use of statistics and research in a climate of growing concern about political interference.
The society also decided, at a council meeting last week, to compile, over the next three months, a dossier of cases of alleged misuse by government departments and ministers, to establish whether there is evidence to back up anecdotal claims that the integrity of government statistics is being undermined.
Miron Straf, the director of the Committee on National Statistics in Washington, which monitors and reviews US government statistics, is to be invited to address the Royal Statistical Society (RSS) on how his organisation operates and how a similar group could be established in Britain.
The decisions follow two recent cases over which the Government was widely criticised — the Prime Minister's refusal to fund a survey of sexual behaviour to further research about the spread of Aids, and a report by the Institute of Fiscal Studies which showed that the Government's new way of counting people in the poorest category of the population had reduced the number by 1 million.
The Government has long been accused by politicians and academics of repeatedly changing the way the unemployment figures are counted to reduce the total.
Earlier this year there were calls for a public inquiry into the Government's use of statistics and constraints on research, from the social statistics section of the RSS, from the Association of Social Research Organisations and from the Social Research Association.
This followed the publication of a book called Facing the Figures, by the Radical Statistics Health Group, and a television documentary, in the series ‘Dispatches’, which said the Government was ‘cooking the books’ and misleading the public over issues such as unemployment, poverty and the health service.
The idea for a national committee to act as an independent watchdog has been proposed behind the scenes by Sir David Cox, one of the world's most eminent statisticians.
Now Warden of Nuffield College, Oxford, he is a former president of the RSS and last year chaired a government committee on the spread of Aids.
Backing is being sought from influential colleagues including Sir John Kingman, Vice-Chancellor of Bristol University, who was president of the RSS until earlier this year, and Professor Peter Moore, former principal of the London Business School, the current RSS president.
Neither was prepared to discuss the plans with The Independent.
Sir David is assured of the support of Sir Claus Moser, newly-elected President of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, Warden of Wadham College, Oxford, and a former head of the Government Statistical Service from 1967 to 1978.
Sir Claus said last night: ‘In official statistics and research, nothing is more important than integrity.
Once the public start questioning the integrity of government statistics, they are questioning the integrity of the Government itself.’
28 UDR men arrested in collusion inquiry: IRA prison escape attempt foiled in Belfast as bomb kills officer
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
POLICE ARRESTED 28 members of the Ulster Defence Regiment in an unprecedented series of swoops in and around Belfast yesterday.
More arrests are expected in other areas of Northern Ireland as investigations continue into collusion between security force personnel and loyalist paramilitary groups.
Last night police said that four of those arrested would appear in court this morning charged under the Firearms Act.
Others would be the subject of reports to the Director of Public Prosecutions and the authorities.
Some of those arrested were released last night, but most were believed to be still in custody at RUC interrogation centres in Belfast and Armagh, held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, the Official Secrets Act and common law.
In other incidents, an RUC superintendent died in a bombing and a major IRA prison escape attempt was foiled in Belfast.
Supt Alwyn Harris, 51, was killed yesterday morning when an IRA boobytrap bomb exploded underneath his car as he drove with his wife to church.
His wife escaped with her life and was treated for shock.
The murder was widely condemned.
Mr Harris, a sub-divisional commander based in the Co Down area, was on sick leave following a heart attack.
The prison break-out attempt took place at Crumlin Road jail in Belfast on Saturday, but failed after police discovered a large bomb nearby.
Another bomb, together with a quantity of ammunition, was later discovered inside the prison as a large-scale search operation was launched.
The bomb contained 4lb of Semtex.
A series of hijackings and bomb hoaxes in the west of the city was apparently designed to act as a diversion as a mass escape was made.
Four men from west Belfast were arrested close to the jail.
The wave of arrests of UDR men took place yesterday morning as part of the investigation into security force collusion.
The inquiry is headed by John Stevens, the Deputy Chief Constable of Cambridgeshire.
The move is unprecedented: a substantial number of security force members have in the past been charged and convicted of terrorist-type offences, but never before has such a number been picked up for questioning at one time.
According to security sources, a UDR man recently charged with serious terrorist offences has made a series of detailed statements to police naming other members of the regiment as being involved in illegal activities.
His information may form the basis of some of the arrests.
A statement from the Stevens team said a number of photo-montages and some ammunition had been found during searches of the homes of UDR members.
The operation was directed by the team backed by 300 RUC officers.
The move follows the recent series of leaks to the media demonstrating that loyalist terrorists had access to confidential security force files and photographs on suspected republican activists.
The scale of the exercise will be seen as confirming suspicions that the number of security force personnel involved in collusion is substantial.
The UDR, which is predominantly Protestant, has traditionally been regarded with distrust by many nationalists.
Suspicions will now be increased that the regiment has been penetrated by a network of loyalist paramilitary supporters and sympathisers.
The arrests will have several political effects.
The authorities may contend that they demonstrate their determination to find extremists in the ranks.
On the other hand, it will be argued that the large number of arrests points to a malaise of such dimensions that it cannot completely be dealt with by a police investigation and that a wider inquiry is called for.
Political reactions within Northern Ireland differed yesterday.
Peter Robinson, the Democratic Unionist Party's deputy leader, described the arrests as a publicity stunt designed to appease the UDR's critics.
The Unionist MP Ken Maginnis, a former UDR member, said: ‘What I hope is not happening is that people who — as I would have had in my time — had montages for lawful and necessary purposes will be made scapegoats.’
The SDLP's deputy leader, Seamus Mallon, said: ‘The question is — is this for the optics or is it for real?’