

RADIO /No laughing matter
By ROBERT HANKS
COMEDIANS are supposed to work better with an audience.
Not always though: witness the strange, sad case of Arnold Brown and Company (Radio 4, Saturday), a series which slips neatly into the BBC tradition of vaguely funny cabaret.
Much of Arnold Brown's strength as a stand-up comedian lies in his eyebrows, a pair of fat black, hyperactive caterpillars.
On radio, metaphorically shorn of them, he is also shorn of that strength.
More seriously, his understated, meditative style is lost: the impression is that his timing is fine, the audience's is all wrong: ‘I was talking to someone at a party the other night…he happened to mention that he was reading Virginia Woolf's letters.
I gave him a real dressing-down.’
This is not a particularly good joke, but it was delivered neatly.
Not a snigger to suggest that anybody in the audience even knew this was a joke.
‘The cheek,’ Brown added.
(Silence.)
‘The absolute cheek.’
(Lone snigger.)
‘Reading somebody else's mail.’
(Audience catches on: laughter.
But not very loud.)
The effect of this is, curiously for a man who claims to have been ejected from the Library Theatre in Manchester for being overdue with his punchlines, to slow things down.
Brown isn't a man with a big punch; it's those telling body-blows that sap your opponent, plus some sly head-butts in the clinch.
Put him in the ring with an audience that you can't see, and he seems to be delivering butterfly-taps.
The Law Game (Radio 2, Tuesday) also has an audience response problem, perhaps because the format is tired; after all, it is in its fourteenth series.
The way it works is this: Shaw Taylor introduces three short scenes in which actors have rows, go to industrial tribunals, issue death threats and so forth.
If necessary, Shaw then adds details (who sued whom), and a panel of celebrities is asked who won and why, or who got sent down and for how long.
The Law Game suffers uniquely by its audience: you know that they are there, because they applaud at the beginning.
But after that, every joke belly-flops into silence.
Well, almost every joke: when celebrity panellist Duggie Brown said ‘backside’, how they roared!
The flatness is a shame, because this is a public service: you can glean from the programme an idea both of how irrational the law can be, and of how flimsy most people's understanding of it is.
I had meant to give a detailed critique of the interaction between performers and studio audience in You Asked For It (Tuesday, Radio 4), a comedy improvisation game produced by the ‘Cardiff Comedy Explosion’ and introduced by a shy man called Luke Sorba.
After 10 minutes of this week's edition I was too embarrassed to go on listening.
It is really very dull.
That comedians work better with an audience is also one of the more convincing justifications for democracy.
Peter Hennessy is conducting a brief series of interviews with ex-prime ministers, on the theme of Premiership (Radio 3, Wednesday).
This week, he put a good case for regarding Alec Douglas-Home, Lord Home of the Hirsel, as one of the most under-rated comedians of the last 30 years.
Lord Home belied his reputation for laziness — the commonly-held view of the elder statesman, as the British prototype for Ronald Reagan, didn't hold water: up and working at 6.30 every morning, even if he did spend uncommon amounts of time in trout streams.
It was a great shock to him, though, after years in the House of Lords, to encounter once more the bear-garden of the Commons: he was unprepared for the shock of the sheer weight of noise from the opposition benches (which were more crowded in those days).
But what undermined him in office, and made him worth hearing out of it, was his surprise at becoming Prime Minister in the first place — Rab Butler shared that — so that, he agreed, he never quite suppressed a sense of the absurdity of his position.
There's a case for bringing back those old style Tory values.
TYPOGRAPHY /The writing on the wall: Tanya Harrod looks at the importance of lettering, in the light of a new exhibition at Portsmouth
By TANYA HARROD
WHEN IT comes to lettering, everyone is a bit of an expert; most of us intuitively respond to the message of a particular typeface.
Edward Johnston's 1915 sanserif lettering for the Underground still strikes an efficient modern note amidst the dirt and gloom.
Similarly the Faber book-jackets, designed by Berthold Wolpe in the 1960s employing his own typeface Albertus, convey a sense of literary energy and creativity.
So do the Gollancz wrappers of the 1930s and beyond with an audacious mixture of typefaces printed on glaring yellow paper.
And at the moment you are reading a typeface called Dutch, a sharper version of Times New Roman.
Twentieth-century artists as diverse as Klee, Miro, Jackson Pollock and Mark Tobey, inspired by the apparent freedom of Oriental calligraphy, have invented new alphabets and made abstract art with letter shapes.
The neo-Romantic poet and painter David Jones drew on an eclectic range of writing styles to create a whole series of semi-private painted inscriptions.
Artists like these, however, whose influence on lettering has been a liberating one, are not to be found in The Spirit of the Letter at Portsmouth City Museum and Art Gallery.
This is essentially a crafts-and design-based exhibition that does not attempt to give a European or transatlantic overview.
Still, while it does not pretend to be comprehensive, The Spirit of the Letter manages to provoke many questions about the protean and varied role of lettering, from typography to bravura calligraphy, public inscriptions to computer-generated letter forms.
Calligraphy — which literally translates as ‘beautiful writing’— bears the same relationship to typography as post and lintel architecture does to the classical orders.
Purists would argue that type cannot be intelligently designed unless the creator understands the calligraphic origin of the thin and broad parts of most typefaces.
Certainly Johnston, Wolpe and Eric Gill, the authors of some of the finest modern typefaces, possessed considerable writing or inscriptional skills.
On the other hand, Stanley Morison, responsible for the typographical identity of The Times in the 1930s, was not an adroit penman — he simply had an unerring eye for good typefaces and strong composition.
The same might be said of Neville Brody whose typography for The Face owes more to computer-operated typesetting than to calligraphy.
Unaccountably, he is absent from this exhibition.
The Spirit of the Letter pays a good deal of attention to the vellum /scribe /fine penmanship side of the lettering question.
But the mainstream of calligraphy used to be a movement that firmly set modernism aside and as a result virtually vanished as a serious art school discipline after the 1960s.
This is a pity.
The problem is as much to do with content as with form.
Whose words deserve expensive risk-taking with black inks, gold leaf and vellum?
At Portsmouth, Lily Lee creatively amplifies a passage from Machiavelli's The Prince, inscribing a chilling statement in a bold agitated hand.
But many calligraphers inhabit a gentler world and are happy to embellish prettily texts of staggering banality.
Arguably this problem of content lies at the heart of the whole lettering question.
It is an abstract art, which we none the less consume as readers rather than as connoisseurs of pure form.
And when it comes to content, the key public commission since the war must be the eight New Testament inscriptions in Basil Spence's Coventry Cathedral.
Whatever else may be said about the Cathedral's architecture and its glass and its sculpture, no one would dispute the success of Ralph Beyer's contributions, known as The Tablets of the Word and cut in Hollington stone on a grand scale.
Beyer's background is cosmopolitan and his sources have always been varied — German expressionist typography, the early Christian inscriptions in the catacombs, the art of David Jones.
The texts themselves are inspirational, but Beyer's lettering style for this commission, which treated each letter as a piece of incised sculpture in its own right, greatly adds to their declamatory power.
Are we likely to see anything on the scale of the Coventry commission again?
This was clearly a response to the devastation of war but in general the public commissions that have provided work for our artist craftsmen and women since then have tended to be bland and factual.
In that sense the talents of such fine letter-cutters as David and Richard Kindersley, Bryant Fedden, Sara More, Tom Perkins, Alec Peever, David Holgate, Michael Harvey and many others are being under-used.
It is partly up to them to break free of their role as craftsmen and craftswomen working to order and to surprise us, as Ralph Beyer consistently does, with lapidary writing that operates as a literary form with a sculptural presence.
The career of the Scottish artist Ian Hamilton Finlay demonstrates what can happen when secular public inscriptions go beyond the formulaic.
He has elevated inscriptions to a new seriousness because the wording of his own work is not bland and ranges from the delphic to the painfully controversial.
The public inscription, like public sculpture, is in a tricky political position today.
The way forward may be a modest one.
‘Poetry on the Underground’, that much-loved project developed by the London College of Printing, suggests the realistic possibilities for uplifting collective reading.
In these days of decline in public provision, these little posters are perhaps the best we can hope for.
The Spirit of the Letter: A Celebration of Lettering and Calligraphy in Britain Today continues at the Portsmouth City Museum and Art Gallery until 12 November and then tours nationally.
THEATRE /Contrary to nature: Randall Stevenson on John Pope's production of Macbeth at the Citizens' Theatre in Glasgow
By JOHN POPE
UNNATURAL troubles, in John Pope's extraordinary production, dominate the stage long before any unnatural deeds by Macbeth himself.
Hecate immediately warns the audience, in a speech displaced to the opening, that it is confronted by a chaotic world in which Scotland does not even stand where it did.
Some Armageddon has wiped away landscape and locale, leaving only a hurricane-stricken desolation, blasted by a huge wind-machine on the stage.
Nature, we learn, has long since sickened and died.
The ‘leafy screens’ of Birnam Wood are merely sets of plastic riot-shields.
The only traces of bladed corn are machine-produced, a flickering film projected onstage showing sunshine, harvest and children, blotted out by Macbeth's huge shadow on the screen.
Description of Dunsinane as a pleasant seat, of sweet and nimble air, is made laughable by a set entirely walled in antiseptic silver foil, lit by fluorescent tubes and peopled by actors swathed in chemical- yellow protective clothing, carrying gas-masks.
The astonishingly monochrome, synthetic quality of the set is modified only occasionally by the saturating splashes of blood-sachets, perfunctorily punctured over the bodies of the slain.
Such a comprehensively de-natured environment is, ironically, most nearly escaped through Macbeth's most unnatural deed.
Murder of Duncan briefly shocks him back into some half-remembered humane responses, though these quickly dwindle again in renewed surfeits of horror.
Elsewhere, even such fragile respite is rare, the production deleting all possibilities of redemption or relief.
The porter's speech disappears, for example; and Malcolm is at least as ugly and graceless as the tyrant he replaces.
The supernatural is as numbed as the natural: equipped with microphone headsets and miniature televisions, the witches are played as suave technocrats, moving among humanity with invisible malice, sometimes doubling as murderers.
Only in the language — spoken with clarity throughout, especially by Simon Tyrrell as Macbeth, and Peter Granger-Taylor as Ross — does any slight consolation remain.
Across ashen, unredeemable scenes, Shakespeare's words resound with redoubled force and humanity; they sound almost ironic, in their fruitless reaching towards the images and emotions which have drained away from a soulless, monochrome universe.
There are times when this universe seems excessively, even arbitrarily, bleak.
Like Peter Brook's Endgame-inspired King Lear in the Sixties, this Macbeth takes the risk of narrowing the play's potential dramatic range in order to create a particular emphasis.
Limited scope exists for actors to develop individual characters: there is little room, in particular, to explore tensions between the sympathy and horror that Macbeth's conflicts can elicit in an audience.
Any loss in emotional or dramatic range, however, is generally compensated for by the fearsome intensity of the vision that results, and the compelling stylishness with which it is communicated.
Moving, like the witches, with confident, implacable force, the Citizens' creates a Macbeth machine to assault a Scottish audience's expectations of this most familiar of Shakespeare's plays, leaving it, by the end, thoroughly drained and disturbed.
MUSIC /Marriage of true minds: The Marriage of Figaro -Theatre Royal, Glasgow
By WILMA PATERSON
AFTER THE considerable controversy following Di Trevis's production of The Merry Widow, Scottish Opera's current Marriage of Figaro, which opened at the Theatre Royal in Glasgow on Thursday, is unlikely to cause offence or rouse strong passions.
Lynn Binstock's direction (the original version was by John Cox) was unprovocative, almost workmanlike, and the production one in which the music and the characterisation were of paramount importance — I certainly discovered fresh beauties and subtleties in the score, which was carefully conducted and nicely paced by a youthful Justin Brown.
Designer John Byrne is probably better known for his stage plays and quirky graphics than for his stage sets, and his work generally has a sardonic and ironic quality eminently suited to Figaro.
Oddly enough, these characteristics were almost wholly lacking in his cleverly designed sets, which were, none the less, imaginative and alluring, and still perfectly in keeping with this lyrical production.
The Countess's bedroom, a sumptuous penthouse in warm, mellow terracotta tones, made a pleasing backdrop to Susanna and Figaro's charming costumes of palest khaki and cream, while the garden of Act Four was a ravishing grotto of drooping, glittering foliage.
Only the odd prop — a portrait or an eloquent statue — and a touch of the grotesque in an otherwise comely chorus, suggested an idiosyncratic personality.
A tale of female cunning and male oppression, sexual intrigue and jealousy, of true love and forgiveness, the political undertones of the original Beaumarchais play are forgotten, but the social and sexual implications of the Da Ponte libretto are still completely relevant and were accentuated in this production by some sensitive casting.
Singing was uniformly excellent.
Jason Howard was very human and charming as Figaro, suitably ironic too, and well matched by a youthful, fetching and amply-toned Susanna (Rosa Mannion).
The Count and Countess both looked and sounded good, though Stephen Page's portrayal of a habitual seducer was less than convincing.
Mozart's perception and understanding of the female psyche is especially illuminating in this piece and Jane Leslie MacKenzie's sad and tense characterisation of the Countess was extremely plausible, if lacking in the real sense of fun which the lady must have had in order to be drawn into the intrigues in the first place.
Clare Shearer, looking rather too much like the Principal Boy of the pantomime, gave an attractive performance as Cherubino — not quite as breathless and impetuous as I would have liked from this juvenile Don Giovanni — but it is very difficult to get used to hearing the immortal Non so piu cosa son sung in translation.
It is Scottish Opera policy to present their operas in English, and while this can make lengthy recitatives comprehensible to those of us whose Italian is less than fluent, I can see no other advantage.
But there was nothing jarring in Michael Irwin's English version.
Stock buffo characters Marcellina and Bartolo (Ann Howard and David Gwynne) added lightness and comedy to what could be described as a serious interpretation of The Marriage of Figaro, not as effervescent as some would have liked but thoroughly convincing just the same — and one in which the complex ensemble were particularly memorable.
The Marriage of Figaro can be seen in Glasgow on 19 and 21 October 19 on 5 and 7 December, with performances in Edinburgh, Newcastle, Aberdeen and Inverness in November.
MUSIC /Twisted tales: La Finta Giardiniera — Grand Theatre, Leeds
By JULIAN RUSHTON
EVEN WITH half a dozen arias omitted, the Opera North production of Mozart's La Finta Giardiniera makes a long evening, three and a half hours including interval.
That it never seems boring is due first, of course, to the richness of the youthful Mozart's music; but given the fantastical convolutions of the story even that might not be enough.
It is the high quality of musical performance, as well as the staging, which somehow make what might have been a curiosity into an entertaining and disturbing theatrical experience.
The production was first given at the Theatre Royal in York, yet it transfers very well to the larger auditorium of the Grand.
The expanses of green still dominate the set, the lighting gains in intensity, and this time the scene-change during Act Two was mercifully quite quiet.
The violence done to Tom Cairns's inventive set, like the aftermath of an explosion, is an apt symbol of the turmoil in the characters' brains.
Tim Albery's production takes this weird eighteenth-century fantasy of nobles, bourgeois, and servants, all of whom finally settle for marrying their own class, and instils it with Fuselian surrealism.
The result is a genuine triumph, thanks to a troupe of singers, the same cast as at York, willing to give their best in attitudes ranging from completely recumbent to perilous perching on ladder or chaise-longue; dragging themselves around on all fours and wrapping themselves in curtains; and generally behaving as though the entire cast (not just the noble lovers, as in the script) is ripe for the psychiatrist's couch.
In the title role, Anne Dawson remained passive until error and madness set in near the end; then she sang with increased energy, and spun her lines with great beauty.
Mozart wrote the part of Ramiro for a castrato, perhaps expecting greater power than Katherine Steffan conveyed, at least until the final aria when this previously rational character loses his cool.
With the exception of Paul Nilon's delightfully zany Count Belfiore, the principal roles were in some danger of being upstaged by the slightly lesser ones (Nilon is not to blame if it remains incredible that any woman, let alone two, should fall in love with such a bizarre creature).
Linda Kitchen excelled as the housekeeper who fails to marry her master, Peter Savidge as the dogged servant of the heroine who finally gets his girl.
Nigel Robson, tall and pompous, became wonderfully enraged as the Mayor; while Juliet Booth, ill on the first night at York but now displaying her fine voice and musicianship to the full, mixed honey and gall as the spoiled and fickle Arminda.
The singers received buoyant if occasionally untidy support from a classically sized and seated orchestra under that excellent Mozartian Alan Hacker.