

Deutsche Bank in UK launch
By JULIAN RUSHTON
DEUTSCHE BANK, the giant German banking group, will today make a move into the British fund management market, launching Deutsche Bank Capital Management (UK), an institutional fund manager.
The move follows the expansion of Deutsche Bank's unit trsut operation, DWS, into the UK in April.
DBCM is an offshoot of Deutsche Bank Capital Management International, founded in 1983 to offer fund management primarily to international companies with operations in West Germany.
It is headed by a Britain, Bill Richards, who was formerly a director of Sun Life, and has offices in New York and Tokyo.
Currently the parent has around $3bn of funds under management, 70 per cent of which is invested in West Germany.
Outlook: Timing more at fault than policy
By JULIAN RUSHTON
There was a hint of panic in the air yesterday, as though the markets suddenly realised that the grapeshot fired by the authorities last week might be heading in their direction.
Weekend talk of policy rifts at the highest level and of impending recession, and a perception that the Government is most reluctant to raise interest rates again, caused sterling to collapse to its lowest against the Deutschemark since the celebrated events of March last year.
These concerns in turn took their toll of equities, which in any case are increasingly being supported by institutional cashflow rather than expectations of company profits.
In the circumstances factory gate prices, which could be interpreted as showing that demand had hardly relaxed, and input prices which underlined the inflationary danger posed by a weaker pound deepened the gloom Yet it was mainly the timing, not the policy, which was to blame.
Trying to plug the hole in the dyke with reserves and then appearing to react to, instead of pre-empting, a widely-anticipated rise in German interest rates, left the impression that the authorities were tailing behind events.
This sense of a loss of control has demoralised the markets more than any other factor.
In two short years the Government has seemed to lose its grip, and that disturbs financial markets.
The evidence of deep concern, if not panic, was the universal reaction to go short of sterling and equities yesterday, and interest rate futures gave little sign of a remission.
Yet the markets may have over-reacted even more than usual.
Evidence of a rift between the Prime Minister and the Chancellor, such as precipitated last year's Deutschemark crisis, is pretty sparse.
The timing question aside, there appears to have been basic agreement between Mrs Thatcher and Mr Lawson on the need to defend sterling.
Whether interest rates or intervention were the chosen instru ment, and in what combination, was probably a secondary question.
As it happens, intervention might at least have tided the Government through the Conservative Party conference had the Bundesbank not intervened.
In March last year, moroever, the German currency was weaker than it is now.
So an exchange rate of fewer than DM3 to the pound today might not be so inconsistent in market terms.
In policy terms, however, it does nothing to diminish fears of another interest rate rise.
The risk is that the markets are perilously close to ensuring that the grapeshot comes straight up Lombard Street in a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Outlook: Ferranti's catch-22
By JULIAN RUSHTON
Solutions to the Ferranti crisis are not going to be easy to find despite the way in which the company has been inundated with offers of help.
Three alternatives face Sir Derek Alun-Jones, Ferranti's beleaguered chairman, all fraught with difficulties.
The first — a rights issue — looks unrealistic.
With Ferranti needing to raise a minimum of £150m in new equity, the issue would have to be on the basis of one for two.
Ferranti is looking increasingly isolated in the UK defence electronics scene and it is difficult to see the institutions tolerating such an exercise or forgiving lightly the management for the International Signal and Control takeover.
Sir Derek's preference is to bring in some friendly Continental company such as Daimler-Benz of West Germany as a substantial minority shareholder, leaving Ferranti with a share quote and at least a semblance of independence.
But it would be equally difficult for the institutions to countenance such an outcome.
They would rather mount their own bid.
This leaves only one realistic option a full scale takeover.
But anyone who launches a bid for Ferranti will want to be sure there are no more black holes lurking in the company's books.
And many of the potential suitors for Ferranti face complex and in some cases insurmountable government objections.
British Aerospace, the lead British contender, may have the backing of the Department of Trade and Industry but it is almost certain to face fierce opposition from the Ministry of Defence.
A further problem is that a BAe takeover would strengthen German objections to Ferranti winning the radar contract for the European Fighter Aircraft since it would mean BAe gaining a disproportionately large share of the total project.
Thomson CSF of France is also big in radar.
One thing is certain.
Not much would be served at this stage by ousting Sir Derek Alun-Jones as chairman, as some shareholders would like.
Though Sir Derek must ultimately carry management responsibility for the mess ISC has got the company into, it would prove difficult to find someone better to sort it out if only because any newcomer would have to spend so long in getting to grips with the problems.
Outlook: The EC spirit of compromise
By JULIAN RUSHTON
After last month's stormy meeting in Luxembourg, when EC member nations could not agree on a common approach to takeover regulation and supervision, John Redwood, the new junior minister at the DTI, will propose a compromise when the ministers gather tomorrow.
The problem was that the EC is split between the smaller countries which want the Commission to review a takeover when combined turnover of the two companies involved exceeds Ecu2bn (about £1.4bn); and the larger ones, like the UK, France and Germany, who think a Ecu5bn threshold is sufficient.
The reasons for the split are understandable.
Denmark, Belgium and the Irish Republic want to protect their domestic industry from foreign predators, and regard the EC as their protector.
The bigger nations, for their part, have already developed systems of takeover supervision, and do not want to be encumbered with another layer of M&A bureaucracy.
The compromise works neatly.
The smaller members, who would normally be defending a bid, will be able to surrender jurisdiction to the EC on any bid above the Ecu2bn threshold; the larger ones will still adhere to the Ecu5bn limit.
The formula seems a good halfway house, and has the saving grace that it avoids another row by commanding EC unanimity.
The position of the UK merger authorities, the OFT and the MMC, as arbiter of most domestic takeovers would remain almost unchanged.
European mega-bids would fall under EC review in current circumstances anyway.
Two potentially problematic areas remain.
The German authorities want, in certain sensitive sectors such as defence and electronics, to retain a final sanction over mergers, which would work against the spirit of a single Euromerger policy.
The French, for their part, are promoting the idea of a ‘Euro-champion’ to take on the US and Japanese world leaders.
This would require that, in certain cases, a merger should be allowed even when it gives a combined share of more than 25 per cent of the European market.
These two issues will test the EC's new found spirit of compromise.
Pearl under siege in insurance revolution: This insurer may have done too little too late to preserve its independence
By JOHN MOORE
FOR THE last 10 years or so the British insurance community has attracted an enormous amount of takeover activity.
In the late 1970s British insurance brokers were takeover targets of their larger rivals in the United States.
Then, in the 1980s, overseas financial groups have had large British insurance companies within their sights, which has led to aggressively fought takeovers.
The wave of acquisitions has been prompted by expansionist desires among the overseas financial groups, which see opportunities to increase market share and provide themselves, in the case of the acquisition of insurance companies, with new marketing and product design arms.
In some cases, overseas groups have just taken speculative shareholdings in British insurance companies in the hope that their interest may flush out other buyers.
The latest, and the largest of the takeovers came last week with the offer of £1.1bn by Australian Mutual Provident, Australia's largest life insurance company, for Pearl Group, a leading British life insurer.
Why Australian Mutual Provident wants the Pearl, which is fighting the bid, is not entirely clear to the City.
All City insurance analysts believe that in any event Australian Mutual will not get the Pearl for the 605p per share bid that it has made.
Pearl's share price stands at 648p as hopes mount in the market that the Australian's interest will flush out a more determined bidder which will offer more.
Pearl has the unenviable reputation of being one of the more sleepy members within a sector not noted for a dynamic approach.
Founded in 1864, the group has maintained its image as a typical home service company, with a mixture of ordinary and industrial branch life business and general insurance business sold through a field force of up to 6,500 individuals, second only in terms of size to the Prudential's of more than 12,000.
As a home service company, or so called‘industrial’ life insurer, it has specialised in arranging policies and collecting premiums on a door-to-door basis, with its sales force collecting small amounts of money on comparatively small life insurance policies.
These policies have, in many cases, been taken out by individuals on low incomes merely to provide for the cost of funeral expenses.
But regulatory and structural upheavals in the City ahead of and after the ‘big bang’ in the British securities markets of 1986 have sparked a revolution within the life insurance industry that the Pearl has often found difficult to keep up with.
Other life insurers sought to increase their distribution networks, either increasing their branches or their personnel in a variety of ways in order to market their products in increasingly competitive environments.
The mighty Prudential and other life insurers bought chains of estate agencies.
The Pearl did not.
The Pearl's decision not to buy estate agencies, with hindsight, may look smart in the wake of the collapse of the housing market but it was failing to take advantage of other changes.
Other life insurers were forging closer links with building societies, who were choosing, under the new regulatory regime, to market the products of only one life insurance company, in accordance with new regulatory requirements.
While the Legal & General established marketing outlets with 19 building societies, the Pearl only established a mortgage facility arrangement with the Alliance & Leicester.
Standard Life, Norwich Union and Friends Provident forged ‘tied’ links with, respectively, the Halifax, Leeds Permanent and Abbey National, three of the largest building societies in the country.
Now building societies are the preferred choice of many customers for purchasing life insurance.
Management of the Pearl is led by Eionion Holland, the executive chairman, and Nigel Proddow, the chief general manager, who have 36 years of experience each with the Pearl.
Both actuaries have tried to turn the Pearl in other directions, taking advantage of the personal pensions boom, and developing the group's general insurance business, which suffered a rough ride in the early 1970s before they took charge of the group six years ago.
Their efforts may be too little too late to ensure that the Pearl maintains its independence.
But whether Pearl's new masters will be AMP is another matter.
Collapsed bank depositors get first payout
From TONY FARAGHER in the Isle of Man
SOME 4,000 depositors who lost £42m in one of Britain's biggest bank crashes are to receive their first interim payment following an £11.7m judgment against fugitive city financier Jim Raper in the Manx Chancery Court yesterday.
Barrister David Ashton, acting for the liquidators of the Isle of Man Savings and Investment Bank, told the court that good news was on the way for the mostly small depositors, many of whom lost their life savings when the Douglas-based bank collapsed seven years ago.
‘There is no reason now why there should not be an interim payment made to the unsecured creditors,’ he said.
The Savings and Investment Bank, said to be owned by property developer Victor Gray, closed its doors in July 1982 having given massive loan facilities.
One of these was said to be a £5m loan to Raper's master company, the Hong Kong and Netherlands based Gasco Group.
This was given nine months before the bank collapsed and financed Gasco's takeover of Cornish tin mining company St Piran.
When the bank went into liquidation repayment was demanded and Raper immediately started a £15m action for damages, saying it was being called in earlier than agreed.
A long-running legal wrangle ensued with Gasco assets ultimately being frozen and a court undertaking secured from St Piran not to reduce its UK assets below £7m, sufficient to cover the SIB claim.
This undertaking was given to the High Court in London but in March last year Vice Chancellor Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson found Raper and the man described as his ‘sidekick’, Douglas Allen, guilty of the ‘most deliberate and serious’ contempts.
Both were accused of aiding and abetting the transfer abroad of £2.6m of St Piran assets in breach of the undertaking.
Raper was jailed for two years and Allen for six months, Sir Nicolas saying it was one of the most serious contempts he had ever come across.
Mr Ashton told yesterday's hearing that neither man had served a day of his sentence as both had been out of the jurisdiction.
Raper's last known address was Quezon City in the Philippines though he is now thought to be in Switzerland.
His clients had pressed ahead with the claim against his companies and Mr Ashton told the Manx judge, John Corrin, that the matter had been settled out of court and Raper was prepared to admit judgment for £11.7m, which would be paid into a firm of local advocates.
This, he said, would clear the way for an interim repayment to the depositors, and although there were some small administration problems, he saw no reason why this should not be done in the ‘near future’.
He said that although Raper and his ‘henchman’, Allen, had unlawfully exported large sums of money out of the UK's jurisdiction, by the terms of the agreement the bank liquidators would take no voluntary part in any subsequent proceedings relating to the contempt charges.
After the judgment, Mr Ashton was approached by a group of irate depositors and questioned about the return of their money.
He told them that around £10m of the lost cash had been recovered and a payment of this would be made.
Brokers ‘unable to meet VAT deadline’
By CLARE DOBIE, Deputy City Editor
CONCERN is growing that a number of stockbrokers will be unable to meet a January deadline for VAT changes which are expected to reduce the cost of share dealing.
The changes follow the adoption in July this year of the Eighteenth EC directive.
H M Customs and Excise confirmed yesterday that they had to be implemented by 1 January 1990.
The changes should reduce investors's costs because VAT will no longer be payable on commissions paid to stockbrokers.
They also affect management fees paid to unit trust managers.
Though a draft directive has been circulating since 1984 it passed its final stages rapidly.
The International Stock Exchange has called for more time to implement the changes but so far it has had little success.
Andrew Ball, of Spicers & Oppenheim, accountants to the Stock Exchange, said yesterday: ‘1 January is impossible and there will be widespread default.’
Stockbrokers and unit trust managers have to decide how much of the VAT saving they can pass on to investors.
While they will no longer have to charge investors VAT at 15 per cent, they will no longer be entitled to recover the VAT they spend on services bought in.
This reduces the benefit of the change to investors.
This suggests the net saving may be nearer 10 per cent.
Paul Masters of BZW, the stockbroking arm of Barclays Bank, said it was too early to say what reductions in commission rates would be possible.
As well as deciding on new commission rates, firms will have to make extensive changes to their computer systems.
Commodities
By CLARE DOBIE, Deputy City Editor
STERLING hung like a pall over commodity markets which have been growing more gloomy for their own reasons in recent months.
But copper, the major London Metal Exchange contract still to be denominated in pounds, did benefit.
Cash LME copper jumped by £54.50 a tonne, helped by persistent buying in New York and concern about political pressure to close the Ok Tedi mine in Papua New Guinea.
A fall of 1,400 tonnes in LME copper stocks, to 102,875 tonnes, also supported the market.
Coffee, however, enjoyed no such support.
The inconclusive end to a fortnight's talks at the International Coffee Organisation further depressed the market.
On the London Fox the January contract collapsed to £636 a tonne, its lowest since the great Brazilian frost of 1975.
The contract later recovered, but signs that producers are selling coffee to maintain market share and income are likely to push prices down further.
Accross the London Fox floor, cocoa remained dominated by strong positions in the December contract.
Cocoa for delivery that month traded at a premium of £36 a tonne to March, the next contract month, about £10 a tonne more than on Friday.
Technology: Radio paging about to go international
By MARY FAGAN
RADIO paging across the world is becoming a reality with the introduction of ‘frequency agile’ pagers which can listen in to the frequencies used by different countries.
Like most radio services, paging is limited by the regulatory authorities' allocation of frequencies, which tend to differ from country to country.
But British Telecom Mobile Communications is introducing a transatlantic paging service based on frequency-hopping technology — the first on which the same pager can used in either the UK or the US.
The service is being launched through Metrocast, the US operation in which BT has an 80 per cent stake.
Metrocast already needs frequency-agile paging to cope with the fragmented US market, and this is now being extended for British businessmen who travel to the States.
The pagers are alphanumeric — they relay information in the form of words and numbers to a tiny scrolling screen on the pager.
Calls made to the BT bureau in Ealing, west London, will be passed on as usual, taking into account the traveller's schedule and the different time zones he or she encounters along the way.
For anyone who travels regularly to the US, the Metrocast service covering more than 100 cities will cost £45 a month plus an initial fee of £30.
Less frequent travellers can have a transatlantic pager for £48 a week or £144 a month.
From January next year a cross-border paging service will be operated covering the UK, Italy, France and Germany, with the British end operated by the Euromessage consortium.
Euromessage, which includes BT, Air Call, Radal Vodapage, Millicom, InterCity and Digital, has been awarded the UK licence to operate on a particular UHF singled out for the service.
Because all four countries have agreed on one frequency, the ‘agile’ pagers are not needed.
From 1993 a more sophisticated European operation called Ermes — European Radio Messaging System — will be introduced.
But by then paging will be in the thick of furious competition in mobile communications.
Digital cordless telephone services — telepoint — are about to start in the UK, and low cost personal communications networks are due to begin in 1992 or 1993.
Telepoint offers one-way telephone services and PCN is expected to be like an affordable cellular radio, so the need for paging seems dubious.
But, according to Jerry Mooney, group marketing director for BT paging, the cinderella of the mobile communications business still has a bright future.
Pagers are expected to be incorporated into telepoint telephones, offsetting the disadvantage of being able to make only outgoing calls.
Incorporated in PCN handsets, pagers would have the advantage of consuming very little power and would allow the power-hungry PCN telephone to be switched off most of the time.
Psion, the UK manufacturer of handheld and laptop computers, has also announced plans to incorporate pagers into computers.
One thing which could give pagers a new lease of life is miniaturisation.
The Japanese are developing pagers the size of credit cards which could arrive in this country as early as next year.
Technology: European boost for the British Technology Group
By MARY FAGAN
THE BRITISH Technology Group, the UK's technology transfer organisation, is branching out into Europe, patenting and licensing technology from researchers throughout the Continent.
With the possibility of privatisation looming, the BTG has been making strenuous efforts to become an international organisation.
Now the European Institute of Technology — an industrial organisation founded by IBM Europe, AT&T, Enichem, Montedison and Philips — has asked it to handle the intellectual property rights for the scientific projects it supports in European institutions.
The EIT was set up last year to help fund university research which could help underpin the technological base of Europe's industry.
The scheme began with 35 projects funded to the tune of Ecu10,000 each to put forward more detailed proposals.
Now about a dozen or so of those are to go ahead with funds of up to Ecu250,000 a year for three years.
The problem with industry-funded research has always been sorting out the intellectual property rights.
The EIT's policy is to hold the patents for products and processes accruing from its funding and to allow members to licence them.
Royalties are to be distributed between the EIT and the research scientists.
With the institute opening its doors to many more companies and introducing ways for smaller firms to take part, the issue could become complex.
The British Technology Group will be responsible for all patenting and for handling licensing of any technologies which the member companies do not want.
An important role will be deciding what a fair rate of return for the academics should be in any given project.
According to the EIT, funds for research should rise to Ecu5m next year.
The annual subscription for large companies is still Ecu200,000, but companies with sales of up to Ecu8bn can pay Ecu100,000 a year.
The deal is a boost for the BTG, the future of which has been in the balance since the middle of last year.
A Coopers & Lybrand report to the Government on the possibilities of privatisation was delivered in summer 1988, but since then the group has had little indication of what its fate might be.
Technology: Scoring for the boss in extra time
By MARY FAGAN
EMPLOYERS gain almost two hours a week on average from early-bird employees, and only 30 per cent of employees contribute no extra time at all, according to a report by the mobile communications group Phonepoint.
Traffic problems are the single biggest reason why people are late for work, says the report, accounting for one-third of late arrivals, with oversleeping and bus or tube problems accounting for 16 per cent and 9 per cent respectively.
Workers under 35 years are the worst oversleepers, but overall women are more likely to be late than men, the survey found.
Women are also more likely to leave work earlier, although only 15 per cent of people surveyed would admit to leaving early at all.
To be sure of punctuality, firms should employ more people in the over-55 age group, in which three-quarters of businessmen claim to be early almost every day.
Businessmen and women in the North-west and Midlands are more likely to be early than their counterparts in London despite the fact that traffic is apparently not a significantly bigger problem.
FKB moves into US medical promotions
By JERRY CONNOLLY
THE ACQUISITIVE sales promotion company FKB Group has broken into the lucrative US medical promotions market with the $41m (£26m) acquisition of a specialist marketing company.
FKB has bought Audio Visual Medical Marketing Inc and its associated companies Pharmaceutical Services International and Data Medical Communications, collectively known as AVMD.
A key element of the deal means that all senior AVMD staff, including senior partner Jan Robinson, have signed five-year contracts to stay with the group.
FKB is paying for the US group through an initial $3.5m in new shares, with a further $19m funded through loan notes realisable in January.
Future payments totalling $18.5m will depend on average post-tax profits over the next four years.
AVMD made $846,000 pre-tax in 1988 and is warranted as having net assets of at least $1.15m.
Duncan Bain, FKB's joint group chief executive, said: ‘This acquisition will not dilute earnings even in the short term.
‘We expect it to contribute 4.5 per cent of profits, and we base that on our expected group performance of 20 per cent organic growth a year.’
FKB, the UK's largest independent sales promotion company, has over the past 15 months made half a dozen US acquisitions.
Mr Bain, who is in charge of the US operations, said: ‘We didn't have any presence in the specialist medical markets, and pharmaceuticals is a fast-growing business with an ageing Western population and greater choice of drugs to be marketed.
It should not be affected by recession.
‘Any company which has spent hundreds of millions of dollars on developing and testing a drug is not going to wait before bringing it out.’
AVMD helps in this marketing operation and has most of the major US drugs firms on its client list.
Mr Bain hopes FKB's other US companies can pick up business from the non-drugs operations of those clients.
Savage forced to cut nearly 200 staff
By JERRY CONNOLLY
SAVAGE GROUP, the USM quoted DIY retail chain, has dismissed almost 200 of its 1,000 UK staff in the face of a slump that cut earnings per share by a third.
Sales almost doubled from £61.9m to £120m for the year to 30 June, but operating margins fell sharply and pre-tax profits rose just five per cent to £7.29m.
Last-quarter UK sales were hard hit by high interest rates eating into disposable income, a slower housing market, and a fall-off in DIY interest caused by the hot weather.
This year's first quarter sales are still below those of last year in the UK, says David Stephens, Savage's financial director, and there is no sign of a pick-up.
in the market.
‘July and August are normally quiet, but this year has been exceptional and the latest interest rate rise won't help,’ he said.
Savage's interest charges are up from £900,000 to almost £2.4m, and gearing was around 90 per cent of shareholders' funds.
The UK accounts for almost half group turnover, and the European operations, mainly France and Germany ‘are not suffering in the same way as the UK,’ Mr Stephens said.
Company News in Brief 
By JERRY CONNOLLY
W B INDUSTRIES, the fully listed spring manufacturer, is funding three acquisitions and reducing its debt with a £5.75m two-for-five rights issue.
It is buying Elson and Robbins, a seat spring maker, for £4.1m cash and £820,000 in new shares.
Elson and Robbins had a turnover of £15.5m in the year to 31 December compared to WB's £3.6m.
W B shares were suspended at 75p yesterday.
DOWTY GROUP, the high technology electronics to engineering company, has paid $12m (£7.5m) in shares for Palmer Chenard Industries, of New Hampshire, USA.
HEYWOOD WILLIAMS, the aluminium and plastics company, has bought Gloster Plastics, window frame makers, for £2.8m, which could increase to £4.7m depending on profits.
Business and City Summary
By JERRY CONNOLLY
ICI disposal: Imperial Chemical Industries has sold its US over-the-counter drugs business in a $450m (£285m) deal with Johnson & Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals, which also gives it the rights to Merck's Elavil anti-depressant drug.
View from City Road, page 29 James Neill suspended: Shares in James Neill, the Sheffield engineer, were suspended at 202p, valuing the company at £140.2m, prompting speculation that an agreed bid will be launched today.
Page 29 Broking concern: Concern is growing that a number of stockbrokers will be unable to meet a January deadline for VAT changes which are expected to reduce the cost of share dealing.
Page 27 TIP leaps 40 per cent: Pre-tax profits at TIP Europe, the trailer rental company, rose 40 per cent from £9m to £12.6m in the year to July as the fleet grew from 10,000 to 18,000 vehicles.
Page 29 Compromise on mergers: The junior industry minister, John Redwood, is to propose a way out of the row over European mergers policy when he meets EC ministers in Luxembourg today.
Outlook, 27 Savage cuts: Savage Group, the USM-quoted do-it-yourself retail chain, dismissed almost 200 of its 1,000 UK staff in the face of a slump that cut earnings by a third.
Page 30 Cluff glitters: Rising gold production pushed Cluff Resources' pre-tax profits for the half year to 30 June up ninefold to £790,000 and strengthened the possibility that the group could pay a maiden dividend this year.
Page 29 Lowndes board strengthened: Lowndes Queensway, the troubled furniture and carpets retailer which recently completed a £18.5m refinancing, has appointed two heavyweight non-executive directors.
Page 29 Sterling slumps: The pound posted its steepest one-day fall in more than three years, sinking almost six pfennigs in a few hours to close at DM2.9737.
Recovery by Mrs Fields: Shares in Mrs Fields, the troubled US bakery and cookie retailer, rose more than 20 per cent from their 12-month low of 19p to 23p after it announced much reduced trading losses.
Page 29 US purchase for FKB: Acquisitive sales promotion company FKB Group has broken into the lucrative US medical promotions market with the $41m (£26m) acquisition of a specialist marketing company.
Page 30 Manx payouts: Some 4,000 depositors who lost £42m in one of Britain's biggest bank crashes are to receive their first interim payment following an £11.7m judgment against City financier Jim Raper in the Manx Chancery Court yesterday.
Page 27 Buoyant Borland: Borland International said it expected second quarter results to beat analysts' expectations after buoyant sales of Paradox, the US software company's database product.
Page 29 World Markets New York: The Columbus holiday and Yom Kippur hit trading, and in low turnover the Dow Jones Industrial Average slipped before rallying to close 5.89 points higher at 2,791.41.
Tokyo: Fuelled by the dollar's decline against the yen, the Nikkei average recovered 167 points of Friday's heavy losses to close at 35,376.35.
Singapore: After touching another post-crash high at midday, the Straits Times index fell back to close 0.37 lower at 1,420.18.
Bombay: Heavy institutional demand to start the new account took prices broadly higher, but a rise in contango charges prompted private investors to sell.
Frankfurt: The DAX index rose 14.69 points to end at 1,658.12, within 20 points of the record high set last month.
Zurich: The stable dollar and Wall Street's firm Friday close stimulated early trading.
The index added 2.2 points to 1,196.5.
Milan: Shares rebounded from Friday's losses but ended below the day's highs, with the MIB 0.43 per cent higher at 1,169.
Brussels: Prices tumbled on the last day of the forward account Oslo: Caution ahead of the 1990 budget clipped 3.83 points off the index to 527.08.
Stockholm: Strong gains by engineer Alfa-Laval helped the index to a 0.06 per cent rise.
Analysts predict rates will stay put
By CLARE DOBIE, Deputy City Editor
THE City is braced for further nervous trading in both currencies and shares this week but most analysts expect interest rates to stay at 15 per cent despite yesterday's slump in the value of the pound.
As the pound slid through the important benchmark of DM3 to close at DM2.9737 and lost ground against the dollar, most analysts agreed that the Chancellor would resist a further hike in interest rates at least for the duration of the Conservative Party conference, and possibly for some weeks to come.
A typical comment came from Bob Semple of County NatWest, the stockbroking arm of National Westminster.
‘I don't think interest rates will go up again.
The Chancellor has no option but to sit and wait,’ he said.
But others were less sanguine.
Richard Kersley of BZW, the Barclays Bank offshoot, said the Chancellor would not only have to increase interest rates but would also have to make other changes.
These could include promising to join the European Monetary System and mopping up liquidity by, for example, special banking deposit rates.
The outlook for sterling is clouded by confusion about whether the Chancellor has set a new floor for the pound.
This uncertainty was behind much of yesterday's fall against the mark.
Some brokers suggested the floor had shifted to DM2.95 but others thought the pound would have to fall still further, possibly to DM2.90, before the Chancellor would react.
The full extent of the weakness in sterling may only become apparent today when trading in the US returns to normal levels after a holiday yesterday.
Analysts were divided over the prospects for share prices as the widely based FT-SE 100 index lost a further 30.5 points to close at 2,247.0.
Most thought there would be further falls this week.
Phillips & Drew, the broking house, has stuck to its forecast that the FT-SE index will be 2,350 at the year end.
But BZW remains more pessimistic, believing the FT-SE index would have to fall to 2,200 before it started to look attractive to investors.
Traders are anxiously waiting for further cues from the Conservatives at Blackpool and the next set of economic statistics.
The retail price index for September is due on Friday when US figures for producer prices are also expected.
Later there will be a Confederation of British Industry quarterly survey.
Market expectations are for little change upwards in the RPI from the latest figure of 7.3 per cent.
Housing market blues until 1992
By GAIL COUNSELL, Property Correspondent
HIGH interest rates mean the housing market looks set to stay depressed until 1992.
Until recently most analysts had expected house prices to begin to recover in early 1991.
While prices were forcast to fall by about 10 per cent on average next year, a slow decline in interest rates over the next 12 months was seen as prompting a resurgence the following spring.
But the worsening base rate environment, which yesterday forced the Halifax, the UK's largest building society, to increase its mortgage rate by one percentage point to 14.5 per cent, seems certain to delay that process.
‘I think the housing market is bound to be psychologically affected,’ said Gary Marsh, head of research for the Halifax.
‘Our view is the recovery will probably now be delayed to the end of 1991.’
House prices have already begun to fall across the country with the most recent statistics showing the Midlands and the North joining London and the South-east.
Prices in some areas have dropped by between 10 and 20 per cent this year and the number of sales has been half last year's.
The Halifax's monthly index shows prices fell by 0.3 per cent during August, compared with a peak in July last year of 4.3 per cent.
Union leaders warn of massive job losses
By HELEN HAGUE, Labour Correspondent
THE RISE in interest rates could cost thousands of jobs across the economy — with the retail, service and construction sectors hardest hit, union leaders and industrialists warned yesterday.
Last week, John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB general union, predicted that high interest rates could kill around 250,000 jobs in the service sector.
Yesterday, the union claimed the first jobs casualty of the base rate rise — the Automobile Association's announcement of 500 job losses, in the wake of the company's decision to pull out of the air package holiday business.
The company said it was ‘pointless to continue to compete in the overcrowded, heavily discounted and ultimately unprofitable air package holidays business’.
The travel industry expects more cutbacks as holidays are sacrificed to meet the mounting cost of household bills.
The CBI fears that the interest and consequent mortgage rate rise will feed through to higher wage claims.
Its latest forecast, issued in August, found that order books had already fallen behind ‘normal’ levels.
As the forecast assumed interest rates would peak at 14 per cent it has already been eclipsed by events.
Even from that base, the CBI predicted that unemployment would rise to 1.72 million in the last quarter of this year to 1.83 million in the last quarter of 1990.
Revised forecasts — expected in November — are likely to be more pessimistic.
Imported food lifts raw material costs
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
MANUFACTURING industry's raw material costs jumped 1 per cent last month due mainly to higher prices for imported food for the processing industry.
The increase, which followed a 0.2 per cent decline in August, took the index for materials and fuel purchased by industry to 104.6, 1985=100, after adjustment for seasonal influences, to stand a provisional 5.3 per cent above a year earlier.
The rise was principally due to higher prices of imported food processing material, underlining City concern over the inflationary impact of a weakening pound.
Prices of other imported materials also increased during the month.
Meanwhile prices at the factory gate increased 0.4 per cent in September, the same as in August, lifting the index to 120.0, 1985=100, which was 5 per cent above a year earlier.
Excluding prices of food, drink and tobacco, regarded as a more reliable guide to the underlying trend, factory gate prices rose 0.5 per cent during September and were 5.5 per cent higher than a year earlier.
City economists also worried that factory gate price inflation was proving difficult to curb.
In spite of high interest rates, price inflation at the factory gate has varied from 4.8-5.2 per cent during the past seven months with little indication that it is set to slip below the range.
Several analysts said this was evidence of continued strong demand in the economy.
Receiver goes into shopfitter Sharp
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
SHARP & LAW, the Bradford-based shopfitter, has called in Cork Gully as administrative receiver following a demand from Barclays Bank for about £18m of outstanding loans.
The receiver has gone in at only the parent company, and Sharp yesterday made it clear that seven of its 15 operating subsidiaries were going concerns.
Indeed the company is close to raising up to £30m from the sale of three operations — Baxter Fell Northfleet, Internal Partition Systems and the French shopfitter, S N Giblin Lavault.
Accountants Ernst & Young, which is handling the sale, said negotiations were at an advanced stage.
Sharp, which is quoted on the USM, had its shares suspended at 42p last week.
Earlier this year it was forced to restate its 1987 profits from £1.2m to £410,000 after an investigation by Ernst & Young discovered errors in the valuations of contracts at Sharp's main business in Bradford.
These problems meant 1988 profits were only £1.06m, compared to expectations of over £4m, and in June the company warned that profits for this year would be below expectations.
Brian Considine, Sharp's chairman, said the 1989 figures would be affected by management problems at the Bradford operation, troubles in the retail sector and high interest rates.
Tunnel revenue forecasts fail to allay cost fears
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
EUROTUNNEL confirmed yesterday that Channel tunnel revenues are not forecast to rise in the early years of operation to offset the £2.2bn rise in the cost of the project to £7bn.
The news sent the Anglo-French group's share price plunging a further 40p to close at 528p.
According to the latest traffic forecasts in the consortium's interim report projected revenue in 1993, the year the tunnel opens, will be just under £580m — the same figure as forecast last year.
Eurotunnel's traffic consultants have, however, increased their forecasts of long-term revenue.
They believe that revenue will reach £820m a year in 2003 and £997m in 2013 — respectively 6.7 per cent and 8 per cent higher than forecast last year.
Despite the gloomy initial traffic forecasts, Alastair Morton, the British co-chairman of Eurotunnel, rejected suggestions that fares would be forced up, saying they would be competitive with ferry and air fares.
Mr Morton described weekend press reports of a serious rift between Eurotunnel and Transmanche Link, the consortium of British and French construction firms building the tunnel, as ‘the Batman school of journalism’.
‘There is no row or brawl going on,’ he added.
‘What there is is a strong difference of commercial opinion.’
However, it is clear the two sides are far from agreement on the extra £382m TML claims the tunnel terminals and fixed equipment will cost, which Mr Morton described as ‘manifestly absurd’.
He refused to be drawn on what would happen if the two failed to reach agreement in time to get the banks' support for an extra £1bn-£1.2bn of finance next year.
Without a satisfactory agreement the banks could refuse to lend more money on top of the £6bn in total committed to the project and demand that Eurotunnel be replaced.
Mr Morton, said he was ‘pretty confident’ that would not happen.
If a deal was hammered out with the banks, an accompanying rights issue to raise up to £400m from existing private shareholders was likely next spring.
Ferranti shareholders to meet chairman today
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
FERRANTI International shareholders meet today amid indications that there will be no solution to the company's problems until Christmas at the earliest.
Sir Derek Alun-Jones, Ferranti's chairman, is expected to postpone the annual meeting for a second time so that revised accounts can be prepared to include the effect of the £185m International Signal and Control fraud.
Sir Derek will resist pressure from some shareholders to resign in the belief that this is largely a minority view.
A spokesman for Ferranti said Sir Derek had no reason to fear a shareholders' revolt and there were no indications that there would be one.
The company's advisers, Baring Brothers, believe that nothing would be served by making Sir Derek a scapegoat at this stage.
They believe that any newcomer would take months to come to grips with what has gone wrong at Ferranti and would as a consequence be worse placed to negotiate a rescue for the group.
Sir Derek is expected to give further details of the progress of negotiations at today's shareholders' meeting.
Potential suitors are believed to be holding off from making outright bids for fear that there may be further black holes in Ferranti's balance sheet.
They also want to assess more fully the damage that the debacle might have done to long-term customer confidence in Ferranti.
Institutional shareholders have told Sir Derek they would not be prepared to tolerate the introduction of a large minority shareholder on favourable terms.
Such a solution would only dilute their interest in the company.
They have also ruled out any possibility of supporting a rights issue.
British Aerospace, possibly in partnership with Thomson CSF of France, has emerged as the leading British contender to mount a bid but could face Ministry of Defence objections.
The MoD is keen to preserve Ferranti as an independent force in defence electronics.
It feels unduly reliant on GEC and BAe for its procurement needs and does not wish to see this reinforced.
Fines plan to combat power cuts
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
THE ABILITY of the electricity industry to keep the lights burning once it is privatised was thrown into confusion yesterday.
It emerged that the Government is being forced to alter arrangements for protecting security of supply and impose fines on distribution companies that allow power cuts.
The changes in the system were disclosed in a letter to employees of National Power, one of the two big generating companies being created in the sell-off, from its chairman, Lord Marshall.
Under the present system the Central Electricity Generating Board is charged with ensuring there is enough power station capacity to meet demand.
When the industry is sold off this obligation will be transferred to privately- owned distribution companies.
However, Lord Marshall's letter says that because of the Government's commitment to introduce competition into electricity supply as quickly as possible ‘alternative arrangements for protecting the security of supply’ would need to be made, involving a ‘capacity deficiency scheme’.
Tony Blair, Labour's energy spokesman, last night described Lord Marshall's letter as ‘deeply disturbing’ and called on John Wakeham, Secretary of State for Energy, for an explanation.
A Department of Energy spokesman said: ‘Hopefully this should not lead to power cuts in most cases because distributors ought to be able to get supplies from other area boards.’
GM may build plant for Jaguar
By MICHAEL HARRISON
GENERAL MOTORS of the US may build new facilities in the UK to support a major increase in Jaguar production as part of its plan to take a 30 per cent stake in the luxury car maker.
This emerged yesterday as the two companies finally confirmed they were discussing a deal to thwart the rival US car giant Ford, which intends to build a 15 per cent stake in Jaguar in preparation for a full bid.
In a joint statement issued after the stock market had closed, the two companies said they were examining ‘certain manufacturing, marketing and other commercial joint venture arrangements’ as part of which GM is ‘considering taking a minority interest’.
Earlier in the day Jaguar shares had fallen back to close 46p down at 685p as speculators cashed in their stock for large profits.
There were also rumours that Ford had now taken its stake up to the maximum 15 per cent allowed under the golden share held in Jaguar by the Government since its privatisation in 1984.
Ford later said that the Jaguar-GM talks had not affected its own plans ‘Today's announcement does not affect our view in any way, and we still plan to acquire up to a 15 per cent holding in Jaguar,’ said a Ford spokesman in Detroit.
GM's plan is to take a 15 per cent stake in the Coventry-based car maker rising to 29.9 per cent immediately the golden share expires at the end of next year.
A variety of options for building the stake are being examined including an issue of new shares in return for GM injecting between £200m and £600m.
Alternatively, GM may opt for a mix of new shares and shares bought in the market.
Part of the strategy of GM, the world's biggest car maker, will be to increase Jaguar's output of 50,000 cars a year by two or threefold and launch new models into the executive market.
This may involve an expansion of Jaguar's main Coventry plant, the building of a new greenfield site or possibly utilisation of spare capacity at the Luton and Ellesmere Port factories of GM's British subsidiary Vauxhall.
Another possibility being mentioned was that GM could begin Jaguar production in the US — the company's biggest market.
This would help protect Jaguar from fluctuations in the dollar-sterling exchange rate — the principal factor behind the collapse in its pre-tax profits in the first half of the year to £1.2m.
Last night Ford declined to comment on the long-awaited Jaguar/GM statement although the company is expected to respond shortly.
Ford, however, has made it clear that it wants ultimate majority control of Jaguar — something which the company's board, led by chairman Sir John Egan, is resisting fiercely.
Armchair Investor: Brixton Estate
By MICHAEL HARRISON
PROPERTY stocks and high interest rates are not thought to be a good combination.
But the security and long-term attractions of many of the investor/developers, as opposed to the property traders which hold on to little of what they develop, makes many of the downgradings a nonsense.
Majors, such as Land Securities and MEPC, have been hit severely and unjustly and Brixton Estate, a favourite in Armchair Investor, has lost a quarter of its value since this column recommended investors take profits at the end of August.
At 194p, down 7p yesterday, the shares stand at a discount of 37.5 per cent to the net asset value expected for the end of this year.
Brixton is in a particularly strong position.
Its portfolio is split 60:40 between industrial properties and offices.
Many of the offices are in the West End of London, where rentals are still growing, and there are quite a few rent reviews coming up in the next few months.
The industrial property is even more secure.
There is a shortage of industrial sites in the South-east of England and rentals are now coming up after lagging behind offices and housing through the late 1980s.
Although Brixton has £180m of borrowings, all but a small proportion of this is borrowed at fixed rates so it does not suffer from higher interest rates.
And as a final plus point, Brixton has no retail property.
Take advantage of current weakness and buy Brixton for the medium to long term.
Market Report: Interest rate fears spread despondency
By DEREK PAIN
FEARS that interest rates will be forced even higher demoralised the stock market yesterday.
In nervous trading the broadly based FT-SE share index slumped 30.5 points to 2,247.0, wiping, Datastream calculated, £6.5bn from share values.
Government stocks fell by more than £1.
The market is at its lowest level since July.
It was only a month ago that the index hit a post crash high of 2,423.9.
Many observers believe it will fall to below 2,200 points even if the anti-inflation policy works and the 15 per cent base rate level is held.
But, if sterling's performance against the US dollar and West German mark is anything to go by, the worry of 16 per cent base rates will continue.
Any further increase could push Footsie, which started the year at 1,782.8, below 2,000.
Trading yesterday was modest, reflecting the Yom Kippur Jewish holiday.
Turnover, according to SEAQ, was 425.8 million shares.
Stores had another miserable day.
Beers, building and properties were other sectors which suffered acute discomfort.
Many of the old takeover favourites were also hard hit as speculators moved to take their profits.
Dalgety fell 11p to 413p.
Como International, the Robert Holmes a Court /Elf Aquataine company, has lowered its stake to below 5 per cent.
Jaguar plunged 46p to 685p as General Motors confirmed it is in talks that could result in it taking a minority stake.
Mr Holmes a Court is thought to have taken advantage of the share's rapid progress, selling his 2 per cent stake.
Ferranti, after touching 61p, closed just 0.5p higher at 59.5p.
British Aerospace, one of the likely bidders, fell 16p to 604p.
Eurotunnel's sad retreat continued.
The interim report left the shares 40p down at 528p.
Joint chairman Alastair Morton is due to make an investment presentation at the Victoria headquarters of Salomon Brothers this morning.
Saatchi & Saatchi, the communications group, was one to shine through the gloom.
Continuing speculation about a bid helped the shares improve a further 9.5p to 349.5p.
At one time they hit 356p.
An array of stories are bemusing the market.
Adia, the Swiss group, is said to be keen to buy chunks of Saatchi.
An Italian bidder, with US support, is rumoured to lurk.
Southeastern Asset Management, a US group, was said to be on the verge of selling on its 10 per cent stake.
There was also some excitement on the oil pitch, with a number of old stories given another whirl.
Burmah was in demand, climbing 18p to 619p, a considerable performance on such a depressing day.
Rumours of transatlantic bids persistently hover over Burmah but it seemed to be the suspected presence of SHV, the big Dutch group, that fuelled the price.
SHV, which has 43 per cent of Calor Group, was thought to be buying Burmah.
One idea is that SHV wants to sell its Calor stake to Burmah and, as part of the deal, take a 15 per cent interest in Burmah.
But Premier Consolidated Oilfields could also be entangled.
Burmah has just under 30 per cent, which could be sold on to SHV, or another party.
Overall oils were among the best performing shares with the sector's defensive qualities in the present uncertain atmosphere drawing support.
Guinness was the best performing drink share as analysts stretched their year's forecast higher after last week's interims.
Some now expect £673m against £521m.
Bass fell 16p to 908p.
Nigel Popham at CIBC Grenfell & Colegrave says the shares are undervalued.
He expects profits to dip this year from the estimated £580m in the year just ended but reach £645m next year.
Armstrong Equipment, resisting a bid from Caparo, fell 1p to 185p.
Possible white knight JH Fenner lifted its stake to 5.6 per cent.
Five Oaks Investments, the property group, edged forward another 3p to 83p.
London Securities now has 13.6 per cent.
British & Commonwealth, the financial group, was another to resist the retreat.
The shares gained 4p to 139p on management buyout stories.
Newcomer Reg Vardy, a motor dealer, closed at 92p against a 90p placing price.
The stock market was a depressed area again yesterday.
At one time the FT-SE share index was down 34.9 points.
It closed 30.5 points lower at 2,247.0.
The FT 30 share index finished 34.9 points down at 1,822.9.
Government stocks were also weak, falling by up to £1.
Mount Charlotte Investments, the hotel group, offers the opportunity to invest in a stockbroker.
It has a 13.1 per cent stake in Peel Hunt.
Robert Peel, MCI's chief executive, has 5.2 per cent.
Peel Hunt, where a leading light is Charles Peel, Robert's brother, will collect a £200,000 fee in connection with MCI's £151m rights issue.
MCI shares held at 77p.
Speculation is increasing that Continental, the West German tyre maker, will be forced to bid for Kwik-Fit, the tyres and exhausts business.
Since building up a 10 per cent stake Continental has tried to arrange trading pacts.
But so far Kwik-Fit's chairman, Tom Farmer, has, it appears, shown little inclination to meet the German wishes.
Kwik-Fit slippd 1p to 143p.
View from City Road: Eurotunnel must dig up facts
By DEREK PAIN
ALASTAIR MORTON, Eurotunnel's co-chairman, was keen yesterday to stress that his upbeat presentation of the Channel link's interim financial progress report should not be interpreted as an arrogant dismissal of the clear underlying problems.
His approach may not be arrogant but neither is it justified.
The time is fast approaching where both the stock market and Eurotunnel's bankers require something a little more concrete than vague reassurances that it will be all right on the night.
There was little in the report to offer investors any incentive to assess the company more favouarbly.
In London the shares lost a further 40p to close at 528p and it was a similar story in Paris.
The shares have more than halved in value since the summer high of 1,172p.
Eurotunnel's prospects will only become apparent once the delicate negotiations with the banks and contractors have been completed.
And it would be dangerous to underestimate the seriousness of those talks.
The banks can technically pull the plug on Eurotunnel.
The common view is that this is unthinkable and politically unacceptable.
But some bankers have an acute awareness of where their loyalties lie and the idea of winding Eurotunnel up and continuing the project with a new management company may have its attractions.
It would ensure that the tunnel was completed and would give the banks much more direct access to the project and its long-term rewards.
The only losers would be the shareholders but they always knew this was a high-risk project.
The negotiations with the banks are complicated by the discussions with the contractors.
Although Eurotunnel's attitude to Trans Manche Link, the contractors' consortium, was more conciliatory yesterday than has been the case, there are still important differences to be settled.
The contractors are rightly concerned that they should not be forced to pick up the bill for problems which are not of their making.
The next few months will be crucial in determining Eurotunnel's future as the nominated manager of the Channel link.
It may be tempting to regard today's share price as a buying opportunity but it is a temptation which should be avoided given the uncertainties and high risk which the company still attracts.
View from City Road: ICI deal makes strategic sense
By DEREK PAIN
IMPERIAL Chemical Industries seems to have struck a surprisingly good $450m (£285m) deal with Johnson & Johnson and Merck in swapping its US over-the counter pharmaceutical business for the rights to an established anti-depressant drug and a substantial, if as yet unquantified, cash sum.
In strategic terms the move makes plenty of sense.
Because of the need for marketing economies of scale there is no point in being a small player, which ICI is, in the OTC market.
If further proof were needed it is the formation of the joint Johnson & Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals Co itself.
Even if ICI's presence in the US OTC market with its well-known Mylanta and Mylanta II antacids is relatively modest it can still get a good price for these products.
The company is coy about revealing the profits from its US OTC products.
But it is notable enough that the deal is worth 3.6 times the annual $125m sales value of these products.
If they made a profit margin of 15 per cent to 20 per cent then the the value of the deal, which includes the rights to Merck's Elavil anti-depressant, is equivalent to 18 times pre-tax profits.
The latest move comes at a time when ICI's £1.2bn a year pharmaceutical division, which accounts for around a fifth of group trading profits, is set to emerge from a relatively fallow period.
Since 1985 profits growth in the division has been restricted to an average of less than 5 per cent a year and as 40 per cent of revenues come from the US the one third fall in the dollar over the period obviously affected the outcome as have rising R&D costs.
But ICI's top drug Tenormin, the beta-blocker, has also run into competition from rival cardiovascular products such as ACE-inhibitors and calcium antagonists and growing generic competition as Tenormin has gradually come off-patent.
New products are, however, in the offing as Zoladex for prostate cancer and the intravenous anaesthetic Diprivan are soon to be launched in the key US market.
By acquiring the rights to Merck's Elival, ICI will gain expertise in marketing drugs for the central nervous system to support its own products in that area which are currently being developed.
But fears of a bulk chemical downturn and worries about the dollar overshadow the ICI share price which at 1,175p sells on less than 8 times 1989 earnings.
View from City Road: Ivory & Sime's wildcard
By DEREK PAIN
NIGEL LAWSON has been testing Ivory & Sime's sense of humour.
As the fund manager launched a campaign to sell its ‘optimum income trust’— a new variation on an old theme, the split trust — the authorities were orchestrating a base rate rise and the stock market is now providing stark illustration of how equities and climbing interest rates do not mix.
The outlook is as menacing as ever, the sort of uncertainty which puts excitement into investment markets and pacemakers into investors.
But the Ivory & Sime trust caters for both the faint-hearted and those happy to embrace risk in the hope of greater rewards.
The £65m trust is divided into ordinary shares, paying quarterly dividends, and ‘zero dividend’ preference shares.
Holders of the prefs will forego dividends in return for 13.7 per cent compound growth over the trust's seven years, thereby allowing the managers to increase dividends to ordinary shareholders who will hold two-thirds of the capital.
They can expect an income return of 8.5 per cent in the first year.
To do this, and to be able to return to all shareholders the full 100p value of their initial investment, the managers must achieve compound growth of 6.8 per cent— a modest target given their plan to invest 80 per cent of the fund in UK blue-chip companies and the fact that the top 20 Footsie stocks last year accounted for 40 per cent of the total income of the FT-all share index.
Returns above this will go to the risk-takers — holders of the ordinary shares.
An added wildcard is the attraction for PEPs.
Because of a loophole in the legislation — which some believe will be closed soon — £4,800 can be invested in this trust, double the usual maximum.
With the associated tax break, the promised returns could gross up into handsome rewards.
Column Eight: Change of course for Burke's
By SIMON PINCOMBE
The grand old name of Burke's Peerage could soon appear on some rather surprising household items.
The company which owns the worldwide franchise of the name and trademark is planning an expansion phase — in the best possible taste, of course— and is hoping to get into the pockets of a few well-heeled outside investors.
A discreet notice has appeared in the latest newsletter of the Local Investment Networking Company, an organisation which matches rich private investors with needy entrepreneurs.
Brooks Marketing, which owns the Burke's franchise, is offering about 10 per cent of its equity in return for £150,000.
The aim, says the blurb, is to develop other publishing and ancestor-tracing businesses.
The company's publishing director, Harold Brooks-Baker, was busy yesterday fielding inquiries about Marina Ogilvy, the pregnant daughter of Princess Alexandra.
However, he did disclose that the money will be used to finance biographies of royals and politicians like Prince Albert and Lloyd George.
He also hopes to exploit the Burke's name by reproducing it on the labels of clarets, burgundies and champagnes.
There are distant plans for a Burke's range of repro furniture and wallpaper.
The activities of its centuries-old rival Debrett's, which uses its once exclusive name to sell smoked salmon, begin to sound comparatively tasteful.
The Takeover Panel has carpeted one of its own.
Last Friday, Meat Trade Suppliers was taken to task for ‘seriously misleading’ shareholders over a hostile offer.
The Panel must be hoping that this will be an end to the matter.
Campbell Allan, a director and substantial shareholder of the sausage casings company, also sits on the Panel's appeals committee.
While on the subject of meat, we can tell you that the competition to find the best-made sausages in the UK gets under way this Sunday with the defending champion reported to be in sizzling form.
George McCartney, a butcher from Northern Ireland, has won the Meat Trades Journal Champion of Champions competition for the past two years.
The title is reckoned to be worth an extra 50,000lbs in sales, so competition will be hot.
Breakfast begins at 8.30am at Butchers' Hall in the City.
The latest edition of The Building Societies' Gazette contains some courageous predictions.
In particular the thoughts of Dick Howard, a bond market specialist with ANZ McCaughan, the stockbroker, are worthy of further examination.
‘Base lending rates will fall to 12 per cent by the end of this year,’ he prophesies.
Agreed bid likely after James Neill suspended
By CLARE DOBIE, Deputy City Editor
SHARES in James Neill, the Sheffield engineer, were suspended yesterday at 202p, valuing the company at £140.2m, prompting speculation that an agreed bid will be launched today.
The shares were suspended at the company's request after James Wilkes, the beer mat maker also based in Sheffield, sold its 9.6 per cent stake in Neill.
According to Stephen Hinchliffe, Wilkes' chairman, it sold the shares for ‘substantially more than 202p’.
This suggests that any bid would be pitched well above the suspension price.
The stake was sold to a single buyer through Warburg Securities.
Neill declined to comment on the sale or the suspension.
The company, which owns Spear & Jackson, the garden tools manufacturer, has been the subject of recurrent speculation for months, and it was fuelled last month when Neill announced a fall in pre-tax profits from £2.71m to just £28,000 in the first half.
Industry sources suggested that Williams Holdings, the conglomerate, or Triplex Lloyd, the foundries and building components company which owns 1.6 per cent of Neill, might be planning a bid.
Williams declined to comment but Triplex ruled itself out.
Jim Doel, the chief executive, said he had failed to find out what was going on.
‘We don't understand why they are so bashful,’ he added.
There was also a suggestion that the bidder may be a financial buyer, looking at the company as an investment rather than an addition to existing operations.
James Neill has attracted the unwelcome attentions of several predators in the past, including Suter, the conglomerate run by David Abell, and BM Group, run by Roger Shute.
Suter's dealings in Neill and other companies are the subject of a Department of Trade and Industry inquiry.
The company recently valued its brand names, which as well as Spear & Jackson include Eclipse hacksaws, in readiness for a hostile takeover.
It has not disclosed how much it thought these brands were worth.
Despite worse than expected profits reported last month, Neill's shares lost only 6p to 191p as bid speculation limited the fall.
Mr Hinchliffe promised that Wilkes would reveal today how large a profit it had made on its shareholding in Neill.
Reduced losses put spice in Mrs Fields
By JERRY CONNOLLY
SHARES in Mrs Fields, the troubled US bakery and cookie retailer, rose more than 20 per cent from their 12-month low of 19p to 23p yesterday after it announced much reduced trading losses.
The shares were helped by the prospect of a resumed dividend payments next year following a recovery in trading performance, the company said.
It last paid a dividend in 1987.
Losses before tax have been cut to $1.3m (£800,000) for the six months to 30 June, compared with $15.1m in the same period last year, on sales up 14 per cent at $60.2m.
The company said: ‘The traditionally stronger second half has started well and it is anticipated cash flow for the full year will exceed capital requirements.’
The improvement could allow some repayment of its long-term debt which has grown from £12.7m in 1986 to almost $69m at the end of last year.
In that period, however, it slipped from a pre-tax profit of $17.14m to a loss of $18.5m.
Radical reshaping of the group's operations away from retail outlets and into bakery operations led to write-offs last year, but this time there were no below-the-line expenses for store closures.
‘As an indication of continuing trading improvement, if current trends are maintained, it is the intention of the board to resume dividends with a payment next June,’ the company said.
Corporate overheads in the first half were cut from $8m to $7.7m, and total operating income rose from $13.3m to £16.2m.
However, interest payments rose from $2.5m to $4.2m while plant losses also rose sharply, up from $349,000 to $1.13m.
The loss per share has fallen from 10 cents a share to 1 cent, but it was the renewed promise of a dividend that helped the shares beat the market trend yesterday.
Most of Mrs Fields' operations are in the United States.
It was launched in Britain on the USM in 1986 at 140p a share.
The price had soared to 250p before crashing last year.
Cluff interims increase ninefold
By MICHAEL PREST, Resources Correspondent
RISING gold production pushed Cluff Resources' pre-tax profits for the half year to 30 June up ninefold to £790,000 and strengthened the possibility that the mining and oil group could pay a maiden dividend this year.
Emboldened by earnings per share jumping from 0.13p to 1.12p, Algy Cluff, the company's chairman said: ‘It's certainly our intention to pay a dividend’.
The bulk of Cluff's turnover, which rose from £1.88m to £6.8m, was generated by gold mining in Zimbabwe.
The company produced 29,224 ounces of gold at an average grade of between 2.5 and 2.8 grammes per tonne, and says it is on course to mine 70,000 ounces during the whole of 1989.
Mr Cluff said that the Royal Family Mine at Filabusi had exceeded its planned production by 12.5 per cent.
Exploration is under way to determine whether the life of the mine can be extended beyond the spring of 1990.
The ore-treatment plant at the Freda/Rebecca mine is running ahead of design capacity, treating an average of 2,800 tonnes of ore a day in August.
Drilling will establish whether reserves of 1m ounces can be increased.
Cluff is also pushing ahead with its Fetish gold mine in Ghana, where borehole results, albeit tentative, indicated high grades.
The company should receive about 9,000 ounces of gold next year from its 50 per cent share of the Transaccion mine in Spain.
Mr Cluff said that the interest payments, which were £605,000 in the first half, on the £7.7m loan for developing the Zimbabwe properties, should diminish as cashflow from gold production reduces the principal.
Two added to Lowndes board
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
LOWNDES Queensway, the troubled furniture and carpets retailer which recently completed a £18.5m refinancing, has appointed two heavyweight non-executive directors.
They are Norman Ireland, chairman of Bowater and former finance director of BTR, and Brian McGillivray, chairman of the photocopier distribution group Erskine House.
The appointments are the first non-executives taken on by Lowndes since its highly leveraged takeover of Harris Queensway last year.
The resignation of Bryan Portman, corporate finance director, earlier this year had slimmed the company's board down to three — James Gulliver, chairman, Eddie Dayan, managing director, and David Tibble, finance director.
Though both new directors are accountants with a wealth of experience, the appointments did not stop the shares falling 1¼p to a new low of 16½p.
Lowndes is expected to show a £17m pre-tax first half loss this week.
Acquisitions help TIP's 40% advance
By WILLIAM BOWN
The number of TIP's vehicles increased from 10,000 to 18,000.
Four acquisitions totalling £50m, led by the £29.5m purchase of Yorkshire-based CSL in January, accounted for a third of the growth in the fleet.
Strongest organic growth came on the Continent, where profits rose by 150 per cent in France and 70 per cent in West Germany.
Of 30 new branches opened, 16 were in mainland Europe.
Jim Cleary, chairman, said: ‘We prosper in uncertainty.
European harmonisation and the Channel tunnel make leasing trailers more attractive.’
TIP has branched out into eight related areas ranging from tanker rental to truck leasing.
Following the purchase of a Finnish company, it has landed its first contract with the Soviet Union.
Earnings growth, diluted by the issue of shares for acquisitions, was just 2.9 per cent to 14.1p.
Stephen Clapham, an analyst at Hoare Govett, said: ‘It will take time to cut costs in the acquisitions, but they look sensible on an 18-month basis.’
Borland sales buoyant
By WILLIAM BOWN
BORLAND International said yesterday it expected its second-quarter results to beat analysts' expectations after buoyant sales of Paradox, the US software company's database product.
Alan Henricks, chief financial officer of the USM-quoted Borland, said Paradox performed well against a weak product from its main rival.
Borland also announced it had won shareholder approval for its reincorporation in Delaware, a preliminary to the company seeking a US listing, probably on NASDAQ.
The reincorporation included a five-to-one share consolidation.