

Leading Article: Massage is bad for the figures
By WILLIAM BOWN
THE longer one party stays in power, the greater the danger that it will find ways of falsifying its record.
In yesterday's Independent, growing concern was reported about the integrity of official statistics.
There have, for example, been 29 changes in the method of computing the unemployment figures since the present Government came to power, so that the total number of people out of work has fallen by a far greater amount in appearance than in reality.
Two disadvantages result.
The first is that insofar as people continue to believe the figures, the Government derives an unfair advantage.
The second is that official statistics become less and less use as a basis for rational debate, let alone for good decisions.
Argument may continue about the extent of poverty or the balance of payments, but the very facts to which each side appeals are in dispute.
The Government may object that the figures will never be perfect.
This is, however, no reason to avoid making them as reliable as possible.
The honorary secretary of the Royal Statistical Society denies in a letter published on this page today that there are plans to set up an independent council to monitor the Government's use of statistics, but such a development would be desirable.
Politicians of all parties resort to dubious statistical assertions.
At the Conservative Party Conference in 1986, Norman Fowler, then Secretary of State for Health, produced a computer printout of 380 new ‘large hospital schemes’: the list was so long because he had counted every programme over £1m, whereas schemes had previously had to cost over £5m in order to qualify.
At present, a minister who abuses statistics in this way has only to fear the counter-assertions of the Opposition, no less self-interested.
One argument to which the Government has no right to resort is that statistics do not matter.
It is obvious that good economic indicators no more ensure good economic management than accurate instruments on the dashboard of a car ensure safe driving.
But since ministers, including the Prime Minister, are so fond of using statistics for the purposes of debate, they cannot be allowed to make the contradictory claim that these figures are irrelevant.
The Government is, moreover, committed to markets, which cannot work well without reliable information, and are severely damaged by misleading data.
Even without the distortions introduced by politicans, the standard of British economic statistics is lamentable.
In a White Paper of 1981, Sir Derek (now Lord) Rayner declared that the collection of official statistics should be cost-effective, and should meet the needs of central government, not the rest of the nation.
But here as elsewhere, though the emphasis on cost and utility was helpful in curbing bureaucratic empire-builders, it failed to provide a full definition of the public service which should be provided.
Advanced societies are distinguished from backward ones by, among many other features, the reliability of the information which can be obtained about them.
Some of that information has to be gathered by disinterested investigators, not by politicians or pressure groups intent on proving points.
After 10 years, this administration still fails to understand how government and markets complement each other.
Leading Article: Regulating the market in ivory
By WILLIAM BOWN
THREE months ago President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya took part in a media event staged in the Nairobi National Park to demonstrate his country's distaste for the ivory trade.
He doused with petrol and inflammable glue 12 tonnes of illegally poached elephant tusks, worth almost £2m.
They were then ceremonially burned.
The gesture was a symbolic expression of the abhorrence felt by growing numbers of people at the threat to the future of the African elephant posed by a particularly bloody trade and will have gained widespread support.
But the destruction of the tusks from 1,800 slaughtered animals was, at a more mundane level, an example of gesture politics.
Had the government of Kenya sold the confiscated tusks on the open market, the money generated could have been used to encourage systematic conservation.
This week in Lausanne, at the conference of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, Kenya, supported by the governments of Gambia, Somalia and Tanzania, is indulging in a similar exercise in political theatre.
These nations are demanding an end to all trade in ivory.
Opposition to any ban comes from South Africa, Zimbabwe and Botswana, which want the international regulatory agency to build on the present system of licensing and quotas.
The southern African states have the right of the argument for two reasons, both severely practical.
First, it would be as unrealistic to impose a world-wide ban on ivory as it would be to attempt to outlaw, say, tobacco or alcohol.
Demand would merely be driven underground, prices would rise and the potential profits available to criminal syndicates — and to corrupt politicians and government officials — would rise accordingly.
Second, criminalising the entire ivory trade would impose a financial penalty on those nations such as South Africa, Botswana and Zimbabwe which have developed relatively effective conservation policies.
These countries are able to practise open trading because their elephant herds are now big enough to demand regular culling.
Killing would continue even if an effective ban on ivory sales were to be introduced.
Part of the the profit from the present, legitimate sales of tusks is used to meet the costs of the conservation programmes.
Part is earmarked for transfer to the impoverished peasant farmers living in the areas concerned.
As a result, villagers in the three southern African states are coming to regard herds of elephants which will be legally culled as a source of legitimate profit.
They thus have a vested interest in their conservation.
In the past these same villagers were more inclined to slaughter elephants in the hope of criminal gain from unlicensed traders.
Kenya's new director of wildlife, Richard Leakey, was quoted recently as saying that government neglect had ‘permitted the poachers to have our parks to themselves as private hunting blocks with their vehicles, modern weapons and chain saws’.
The objective of the Lausanne conference should be to encourage Kenya and its allies to emulate the conditions pertaining in the Kruger and Hwange national parks, where culling has become a necessity born out of successful conservation, rather than to encourage policies which could turn them into the run-down disaster zones Mr Leakey described.
A soothing seasonal checklist
By MILES KINGTON
I FIND a lot of anxiety among people about the dividing lines between the seasons of the year, or what the French call pre-Mistral tension.
When does summer end and autumn begin?
Was summer longer than usual this year to fit in six Test matches against the Australians?
Was autumn further delayed to allow six party conferences one after the other?
What part of the year are we in now, for heaven's sake?
Well, relax.
There is a totally painless way of establishing whether summer is really over, and that is to fill in the following checklist of autumnal signs as they occur.
When you've ticked every box, autumn is here.
OK?
Right, let's go.
It is a sign that autumn is approaching when…
You stop leaving doors open behind you as you come into the house.
-You start thinking about a coat.
-You think you're buying three pounds of onions in the shops, get home and find you're actually carrying a bag of the new season's hyacinth bulbs.
-Stationers start overflowing with 1990 calendars, bearing pictures of thatched kittens. -After yet another new TV series, you start regretting all the rude things you said about the summer repeats.
-You start getting this strange maternal urge to bring in everything from the garden overnight.
-You have a brilliant idea for a Christmas present for somebody.
-British Rail issue a new timetable and you have a nasty suspicion that they have juggled it around so that they have deleted a few trains and cut out that convenient late night one, and you look for your old timetable to check but it has gone with the wind.
-You start noticing your friends arguing about whether the clocks go backwards or forwards in October.
-You find postal charges mysteriously a penny higher than you thought they were, so you buy a sheet of 1p stamps to upgrade all the old ones you have left, and then you find you haven't got any old ones left, only this big sheet of 1p stamps.
-You notice teams of British Rail gardeners and foresters chopping, cutting and burning the vegetation growing alongside railway lines like East German border guards improving their arc of fire and wonder idly what they do the rest of the year.
-The only cricket stories in the newspapers are suddenly about winter tours of places you didn't even know played cricket.
-You start forgetting where you went on holiday this summer.
-The banks start promising to look after you much better than ever before, and to shower you with presents.
But they will only do this, it turns out, if you're 19 and just going to college.
-Buses in the morning and afternoon are suddenly full of children, traffic jams are caused by cars containing family groups and signs appear in tobacconists' shops: ‘Sorry, No More Than One Schoolchild In Here At A Time, Put Your Arms Up and Stand Against The Wall To Be Searched When Requested.
Thank You'-You are about to deflate the small plastic paddling pool in the garden in which no infant has paddled for a month until you realise that it is now full of strange vegetation and even stranger swimming insects and you decide to keep it as a nature reserve.
-You notice that the section of your local supermarket which has stocked picnic and barbecue material since the birth of time has suddenly disappeared and been replaced by a new section stocking wrapping paper, crackers and tinsel decorations.
-A letter appears in a national newspaper expressing disbelief that the writer has already spotted the first penny-for-the-guy collector/Christmas tree/artificial snow sprayed on shop window/Valentine cards on sale.
-People start using the curious phrase ‘Indian Summer’ if the sun stays out for more than 10 minutes at a time.
-Your summer clothes go into hibernation in cupboards, wardrobes, dry cleaners', cloakrooms, hat-stands, boots of cars, other people's houses, restaurant vestibules, backs of chairs in disused rooms and many other places from which they will eventually creep, crumpled and dishevelled, in six months' time.
-Somebody says: ‘Oh God, do we really have to spend Christmas day this year with…? '-
Letter: The vital question on higher education funding
From Professor MARTIN HARRIS
Sir: The ongoing debate about the suggestion by the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (CVCP) that universities must identify the full costs of their undergraduate programmes and should examine various ways in which these costs might be met seems to me to have largely missed the main point at issue.
Government, employers and educators alike are now convinced that higher education should be expanded radically during the next decade, to include perhaps twice as high a proportion of school leavers and others than has traditionally been the case in the UK.
The question is how this expansion can be paid for, given that the new Secretary of State has said quite candidly that his present view is that higher education cannot expect a higher share of public spending than it currently receives.
In this situation, universities have three choices.
One is to say that substantial expansion is simply not possible, given planned expenditure levels.
This would in many ways be the easiest option for us to follow — the status quo can always be defended but would clearly disappoint the legitimate aspirations of ever more young men and women to participate in higher education and, just as serious, fail to provide the educated and skilled workforce which the country so manifestly needs.
A second apparent option would be to take more students without additonal funding.
The result of this on any significant scale would inevitably be a decline in the quality of the education we provide, and consequently of the graduates we produce.
And the issue is not simply that of deteriorating staff-student ratios, which has attracted so much attention, but at least as much a question of capital investment.
In my own university, for instance, the number of first year students of biology that we have been able to accept this year has been entirely constrained not by the quality of our applicants but the physical size of our teaching laboratories.
Who will pay for their extension?
And, given the much valued British tradition of attending a university or polytechnic away from home, who will fund the additional sleeping accommodation for students, the absence of which has attracted so much adverse publicity this week?
Questions such as these have to be faced urgently if the university system is to expand as we all wish it to.
So, if turning away qualified candidates, on the one hand, and significant loss of quality, on the other hand, are to be avoided, that leaves only the third option, namely the funded expansion of our higher education provision.
What the vice-chancellors are asking, very simply, is where the necessary additional funds are to come from.
This is far too broad a question for us to seek to answer on our own, even if we wished to, affecting as it does everyone who hopes to enter higher education, their parents and their future employers; but it is imperative that the debate should be joined.
There are those who believe passionately that one only appreciates what one has paid for oneself, while there are others who believe, like your higher education correspondent Ngaio Crequer, that the public funding of higher education has served a whole generation well and should be allowed to continue to do so in future.
A key issue which must be addressed in this debate is not what most favours the sons and daughters of those families already committed to higher education, important though this is, but rather which funding system will most likely encourage first-generation entrants to higher education from social groups not hitherto persuaded to participate, because it is only from these groups that the necessary growth of an education and trained population can actually come.
This is the question which vice-chancellors have sought to raise — and this is the question to which society must, as a matter of urgency, respond.
Letter: Smart thinking on public transport
From Dr IAN BASNETT
Sir: I was interested to read Terence Bendixson's article (5 October) on directly charging for road use.
Putting to one side the other inequities associated with such a system should it be introduced, I hope due consideration would be given to the problems of the disabled.
Many disabled,(partly because of their disability and partly as a result of the inadequacy of public transport), are completely dependent on private or other vehicles to get out at all.
Unless those wholly or almost wholly unable to travel any distance without a vehicle (bearing in mind the current state of the pavements) were exempt from such a charge, it would amount to gross discrimination against an already disenfranchised group.
Letter: Smart thinking on public transport
From Mr CHRIS BUSHELL
Sir: For real dramatic effect, your article on road pricing by Terence Bendixson (Focus, 5 October) should have been published alongside that of John Lichfield reporting from Los Angeles the day before.
The experience of Los Angeles, which is the largest developed city in the world without any form of rail transport, should be a terrible warning to politicians who ignore or dismiss the crying need for improvements to our own public transport networks.
Here in London and the South-east, we already have metro and commuter railways which carry over 1,300 million passengers a year.
On London Transport alone, over 1,900 million annual journeys are made on buses and tubes.
Yet we suffer ever-growing road congestion, the amelioration of which most thinking people now agree cannot be achieved merely by building more roads.
Certainly we need road space for those who must drive, but there are many drivers who would willingly change (or revert) to public transport given some inducement — like services that are more frequent, more reliable and more widely available, or a further disincentive to the scandal of non-essential company cars that make commuting free of charge to their users.
We must make public transport once again the ‘smart’ way to travel.
To give Londoners the range and quality of rail services enjoyed by Parisians will cost a great deal of money, but this money will have to be spent if our public transport is not to slip once again on to the mad downhill spiral of reduced investment, reduced service, reduced passengers, reduced investment and so on.
This way only leads to the nightmare of Los Angeles.
Fortunately for us, and unlike Los Angeles, we already have the basis of a high-quality rail system — the huge network of lines laid down by our Victorian forefathers, many of which remain grossly under-utilised in a rapid transit context.
Coupled with desperately needed new construction, such as the cross-rail proposals, these existing routes could be made to really work for us at a fraction of the cost of new road-building, and with minimal land encroachment, pollution or disturbance to the environment.
Labour's ‘radical’ plans are to be welcomed for the vision they bring of the kind of urban public transport that is more or less taken for granted in western Europe.
In the race to present the ‘greenest’ image in advance of the next election, the present government may find it prudent to revise its view that Britain cannot afford such luxuries.
Letter: Official statistics
From Professor B. W. SILVERMAN
Sir: The Royal Statistical Society indeed has a keen interest in government statistics ('Moves to monitor use of statistics by Government', 9 October) and is planning an open discussion meeting in December, introduced by the head of the Government Statistical Service, on the topic of public confidence in official statistics.
However there are no plans at present to set up an independent council to monitor the Government's use of statistics.
Letter: Illogical verdict
From Dr BLAIR H. SMITH
Sir: I refer to the dropping of charges against the man accused of raping a mentally handicapped girl on the grounds she was not of fit mind to answer questions and give evidence (4 October).
As he was found guilty of having intercourse with a girl of under 16 years of age, logic surely draws the conclusion that if she is unable to testify in court, she is unable to give informed consent to sexual intercourse; in other words that the grounds on which the charge was dropped should have been the grounds on which rape was proven.
Letter: Arts leaflets
From Mr LUKE RITTNER
Sir: Your report (9 October) stated that the Arts Council had prepared two leaflets for separate distribution at the Conservative and Labour Party conferences.
This is not so.
In fact, we have published three leaflets, dealing respectively with the arts and the quality of life, the earnings of arts organisations and attendances at arts events.
All three were distributed throughout the Labour Party conference last week in Brighton and all three are available this week in Blackpool.
Letter: Good buildings but no good streets
From Mr ROGER JAMES
Sir: I agree with Jonathan Glancey when he says, in your welcome new Architecture page, that ‘the British public needs…to be shown what a city street such as Hammersmith Road could become if built by the best architects and developers’.
But where is there such a street?
I remember as a young man walking up and down the main street of the 1951 South Bank Exhibition for the sheer pleasure of it, and thinking how marvellous it would be if every town could have a street like this.
But is was not to be.
There are good modern buildings but no good modern streets.
Letter: Psychological addiction to crack
From Mr J. D. ASHCROFT
Sir: Keith Botsford's column (7 October) highlights the need for clear information about and reporting of the approaching crack epidemic.
In the mid-1980s, I was addicted for nearly a year to ‘free-basing’ cocaine, which is no different in any way from what is now called crack.
It has been quite common in London for nearly 10 years.
‘Free-basers’ make their own crack, rather than buying ready-washed ‘rocks’.
Seizures of crack are quite irrelevant in gauging the growth of cocaine smoking (as opposed to‘snorting’), since a baser buys ordinary powder-form cocaine.
As I know from my own experience, crack, or free-base, is highly addictive, but in a psychological rather than a physical way.
Once the motivation to stop arises, it is not so difficult to kick the habit.
In other words, the habit is by no means incurable.
Further, crack is not ‘instantly’ addictive; it takes, usually, a few weeks of regular sessions to produce addictive tendencies.
The addiction is to the ‘rush’— an experience of great pleasure which lasts a relatively short time.
In my own case, the motivation to stop free-basing followed the realisation that what crack promises in the rush is never delivered.
With increasing use, it leads to emotional instability and feelings of paranoia.
It is also a hideously expensive habit.
I would rarely spend less than £200 a night, and often more.
As the pleasurable feelings which first fuelled my psychological addiction decreased and began to turn sour, it became easier to give up the habit, something which would not be possible with a physically addictive drug such as heroin.
If the craving returned, I could cope by contemplating it for an hour or two, until it went away.
Crack is a dangerous drug because it is initially very addictive and because of its enormous financial cost.
But it is probably relatively easy to give up compared to heroin.
In trying to educate people against using it, I would emphasise not its dangers but the fact that ultimately it is a complete waste of time and money.
Letter: Late-night news
From Mr TOBY ENGLISH
Sir: Your expansion is a terrible thing.
You should have been more kind to your loyal readers.
It is now 10.30pm and I have still not finished today's Independent.
What will happen when you publish on Sundays as well, I dread to think.
Letter: Adoptive parents
From Mr NICHOLAS BAKER, MP
Sir: In her article ('The child as a piece of disposable property', 2 October), Sue Wells argues for a change in adoption law so as to bring it nearer an open adoption system, whereby adopted children remain in contact with birth parents.
This argument, based apparently upon the particular circumstances of a young woman in New Zealand whose daughter was unfortunate enough to grow up in care, itself an unusual experience, is dangerous and partial stuff.
Adoption agencies in Britain take the greatest trouble to see that children are placed where they will enjoy a strong family background.
It is the security of that family background which is the basic need of any child.
In order to provide it, adoptive parents themselves need the security of knowing that they alone have the joy and responsibility of bringing up the child.
Constant tugs of war between birth and adoptive parents would destroy the stability of the most rational child, who is presently adequately protected by the right to see birth parents at the age of 18 when the necessary information is available.
The changes proposed by your correspondent, as well as by Polly Toynbee in her book Lost Children, could well add to the increasing number of children in our society who lack a strong family background provided by two married parents.
Letter: Uppark treasures
From Mr ROBIN MILLER
Sir: The extraordinary circumstances which led to Uppark being preserved, virtually unchanged, since the early nineteenth century are well known.
What seems to have been forgotten is the role played by my relation, Meg Meade-Fetherstonhaugh in bringing this Sleeping Beauty to life for our generation to enjoy until its tragic destruction.
When Meg arrived at Uppark as its first chatelaine in many a year she found all the original fabrics in place, but hanging, through neglect, ‘like grey seaweed’.
She was advised to throw the whole lot away.
She refused.
She knew she had inherited something unique; she did not know how to save it; she found out; and she did it, down to the last chair cover.
I believe it was a woman from the Savonnerie company who taught Meg how to make the herbal soap which restored not only the colour of the fabrics but also their texture, how to stretch the fabrics on rollers of scrim, 30ft long, and how to repair the fabrics with 100 wax threads to the inch.
One can only imagine the time, the patience, the dedication, the sheer labour.
And when everything at Uppark was complete she continued to use her skills and the workforce she had trained to save other fabrics.
Other houses have treasures.
It was the ‘small’ things at Uppark that Meg saved and cherished that made it what it so uniquely was — the chair covers, the blankets Prinny pulled up to the portly royal chin, the original wallpapers in the attics where this quiet, remarkable woman worked to such effect.
Like the colour of the great shades in the saloon, they cannot be replaced or even exactly reproduced.
For that reason, I feel Meg would have opted for Anna Pavord's scheme.
The liberal Inquisition: Shabbir Akhtar says freedom of speech should not override society's other values
By SHABBIR AKHTAR
ONE might forgive John Torode ('Illiberal liberalism', 3 October) for thinking that the intolerance of liberals who make loud professions of tolerance is preferable to the intolerance of Muslims who do not.
But pardonable errors are errors nonetheless.
Meditating on the Anglo-Rushdie tragedy, he ‘long(s) for the protection of a written constitution like that of the US…which elevates freedom of expression above freedom to hide from intellectual challenge, or even vulgar verbal abuse.’
He warns us against being seduced by ‘a new and…illiberal ‘liberal’ orthodoxy' designed to accommodate demands for a law protecting Islamic sensitivities.
In his defence of Rushdie's right to publish, Mr Torode argues we should be allowed to ‘shock and insult and to ridicule as a way of testing the faith of our forefathers’.
We should not ban Voltaire's Candide, Tom Paine's Age of Reason, Bertrand Russell's Why I am not a Christian, Scorsese's The Last Temptation of Christ, or Monty Python's The Life of Brian.
But if we are to understand people's anxieties and hopes, we cannot ignore their sensitivities.
Even if a Rushdie-like attitudemay occasionally be necessary in the face of entrenched orthodoxy, iconoclasm need not lapse into abuse.
A scepticism reverent in tone may be revolutionary in content.
The works Mr Torode would refuse to censor differ in status.
Russell's critique of Christianity is not obscene.
Its tone is playful and frivolous but it makes some valid criticisms.
Paine's Age of Reason is iconoclastic but its central thesis is not reducible to a parody of the Christian faith.
A few of its witticisms are unnecessarily provocative and should be censored.
Voltaire's work is, arguably, offensive but one should err on the side of allowing it to be available.
The Last Temptation of Christ is disturbing but discerning.
It does not suggest that Christ was irredeemably wicked but merely that, in his humanity, he experienced temptation.
If the scenes of homosexuality were less explicit, there would be a powerful case for allowing its broadcast.
The Life of Brian, like Rushdie's The Satanic Verses, should be removed from public knowledge.
Neither teaches the ignorant nor disturbs the orthodox in the right way.
Both are parodies of seminal religious figures with vast and enduring ideological legacies.
Such works demean religious believers and hold up their convictions to contempt.
In a multicultural society, we must not allow our idolatry of art and literature to obscure issues of immense social and political significance.
Art should identify and condemn injustice and evil, but it can never properly be used to humiliate those, living or dead, who are among the best of our species.
Both Muslims and their liberal opponents should now shun the dramatic dogmaticism of former days and ask themselves: is freedom of speech a negotiable value?
Is it a contestable concept?
Does the secular clergy have the right to canonise freedom of speech as an absolute value overriding all others?
Does the Muslim minority here have the right to demand legislative changes to protect the dignity of its members?
Mr Torode is fanatical in his responses.
If he wants to ‘elevate freedom of expression above freedom to hide from intellectual challenge, or even vulgar verbal abuse’, then why should Muslims not elevate the obligation to defend Muhammad's honour above the liberal desire to prostitute his reputation?
Is Mr Torode's liberalism any less an absolute ideological position than the Islamic fundamentalism of his opponents?
Such attitudes create a deadlock.
The opponents, then, regrettably, tend to move into the sphere of physical power.
Muslims soberly recognise that, in a world addicted to the logic of coercion, it is, sadly, sometimes necessary to be militant in the defence of one's persuasion.
In the end, John Torode's attitudes bring into question the very purpose of law.
Most liberals have thought that we, unfortunately, needed the firm yoke of the law to ensure that the interests of weaker individuals and groups were not substantially harmed by the irresponsible attitudes and actions of the more powerful.
If the new liberals have their way, the law cannot be credited even with such a modest achievement.
The final irony is that the kind of liberalism John Torode wants is itself illiberal.
There can be nothing but hubris in a position that substitutes one moral absolutism for another while pretending to offer humility.
The liberal Inquisition is no doubt set to continue.
BOOK REVIEW /Including it all in: ‘A Scott Berg’— Sam Goldwin: Hamish Hamilton, 16.95 pounds
By ROBIN BUSS
IN AUGUST 1962, Sam Goldwyn packed the Beverly Hilton to celebrate his 80th birthday.
President Kennedy sent a telegram, Richard Nixon praised ‘one of those who began with nothing but his own ability, and achieved greatness on just that’.
Jimmy Durante sang ‘Inka Dinka Doo’.
The best estimates, in fact, put his age that August at a month or so past 83.
Goldwyn did not conceal his origins, but would sometimes embroider on them.
His East European Jewish background — he was born Schmuel Gelbfisz, in Warsaw — and the instinct that first led him into pictures, make him typical of the men who created Hollywood: Louis B Mayer, Adolph Zukor, Carl Laemmle, William Fox and the Warners.
But his path differed from theirs in one important respect.
In the early 1920s, when the industry was increasingly the preserve of the studios, Goldwyn found himself an outsider, an independent producer in competition with the majors.
This left him exposed but, at the same time, free from many of the studio constraints.
As a result, some aspects of Hollywood history are magnified in the ups and downs of his career.
The pursuit and creation of stars, for example, occupies a large part of the story that A Scott Berg has to tell: Goldwyn was constantly trying to sign up the human properties who would ensure the success of his pictures.
‘Crude’ and ‘loud’, according to Eugene Zukor (in an industry where these traits had to be marked to draw comment), he was in frequent conflict with his collaborators.
He made enemies and friends, gambled, pursued women, married, remarried, produced good films and bad, and survived to become an American legend.
It should be impossible to write a boring book about Goldwyn, but Berg comes close.
The twists and turns of Goldwyn's life can become tedious, since he was so often fighting the same battles; and the extent of his involvement in the industry means that Berg continually digresses to enlarge on some aspect of movie history, or introduces us to other personalities as they appear.
No one, in this cast of hundreds, has just a walk-on part: a role in just one Goldwyn film entitles us to the full biography of Frances Farmer, from winning a teenage essay competition to her eventual confinement in an asylum.
When Berg describes the Goldwyns moving house, moreover, to 1800 Camino Palmero or 1200 Laurel Lane, you could probably find your way round the properties blindfold on his description.
Yet from this trivial and exhaustive research, a portrait of Goldwyn does start to emerge — indulgent, yet credible and sometimes touching — until, at length, it triumphs over the irrelevant details, the plot summaries, and the occasional errors of fact.
It is the portrait of a brash, insensitive but privately vulnerable man, who suffered from being portrayed as the comic perpetrator of ‘Goldwynisms’: ‘the public stayed away in droves’, ‘include me out’, and many more, many apocryphal.
He could be mean to those who worked for him and generous to those to whom he owed nothing.
A boon to Western Union, he conducted business by wire, in effusive capitals.
His second marriage, to Frances Howard, lasted nearly 50 years.
It seems to have been based on real understanding, but little real intimacy.
Goldwyn considered himself physically unappealing and Frances retained a lifelong devotion to George Cukor, who was homosexual.
Berg implies that they settled for a stable relationship, Frances acting the perfect Hollywood wife and ultimately finding consolation in religion, while Sam's unspent emotions were burned off in work.
During the night after The Best Years of Our Lives scooped the Oscars, she came downstairs to find him sitting alone, with an award in each hand, sobbing.
If this was the summit of his career, his finest moment was his maverick statement opposing the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
Otherwise, Goldwyn remained chiefly a facilitator and a financier, and Berg is unable to support any more substantial claim for him, or to resolve the ambiguities in the producer's role.
Goldwyn tried to stamp his own notions of quality and Americanism on his pictures, but he did so as a tycoon, in competition with writers, directors and stars.
A picture that is grim, not lurid
By PETER JENKINS
BLACKPOOL: A bit of a cheer went up when the news came through last week in Brighton of the Government's humiliation at the hands of the Bundesbank.
From the leadership, the word quickly went out: bad news is not good news, no triumphalism.
But Labour leaders were purring like pussies all the same; as they saw it, the 15 per cent lending rate made necessary by a £20bn trade deficit virtually endorsed their analysis of Britain's economic weakness.
The razing of manufacture by a too-high exchange rate, the abdication of government from the promotion of industry, and the dissipation of the oil revenues on tax cuts was resulting in the nemesis of Thatcherism.
It is an appealing diagnosis for a party eager once more for power.
But is it true?
I write as a gloomy chronicler of Britain's relative economic decline struck by the inherent improbability of reversing a century's trend in a mere decade.
Today the word ‘decline’ is once more on senior ministerial lips and, from outside the Cabinet, Michael Heseltine draws new attention to the urgency of arresting it.
The deep-grained uncompetitiveness of the British economy, most notably its persistent failure to produce a sufficient supply of needed skills, has to be part of the explanation of such a trade imbalance.
The Government insists that the trade deficit is the result primarily of excess demand; it is man-made or — as Number 10 would put it — Lawson-made.
The charge is that he allowed domestic inflation to get out of control and messed around with the exchange rate when he should have been applying the monetarist remedy.
But if inflation could be brought quickly down again, the balance of payments would look after itself.
For, says Mr Lawson, a trade deficit is not in itself a problem if the world is happy to finance it.
Other trends in the economy, investment for example, are encouraging, and productivity has been rapid by British standards.
The cultural changes of the Thatcher years — supply-side improvements in management, shopfloor relations and the spirit of acquisitiveness — have resulted in a strong underlying improvement in Britain's economic performance, which the world recognises if the Labour Party does not.
I rehearse these arguments not in an attempt to settle them but for the purpose of casting doubt upon the thesis that the performance of the economy is at the crux of the Government's difficulties.
If Mr Lawson now drives the economy into deep recession or, alternatively, inflation is let rip, the Government would almost certainly perish at the polls.
But its predicament is not yet as lurid as that.
Even if things go fairly badly it is not certain that voters would turn to Labour as economic saviour.
Economic management has never been Labour's strong point.
The opinion polls continue to score the Conservatives well ahead on this count.
For the moment, high interest rates have eroded people's economic confidence in the future but the trends in savings and consumer spending scarcely suggest a lack of economic buoyancy after seven years of real income growth.
Even at this awkward moment, I doubt that the performance of the economy alone, or even chiefly, will lose the Conservatives the next election.
Preaching economic death and disaster may not be Labour's best tactic.
In a lecture he delivered on the fringe of last year's Conservative Party conference, Mr Lawson said: ‘While economic failure will most certainly drive a government out of office, economic success alone will not ensure that it retains office.’
He must wish he had rather more economic success to report this year, but the thought remains valid.
If ministers spend this week in Blackpool trying to paint the Labour Party red again — as Kenneth Baker seems to intend — they will have missed the point and further demeaned themselves in the eyes of the public.
The Labour Party comes to the fore when the distribution of resources comes to the top of the agenda.
While people look to the Tories to make money, they look to Labour to spend it to more social purpose.
The indictment now levelled against the Government is that the years of Thatcherite prosperity have been matched by a deterioration in public services and the environment.
Mrs Thatcher's only answer, people have been encouraged to believe, is to privatise everything that moves.
This public backlash against the shoddy, callous and spivvy aspects of Mrs Thatcher's administration does not derive from the sense of chronic economic crisis which infected the politics of the 1970s but, rather, is born of prosperity.
Prolonged prosperity is as likely as prolonged adversity to engender the mood that it is time for a change.
Today people are wondering why a country which, according to Mr Lawson not long ago, was experiencing an ‘economic miracle’, has been reduced to such public squalor — dirty, violent, congested and broken down, prone even to third-world disasters?
Economic difficulties are foreclosing on Mr Lawson at an awkward moment for the Government.
The rumours which upset markets yesterday of a renewed difference of opinion between the Downing Street neighbours appear this time to be without substance.
But exchange rate troubles draw attention to the unresolved argument between Mrs Thatcher and her Chancellor (backed by Sir Geoffrey Howe) about subjecting the pound to the formal discipline of the European Monetary System.
The Bundesbank has made mock of Mrs Thatcher's ‘when the time is right’ position.
This arcane dispute contributes to the electorally damaging impression that the Prime Minister is willing to hammer the country on the anvil of her dogmatism.
Meanwhile, declining confidence in the pound, and perhaps in the ‘Thatcher Revolution,’ is severely constraining ministers at a time when — as a formidable faction in the Cabinet has recognised — the Government needs to give a higher priority to the quality of life if it is not to be swept aside in the 1990s.
The enthusiast in the wings: Michael Heseltine tempered his Tory loyalty with some cautious ambition when he spoke to Anthony Bevins
By ANTHONY BEVINS
If Margaret Thatcher stands down before the next election, as most voters appear to believe she should, Michael Heseltine is the popular choice to succeed her as Conservative leader, according to the opinion polls.
But, following the Labour Party's transformation, he will be under pressure to explain how his beliefs differ from those of Neil Kinnock.
Faced with renewed attention from the Press and public, Mr Heseltine, although naturally shy, is soon overwhelmed by the instinct to advertise his political wares.
Referring to his decision to resign from the Cabinet over the Westland affair in January 1986, he says: ‘I made a statement that day making it clear that I was going to continue in active politics in any role the Conservative Party wanted.
‘In a sense I'm a market-led politician.
It is a valuable thing to remember that you can never succeed in public life further than your friends will let you.
You've got no way to say, ‘I'm going to make a takeover bid,’ or ‘I'm going to appoint myself,’or whatever.’
At Brighton last week, Mr Kinnock spoke about the need for greater investment in education and training, research and development, science and transport, the need for a beefed-up Department of Trade and Industry.
On the face of it, a reflection of Mr Heseltine's own views.
He says of Mr Kinnock's call: ‘I think it is a huge tribute to those of us who have spoken for the Conservative Party on industrial matters, and have had some personal experience in creating a small business and building it up to some size.
It is a great tribute that the Labour Party, having done so much to destroy the climate in which industry is successful, is now having to listen to what we're saying.
‘But it's not Kinnock; it's Mr Gorbachev; the world has come on to our ground and I find that a source of strength, because at least we know that we're talking about the capitalist system.’
He then goes on to criticise Labour for suggesting that priority spending on education and training can help overcome the difficulties of the balance of payments deficit — because such investment programmes take generations to work through the system.
‘So we're talking about the next century.’
And what of this century, including, more pertinently, the last decade under Mrs Thatcher?
‘I think this government…in terms of industrial support policies, has made gigantic strides.
Take education: it has made gigantic strides against bitter opposition to reform the system, to raise standards, to monitor the results and to draw industry closer to the academic and the educational world.’
But when asked whether those strides had been adequate, Mr Heseltine says: ‘We have not set our sights on achieving the standards of the world's best.
We have to do it.’
Thus, his view on the Government's education record is: good effort, but must do better.
The same applies to research and development and investment generally.
‘The uncomfortable problem Britain faces is to recognise its capacity to consume and not to invest.
The public debate about political priorities focuses far too much on what we can do for today's consumption and far too little about what we invest in the future.
Research and development should be taking a bigger priority in our public expenditure and within the private sector than it is even now.’
But there are other differences between the government frontbench and the man in the wings.
On poll tax, he says with due modesty: ‘There is nothing attractive in politics about the language of ‘I told you so.’
'He told the Conservative Party that it would be an unpopular tax when he first opposed the idea — successfully — as Secretary of State for the Environment in the early Eighties.
He then spoke out against the legislation, from the backbenches, when it was introduced in the Commons.
‘I made one speech on the subject and I've not referred to it since, and there seems no purpose in doing so.’
Why not?
‘In the end, I'm a Conservative.
In the end, I don't believe the poll tax justifies a vote against this Government in a general election.
In the end, I want the Tories to win and I will do nothing to prejudice that position.’
And what of that other political sore, the proposed health service changes?
‘I go back to my opening view.
We are a high-consumption society and we have got to conserve the national resource and make sure that every part of it is effectively used.
And so if one of my colleagues sets out on a reform designed to get better value for money and a more effective health service, I'm going to support him.
I will support the legislation.’
But he then adds: ‘I would say just this: that having got the legislation it would be wise to proceed by exemplar, by experiment, by demonstration of success rather than trying to do a root and branch revolutionary approach.
It is such a complicated thing to try and do, you do need the support of the medical profession and of the managers of the health service and of the public, and you'll get it more effectively if they can see by example what you're trying to do comprehensively.’
At which point I asked Mr Heseltine what he was up to.
What was his game?
He supported the Government, he was loyal, but there too often appeared shades of difference which set him apart as a challenger.
He said that cabinets and parties were coalitions; groups of people with a common philosophy, providing ‘a starting point in most discussions which enables them to work their way by dialogue through to agreement’.
Inside Cabinet, he had played that role, with the required public discretion, to argue the case for council house sales, industrial competition, and the inner cities policy.
Now, an outsider, he was arguing his own beliefs, within the Conservative framework, from the public platforms of Westminster and beyond.
That was all very well, but agreement by dialogue did not match the public perception of Mrs Thatcher's Government.
Mr Heseltine says: ‘The media are very good at sensing a mood and then exaggerating it.
I think that basically the 1980s were very rough and there were some very difficult times and in order to persuade the country to change, and impose change where it was resisted, and to carry it through, required both will and language characteristic of that challenge and Mrs Thatcher has been associated with that.’
He goes on to argue that the reality is different from the rhetoric.
As an example he cites Europe; his political passion — just as it would appear to be Mrs Thatcher's bete noir.
‘This government has taken Britain into Europe further and more irrevocably than any previous government.
The Macmillan government applied to join, the Heath government signed the treaty as it was, but at that stage basically the nation states retained the veto process which had been injected by de Gaulle into the original treaty.
‘It was Mrs Thatcher who signed the Single European Act, which is the biggest transfer of sovereignty undertaken in any period of our history.
From that moment on, we were committed to a process that required majority voting, to which we were subject.
The conclusions from that are of profound consequence.
‘The precise scale you can't quantify, but I can give you the parameters.
When Jacques Delors said that within 10 years, 80 per cent of the decisions affecting the industrial economic and commercial matters would be taken in Brussels, Lord Young argued with him and said it would be 50 per cent.
I am not in the business of arguing with either.
50 per cent taken by Brussels?
That's not to me consistent with a view that we have remained detached and apart and able to take whatever decisions we like regardless of our partners.’
Then right at the end of the interview, he comes back to the fundamental question about himself — what is on offer.
He says: ‘There are great forces at work, and they've already embraced us in a world market, they're sweeping us towards a European destiny.
They are forces which are spreading wealth faster than at any time in human history and in one's political approach I think you either are an enthusiast anxious to embrace the forces that are at work or you are a sceptic, perhaps inclined to resist them, hoping that you can frustrate them.
‘Now I am by nature an enthusiast.
I've no idea whether Europe is going to work, no one has, and I can think of huge historical reasons why it won't.
But I know this; if it is going to work, there is no argument that denies Britain a place at the leading edge of what is happening.
‘Obviously, by background and experience I'm wholly committed to the benefits of the capitalist system.
But I'm a Tory.
And I believe that with the privileges that come to those who benefit most from the capitalist system there are obligations, and so the combination of that latter thought makes me want to do something about the inner cities, plus a revulsion at waste and hopelessness and dereliction and concern which is self-evident in some of these older towns and cities.
‘So, given that I have a political opportunity, I tend to become an enthusiast harnessing the forces that are at work, trying to get the best out of them, trying to use them for the political purposes that I believe in.
There's a role for people like that.
But in a political party, there's a role for the sceptic.
Because the enthusiast must be constrained, the sceptic must be led.
And the excitement of democracy, of being a member of a cabinet or whatever, is to see how these forces inter-relate.’