

Court Circular
From LEONARD DOYLE in New York
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 9 October: The Queen was represented by Major John Henderson at the Memorial Service for Colonel the Hon Sir Gordon Palmer which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this afternoon.
The Duke of Edinburgh was represented by Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir John Grandy.
The Duke and Duchess of York was represented by Major William McLean.
The Princess Royal was represented by Lieutenant-Colonel Peter Gibbs.
9 October: The Princess Royal this morning arrived at Glasgow Airport and was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Renfrewshire (Major JDM Crichton Maitland).
Her Royal Highness subsequently arrived at Enmore Hotel, Kirn, and was received by Colonel RM Campbell-Preston (Vice Lord-Lieutenant for Argyll and Bute).
The Princess Royal, President, Riding for the Disabled Association, later attended a show given by the Dunoon and Cowal Branch of the Association at Dunnon.
Afterwards Her Royal Highness attended the European Sheep and Wool Centre, Lochgoilhead and opened the Drimsynie Holiday Village, Lochgoilhead.
The Princess Royal, attended by Mrs Timothy Holderness-Roddam, travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
CLARENCE HOUSE 9 October: Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother was represented by Sir Martin Gilliat at the Memorial Service for Colonel the Hon Sir Gordon Palmer which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle this afternoon.
Miss Alexandra Loyd and Lieutenant-Commander Patrick Jephson RN were in attendance.
The Princess of Wales attended the Memorial Service for Colonel the Hon Sir Gordon Palmer which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this afternoon.
The Prince of Wales was represented by Mr Gerald Ward.
9 October: The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, Patron of The Northern Ballet Theatre, this morning visited the Company at their Studios in Zion Crescent, Hulme, Manchester.
Her Royal Highness, who travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight, was attended by Mrs Jane Stevens.
The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon was represented by the Hon Mrs Wills at the Memorial Service for Colonel the Hon Sir Gordon Palmer which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this afternoon.
9 October: Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester and The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester were represented by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Simon Bland at the Memorial Service for Colonel the Hon Sir Gordon Palmer which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this afternoon.
YORK HOUSE 9 October: The Duchess of Kent this morning attended the launch of Tears and Smiles — The Hospice Handbook by Martyn Lewis at British Telecom Tower, London W1.
Her Royal Highness was attended by Miss Sarah Partridge.
The Duke and Duchess of Kent were represented by Mr Andrew Palmer at the Memorial Service for Colonel the Hon Sir Gordon Palmer which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this afternoon.
THATCHED HOUSE LODGE 9 October: Princess Alexandra, attended by Lady Mary Mumford, arrived at Heathrow Airport this afternoon in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight upon the conclusion of the visit to Monserrat and the British Virgin Islands.
Her Royal Highness was represented by Sir Angus Ogilvy at the Memorial Service for Colonel the Hon Sir Gordon Palmer which was held in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, this afternoon.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Princess of Wales, Patron, RELATE, attends the premiere of Shirley Valentine at the Empire, Leicester Square, London WC2.
The Duchess of York, President of Action Research for the Crippled Child, visits the Duncan Guthrie Institute at the Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow; and this afternoon, as Patron of Museums Year 1989, opens the Customs and Excise Museum and Exhibition at Custom House, Greenock, Glasgow.
Prince Edward attends a performance of Buddy in aid of the Sharon Allen Leukaemia Trust at the Victoria Palace Theatre, London SW1.
The Princess Royal visits the Elizabeth Foundation, Southwick Hill Road, Cosham; attends the Centenary Service of Thanksgiving at St Mary's Church, Portsea, Portsmouth; opens Whitbread Brewery's new depot at Hedge End, Southampton; opens the hostel at Sparsholt College, Winchester; this evening, as President, The Save the Children Fund, attends a Save the Children Fund Industry and Commerce Group Reception at Buckingham Palace for Patrons of the 70th Anniversary Training Appeal; and, as President, Engineers for Disaster Relief, attends a Dinner at the Institution of Civil Engineers, Great George Street, London SW1.
The Duchess of Gloucester, Patron, Asthma Research Council, opens the Allergy and Allied Respiratory Disorders Department at Guy's Hospital, London SE1.
The Duke and The Duchess of Kent attend a Gala in aid of the CPRE at the Royal Festival Hall, London SE1.
The ballerina Lydia Lopokova, pencil on card, 1919, by Pablo Picasso, which has been acquired by the Fitzwilliam Museum, in Cambridge.
By JOANNA GIBBON
The ballerina Lydia Lopokova, pencil on card, 1919, by Pablo Picasso, which has been acquired by the Fitzwilliam Museum, in Cambridge.
This is one of three drawings of Lopokova by Picasso, the latter having come to London for the first time to work on designs and sets for Massine's Le Tricorne, writes Joanna Gibbon.
Picasso also made a series of studies of Lopokova and Massine in the can-can for Massine's Boutique Fantasque.
The painter's interest in ballet was stimulated by his affair with one of Diaghilev's dancers, Olga Koklova, whom he later married.
Lydia Lopokova (1891-1981) studied ballet at the Imperial Ballet School in St Petersburg, joined the Diaghilev Company in 1910 and remained with it until it was disbanded in 1929.
She was renowned for her character dancing, appearing in a production of The Sleeping Princess in 1921 as both Aurora and the Lilac Fairy.
With her husband, Maynard Keynes, she founded the Cambridge Arts Theatre in 1936.
The Fitzwilliam Museum bought the study, which is now on display, with help from the National Art Collections Fund, and a regional purchase grant from the Museums and Galleries Commission (administered by the Victoria & Albert Museum).
Appointments
Gazette Page 20
Anniversaries
By JOANNA GIBBON
On this day: Lucius Plancus founded Lyons, 43 BC; rioters burnt down Nottingham Castle, 1831; Henry Morton Stanley met Dr Livingstone, Ujiji 1871; the Savoy Theatre opened with a performance of Patience by Gilbert and Sullivan, London 1881; Gershwin's Porgy and Bess opened in New York City, 1935; Tristan da Cunha islanders were evacuated following a volcanic eruption, 1961; the XVIIIth Olympic Games opened in Tokyo, 1964; Fiji became independent, 1970; Sir John Betjeman became Poet Laureate, 1972; Spiro Agnew resigned as US Vice-President after being fined $10,000 for income tax evasion, 1973; in the General Election, Labour was returned with an overall majority of three, 1974.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 20
Obituary: Edmund Osmanczyk
By JAN CIECHANOWSKI
EDMUND OSMANCZYK was a versatile and accomplished author, journalist, parliamentarian and encyclopaedist who had a lifelong and unquenchable interest in international affairs.
He spent most of his professional life outside his native Poland, working as a foreign and diplomatic correspondent for the Polish media.
He worked in Europe, the USSR and North and Latin America and covered such important events as the storming of Berlin by the Russians and Poles in 1945, the Potsdam Conference, the Nuremberg Trials and many post-war Summit Conferences.
He was, par excellence, both Pole and European, looking forward eagerly to the day of the creation of a united Europe — to him the ‘motherland of motherlands’— free from the control of or undue influence from the two super powers.
Born in 1913 in Silesia, the descendant of a Turkish soldier who had settled in Poland after being captured by the Poles at the Siege of Vienna in 1683, he was educated at a Gymnasium in Warsaw and at the Universities of Warsaw, Berlin and Bordeaux, where he studied history and journalism.
During the war he served in the Home Army, working for the clandestine radio show, and took part in the Warsaw rising of 1944, which he later described as ‘the most tragic of all Polish insurrections’.
In January 1945 he was arrested in Krakow by the Gestapo but managed to escape from the transport taking him to a concentration camp.
Soon after the liberation of Poland he joined the Polish regular army as a war correspondent and eventually entered Berlin with the First Polish Infantry Division.
From the publication, in 1946, of his book The Affairs of the Poles Osmanczyk's constant call was for Polish-German reconciliation as one of the essential steps towards the creation of a new, permanently conflict-free Europe.
He rightly felt that in the age of nuclear weapons any future war in Europe would be an act of suicide and so from 1956 he appealed repeatedly for an improvement in East-West relations and for super-power disengagement in the continent's central heartland.
He also strove staunchly to strengthen relations between the Poles living in Poland and those scattered abroad in the 13-million-strong Polish diaspora — links which had been almost destroyed during the Cold War period by Communist authorities, oblivious to their potential value to both sides.
Throughout the Seventies and Eighties — following his final return from postings abroad to work in Poland — he was a determined champion of human and civic rights for all his fellow citizens, regardless of political or religious affiliations, and an untiring advocate of political and economic reform.
A long-standing independent member of the Polish Parliament — the Sejm — he often used this position as a platform from which to criticise the Government and the ruling Party.
He fought for the introduction of a free press, the right of everyone to travel freely, a sound convertible currency and the right to existence of a Polish opposition.
He knew that these were the essential ingredients of political and economic stability in Poland and that two of them — political opposition and a free press — were the only real guarantees against Government abuse of power.
He was energetic in the struggle for Solidarity and finished his parliamentary career as a Solidarity-sponsored senator (for his native Silesia) in the newly re-established Senate to which he was elected last summer.
Osmanczyk wrote a number of useful and influential works, in Polish, Spanish and English, on Polish and international affairs.
The most important of these was his thousand-page Encyclopaedia of the United Nations and International Agreements, published in Philadelphia in 1985, of which he produced editions in all three languages.
He was justifiably proud of this splendid work which he rightly considered to be his main literary achievement.
At the time of his death he had just completed a second, much fuller edition, to be published in 1990.
Obituary: Aubrey Boomer
By CHRISTOPHER PLUMRIDGE
AUBREY BOOMER was the last surviving member of the Great Britain and Ireland Ryder Cup team which contested the first match against the Americans in 1927.
The son of a professor, Boomer became interested in golf when he watched the six-times Open Champion Harry Vardon, whose birthplace he shared, playing in Jersey during the First World War.
Boomer chose to pursue his career in France and he and his brother, Percy, became the professionals at the fashionable St Cloud club, just outside Paris.
Golf on the Continent in the 1920s was very much a pastime for the rich, whereas in Britain professionals were employed by clubs as low-paid servants: across the Channel they were regarded as the social equals of the members they served, by virtue of their skill at the game.
Aubrey Boomer's tournament career was also confined to the Continent, where he was extremely successful, winning the French Open a record five times between 1921 and 1931, the Belgian Open twice, the Dutch Open twice and the Italian Open once.
He challenged for the Open Championship on one occasion, in 1927 at St Andrews, when he was unfortunate enough to run into Bobby Jones at his best.
The American set a new record aggregate of 285 and Boomer shared second place, six strokes behind.
Boomer was a handsome man with a great deal of charm and became the favourite professional of the rich who visited Paris, playing with such luminaries as Sir Philip Sassoon, who rewarded Boomer by having suits made up for him from Savile Row.
This kind of treatment caused resentment among the petty-minded officialdom which ran the British professional game, and when Boomer was chosen for the 1927 Ryder Cup team he was picked up at Cherbourg en route to America and made to wear what every Frenchman was supposed to wear — a beret.
The crossing took almost a week and those team members who were not seasick practised hitting shots on board, timing their swings with the roll of the ship.
On arrival at Worcester, Massachusetts, for the match, the earth was still moving for the British side and they lost nine-and-a-half to two-and-a-half, with Boomer winning his foursomes in partnership with his friend Archie Compston, but losing his single.
Boomer was selected again for the 1929 match, which took place at Moortown, Leeds, and was made vice-captain under George Duncan.
He played his part in a famous British victory, winning his single, having lost in the foursome.
This was to be Boomer's last appearance in the Ryder Cup, although he was still quite clearly a good enough player to hold his own against the best of the Americans.
The British penchant for shooting themselves in the foot emerged again when officials decided that professionals who resided and worked outside Britain were ineligible to play, although they qualified by birth.
This move was based purely on jealousy, as professionals on the Continent enjoyed a far higher standard of living than their British-based counterparts.
The rule also affected Henry Cotton, who took up the post at Royal Waterloo, Belgium, in 1933 and thus missed two Ryder Cup matches when he was at the peak of his powers.
Aubrey Boomer also held the post at Royal Waterloo and subsequently moved to the Royal Golf Club de Belgique at Ravenstein.
He was due to attend this year's Ryder Cup match at The Belfry, but illness prevented him.
His death means that the American Gene Sarazen is the only survivor of that first Ryder Cup match 62 years ago.
Obituary: Professor Bernard Harris
By JOHN ROE
BERNARD HARRIS, formerly Professor of English at York University, was a gentle and gentlemanly scholar of the school of Allardyce Nicoll, his Stratford mentor, a type which is sadly disappearing as universities enter a tougher phase.
A Renaissance scholar with a strong emphasis on English drama, he was active on the Board of Shakespeare Survey, to which he contributed articles on Elizabethan satire while co-editing with John Russell Brown the early volumes of the influential Stratford-upon-Avon Studies.
Harris was born at Henley-upon-Avon, but the family soon moved to Birmingham, where he was later to become associated with the Shakespeare Institute.
He took his BA at Birmingham in 1948, and followed this with an MA (on James Shirley) in 1952.
Nicoll appointed him a fellow of the Shakespeare Institute in 1953.
Harris came to York in 1963 as the first lecturer appointed to the English Department by the founding professor Philip Brockbank.
They quickly recruited others and soon established a formidable department which based its teaching on a principle of direct engagement with the student.
Harris rose to the position of full professor at York in 1971.
His literary interests were remarkably wide and his expertise ranged from Anglo-Irish writing to Silver Age Latin epigrammatists; but he published mainly on seventeenth-century comic or satirical dramatists, as his editions of Marston's Malcontent and Vanbrugh's Relapse testify.
His own wit was ruefully amiable.
Once when we were both contributing to The Year's Work in English Studies (he on Renaissance drama), I met him in the library and expressed anxiety about the deadline.
‘I've missed it too,’ he said reassuringly; then, more reassuringly, ‘but I'm unrepentant.’
True to the York principle his commitment was entirely to the person, sometimes causing exasperation to administrators.
An undergraduate met by chance on the campus walkway might be treated to one of his brilliant, spontaneous tutorials, the kind normally only dreamt about, while a group of colleagues over whose meeting he was to preside gazed at an empty chair.
Conducting a graduate seminar on the unpromising topic of textual variants he would hold the room spellbound for two hours by his unforced erudition.
He was the possessor of learning which he shared unselfishly with his students, making them feel it was just as much theirs as his.
More of his scholarship should have found its way into print, but persistent illness, latterly reinforced by family tragedy, cruelly intervened and compelled his early retirement.
Yet if his ideas and perceptions did not always reach the page, they undoubtedly entered the minds and imaginations of the many lucky enough to converse with him.
Obituary: Rollo Silver
By RUARI MCLEAN
Rollo Silver, librarian and printing historian, born New York 1909, married Alice Gindin, died Boston 20 September 1989.
For this, he had an odd background.
Born in 1909 in New York City to parents who were members of the Ethical Society, he went to a school run by the Society where, under distinguished teachers, he ended up with little knowledge of even how to write correctly.
Never mind: he taught himself and entered Brown University, Rhode Island, a Baptist foundation.
When he wrote a letter to the college newspaper criticising the compulsory chapels and boring sermons, he was expelled.
But when someone wrote letters on his behalf to The New York Times he was quickly reinstated by the university president, and graduated in 1931.
During the Depression Silver sold china and glass in Fifth Avenue, worked a petrol pump, and sold cigarettes wholesale; but all this time he was collecting Walt Whitman; he also studied for a Master's degree in English at Boston University, which he was awarded in 1941.
Then in 1941 America entered the war.
When the US army discovered that Silver had been engaged in research work (on Whitman) he was put to personally testing the durability of uniforms, in sub-zero and boiling temperatures, artificial rain storms in laboratories and real tropical conditions in Florida: he soon became an assistant director of this project and stayed there for two years.
Then, in pursuance of his interest in Whitman and others, he decided to study to become a librarian.
In 1953 he became Assistant Professor and in 1957 Professor of Library Science at Simmons College in Boston, where he remained until 1965.
One of his students at Simmons was the daughter of Frank Francis, Director of the British Museum, and this led to close contacts with the printing and publishing world in Britain.
From 1957 Rollo and his wife Alice came to London every year, where he was elected an honorary member of the Double Crown Club (whom he addressed, on WA Dwiggins) and the Wynkyn de Worde Society.
Friendships made in this country were warmly reciprocated by the Silvers in their beautiful old house in Mt Vernon Street in Boston, where they lived an elegant and ‘simple’ life: they never owned a car, and never cooked in their kitchen; all meals except breakfast were eaten in restaurants.
Rollo loved being taken to the gilt and plush ambience of Rules in Covent Garden, to which his riposte was Lock-Obers in Boston, which he protested was not so good.
Rollo Silver was old-fashioned in the best of ways, and a warm friend of the book world.
Correction: Obituary: Mark Dignam
By MARGARET WOLFIT
MAY I correct a mistake in Ossia Trilling's Obituary of Mark Dignam (5 October)? writes Margaret Wolfit.
Rosalind Iden was not (to my knowledge) at Sheffield Repertory Company.
It was my mother Chris Castor, a fine actress, who was leading lady there and gave Mark Dignam lessons in elocution.
She had trained under Kate Rorke at the Guildhall, where she won the silver medal for elocution.
Obituary: Albert Geldard
By MARGARET WOLFIT
Albert Geldard, footballer, died Bury, Lancashire aged 75.
He shared (with Ken Roberts of Wrexham) the distinction of being the youngest Football League player when he appeared for Bradford Park Avenue against Millwall 60 years ago aged 15 years, 158 days.
Later won four England caps.
Obituary: Canon Hugh Pickles
By GERALD HOWAT
HUGH PICKLES was one of life's enthusiasts and eccentrics.
Cricket, he claimed, was his second religion, but his first won him the loyalty and affection of generations, whether the staff and pupils of Worksop College, of which he was chaplain, or his parishioners at Blewbury in Oxfordshire, of which he was vicar from 1964 until his death, five days before he was due to retire.
His canonry was not of Oxford but of Kobe, of the Anglican Church in Japan, but it was the Oxford Diocesan Clergy Cricket side which he captained and ran for 25 years.
Three weeks before his death he received the Church Times Cup when Oxford beat Rochester in the Final.
Only a year earlier he had performed his last hat-trick.
His skills as a coach (the England player Philip Sharpe was one of his discoveries), his knowledge of players, his presence at cricket's great occasions and his ability to entice the great and the famous to play for his occasional XIs combined to make him, in his own way, one of the game's celebrities.