

Health Update: Impure cheek
By OLIVIA TIMBS
WEDDINGS may be hazardous for guests, according to an anonymous report in The Lancet.
The author considers the risks of kissing the bride at the reception and argues that the vogue for ‘continental’ kissing means the risk of contracting a bug from a fellow guest, via the bride's cheek, is considerable.
The author suggests you should either make sure you are near the front of the receiving line ‘or, before applying the lips, wipe the bride's cheeks gently with a dilute solution of hypochlorite’.
From personal experience, the greater hazard may be for the bride.
After a reception for nearly 150 guests, my right cheek was red and raw: a result of male guests who had failed to have an afternoon shave.
Health Update: Anxious patients
By OLIVIA TIMBS
PEOPLE suffering from terminal cancer are understandably depressed and anxious during their treatment.
However, Sheila Payne, from the Department of Psychology, University of Exeter, has discovered that women being treated for breast or ovarian cancer were much more anxious half-way through their treatment than they had been at the beginning.
Sheila Payne suggests a number of reasons for this: the side effects of the drugs become more distressing; patients are aware that they will have to go through further courses of similar treatment and feel gloomy at the prospect; and they receive less support from health professionals than at the start.
Sheila Payne argues in Counselling Psychology that women would benefit from attention throughout their treatment — not just at the beginning.
Health Update: Dishwasher warning
By OLIVIA TIMBS
AUTOMATIC dishwasher detergents are an unrecognised hazard to children.
They work by creating a powerful alkaline solution which dislodges fats.
They are highly caustic and can cause terrible injuries to the throat and stomach if they are accidentally swallowed.
A report from Australia on children who had swallowed dishwasher detergent revealed that nearly half had been given the wrong advice and made to vomit.
This can cause even more damage to the throat if the lining is already damaged.
Medical advice should be sought as quickly as possible.
A commentator in The Lancet argues that detergents should be sold in child-resistant containers.
Parents should be aware that sludge left behind in the dispenser is highly concentrated and dangerous.
Health: The choice that allowed a life for Sophie: Pregnant at 37, Belinda Whiting decided against screening.
She explains why to Eileen Herzberg
By EILEEN HERZBERG
BELINDA WHITING gave birth to Sophie, a baby with Down's syndrome, 18 months ago.
Although Belinda was 37, she decided against amniocentesis or any other test to detect chromosomal abnormalities.
She wanted her baby, did not want to run the risk of a miscarriage and would not have considered an abortion.
‘I don't understand how people can abort a wanted child.
How we can legally do away with children like Sophie,’ Belinda explains.
‘It seems a terrible arrogance to abort a baby because you believe it isn't good enough.’
Belinda had made a conscious decision to have a baby and felt that it was important to keep healthy by eating well and exercising during her pregnancy.
‘I felt I was doing everything I could to nourish and protect the baby and I was so sure about the rightness of it all that I didn't want a scan.
I didn't want any intervention.
‘I knew that whatever I was producing, I was meant to have: that somehow we had chosen each other.
Throughout the pregnancy, I sensed there was nothing wrong with the baby; that it was very strong, healthy and right.’
But despite all the careful preparation, the birth turned out to be difficult and traumatic and Sophie was finally born with the help of forceps.
Belinda says: ‘I remember looking at her clearly for the first time, searching for that visual connection with my family or her father's, some genetic connection to identify myself with her, but seeing instead that otherness — the look of a stranger.
‘From the eyes, the ears, the shape of the head, we knew immediately.
My heart sank and numbness took over.
I kept thinking: ‘This isn't real.
Tomorrow I shall wake up from the dream.’
' The initial shock was distressing, but after a night's sleep, nature's chemistry had wrought its miracle and Belinda fell completely in love with her daughter.
‘I felt high for about four days, not thinking about anything but caring for her.’
As an anxious new father, Belinda's partner, Jem, read everything he could find about Down's syndrome because he wanted to know what he could expect from the future.
For Belinda, looking after Sophie was the only way she knew how to deal with the shock.
‘I couldn't bear to think of the future, of what would happen to her when we got old, if we got ill, when we died, or worse — whether she would only live a few years,’ she says.
‘At moments it seemed overwhelming.’
Wrapped up in the everyday business of looking after her newborn baby, Belinda felt fine: she could cope for a few days.
Then she would explode with grief and anger.
‘What seemed so hard at the beginning was the limitation that calling her Down's and handicapped would have on her new life.
Nothing could be done to alter what felt like a sentence.’
With no escape route, Belinda was forced to take a long, hard look at herself, re-evaluating expectations for herself as well as Sophie.
Forced to face up to her own fears and failed expectations, it was as if Belinda had to deal with two babies: one was the theoretical idea of a baby with Down's syndrome, the other was Sophie herself.
She says: ‘Experiencing the reality of this very wonderful little human being makes a mockery of any disappointment that could have been felt in her.
She has been a delight from the beginning, not only to us, but to all the friends and relatives who have met her.
She gives out so much and has so much to teach us.’
Coming to terms with the idea that Sophie is different, Belinda finds making comparisons with so-called normal children increasingly meaningless: ‘There is nothing abnormal about Sophie.
She is different, yes, but we see that difference as a uniqueness peculiar to her.
She has her own purpose and we are very proud to have her in our lives to love.’
Like so many women of her age, Belinda wanted her baby very much and felt that it was a miracle when she became pregnant.
Because of her age, she had a one in 180 chance of carrying a baby with Down's, yet she was not unusual in deciding against having an amniocentesis.
Half the women whose age — 36 plus — puts them at relatively high risk of carrying a Down's syndrome child, also refuse amniocentesis.
Either they do not want to run the risk of miscarriage (about one in 100-200) which the procedure entails; or they would not want a termination even if the baby was found to be disabled.
Few people would wish to deny a woman's right to know whether the baby she is carrying is disabled, and to decide — with counselling if needed -whether she wants to have it.
But what seems to be in question is the right to choose otherwise — to refuse the procedures used to detect abnormality.
Many doctors assume that if Down's is spotted, termination is the only ‘sensible’ thing to do, what all women will want.
Describing a new screening programme to detect Down's in the foetus at a London hospital, the British Medical Journal (8 October 1988) claims that it could ‘detect 60 per cent of affected pregnancies…and could reduce the number of children born with Down's syndrome in the United Kingdom from about 900 a year to about 350 a year’.
This assumes that all the women who are found to be carrying a child with Down's syndrome will want to terminate their pregnancies.
Will children with Down's syndrome become an endangered species?
Should doctors always be so keen to offer abortion as the only solution to women who are in the first throes of disappointment and depression at the news that their baby is not genetically perfect?
Dawn Winterhalder was 32 and expecting her fourth child when she developed hydramnios — excess fluid in the womb — and her gynaecologist became seriously concerned about the baby's health.
She was 22 weeks pregnant when doctors discovered that her baby had Down's.
Dawn recalls: ‘The consultant assumed I would terminate the pregnancy.
He suggested abortion two or three times and made it very clear that he thought I was making a mistake.
He said it was a devastating mental handicap: ‘You'll find her a terrible burden on your life and your family.
Are you sure you are making the right decision?’
‘Fortunately I was strong, but had I been weak, I might have given in.
I think it's very sad, to have a terribly negative view put to you when you are in a vulnerable situation.
‘Now we've got Rebecca she's a delight.
We expect little and get a lot.
I really don't see a handicap as a handicap, I just enjoy Becky for who she is and what she is.’
Odds against a Down's syndrome baby The risk of having a Down's syndrome baby: if you are 25 is one in 1,500; if you are 30 is one in 800; if you are 35 is one in 300; if you are 40 is one in 100; if you are 45 is one in 30.
Health: Happiness is born-again hugging: Simon Denison joins a rebirthing weekend and weeps with two hundred apprentices in loving relationships
By SIMON DENISON
THE LOVING Relationships Training began to the sound of Albinoni's Adagio.
Two hundred people were milling about the room; 20 or 30 of them were hugging each other in greeting.
‘Do these people know each other?’
I asked someone, shaking his hand.
‘No, but they've done this before’ he replied, with a huge smile.
‘You'll see, we do a lot of hugging this weekend.’
He was right.
At the end of the training — a weekend seminar on the philosophy of Rebirthing — all 200 were in each other 's arms, many crying with happiness.
An elderly English lady, with a tendency to pre-war propriety, who told me on the Friday that she was afraid it would all be ‘another load of pretentious American rubbish’, said on Sunday that she had learned to open up for the first time in her life.
What on earth had happened?
Loving Relationships Training (LRT) sounds like ‘How to Find a Man and Keep Him’ women's magazine advice.
But at £320 for the weekend, it is more expensive.
On a superficial level, there are similarities.
The weekend is a training in how to find and nurture the right sort of relationships with friends, parents, business, money, and especially sexual partners.
Rebirthing is a form of group psychotherapy, teaching participants how to eliminate the hang-ups that cause conflict and pain in our dealings with each other.
Developed in the Sixties in the United States by Sondra Ray, rebirthing has grown increasingly popular.
Thousands of people in Britain visit rebirthers every year.
At the start, we introduced ourselves: most were creative people or professionals, aged between 25 and 35.
About half said they were in stable relationships.
Less than a quarter claimed to be (or looked) miserable or confused.
Rebirthing, we were told, offered a superabundance of all good things with no sacrifice whatsoever.
You can have it all, we were told; even eternal life was promised.
The central tenet of rebirthing is that thought is creative and that our beliefs about ourselves are self-fulfilling: according to the trainers, a ‘beautiful’ American couple called Peter and Meg Kane, if we can think positively about ourselves and get rid of negative thoughts, we can eliminate our insecurities.
So if a man who has had an adolescent incestuous relationship with his mother now feels guilty about having close relationships with women, he is told that there is nothing wrong in loving women.
He must then affirm this, over and over again, until he begins to believe it.
There is nothing new about this.
According to Jenny Cousins, a psychologist and practising psychotherapist, teaching people to think themselves out of negative and erroneous beliefs about themselves is a standard psycho- therapeutic practice.
‘It is absolutely as effective as anti-depressant drugs, if not more so.’
The LRT method of shaking off destructive beliefs about ourselves brought with it an astonishing sense of joy.
Everyone had to admit what rebirthers call their ‘personal lie’ and affirm that the opposite — their ‘eternal law’-was true.
People milled about the room, shaking hands, saying things like: ‘Hello, I'm Jane, and I have a right to be alive.’
'Oh, that's great.
My name's Jonathan, and I am good enough.’
Tears of happiness and laughter were pouring down everybody's cheeks.
One danger is that for some people everything might happen too quickly at a Loving Relationships Training weekend.
They might regress too far too soon, and there is no follow-up for LRT ‘graduates’.
Neither is there any screening of precariously unstable people, who might be unable to cope with what comes up.
The weekend lost its appeal for me when it came to the fundamental rebirthing philosophy.
Traditional psychology from Freud onwards has held that what happens in the earliest years of childhood can affect our later perceptions of ourselves.
But the rebirthers take this further.
If a boy is born ‘breech’, or bottom first, for instance, he may later believe that he does things the wrong way round; or because such births are painful for the mothers, he may decide that he hurts women.
A girl born with the umbilical cord twisted round her neck may feel that she always gets herself tied up in things.
Because beliefs about ourselves are self-fulfilling, these people will continue to find themselves in situations in which they can prove themselves right.
‘It may sound plausible, but is it correct?’ asks Charlie Lewis, an academic psychologist at Reading University.
‘I doubt whether babies have the software to be able to map these experiences on to their memory.’
Rebirthing psychology also verges on the absurd in its extension of the idea that thought is creative.
To a rebirther, thought is always creative.
And the reverse is also true: namely that all events are created (only) by thought.
So if someone is mugged, raped, or injured, it is because he or she believed it would happen.
The rebirthers believe that positive thoughts can have similar effects.
The biggest nonsense is the belief that we can be physically immortal, if only we believe it.
‘The only reason we die is that we think death is inevitable.
It is the greatest negative thought in the world,’ said the Kanes.
The centrepiece of the weekend was a ‘group rebirthing’.
Lying in rows on the floor, we breathed deeply without pause, the idea being that we can cleanse our bodies of negative thoughts and that some, by actually reliving the experience of their birth, can release their first hang-ups.
Orthodox medical explanations of the process are less dramatic.
‘If you breathe in and out like that you will definitely hyperventilate,’ says Jenny Cousins.
‘It could be dangerous.’
The lights were dimmed and the process started.
Breathing with the others, my heart began to beat very fast, and soon my fingertips were tingling.; eventually my whole body was filled by trembling.
The loud sound of 200 people breathing hard was soon punctuated by a woman beginning to sob, then howl.
Others started to join in.
Sometimes there were cries of pain, shouts of ‘I can't breathe’, but mostly a loud and continuous din of sobbing from at least half the people in the room.
As each person began to cry, a rebirther helped to calm them down.
Eventually the room grew quiet.
Afterwards many people said this experience had been traumatic but positive.
One girl said that she had been unable to breathe, and was only able to do so when she covered her face with a pillow.
Then she had remembered her birth.
She was in the birth canal, her head and ears were covered, she was at peace.
Then a whoosh, and she was out in the painful, bright light.
A man said he had breathed for ages and felt nothing.
Then he was touched on the head by a rebirther and broke down into uncontrollable sobs.
‘I realised for the first time that I have never been wanted: it really was such a revelation.
But now, it sounds crazy but I have never felt so happy.’
He was not alone in feeling this way.
Many others were laughing and crying and hugging each other.
I wept too.
Was all this emotion merely suggestibility to the day's teaching?
Or a reaction to an atmosphere charged by 100 people's grief?
Or is there more to breathing than we understand?
Some people seemed genuinely changed by the weekend: they learned that they really could give or receive love.
For others it provided a safe environment in which they could recognise the insecurities that were messing up their lives.
Nobody I spoke to regretted the money they had spent.
Time will show whether the training has long-term benefits — or whether it merely creates LRT junkies, capable of happiness only in an environment unnaturally charged with emotion and hooked on an expensive promise of love and everlasting life.