

Shortage of nurses ‘could grow worse’
By GILES GORDON
First Edition THE STAFF shortage crisis in nursing could go from bad to worse as industry, the United States and Australia take their pick of recruits, it was claimed yesterday.
Brenda Baxter, chairwoman of the National Association of Theatre Nurses, said: ‘There have always been unfilled vacancies in this speciality.
What is new is that we have moved from too few qualified nurses coming to work in the operating theatres, to not enough people entering nursing.
‘The profession as a whole is in crisis as nursing is now in direct competition with business, industry and other professions to attract personnel into its ranks.’
She told 1,000 representatives at the association's 25th annual congress in Harrogate, North Yorkshire, that the nursing shortage was being experienced by the rest of the Western world with the subsequent drain of qualified theatre nurses going to the US, Australia and anywhere else offering a better deal.
‘All of this suggests that things could go from bad to worse,’ Miss Baxter said.
Parents who abuse their children have often been abused themselves, Dr Hans Steiner, consultant paediatrician and senior lecturer in child health at Newcastle University, told the congress.
‘I am now surprised if the parent involved has not got such a history.’
He said professionals dealing with the problem had to ‘break the circle’ of abuse.
Raiders find getaway car driven by PC
By GILES GORDON
First Edition TWO MEN who fled after bungling a raid on a shop jumped into a getaway car only to find a policeman at the wheel.
Constable Dale Buckingham had just collected the car from the scene of the raid, in Bristol, and was taking it to his police station when he saw two men he suspected of being involved in the raid, and stopped.
According to a report in yesterday's Newsbeat, the Avon and Somerset Police newspaper, the men recognised the car and jumped in, congratulating the driver on avoiding the police.
It was only when PC Buckingham called for assistance on his personal radio that they realised what was happening.
They attacked him, but he was able to hold them off until help arrived.
Correction: Case Summaries: Lex Services plc v Johns
Home News Page 10
Law Report: Tribunal's decision on road verges cannot be re-litigated: Crown Estate Commissioners v Dorset County Council — Chancery Division (Mr Justice Millett), 6 October 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
The decision of an inferior tribunal with a limited jurisdiction and a limited function to perform is capable of creating an estoppel for all purposes, subject to the principles that it cannot conclusively determine the limits of its own jurisdiction and that a public official cannot be debarred from performing his statutory duty.
Mr Justice Millett held that, by reason of the decision of the Chief Commons Commissioner on 17 March 1977, the plaintiffs were estopped from asserting as against the defendant council (other than in proceedings concerned with the registrability of certain grass road verges within the Royal Manor of Portland under the Commons Registration Act 1965, in respect of which the plaintiffs accept that this issue had been finally determined) that the road verges were not part of the highway.
In 1968, the road verges, with other land, were provisionally registered by the council, acting as registration authority, in the register of common land.
In 1969, various rights of common were registered.
The council as highway authority lodged an objection to the registration of the road verges on the ground that they formed part of the highway.
After a hearing in 1976, the Chief Commons Commissioner found that the road verges were part of the highway, and so did not fall within the definition of ‘common land’ in section 22(1) of the Act.
The registration, excluding the road verges from the register, became final in 1977.
The council had recently authorised an adjoining owner to construct and pave an access way over part of the road verge.
The plaintiffs claimed that certain grass verges were part of the manorial lands of the manor and wished to re-litigate the question of whether the road verges were part of the highway.
John Mummery (Farrer & Co) for the plaintiffs; Sheila Cameron QC, and Frank Hinks (County Solicitor) for the council.
MR JUSTICE MILLETT said that the particular question was whether a decision of a commons commissioner that certain land was not registrable as common land because it formed part of a highway was capable of giving rise to an estoppel per rem judicatam so as to preclude the landowner from afterwards asserting, in proceedings unconnected with the register, that the land in question did not form part of a highway.
It raised the more general and important question whether the determination of a statutory tribunal with a limited jurisdiction could give rise to issue estoppel at all, or only to cause of action estoppel; in other words, whether it could give rise to an estoppel for all purposes or only for the limited purpose for which the jurisdiction to make the determination was conferred.
The council contended that the plaintiffs were estopped from asserting that the road verges did not form part of the highway by the decision of the Chief Commons Commissioner.
Res judicata was a special form of estoppel.
It gave effect to the policy of the law that the parties to a judicial decision should not afterwards be allowed to re-litigate the same question, even though the decision might be wrong.
If it was wrong, it must be challenged by way of appeal or not at all.
As between themselves, the parties were bound by the decision, and might neither re-litigate the same cause of action nor reopen any issue which was an essential part of the decision: cause of action estoppel and issue estoppel respectively.
The plaintiff accepted they were precluded from re-litigating whether the road verges were registrable under the Act, by the commisioner's decision, which they conceded gave rise to cause of action estoppel, but said the requirements of issue estoppel were lacking.
The requirements of issue estoppel were summarised in The Sennar (No 2)(1985) 1 WLR 490, 499.
The plaintiffs contended that the commissioner was not a court of competent jurisdiction, and that the issue before him of whether the entries in the register were validly made was not the same as the issue in the action, which was whether the road verges formed part of the highway.
They submitted that the commissioner had no jurisdiction to adjudicate on the status of the road verges generally or otherwise than for the limited purpose of deciding what entries should be contained in the register.
The plaintiffs had cited highway, tax and rating cases in support of the limited jurisdiction principle.
The leading highway authority, R v Hutchings (1881) 6 QBD 300, where the justices were held to have no jurisdiction, did not help the plaintiffs.
The rules developed in taxation and rating cases could not be applied more generally.
They were sui generis, and were to be justified by considerations of policy.
The supposed principle did not exist.
The whole doctrine of res judicata was based on considerations of judicial policy, was of great importance but was not paramount.
It must yield to the principles that a tribunal of limited jurisdiction could not be permitted conclusively to determine the limits of its own jurisdiction and that a public official could not be debarred from performing his statutory duty.
Subject to those two safegaurds there was no reason why the decision of an inferior tribunal with a limited jurisdiction and a strictly limited function to perform should not be capable of creating an issue estoppel.
All the requirements of issue estoppel were satisfied in the present case.
The commissioner had statutory jurisdiction to decide whether the road verges should be registered as common land.
For that purpose he had to determine whether they formed part of a highway.
He, therefore, had jurisdiction to determine that question also.
But it was not a jurisdictional question, for his jurisdiction to decide it did not depend on the correctness of the answer he gave.
Farmer sees financial sense in going green
By MIKE PRESTAGE
HILL FARM, in the heart of south Somerset, is about to undergo a revolution that will be watched with interest by neighbours and from further afield.
It is thought to be the largest British dairy farm to go green, and the conversion — for deeply held environmental reasons — is backed by sound economic logic.
Oliver and Vanessa Dowding are not amateurs living the good life on a smallholding.
From the dairy yard where Friesian cows wait to be milked, fields stretch a mile and a half to a distant hill.
There is a second dairy yard at the far side of the farm, near the village of Shepton Montague.
The 920-acre mixed dairy and arable holding employs five full-time staff, as well as two students gaining work experience.
Three generations of Dowdings have run the farm and used herbicides, pesticides and the best the agro-chemical producers could come up with to get the maximum yields.
But no more.
The spraying machine in the yard will become a museum piece as pesticides are outlawed.
Mr Dowding is a leading official in the local National Farmers' Union and is aware of the risks involved in throwing away the drugs and chemicals.
However, he believes the increased market for green products, and the premium price people are willing to pay, makes the conversion commercially viable — and will help farmers to break the stranglehold of the powerful agrochemical companies.
He said: ‘If you look in any of the farming magazines, the majority of the full-page ads are from drug companies.
They have a tremendous hold on the industry, and the pressure is on to use more and more chemicals to get better and better yields.
It's a treadmill that is hard to get off.’
Though he expects lower cereal crop yields after he completes the conversion, there is a saving of £70 an acre in the cost of pesticides and herbicides.
The higher price being paid for environmentally sound produce also means that, despite the smaller crop, his income will stay much the same.
Extra can also be earned on milk produced from ‘green’ cows; customers pay 10p a pint more in the shop.
He said the conversion would take three years and the pitfalls were unknown.
‘It is a risk, but it's something I have wanted to do for some time and I believe it is feasible.
We are determined to make it work — the last thing I want is to be a laughing stock among local farmers if I fail.’
He said the way drug, chemical and fertiliser companies and supermarket chains were manipulating the public's opinions and buying habits and dictating to farmers was ‘frightening’.
An example he cites of the way drugs are pervading the industry is the experiment with BST hormone which is being injected into cows, including animals on farms in Somerset, to improve milk yields.
In spite of fears about the use of the hormone, the names of the farms taking part in the trials are kept secret, and their milk is fed into the public supply.
‘This use of drugs to help nature along is worrying.
The attitude of the companies is such that I want nothing to do with them; I like to think we will survive without ruining the lives of the animals and destroying the land.’
Running a farm on green lines will mean much more planning ahead and developing such techniques as homeopathic treatment for sick cows, though as a last resort medication will be given.
‘If we can prove this works,’ Mr Dowding said, ‘I am sure there are a lot of other farmers who want to give it a try and are just waiting.
Hopefully, our experience will be of use to them.’
Berlin conductor
By MIKE PRESTAGE
Alun Francis was appointed principal conductor of the Berlin Symphony Orchestra.
Bomb blocks road
By MIKE PRESTAGE
A suspected Second World War bomb found in road works near the A2 exit of the M25 between Dartford and Swanley in Kent closed both roads for several hours last night, leading to a 25-mile traffic jam at one point.
Sentence cut
By MIKE PRESTAGE
Malcolm Conway Graham, 41, a Kent residential social worker jailed for five years for having unlawful sex with two teenage girls in his care, was cleared in respect of one girl.
The Court of Appeal decision left him with a two-year term to complete.
1m pounds drugs haul
By MIKE PRESTAGE
Eight people were being questioned by police after 250 kilos of cannabis worth £1m was found concealed in a consignment of cabbages which arrived in Birmingham from Holland.
UDR men's bail curbs are lifted
By MIKE PRESTAGE
Four members of the Ulster Defence Regiment arrested and charged with arms offences were granted unrestricted bail by the High Court in Belfast yesterday.
The men were among 28 UDR members arrested during police raids on Sunday in the inquiry into alleged security leaks.
Darryl Chapman, 29, is accused of possessing three rifle magazines, and the other three — Leslie Wheeler, 24, Robert Thompson, 25, and William Casement, 31 — face charges of possessing ammunition.
On Monday the men were each granted bail on condition that they remained in military custody.
But Lord Justice MacDermott did not impose any conditions when he released them on their own bail of £100.
Rich should give more to the arts, Palumbo says
By DAVID LISTER, Arts Correspondent
WEALTHY businessmen who have benefited from low tax rates should do more to subsidise the arts, the chairman of the Arts Council said yesterday.
Peter Palumbo also hinted that, in the current squeeze, public money might have to be limited to centres of excellence and innovation.
Introducing the Arts Council's annual report, Mr Palumbo, a highly successful property developer, pointed out that the public sector gave five times as much as the private sector in Britain, whereas in the United States 90 per cent of the arts were funded by private donations.
‘It is that sort of tradition I shall be seeking to foster, albeit in lower percentage terms,’ he said.
‘The fact is that many people have made substantial personal fortunes in the last few years, and with encouragement and the lowest income tax rate for 50 years, I believe they will be prepared to acknowledge their privileged position and return to the community a portion of their good fortune.
Like it or not, they have inherited the mantle of the great patrons of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and it is a responsibility that they can hardly deny.’
However, the trend appears to be going in the reverse direction.
The Association of Business Sponsorship of the Arts says many sponsors are uneasy that they are expected to replace, rather than supplement, government grant, and a fall in sponsorship is feared.
Mr Palumbo also suggested that grant money might be taken away from companies which failed to achieve a sufficiently high standard.
The Arts Council is holding a special meeting in November to discuss the funding crisis; it is thought that it might decide to cut the number of bodies receiving grant if more government money is not forthcoming.
Mr Palumbo said: ‘Excellence springs up in many places.
It is, however, essential.
I can see no justification in spending taxpayers’ money in order to celebrate the second-rate.’
But he said he was committed to funding experimental art, ‘the equal of research and development in industry’.
He also implied that the Arts Council might soon give greater emphasis to its former role as a policy body as well as a grant-giving organisation.
It existed to ‘speak for artists and art organisations, to offer them advice, to argue for them and to champion their interests in the media and to government whenever and wherever the need may arise’.
Luke Rittner, secretary general of the Arts Council, said inflation had outstripped grant aid by 6 per cent, and ‘a failure by government to recognise this situation will be a cruel slap in the face to an arts world that has done so much to adapt to the market economy of the 1980s’.
A £5m development appeal launched yesterday by the Natural History Museum has already raised £2.5m.
The appeal aims to raise the rest over the next five years through private sector support.
Gerald Ronson, co-chairman of the fundraising committee, said: ‘We have to use money from business because government funding is being cut back.’
BP is providing £1m of sponsorship.
US law rejected as model for seizing criminal assets
By TERRY KIRBY, Crime Correspondent
LAWS to confiscate the proceeds of organised crime in the United Kingdom should not follow the American pattern, according to a report on practises in both countries published yesterday.
The report, by Professor Michael Zander, of the London School of Economics, criticised United States legislation on the confiscation and forfeiture of assets as being too wide-ranging and open to abuse by prosecutors.
In the report for the Police Foundation, an independent research body, Professor Zander argues that the main US legislation, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act, is ‘fundamentally objectionable’ since it allows forfeiture without criminal conviction.
The criticisms will be studied closely by the Home Office, which has overseen an increase in British legislation aimed at the seizure of financial gains from crime, particularly drugs and terrorism.
While generally approving existing British legislation, Professor Zander cautioned against any extension of powers and points to the United States where, he said, mere suspicion could mean financial ruin for individuals and organisations while the law also allowed the seizure of all assets, not simply those related to a specific offence.
‘The US law in this respect seems greatly excessive,’ he said.
‘To take away the profits of crime is one thing; to seize assets that have no connection with crime is another.
Forfeiture should be proportionate to the offence.’
The professor believes the potential damage is so great there is a temptation for suspects to plea bargain.
Entirely innocent people might admit to lesser offences to avoid confiscation.
‘The resulting scope for abuse of prosecutorial discretion is great,’ he adds.
The report also criticised US law for confusing juries, extending the scope of conspiracy charges, and having vague language and excessive penalties.
However, Professor Zander supported the American idea of using money and other assets seized in drugs inquiries to fund law enforcement operations.
The Home Office has ruled out specific allocation of seized funds to law enforcement bodies but is considering the possibility of a central pool for expensive police operations.
Laboratory seeks industrial cash
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
A LEADING government scientific research centre is selling its services to industry in an attempt to bolster its ailing finances.
Daresbury Laboratory, near Runcorn, Cheshire, has Europe's largest and Britain's only source of synchrotron radiation (SRS)— vital to the study of protein crystals and the development of drugs to combat diseases such as Aids.
The laboratory, one of four run by the Science and Engineering Research Council, has come under increasing financial pressure as its £20m annual budget has fallen sharply in real terms.
Professor Alan Leadbetter, Daresbury's director, said its buying power had declined by 7 per cent per year over the last few years.
Selling science to industry was ‘necessary’.
‘We simply do not have enough money.’
Earlier this year, the SERC said its laboratories should use 20 per cent of their resources to attract outside work.
But Professor Leadbetter also feels the laboratory has a duty to serve British industry, which, he said, lags behind Japan and the United States in the exploitation of advanced facilities such as the SRS.
Daresbury's work for industry, which amounts to only 5 per cent of its activities, could double within a year, Professor Leadbetter said.
Glaxo, the pharmaceutical company, has already announced a £500,000 contract to use the SRS.
Some of the profits will be used to buy sophisticated instrumentation which Daresbury cannot afford.
Moves to set up statistics watchdog
By ROSIE WATERHOUSE
MOVES to set up a national watchdog to monitor the integrity and accuracy of government statistics gained momentum yesterday when plans were announced for a meeting to draw up firm proposals, writes Rosie Waterhouse.
The Statistics Users' Council is to hold a seminar of its member organisations, including the Confederation of British Industry; the Trades Union Congress; the Royal Economics Society; the Institute of Statisticians; the Royal Statistical Society, which is already considering an idea for a watchdog organisation; and the government Statistical Service.
A forum to establish guidelines for a national statistics council is being organised by Ian Maclean, secretary of the Statistics Users' Council.
University plans to double its students
By NGAIO CREQUER, Education Correspondent
THE University of Southampton announced plans yesterday to more than double its student numbers over the next 35 years by building an additional campus.
The university wants to expand from 6,800 students to 15,000 by 2030 and it is clear some private fee-paying would be instrumental in that expansion.
It has identified a 295-acre site of mainly coniferous woodland managed by the Forestry Commission, and is discussing acquisition with landowners and local authorities.
Professor Gordon Higginson, university vice-chancellor, said yesterday: ‘I am not assuming students would be fully-funded by government.’
The professor said the idea of a two-year degree was under consideration.
He pointed to a ‘desperate need to educate the population better’ and said that in the first half of the Eighties the engineering workforce fell by a third and the number of graduates employed increased by half.
The additional campus, 2 ½ miles from the present site, would make Southampton one of Britain's largest universities.
College lecturers have voted overwhelmingly for a one-day strike and a total ban on flexible working over pay, the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education announced yesterday.
Artery ‘drill’ brings hope for heart cases
By ROB STEPNEY
A NEW blood vessel ‘drill’ which can relieve blocked arteries supplying the heart has been used successfully for the first time by surgeons in Britain.
A man of 65, from Bristol, last week became the first British patient to benefit from the technique, known as rotational angioplasty.
His arteries were blocked with hard calcified deposits of cholesterol.
Conventional treatments, including surgery, had failed to improve the blood flow to the heart.
An oval drill head was attached to a flexible wire and threaded into a blood vessel in his leg.
Watched using X-rays, it was pushed through the main artery and into the small opening of the coronary arteries at the top of the heart.
The head bored through the blockages that were reducing the blood flow.
Such blockages cause pains known as angina, and in severe cases can lead to a heart attack.
The patient then underwent a treatment called balloon angioplasty in which a small rubber balloon was passed inside the artery and inflated, thus pushing the remaining cholesterol deposits back into the artery wall.
Dr Jonathan Crick, a consultant cardiologist at Bristol Royal Infirmary, and a consultant radiologist, Dr George Hartnell, tried the technique after hearing of its use in West Germany.
The Conservative Conference: Clarke urges Treasury Secretary to back NHS bid: Direct appeal to Lamont brings battle for additional health service funding into the public arena
By JUDY JONES and COLIN BROWN
KENNETH CLARKE, the Secretary of State for Health, yesterday took his battle for more money for the health service to the conference hall at the annual Conservative Party conference in Blackpool.
Mr Clarke made a direct appeal to Norman Lamont, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, to support his bid for between £1-2bn extra for the NHS budget next year.
‘Norman Lamont is a good friend of the NHS and I am sure — or I think I am sure — that he will prove it,’ Mr Clarke said.
Mr Lamont is engaged in a series of behind-the-scenes negotiations with the major spending ministers at the conference to reduce £10bn in excess bids.
It is expected that the health budget for next year will be settled in the talks, but disputes over education and transport could go to an appeal to the Star Chamber of ministers chaired by Sir Geoffrey Howe.
In a robust speech, which won him a standing ovation, Mr Clarke denied suggestions that Government's plans to overhaul the NHS were a substitute for extra money for the service.
‘Thatcherite Britain now spends more taxpayers’ money on our health than on our defence.
It was the last Labour government which spent more on defence than the NHS.
We are not proposing reform instead of spending more money on the NHS.
‘We intend to reform as well as spending more money in order to get the most out of that money for the patients.
We are fully prepared to accept the cost of a high quality and expanding service.
Cost is not the enemy.
Waste is the enemy of a good service.’
The Secretary of State further emphasised that the Government was not embarking on the privatisation of the NHS.
Private polls conducted for the Tory Party have shown concern among voters that the service, like water and electricity, is about to be sold off.
Mr Clarke told representatives: ‘We haven't any plans for privatisation.
We never have.
I regard the whole idea of privatising the NHS as quite daft -impossible in a universal service offering the full range of service to every citizen of all ages and states of health without any of them having to pay for their medical treatment.’
He remained unchanged in his ‘unwavering and inflexible commitment’ to the principle of an NHS funded largely out of taxation, giving free medical treatment to everyone regardless of means.
‘But we will and really must change the bureaucracy, the remoteness of management, the impersonal care for patients, the frustrations of the staff and the failure to maintain high standards everywhere that the present way of running the service causes far too often.’
Regional variations in waiting times for operations, the excessive drugs prescribed by some doctors and other failings were often not the failing of a single individual.
‘They are the fault of the old-fashioned way in which it is run.
It is our duty, if we care, to tackle the causes of these problems.’
Mr Clarke won the approval of the conference for a strong attack on the BMA's campaign against the NHS changes.
Tory supporters also turned against the BMA and angrily disrupted a BMA fringe meeting shortly before the health debate.
The anger against the BMA was still present in the hall when Mr Clarke repeated his appeal to the British Medical Association to withdraw its campaign against the Government's health service White Paper Working for Patients.
‘After eight months, I recently won an admission from the BMA that our proposals in the White Paper would not and could not cause any doctor to have to refuse any patient medicines which that patient would need.
They did not say sorry.
‘They have not yet admitted that none of my proposals would force a patient to travel long distances for treatment against his or her will; that no doctor will have any new financial incentive to refuse elderly patients on to his list.
They still do not concede that we are doing nothing to force any GP to spend less time with his patients.
‘They ought to because all those allegations are untrue as well.’
Speakers in the health debate overwhelmingly supported the Government's blueprint for changing the NHS.
Paul Twyman, of North Thanet said: ‘The BMA are a trade union and they are entitled to stand up for their members’ interests, but they are not entitled to abuse their professional position by deliberately scaremongering and frightening elderly patients.’
Sheila Scott, a state-registered nurse from Hendon, said the Government was right to try to make the NHS more cost-conscious.
‘If it means treading over sensitive toes, so be it.’
The Conservative Conference: A lone police officer on duty on Blackpool seafront yesterday as part of the increased security there for the Conservative Party conference
By JUDY JONES and COLIN BROWN
The Conservative Conference: A lone police officer on duty on Blackpool seafront yesterday as part of the increased security there for the Conservative Party conference
The Conservative Conference: Fowler prepares law to stamp out wildcat strikes
By COLIN HUGHES and STEPHEN GOODWIN
LEGISLATION TO curb wildcat strikes will be introduced during the coming parliamentary session, Norman Fowler, Secretary of State for Employment, announced yesterday.
He told the conference that he will today be publishing a consultative Green Paper to tackle what he called ‘the weapon of the militant — the tool of the wrecker’.
Three out of four strikes are unofficial.
Afterwards he told reporters that the proposals would probably be incorporated in an industrial relations Bill which could be published either late this year or early next year.
The same Bill will ban the remaining forms of secondary action, and outlaw closed shop agreements altogether.
But Mr Fowler confirmed that the Government's attempt to find a way of preventing strikes in essential services has so far failed.
He told a press briefing that the issue remained under review, and emphasised that he hoped the legislation on unofficial strikes would help to prevent disruption of essential services.
His review of the law on unofficial action and strikes in essential services was launched during the early summer this year, when a sequence of strikes hit the railways and the London Underground.
The latter action was exclusively unofficial, and repudiated by the union, but it was widely known to be organised in secret by a small group of shop stewards.
Today's Green Paper is expected to contain two separate methods of enabling employers to take action in the civil courts against the organisers of unofficial strikes.
One will enable employers to take the union to court, where it would risk losing its immunities, if it fails to repudiate the action.
The other is likely to enable employees to dismiss strike organisers, where the union has repudiated the action.
In his conference speech Mr Fowler attacked Labour's reviewed industrial relations policy, saying it had one aim: to make strikes easier.
When Labour opposed sequestration of union assets it meant, ‘strike freely’, when it said trade union immunities would be restored it meant ‘strike often’, and when it approved of enabling secondary action it meant ‘strike anywhere’.
He proclaimed the Government's success in reducing unemployment by 1.2 million since the last general election, with both youth and long-term unemployment falling.
‘It has been the largest and longest sustained fall in unemployment in the history of this country.’
But employment prospects would be limited if pay settlements were too high: labour costs had to be controlled, Mr Fowler warned.
Conference speakers repeatedly called for no let-up against the unions.
Chris Davis, managing director of a Liverpool manufacturing company, said not enough had yet been done to restrict union power.
‘There are still nearly three million trade unionists in either pre or post-entry closed shops,’ Mr Davis said.
His own firm had been picketed for the last five months in a dispute over the use of new technology.
Don Stewart, a farmer from Boothferry, declared: ‘No more closed shops; no more trade union barons.
That is the road of future success for the Tory government.’
Jacqui Lait, of the European Union of Women, attacked Labour's proposal for a minimum wage.
It would put thousands out of work and close business after business.
‘That is the thorn on the red rose,’ she said.
Representatives also emphasised the need for more skill training.
Jenny Riley, a recruitment consultant and parliamentary candidate in Newcastle East in 1987, said there had to be ‘massive’ programmes of training and retraining.
Almost every business sector lacked specialist and well-qualified staff.
The Conservative Conference: Councils to face housing targets
By JUDY JONES
COUNCILS will be asked to set annual housing targets and explain any failure to meet them to their tenants under government proposals announced yesterday.
Michael Howard, Minister of State for Housing, hailed the move as a ‘clear enhancement of tenants’ rights', enabling people to judge how well local authorities ran housing.
‘Tenants and community charge payers will have the evidence they need to condemn inefficiency,’ he said.
Mr Howard was responding to Tory grassroots demands for the Government to do more to relieve homelessness and allow councils to spend more of their own cash to provide homes.
Ministers will decide in January exactly how council performance should be measured and they want assessments to begin in April.
A consultation paper published yesterday suggested the proportion of rent collected, the amount of rent arrears, the number of empty properties and the average cost and waiting time for repairs must be included.
The minister also said a framework for securing the future of shared ownership schemes in rural areas, offering part-rent, part-purchase deals, had been agreed with the Housing Corporation.
During the housing debate, Kevin Johnston, from Eastbourne, East Sussex, was cheered as he said: ‘The homelessness problem is even more acute now than in 1985.
Quite clearly, to the shame of local and central government, the homelessness crisis has been allowed to get to such a level that I would describe it as a national disgrace.’
Thousands of families were destined to a life of misery in cramped bed and breakfast accommodation.
Many had no privacy and were living in filthy conditions.
Fire safety standards were widely flouted.
More than 400,000 individuals were now classified as homeless and, in the second quarter of this year, some 33,000 people were placed in bed and breakfast accommodation.
‘It takes away an individual's dignity and a family's self-respect.
It destroys hope for a better life.
But as a party and as a government we have a duty to encourage families to better themselves and discourage dependency.’
Eileen Sandford, vice-chairman of Shrewsbury's housing committee, said the borough had a waiting list of more than 4,000.
‘Soon we shall be reaching the bed and breakfast stage…but it is totally unsuitable for young and elderly people.
The situation embarrasses us in committee.
We face Labour's jibe that the Government holds all our revenue and that we can only save 20 per cent from our house sales.’
Jean Burnham, from West Sussex, criticised the ‘smug’ Richmond Conservative Association's motion for debate, welcoming government initiatives to increase the supply of low-cost housing.
‘We must be allowed to spend our capital receipts.
We do not want to be handing our paper profits back to the Government.’
Mr Howard emphasised the Government's continuing commitment to its Green Belt policy.
‘In the Thirties we established it.
In the Fifties we expanded it.
In the Eighties we have doubled it.’
He cited the decision last week of Chris Patten, Secretary of State for the Environment, last week to turn down the housing development for Foxley Wood in Hampshire, adding: ‘We have repeatedly said that, wherever possible, decisions of this kind should be left to local people.’
The Conservative Conference: Wakeham puts faith in nuclear power
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
NUCLEAR power and more competition were offered to the Conservative conference yesterday as the Government's answer to protecting the environment and safeguarding the future of planet Earth.
Reaffirming the promise to privatise the electricity industry within the life of this Parliament, John Wakeham, Secretary of State for Energy, said competition between generating companies would be a massive incentive to use fuel more efficiently and keep costs down.
‘For us, energy needn't cost the earth.
And it won't,’ he told the conference.
‘Nuclear power is, without a doubt, the cleanest — and by any objective criteria — safest way of sustaining growth and protectingthe environment at the same time.
It is the only energy available in the quantity we need that doesn't damage our atmosphere.
And it is also the only source of power we know that will still be available when coal and gas supplies run out.’
Several delegates expressed disappointment at the delay in the electricity privatisation timetable, but Mr Wakeham said he would make no apology.
It was the biggest privatisation ever.
The Government wanted to get it right and ensure genuine competition.
In the first criticism of Nigel Lawson from the floor, Rupert Blum, an energy economist from Leominster, argued that a base rate of 15 per cent, plus the lenders' mark up, meant energy conservation schemes simply did not pay.
He appealed to the Chancellor to ‘start fighting inflation with more flexible, more imaginative measures than ever rising interest rates’.
The debate also brought demands for privatising the pits.
Trevor Evans, a mineworker and vice-chairman of Bolsover Conservatives, said that the ideal for the future must be a private coal mine and power station working together.
The privatised electricity industry should not rely on imported coal ‘dumped’ at artificially low prices, he said.
The Conservative Conference: Easy lie the locks that would bear the crown
By COLIN BROWN
MICHAEL HESELTINE yesterday eclipsed the conference with a sideshow at the Grand Theatre, a couple of hundred yards down the road from where the full conference was taking place.
The Cabinet outcast managed to upstage Kenneth Baker, the Conservative party chairman, who has been taking acting lessons from Kenneth Branagh.
The big question now is how soon the blond from Henley will eclipse the blonde from Finchley, who is said to be planning a speech which would make Joan of Arc sound hesitant.
Mr Baker adopted the Henry V model for his official morale-boosting speech from the conference platform.
He stiffened the sinews, jutted the jaw, summoned the Baker blood and delivered the ‘once more into the breach dear friends’ soliloquy with fiery passion.
The cherubic Baker face was fixed with a hardened lip for the tough bit on the economy, subtitled, I support Nigel and so should you.
People were asking whether the Government had got the economy right, Mr Baker said.
‘Again, I say yes.
Nigel Lawson took a very courageous decision in the war against inflation.
He did not shrink from doing what was right.’
The only problem with the Shakespeare text is that it is open to modern political misinterpretation.
When Mr Baker quoted Henry's words before Agincourt —‘He which hath no stomach to this fight, let him depart’— it was seen, not as an attack on Labour, but a slight on the Chancellor who had decamped from the conference for Blaby.
Throughout his performance, Mr Baker allowed a carefully oiled strand of hair to fall over his forehead, clearly an attempt to steal the crown from the famous golden locks which thrilled successive Tory conferences.
But the Heseltine mane has been tamed.
It is neatly trimmed and, though elaborately structured, never fell out of place.
Heseltine watchers could have wished for no clearer sign of his leadership intentions.
They settled down to a tour de force, delivered with the power of Concorde on full throttle.
The Grand is an intimate theatre setting.
But this was the conference speech for the big hall, delivered with the full range of Heseltine oratorical skills which used to bring the entire conference to its feet.
‘He's beginning to sound just like Churchill,’ one admirer said softly.
The words roared over a row of Henley Heselteenies and reverberated in the gods.
This was the conference speech which the conference would never hear, but he tried.
When it was over, Robert Hughes, PPS to Ted Heath and dampish MP for Harrow West, put into words what everyone was thinking.
‘A Conservative Cabinet without you is like Hamlet without the prince.’
The Conservative Conference: Tea room talk shows high interest in Lawson
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
HAD Nigel Lawson toured the tea bars at the Blackpool Winter Gardens yesterday, he would have found one topic on everyone's lips — increased interest rates.
Several grass-roots supporters want their concern about interest rates and higher mortgages to be brought out in the open tomorrow when Mr Lawson replies to the debate on the economy.
But the Chancellor would have drawn considerable heart for his important speech.
A straw-poll of representatives yesterday showed support for the Chancellor is remarkably resilient.
The vitriolic attack on Mr Lawson in the Daily Mail had few supporters.
‘Who are you going to put in his place?’ many said when asked about the call for his sacking.
One party worker from a Midlands constituency said: ‘I don't mind how many kids he's got, but Cecil Parkinson is too lightweight to become Chancellor.
Nigel has got nerve.
This party likes nerve.
The Tory Party likes taking the medicine.
But it needs to know it is getting better.’
Several indicated they would be looking to Mr Lawson to give the Tory voters a reason for enduring the pain of higher mortgages.
But the Chancellor may have a hard time explaining why the pound has to shadow the Deutschmark.
‘It's the fault of the Bundesbank, or is it the Bundestag?’ one perplexed representative said.
Another problem which Mr Lawson will have to address is the generation gap with the new Tory voters, who have grown up with Thatcherism.
A party worker from Cheadle said: ‘I have a boy of 30.
He was 20 when the Thatcher government came to power.
He doesn't remember inflation at 27 per cent.
Our real problem is that people are now comparing our performance with our own record.’
A young Tory activist from Preston said: ‘We are the victims of our own success.
People have got used to years of growth.
This crisis has a lot to do with press hype.’
There is resentment that the rise in interest rates has not been explained properly.
A middle-aged woman from St Helens said: ‘Mr Lawson doesn't seem to bother trying to get it across, but then most Chancellors are like that.
Personally, I'd like to bring back Sir Geoffrey Howe.
He got the economy straight.’
Another representative said: ‘It's not us.
But it's our children, who have mortgages.
I have brought them up to support the Conservatives, but they are saying they are not going to vote again next time.’
Grass-roots workers recognise the problems being stored up for the general election.
‘People in my patch don't like being unpopular,’ a worker from Manchester said.
‘They keep saying, ‘Why are they doing this to us?’
'Another worker, who stood as a Conservative councillor, said she had encountered Mr Lawson at a reception last year and had been asked by the Chancellor why she had lost.
‘I told him straight.
I said it was because of your bloody policies.
Why didn't you save up the bad news for after May 5?
He didn't like that.’
At least one MP was taking some solace from the economic medicine.
‘It's put the shits up the middle-classes and it will stop them spending, which is what we want,’ he said.
The Conservative Conference: Conference quotes
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
‘As Londoners, desperately worried about the present route of the Channel tunnel, what do we say to those who think the Talis alternative is beneficial?’— Chris Fraser, Peckham ‘Out of the huge crowd of demonstrators, a woman ran out and thrust a baby in my arms — then she vanished’— Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Health ‘Polluted rivers, filthy streets, bodies bedded-down in doorways are no advertisement for a prosperous or caring society’-Michael Heseltine ‘We know that God has endowed her with that great quality of not fidgeting when it is necessary to come to grips with prickly nettles…
Mrs Thatcher epitomises that something extra in womanhood.
Mrs Thatcher enhances the meaning of womanhood’— Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Chief Minister of the KwaZulu
The Conservative Conference: Immigrants leaflet causes row
By JUDY JONES
A TORY MP last night appeared to defend the circulation of an immigration leaflet by a right wing pressure group, depicting a wave of black figures falling from a dustbin on to a map of Britain, writes Judy Jones.
Tim Janman, MP for Thurrock, was asked for his view at the Monday Club fringe meeting, attended by about 40 people, that the leaflet had advertised.
He said: ‘If you look at the lack of immigration control in the past, then yes, in the Fifties, Sixties and Seventies Britain had become the dustbin of the world.’
There was a need to offer voluntary repatriation to members of ethnic minorities settled in the UK, he said.
Earlier, David Hunt, Minister of State for Environment, denounced the Monday Club leaflet.
Holding up a copy at a One Nation Forum fringe meeting, he said: ‘We can do without that.
Let us get to the real matter in hand — how to develop our relationship with the ethnic minorities.’
Mr Janman clashed at the Monday Club meeting with fellow Tory Mike Truman, who contested Ealing Southall for the party at the last election.
He said: ‘You are saying that all those people in my constituency ‘We don't want you.
We detest you so much we will bribe you to go away.’
However, Mr Janman countered that ethnic minority groups did not wish to integrate with the indigenous population.
Today's debates: social security and pensions; environment and planning; law and order; education; and the poll tax and local government.
The Conservative Conference: Tories closer to standing in Ulster
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
THE RULING body of the Conservative Party yesterday gave way to rank-and-file pressure and moved a step nearer to sanctioning official party candidates in Northern Ireland.
At the close of unusually emotional debate, Sir Peter Lane, chairman of the National Union Executive Committee, agreed to recommend affiliation to the party of a model Conservative association set up in North Down.
Last November the executive committee turned down North Down's application.
But by an overwhelming majority on a show of hands vote, party representatives demanded it reconsider the decision at the earliest possible opportunity.
John Strafford of Beaconsfield was given a standing ovation after declaring that the people of Northern Ireland had ‘more than earned the right to be members of the Conservative Party’.
One potential embarrassment for the Government in the move is strong opposition of the Ulster Tories to the Anglo-Irish agreement.
There were jeers when Stephanie McKenzie-Hill argued that the North Down association should be asked for a commitment to support the party manifesto, including the agreement.
Providing the National Union executive accepts Sir Peter's recommendation, the North Down Tories intend to field a candidate in the next general election.
There was delight among Ulster Tories, present as observers.
Laurence Kennedy, their chairman, hailed it as ‘a new start for Northern Ireland’.
He acknowledged they were at odds with the Government over the agreement, but said the North Down association would support the party manifesto.
Moving the affiliation motion, Phil Gallie, Ayr constituency, was cheered when he discounted fears of a final break with the unionist parties.
‘All United Kingdom citizens should have the opportunity to select on broad base policy option as opposed to narrow sectarian appeal,’ he declared.
Backing for Hong Kong over ivory stockpile
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
HONG KONG won British backing yesterday for a plan to continue trading from its stockpile of ivory, even if a world-wide ban is agreed by Cites, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species.
Hong Kong has objected to the proposed ban because its stockpile of 670 tonnes — the tusks of up to 75,000 elephants — is worth $134m, while at least 3,000 jobs in the colony depend on the ivory carving industry.
Chris Folland, head of the British delegation to Cites, said yesterday: ‘All of Hong Kong's 670 tonnes were legally imported, in accordance with the provisions of Cites.
Hong Kong supports a ban on trade in new ivory, and we believe it now has a villain-proof system for its stocks.
‘It is up to this meeting to decide what happens to those stocks, but we see no reason for Hong Kong to be penalised.’
In a statement circulated to delegates yesterday — as the full debate on the proposed ban got under way— the Hong Kong government said that, while new ivory should be banned from trade, ‘properly controlled trading of legally-acquired and legally-held ivory should be allowed to continue’.
Shaharyar Khan, Pakistan's High Commissioner in London, unfurling his country's flag outside the Commonwealth Institute, west London, yesterday
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Shaharyar Khan, Pakistan's High Commissioner in London, unfurling his country's flag outside the Commonwealth Institute, west London, yesterday.
Pakistan rejoined the Commonwealth on 1 October, having left 17 years ago in protest at the recognition of the breakaway state of Bangladesh, formerly East Pakistan 
Five years in prison proposed for hackers
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
COMPUTER hacking should be outlawed by three new criminal offences to curb the use of computers for serious crimes and maintain confidence in computer systems, the Law Commission recommended yesterday.
There should a widely-drawn ‘basic’ summary offence of unauthorised entry into a computer system, an aggravated offence of unauthorised entry with intent to commit or assist in serious crime, and a further serious offence of altering computer-held data or programs.
The two serious offences should carry maximum jail terms of five years.
It was not enough to patch up existing gaps in the criminal law, the commission said.
Announcing the recommendations, Lord Justice Beldam, its chairman, said hacking was ‘far from being a youthful prank’ and caused serious consequences.
The commission's final report, which contrasts with tentative suggestions 12 months ago, was welcomed by Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
‘The Government considers that legislation should be brought forward when a suitable opportunity arises,’ he said.
The Department of Trade is seeking further comments, which should be submitted as soon as possible.
The report represents a victory for the Confederation of British Industry and a lobby led by Emma Nicholson, Tory MP for Devon West and Torridge, which had campaigned for tough new laws.
The CBI endorsed the report yesterday.
The basic offence would cover amateur hackers who access systems for fun and would be intended to act as a general deterrent to all types of hacking.
Eric Howe, the Data Protection Registrar, had argued that the activities of the mischievous or curious should not be criminalised.
But the commission accepts that since the simple offence would cover deliberate foolishness which caused cost and inconvenience but which did not damage property or seek dishonest gain, the penalty should be modest and limited to a maximum of three months' imprisonment.
It will not carry police powers of arrest and search of premises.
The commission accepts that the basic offence might not lead to many convictions.
But Richard Buxton QC, a commissioner, said: ‘The introduction of a hierarchy of offences will convey the message that this conduct is no longer responsible or funny.
We expect that to have a substantial effect.’
Big business was spending millions of pounds on security to deter simple unauthorised access.
The offence of hacking with intent to commit serious crime — including all serious forms of dishonesty, serious offences against the person and blackmail — would enable criminals to be apprehended earlier, he said.
The third offence would cover the use of worms, viruses, Trojan horses or logic bombs and include both attacks on particular computers and the putting into circulation of infected computer disks that eventually cause unauthorised alterations to computer material.
The current law of malicious damage produced far too erratic and uncertain results.
Special safeguards will apply to protect employees of system operators to ensure that those who are careless or negligent will not be accused of criminal offences.
The commission rejected submissions that Police and Criminal Evidence Act rules on the admissibility of computer print-outs in evidence are too strict.
Barrister warns of ‘blackmail charter’
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
OUTLAWING basic computer hacking will amount to ‘a charter for blackmail’ and will drive innocent youngsters underground and into the hands of serious criminals, according to Alistair Kelman, a barrister who is an expert on computer law.
He said yesterday that young people who hack innocently and for fun will be more inclined to listen to approaches from potential evil doers.
‘Having committed one offence and been given a criminal recordfor innocent hacking, they may feel that they might as well get in a bit deeper.’
Mr Kelman believes that the net result of the Law Commission proposal will be to increase the risks to companies because hackers who often tell their ‘victims’ about their insecure systems will be afraid to do so.
It will also decrease the likelihood of catching hardened computer criminals by turning informers into criminals, and allow computer manufacturers to carry on selling insecure computers for applications where they should not be used.
Stephen Gold, who gained notoriety for his part in hacking into the Duke of Edinburgh's Prestel mailbox, said that the law would not be enforceable.
‘No information will be obtained from hackers because they will be afraid of prosecution.’
A more sinister problem was that of hackers being approached by serious criminals, he said.
‘If I was approached by a terrorist to undermine the Bank of England, my immediate reaction would be to tell the police.
Now a hacker in that situation would have to think twice.’
Mr Gold has been asked, in the past, to undertake various hacking acts, including a request from Stern, the West German magazine, to hack into the Princess of Wales's Barclaycard account.
Adding his voice to the outcry against outlawing simple unauthorised entry into computers, Budley Salterton (not his real name) warned: ‘It's not the catch-all they (the Law Commission) hope for.
It might put less determined hackers off, but it does not remove the challenge so it won't stop hacking.’
The law could result in less security for business.
‘A lot of hacking goes on inside companies by employees trying to find easier ways of doing their jobs.
This is often picked up by the programmers, who then make the system more secure.’
The Confederation of British Industry rejected criticism that companies and manufacturers with poor security can hide behind the law.
If the recommendations became law, unauthorised entry to a computer through carelessness would technically be an offence, so there was more of an onus on companies to ensure that all employees knew exactly what they were authorised to do, a spokesman said.
However, Mr Kelman is convinced that a law against hacking for fun will hamper the investigation and prosecution of computer crime.
‘My experience is that hackers are the world's innocents — they can so easily be manipulated,’ he said.
Shortly after the commission's report was made public, Alan Soloman, a computer virus expert, invited hackers, and those whose business it is to keep them out, to a tournament which will test the expertise of both sides.
Jury told of blood on car
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
A MAN accused of killing Marie Wilks arrived at a friend's house with a thick smudge of blood on his car the day after she disappeared, the M50 murder trial was told yesterday.
Kerry Evans said at Shrewsbury Crown Court that he asked Edward Browning about the blood, and was told that it must have come from an animal he had hit while driving to Scotland.
Mr Evans, of Inverurie, near Aberdeen, said that Mr Browning telephoned him from South Wales on the evening of 18 June last year to say he wanted to visit.
He noticed the blood on the mudguard of Mr Browning's Renault 25 the day after his arrival.
Mr Browning, 36, of Cwm-parc, Mid Glamorgan, denies murdering Mrs Wilks, 22, whose body was found below an embankment on the M50 near Tewkesbury.
Scottish solicitors' monopoly over conveyancing fees to be ended
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
SCOTTISH solicitors' monopoly over charging fees for conveyancing is to be ended and their rights of audience extended to Scotland's supreme courts, the High Court and Court of Session.
The changes are two of the principle proposals contained in a government policy paper on the Scottish legal system published yesterday.
Malcolm Rifkind, Secretary of State for Scotland, described the move as a modernising exercise.
‘We are removing some of the cobwebs on the fringes of the Scottish legal system.’
However, Alistair Clark, president of the Law Society of Scotland, which represents 6,400 solicitors, criticised the decision to allow banks, building societies and other authorised practitioners who complied with a statutory code of conduct to charge for conveyancing.
The present system, involving solicitors who ‘put the interests of their clients first’, was being replaced by ‘a free market which will be a free-for-all among a handful of powerful, profit-motivated instititutions serving the financial interests of their shareholders.’
Alan Johnston QC, treasurer of the 250-strong Faculty of Advocates, said: ‘The disappearance of many small legal firms which rely on conveyancing income to underwrite the provision of other, non-profitable legal services will not be in the public interest.’
The faculty also opposed the move to extend the rights of audience to suitably qualified solicitors, ‘not to protect a monopoly’, but because it felt the administration of justice might suffer.
However, Mr Johnston was delighted by the Government's decision on lawyers' partnerships, a view not shared by the Law Society of Scotland.
The Government plans to remove the statutory barrier to the formation of partnerships between solicitors and non-solicitors.
However, the document adds: ‘Those who practise in the courts owe duties to the court in the interests of justice’.
Thus, the professions might continue to regard rules limiting ‘forms of organisation among their members as necessary’.
These would require the Secretary of State's approval.
But Mr Clark said this section of the policy document left ‘more questions unanswered than answered’.
Those who practised in court would be protected from multi-discipline partnerships.
But what would that mean for a partnership of solicitors where some practised in court and others did not.
But the faculty welcomed the Government's view.
It had opposed partnerships of advocates, believing they would reduce choice and efficiency.
More companies impose curbs on smoking at work
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
SMOKING has become the main health concern of companies, with a sharp rise in the number introducing policies to control smoking at work, a conference on the issue was told yesterday.
But, as Action on Smoking and Health predicted that within a few years the majority of companies will have smoking policies, Roger Stubbs, deputy managing director of MORI, warned a confrontation is looming between ‘green consumers’ and ‘smoking civil libertarians’who insist aggressively on their right to smoke in public places or at work.
A MORI survey of more than 100 personnel directors at the top 500 companies and financial institutions, shows four out of five have designated no-smoking areas.
Nearly a third have introduced restrictions, or further restrictions, on smoking in the past 12 months.
Two years ago, barely two-thirds of top businesses questioned had such policies.
Only one in seven has a complete ban, Mr Stubbs said.
Most have no-smoking areas or designated smoking rooms, but more than half the companies still without restrictions reported less tolerance for smokers.
Almost four out of five people now accept passive smoking is harmful, the MORI surveys show.
That, coupled with an estimated 50 million working days a year lost to smoking-related illness, means companies now list smoking as their main health concern for male employees and second most important, after VDU and computer worries, for women.
Mr Stubbs told the Bupa symposium: ‘The big anti-smoking battalions are in the ascendant.
Smoking in the workplace is becoming less and less acceptable.
Many smokers feel guilty about their habit and most would like to give up.’
But there is, he said, ‘a hard core of vociferous and aggressive smokers’.
‘They are outraged at blanket smoking bans, in workplaces or aeroplanes, for example.
The green consumers are heading for a confrontation with the smoking civil libertarians.’
Many of the latter were young, in their twenties, and included ‘yuppies’ in City and financial institutions who might not smoke a lot but took the attitude that they would smoke more at work if people pressured them over their habit.
Some companies which have introduced smoking restrictions have faced resignations over the issue, he said.
Twenty per cent of smokers in the MORI surveys deny passive smoking is harmful, and 10 per cent believe smoking does not cause fatal diseases.
‘Views are polarising,’ he said.
‘There are people who are ‘smokers and proud of it’ who are coming up against the trend that the rest of society wants to see.’
The survey shows that more than half the companies which have smoking restrictions introduced them after pressure from the workforce, with a quarter having the issue raised through health and safety committees.
Mark Flanagan, of Ash, said companies were also concerned that passive smoking will fall within the Health and Safety at Work Act now it is a proven health risk.
Five years ago, he said, Ash could list only a handful of companies with smoking restrictions.
‘Many…had a complete ban and had been no-smoking from the start because they perceived that smoking did not fit in with their ethos — Boots, for example, or the Body Shop.’
At that time Ash was getting about 20 inquiries a month, mostly from employees, on how to introduce smoking polices.
‘Now we get 200 a month, of which more than 100 are coming from employers who want to develop such policies…
Within a few years we will see the majority of UK companies having smoking policies.’
There were no excuses now, he said, about it being difficult to do.
BP, ICL, IBM, Volvo, British Gas in Wales, British Telecom in the South-west, and a clutch of local authorities, many of which had led the way, had all shown it could be done, with Ford announcing its partial ban recently.
Central government departments, however, had been slower to react.
Ash, he said, did not advocate complete bans on smoking.
These should be considered only where designated smoking areas could not be provided.
‘It should be done on the basis of the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air, but wherever possible taking account of the needs of those who smoke.’
Nicotine addicts' stairway to heaven
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
SHEILA KEOGH and Carol Morrison are perched on the stairs outside their third floor office, lighting up again.
Six months on from ICL's decision to introduce a no smoking at work policy at its Reading office block, it is still possible to indulge in an on-site nicotine fix.
The policy has been applied nationwide at the company's 100 locations after a pioneering attitude survey at Reading, where 81 per cent of the workforce were found to be non-smokers.
In the city-centre block, there is a ground-floor coffee room with ashtrays, easy chairs and potted plants set aside for smokers.
But, despite its echoes of furtive schoolday puffs behind the bikesheds, Sheila and Carol prefer the stairwell.
‘We can hear the phones, and it saves a trek downstairs,’ says Sheila, who has been smoking for 25 years.
Before workrooms were deemed no-smoking zones, the small admin room where the two work was known as ‘the gas chamber’ because of the fug generated by five smokers.
Now, though the office air is clean, the butt-crammed ashtray outside testifies that smoking is far from stubbed out.
Both women went to a ‘smoking cessation course’ the company laid on before the policy went on stream.
But they did not stick it out.
‘It was good for those who were determined to give up — and a couple of people did.
But I don't think we had the right attitude,’ Sheila says.
Their fellow worker Paul Sinclair, a 20-a-day man, takes the stairwell option.
He cut down to five when the policy was introduced, but is back to pre-ban levels.
Cathy Wallis, a computer programmer, believes the policy has improved the quality of her working life and would definitely think twice about accepting a job where smoking was the norm.
She feels sorry for smokers —‘Nowadays, I think it is looked on as a sort of disability’.
The Reading attitude survey found 15 per cent of smokers — and 67 per cent of non-smokers — favoured a total ban.
Implementation has been left to local managers, who appear to have baulked at that option.
The ‘ghetto’ policy at Reading has posed no problems for life-time smoker Stan Peat, employed in security.
‘If I want a cig I can come in the coffee room.’
But, down the road at Bracknell, ICL plans to ban smoking throughout its new building.
Stubbing out his butt, Stan shudders at the prospect.
Bankers ‘have no debt-swap claim’
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
FIVE BANKS, which could lose over £100m if money market transactions by the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham are ruled unlawful, should not be allowed to appear at the hearing into their legality, the High Court was told yesterday.
Anthony Scrivener QC, for Hammersmith and Fulham, was presenting the council's case on the fifth day of a hearing in which the district auditor is seeking to have the transactions declared ultra vires, or beyond the local authority's legal powers.
Mr Scrivener said: ‘This court has no power to order repayment of ultra vires expenditure,’ and he commented on the presence of bank representatives, saying: ‘I have difficulty with them being here.’
If the banks wanted to seek relief, they would have to do so through a separate case brought against the local authority, he added.
Although the banks will begin to present their arguments today, Mr Scrivener said: ‘This court is not concerned with private rights.
There is no justiciable issue between the auditor and the banks.’
The two judges, Lord Justice Woolf and Mr Justice French, widened the scope of the hearing by ruling that arguments about the enforceability of the transactions could be presented.
With the council now agreeing with the district auditor about the unlawfulness of the deals, which at one time involved a notional £6bn, the banks are the only parties arguing that the transactions should be enforced.
Mr Scrivener said that while the council did have the right to take out interest-rate swaps for debt management, other types of transaction were ultra vires.
However, he accepted that the council was ‘involved in an exercise of trading’ rather than attempting to manage its debt and that local authorities cannot be involved in trading activities without a specific power to do so.
If the transactions are found to be lawful and enforceable and interest rates remain high, the council stands to lose at least £69.1 million -the estimated negative value of its portfolio in February.
Hurd urged to bring in laws on use of video ‘spy’ cameras
By PHIL REEVES
LAWS should be passed controlling the rapidly increasing use of video ‘spy’ cameras in public places, the National Council for Civil Liberties said today.
The pressure group has written to Douglas Hurd, the Home Secretary, warning of a ‘serious risk’ to civil liberties unless statutory regulations are introduced.
It says video surveillance is currently only subject to‘vague and inadequate’ government guidelines.
Hundreds of thousands of small, sometimes hidden, cameras have been installed in the last decade, mainly to detect crime or monitor traffic.
Last year, about £30m of closed-circuit television equipment was imported.
Video monitoring is widely used by local authorities, the police, companies and private security firms.
In some cases, cameras which produce high definition close-up pictures are linked to video recorders or to screens in police stations.
At present, the use of such systems is not covered by any statutory regulations.
Local authorities using video cameras determine their own controls.
Although some apply strict guidelines, others contract out their surveillance to private security companies.
In a research paper published today, Liberty — the logo used by the NCCL -warns that, without regulations, video surveillance could be used to harass groups who are considered a potential threat to public order, such as young people, ethnic minorities and political activists.
It warns that the spread of vast computer data banks means it will soon be possible to identify individuals walking along a street, whether or not they have committed a crime: ‘The new PNC2 police national computer will be capable of storing digitised photographs to which detectives will have instant access.’
The paper states: ‘It is not implausible to foresee a situation in which central government exercises increasing control over the ordinary movements and activities of its citizens.
Big Brother could be watching.
. on every street corner, and democratic dissent could be inhibited.’
It warns that recorded material could be used by blackmailers.
In addition, data could be passed to the police, private detectives or computer database holders.
Widespread surveillance threatens to alienate the public.
Liberty is proposing regulations, including a rule requiring anyone installing cameras to supply the authorities with valid reasons for doing so.
The laws should be backed up by an effective inspectorate, it states.
Video users should also have to give the number and location of their cameras, post public warning notices, and specify who is entitled to operate the system.
Private security firms using surveillance systems should be subject to inspections.
Liberty also suggests that video users should apply to their local authority for a licence, allowing objectors to register their opposition.
Video systems at football grounds should be regulated and individuals should have the right to see any recorded evidence used against them.
The group also condemns the Government for failing to carry out research into its effectiveness.
‘Extravagant claims for its effectiveness are often based on anecdotal evidence,’ it says.
Nuns gain court reprieve for hens Court reprieves nuns' hen flock
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
FOURTEEN NUNS battling to save their flock of 5,000 chickens from slaughter have won a further reprieve.
Lawyers representing the nuns from the Our Lady of the Passion Monastery, Daventry, Northamptonshire, were yesterday granted a judicial review of the Ministry of Agriculture order to slaughter the chickens.
This followed a private hearing before Mr Justice Konrad Schiemann in London.
It is alleged that the flock is infected with Salmonella typhimurium.
The judicial review hearing will take place on Friday in the High Court when the full arguments will be presented, according to Dennis Cooper, who is representing the nuns.
In a written application for the review, lawyers said the decision to slaughter was made ‘despite a significant lack of evidence of a connection between the food poisoning outbreak in Bedworth and the monastery’.
Ministry officials were also accused of giving conflicting evidence, leaving doubt as to the accuracy and reliability of reports of infection.
They had refused to supply details of alleged infection and this deprived the nuns of a chance to determine whether mistakes had been made, the lawyers said.
They said the failure to give full reasons for the intended slaughter and the absence of any factual basis for the action justified the High Court in blocking the order.
The ministry claims that an outbreak of food poisoning in July, at Bedworth, near Daventry, caused by Salmonella typhimurium was traced to the monastery.
However, the nuns said the ministry changed its account after initially telling them that Salmonella enteriditis was responsible.
Richard North, an environmental health officer advising the nuns, said last night that they were all ‘delighted’ with the outcome.
Mother Catherine, 82, the mother superior, will attend the hearing on Friday, he said.
Mr North is technical adviser to the United Kingdom Egg Producers' Association, which has launched an appeal to meet the nuns' legal costs.
A spokesman for the ministry said it would continue consultation with Mother Catherine, and would be studying the papers submitted by the lawyers.
‘There is still a statutory obligation to slaughter the flock,’ he said.
UN protest over Kurd ignored
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
THE HOME OFFICE is pressing ahead with the deportation of a Kurdish refugee, in spite of protests from the United Nations High Commission for Refugees that his life could be in danger if he returns to Turkey.
A High Commission official has interviewed Selahattin Ozberk, 30, and a doctor who examined him said that he is potentially suicidal and has scars which appear to be from beatings in Turkey.
He is likely to be put on an aircraft in the next few days.
The commission said: ‘We feel he is a genuine political refugee who has reason to fear persecution.
The Government's decision to deport him is regrettable, but the matter is out of our hands.’
The commission is effectively saying the Government has not followed the UN Convention for Refugees, under which anyone with a well-founded fear of persecution should be granted asylum.
Mr Ozberk is one of 18 Kurds still detained at the Haslar Centre for young offenders near Gosport, Hampshire, all of whom face deportation.
A further seven were released yesterday, and seven on Monday night.
His solicitor, Michael Hanley, said: ‘We expect a date for his deportation is imminent.
He says he has been beaten and kicked in his local police station in Turkey.
They want to know the whereabouts of his brother, who is a member of an illegal Kurdish independence organisation and in hiding.
His fear is that he will be tortured to extract information about his brother.
He doesn't think he'll be able to resist.
He broke down and cried when we talked to him about it.’
Mr Ozberk, who has been refused leave for a judicial review, is left with no right of appeal — unless he first returns to Turkey, where his wife and three children live.
The Charter 87 campaign group for refugee rights wrote yesterday to Timothy Renton, Minister of State at the Home Office, pleading for a reprieve.
PC says he was handed ‘sex on plate’
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
A UNIFORMED police constable accused of raping a young mother on the front seat of his patrol car claimed yesterday that she had handed him ‘sex on a plate’.
Peter Anderson, 41, told an Old Bailey jury the woman, 18, suddenly became passionate and initiated intercourse.
But under cross-examination, he was accused of deliberately setting out to besmirch her character.
Mr Anderson had also claimed to investigating officers that the woman told him she had had three Aids tests and was taking a contraceptive pill.
Her doctor had told the jury she was not on the pill and knew of no tests.
Richard Carey, for the prosecution, said: ‘Your intention was to blacken the woman's character.
That is what you have been doing by lying about the many things you say took place.’
Mr Carey added: ‘You were so keen to have your own way with her that you disregarded the fact that you could have made her pregnant.’
Mr Anderson replied: ‘No, she said she was on the pill.’
Mr Anderson, married with two sons and based at Surbiton, has denied raping the woman after agreeing to take her home from a discotheque last March.
He told the jury yesterday that he had never threatened her with his truncheon, but he had offered to use it as a sexual aid.
Mr Anderson said he had driven to the allotment after the woman suggested going somewhere quiet.
He knew of the spot because it was the habit of patrolling officers to stop ‘and have a glass of wine or a chat’.
‘Does that mean other police officers might have been there?, he was asked.
‘Most definitely yes,’ he said.
Mr Anderson also admitted checking to see if the woman had a police record.
Asked why by the judge, he said it was because of fears about Aids.
Salmon cash
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
Salmon angling contributed £50m to the Scottish economy last year and generated 3,400 jobs, according to a study for the Scottish Tourist Board and the Highlands and Islands Development Board.
The declining salmon netting industry contributed only £3m.
Leisure complex
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
Councillors in Bromley, south-east London, gave outline planning permission for a multi-million pound sports and leisure complex on the historic Crystal Palace site.
The proposal, by Al Houda and Holiday Inns, includes a 150-bedroom hotel and multi-screen cinema.
Man questioned
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
Police were questioning a 30-year-old man in connection with the murder of Elizabeth Page-Alucard, 41, the counsellor who was found dead on Saturday at a drugs advisory centre in Worcester.
Arts agreement
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
Managers and unions at the South Bank arts complex in London agreed to reopen talks in their pay dispute.
A meeting of staff agreed to a concordat under which the unions will suspend industrial action and the management agrees not to terminate any contracts during the talks.
Ambulance talks
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
Management in the ambulance dispute told Acas, the conciliation service, that they had no intention of acceding to union demands.
Management leaders repeated their refusal to countenance arbitration over the 6.5 per cent offer.
Inquiry plea on collusion claim
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
A group of lawyers from Britain and Europe called for a judicial inquiry into allegations of collusion between loyalist paramilitaries and the security forces in Northern Ireland.
In a report today, the lawyers, including representatives of the National Council for Civil Liberties and the Haldane Society, criticise Douglas Hogg, the former Home Office minister, and the RUC for accusing some solicitors of holding IRA sympathies.
A loaded pistol and a small quantity of explosives were found in Belfast's Crumlin Road jail as a search continued after an IRA attempt to stage a breakout.
Police face discipline moves
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
Policemen standing yards from where 95 soccer fans died in the Hillsborough football stadium disaster were last night expecting disciplinary charges.
They are accused of failing to use their initiative and not opening emergency gates.
Some South Yorkshire policemen have already been served with discipline papers — an early notification of any complaint which might lead to a disciplinary hearing — by West Midlands officers investigating handling of the disaster.
Debate grows over whether time is ripe to join ERM: Falling pound puts Conservatives under pressure at Blackpool, from industry and the Press
By ANTHONY BEVINS and PETER TORDAY
THE RAW political pressure for an early decision to join the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) was increased at Blackpool yesterday by a coincidental pincer movement headed by Michael Heseltine and the Daily Mail.
Entry has long been opposed by Margaret Thatcher and her No 10 economic adviser, Sir Alan Walters — resisting the overtures of Nigel Lawson and Sir Geoffrey Howe with the brick-wall response that the pound would enter ‘when the time is ripe’.
But there was increased speculation on the Conservative Party conference fringe in Blackpool that an urgent decision on full membership of the European Monetary System (EMS) could get the Government off the economic and political hook of high interest rates, a falling pound, and massive Bank of England intervention in the markets.
Because of the market sensitivity of such a decision, ministers were refusing to respond to questions.
But one well-placed Cabinet source did say privately that he would not put money on it; there was no such thing as an easy answer to current problems; and that ERM entry would be tantamount to jumping from ‘the puddle and into the pond’.
Speaking at a packed fringe meeting, however, Mr Heseltine urged quick action.
He said the Chancellor had had no choice but to put interest rates up last week.
But he then added: ‘I hope the Government will not delay further its clear commitment to join the full EMS.
‘The full credibility of its strategy would then be enhanced.
A formal relationship with the Deutschmark would signal the long-term determination to accept the discipline that our counter-inflationary policy needs.
‘Outside, but shadowing the Deutschmark, we deny ourselves the support of the system at times of currency fluctuation.’
Commenting on the falling pound, he said: ‘We could accept a lower parity as part of a decision to join because it would be coupled with the disciplines of the exchange rate mechanism.
‘To accept the lower parity without the disciplines would be to license the inflationary wage settlements that have characterised post-war Britain.’
The challenge was underlined by yesterday's scathing front-page ‘Daily Mail Comment’ attack on the Chancellor, which concluded: ‘The pound should be allowed to fall.
Britain should then join the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System, which Mrs Thatcher keeps promising to do when the time is ripe.’
Nevertheless, there are some senior Conservatives who subscribe to a long-standing conspiracy theory; that the time would come when such a sterling crisis would happen — and would force Mrs Thatcher toaccept the only alternative was ERM entry.
The economic and political debate over the merits of full EMS membership will now intensify.
It seems a highly attractive alternative to periodic sterling crises.
Proponents argue it would stabilise the pound and save Mr Lawson from resorting to the conventional answer to a currency crisis: a big emergency increase in interest rates.
Because Britain is already an EMS member, no legal changes are required for joining the exchange rate mechanism.
Mr Lawson would instruct Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Governor of the Bank of England, to begin secret negotiations with European central bank counterparts on the best exchange rate at which to enter.
In practice, that would have to be about the level at which sterling was trading in the foreign exchange markets.
If Britain chose a rate significantly above or below, currency market pressures could try to push the pound into line.
The decision to enter could be announced any time after completed negotiations and entry could take effect the next weekend, when markets are closed.
To become a full member, Britain would need to introduce several technical measures.
It would set a central rate for sterling against the European Currency Unit.
This is a hybrid of EC currencies increasingly traded on international capital markets and seen as a forerunner of a single European currency.
The Government would establish the limits within which sterling could trade above or below that central rate.
In practice, most member countries have set divergence limits of 2 ¼ per cent either side of the central rate.
Italy and Spain negotiated divergence margins of 6 per cent.
It has been argued that Britain could adopt their position, but would eventually move to narrower trading margins.
To hold the pound within its margins the system requires a member country to intervene in the markets when its currency diverges 75 per cent of the way to its permitted fluctuation margins, either side of the central rate.
At the point of full divergence, Britain could call on other EMS central banks to hold the pound within its agreed trading limits.
It could also be obliged to change economic policies — such as raising or lowering interest rates and taxes — to reinforce intervention.
The advantage to Britain of ERM membership would be that, in addition to the Bank of England's $42bn of foreign currency reserves, the pound could be supported by other European central banks, such as the wealthy West German Bundesbank, making speculation against sterling a much riskier business.
More fundamentally, anchoring the pound to the ERM would, it is argued, link it to the successful anti-inflation policies of the Bundesbank, ensuring low inflation in Britain.
In turn that would reduce significantly interest rates in Britain.
Yet, in spite of repeated European calls for Britain to join the ERM, it is plain West Germany and France would not welcome British membership at present.
The tricky economic and political question is the exchange rate at which the pound would join the ERM.
The unspoken concern of West Germany and France is that if sterling joined the ERM at its present exchange rate, a devaluation might still be required in several months' time.
That would provoke a politically damaging general realignment of exchange rates within the system, which has managed without any changes since early 1987.
Opponents of membership, such as the Prime Minister, argue that whatever the right level of entry it is at least necessary to reduce inflation to the European average of roughly 3-4 per cent.
But in 1979, France joined with inflation of 10.4 per cent compared with 4 per cent in West Germany, a wider inflation differential than exists between Britain and Germany today.
The Government's dilemma is that sterling is falling because the financial markets no longer have faith in government policy towards the pound.
Mr Lawson has frequently ruled out supporting the pound by means other than interest rates.
But the stage has probably been reached where only a politically unacceptable increase in those rates would stabilise the currency.
But it is not only recession fears which drive down the pound.
Britain's current account deficit is likely to hit an unprecedented £20bn this year.
Currency markets, however, take the view that the deficit is so large that only a lower exchange rate will help to speed up the adjustment.
Draw for Speelman after pawn blunder
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
JONATHAN SPEELMAN gave his supporters an anxious day in the sixth round of the Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-finals yesterday.
One down against Jan Timman, with three left to play, he was looking for a solid advantage with the white pieces.
Instead a blunder in the opening left him a pawn down, on the verge of defeat.
Good technique in a Rook and pawn endgame, however, enabled him to salvage a draw.
While Timman played with impressive composure, Speelman seemed oddly distracted.
Quite apart from the blunder there was one moment near the end of the game when he was walking around on the stage of Sadler's Wells, unaware for a few minutes that it was his move.
Timman now leads by 3 ½ -2 ½.
There was no play in the other semi-final yesterday, after Karpov's decision to take a time out; he leads Yusupov 2 ½ -1 ½.
Both matches resume tomorrow after a rest day today.
Speelman was almost apologetic about his efforts to win the adjourned fourth game, with Rook and Bishop against Rook.
He had confidence in Timman's ability to hold this theoretically drawn endgame, but tested him for four hours on Monday before agreeing to share the point.
Here are the moves of the marathon fourth game.
‘Mail’ joins anti-Lawson chorus (CORRECTED)
By ANTHONY BEVINS and MAGGIE BROWN
Correction (published 12 October 1989) appended to this article.
NIGEL LAWSON'S problems with the Tory conference were aggravated yesterday by a scathing front-page attack in the pro-Tory Daily Mail.
Under a banner headline, ‘This bankrupt Chancellor’, and a cartoon of a tubby, bedraggled figure with empty pockets, the newspaper said he had betrayed the people, himself, his party and Prime Minister.
It said that he had reneged on his monetarist beliefs; that arrogance has been his undoing; and that his policy lay in ruins.
The article concluded: ‘The bankrupt Chancellor should go…
The right politician must be put in charge of the Treasury to bring the economy back to even keel, reduce the trade deficit and force both inflation and interest rates down in time for the next election.
‘If the Government thinks this is a tall order, then the Daily Mail agrees with it.
But they got us into this mess, it's up to them to get us out of it.
If they fail, they will find themselves out of office.’
The fact that the final article is likely to have been polished by Sir David English, the editor and long-standing friend of Margaret Thatcher, prompted speculation that the Number 10 knives were out for the Chancellor, and that his days might be numbered.
But when Sir David was asked whether Mr Lawson was being lined up as a scapegoat, he said: ‘These are problems of the economy and the Chancellor's handling of it.
You must not see all this as a Machiavellian plot.
It's a perfectly straightforward reaction to events.’
Nevertheless, in the wake of last week's one-point hike in interest rates, Friday's Daily Mail commented that Mr Lawson had had little choice but to follow the West German increase.
‘The Chancellor's time is evidently running out.
If his medicine is not visibly working soon, he will, like many of the unfortunate people who cannot afford their mortgage payment, have to be evicted from his comfortable home.’
There was no hint then that the Mail was running on such a short fuse.
But Sir David said yesterday: ‘We've always had doubts about this policy, and the thing that now confirms our doubts is that it hasn't worked.’
His instinctive editorial policy, and his mercurial reflection of reader moods, is a well-known feature of his journalistic style.
Asked whether yesterday's attack had been a case of spontaneous combustion, he said: ‘Look, it's a reaction that I put forward there on behalf of, as much as anything else, the readers of our newspaper.
We've certainly criticised this Chancellor, and we've certainly criticised Tory governments in the past.’
Sir David, knighted in 1982, has swung his paper behind critical issues: it started campaigning on environmental issues a year ago just as the Conservatives switched tack.
Charles Wilson, editor of The Times, asked whether it was not damaging to devote so much space to the attack, said: ‘This conference should be discussing why this bankrupt policy isn't working.
He did have an alternative, he could have let the pound drop lower.’
CORRECTION The statement attributed to Charles Wilson, editor of The Times, saying that Chancellor of the Exchequer should have let the pound drop lower, was in fact made by Sir David English, editor of the Daily Mail.
We apologise for the error.
Employers fear investment and jobs will be severely affected
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
INDUSTRY was divided last night on whether the economy was about to enter a damaging recession but there was general agreement that jobs and investment would be hit severely.
Ian Thompson, economic adviser to the Engineering Employers' Federation, which has 5,200 member firms, warned: ‘The basic message is that the UK economy is heading for recession, with reduction in investment, domestic demand and jobs.’
The federation believes that 53,000 jobs in engineering will disappear next year — a fall of 2.5 per cent— with mechanical and electrical engineering and the car industry the worst affected.
Andrew Sentance, economics director at the Confederation of British Industry, said the economy was balanced on a knife-edge but it was not possible to say whether it was heading irretrievably for recession.
‘There is no sense of crisis, of panic setting in among businesses yet, but if interest rates go up again it could be very detrimental,’ he said.
Nevertheless, the CBI, backed by the gloomiest forecast on output from its member firms in two-years, predicts that growth in investment will stagnate next year and unemployment will cease to fall.
‘The levelling out of investment is worrying because it needs to grow so that UK industry can keep up with international competitors,’ Mr Sentance said.
ICI, Britain's second biggest exporter, said the fall in the value of the pound would make exports more competitive.
But it warned that the latest hike in interest rates could have serious repercussions for its UK customers by weakening demand.
Mr Thompson said that what marked out the drift to recession was that the service sector would be as badly hit as manufacturing at least, and possibly worse affected, unlike in the recession of 1981.
Healthy and rising exports would help balance out the squeeze in the domestic economy.
He said that the federation does not predict that any sector of engineering will increase employment next year, though it forecasts the civil aerospace industry will be least badly affected because of a backlog of orders and its high level of exports.
The CBI cautioned that the rise in mortgage rates would feed through into pressure for higher pay, raising the prospect of wage inflation and undermining businesses.
Its last detailed forecast, published before the latest increase in base rates, predicts unemployment rising to 1.72 million in the last quarter of this year.
Detective is suspended
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
A SECOND senior detective with a regional crime squad has been suspended after an internal inquiry into allowances irregularities.
The detective, whose name and rank have not been given, is a member of the Essex force and worked at the Brentwood office of the No 5 Regional Crime Squad, covering a large area of East Anglia and the South-east.
Two weeks ago, a detective inspector from the office was suspended as part of the inquiry by Chief Supt Peter Nevitt, a divisional commander in the force.
Essex police emphasised that the inquiry is separate from one into corruption at Brentwood.
PENSIONERS protesting outside Manchester's town hall where about 3,000 rallied yesterday at a Grey Power conference.
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
PENSIONERS protesting outside Manchester's town hall where about 3,000 rallied yesterday at a Grey Power conference.
They heard Jack Jones, the former transport workers' union leader, condemn British pensions as the worst in Europe and denounce means-testing for pensioners.
‘It is time that Mr Lawson was targeted with all his friends.
Like Jim Larkin said in the First World War, ‘Hang the Kaiser and all his relatives’,'he said.
Alf Morris, the Labour Party's spokesman for the disabled, promised that it would increase pensions above the rate of inflation.