

Talk of the Trade: Antiques record
By ANN ROBERTS
THE first antiques ‘freesheet’ is claiming to have topped the circulation of every other antiques magazine just four months (and one issue) after its launch.
The World of Antiques is produced quarterly from a cottage in Somerset by Duncan and Jacki Phillips and distributed to everyone who visits antiques fairs around the country — estimated at 50,000 people every three months.
The top-selling magazines have a circulation of around 14,000.
Talk of the Trade: Technical hitch
By ANN ROBERTS
THERE are grumblings among BBC Television technical staff, whose objections to cramped studio conditions caused a two-week delay in the launch of the new Breakfast News.
When it was eventually launched last week, critics -including our own Mark Lawson — noticed a number of technical blips.
The next day a high-tech caption machine broke down.’
Talk of the Trade: Disputed Record
By ANN ROBERTS
RUPERT MURDOCH's News International is furious that the Audit Bureau of Circulations has allowed Robert Maxwell's Daily Mirror to include the sales of its Scottish sister paper the Daily Record in calculating its circulation figures.
Together, the Mirror and Record sales amount to 3,900,000 — only 200,000 below The Sun.
The Mirror sells 3,200,000 on it own.
NI insists that the Mirror and the Record are separate newspapers with different editors and very little common content, even selling at different cover prices.
Talk of the Trade: Battle to rule the air waves
By ANN ROBERTS
THE fuse is lit for Britain's radio explosion.
Four of the extra 21 community stations are vying to be first on the air.
Manchester's Sunset Radio is aiming for 22 October, Haringey's LGR/WNK for 16 or 30 October.
Hounslow and Ealing's Sunrise Radio is set for early November, along with Bradford City Radio.
London Jazz Radio, winners of the lucrative London-wide FM frequency station, is looking for a February launch.
Another two London FM frequencies now being made available are likely to attract around 30 applications next month.
All of this favours the growth of radio programme suppliers.
Today sees the launch of The Unique Broadcasting Company, which aims to exploit openings for sponsored radio: Noel Edmonds is a key associate.
This is a lucrative business, since the price of sponsoring a series such as Nescafe's Network Pop Chart can approach £500,000, while a one-hour programme reaching 70 per cent of independent local radio may cost around £20,000, with three namechecks during the broadcast, and up to 10 in trailers.
Daily Telegraph: A decade of disappearing readers
By ANN ROBERTS
The Daily Telegraph has slipped into decline over the last 10 years, losing more than a million readers (3.59 million in 1980; 2.55 million 1989).
Sixty one per cent are over 45, compared with 56 per cent in 1986, when proprietor Conrad Black started to modernise the image.
New printing helped, but the strategy hasn't really worked.
Media: Guide to the world, the universe and decline
By MAGGIE BROWN
EIGHT months ago the conservative Daily Telegraph seemed a happy media parable of modern Britain.
A dozy, family-run business which faced bankruptcy in 1985, had been put to rights by the application of sound Thatcherite principles.
The group was set to make £40m profit this year: a stock market flotation loomed.
The paper had worked hard at being modern, adding proper features and news analyses.
On Saturdays, it arrived with a stylish colour magazine, taken over from the Sunday Telegraph.
An influx of bright youngtalent was set to work under a dashing editor, Falklands hero Max Hastings, who occasionally took an independent, anti-government line.
Sustained advertising campaigns -‘Your guide to the world, universe and everything'-tried to persuade yuppies and advertising agencies to view the paper in a new, chic light.
Yet, as the accompanying graph shows, The Daily Telegraph continued to lose readers.
The Sunday Telegraph behaved in a more quirky fashion, until shorn of its magazine a year ago.
They remain publications predominantly loved by the middle-aged, elderly and Conservative politicians.
But there has been enough good news to feed the belief that the strategy largely implemented by the Chief Executive and Editor-in-Chief, Andrew Knight, had borne fruit.
Even the industrial costs of over-ambitious Docklands works had been defrayed through a print sharing arrangement with the Express.
Then, on 22 March, the confident mood was poisoned.
Amid mounting rumours that the Sunday Telegraph was going to be abolished, Mr Knight announced that the editorial staff of the two titles would be pooled, under the editorship of Max Hastings.
The apparent aim was to strengthen the Sunday Telegraph, which with a circulation of 667,000 was nearly half a million copies behind the daily and facing a fight for its life.
But it was also a device to increase productivity: everyone was to work a five-day week.
A summer of mounting discontent began in April.
The first victim of a collapse in morale was the Sunday Telegraph: its former editor, Peregrine Worsthorne, sacked by Mr Knight over poached eggs at Claridges, was confined to organising its distinctive opinion pages.
Talented staff began to leave.
A working group which was debating ways of running a common staff, increasingly became dominated by the apparent overmanning of both papers.
By July, the relatively calm mood of The Daily Telegraph was badly infected with rumours that more than 100 redundancies were required in the staff of 440.
Andrew Knight says now that there was no target.
He wanted the same efficiency on the papers as on newly-founded ones.
Sub-editors, who work long evenings, currently do a four-day week, he says.
If they work five days, there would, in theory, be a 20 per cent increase in periods worked, therefore on paper you would need a fifth fewer people.
‘At which point an editor would say, that is not how it works.
We went through a process of learning about each other 's business’.
His intellectual approach to the management of human resources seems to have made matters worse.
Meanwhile the paper imposed a 4 per cent pay deal, sweetened with merit money, an action which further inflamed feelings and led to industrial action and set Monday 9 October as the date when all would be revealed.
It was also to be Andrew Knight's last executive action: he is becoming a non-executive deputy chairman as Conrad Black, holding 80 per cent of the shares, assumes daily control.
In the event, the paper has declared 33 named redundancies.
Savings are modest.
Mr Knight hasn't costed them.
In the 1990s there is no room for the hard-won concessions of the 1970s — sabbaticals, fixed newspaper allowances and four-day weeks — which recognise the problems of stressful, anti-social hours.
But this week's 36-hour strike was provoked by the content of the new contract on which journalists are to be re-employed.
To quote: ‘The nature and demands may neccessitate you to work at times other than your normal hours.
Heads of Department may then permit you time off in lieu’.
There are fears of family life going down the drain, as staff may get only two complete weekends off in seven.
The talk is of ‘bondage’ to the paper: under a highly restrictive contract.
So what began, apparently, as an attempt to strengthen the weakest paper of the group has convulsed the main profit-earner.
Whether this is the start of a deliberate confrontation, or the result of bad management of the kind which provoked BBC staff to strike this summer there is every sign that Mr Black wants his staff on a far tighter rein.
No-one expects a 36-hour strike to deter him.
Media: A new brand of screen sponsorship: Easing of broadcasting rules will let advertisers fund TV programmes.
Harvey Lee reports
By HOARVEY LEE
SPONSORSHIP has become the most hotly debated subject in television.
Hardly a week passes without a major conference — in the past seven days, one in London, another in Lisbon — where television companies, advertisers and sponsorship consultants, a new breed, come together to divine any slight shift in the regulatory tea leaves.
Until recently, company sponsorship of ITV or BBC programmes was strictly confined to events which would be taking place regardless of their being televised.
The Broadcasting Act, which governs ITV, limitsit to ‘doings, places, happenings and things’.
This has meant sponsors could pay to stage an event, say the Trebor Mints Pure Strength Challenge, but not directly pay to make the television programme.
Now, under pressure from the ITV companies, the Independent Broadcasting Authority has relaxed its interpretation of the Act.
Both are now due to be replaced, the first by a lighter touch Independent Television Commission, the other by a new Broadcasting Bill that will be far more permissive.
Arts reviews, instructional programmes and the weather may now be directly sponsored.
Drama and situation comedy are likely to be next.
With government nudging and IBA winking, the ITV companies are leading what Channel 4 chief executive Michael Grade describes with alarm as a ‘cavalry charge’ towards sponsorship.
All the companies have a sponsorship executive, and the commercial network has a sponsorship committee.
Two examples of their efforts are already on screen: People and Pets is an animal advice series produced by Granada, ‘in association with Pedigree Chum’.
But the national weather forecasts, sponsored by PowerGen, have caused the biggest storms.
Unveiling details of the £1.7m deal, Ed WAllis, PowerGen's chief executive, candidly said he would expect some say in the way the weather was presented.
Mr Grade has been most vociferous.
‘Sponsorship is the slippery slope towards the erosion of editorial independence.’
But his further assertion that ‘it always ends in tears’ surprised many programme-makers, not least of all his own staff.
Channel 4 has if anything led the cavalry charge, pioneering direct sponsorship deals for minority sports such as American Football, Tour de France cycling and Sumo wrestling.
Current practice so far is based on the notion that some sponsorship is harmless.
There is little chance of advertisers influencing sport or performance art.
Sponsored Shakespeare is unlikely to feature Lady Macbeth holding a proprietary stain remover during her ‘damned spot’ soliloquy.
If Cornhill could influence the outcome of Test Cricket, it would have been its patriotic duty to have done so by now.
But Mr Robin Duval, chief television assistant at the IBA, the person who has been most closely involved in monitoring sponsorship, observes: ‘The widely canvassed notion that sponsors never seek to influence programmes simply does not hold up in my personal and direct experience.’
The public and private faces of sponsors certainly differ.
Ed Wallis, of PowerGen, was the first to openly admit that having paid the piper, he would expect a choice of tune.
A stern note from the IBA advised him that if he had read the small print on his contract, he would have realised he had no right to.
But in a recent annual survey of 150 top UK advertisers, conducted by sponsorship consultants Granard Rowland, part of Saatchis, 50 per cent of marketing directors said they believed sponsors should influence programme content.
Robert Dodds, managing director of Broadcast Innovations, a sponsorship firm backed by two advertising agencies, told a conference last week: ‘There is an arrogant belief on the part of broadcasters that advertisers should support their output regardless of where the programme is scheduled.
If an advertiser doesn't insist on some scheduling guarantee for investing in a programme, he needs his head tested.’
Yet with annual income from advertising topping £1.3bn and a growth rate of 15 per cent, why should ITV need to bother with what at best will remain a marginal financial contribution?
Hugh Geach, head of programme support services at Television South, explains: ‘Everything the Government has done has been designed to open up television to market forces, to encourage new channels and competition for advertising.
Money will be spread more thinly and the companies may become more reluctant to fund minority appeal programmes, particularly big budget documentaries.’
This was the fear behind Melvyn Bragg's initial plea for a millionaire to sponsor LWT's South Bank Show.
He insisted that it was a precautionary ‘belt and braces’ measure for tougher times ahead.
The swift intervention by his managing director, Brian Tesler, underlined the extreme sensitivity ITV feels on the subject.
Jon Marchant, Granada's sponsorship controller, was a principal negotiator on the PowerGen deal and is drawing up ITV's plan to put next year's World Cup sponsorship out to tender.
He says: ‘Production costs continue to soar.
High quality programmes need long-term commitment and funding.
Sponsorship can play a vital role in securing the future of high-quality television.’
Some admit it already does.
Tim Brady, head of corporate sponsorship at Thames, the richest ITV company, pointed to The Concert, an overnight rock series, sponsored by McEwan's lager to the tune of £50,000.
Mr Brady said: ‘Audiences at 1.15am are tiny and programmes at that time attract very little advertising revenue.
Without sponsorship, the series simply would not have been made.’
Independent producers, from whom the Government expects both ITV and BBC to take one quarter of their programmes, regularly complain that the broadcasters, like building societies, are reluctant to advance the full cost of a project.
They see sponsorship as a useful top-up.
But this has already given rise to concern about hidden or back-door sponsorship.
The BBC was forced to drop an independently produced film for Arena on lorry drivers when it emerged that it was partly funded by a hauliers' association.
The film opened on a long lingering shot of sponsors' lorries.
The furore led to a revision of the BBC's sponsorship guidelines, though the formal position is quite clear.
Clause 12 of the Licence says: ‘The Corporation shall not send or emit any sponsored programme.
‘The prohibition is total,’ warns the rulebook.
The BBC says it wants to encourage sponsored events which it can cover.
And sponsors claim that BBC producers are among the most persistent canvassers for their cash.
Advertisers also point out the hypocrisy of barring sponsored programmes when sports coverage is awash with branding.
Mr Marchant argues that to make sure sponsorship is transparent to viewers, as the new Broadcasting Bill will insist, sponsors should be given far more prominence than the present restrictions to discreet and static front and end credits on programmes.
He sees no harm in Pedigree Chum being mentioned as sponsors by the Pets and People presenters.
This and more already happens on satellite and cable channels, which are under the more lenient gaze of the Cable Authority.
EC legislation could well put a stop to this.
News and current affairs will remain a no-go zone for sponsors.
So there is little chance of our newsreaders breaking off, US-style, from a headline story to extol the virtues of a brand of paint, or even a national newspaper.
But the greatest danger could be that which is not shown, the commercial temptation for sponsors to play safe.
Duval agrees: ‘For me the real issue is programme choice, in the sense of what is actually scheduled.
I wonder now if Spitting Image or the The Singing Detective could ever be originated in any British system of the future substantially dependent on sponsorship?
In 1959, the producers of a US television drama about the Nuremberg war crimes trials were forced to delete the words ‘gas chamber’ from the soundtrack.
The sponsor was the American Gas Association.
So far, British sponsors have been discreet.
But how much longer will they remain so?