

Rugby League: Willey takes Bradford helm
By PAUL WILSON
BRADFORD Northern have appointed Ron Willey, a veteran Sydney coach, to succeed Barry Seabourne, at Odsal.
Willey, credited with bringing Manly to pre-eminence before spells with Balmain, Norths, Souths and, most recently, Penrith, hopes to arrive in time for Sunday's Yorkshire Cup semi-final replay, against Halifax.
At 59, he will be the oldest coach in the First Division, but Willey can draw on a wealth of experience.
His Grand Final-winning Manly side of the early Seventies included not only Malcolm Reilly, now the Great Britain coach, but also Bobby Fulton, the leader of next year's Kangaroos.
His appointment on a two-year contract will disappoint David Hobbs, the caretaker who had applied for the job on a permanent basis, but Chris Caisley, the Odsal chairman, hinted yesterday that patience might bring a reward for the Northern captain.
‘Ron is the right man for us at the moment,’ Caisley said.
‘David has done a great job over the last few weeks but he still has playing ambitions.
Working closely with Ron Willey can only enhance his future coaching prospects.’
Bradford's decision, together with Salford's installation of Kevin Tamati last week, means an unprecedented half of the first division clubs have overseas coaches.
Alex Murphy recently suggested this situation had arisen because of the sterility of the Australian game, but there are less complacent views.
Phil Larder, the national coaching director, accepts Sydney specialists can bring short-term benefit, but feels a new generation of English coaches is being held back.
‘It is not axiomatic that overseas coaches are better than our own,’ Larder said.
‘That might have been the case once, but now we produce perfectly good coaches ourselves, and I'm concerned the incentive will disappear if administrators continue to look only to Australia.’
Football: Single-minded England come to the point
From PATRICK BARCLAY in Katowice
ONLY by breaking the habit of what seems a lifetime will England this evening jeopardise their hopes of reaching the World Cup in Italy next summer.
It is eight years since they lost a World Cup qualifying match, six years since they lost a qualifying match for either of the international competitions open to European countries.
A point in the Slaski Stadium would carry Bobby Robson's team into the finals, and few Poles doubt their chances.
With all Polish clubs eliminated from Europe the local mood is as grey as Silesia's industrial landscape.
England face a far less forbidding task than in 1973, when defeat on the same Chorzow ground by a gifted, combative Poland signalled the beginning of the end for Sir Alf Ramsey.
‘Our football at the moment,’ as one sage put it, ‘is like our economy — failing to keep pace with changing conditions in the society around it.’
In the shops it was possible to buy imported vodka, but not Polish; supply could not meet demand.
In football too, he said, production lines were faulty.
Never, indeed, has one seen such shoddy workmanship in a Polish team as that displayed at Wembley in June, when they lost 3-0, dismaying the folks back home.
Under the new management of Andrzeja Strejlaua, and with several team changes, they were said to have been much improved in narrowly losing a friendly in Spain last month.
Video evidence of the match is not available but England's attitude was summarised by the captain, Bryan Robson, who said: ‘We're not too bothered.
The main thing is to get our game right.
If we do, we will win.’
Bobby Robson has made the three expected alterations to the team that began the 0-0 draw in Sweden last month.
The captain, absent with bruised ribs then, replaces his injured Manchester United colleague Neil Webb.
Chris Waddle moves from the right flank to the vacancy on the left caused by John Barnes's withdrawal and David Rocastle takes over on the right.
The balance of the side is just as Bobby Robson would have wished it; bearing in mind the need for midfield solidity, Rocastle would probably have played anyway.
The extraordinary episode of Bryan Robson and his quick-healing fracture has yet to be fully explained.
But Bobby Robson said last night that his fitness was in no doubt.
‘We've nursed some players through training these last few days, but he's not one of them.’
Assuming no relapse, Robson and Steve McMahon, who wore the captain's mantle so impressively in Stockholm, are capable of winning enough possession to prevent the defence from coming under sustained pressure.
McMahon had failed to convince the manager on his five previous appearances.
As he said yesterday: ‘Stockholm was make or break.
I had to show him I could be an international rather than just a squad player.
So I went out to play like I do for Liverpool.’
Only poor Webb, still in plaster but determined to be back in the side in time for Italy, can feel discouraged by the way he brought it off.
The acting captain Terry Butcher, bloodied but unbowed, gave a particularly stirring performance that night and was ably complemented by Des Walker until the Nottingham Forest defender almost gave the match away with an aberrant pass back.
What England, yet to concede a goal as they go into their sixth and final group match, must avoid this evening is such an error in the early stages.
Then, Poland might just surprise themselves and a crowd expected to fill only a quarter of the 72,000-capacity stadium.
They are, after all, unburdened by expectation of success (to have a chance of qualifying, they must win all of their last three matches) and strengthened by the return of the Glasgow exile Dariusz Dziekanowski.
He will be supported up front by Hamburg's Jan Furtok and the tousle-haired Roman Kosecki, a lively substitute at Wembley who, like his captain, Dariusz Wdowczyk, will be hoping to impress British talent spotters.
England have Gary Lineker and Peter Beardsley and, surely, too much experience for Poland.
The main fear is that Captain Marvel, having turned into Captain Miracle, will be revealed as Captain Mortal; the sight of Robson limping off would be ominous.
But then England are not Manchester United, who crumbled at Portsmouth after he departed to have his fracture diagnosed.
They got a point without Robson in Stockholm.
They know the qualifying course as well as any team in Europe and, shortly before 7pm, should have earned themselves a toast in vodka, imported, of course.
ENGLAND'S PLACE ON THE ROAD TO ITALY ENGLAND need a point to ensure a place in the World Cup finals alongside Italy (the hosts), Argentina (holders), Yugoslavia (winners of European Group Five), Brazil and Uruguay (winners of their South American groups) and Costa Rica (from the Concacaf Group).
With nine points, they would be certain to qualify even if they are overtaken by Sweden.
If England lose they can still reach the finals as one of the best two second-placed teams in the three four-team European groups.
In such circumstances England's goal difference could give them an advantage over, say, Denmark in Group One or The Netherlands in Group Four, both of whom complete their fixtures next month.
Football: Rivals speechless on the eve of battle
From JOE LOVEJOY in Dublin
WHATEVER happened to the blarney?
Jack Charlton and Billy Bingham were spouting nothing but platitudes last night, leaving the Dublin public to count punts and what sounded suspiciously like chickens before the Republic of Ireland's historic World Cup tie against their northern neighbours at Lansdowne Road this afternoon.
Neither manager would give a clue as to his team, or discuss in depth a match which could see the Republic qualify for the finals for the first time.
Instead, the debate here focused on the bonuses Charlton's players will receive for getting to Italy (£25,000 per man) and the Sports Minister's public criticism of Irish television for their decision not to screen the other tie in Group Six, between Hungary and Spain.
Victories for the Republic and Spain would settle the issue, with the Spaniards qualifying as group winners and Charlton's side advancing with them, as runners-up.
Frank Fahey, the Irish Minister for Sport, told RTE that the situation demanded that they broadcast Hungary v Spain, which kicks off at five o'clock — a suggestion which brought a mind-your-own-business response from their head of sport, Tim O'Connor.
O'Connor points out that demands for the game in Budapest is based on the dangerous presumption that the Republic will beat Northern Ireland — a result they have yet to achieve after three meetings.
The North's chances of qualifying perished with their 2-1 defeat at home to Hungary in June.
The Republic are unbeaten at home in their last 16 games, but if recent results point to only one winner, they know form can be a fickle friend when tribal passions are aroused.
Charlton confessed: ‘This one has been troubling me for some time.
The nearer it gets, the more worried I become.’
His apprehensions are fuelled by a crop of injuries that may deprive him of Paul McGrath (hamstring), Kevin Moran (bruised back) and Steve Staunton (ankle).
John Aldridge has scored just one goal in 26 internationals and Tony Cascarino three in 16 appearances.
Did the Republic have a problem in attack?
‘Not at all.
Next question.’
Was there a contingency plan to cover the loss of McGrath, Moran and Staunton?
‘No.
Next?’
Charlton has no need to wax lyrical to talk up a crowd.
Interest here is such that the FA of Ireland could have sold three times the 46,000 tickets.
Rowing: Norrish offers to resign
By HUGH MATHESON
ALI NORRISH, the Oxford University Boat Club president, offered to resign last night after failing her first-year engineering examinations for the second time.
Norrish was elected last May to be the first woman president of the 150-year-old club.
‘I'm deeply disappointed,’ she said last night, ‘but more for OUBC than myself.’
She came to the university after steering the British women's coxed four in the final of the Olympics in Seoul.
She joined the Boat Race squad last January and quickly took over the Blue boat.
In the week before the race, she became embroiled in a controversy over the skill of her opponent, the American Leigh Weiss, who had also steered international women's crews but who was deemed not to know enough of the Boat Race course on London's tideway.
In the event, by the intervention of the umpire, Norrish was given enough room after two minutes to grasp the stream and she held on to her advantage with great skill until Oxford were clear and the race was won.
With no primus inter pares among the many oarsmen candidates for the presidency, Norrish, slightly against her will, was elected.
She confessed her doubts about combining the huge workload of president with her preliminary exams.
Her tutors at University College have allowed her a third attempt next year but have insisted she take a year out.
Martin Watts, of Oriel, this year's coxswain of Isis, the Oxford second crew, takes over as acting president.
He will have to call an election which will probably be contested by Richard Thorpe, the 1989 stroke, Calman McLennan, a fourth-year medical student, and Richard Hull, the post-graduate from Cambridge.
Football: Charlton criticises Edwards
By HUGH MATHESON
BOBBY CHARLTON, the former Manchester United and England forward, who is now a club director, made it clear yesterday that he would be willing to take over as chairman ‘if the right person asked me’.
Charlton was critical of the way the proposed sale of Martin Edwards's majority shareholding to Michael Knighton for £10m had been handled.
‘It has been very disturbing and hurtful for me to see the way things have happened,’ Charlton said.
Talks were still going on between Knighton and his stockbrokers Laing & Cruickshank last night to prepare an offer document before tonight's midnight deadline.
‘Throughout all of this Manchester United has been kicked around like a football and the quicker this ends the better,’ Charlton said.
‘The directors have been impotent because the deal was between Martin Edwards and Michael Knighton.
The board has tried to gather information about the bid, but we could not act until we knew who to act for or against.
‘Perhaps Martin Edwards will admit that he has made a mistake selling to the person he has done and the way in which he has sold it.
With hindsight he may have acted differently.
‘Certainly promises were made when Michael Knighton came to the club and doubts have now been cast on his ability to fulfil these, but if he does everything he has said who is to complain?’
Football: Bull's double may be in vain 
By HUGH MATHESON
Poland Under-21.. 1 England Under-21.
3 STEVE BULL scored twice as England finished their European Championship Under-21 qualifying campaign with a flourish in Jastrzebie Zdruj, but they are still likely to miss out on a quarter-final place for the first time since the competition began 13 years ago.
Sweden, who beat England last month, need only avoid a heavy defeat in Poland a fortnight today to head the group and qualify for the final stages.
England made an excellent start when Manchester City's Ian Brightwell headed them in front from a David Smith cross in the ninth minute.
Bull exploited hesitancy in the Polish defence when he headed in the second goal in the 36th minute, again from a Smith cross, after good work by David Batty.
Arsenal's Paul Merson almost made it three when he connected with a Bull cross a minute before the break, but goalkeeper Adam Mateysek reacted quickly to parry the ball for a corner.
England always looked dangerous and extended their lead in the 53rd minute when Merson opened up the Polish defence for Bull to slot in the third goal.
Piotr Prabucki scored a consolation in the 73rd minute when he sent an angled shot into the net off Digby's fingertips.
Football: Taylor's chief interest
By PHIL SHAW
GORDON TAYLOR, the players' union secretary, yesterday confirmed that he is still prepared to take up the post of chief executive of the Football League -despite a cold-shoulder from the League's management committee and the reluctance of the Professional Footballers' Association to release him.
‘The League just don't seem able to sort it out,’ Taylor said yesterday.
‘It was over two months ago that I was approached about the job, terms were agreed and I was a part of Bill Fox's presidential platform.
‘It was voted on by the clubs but there has been no ratification of that by the management committee.
My people at the PFA feel that until the League get together and show there is a practical job for me to do, they don't see why they should let me go.’
Walsall's move from Fellows Park to a new £4m stadium has been postponed until the start of next season because the pitch will not be ready in time.
The FA has charged Dunstable with bringing the game into disrepute for their FA Cup qualifying round walk-off at Staines.
Dunstable had three players sent off, the rest left the field in protest and the match was called off and awarded to Staines.
Justin Fashanu, the former Norwich and Nottingham Forest striker, scored three and Clive Allen two in Manchester City's 5-0 home win against Notts County in a reserve match.
Fashanu is on trial with City after a knee injury.
Ruud Gullit flew back to Milan from Amsterdam yesterday to resume light training after a Brussels specialist confirmed he would not need further surgery on a nagging knee injury.
He will not train with his team-mates for five weeks.
Sport in Short: Windsurfing
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Tennis
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Speedway
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Snooker
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Rugby Union
By PHIL SHAW
WALES, the Soviet Union and West Germany are three new nations making their debut at the 15th Hong Kong Sevens, to be staged from 31 March to 1 April next year.
Sport in Short: Rallying
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Judo
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Golf
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Football
By PHIL SHAW
WELSH CUP DRAW: Southern Section: Swansea v Merthyr Tydfil; Pembroke Borough v AFC Cardiff; Cardiff City v Newport or Brecon; Barry Town v Bath City; Sully or Maesteg Park v Worcester City; Ton Pentre v Port Talbot; Ammanford Town v Llanelli; Aberystwyth v Islwyn Ath or Cardiff Corries.
Northern Section: Hereford v Connagh's Quay Nomads; Porthmadog v Wrexham; Penycae v Caersws; Conway Utd or Bangor v Flint; Mostyn or Brymbo Steelworks v Colwyn Bay; Morda Utd v Kidderminster Harriers; Twyyn-Bryncrug v Lex X1; Chirk v Rhyl.
Ties to be played on or before 11 November.
Sport in Short: Cycling
By PHIL SHAW
LAURENT FIGNON said yesterday that his three-month suspension for failing a dope test was lenient.
‘It doesn't encourage people to be too careful,’ he said.
ROLF GOELZ, West Germany's leading rider, dominated a four-man sprint to win the 214km Milan to Turin classic for the second successive year yesterday.
Sport in Short: Cricket
By PHIL SHAW
THE INDIAN Board of Control yesterday relaxed rules binding Indian cricketers during tours abroad.
Players would no longer be barred from playing in another country after a tour.
Sport in Short: Boxing
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Baseball
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Athletics
Sport Page 37
Rugby Union: Chilcott is forced to play a waiting game
By BARRIE FAIRALL
GARETH CHILCOTT, the England prop who was sent off for the fourth time in his playing career with Bath when the champions suffered a League reversal at Gloucester last month, is still awaiting news of his punishment from the Somerset disciplinary committee.
The Chilcott case was due to be heard last night by the committee, which generally meets once a fortnight.
The trouble is that since Chilcott's dismissal for punching, players in the county have been on their best behaviour.
John Davidson, the secretary of the committee, explained: ‘We've got some fixed dates in the diary, but we don't always operate to those because it depends whether or not we've got enough cases.’
Davidson added that Somerset has about four cases to hear next week which means that Chilcott is left kicking his heels for another seven days.
Meanwhile, the recipient in an alleged head-kicking incident at Twickenham last Saturday, plays on.
Richard Langhorn, the No. 8 whose stitches resulted in a letter of complaint to Swansea by Harlequins, has been passed fit to play for Quins in this weekend's First Division game at Bedford.
Another Harlequin, Everton Davis, has been seeking a second opinion on the knee injury that forced him out of last month's England training session.
The wing was also ruled out of the squad last year — by a groin injury which required surgery — and the surgeon's knife was poised again until a specialist diagnosed that an operation was not necessary.
Rugby Union: Shelford has work cut out
By STEVE BALE, Rugby Union Correspondent
THE All Blacks stepped off their plane at Heathrow yesterday straight into the arms of a waiting posse of officials set on saving Wayne Shelford and New Zealand rugby for amateurism.
The efforts of the home unions' committee appear to have worked — for now at least.
Shelford, the tour captain, will no longer be asking £500 for personal appearances and is understood already to have set about ‘dismantling’ those that had been arranged.
‘We have received categorical assurances that whatever has been reported about his earning money while he is here is not the case,’ Ronnie Dawson, the home unions chairman and Irish RU president, said.
Bob Weighill, the home unions secretary, added: ‘It is not normal for rugby union players to work while on tour.’
What, then, is his work?
Shelford's full-time employment is the promotion of Wayne Shelford (through Mark McCormack's International Management Group).
At yesterday's welcoming press conference he declined to comment and instead confined his remarks to the job in hand: seven matches in Wales, five in Ireland and one (against the Barbarians) in England.
The problem has been deferred rather than resolved, as the pressure inexorably intensifies to relax rugby union's amateur regulations.
These are interpreted differently Down Under; to take two among many examples of the New Zealand way, back home Shelford promotes, unimpeded, a brand of baked beans (called Watties), and John Kir- wan, the wing, advertises bananas.
‘We are still within the amateur regulations or we wouldn't be here,’ Grant Fox, the All Black outside-half, said yesterday.
‘I believe players should be able to make money for making a speech or opening a supermarket.
Concessions must soon be made.’
It is a view increasingly shared by players on this side of the Equator.
The tourists anticipate a harder time than recent evidence in Welsh and Irish rugby might have suggested to them.
‘A lot has been said about how weak Welsh rugby is,’ the coach Alex Wyllie said.
‘But no All Black team other than 1967 and 1924 has gone through unbeaten and we know very well we will have tough games against Wales and Ireland.’
Shelford was in Wales last October to watch Neath beat Toulouse, a result which has led him to a conclusion similar to Wyllie's: ‘From the performance Neath put on that night, Welsh rugby is in pretty healthy hands.’
The matches actually begin on the coastal belt in Cardiff on Saturday (the New Zealand team will be announced this morning), and the tour moves on to Pontypool next Wednesday.
By then Wyllie, the sole selector, hopes to have given all 30 players a game.
Rugby Union: Botha a ghost at the feast
By STEVE BALE
Newport..... 13 Barbarians.. 40 SO THE Welsh have not after all severed all links with South Africa.
Naas Botha, of all people, turned up at Rodney Parade last night to see the Barbarians' annual autumn get-together.
The Springbok stand-off is not about to be signed up in south Wales.
He is merely stopping over en route from the Republic to Italy, where he plays rugby for Rovigo.
But the company he has been keeping has been fascinating.
Brian Jones, secretary of the Merit Table organisation, which brings together Wales's 18 senior clubs, is putting him up.
Yesterday he and Botha lunched with Terry Vaux, the WRU committee man who resigned from the International Rugby Board as a result of the South African row.
The fare laid before Botha last night was hardly epicurean.
Newport have fallen on even harder times than last year, when the Barbarians beat them 60-18, and the Baa-Baas too scratched around for fluency.
Only occasionally was there any doubt that they would win, however, particularly as David Phillips, who took over the kicking on the early retirement of Brian Bolderson, kicked only one of four penalty chances for Newport.
The Barbarians countered with first-half tries by Jeremy Guscott and Owain Williams.
Guscott's, set up by a break by Brendan Mullin, was a felicitous product of the renewal of the Lions centre pairing who did so well in Paris last week.
The Black-and-Ambers' All Black date in three weeks has been looking more of a death sentence than an opportunity to breathe new live into an ailing club.
But last night they at least could not be faulted on their spirit.
Having taken the game to the Baa-Baas at the start of the second half they deserved their try by Damian Griffiths, although the revival was brief.
Within two minutes Mike Hall put Peter Dods in for the Barbarians' third try, and another four followed in a procession interrupted by one for Newport by John Thomas.
Phil John, John Morrison, Craig Chalmers and Williams completed the Baa-Baas' runaway, with Chalmers's six conversions from seven giving him 16 points from a productive night.
Botha, meanwhile, signed off with a few words of advice for the Welsh: ‘They are going berserk about nothing and it might be time for the WRU to concentrate on their own rugby.’
Which is precisely what last Friday's anti-SA vote means they are now doing.
Newport: Tries Griffiths, Thomas; Conversion Callard; Penalty Phillips.
Barbarians: Tries Williams 2, Guscott, Dods, John, Morrison, Chalmers; Conversions Chalmers 6.
Rugby League: Warrington danger springs from Mackey
By PAUL WILSON
Warrington.. 28 Widnes....... 6 WIDNES appear to be still paying the price of becoming world champions.
Humbled at Sheffield Eagles on Sunday, in their first game after the defeat of Canberra Raiders, they failed to bounce back in the Lancashire Cup last night, losing to a disciplined Warrington side.
As at Sheffield, the margin of defeat was surprising.
Making an extraordinary number of handling errors and under-using the speed in their backs, Widnes were scarcely in the hunt.
At one stage in the game they were down to 11 men, but their shortcomings should not be allowed to detract from Warrington's impressively positive performance, the home side contributing much that was memorable in a thrilling and thunderously received encounter.
Warrington set out to contain Widnes in their own half and pressure them into mistakes, and met with early success on both counts.
A misunderstanding between Richard Eyres and Derek Pyke gave Rocky Turner his first penalty chance, and a second, from a similarly kickable position, arrived when David Hulme was forced to obstruct Mark Roskell.
Hulme transgressed even more unpardonably in the 14th minute, when his high tackle on Greg Mackey earned a spell in the sin-bin and allowed Turner a third goal, this time from the half-way line.
Mackey, an Australian scrum-half whose short contract Warrington are trying to turn into a long one, was a constant source of danger to Widnes, and provided the final pass to enable Mark Forster to score a try in Hulmes's absence.
Widnes were back to a full complement of players by the time Tony Thorniley scored Warrington's second, again from an inspired Mackey pass, but the visitors were powerless to prevent the centre reaching the line from 25 yards.
Worse, Barry Dowd, injured in attempting a final tackle, joined Eyres in the casualty room, as Widnes were forced to field both their inexperienced Welsh substitutes before half-time.
The Widnes tale of woe continued in the second half, when Tony Myler was unable to hold Pyke's pass and Turner intercepted to give Thorniley a second try.
Andy Currier was eventually able to provide consolation at the other end, but departed for the sin-bin 30 seconds later after a foul on Bob Jackson, accompanied by Paul Hulme, who questioned the referee's decision too vehemently.
Joe Ropati scored a final try for Warrington, with Turner adding a sixth goal.
Warrington now meet Oldham in the final on Saturday at St Helens.
Motor Racing: Spanish result to stand
By PAUL WILSON
THE RESULT of the Spanish Grand Prix will not be nullified, even if an appeal by Nigel Mansell on his exclusion from it is successful, the president of FISA, the sport's ruling body, said yesterday.
Jean-Marie Balestre confirmed the British driver's ban from the Jerez race for ‘a recognised, proven and established offence’ and ruled that his appeal could not affect this year's world championship.
Mansell has appealed against a one-race ban imposed by FISA for reversing in the pits during the Portuguese Grand Prix in Estoril on 24 September.
Balestre said Mansell had admitted and apologised for reversing.
The FISA president said the sanction against Mansell was for this breach of security rules and had nothing to do with his failure to stop after a black flag was waved at him three times.
Balestre criticised the media, Mansell and Ferrari and the International Automobile Federation's appeals tribunal for spreading confusion about the case.
He said the media had been impulsive in reporting the incident and that Mansell and Ferrari had appealed to two different bodies — the national motorsports tribunal in Portugal and FIA's international tribunal.
He said that the FIA tribunal had no right to rule on the case until a hearing in Portugal and should not have heard representation from Mansell and Ferrari at a hearing in Paris last Thursday.
The Portuguese hearing would go ahead on 18 October even though Ferrari had asked for it to be postponed, he said.
Any ruling in Mansell's favour could only affect the size of his $50,000 (£31,500) fine, Balestre added.
Amateur Rugby League:: Yearning from the students
By PAUL WILSON
PLAYING rugby league can be addictive, according to Martyn Sadler, the chairman of the students' association, who reports that young people introduced to the game at university or college are no longer necessarily lost after graduation, writes Paul Wilson.
First to profit from this trend are Bradford's Dudley Hill, who, with five members of the English Students World Cup squad in their side, have made an explosive start in the BNFL national league, leading the first division with six wins from six matches at an average of almost 40 points per game.
Mick Keebles, the World Cup captain, heads the off-campus contingent, which also includes John Jenkins, a centre who briefly returned to rugby union with Waterloo on leaving Leeds Polytechnic, but decided it did not quite match the real thing.
There is more to Dudley Hill's startling success than graduate recruitment.
This season they are coached by Peter Roe, the former Bradford and Keighley centre, and have Paul Dennis, an ex-paratrooper as fitness conditioner.
From his universal nickname — Tenko — it will be surmised that Dennis demands more than a few laps of the pitch prior to a session in the pub.
Training for the new season began on 20 June, earlier than at many professional clubs, and even more astoundingly among amateurs, Dennis's players renounce mid-week alcohol.
Results have been rapid.
Huddersfield, Second Division professionals, were seen off in a pre-season friendly, and in the National League a succession of self-respecting clubs have been trounced.
Millom arrived undefeated but were routed 48-8.
Leigh Miners fancied themselves against the upstarts, but fell to a 35-12 home defeat.
Rugby Union: Goodway, Hobbs back for Britain
By PAUL WILSON
ANDY GOODWAY and David Hobbs, two former Oldham forwards, were yesterday rehabilitated at international level when Malcolm Reilly named a squad of 21 for the first Test against New Zealand on Saturday week.
Goodway, now of Wigan, disappointed Reilly deeply by withdrawing from last year's tour for personal reasons which seemed less than urgent, but the coach has sensibly decided against holding grudges.
After several public expressions of regret and an impressive start to the season, Goodway makes the party on the unanswerable grounds of form.
Hobbs, who last played for Great Britain in France in 1987, returns to international favour on the strength of the maturity he has displayed since taking over the captaincy at Bradford this season.
Kelvin Skerrett, another high-profile performer in the Northern pack, is one of three uncapped players.
In the backs there are no real surprises.
Andy Currier and Paul Newlove are the newcomers, scarcely unheralded, but Reilly has chosen a squad rather than a team because of injury doubts over Andy Gregory and Joe Lydon, and with the threat of suspension hanging over Shaun Edwards.
Thus while Deryck Fox can celebrate his first call-up since 1986, it is only with the knowledge that he will be discarded if Gregory is passed fit.
Those waiting to see whether Edwards or Tony Myler gets the stand-off shirt must likewise wait a little longer, and Reilly has also prevaricated over the choice between Alan Tait and Steve Hampson at full-back, though neither player is injured.
One notable absentee from the squad is Lee Crooks, once rated invaluable by Reilly, who appears to have come to a career crossroads.
The £172,000 prop failed to appear for Leeds on Sunday, and yesterday confirmed his disenchantment at Headingley by asking for a move.
Salford yesterday announced the signing of David Fell, a 23-year-old centre from the Orrell rugby union club, on a £40,000 contract.
Baseball: Clark caps Cubs' demise
By PAUL WILSON
WILL CLARK applied the coup de grace that extended the Chicago Cubs' post-season losing streak to 44 years and took the San Francisco Giants into the World Series against their neighbours the Oakland Athletics.
Stepping up to bat in the eighth inning of game five on Sunday with the scores tied 1-1, the Giants first baseman had trouble controlling the adrenalin, ‘but I took a deep breath and tried to focus on the point of release of the ball’.
He hit a single that brought two runners home, and San Francisco held on to win 3-2 and take the National League title 4-1.
Clark, whose batting average for the series was an amazing.
650, won the most valuable player award for his play-off record of eight runs, two home runs and eight runs batted in.
‘I want to stress I'm happy with the award but this is not a one-man team,’ he said.
‘It has character, a great manager in Roger Craig and 24 guys who don't know how to quit.’
Golf: Organisers accuse Faldo of ‘disloyalty’
By PAUL WILSON
NICK FALDO was accused of ‘disloyalty’ yesterday after opting to miss his defence of the Volvo Masters title at Valderrama, Spain, later this month, and play in the Nabisco Championships in the United States instead.
Mel Pyatt, the Volvo spokesman said: ‘It is all very sad; loyalty seems to have gone by the board.
It is a shame that the players feel they can put sponsors to ransom like this and that they are bigger than the sport.’
Faldo said at Wentworth yesterday that he made the decision because he feels he cannot now finish at the top of the European order of merit by playing in Spain.
‘I realise the European Tour will not be too happy but I blame them anyway for the clash of dates,’ Faldo said.
The US Masters champion added: ‘I always try to defend a title but I have sweated my guts out in America this year to get where I am and I feel I am entitled to play.
It is a good tournament, a good field and a course where I have won before.’
Another Ryder Cup player, Seve Ballesteros, is also torn between tournaments.
Despite protracted negotiations, the Spaniard will stick to his plans to play in a conflicting event in Japan instead of the World Cup in Spain in November.
Athletics: Whitbread chosen without a throw
By PAUL WILSON
THE England women's selectors have been able to include both Fatima Whitbread, the javelin world champion, and Tessa Sanderson, the Commonwealth champion, in the 48-strong team for January's Commonwealth Games in Auckland, despite neither woman throwing at the trials in August.
The use of qualifying standards meant the women had none of the awkward choices which confronted the men, also enabling them to bring in experienced campaigners like Christina Cahill (1,500 metres) and Wendy Sly (3,000m), despite both runners having had restricted summer seasons.
Meanwhile, Scottish athletes and officials yesterday angrily rejected as ‘useless’ an offer by the Scottish Commonwealth Games Council to extend the time limit to achieve the qualifying standards for New Zealand.
Announcing that Scottish companies and local authorities had raised more than £230,000, George Hunter, the Games Council secretary, said that this would allow the time limit for achieving qualifying standards to be extended to the end of December.
‘Not one person who has met the qualifying standard before the plane takes off for Auckland will be left behind,’ Hunter said.
But Brian Whittle, the leading 400 metres and 800 metres runner, was among those to dismiss the offer because of the lack of competitive opportunities between now and the new deadline.
Football: Charlton wins the green vote: Ken Jones on the simple yet successful philosophy that has made Jack Charlton the outsider a giant in terms of popularity
By KEN JONES
WHEN citizens of the Irish Republic bestow sainthood on Jack Charlton, thinking him to be perhaps the most significant figure in their sporting history, they are not merely responding to what he has already achieved with the national football team.
There is also the man.
That an English hero should become so popular on historically alien ground is a phenomenon best explained by Charlton's instinct for being nothing but himself, a characteristic that appeals mightily to the Celtic nature.
Last week while Bobby Robson was surrounded by players and coaches, knee-deep in the paranoia that appears to afflict the majority of football managers, Charlton was fishing in Ayrshire, not seeking relief from cumulative tension but simply enjoying life.
This may have strengthened an impression that occurs frequently to his critics, one of relentless eccentricity most manifest in forgetfulness.
What they ignore is Charlton's ability to dispense knowledge acquired when turning out in more than 600 matches for Leeds United and 35 in the England colours, his World Cup experience of great and possibly lasting importance to the Irish cause.
In Dublin today Charlton will send out the Republic against Northern Ireland in an attempt to take the points that would virtually ensure participation in the World Cup finals next summer in Italy, a feat guaranteed to consolidate his status as a modern Irish hero.
If anything the prospect of increased attention embarrasses Charlton.
‘I don't need to be more famous,’ he said last week after returning to a charmingly comfortable home converted from farm buildings some 15 miles to the north-west of Newcastle.
A glistening 18lb salmon lay on a kitchen work-top and Charlton applied a sharp knife, gutting and then carving it into steaks.
He wore battle-dress green, slacks and sweater and his weather-beaten face glowed with satisfaction and well-being.
Later he spoke about references to him in a popular Sunday tabloid, scowling at the implication that his approach is essentially haphazard.
‘It hurt me,’ he growled, ‘all that stuff about sitting on river banks and prowling moors instead of concentrating on the job, turning up late and being more interested in fishing and shooting than football.
They forget I took the job on the understanding that management of a national team can only be part-time employment.
What can you gain from sitting behind a desk making and waiting for telephone calls, going from game to game watching players you already know about?’
The philosophy is devastatingly simple, Charlton recognising that he cannot hope to improve players technically in the short time available to him before matches.
‘I don't want them to get bored with me or me with them.
There are rooms booked in the hotel if they want to take the opportunity of visiting relatives but I don't expect them in Dublin until two days before we play.
From then on they are with me.
Nothing complicated.
We sort out the free kicks and pay attention to specific tasks.’
Under Charlton the Republic have made quite dramatic progress, reaching the finals of the European Championships in West Germany last year, his appointment undeniably responsible for an upsurge in potential after decades of comparatively anonymous endeavour.
As this has been achieved with a style of football that owes little to romantic idealism, Charlton is not in trouble-free waters although even his most vigorous detractors are now inclined to take a pragmatic stance, appeased by success and forced to accept his widespread popularity.
When it comes to the Republic's method Charlton is unrepentant.
‘We are not playing kick and rush,’ he insisted when driving out to a friend's hotel in the Derwent Valley below Consett, pausing now and then to savour the uncluttered Durham landscape, his heart for ever in the North-east of England.
‘I simply don't want the ball put at risk in areas where we are immediately vulnerable to counter-attacks and we must always be giving the opposition something to think about.
They should never feel comfortable or be familiar with the problems.
The team must never to be stretched and when we press forward that also means the goalkeeper.
‘Liverpool have exploited that but it first came to me many years ago in a charity match at Newcastle.
For the fun of it Len Shackleton played in goal and of course he was full of tricks, shaping to punch or catch the ball on the edge of the penalty area and then controlling it on his chest, things like that.
But he was also occupying space behind the defenders, making it difficult for attackers to get in on passes.’
None of the Republic players was more likely to come into conflict with Charlton's tactics than Liam Brady, who announced his retirement from international football after being substituted 10 minutes from half-time in a recent friendly against West Germany.
Charlton immediately came under fire, his decision to withdraw Brady from the fray seen to be cavalier and grossly insensitive.
‘I am paid to win matches,’ Charlton said.
‘I like Liam and have great respect for his ability and reputation but he wasn't doing what was expected and it was necessary to make a change.’
Subsequent emollient correspondence has has healed the rift and Brady remains within Charlton's embrace, his vast experience still on tap and offered enthusiastically.
This did not come as a surprise.
What some of us have come to expect from Jack Charlton cannot always be adequately defined: obdurate, quick-tempered, argumentative but unfailingly loyal and never less than a man.
Football: Polish history a reminder of harsh lessons
By KEN JONES
IMAGES of Chorzow: bleak terrain, the coalfields of Silesia, a passionate audience, ferocious tackles, grim possibility.
The irresistible thing is to suggest that even the most resolute of England's footballers, ever mindful of the predicament that could result from defeat, are not entirely immune to what awaits them today in Poland.
History is set out in apparently discouraging detail.
‘One of the most difficult matches we have ever been asked to play,’ confided Sir Alf Ramsey in June, 1973, his apprehension understandable despite being able to call upon the vast experience of Bobby Moore, Alan Ball and Martin Peters.
For Moore, on the occasion of his 105th appearance in England colours, it became a miserable exposure to the inevitability of decline, an uncharacteristic positional error enabling Lubanski to surge through for the second of Poland's two goals; the famed captain would play only three more times for his country, and not in the climax to the qualifying group, five months later at Wembley.
The end was in sight for a number of them that day in Chorzow: Alan Ball, sent off, unable to contain his frustration; Ramsey, the most successful of England's managers, sacked within a year.
An era crumbling.
There were other times in Silesia.
September, 1973: Poland versus Wales in England's qualifying group, a brutal confrontation, the late Trevor Hockey sent off, his manager Dave Bowen choking back obscenities.
Unable to build upon a draw against England at Wembley and a victory over Poland at home, Wales, defeated 3-0, were out of the World Cup.
It was in Silesia that a marvellous Tottenham Hotspur team, League champions and FA Cup winners in 1961, were first introduced to the hazards of European competition, their ambitions in disarray until Dave Mackay inspired a partial recovery that led to a 8-1 success in the return at White Hart Lane.
Only spirited defending of the highest order and considerable good fortune enabled Manchester United to progress beyond Silesia in 1968: despite losing 1-0 to Gornik, Sir Matt Busby's vision of winning the European Cup was still intact as the result of a two-goal advantage from the first leg.
So was it ever thus, history the source of ominous portent, further nourishing Bobby Robson's anxiety?
He can take heart from the events of 1966.
After wandering through Scandinavia, permutations completed, England came to Chorzow, the last match they would play before taking part in the World Cup.
Silence settled on the assembled company as Ramsey read out his team.
‘…Hunt and’ pause for effect ‘Peters’.
England defeated Poland 1-0, Roger Hunt the goalscorer and the tenacious manner of that victory persuaded us that the possibilities were immense; of that team, only Jimmy Greaves would be missing from the World Cup Final.
Cricket: Larkins given a one-day pass
By KEN JONES
WAYNE LARKINS, shunted into the sidings after the last of his six Test caps in 1981, has been recalled to the England team for their one-day match against a Railway XI in Delhi today.
For Larkins the game represents a chance to book his ticket for Sunday's Nehru Trophy opener against Sri Lanka.
The dashing 35-year-old Northamptonshire batsman was the personal choice of Graham Gooch for this winter's battles in India and the West Indies.
‘It's good for the confidence to know that the captain wanted me,’ Larkins said.
‘I have to admit I was surprised when my name was announced for both tours but, hopefully, I can take the chance with both hands.’
Gooch launches the partnership today and will probably stick with it for Friday's second and final warm-up match against an Air India XI.
Larkins, like Gooch, was a member of the 1981-2 rebel tour to South Africa.
The nearest he has come to an England place since was three years ago when he broke a thumb within 24 hours of being selected to face India.
The Australians have cleared the all-rounder Steve Waugh for the trip to India despite a back injury which will prevent him from bowling in the tournament.
Australian Cricket Board manager Graham Halbish said doctors had ordered Waugh not to bowl for several months after diagnosing a stress fracture of his lower back — a legacy of the recent Ashes tour of England.
Waugh led the Ashes batting averages with 126.5 from eight Test innings including four unbeaten knocks, but bowled only sparingly in the series because of his back problem.
Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka will be making short unofficial tours of England next year, in addition to the official tours by New Zealand and India.
Tim Lamb, the TCCB cricket secretary, said: ‘The Board has agreed to host the additional tours in order to assist the development of cricket in Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka.’
Judo: Ogawa shows his age
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
HEAVYWEIGHTS, it is said, take a while to mature but tend to remain longer in the sport.
But in world judo at present, there is a group of young fighters all jockeying for the top positions — and in the first day of the World Championships here yesterday, they began to sort themselves out.
The man who headed the pack was Naoya Ogawa, 21, of Japan, who first came to prominence two years ago at the World Championships in Essen when he threw Britain's Elvis Gordon for ippon in the final of the open weight category.
This time, he appeared in the heavyweight division where he produced similar results, throwing his three opponents in the preliminary rounds for ippon (10 points).
In the final, Ogawa accounted for another talented youngster, the 23-year-old Cuban, Francesco Moreno, who had earlier defeated the European champion, Rafael Kubacki, of Poland.
Gordon, now 31, could not live in this company.
He was beaten by both Kubacki and Grigory Veritchev, the 1987 Soviet world champion, who both captured bronze medals.
Femgliah Gao, China's leading heavyweight, added another world title to her collection.
It was not as easy as usual, however, with West Germany's Regina Sigmund providing stiff opposition in the final.
Britain's Sharon Lee also faced Gao and succumbed to two knockdowns, but although she left the hall without a medal, two good wins, including a 20-second victory over Carole Scheid, of the United States, showed that she is capable of making an impact at world level.
Sailing: ‘Inadequate’ Soviet slips anchor in port
By STUART ALEXANDER
ALEXEI GRYSCHENKO, co-skipper of Fazisi, the Soviet yacht in the Whitbread Round the World Race, has gone missing in Uruguay.
After disappearing for 48 hours the matter has been reported to the police in Punta del Este and Montevideo.
Gryschenko, 42, from Kiev, had had grave doubts about doing the first leg of the race.
Although co-skipper, it was the American Skip Novak whose experience the Soviets had used to manage both the breakneck completion of the 82ft yacht and help to train the crew.
Having done three previous Whitbreads, including skippering Simon Le Bon's Drum, Novak's big boat and his ocean-racing experience far exceeded anything Gryschenko had come across.
The Russian felt inadequate, but was persuaded that not doing the leg would just put him further behind as the crew developed experience.
The police in Uruguay are also taking an interest in the French yacht Esprit de Liberte.
The project crew has yet to appear in Punta del Este, so the crew has no money to pay bills already incurred, and their passports have been left in France to be given Australian visas.
Skipper Patrick Tabarly, brother of Eric, was yesterday trying to enlist the help of the French Embassy in Montevideo in the hope of preventing his yacht being impounded should the bills remain unpaid.
On the swings and roundabouts of crew changes, Grant Dalton, skipper of the New Zealand ketch Fisher & Paykel, issued a denial that Britain's Chris Law would be joining the crew, while Lawrie Smith, skipper of Rothmans, said that on 20 October he would announce that David Powys would boost the crew to 14, plus one or two others.
A new, hard-edged approach is expected from the joint services maxi-yacht, Satquote British Defender, in the second leg to Fremantle, Western Australia.
Taking over as skipper from the Army's Lt Col Frank Esson is the yacht's navigator, the Navy's Lt Commander, soon to be Commander, Colin Watkins, and the crew is being increased in size from 15 to 16.
The quiet-spoken Esson has paid the price of seeing Defender slip from being third at one stage of the first leg to ninth in Punta, leaving Watkins to attack a two days, 17 hours, 37 minutes and 25 seconds deficit to make up on the leader, the New Zealand ketch Steinlager, and a 30 hours, 54 minutes, 52 seconds on the other top British challenger, Rothmans.
The damage to the mast has been repaired and three Army officers, Garfield Smith, Nick Bate and Richard Nicholson, have joined the crew, Mandy Gallow and Tim Morris having made a scheduled return to duty.
CPO John Giblet is the extra man joining Watkins, who is a veteran of the 1973 race on Adventure, on the 7,600-mile leg where the yachts will play chicken with the 40-knot winds and high-rise seas of the Southern Ocean.
American Football: Shell's shock is a winning start
By STUART ALEXANDER
ART SHELL, the first black head coach in the modern NFL, recorded his first victory as the Los Angeles Raiders beat the New York Jets 14-7.
Shell, who succeeded Mike Shanahan last week, got off to a winning start thanks to the safety, Eddie Anderson, who returned an interception 87 yards for the winning touchdown early in the fourth quarter.
‘In this organisation there is no black and white,’ Shell said.
‘It was a great moment for us to win.
There's nothing like winning.
I was talking to Al Davis (the team's owner) and he said, ‘There's no pressure on you to do anything.’
But I put that pressure on myself.’
After a scoreless first half, the Raiders took the lead on their first possession of the second when Jay Schroeder's 73-yard pass found Mervyn Fernandez.
The Jets responded with a 97-yard drive which ended with a one-yard scoring run by Roger Vick.
The Jets mounted a final drive which was halted on the Los Angeles 15-yard line with nine seconds left to play.
‘Those last two minutes felt like two hours,’ said Shell.
The victory ended a run of three successive defeats, and Shell showed himself to be a relatively undemonstrative head coach prepared to listen to the advice of his assistant coaches and players before calling the big plays.
Bo Jackson, the outstanding running-back who rushes for the Raiders when not playing baseball for the Kansas City Royals, returns to practice this week, but is unlikely to be ready for the Raiders game on Sunday…against the Kansas City Chiefs.
Rallying: Fiorio keeps his cool to extend lead
By STUART ALEXANDER
ALESSANDRO FIORIO, of Italy, despite being plagued by overheating problems in his Lancia Delta Integrale, extended his lead to more than half a minute during the second stage of the San Remo rally yesterday.
Fiorio stretched his 18-second margin over the second-placed Toyota of the Spaniard, Carlos Sainz, to 35sec with wins in the last three of the morning's six special stages.
Sainz's team-mate, the 1987 world champion, Juha Kankkunen, of Finland, hung on to third, but his overnight deficit increased to 2min 0.04sec.
Roads were turned to mud by days of rain and Fiorio had the additional hardship of a bubbling radiator to contend with.
The championship leader Massimo Biasion, of Italy, will retain his world title if he repeats his 1988 triumph in San Remo.
Biasion won the first three of the morning's special stages but then lost valuable seconds when he spun and lies fourth overall, two minutes behind Fiorio.
The rally ends tomorrow.
Squash: Parke emphasises his upward mobility
From RICHARD EATON in Singapore
SIMON PARKE became the youngest male player to represent England when at the age of 17 years and two months he helped his country to a second 3-0 victory in the World Team Championships here yesterday, this time against the hosts.
If anybody has what it takes, it is this long-legged, fair-haired fellow from Knaresborough.
The young Yorkshireman apparently has a good temperament and a complete all-round game.
To these qualities, he has been adding more and more flair within the past fortnight.
Anthony Chua will testify to the fact.
The Singaporean yesterday needed 11 attempts before he won a rally, and lost 15 points before he won one.
Chua is not a front-line player but Parke's 9-0, 9-5, 9-5 victory signalled the launching of a new ‘star’.
To maintain the upward momentum, Parke must keep his ambitions high, yet keep his feet on the ground.
It is probable those legs will get even longer; Parke is 5ft 11in and growing.
Tall men rarely reach the top in squash.
However, Parke may soon be at the heels of Del Harris, the 20-year-old England No. 1 who had to battle hard for the second day in succession.
He was 5-3 down in the fourth game against Peter Hill before winning 9-1, 9-0, 2-9, 9-5 in a patchy, not to say puzzling, match.
Harris won the second game in exactly two minutes without losing a rally, then had trouble with his racket handles and his control.
Meanwhile Jansher Khan, the new world champion who had his $15,000 prize money withheld because he left the official dinner early, may have lost his chance of taking over as world No. 1.
The International Squash Players' Association said it will take action this week on the 20-year-old Pakistani, and the likelihood is a fine and a zero point score for the World Open.
If so, Jahangir Khan, his predecessor as champion, will stay at the top for the foreseeable future.
‘We are absolutely disgusted with his behaviour,’ Roger Eady, the ISPA's executive director, said.
‘It is something we can't tolerate.
It will affect his livelihood if it turns sponsors away.
They will find another activity where athletes are more receptive to their requirements.’
Schools Football: Bolton fall to old-style virtue
By PHILIP JAMES
THE VIRTUES of good old-fashioned wing-play were underlined at Bolton where Hulme Grammar School, Oldham, beat their hosts 2-0.
Bolton, unbeaten before Saturday's match, fell behind in the opening minute when right-winger Ryan Hill drifted into the penalty area, met a cross from the left, and fired in from an acute angle.
After that, Hill, feeding off a series of well-weighted, accurate passes from Richard Smith in midfield, continued to torment the Bolton defence with a series of penetrative runs down the flank.
Midway through the second half, Hulme's second goal again originated on the wing.
Daniel Mellor's cross was headed in by Matthew Hunt from close range.
There is no doubt that the direct approach is still effective as well.
A fast and furious encounter between Aldenham and King Edward School, Witley, had yielded no goals when, with just minutes to go, Aldenham's Jason Clemow tried a long-range shot, the goalkeeper parried, and Kazeem Abimbola poked in the rebound.
Steve Morrell of King's School, Chester, hit a hat-trick against Repton but still finished on the losing side.
The match ended 5-3 in Repton's favour, thanks to two goals by Richard Basnett, and others from Jim McDonald, Jimmy Tipper and Robin Powell.
Eton and Lancing enjoyed rather less excitement as they fought out a dour 0-0 draw.
Lancing's master-in-charge, John Wilks, described the scoreline as ‘a perfect summing up of the match — dull’.
Eton were in charge for most of the match, although Lancing squandered the best chance near the end.
The Northern Independent Schools trials were held at Bolton on Sunday, and a team was named for this Sunday's match against Cheshire.
Hulme Grammar were best-represented, with three players in the side.
At Eton, the Southern trialists were whittled down to a 16-man squad to face Essex at Forest on 5 November.
Three Brentwood boys were included.
Boxing: Hardy is quick to retain title
By PHILIP JAMES
BILLY HARDY retained the British bantamweight title against Brian Holmes in Sunderland last night, knocking out the Scottish challenger with an explosive assault in the first round.
The pair had met two years ago when Hardy scored a convincing 10-round win in a non-title bout.
But this time Hardy went straight on to the attack, putting Holmes on the canvas with a right over the top for an initial count of seven.
Seconds later, Hardy landed a stunning left to stagger Holmes again for another count before he finished off his third defence of his crown after two minutes 40 seconds of the round, with a barrage of punches that left referee Larry O'Connell delivering the full count.
Lennox Lewis, the British heavyweight, stormed to another thrilling victory when he knocked out Bradford's Steve Garber in one minute 30 seconds of the first round in Hull last night to record his fourth successive victory.
Like Hardy, Lewis started impressively, knocking Garber to the floor with two thundering rights to the chin inside a minute.
A packed City Hall did not have long to wait as Lewis roared in with several more stinging rights and left hooks and when Garber was floored for the second time he had no chance of beating the count.
Gary Stretch makes the first defence of his British light- middleweight championship against Rochdale's Derek Wormald at the London Arena tonight, knowing it could lead to a lucrative world title eliminator against Leicester's Chris Pyatt.
Stretch outpointed Gary Cooper for the vacant title more than 12 months ago.
Racing: Glover's rise from dark side
By SUE MONTGOMERY
THERE are times when life not only kicks you in the teeth, but follows up with the knee in the groin and the rabbit punch to the back of the neck as well.
That sort of assault makes it more difficult to get up.
But when you do, it's a sweet, sweet moment.
And on Saturday, in the rain at Newmarket, Jeremy Glover savoured it to the full.
He had just won the competitive Cambridgeshire Handicap for the second time in three years.
Glover has been training for only five years, and many a famous name has yet to come within spitting distance of the race, so the achievement was remarkable.
But the man's melon-sized grin as he scampered into the sodden winner's enclosure to welcome Rambo's Hall indicated more than that.
He had proved that he had not, after all, thrown away his how-to-train manual, despite the fact that only Rambo's Hall has won for him this season.
Glover's year began badly and went downhill from there.
Two weeks before the start of the Flat season he was in hospital having most of his bowel removed because of severe, life-threatening colitis.
Then his horses contracted a virus.
And the really crushing blow came when the owner of his star performer, Joveworth, removed the horse from the yard.
Six weeks later the grey won the Ayr Gold Cup for his new trainer.
‘After Joveworth went I was really in two minds as to whether to pack it in.
It was Reg Hollinshead and Steve Norton who snapped me out of it.
They told me that this sort of thing happens, it's part of training, and to stick in there and show the buggers they were wrong.’
Glover showed them, and if anyone had cared to look, the portents for Rambo's Hall's win were there.
On his previous outing, at Ayr, the four-year-old gave Sonilla 17lb and ran her to three-parts of a length, with Ned's Aura third.
Sonilla and Ned's Aura both won at Newmarket the day before the Cambridgeshire.
Glover grinned: ‘I ran him at Ayr just to freshen him up.
And I got on at 50-1 immediately after that race, and had a fair bet.
Winning that race was bloody brilliant.’
Joveworth, incidentally, finished 25 lengths behind Rambo's Hall.
Glover, 45, and a former top-notch jump jockey, took up training relatively late in his racing career.
He retired as first jockey to Stan Mellor in 1977, after eight seasons in the top 10.
The likeable Glover, a most sympathetic horseman, trains at his own Pinewood Stables at Carburton, near Worksop, which sounds horrendously urban, but isn't.
The 36-box yard is set amidst 17,000 acres of glorious scenery in Clumber Park, owned by one of Glover's most loyal patrons, Lady Anne Bentinck.
It is entirely appropriate that racehorses should be trained in that setting, for Lady Anne's grandfather was the 6th Duke of Portland, owner of the legendary racehorse and sire St Simon.
The box where he lived as a stallion is still preserved on the estate.
The owners of Rambo's Hall, four businessmen, have stuck by Glover when those of lesser faith might not have done.
The trainer explained: ‘Three of them, Jeff Newton, Mick Dews and Barry Dixon, had a horse with me called The White Lion, who won a seller and I told them to let it go.
But the new bloke sent it back to me and it went on to win six races, and I felt so sick for the lads.
‘After The White Lion won they gave me £6,000 and told me to get them another, so I sold them three shares in Rambo's Hall — who I'd bought cheaply in a job lot as a yearling — for £1,500 each.
Bud Booth, who I used to ride for, came in later.
Rambo's won first time, and now it looks like they've got a decent horse.’
Glover is used to pain.
As a jockey, he broke everything — skull, neck, vertebrae, feet, kneecaps, collar bones — bar his legs.
But permanent illness is more difficult than injury.
He talks about his ileostomy (a permanent colostomy) with the lack of embarrassment that only someone who has been through it can.
He said: ‘I've always been a worrier, and apparently it's stress that makes the lining of the stomach and bowel come away.
I was on drugs, but they kept having to use stronger and stronger ones for the pain.
I only had about two inches of rectum left, and they said cancer was a possibility, so they just took it all out.
I had begun to feel that ill that I didn't care, but I was back riding out three lots three weeks after the op.’
For much of this year, Glover's drawn face has matched his prematurely greying shock of hair.
But the Cambridgeshire result gives lie to the notion that nice guys can't win.
The oldest rookie is still punching to the line.
Racing: Roberts to get a run out of Money
By HYPERION
MICHAEL ROBERTS recorded his second consecutive century in this country when winning the last race on Power Shift at Folkestone yesterday and can take this season's total beyond 100 at York this afternoon, writes Hyperion.
Winning the three-year-old stayers' race on Star Lord (2.30) should not be a problem for Roberts but the price will be cramped.
Victory at better odds, however, could can come through Where's The Money (3.00), a lightly-raced three-year-old who will be fresher than most of her rivals.
Roberts excels on sprinters and the filly is well drawn.
The nine-race card at Haydock is strong on quantity but lacks runners of the class of Old Vic, the winner of the Whitebeam Maiden Stakes by six lengths last year who went on to take this year's Irish Derby and its French equivalent.
The same race is divided into two today, and the spoils should be split between Adding ((2.15), from the in-form stable of Guy Harwood, and Toucan (5.45), a Luca Cumani runner who finished well when third to stablemate Chirone at Yarmouth last month.
Also at Haydock, the 5lb claim of talented apprentice jockey Jimmy Fortune eases the burden on topweight NATIVE GEM (4.45) and this filly's consistency should be rewarded.