

TELEVISION /Travel sickness
By MARK LAWSON
IS IT POSSIBLE to be too nice to be a television presenter?
Certainly, there is substantial observable and anecdotal evidence that, in the cases of many of our leading frontpersons, qualities other than modesty and friendliness rank highest among the energies they bring to their profession.
Charm is like Spam; you have to have something else with it.
You can be nice with a slight edge of cynicism like Ludovic Kennedy, Alan Whicker or Desmond Lynam but, in adult television at least, being pleasant about everything all the time is best left to constitutional monarchs.
So the main tension in Around The World In 80 Days (BBC 1), in which Michael Palin does a Phileas Fogg, is whether the famously amiable presenter will ever rise to a barbed remark.
Ladbroke's had a book open on whether he would get round inside the distance but the far spicier price would be odds against him in bawling out a porter in Bangkok.
Being rude about Palin feels like bombing Switzerland, but for the first time he seems, with this series, to be to post-Python what Paul McCartney was to post-Beatles.
His equable temperament would complement perfectly a tough production but this one kicked off soft.
Six hours of television began with Palin taking a phone-call at home ('The BBC?
Oh, yes? ') asking him whether he had ever thought of going round the world in 80 days.
It was a tense moment but, luckily, he said yes so the seven-part series was underway.
A useful rule of documentaries is that re-creations of scenes which occurred before filming always leave the viewer feeling cheated.
Curiously, Palin made a point in the commentary about how he wasn't pretending that he was on his own or that there were not gruff acolytes kneeling at his feet as he spoke.
Director Roger Mills even retained a quip from Alan Whicker (whom the presenter consulted) about a Bernard Levin series in which the pretence of solitude was attempted.
This was fine, but solid evidence will have to be provided that the scene in which Palin woke up on the Orient Express to the knock of brioches at the door was the real thing.
I expect the crew had tiptoed down very gently from the bunk above while he slept.
On the subject of rest, you twitched a bit when Palin was referring to feeling weary as early as the second day.
The script kept sending out these little signals ('It's only when there's land around that sea travel becomes really interesting') but it was possible to take them as evidence not of exhaustion but of apprehension about the project.
The nerves extended to the visuals.
Venice, God help us, was introduced by a shot of gondoliers.
But then the problem with a television tour of Europe is that it begins with the familiar.
We must hope it was a harbinger that the one riotously funny scene occurred at the end of the first episode, with Europe through.
The presenter had been advised confidently by Coutts before he left London that, should funds be required, he should telephone them with the code-word Jabberwocky.
Short of cash while just short of Cairo, Palin reached them from the ship.
‘This is Jabberwocky…
Can you tell her it's Jabberwocky?…
Oh, it's Friday…
I see.’
You suspected that in the deterioration of the arrangements lay the series' main hope of improvement.
Nice Work (BBC 2), in which factory meets fiction, continues to be the treat of the week.
David Lodge has adapted himself cleverly and economically, introducing the kind of tricks that actors can make work for you; like the way in which Vic the businessman uses choice lines from Robyn the lecturer in subsequent conversations.
The Christophers Parr and Menaul, producing and directing, have also thought through visually a literary script; from the astonishing Rothman's smog of the board-meeting scenes to the volley of sighs, nods and twitches -beautifully played by Warren Clarke and Haydn Gwynne — by which Robyn's gradual acceptance that executives also possess inner lives is signalled.
The only quibble is that the materials of Vic's erotic dream about Robyn -in which she splashes with nymphs in a pool before firing an arrow — are a bit literary.
His fantasy would more probably have been of Robyn as the first female, naked centre-forward for Birmingham City.
Sorry, Rummidge City.
THEATRE /A mingled yarn: Paul Taylor reviews All's Well that Ends Well at Stratford
By PAUL TAYLOR
THERE ARE moments in Barry Kyle's partly dismal, partly enchanting production of All's Well that Ends Well, that will come as a great comfort to anyone who is exceptionally slow-witted.
Just in case you fail to deduce, for example, that war is more a matter of narcissistic games-playing than of honour for the play's young soldiers, they helpfully tote around personal full-length mirrors in the court scenes.
Then, in a dream-like sequence at the end of the first half, they are seen raiding the nursery at Rossillion, where they proceed to plunge their swords into a defenceless rocking-horse.
Likewise, to give the fistula-suffering monarch (Hugh Ross) rather more than his fair share of Fisher King-like significance, he is made to stagger about in a stagy, enfeebled agony that could compete with Amfortas's travails in Parsifal.
This is, you will gather, a production that tends to deliver its messages by lorry.
But the crude over-emphases jostle with touches of true subtlety.
In the course of the drama, Gwen Watford's venerable Countess seems to get perceptibly older, whiter-haired and stiffer in the joints, as though her son's behaviour towards Helena and the news of his other derelictions has slackened her hold on life.
And, given that All's Well is a play in which mementoes of the past and symbols of family tradition (rings, secret medical cures) carry such a charge and play a crucial part in the plot.
It is especially moving in this production that Watford, painfully trying to disinherit her son from her affections, should feed his little toy soldiers and letters home to the smoky bonfire of autumn leaves on her estate.
One of the peculiarities of this problem comedy is that the main obstacle to the course of true love comes not, as is traditional, from the older generation but from the young hero, Bertram.
He has, you might suppose, some right on his side.
After all, why should he consent to be Helena's fairy-tale prize for curing the King, if he cannot love her?
But your ability to sympathise with him is powerfully lessened by the fact that this hero is also an immature prig and lying snob, whose principal objection to Helena is her social inferiority.
In an over-diagrammatic performance, Paul Venables suggests that, buried deep down, Bertram may harbour a secret affection for his enforced bride.
This, because he wants to cut a figure among the fighting lads and impress Parolles, he is forced twistedly to repress.
Having reduced Helena to tears by refusing her a kiss on his departure for the wars, he has, you notice, to check himself from an involuntary lunge forward to comfort her.
This hint of a potential for goodness in the hero helps give some human credibility to Helena's otherwise folkloric determination to re-entrap him via the bed trick.
At least the object of this man-hunt is not wholly worthless.
It is in the second half, when Helena becomes a quasi-symbolic force for life and renewal that Patricia Kerrigan's performance comes into its own.
As she orchestrates the substitution plot, she radiates a touchingly-willed but inspiring hopefulness.
Harriet Walter, in the last RSC All's Well, realistically signalled a pained disgust at the fresh flaws in Bertram which this scheme brings to light.
But Kerrigan has a keyed-up, visionary quality which, though it does not overlook these drawbacks, manages to see beyond them by an act of moral imagination to the purposed end.
There are fine performances, too, from Bruce Alexander as the wordy and worthless Parolles, his front of unfazable swagger clearly a very thin crust over awful insecurity.
Here, even the famous credo of uncrushability by a mere comic plot comes across as somewhat comically crushed.
Best of all, though, is Suzan Sylvester as Diana.
Appropriately for a drama in which the grossest crimes, though intended, turn out to be apparent rather than real, her chaffing in riddles of Bertram and the King in the final scene is a marvellous mix of the pointedly cutting and the teasingly playful.
It is a performance of real moral authority, lightly worn, and richly earns her the right to be the character who, like Paulina in The Winter's Tale, stage-manages the resurrection of the heroine — here literally pregnant with the future.
MUSIC /Rich contrasts: Rattle conducts Ravel and Mozart.
CBSO /Rattle — Birmingham
By JAN SMACZNY
THE ACOUSTIC of Birmingham Town Hall has never been kind to the mistier recesses of Debussy and Ravel.
In the first half of a concert which spanned the gamut from Expressionism to Impressionism, the hall's resonance favoured the spare lines of Webern's Op 6 while proving cruelly analytical in Ravel's Sheherazade.
Such imaginative concert planning deserves a more versatile acoustic, one which the Town Hall, for all its considerable virtues, does not possess.
Webern's Six Orchestral Pieces, still perceptibly Romantic even with the pruned wind band of 1928, emerged under Simon Rattle with enormous personality.
The funereal fourth piece despite some squelchy brass chords, had a true air of expectancy and generated a terrifying climax.
The brutal clarity which the acoustic bestowed on Ravel's Sheherazade stripped the work of atmosphere.
There was lots of marvellous playing with sensitive string sound and excellent wind solos, but the whole was too clear an image of Ravel's subtle settings.
The cycle might have been written for the celebrated dramatic powers of Maria Ewing.
Her performance, though full of poise and presence, was at a disadvantage in terms of balance.
Many vital stanzas were lost, although none could fail to mark the superbly engineered climax of the first song or the sensuous duet with the flute at the end of the second.
For those seated close to the orchestra, this performance was doubtless a treat; those up in the gallery were left frustratingly under-involved.
No such problems marred a fascinating interpretation of Richard Maunder's newish edition of Mozart's C minor Mass.
With the soloists placed above the orchestra, nearly every note was audible.
It is quite an achievement to upstage the assembled might of City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and Rattle, not to mention Maria Ewing as second soprano, but this is precisely what Barbara Bonney, standing in for an indisposed Lillian Watson, did.
Her solos brought us some of the most memorable Mozart singing heard in years.
The contrast between her fine-boned line and Maria Ewing's post-classical, though undeniably exciting, view of her role in the Domine Deus was revelatory.
Pitting a slim-line orchestra against a jumbo choir might be hazardous with any body other than the CBSO Chorus.
In the fast passages the choir sang as one voice and did much to render some mannered readings of appoggiaturas and dynamics thrilling.
This performance was a rich mixture of styles: perhaps not one to put on record, but certainly not to be missed live.
MUSIC /Pinning it down: The Marriage of Figaro -Glyndebourne
By MICHAEL JOHN WHITE
REIGNING monarchs have a history of obtuse relationships with Mozart.
Joseph II will always be remembered for finding ‘too many notes’ in Die Entfuhrung; and our own Queen has an almost comparable claim on immortality if the story is to be believed that when asked to attend a performance of Figaro, she replied: ‘Is that the one about the pin?’
It is, of course, the one about the pin.
And however silly it might sound to take so slight a fragment of the story, the possibility of doing so says perhaps as much about the richness of the opera as it does about the interests of the listener.
There are many, varied access routes into great art, as this year's Glyndebourne Figaro has shown.
In quick succession it has passed through three lives.
There was the original Peter Hall /Simon Rattle collaboration for the festival, remarkable for the introduction of authentic instruments to Glyndebourne.
Then there was a semi-staging for the Proms.
And now the production has been re-staged by Stephen Medcalf for the Glyndebourne tour with a new cast (some of the occupants of minor roles in the festival have been promoted: Alison Hagley's Barbarina is now Susanna), a different orchestra, the London Sinfonietta, and a new conductor, Sir Peter Maxwell Davies.
The acquisition of Sir Peter is, inescapably, the chief interest of this Figaro.
As a conductor he is, in a sense, a ‘new boy’, accustomed to directing contemporary music but a late-starter in broader repertory.
This Figaro is the first time he has tackled an opera written by someone other than himself.
The result is very different from Rattle: the authentic instruments are gone; and the London Sinfonietta are not particularly experienced in playing Mozart.
But they are supremely experienced in the process of discovery, and when they do play older repertory they always do it with a sense of looking freshly at the notes, taking nothing for granted.
All the details in the Figaro are prominently placed, the product of obvious and careful thought.
There isn't the transparent profile of original instruments, but Davies has encouraged an approximation to it.
His speeds are not so driven as Rattle's, the energy level is lower; but there is a clearer sense of the cunning in the music.
The ensemble, sometimes a bit slack, worked especially beautifully in Act Two, where the singers were at their best: a strong, capable Figaro from Robert Poulton, a pleasingly unhaughty Countess in Elizabeth Gale, and a fine, well-focused Almaviva in Robert Hayward despite his dramatic reticence.
The restaging generally has less bite and less fluency than Hall's original — Susanna's humour is more truly peasant-like — but it feels warmer and more sympathetic.
Medcalf's pin pricks gently.
THEATRE /When the chattering stops: Heartbreak House -Cambridge Arts Theatre
By ADRIAN POOLE
A CAST LIST boasting characters called Hesione Hushabye and Lady Ariadne Utterword does not promise an evening of undertones.
Shaw's Heartbreak House pays homage to Chekhov, but it has nothing to learn from Joe Orton.
‘Is this England, or is it a madhouse?’ cries someone.
No need to ask.
Nancy Meckler's production for Shared Experience makes this peculiarly English madhouse funny and frightening in almost all the right ways.
There is certainly a war on, but no one seems to notice the one going on outside.
Meckler makes a ghostly Tommy wander in and out of Captain Shotover's country villa, but Shaw's family of grotesques are far too absorbed in playing their power-games to pay any attention.
They fill the foreground with easily punctured fantasies and vicious cartoon banter.
The words ‘bloated capitalist’ take the literal shape of the mountainous Boss Mangan.
Women swoon at the sight of the moustache sported by Hesione's husband; later on this reluctant roue appears as an Arab sheikh.
In the sex-wars, the men mainly get the worst of things.
Two of the women turn Mangan into a blubbering infant, and a third polishes her nails with vigorous glee over the wallowing body of her sentimental admirer.
‘Cry baby,’ Ariadne chortles.
This is all good rollicking fun, though never quite clean.
But it is when all the brittle, garrulous posturing gives way to something else that this production really shows its intelligence.
It is the moment that Shaw called, perilously, ‘heartbreak’, but there is nothing sentimental about the pauses when the chattering stops.
Wisps of distant music, the creak of machinery, enigmatic shiftings of light, a spasm of slow-motion: first you realise that this house (in Dermot Hayes's cunningly flimsy set, a little Calvary of stunted, corroding masts) is haunted, then that it is doomed; and then, the real turn of the screw, that these people may really want to be doomed.
‘Is there thunder in heaven?’ asks Hector Hushabye, vainly clutching for Jacobean grandeur.
We really can't see much future for a gang of derelicts like this —‘rather a favourable specimen of what is best in our English culture’, one character blithely insists — and they don't see any for themselves.
Shaw said that his method was founded upon music, and this extraordinary, teetering play needs the finest of ears to balance its tones and pace its switchback rhythms.
Shared Experience does it proud.
Inside Eye
By LIAM CARSON
Liam Carson, general manager /director of the Groucho Club, has worked in London restaurants for the last 15 years.
LUNCHTIME at the Groucho Club is never like this.
For a start Albert the Thief would not have made it through the membership committee.
He is the embodiment of a restaurateur's nightmare, someone who behaves grotesquely yet spends an awful lot of money.
Quelle horreur: many's the time I have found myself torn between throwing people like him out and putting up with them for the sake of the cash-till.
This decision would have been complicated by the fact that Albert is also the part-owner of La Hollandaise.
But, while he is of Le Patron Mange Ici school (which always used to be the sign of a good restaurant), I can't see that it would have been particularly good for business here.
His antics and those of his wife would have the environmental health officer round at the drop of a hat.
Fornication in the kitchen is surely not allowed under Section 37/3 of Westminster City Council Environmental Health Act…
Still, this orgy of food and sex would have suited the dear departed Peter Langan (with whom I worked for four years) very nicely.
The kitchens in La Hollandaise were undoubtedly going to serve decent grub.
I am sure I spotted Nico Ladenis preparing some divine demi-glace and Bohringer, the head chef, bore an uncanny resemblance to Michel Guerard, one of France's three-star Michelin men.
Chefs are not usually noted for their even-temper and calmess, however, and Bohringer's sleepy-eyed nature was at odds with this.
The entire kitchen (there must have been a brigade of 50 where one would expect more like 12), belongs to some turn-of-the-century grand Parisian establishment, but strangely there was only one washer-upper.
The food, fancy French, all mousses and coulis, stuffed this on a bed of that, is now rather dated — stuck in a late-Seventies time-warp.
Had Greenaway wished to depict the chic cuisine of the moment, he should have chosen ‘Cuisine de Terroir’(food of the earth)— solid, gutsy, grandmother's cooking very far removed from the nouvelle fantasia we see here.
Full marks for the service, though: discreet and professional.
If you go and see this film I recommend that you don't eat first.
A couple of stiff drinks and a bowl of soup afterwards was about all I could cope with.
I felt strangely repelled at the thought of eating meat.
Peter Greenaway has advanced the vegetarian cause no end.
FILM /Architectural bellies: The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover; Shirley Valentine
By ADAM MARS-JONES
BY NOW, the name of Peter Greenaway functions either as a reliable guarantee or a reliable warning.With The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover (18) he has made a few changes, but certain basic principles hold good: the look of everything is still turned into art history, and the meaning of everything is still turned into nothing, a nothing that sometimes seems despairing and sometimes only smug.
Greenaway's obsessively elaborating and allusive aesthetics have always been strangely at odds with his reductive philosophy, but the insistent paranoid patterns — lists, correspondences, arcane games — which in earlier films served to bind them together are much less in evidence in the new film.
There are still a few speeches in Greenaway's house-style of inert paradox and cod worldliness — notably a digression by the Cook (Richard Bohringer) about black food and the price structure of restaurant meals — but the story, for better or worse, stands relatively clear of verbiage.
The bulk of the action takes place in and around an impossibly stylish restaurant, divided into the four zones of car-park, kitchens, dining-room and lavatories.
The zones seem to be associated with different moods and eras, post-industrial apocalyptic for the car-park, medieval for the kitchens, belle epoque for the dining-room, and high-tech for the lavatories.
They are also rigorously colour-coded, so that when the Wife (Helen Mirren) walks into the lavatory from the dining-room, the camera keeping pace with her all the while, she is miraculously redressed in identical tacky Jean-Paul Gaultier clobber, but now in white and not red.
The constant tracking shots across the extraordinary sets provide the film's major pleasure.
Greenaway's camera, to chime with the story's intensive focus on eating, is fixed at stomach height for most of the film.
But though the camera may be at gut level, a cerebral decision has placed it there, and it is characteristic of Greenaway that he should stylise a major element of his film in this way.
For this most unspontaneous of artists, it is better to have a bad reason for something — a tenuous or cabbalistic reason — than to depend on chance, subjectivity and the moment.
Of course, only a sensibility that is accustomed to seeing food largely in still lifes can be surprised, as Greenaway seems to be, by the revelation that food, whether eaten or not, eventually by digestion or rot comes to look less good.
This is a particular case of a general rule about Greenaway's films: that only a person as obsessionally preoccupied with formal patterns as the director — and that is a tall order — can properly share his shock when death turns out not to be deterred by lists and games after all.
More moderate temperaments, to whom the patterning seemed a sort of death in the first place, are apt to remain stubbornly cheerful.
The plot of The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover has a hand-me-down Jacobean tragedy feel to it, though it is usually only the language of those plays that remains exciting, not their storylines, and Greenaway is innocent of imitation there.
The character of the Thief is of unrelieved grossness and barbarity, and Michael Gambon turns in a resolutely one-dimensional performance.
Sometimes an actor makes an escape attempt in a Greenaway film (notably Brian Dennehy in Belly of an Architect) but Gambon is a model prisoner of his director.
Oddly enough, there is a point in the new film when Greenaway puts the formalism on a back-burner, and seems to remember that he has hired actors -people, that is, who are skilled at projecting emotions.
But by then it is too late.
Without fair warning he calls on Helen Mirren, hitherto muffled by the black flounces of his cosmology, to produce raw feeling, love even, loss and rage.
She must go to sleep next to her murdered lover, talking of breakfast, and she must then persuade the Cook to prepare the body for eating.
In these scenes, Greenaway's camera stops moving and his technique, alternating awkwardly between long shots and close-ups, seems ragged and inadequate.
The defence of formalism is always that it serves to control an excess of feeling, but here in the absence of formalism there is nothing but empty pathos, artificiality in its weak form.
In a recent interview, Greenaway said that he hated the idea of a shot in a film being only a preposition, linking what went before and after.
It is a revealing remark, because it shows that he doesn't think of himself as being in the business of constructing anything like sentences, though a film sequence is a sort of visual sentence, composed of standard elements inflected in an infinite variety of ways.
What writer, after all, would think of despising a part of speech for performing its indispensable task?
Greenaway rejects the conventional grammar of film, its reaction shots and implied points of view, but he replaces it not with his own idiom but with his slide library, though a film modelled on an art-historical lecture has no greater intrinsic claim to quality than one modelled on a promotional video, a newsreel or a travel brochure.
Shirley Valentine (15) is a film version, directed by Lewis Gilbert, of Willy Russell's one-woman show, first performed by, and now starring, Pauline Collins.
It is a piece with few reasons to be a film, and mercifully few pretensions to cinematic status.
If Peter Greenaway's camera is anything but a participating human representative, Gilbert's is nothing else, addressed, ogled, and even winked at by the heroine.
The story is of ersatz oppression and liberation, oppression by domesticity and chips in suburban Liverpool, liberation by sunshine and retsina on a Greek island holiday.
(They don't have winter in Greece, you know.)
Russell's screenplay is full of announced sympathy for ordinary people's lives, and actual condescension.
The ways for women to escape or understand their circumstances are systematically disparaged.
Marjorie (Joanna Lumley), for instance, whom Shirley envied for her academic prospects, ends up with only the freedom of high-class prostitution.
Shirley's best friend Jane (Alison Steadman), on the other hand, declares herself a feminist but is shown as merely paranoid and frustrated, cured of her analysis by a brisk holiday romance.
Only escapist fantasy is allowed any authenticity.
Still, Pauline Collins is genuinely charming, there are some perky one-liners, and if there was an Oscar for Best Crinkly Smile In A Supporting Role, Tom Conti would have it sewn up.
FILM /Dropping in the ocean: The Abyss, Young Einstein, Lola, Asterix and the Big Fight and Driving Me Crazy
By SHEILA JOHNSTON
WE ARE unlikely to learn many secrets of the soul when the Enterprise sallies forth next week in Star Trek V; but perhaps the underwater movie is more conducive to introspection than questing journeys into outer space.
Luc Besson's The Big Blue, for all its follies, had some lovely brooding moments, and The Abyss (12), the biggest and almost certainly best of the current American wave of subterranean movies, nurtures expressly metaphysical intentions: it is, says the producer Gale Anne Hurd, about ‘the abyss inside each of us’.
It is directed by James Cameron, though, and so primarily a first-rate action picture.
Money may have disappeared down a black hole (the budget was $40m according to Hurd, though industry sources put it nearer $50m), but it has all been spent on spectacle, not marquee names: Ed Harris (from Jacknife) and Mary Elizabeth Mastroantonio star as an oil-rig foreman and the project engineer, both brought in to rescue a striken nuclear submarine.
The underwater sequences — which occupy most of the film — warrant the price of admission alone.
Shot in an eerie, aqueous light, the scenes in the submarine rig are fraught, cramped and dangerous, in the tradition of The Boat, the diving scenes — men swimming in slow-motion or submersibles, magically lit, gliding along like ancient chariots — are steeped in silent mystery.
as if it were not enough to battle the elements and their colleagues (the crew includes a freaked-out Naval officer with a nuclear warhead and an itchy finger), Harris and Mastroantonio are a husband and wife with marital troubles.
In the course of their mission, which takes each through a death and rebirth (Harris is required to plunge to the bowels of the earth, breathing a kind of oxygenated foetal fluid), they learn to love each other again.
Though these bits, unashamedly sentimental, met with laughter, it seemed most like a nervous release of the tension of the previous scenes.
But, in the most egregious error of judgement, the film, not content with human interest, ropes in aliens as well, arriving like a deus ex machina from the ocean bed, as though the characters were unable to face their darkest selves without prodding from a benign ET.
It is a silly, redundant device that eventually drowns the film in a surfeit of plot.
The famous photograph of the 72-year-old Albert Einstein sticking out his tongue at the camera inspired an Australian film-maker who (for reasons he may come to regret) has adopted the name of Yahoo Serious to make Young Einstein (PG), a mock-heroic biopic dedicated to ‘the genius rebel with a clowning sense of humour’.
Probably Serious, who not only stars in the film, but directed, wrote, produced and edited it too, would not mind the description being applied to himself.
It begins as Einstein, the hick son of Tasmanian apple farmers, is prompted by a Newtonian falling fruit to discover gravity only 300 years apres la lettre.
Thence, he invents the theory of relativity as a means of putting bubbles into home-made beer; rock and roll; and (his country's major contribution to world culture) the surfboard.
The main joke, a cheerily philistine one, is to pitch Australia from the margins of Western thought into its centre.
The jokes are copious, hit-and-miss and very broad (the credits include a ‘collapsing dunny specialist’): we're in Life of Brian territory, which may be more congenial here than in America, where the film failed to reproduce its massive success on home turf.
Jacques Demy's Lola (15), made in 1960, continues the little spate of revivals from the heyday of European cinema.
It plays with Godard's Une Femme est une Femme, made the following year, both graceful and romantic tributes to the MGM musical comedy, and to their vibrant stars, Anouk Amiee and Anna Karina.
Asterix, whose village was the last in Gaul to resist the invading Romans, was conceived in the Fifties with, no doubt, the Occupation still fresh in memory.
He has proved a durable fellow, though, inspiring 28 comic books to date and six animated features, the latest being Asterix and the Big Fight (U).
Gaul might be divided into three parts, but this film, imperfectly cobbled together from two separate stories, displays no such narrative neatness.
Many of the gags expire when extended beyond a comic-strip frame, and few of the clever puns which have secured Asterix an adult following, survive translation.
‘The biggest mass art project in the history of the world’ was how the impresario Andre Heller modestly described his plan to stage Body and Soul, an extravaganza of black song and dance.
Nick Broomfield was hired to record the event.
It was a nightmare: early on, his budget dropped from dollars l6m to £300,000, and his crew was reduced to two.
Driving Me Crazy mercilessly records the squalls, the vibrant performances and the inertia of the production team, who spend most of their time solemnly discussing what black music means to them and jockeying for pole position.
Broomfield gets under everyone's feet, but soldiers on and ends up with a revealing, funny film about the petty power plays and outsize egos of showbiz.
Rushes
By SHEILA JOHNSTON
Next week sees the release of Melancholia, a directorial debut by Andi Engel, who has until now been best known for his work as a film distributor.
Engel is German by birth but has lived in Britain for the last 20 years, and this mixed background has been reflected not only in Melancholia's plot but in its production history, as it has been co-financed by the British Film Institute and the Hamburg company Lichtblick.
It was a collaboration with some useful lessons for British companies.
According to Colin MacCabe, who produced the film for the BFI, two areas in particular proved unexpectedly tricky.
The first was the question of where and how the co-production funds could be spent.
Hamburg enjoys an extremely high level of film subsidy -approximately £6 million a year, or three times the sum available in Britain.
This generosity is, it seems, partly due to regional rivalry.
Hamburg's local government had seen the results of generous film funding in Berlin: the city became attractive to film-makers, work came pouring in and attractive or interesting images of Berlin were sent around the world.
Hamburg's decision to follow suit looks like a shining opportunity for venturesome British outfits, but there are snags.
Subsidies are granted only on the agreement that a set percentage of any budget must be spent in Hamburg.
MacCabe and company had assumed that their location work would prove more than adequate to meet the quota, but then found that they were obliged to do all their processing and post-production work in Hamburg, too -a doubly inconvenient requirement since the local labs are not used to working nearly so quickly as their counterparts in London.
The second unexpected area of conflict came over the question of who was to be entitled to final cut on the film.
The German co-producers were shocked when they found that the contract for Melancholia gave this right to the BFI, since in Germany final cut is almost always given to the director.
After considerable wrangling, a compromise was reached: there would be a German version of the film which would be Engel's and a British version which would be the BFI's (though these ‘versions’ proved, in the event, to be identical).
As a producer, MacCabe is naturally enough dismayed by this pro-directorial bias: ‘If you look at what's been happening to British cinema over the last 10 years or so, then it's clear that it has tended to be production-led — names like Working Title, Palace Films or Zenith are as important as those of any individual director.
Good films come about when there are two centres of power — in other words, when there is the opportunity for some really good rows.
‘But the German system appears to have no place for the producer — it's like a final, ridiculous culmination of the auteur theory, which insisted that movies are made by directors rather than producers — and so it has no room for that kind of creative argument.’
If MacCabe's views on the value of a good row are right, then 1992 may offer some stranger cultural exchanges than expected: we may end up putting our mouths where their money is.