

BOOK REVIEW /Laughter in the dark: ‘Wartime’— Paul Fussell: Oxford, 15 pounds
By TIM BLANNING
FOR THE title of his last chapter Paul Fussell borrows Walt Whitman's prediction about the American Civil War, ‘The real war will never get in the books’, and then comments: ‘Nor will the Second World War, and ‘books’ includes this one.’
He is right, but this modest disclaimer is at odds with the confident tone he adopts in the rest of the book.
Nowhere in the previous 300-odd pages has he shown any doubts in his mission to give an account of the war fought by the Allies which balances all those previous versions ‘sanitized and romanticized almost beyond recognition by the sentimental, the loony patriotic, the ignorant and the bloodthirsty’.
His technique is simple but effective; he looks at the war ‘from the bottom up’.
He cares neither for the broad sweep of grand strategy nor for the narrow focus of specific campaigns, so he ignores both government archives and the memoirs of the great and the good.
What Fussell is looking for are the records of the little people, to discover what the war was like for them.
Perhaps not very surprisingly, it turns out to have been pure hell -brutality intensified by stupidity.
Typically, the first action he describes was a mistake: the bombing of Freiburg at the beginning of the war by a squadron of the Luftwaffe believing itself to be over Dijon.
That sets the tone for what follows, as blunder is piled on blunder.
‘We made a major assault on German agriculture’ was the laconic comment of J K Galbraith on the notorious inability of bomber crews to drop their loads anywhere near their urban target.
Fussell records that German manufacturing output seemed to increase with every bomb dropped; he might have added Albert Speer's witty — and possibly accurate — comment that Allied bombing had actually improved productivity by destroying the bureaucracy's files.
Tales of squadrons bombing their own units are here in abundance.
Although much of this is very funny, the laughter is decidedly uneasy, for death is almost always present.
Fussell is a past master of gallows humour; but every now and then one can laugh without any sense of guilt, usually when senior officers are being mocked.
Anyone who has ever suffered at the hands of military pomposity will relish the story of General Patton inspecting a hospital in France and screaming abuse at a man for not coming to attention in his presence, only to be told ‘Run along, asshole.
I'm in the Merchant Marine.’
Fussell clearly did suffer during his own military career.
His hatred of the army is shouted from every page, most loudly in a wonderful chapter on ‘Chickenshit’, best defined as ‘sadistic pedantry’.
He agrees with an unnamed British soldier that there were two wars being fought — against the designated enemy and against the army.
No wonder, then, that Fussell can find not a single redeeming feature of the war.
In the space of one page he describes it as ‘indescribably cruel and insane…savage, insensate, barely conceivable to the well-constructed imagination’, ‘boring’ and ‘demoralizing’.
This is not the first or last case of over-statement.
One's admiration for the brilliance of Fussell's writing cannot suppress doubts about the partiality of the picture he is drawing, with all its entertaining anecdotes and quotes.
He gives us two kinds: salty recollections, verses and songs of the rank-and-file (surely no previous volume from this august publisher has contained so many f-words and c-words); and more elegant expressions of disillusion from the intelligentsia.
There are plenty of both, more than enough to sustain an indictment of the war, but insufficient for an understanding of what it was all about.
It was concerned with more than the effing and blinding of other ranks or what Cyril Connolly published in Horizon.
When Fussell tells us that the war was ‘so devoid of ideological content that little could be said about its positive purposes that made political or intellectual sense’, he shows that he has become the prisoner of his own limited sources, and also of an imagination limited by distaste for his subject.
By choosing to take at face value all the evidence pointing to the futility of the war, and ignoring all those who believed, with patent sincerity, that they were fighting for something worthwhile against something evil, he has taken cynicism to the point of naivety.
My Week: Meeting in Mukden
By CHARLOTTE BLACKER
THE late James Cameron, who roamed the globe, used to claim that his least favourite city was Mukden in Manchuria…until he went to Blackpool.
I know nothing about Mukden except that it and Blackpool are equally unlucky in their names.
But there is something infallibly depressing about Blackpool.
The fun is obligatory, that's the problem.
So when the wind blows and the rain descends, as it has this week, you are not only upskirted and damp, but you feel guilty too.
This is uncomfortably similar to the endemic guilt of constituency agents like me, since it's our role to believe that everything die Partei does at all times is absolutely right.
And of course it is.
Other sections of the Partei (except the government speakers) are allowed to express dissenting views.
They are even allowed to say we have, here and there, made a cock-up.
We agents, however, must represent anything with the air of a cock-up only as an opportunity to demonstrate the Partei's brilliance in extricating itself from it.
Thus, we are the only definable group in the Winter Gardens today who are actually looking forward to Nigel's speech.
PERHAPS we are the only definable group, except for the landladies, who look forward to conference at all, conference and elections being the only points in the calendar when our lives become primed with meaning.
We know now why God chose us to be agents and not lollipop persons or antique dealers.
This priming often has to last the entire remaining 51 weeks.
But when apparatchiks from Central Office, who have us acting as stewards (ie, usherettes) are often seen risking life and limb, SAS-style, in order to arrive at a doorway at the same time as a minister does, they are taking a serious risk with morale.
Last year, so piqued was I by this, that I plunged the outsize handbag of an excessively bossy senior stewardess from Central Office into a fire-bucket of water on the grounds that it could have contained an incendiary device.
This year I have paid for it.
I have been banished to a windy concrete corridor far from everywhere.
What primes us agents most is our own exclusive conference speech from the Leader.
This occurred on Monday night at a dinner at the Imperial Hotel.
When she sat down we rose in a body, convinced and as one.
This was an outstanding achievement, since we began the dinner (with Avocado aux Crevettes de Blackpool) unsettlingly divided: the organisers (Central Office again) had expanded the Top Table so ridiculously, in an attempt to flatter those who care about such things, that all of us who weren't on it were consumed with envy.
The Leader's message was that winning the next election depended not so much on her as on us.
Our collective noun is an Apprehension of Agents.
Conferencemanship is an inferior art form.
Not so much for the platform speakers, who have arrived, but for some of the floor speakers, who haven't and would like to.
I refer to would-be parliamentary candidates, Bordes-type aspirants with lunging bosoms and other improbable specimens, who seek to board the Candidates' List, and in due course may turn up before our selection committees.
These types hang around the Great in the hope of getting them to pull a string.
WE agents are Shepherds of the Faithful — the 5,000 or 6,000 who fill the hall, averaging a dozen per constituency.
We book them into the Seaview and the Esplanade and give them a comradely nosh-up at the Claremont.
They are much nicer people than the mass of politically inactive carpers would suppose.
The blue-rinsed dame and the bottle-nosed blimp are extinct species here.
And of those who would hang, it is less for retribution than to save the next victim.
(But it would be a mistake to bring it back — we are bound to hang some unfortunate youth who would later be proved innocent by Ludovic Kennedy.)
For now they sit like shareholders at the annual general meeting of a company whose profits have fallen on last year's.
What will they take home?
1.
Three or four sharply conflicting views about the suitability of Michael Heseltine for the leadership of the Partei should it ever become vacant again.
2.
Reassurance that it's safe to stick to the policy without losing the next election.
3.
A stick of Mukden rock.
The author is constituency agent for Kensington Conservative Association.
A task for the green-eyed boy
By PETER JENKINS
BLACKPOOL: The Prime Minister's speech-writer-in-chief, Chris Patten, had never himself addressed a Conservative Party conference.
He must have felt like Sir Norman Hartnell wondering what to wear for the Royal Enclosure at Ascot.
Never clash with the Queen: the same goes for any aspiring young member of Mrs Thatcher's Cabinet.
One of the ‘Blue Chips’, regarded in her early days as little better than an Edward Heath Youth Movement, the new Secretary of State for the Environment is now her green-eyed boy.
Yesterday was his big chance.
Much was expected.
In tone and content Mr Patten's speech was of some significance, coming like a breath of damp air into the dry and brittle atmosphere of the Winter Garden.
In what has been a good year for poets at the conferences, with Neil Kinnock quoting both Frost and Shelley, and Kenneth Baker identifying with Henry V or Kenneth Branagh, Mr Patten chose Larkin's observation that, with honour gone, all we could now leave to our children was money.
Was this an ecumenical endorsement of the Archbishop of Canterbury on Thatcherism?
Surely not.
Burke was also invoked as a reminder that the cult of individualism is not the only, nor perhaps the chief, stream of the Tory tradition.
Burke, said Patten, had reminded us of our duties as trustees for the nation, of its traditions, its values and its riches.
A nation, he had written, was a partnership between the past, the present and the future.
Nothing snide or loaded here but enough to set a high Tory and paternalistic tone not often heard from the platform at recent Conservative conferences.
Appropriate too, because the sudden greening of British politics, the rediscovery of the quality of life (QOL, as it used to be known among Labour ministers on a previous incarnation) introduces a catalytic ingredient into the brew known as Thatcherism.
Environmental protection and wealth creation are in tension but not necessarily in conflict, and indeed there can be little hope of improving the quality of the environment without the resources to do so.
This has become the standard Tory party-point in which the Labour Party can be linked with the ecological disaster areas of the no-growth communist world.
But in no way can effective environmental policies be rendered compatible with the anti-statist, non-interventionist creed which has inspired a good deal of Thatcherite rhetoric.
Concern for the environment was certainly not among the Victorian virtues and the passing of laissez-faire and the coming of the welfare state could be written as a parable around the ideological battles which preceded the conquest of cholera through the construction of sewers at the public expense.
‘It is for government to regulate on behalf of the community, to set the standards and the environmental goals,’ said Mr Patten emphatically.
‘Planning,’ he later added, ‘is a form of regulation to enhance the quality of life.’
Pattenism is not to be a continuation of Ridleyism: an important theme underlying the whole speech was that he intends not to err on the side of market forces at the expense of planning restrictions.
Regulate?
Deregulate is the British cry for the Europe of 1992.
Regulation is a nasty continental vice, what the European Commission does, what makes Jacques Delors run.
Here is an ostensible shift in the balance of the Government's approach, reflecting the new composition of the Cabinet but also, perhaps, the new constellation of electoral politics following the disintegration of the centre parties.
The centre ground of British politics is once more an open arena for two-party competition.
The centre ground is these days tinged with green.
How green is the Tory party?
In its heart, not very.
The Prime Minister's latest ambition is to close the ozone gap and save the world from the greenhouse effect.
We should wish her every success.
At home, on both wings of her Cabinet, are ministers who regard green politics as no more than the latest fad; the election will not be won by fighting on the beaches, in the air, and in the green belts, but once again in the pockets of the people, is their view.
QOL?
Yes, well, up to a point…
As for the rank-and-file, the conference gives the impression that green belt and suburban preoccupations dominate the concern for the future of the ecosphere, not-in-my-backyard as Nicholas Ridley dubbed the attitude, ever honest and inept.
And the green-eyed boy himself?
Identifying the environment as a major priority is one thing, doing something about it another.
The scope for action ranges from saving the world to cleaning up Clapham High Street.
Mr Patten scored well in the middle range, for example the town and country planning issues which most concern his own supporters.
He also ranged higher and spoke inspirationally of the ‘absolutely imperative task, to bring the whole world together in a cause which both touches and imperils our common humanity’.
But when he got down to the streets where we live he said, ‘If people want a cleaner Britain, they can start with their own street and their own neighbourhood’.
How I can make a start cleaning up Clapham High Street I would like to know.
It is used by vast numbers of people who do not live there but take lunch at its many bus stops.
Sometimes is almost ankle deep in filth and litter.
Mr Patten promises that the Government will ‘allow (sic) the public to take local authorities to court if they fall down on the job of keeping the streets clean.
But why should the citizen have to do this?
Should not the Government enforce the statutory responsibilities of local authorities?
Why do the police not enforce the law?
Cleaning up Britain does not require international action, involve huge public expenditure, or impair the efficiency of industry.
It is exactly the kind of thing a truly determined and environmentally conscious government could get on with and do.
Great seaside pretensions
By TERRY COLEMAN
To Blackpool, for the illuminations, and to hear three leaders’ speeches -those of Baker, Heseltine, and Howe.
Mrs Thatcher's own will come tomorrow.
‘Like Disneyland,’ said the innocent, first-time Tory delegate with whom I shared a cab from the station.
No, I said.
There might be funfairs everywhere, but the real Disneyland was neither crumbling, nor swept by bitter winds off the Irish Sea, nor cursed by hotels that are really gimcrack boarding houses, nor served by superannuated London cabs displaying notices saying that if you're so drunk that you're sick inside, a cleaning fee of £10 will be payable to the driver.
The survival of Blackpool as a resort proves vividly the stubbornly persistent poverty of expectation of the English.
But there are the illuminations, miles of them along the seafront, which people really do come to admire, driving slowly and reverently down the tatty Golden Mile.
And, for this week of the Conservative conference only, there are endless television lights in the foyer of that fortress called the Imperial Hotel.
The lights are always there so that Mrs Thatcher, at whatever hour, may choose to be seen on TV sweeping through saying nothing, thus demonstrating that she is Prime Minister and going busily about the nation's business.
And Blackpool does have, at the Winter Gardens, the most atmospheric party conference hall in England, a plush and gilded set for political dramatics.
There on the platform you see who's in, who's out, and at whom Mrs Thatcher smiles.
There and in its environs, this week, have been played out the shows of Kenneth Baker as Kenneth Branagh, Michael Heseltine as Alvin Stardust, and Geoffrey Howe as Geoffrey Howe.
The situation is grave because the bank interest rate is at 15 per cent.
It is not grave because there needn't be an election for two years and more.
It is all in order because the proceedings start with a service conducted by the Anglican rural dean, at which the reading is by a member of the Free Churches, and where prayers are said by a Jesuit.
It is all out of order because the preliminaries are a shambles.
Was this shambles a sign?
It is unusual.
The Tories are impeccable in their organisation.
But you get in nowhere without a pass, applications for which are vetted by the Special Branch, and this year hundreds of passes went missing and had to be queued for.
You waited outside in the street for up to two hours, and then, when you got to the box office, the passes were heaped in no known order, and Tory office girls scrabbled through piles of them as if digging for hidden bones.
When the passes were found, each was enclosed in an envelope with a first class frank and a recorded delivery sticker; the covering letter inside mine was dated 18 September.
Then the chains on some passes were too short to pass over the wearers' heads: they were getting longer chains in.
Then, the day before it was due to begin, they had already run out of conference handbooks.
I will remark that MCC, a cricket club efficient by long tradition, made a similarly chaotic cock-up with its match tickets at the beginning of last season — and look how that season turned out.
I sometimes think that only the professional politicians, the organisers and the hacks who cover these things year-in year-out have the vaguest idea what anything is about.
This year 1,073 motions have been put down, but only 18 of those will be debated, and, of those 18, only two will be chosen by the conference itself.
A typical motion will congratulate Her Majesty's Government on its policy, and call upon it to continue.
I call this a ‘congratulate, and call upon’ motion.
There is the occasional ‘congratulate, but call upon’ motion, but such deep dissent is rare.
The debates are processions of praise.
To many delegates their presence is a holiday and a reward.
The law and order debate is a traditional exception.
As the representative from Rochdale said yesterday afternoon, she knew most people in the hall would vote for the return of the death penalty, at which the applause was loud and sustained.
But that is a permitted indulgence.
And though the Tory woman's hat is a high art form now decayed and lost, as is that of the elegant crossing of Tory wives' legs on a platform far above, and though the party has become more catholic in the women it attracts, there is a still a discernible type of Tory woman.
Two of the female proposers of motions are married with four children each.
And one of this year's vice-presidents of the association is a farmer's daughter who became a farmer's wife who gave birth to three sons, and whose special interests include farming.
It will be seen, therefore, that whatever the state of the pound Mrs Thatcher is in no danger from the constituencies.
But the menace of the IRA is everywhere.
Mrs Thatcher's car is armour-plated, the platform party leaves in a tank-like bus, the town crawls with policemen, and all this vigilance costs £1.1m.
The ratepayers are sick of paying 49 per cent of this bill.
But let me get to the various leaders' speeches.
Mrs Thatcher has a new party chairman, Mr Baker, who worked for Mr Heath, and in former days was a notorious wet.
He once said the Tory party was like a bird — with a left wing, a right wing, and its brains in the middle.
He is a man who has edited a book of satirical verse.
He has miraculously survived all this, and even being education secretary, but how would he measure up to being chairman, in a party where, in times of stress, to be party chairman is a greater thing than to be a secretary of state?
And the chairman also has to make a big speech on the first day.
He managed.
Now Mr Baker is a man of substance, who, as a backbencher in the year Mrs Thatcher came to power, said in the House that a backbencher trod a fine line between sycophancy and rebellion.
He is ambitious, but rebellion of any overt kind now appears to be out.
The Prime Minister, he said, had entrusted him with delivering her fourth election victory.
On the platform he made a movement of deference to her, with open hand held out.
She in return regarded him with what looked like admiration.
He would not fail her, he said.
The first election shots had been fired.
The polished Mr Baker, in defence of Mr Lawson's interest rates, even brought himself to shout, something for which the conference handbook, in its Suggestions to Speakers on page 46, says there is no need.
‘Victory,’ he said.
He even descended to the realms of the unwise and hubristic Kenneth Branagh and declaimed some words of Henry V before Agincourt.
Everyone knows Mr Baker has edited the Faber Book of English History in Verse, and included some lines from Henry V, but even there he never got to that particular bit.
He which hath no stomach to this fight, let him depart.
At which, after an ovation, half the audience did depart to hear Michael Heseltine, whose idea of a fringe meeting is to hold it in the Grand Theatre, which is very grand, built 1906, seats 1,200, and where Alvin Stardust will head the bill in this year's pantomime.
Watched from above by proscenium cherubs, and in the spirit of One Nation first enunciated by Disraeli and all that, Michael Stardust held forth, he who walked out of the Cabinet and resigned.
He who also hopes for the leadership, but not yet, but still makes a speech fit for a leader.
Now this speech has been well reported, and 10 commentators will produce 10 glosses.
And, true, he hacked at Mr Lawson's trade deficit; but he also defended his rise in interest rates.
But above all, this was a loyal speech.
It had to be, because Tories destroy those whom they deem disloyal.
But this speech fairly shone with loyalty, way beyond the call of self-preservation.
Filthy streets, he said, bodies bent down in doorways, were no advertisement.
But that's the permissible Heseltine touch.
All this, I say, giving my gloss, can be read — and more particularly seen and heard, since Heseltine's manner and presence carry their own conviction — as the utterance of a man demonstrating that he has been in the wilderness longer than it is in anyone's interest.
‘Make me an offer,’ he might have been saying.
And that is as acceptable an approach as a little touch of Harry at the conference.
Then we come to Sir Geoffrey Howe, the third contender.
He is a grey man in a grey suit.
He is Deputy Prime Minister, but yesterday sat on the very edge of the platform group.
He is not down to address the conference at all.
But he could and did hold a fringe meeting with the Bow Group, where he gave the becoming speech of a statesman.
He toured the world.
What Gromyko had said to him and what he had said to Shevardnadze.
How the miracle of the turn-round and recovery under Margaret Thatcher's leadership was rightly hailed as an inspiration worldwide.
How Mr Lawson was right, and had not only his sympathy but his support.
But, he said, they should never be seduced into thinking their policies had been so effective that there was no risk of relapse.
He was wary of triumphalism.
There was, he said, a triumphalist literature which celebrated the end of the struggle as we had known it.
He named Francis Fukuyama, an American, whose ‘End of History’ article might tempt one to think that the struggle was over and to put one's feet up, thinking that every alternative to economic liberalism, in recent times, had shown itself to be hopelessly flawed.
But it did not follow that we could now relax, least of all in Britain.
Here was the statesmanlike Howe.
Not a flourish.
Never a shout.
His great strength is that he looks a small-'c' conservative, with that appealing moderation which used to be thought Tory.
You could say that, somehow, he made the most convincing of the would-be-leaders' speeches.
Mrs Thatcher, though, is there, and triumphantly there, and will be triumphally acclaimed when she has her say tomorrow.
Leading Article: The return of Edmund Burke
By TERRY COLEMAN
‘READ Edmund Burke.’
With this advice the Secretary of State for the Environment, Christopher Patten, yesterday rebuked a Thatcherite who had urged the Conservative Party to put its faith in the free market.
The Thatcherite thought Mr Patten was wrong to oppose the building of a new town at Foxley Wood, in Hampshire.
Most of the conference firmly supported Mr Patten.
His predecessor, Nicholas Ridley, had favoured the building of Foxley Wood, but his approach to the environment was so unpopular that he was moved to another department.
The Prime Minister has far more sympathy for Mr Ridley's view than Mr Patten's.
She has failed, however, to convert her party.
In Blackpool, evidence mounts daily that the Conservative Party has rejected Thatcherism.
Speakers may still make respectful remarks about the market, but few want it to be free.
Michael Heseltine is among the eminent figures who have advocated greater government help for industry.
His advocacy is not surprising: he never abandoned the interventionism which was part of the conventional wisdom in the Sixties and Seventies.
But he evidently believes his chances of eventual succession to the leadership of the party are enhanced by his ‘pragmatic’ plea for intervention.
More strikingly, Sir Geoffrey Howe, a stalwart of the heroic period of Thatcherism in the early 1980s, when she as Prime Minister and he as Chancellor of the Exchequer defied almost the entire economic establishment, has started to lay greater stress on the Government's role in industry.
Sir Geoffrey spoke more cautiously than Mr Heseltine when he urged ‘the energetic use of existing agencies and resources, private and public sector alike, to give potentially fruitful initiatives a helping hand’, and praised the work of the Welsh Development Agency.
In effect, however, he was letting it be known that Mr Heseltine would not be the only interventionist candidate for the leadership -nor the only one to feel more enthusiasm about Europe than Mrs Thatcher.
The rise of public concern about the environment has done most to hasten a realisation among Conservatives that Thatcherism has its limitations.
‘First, our philosophy,’ Mr Patten said at the start of his speech yesterday.
He did not then make an appeal to Adam Smith, the intellectual inspiration behind Thatcherism, but went on: ‘The greatest of Tories, Edmund Burke, reminded us of our duties as trustees for the nation, as good stewards of its traditions, its values and its riches.’
In this speech, Mr Patten confirmed himself as the leading exponent in the Cabinet of a traditional Toryism owing nothing to Mrs Thatcher.
Students of political philosophy are sometimes set the question: ‘Was Burke consistent?’
They invariably get into difficulties trying to answer it, for Burke, unlike Adam Smith, was not a systematic thinker.
Therein lies the danger for the Tories in rediscovering him.
His sublime but discursive wisdom could be used to camouflage a headlong rush towards an easier life, one in which hard problems are fudged, not faced.
The arrangements announced yesterday to ease the introduction of the poll tax are symptomatic of a less rigorous approach.
In practice as well as in theory, Thatcherism is in the process of being abandoned.
Leading Article: De Klerk takes a necessary risk
By TERRY COLEMAN
PRESIDENT F W de Klerk's decision to release Walter Sisulu and seven other long-detainees is only his first step along the road of political reform in South Africa — but an important one.
Mr Sisulu, the former secretary-general of the African National Congress, may be less famous than Nelson Mandela, but he is equally formidable: if his family is included, even more so.
Mr de Klerk is taking a risk in releasing him unconditionally, a move which can be interpreted as a de facto unbanning of the ANC.
If Mr Sisulu senior (and his seven fellow detainees) are allowed to take part in political activities, his wife Albertina and their son Zwelakhe, a newspaper editor, cannot realistically continue to be restricted.
From his own continued but comfortable detention, Mr Mandela will be assessing the unconditionality of his colleagues' release.
He would evidently like to make the freeing of all political prisoners a pre-condition of his own release.
The latter, he said yesterday, is ‘not now on the agenda’.
One of the many dangers for South Africa's evolution is that each move which President de Klerk makes will be discounted in advance by the opposition.
It was, at the least, bad psychology for Archbishop Desmond Tutu to belittle the release of this first batch of heavyweight political prisoners.
The same discounting may occur with the next moves, probably involving the lifting of the three-year-old state of emergency and the formal unbanning of political organisations.
As for eventual negotiations on political reform, the ANC has already partially pre-empted them by drafting its own programme, which was endorsed this summer by the Organisation of African Unity and leaders of non-aligned countries.
Further endorsement will be sought at the Commonwealth heads of government conference in Kuala Lumpur next week, and at the General Assembly of the United Nations.
Unexceptional though the proposals are, their widespread endorsement could have two unwelcome effects for Mr de Klerk: of internationalising negotiations for reform, and of marginalising other potentially important representatives of the black majority, like the Zulu leader Chief Buthelezi.
For Mrs Thatcher, the timing of President de Klerk's announcement in the week before the Commonwealth conference is helpful, though she would have had no difficulty in resisting pressure there for further sanctions.
For her and others who wish South Africa well, Mr de Klerk's bona fides remain unproven.
Is he genuinely anxious to give the black majority full political rights, or is he simply interested in the survival of Afrikanerdom?
The economy is crumbling, and the country's foreign debt is due to be rescheduled by next June.
From all quarters, and especially from the white business community, the message is the same: only with social justice can the country's economic potential be released.
Some remarkable men are now being freed after a quarter century in prison.
Their crime was to want to overthrow the apartheid state.
Their minor acts of sabotage — reminiscent of those of Welsh nationalists — caused no injuries, let alone deaths.
Their return to public life will increase the pressure for political reform.
It is a process which Mr de Klerk must accelerate, but which he will find hard to control.
Importance of being Kenneth
By MILES KINGTON
TODAY we conclude our extract from the hitherto totally unknown Shakespeare play.
King Kenneth I, Part II Confident young Kenneth is being warned by his wife, Queen Emma, that if he gets any more young and confident, people may gang up and say rotten things about him…
King: Publicity, they say, is never bad.
Tis better to be mocked than be ignored.
Together, dearest Emma, we can rise Above the petty heckling of our foes Tis all hot air, and hot air can be used To hoist aloft the balloon in which we soar!
Just turn your face a little to the right.
That's better; now you're much more in the light.
Emma: Publicity's a tiger which can turn and rend The man who thought it once to be his friend.
King: Sweet Emma, you remember far too well The jeers and cat-calls mingled with the praise When you did sing and dance for half an hour In your own TV show.
It was not bad at all…
Emma: Not bad at all!?
I thought you liked the show.
Emma: Too clever by half, Or so the critics said, week in, week out.
King: They say the same of me, and always will In England, where to excel is still a crime.
And yet if we are both ‘too clever by half’
Then let us join our clever halves to make a whole!
Emma: You may be right.
Yet I do fear the worst.
King: I'll walk on unafraid!
Emma: Look both ways first.
Exit Queen Emma.
Kenneth takes several phone calls from his agent.
Then enter the ghost of Laurence Olivier.
King: What pale and ghastly apparition here Doth tear the eyeballs from my living sight?
Speak, if thou canst, and whilst thou'rt at it, Move one small pace this way to get in range.
This is a two-shot, not a bloody close-up.
Speak, speak, thou vision of hell!
Ghost: All right, all right !
Don't shout at me; it gives a ghost a fright I've only come to have a little chat I do not think we've met.
The name's Olivier…
King: Of course.
They still talk much of you today…
Ghost: Oh, do they now?
How very gratifying…
King: And endlessly contrast yourself and me.
Ghost: Well, Ken, dear boy, you somewhat asked for it, When you chose Henry V to film again, Drawing inevitable comparisons.
King: Comparisons with you are odorous.
Ghost: Oh, very droll, dear lad — you will go far.
But I have come to warn you that ahead Lie hazards that are little short of dread.
King: You mean the constant limelight and the gossip?
The crowd of critics waiting for a fall?
Ghost: Oh no — that's all great fun, I think, don't you?
King: Well then, the titles, slowing down the actor, Like silken chains around his neck and feet?
Ghost: Well, to be honest, I was never bored With being a knight, or, better still, a lord.
No, I was thinking of a far worse fate Which can o'ertake you when you're 28.
King: Which happens, as you know, to be my age.
Ghost: I know.
Learn, then, that on the stage The worst thing's not to be the newest Larry But to hear behind your back Tom, Dick or Harry Being greeted by the critics with ‘Hosanna!
Here comes the man to oust old Kenneth Branagh!’
King: A young pretender to my crown you mean?
Ghost: Just so.
Think on't.
And now I leave the scene.
Thank God no more by me needs to be said.
Line-learning is so boring when you're dead.
Exit the ghost of Larry, leaving Kenneth looking pensive, as well he might.
For rest of story see daily Press…
Letter: Arts grants for ethnic minorities
From Mr FRED D'AGUIAR
Sir: Fiona Pith-Helmet must have had her hard hat pulled over her ears and eyes leaving only her mouth operational when she accused the Arts Council of inverted racism ('What about the special needs of a struggling poet without funds?’ by Fiona Pitt-Kethley; Living, 27 September).
Being wilfully deaf and blind these last 25 years, she would have missed the debates and riots which culminated in the Race Relations Acts and in institutions such as the Commission for Racial Equality.
With a head as hard as hers, she would have failed to register any number of missiles lobbed her way, such as the Scarman Report which followed the Brixton riots of 1981.
It is exactly the equality before the law, which Ms Pith-Helmet invests with so much trust, that has betrayed blacks and Asians in the courts, in their treatment at the hands of vicious and prejudiced police (that has resulted in the death of 10 blacks at the hands of police during the course of arrest and interrogation in the last 15 years), that allows black and Asian homes to be terrorised by racist thugs who can sprinkle liberally their British hospitality in the form of firebombs, beatings, excrement dumped on doors, and children bullied to the point of suicide and madness.
But this is reality, not the world of arts subsides and grants to which Ms Pith-Helmet aspires to belong.
Being deaf and blind, all this would have passed her by.
The notion of giving a helping hand to a new literature produced against these overwhelming odds would naturally appear to her to be anathema.
Two notable and deserving successes cited by her in no way disqualify the principle of special needs.
If anything, the rarity of such successes (disproportionately few in relation to the number of writers and artists) testifies to the crucial place of Arts Council grants for minorities in British society.
Letter: A way out for the elephants
From Mr DAVID COULSON
Sir: Your leading article on the ivory trade (10 October) was a bitter blow to all who have the interest of the African elephant at heart.
Far from indulging in political theatre as you suggested, Kenya and Tanzania, by campaigning for an international ivory trade ban, are fighting for their political life.
Both countries depend on wildlife-based tourism for their economic survival.
Both countries are being bled dry by the poachers who supply the ivory trade.
Both countries also enjoy the full support of Britain and the US — a point you chose to ignore.
The argument that a ban will drive ivory trading underground is plainly absurd, since up to 90 per cent of all ivory currently in trade has come from elephants illegally slaughtered by poachers.
Nor can an ivory ban be compared to attempts to stop trade in alcohol or tobacco.
Nobody ever got high on elephants' teeth.
Common sense cries out for a moratorium to allow the herds time to recover.
No one will suffer.
The southern African countries can salt away their ivory stocks in the bank until the day trade resumes, and watch them increase in value.
Since tusks continue to grow throughout an elephant's life, the amount of ivory carried by the herds will also increase.
Then, properly managed, perhaps using birth control instead of the crude culls practised by Zimbabwe and its friends, there is no reason why elephants should not go on producing ‘found’ ivory (tusks picked up after natural mortality) and tourist revenue for ever.
Surely it is time we stopped talking of elephants as if they were a commodity to be traded, like so many cans of paint, and accept them for what they are, ancient and splendid fellow inhabitants of the earth who share with us the joys of close kinship bonds and grieve when they are severed.
Letter: Secrecy in Tory selection process
From Mr ERIC CHALKER
Sir: The article by Tom Arnold (9 October), vice-chairman of the Conservative Party, takes much pride in the fact that social connections are, in his view, no longer a passport to becoming a Conservative candidate (9 October).
He offers Conservatives and the public at large a picture of equal opportunity for all.
Unfortunately, within the party, there is widespread distrust of the approved list of candidates and it is regarded as anything but fair.
The eminent weekend ‘assessors’ are no doubt most conscientious in their task and, despite the apparent absence of a ‘score card’, come to their conclusions in inviolate objectivity, but that is not the whole of the process.
Before most aspirants get to a parliamentary selection board, they are vetted by one of the party's full-time professionals, who submits a secret report.
Other individual reports are also obtained (so does it really not matter whom you know?) and are added to each individual's file.
These files are secret of course.
It is the secrecy and lack of accountability that are the present system's greatest faults.
At no point is any aspect of the selection process subject to democratic scrutiny or approval.
Tom Arnold himself is appointed, not elected and, although he reports to a committee ‘representing’ the voluntary party, he is not accountable to that committee, nor is that committee elected by the constituency associations on whose behalf it is supposed to act (it does not even report to them).
Of course there are allegations of favouritism, affecting both getting on to the list and then getting ‘placed’ afterwards.
Social background may not matter much now (but until they publish the list we cannot judge this for ourselves), but the 100 per cent increase in party professionals getting on the list and getting elected to Parliament between 1979 and 1987 cannot, surely, be just coincidence?
So, too, do we hear and see frequent examples of the pressure to conform that is put upon those who have parliamentary ambitions.
When the path to achievement of ambition is a hidden process rather than an open competition, all are vulnerable to establishment pressures.
The old ‘establishment’ to which Tom Arnold refers may have gone, but a new one is in its place and he is a representative of it.
Letter: ‘Trojan’ arguments
From Mr PATRICK ROBERTSON
Sir: Contentious points are raised in your leading article, ‘High time for monetary union’(11 October), not least the title, which itself implies an ideological support for ‘European union’ in favour of an analytical study of the forces at work in Europe.
It is a fallacy at the present moment to believe that there are any quick cures for our monetary difficulties, least of all joining the ERM (European exchange rate mechanism).
Membership of a system of exchange rate parities which are fixed would involve considerable intervention in the underlying economy to maintain that fixity.
We would be forced to invent more and more mechanisms to avoid the realignments which members of the ERM are bound to face.
In the long-term, this may be more damaging than a short-term run on the pound.
Predictable is the reference to our non-membership being the result of ‘narrow-minded nationalism’, and this emotive point somewhat detracts from the overall objectivity of many who put forward cogent arguments for British membership of the ERM.
In this context, although Mr Lawson supports the ERM, he too would be, no doubt, a narrow-minded nationalist when faced with the prospect of European Monetary Union, as would increasing numbers of German economists who argue on the basis of economic research that EMU is not necessarily an attractive option.
It is a tragic fact that the European debate, which is the most complex and important issue facing the countries of this continent, should be treated in such a facile manner, with the Trojan horse of ‘nationalism’ and ‘sovereignty’wheeled out every time better arguments do not prevail.
Europe has a destiny to fulfil, and in years to come it will become apparent that the best Europe is one which rejects interventionist mediocrity in favour of a European Community which will deliver the promise of a higher standard of living and political pre-eminence so justly deserved by all Europeans.
Letter: South-east shambles
From Mr ERIC GATES
Sir: Paul Barker's analysis of the shambles of planning policy in the South-east in the aftermath of Foxley Wood was most perceptive (9 October).
While the objectors to Foxley Wood — and to Tillingham and Stone Bassett before it — may be rejoicing, the decision leaves us with no solutions to the future growth of population and households in the region.
Here in Milton Keynes — one of the areas suggested by Paul Barker that developers should now direct their attention to — the Government's false starts, decisions and counter-decisions, do seem ludicrous.
We have the land and the right planning framework to create new communities that do offer the sorts of housing and living conditions that many people are looking for.
Many major housebuilders are already here, and large development opportunities of the size of Foxley Wood are being offered.
The difference is that they take place within an agreed plan and programme.
What is amazing, therefore, is that the agency that has the responsibility for this programme — Milton Keynes Development Corporation — has been largely wound down over the past few years and the remainder of it will cease to exist in 1992.
Along with many of the other development corporations, the skills and experience in creating new communities have been dispersed — a fact that always amazes foreign visitors who look on British new towns as one of the major achievements of post-war planning anywhere in the world.
So perhaps another note for Mr Patten's no doubt very full in-tray is to look again at the decision to close down the body responsible for developing Milton Keynes, and start a new government initiative to encourage more new settlements throughout the region, rather than leaving it to private consortia to chance their arms through a development control system which seems unable to accommodate new initiatives in planning.
Letter: Future of the National Fruit Collection
From BARONESS TRUMPINGTON
Sir: An article by Anna Pavord on the National Fruit Collection (Weekend, 30 September) described very clearly the issues involved in the future of the collection, and I am glad the message is finally getting across that the Ministry will be continuing to support it.
I would, however, question the accuracy of the sub-title to the article: it is not the case that the Government ‘will no longer fund horticultural research’.
Public funding is being withdrawn from research and development which is of direct benefit to growers — like the evaluation of different varieties in the National Fruit Trials at Brogdale — but the Government will still be paying for a substantial amount of horticultural research at a number of centres spread across the country.
I would also like to reassure your readers that moving the National Fruit Collection, should this prove necessary, is unlikely to be the traumatic event that some people imagine.
The fruit trees would be moved in stages, over a period of years.
The parent trees would be retained for several years after the new trees had been planted at the new site, just so that they could be used as a reference for checking.
Great care would be taken during the whole operation, and there need be no fears that varieties could be incorrectly named or labels lost.
There is nothing new about this procedure; the National Fruit Collection has already been moved from Wisley to Brogdale.
No one disputes the satisfactory results of this earlier move.
The Government is as keen as anyone else to ensure that this fine collection of old and new varieties is maintained to a high standard.
Letter: The Runcie effect
From The Rt Hon Sir FREDERIC BENNETT
In this context one paragraph in the Archbishop's recent controversial article in The Director is surely enlightening: The successful are always tempted to regard their success as a sort of blessing or reward for righteousness.
This can lead to judgements being made about the unsuccessful, the unemployed, the poor and the unintelligent which are both uncharitable and untrue.
One can legitimately ask Dr Runcie what are the temptations facing those who are unsuccessful, in regard to their own failings and failures — indulgence in self-pity; trying to pass the buck; bitterness, even resentment.
Under such circumstances would he agree that judgements could be made (inter alia, by himself) about the successful, the employed, the better-off and the intelligent, which are both uncharitable and untrue?
Letter: Cynical comment
From Mr CHRISTOPHER LUCAS
Sir: Your otherwise sound leading article ('Private gifts for public arts', 11 October) shot itself hypocritically in the foot in its last paragraph by expressing irritation with corporate executives who ‘parade as great patrons while giving away their shareholders’ money'.
That comment under-estimates the growing interest which shareholders are beginning to take in the wider responsibilities of the companies they invest in (eg, support for arts, education, health, environment or indeed anything which contributes to an increase in the quality of life), and its cynicism can only alienate the executives whose involvement in their companies' patronage we so badly need to encourage and applaud.
Letter: Funding students
From Professor JOHN GRIFFITH
Sir: The letter from the vice-chancellor of Essex University (10 October) reflects the appalling compliance with government views which has been the policy of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals over the last decade.
The Secretary of State says no more money so that's that.
Don't be beastly to the Conservatives.
The letter says that the key issue is which funding system will most likely encourage first-generation entrants to higher education from social groups not hitherto persuaded to participate.
Is the writer seriously suggesting that changing from a system where fees are paid in full by the state to a system where they are paid wholly or partly by the student is likely to be encouraging?
Letter: Was Euripides's Apollo an ancient Green?
From Mr RALPH HILL
Sir: The earliest recorded Green?
In Euripides's play Orestes (408 BC), Apollo says The gods by means of Helen's loveliness embroiled Troy and Hellas, causing death thereby, that they might lighten Mother Earth of the outrage done her by man's excessive population.