

DANCE /Louise Levene preview LCDT's autumn tour; plus listings
By LOUISE LEVENE
London Contemporary Dance Theatre have begun touring this autumn with their usual selection of excellently mixed bills.
They dance to an exciting variety of music by composers such as Boyce, Shostakovich, Britten and Philip Glass.
Two of the new pieces, To Comfort Ghosts and another tentatively titled New Dance are choreographed by LCDT's new artistic director Dan Wagoner.
Another new work Orfeo (pictured above) by Kim Brandstrup deals with the myth in the manner of a baroque opera and is set to the computerised harpsichord of Ian Dearden.
The perennially popular pastoral celebration Arden Court by Paul Taylor will be danced at four of the venues.
Plymouth, Coventry, Bristol, Leeds, Cardiff, London (see below for details).
The Place (387 0031) Laurie Booth Terminus Terminux to Sat; Compagnie Cre-Ange Noir Salle should be livelier and less self-indulgent than Emile Dubois' much-hyped and absurdly over-long opening to Dance Umbrella ‘89 17-18 Oct.
Royal Opera House, WC2 (240 1066) Royal Ballet Mixed Bill: Rubies, Other Dances (Sylvie Guillem happy and relaxed with her old partner from Paris Laurent Hilaire), Ashley Page's new Piano (opened to mixed reviews.
The conductor does Beethoven no favours and the ballet is a little long but is worth seeing), Requiem tonight, 27 Oct (when Sylvie Guillem dances Grand Pas Classique with Cope); La Bayadere Fri (Guillem, Bussell, Cope 13 Oct); Postal booking: Prince of the Pagodas. 7 Dec (Gala), 8, 11, 14, 15, 19, 20 Dec. 65 amphitheatre seats are sold from 10am on the day.
One per person.
OPERA /Finding the right tenor: Mark Pappenheim previews new Britten productions and a competition in memory of Peter Pears
By MARK PAPPENHEIM
Benjamin Britten overshadowed the whole of Britain's post-war operatic scene, from the revelatory first performance of Peter Grimes at Sadler's Wells in June 1945, to the desperately achieved premiere of Death in Venice, three years before his own death in 1976.
Throughout all his operatic output, one factor remained constant: the inspiration of Peter Pears as friend, lover and uniquely-voiced creator of all the tenor leads from Grimes to Aschenbach.
It was an artistic relationship that ultimately cost the composer his life as he repeatedly delayed vital heart surgery to complete the role that he knew would also be Pears's last.
Pears himself died in 1986, leaving a new generation of British tenors to emerge from beneath his shadow at a time when Britten's own work is undergoing vital reassessment and revival.
On Saturday, Stephen Lawless's new GTO staging of Death in Venice opens its tour at Glyndebourne with Robert Tear as Aschenbach, the only Pears part (bar Albert Herring) he has yet to sing.
Opera North has also just unveiled a new Britten staging: Peter Grimes, directed by Ronald Eyre and with John Treleaven as the visionary Suffolk fisherman.
It reaches Manchester on Wednesday, the same day that Philip Langridge opens at Covent Garden in Elijah Moshinsky's proto-Brechtian Grimes.
Meanwhile Imperial Opera are bravely burrowing further back in the Britten archives to stage the comic musical Paul Bunyan which Britten wrote with Auden during wartime exile in America (see listings, below, for performance details and for discount offer on the Royal Opera's Peter Grimes).
And this week has seen the launch of a new international singing competition in memory of Peter Pears.
Over 80 artists from some 14 nations entered for the new BP Peter Pears Award, each presenting a 22-minute programme representing their talents in opera, oratorio, baroque and 20th-century works; Britten was to be heard in most contestants' 20th-century selections.
Four finalists will go through to the closing contest on Sunday when James Lockhart and the ENO orchestra provide an operatic interlude while the jury is out for the final count.
Lord Harewood chairs the panel, which includes Covent Garden's current Valkyrie, Dame Gwyneth Jones, as well as Norman Bailey and Josephine Veasey.
My money's on Alastair Miles, currently stealing the show as Raimondo in WNO's Lucia.
Readers who want to hear who wins the Peter Pears Award First Prize of £5000 can buy two tickets for the price of one in the stalls or dress circle (£6-£8.50) upon presentation of this page at the Sadler's Wells Box Office or by quoting this offer on 01-278 8916 Sun 6.30pm Sadler's Wells, Rosebery Ave EC1.
POP /Far Out sounds from Stourbridge: Giles Smith samples The Wonder Stuff and chooses the gigs of the week
By GILES SMITH
The Wonder Stuff come from Stourbridge, in the West Midlands, and have never been shy about saying so.
In fact, in interviews, a quick reference to the home town frequently serves them as well as a rhetorical trick: by declaring their provinciality, they can remind you just how surprised they are to be attracting so much attention all of a sudden.
You could hardly blame them, though, for feeling bewildered from time to time.
One minute they were pushing forward a couple of tentative singles on their own label (The Far Out Recording Company), the next they were being pressganged by Polydor and trailed across the press following the release of their debut album, The Eight Legged Groove Machine.
Q liked it.
So did Smash Hits.
It gave them something more than local interest to build on.
The follow-up, Hup, came out last week and runs along the same lines: some neatly-chopped guitar riffs float in a fashionably psychedelic haze, while the nasal disdain of Miles Hunt's voice rides a few tuneful melodies.
It's a simple arrangement and adapts straightforwardly to the stage.
As the tour will doubtless prove, what drives them crazy in Stourbridge holds good elsewhere.
JOE JACKSON Over from New York to give his first London performances for three years.
An 11-piece band will cover the ground between Look Sharp! and this year's excellent Blaze of Glory, passing several notable pop landmarks on the way.
THE MIGHTY LEMON DROPS A vast noise in the midst of which some bold melodies are attempting to box their way out.
Worth being ringside.
Fri, Sat London Dominion; Sun Birmingham Hummingbird.
FISH Fish has now slipped loose of progressive rockers Marillion, but the title of his forthcoming album (Vigil in a Wilderness of Mirrors) suggests he's still thinking on the grand scale.
Sun Dingwall Legends; Mon Elgin Town Hall; Tue Ullapool Village Hall.
THE TEMPTATIONS No longer with Kendrick and Ruffin up front.
But nevertheless, the tunes, the outfits, the lush harmonies, the synchronized dancing — irresistible.
Tonight London Hammersmith Odeon; Fri Nottingham Royal Concert Hall; Sat Newcastle City Hall; Sun Edinburgh Playhouse; Mon Liverpool Empire; Tue Manchester Apollo; Wed Wolverhampton Civic Hall.
Tonight London Royal Albert Hall; Sat Southampton Mayflower; Mon Birmingham Hippodrome.
THE SUGARCUBES The sound of independent Iceland.
Several members of the group are published poets.
JOE STRUMMER Last summer the former Clash singer set out on the fairly unequivocal ‘Rock Against The Rich’ tour, where he sounded pretty fed up about everything.
This time he is promoting a solo album.
And he still sounds pretty fed up about everything.
CHRISTY MOORE Costello, The Pogues, and U2 are among a hoard of artists quick to declare the Irish folk-singer's influence.
Tonight Leeds Irish Centre; Fri Liverpool Royal Court; Sun Newcastle Playhouse; Mon Manchester Free Trade Hall; Tue Birmingham Town Hall.
THE TOM ROBINSON BAND The original line-up, road-testing some new material for future release, while at the same time customising some of the old agit-pop anthems.
Fri Northampton Roadmenders Centre; Sat Manchester International; Wed Sheffield University.
GARY NUMAN All the hits are made available again on a live compilation, The Skin Mechanic.
Remarkable how long a nasal drone and a cheap synth can sustain a man.
Tonight London Dominion; Fri Oxford Apollo Theatre; Sat Sheffield City Hall; Sun Hull City Hall; Mon Manchester Apollo; Wed Bristol Colston Hall.
LOUDON WAINWRIGHT III Sly American songwriter, whose new album, Therapy, ponders the demands of fame: like having your picture alongside Frankie Vaughan's in the local launderette.
Tonight Southport Arts Centre; Sat Wolverhampton Wulfren Centre; Mon Brighton Zap Club; Wed Manchester International.
DAVID ESSEX Going all out for the Cliff Richard Award for persistent youthfulness.
He'll need a lot of breath for this lengthy stint, which heads off towards the new year.
There are only 45 David Essex gigs to Christmas.
Tonight Bradford Alhambra; Fri Hull City Hall; Sat Nottingham Royal Concert Hall; Sun Stratford Royal Shakespeare Theatre; Mon Bristol Colston Hall; Tue Northampton Derngate Centre; Wed Cardiff St David's Hall.
ROOTS & WORLD MUSIC THE NORMAN COOK ROADSHOW The former Housemartin alongside The Real Sounds of Africa (suppliers of the Zimbabwean World Cup theme song), while, all around, graffiti artists spray and club DJs mix.
There are twenty seven people on the stage at any one time.
Sat Trent Polytechnic; Tue Birmingham Hummingbird; Wed Brighton Top Rank.
PAPA WEMBA A show built in Paris on musical foundations assembled in Zaire.
Much use made of the lokole, a percussion instrument employed to communicate between villages.
Tonight Liverpool Bluecoat; Fri Manchester International 2; Sat St Helens Citadel; Sun London Town & Country.
LE RUE Cajun crazies, featuring some fairly forward fiddle-playing from leader, Pierre.
Fri London Royalty Theatre.
JAZZ /Pete Martin selects a fortnight of gigs, starting with Lionel Hampton
By PETE MARTIN
LIONEL HAMPTON One of the few remaining links with the classic era, Hamp played drums for Louis Armstrong as long ago as 1930; later in that decade his pulsating vibes gave Benny Goodman's great quartet much of its joie de vivre.
Since the Forties he has led his own big bands, noted for their driving swing on up-tempo numbers like ‘Flying Home’, and for the leader's exuberant showmanship.
Sun 22 Lewisham Jazz Festival; Mon 23 Northampton Derngate; Wed 25 Canterbury Marlowe Theatre; Thur 26 Edinburgh Usher Hall; Fri 27 Glasgow City Halls; Sat 28 Cork Jazz Festival; Mon 30 Birmingham Alexandra Theatre; Tue 31 Bristol Colston Hall; Wed 1 Nov Cardiff St Davids Hall; Fri 3 Poole Arts Centre; Sat 4 London Dominion Theatre; Sun 5 Manchester Free Trade Hall; Mon 6 Sunderland Empire Theatre.
MIKE STERN/BOB BERG Stern's guitar and Berg's saxophone are currently best remembered for their contributions to Miles Davis' comeback bands.
But both played a great deal of different music before then, and have done so since.
Fri 20 Edinburgh Queens Hall; Sat 21 Leeds Trade Club; Sun 22 Town & Country Club, Kentish Town, London NW5.
LEE KONITZ Over the years, Konitz has developed into one of the most fluent and intelligent of contemporary improvisers, his light yet husky alto sound the perfect vehicle for his incisive lines.
He resumes a remarkably productive partnership with pianist John Taylor, himself among the best around.
With Mick Hutton (bass) and Steve Arguelles (drums).
Fri 20 Mansfield Civic Centre (with the Cantamus Choir); Sat 21 Queen Elizabeth Hall, South Bank, London SE1; Sun 22 Dartington Arts Centre Great Hall; Mon 23 Bristol St Georges Church; Tue 24 Padiham Town Hall; Wed 25 Darlington Arts Centre, Vane Terrace; Thur 26 Aberystwyth Arts Centre; Fri 27 Brighton Concorde Club; Sat 28 Llantwit Major St Donats; Sun 29 Birmingham Midlands Arts Centre.
JOE HARRIOTT Memories of the great altoist are evoked by a quintet featuring three members of his band: trumpeter Shake Keane, bassist Coleridge Goode, and drummer Bobby Orr.
The pianist is Michael Garrick and altoist Martin Hathaway has the daunting task of following in Harriott's footsteps.
Fri Cheltenham Queen's Hotel; Sat Berkhamsted Civic Centre; Sun Birmingham Midlands Arts Centre; Wed Leeds College of Music; Thur 26 Northampton Arts Centre; Thur 2 Nov London, University College School; Sat 4 London, Pizza Express, Dean St, W1; Sun 5 Brentwood Monkey Club; Wed 8 Nottingham Old Vic; Sun 12 Newcastle Corner House; Fri 17 Brighton Concorde Club; Sat 25 Swindon Link Ctr.
ART BLAKEY The godfather marks his 70th birthday with a reunion band featuring past and present Messengers.
Jackie McLean, Benny Golson, Bobby Watson and Curtis Fuller are among those rumoured to be involved.
Fri 20 Aberdeen Alternative Festival.
Full details 0224-635 822.