

The Conservatives in Blackpool: Heseltine attacks Chancellor for ‘naivety’
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
AS THE pound continued to sink, moving below the symbolic DM2.95 figure on the foreign exchanges, and shares plummeted, Nigel Lawson yesterday went into retreat at his Leicestershire constituency home to draft tomorrow's make-or-break speech for the Conservative conference.
The Chancellor had left Blackpool late on Monday night, after addressing party agents, but conference jitters were so great that his unexpected disappearance prompted rumours that he had gone back to London for crisis talks.
Those rumours were quickly quashed by the Treasury, but there remained an underlying conference mood of expectation and anticipation; wondering how Mr Lawson would respond to party concern about the economy.
His acute political and personal crisis was increased by a direct attack from Michael Heseltine, who said the Chancellor's attempts to shrug off the trade deficit smacked of ‘socialist naivety’.
Speaking to a conference fringe meeting, he warned: ‘Your empty words will come back to haunt you.’
The former Cabinet minister joined the pro-Tory Daily Mail in urging an early decision on membership of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, something which was ruled out by a senior Cabinet source as jumping ‘from the puddle into the pond’.
As for last week's increase in interest rates, which he endorsed, Mr Heseltine said: ‘We must not let the medicine drag out, dissipating our economic strength and dispersing our political support.’
And in a direct repudiation of the Chancellor's repeated statements, he said: ‘I beg our party not to argue that a deficit on overseas trade is of incidental importance, self-correcting, easily financed.
I don't believe a word of it.’
Mr Heseltine then accused the Government of standing by while ‘our former pre-eminence as a manufacturing nation has been steadily eroded’.
Industry had become an ideological battleground, caught in the left-right crossfire.
‘Interest rates twice as high as those of our competitors choke off British investment.
Exchange rates held up artificially high by interest rates prejudice exports and encourage imports,’ he said.
Meanwhile, ministers rallied in a concerted effort to denounce rumours of a rift between Mr Lawson and Margaret Thatcher.
Cecil Parkinson, regarded as a potential successor to Mr Lawson at the Exchequer, said in a BBC television interview: ‘You heard the Prime Minister last night say very clearly and openly that she and the Chancellor are in total agreement and that she has every confidence in him.
‘Now I would ask you to measure what she says against rumours and speculation.
She's spoken out very clearly and said that those rumours are baseless.’
As for the Chancellor himself, Mr Parkinson said: ‘I think he has both the backbone and the brains and the determination to see us through this difficulty.’
But yesterday's Daily Mail said, under the front-page headline ‘This Bankrupt Chancellor,’ that Mr Lawson had betrayed the people and his party; had reneged on monetarism; and should go.
Although conference representatives seemed muted in their applause for Kenneth Baker, the party chairman, when he defended water privatisation, they responded well to his support for Mr Lawson's increase in interest rates.
Mr Baker was applauded when he said: ‘He did not shrink from doing what was right…
Some people said he was going to postpone it until after our party conference.
Such an act would have been deceitful and irresponsible.’
Viewpoint: Lawson suffers for Thatcher's hatred of EMS
By MATTHEW SYMONDS
RONALD REAGAN'S ability to escape blame for his frequent lapses from even basic competence earned him the nickname ‘the Teflon President’.
Mr Reagan pulled off his political con-trick through a mixture of calculating charm and genuine niceness.
Margaret Thatcher is working hard to become a ‘Teflon Prime Minister’.
But in her case the technique employed is a great deal less attractive — it is to blame everyone but herself when things are going wrong and to make scapegoats out of able colleagues.
When the Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, addresses the Tory party conference this morning, he will know that despite the appearance of support from the lady at his side, it she who is almost single-handedly responsible for the undermining of his policy and his prestige.
There is no reason to suppose that Mrs Thatcher took any pleasure from the Daily Mail's attempt to destroy her Chancellor earlier this week.
But it is she who has created an atmosphere in which it is possible for her most senior minister to be publicly rubbished while she escapes without blemish or stain.
It is one thing for dissident ministers to buck Cabinet responsibility and risk the sack.
It is another for the Prime Minister to distance herself from the policies of the government of which she is head.
Let us be clear about the causes of our present economic travail and where the blame lies.
The Chancellor is not without fault.
He made an error of judgement, albeit one which is understandable, when he pumped additional liquidity into the system following the stock market crash of October 1987.
He believed that recession was a more immediate enemy than inflation and acted accordingly.
He then compounded that error six months later when his undeclared policy of shadowing the German mark, at a time when sterling was in high demand, resulted in a reduction of interest rates unwarranted by domestic conditions.
Mr Lawson's mistake was that when formal monetary targeting broke down because of the impossibility of finding any measure of money which bore an accurate relationship with nominal demand, he thought that he could use the exchange rate as an informal target.
He hoped that the markets would see that he had tied sterling to the Deutschmark and that they would realise that this meant a commitment to achieving German-style price stability.
He also hoped that success would build an unanswerable case for membership of the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System, which he believed had become vital.
There were three fatal flaws to the Chancellor's strategy.
The first was that because the exchange rate target was not explicit it was ultimately not credible.
The second was that by shadowing the mark outside the ERM, sterling was denied the protection afforded by the combined reserves of the other member countries.
The third was that when Mrs Thatcher concluded that the way was being prepared for full membership of the EMS, she was able to destroy the shadowing strategy by loudly denying its existence.
Since the summer of last year we have been living with the consequences of Mrs Thatcher's unreasoned dislike of the ERM.
She repeatedly says that inflation is too high and that its reduction must be the Government's overriding priority.
She has the evidence of her own experience that the achievement of low inflation through monetary discipline is not something at which either the British Treasury or the Bank of England excels.
She would not dispute the fact that, by contrast, the Bundesbank is very good indeed at it, nor that since inflation-prone countries, such as France and Italy, joined the Deutschmark-dominated ERM their inflation rates have been forced down to German levels.
Yet a combination of gut anti-European prejudice and some strange part-ideological, part-mystical belief in a largely bogus economic sovereignty (witness the events of last week) prevents her from taking the one step which would give credibility to the fight against inflation.
The direct results of the Prime Minister's aversion to the EMS are: interest rates which are higher than is needed to take the heat out of the economy; an incipient sterling crisis; the prospect of recession; jittery financial markets waiting in vain for a clear signal about the direction of policy; poisoned relationships with some of her most senior colleagues and Tory MPs who increasingly fear that her arrogance and stubbornness will cost them their seats.
If the Government was serious about regaining the initiative it has so wretchedly lost, the Prime Minister would sanction the Chancellor to announce this morning that Britain is seeking to join the ERM at the earliest practical moment.
The effect would be as positive as it would be dramatic.
Government will spend 1bn pounds to smooth poll tax: Policy initiatives in advance of election reassure party rank and file
By COLIN HUGHES, COLIN BROWN and ANTHONY BEVINS
THE GOVERNMENT will spend more than £1bn before the next general election to take the sting out of the poll tax.
More than half the extra money — announced at the Conservative Party conference yesterday by David Hunt, the local government minister — will be spent in 1991/2, the last full financial year before the election.
The announcement, coming alongside the announcement of a major ‘green’ White Paper next year, signalled a clear decision by the Prime Minister to smooth the rough edges of Tory image and policy in the pre-election period.
Conference representatives responded with evident relief.
The extra cash, however, will only partly soften the impact of the introduction of the poll tax next year.
It will provide little help to many Tories, particularly in London, who will be fighting local elections next May.
Sir Rhodes Boyson, the MP for Brent North, who has led the Tory backbench campaign to wring more funds from the Treasury, argued that more money should have been provided for next year.
But John Heddle, who chairs the Conservative parliamentary environment committee, was confident it would be enough to ‘buy off’ most of those Tory MPs, particularly in marginal seats in the North and North-west of England, who have been putting intense pressure on ministers.
Roy Thomason, Tory chairman of the Association of District Councils, said: ‘This is just what's needed.’
He would be seeking assurances from ministers that administrative costs would be covered from central funds.
David Blunkett, Labour's local government spokesman, said the announcement meant that the Government had admitted defeat over the poll tax, and that the money was solely aimed at the next election.
Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment, later countered: ‘If the Labour Party are accusing us of an electoral bribe, it shows that they find it rather difficult to criticise us on any other grounds.’
He added that the measures announced yesterday would be the last change to the Government's poll tax plans.
‘These are the terms and conditions on which we will be introducing the community charge,’ he told a press conference at the Blackpool conference.
The Treasury has agreed, under pressure from the Cabinet last Thursday, to spend about £1.3bn over the next four years in two separate ways.
The first — which will start in April next year, and run for three years — is a new system of transitional protection for those households that stand to lose most from the abolition of domestic rates.
From the outset, no individual or couple will lose more than £3 a week from the changeover so long as their local council spends according to government assumptions.
Where the council ‘overspends’ government targets of an increase of no more than 8.3 per cent in spending next year, some poll tax payers may lose more.
The £156-a-year cap on losses is expected to help 6 million people in the first year of the poll tax.
It will also be specially targeted at pensioners and disabled people who do not currently pay rates, a decision which will probably add 400,000 pensioners to the beneficiaries.
That protection for individual losers will cost £300m next year, around £200m the year after, and £100m the year after that.
The other plank of the announcement is that, after the first year, better-off councils will no longer have to contribute to the ‘safety net’ originally designed to ease the impact on those areas of the country which are set to lose.
That will cost the Treasury £400m in the second year of the poll tax, £200m in the third, and £85m in the fourth.
The package will be extended to Wales, and retrospectively to Scotland, where the poll tax is already in force.
On the eve of Nigel Lawson's make-or-break speech to the Tory conference in Blackpool, an opinion poll last night suggested that 68 per cent of the voters had little confidence in his management of the economy.
The Guardian/ICM poll, taken last week when interest rates went up to 15 per cent, also found that Labour had maintained its 10 per cent lead over the Conservatives.
Pressure on the pound lightened yesterday as financial markets decided to suspend judgement until they heard what the Chancellor had to say, a mood which was reflected among Conservative representatives.
Mr Lawson returned to Blackpool from his Leicestershire home yesterday, and he will reply to a debate on the economy at around noon today.
The party will want him to resolve concern about high interest rates and mortgages, the weaker pound and higher inflation.
John Biffen, the former Leader of the Commons and Chief Secretary to the Treasury, said yesterday he found government policy ‘confusing’, and party nerves were not calmed by a fringe speech from Sir Geoffrey Howe, the deputy prime minister, which echoed some of Michael Heseltine's criticism on Tuesday of government policy and presentation.
The Conservative Conference: Patten launches Tories' green shift
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
A REVIEW of all government policy affecting the environment was announced yesterday by Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment, in a Conservative Party conference speech that flagged a shift in the Government's ideological stance.
The review will lead to a ‘green’ White Paper, planned for publication next summer and likely to provide the kernel of the Tories' next general election manifesto.
It will move the Government away from its emphasis on unfettered market forces, towards the need for intervention and regulation to protect people's quality of life.
A Cabinet committee, expected to be chaired by the Prime Minister, will be set up soon to look at the broadest possible scope of environmental policy, taking in road traffic, housing, agriculture, the rural economy, energy, and industrial development, as well as the obvious ‘green’ areas of policy such as planning, waste disposal and pollution.
The committee will therefore include ministers from most of the main Whitehall departments.
A strong Treasury presence is certain, because methods of placing a cost on the environment will be one of the key questions to be decided by the review.
It will, for example, decide whether the Government wants to adopt the approach advocated by Professor David Pearce — Mr Patten's main outside adviser — of taxing polluters.
One possibility is that the Government will advocate a ‘carbon’ tax on the burning of fossil fuels — oil, gas and coal.
But ministers would almost certainly prefer such a ‘green’ tax, designed to limit planetary damage, to be introduced according to international agreements, rather than by Britain alone.
The main shift, however, is in the new emphasis the White Paper is bound to place on intervention and regulation, words that have been regarded as mostly unpalatable in Tory conference debates over the past decade.
Mr Patten said that, just as there was ‘an overwhelming moral argument for prudent management of the economy’, so there was also ‘an ethical argument for prudent management of the environment’.
He added later, with Margaret Thatcher applauding alongside, that it was ‘for government to regulate on behalf of the community’.
Only one representative came to the podium to protest against the dilution of free-market principles.
Mr Patten spelled out his direction even more explicitly in a BBC radio interview, by linking his line to the Disraeli tradition of Toryism.
‘The market isn't enough, and I don't think that Tories have ever believed the market is enough.
We've always believed that the market has to be regulated; that's what Disraeli and Peel were all about in the nineteenth century,’ he said.
Green campaigners welcomed the tone and direction of Mr Patten's conference speech.
Jean Lambert of the Green Party said it was ‘pace-setting’, and added: ‘I wish him luck — though I am sceptical about his chances.’
De Klerk gives Mandela and ANC a growing role: South Africa's white leader, who yesterday met black churchmen, is already deferring to Nelson Mandela, John Carlin writes
By JOHN CARLIN
NOW THAT President F W de Klerk has announced the release of eight of the nine most prominent political prisoners in South Africa, the question is when — not if — the ninth, Nelson Mandela, will be freed.
And it is looking increasingly as if the date will be as much Mr Mandela's own decision as the government's.
For the most remarkable thing to have emerged from Mr de Klerk's decision is the degree to which Mr Mandela and the exiled African National Congress have become participants in government decision-making.
He has acquired an autonomy and influence staggering even by the standards of a country where anomalies are institutionalised.
Indications of Mr Mandela's growing political stature in the eyes of the government have been accumulating for some time.
One paragraph in Mr de Klerk's statement on Tuesday announcing the release of Mr Mandela's old associate Walter Sisulu provided the final piece of the jigsaw.
‘It is necessary to state,’ Mr de Klerk said, ‘that Mr Nelson Mandela is fully appraised of these proposed releases.
In fact, discussions were held with him and he considered yet again that his release is not now on the agenda.’
Mr de Klerk, so eager to placate Margaret Thatcher and international opinion generally, was saying, between the lines: ‘Look, I know you're asking for Mandela's release.
But what can I do?
He doesn't want to go out yet.’
Even if that is not the whole truth,— clearly, the government has a crucial say -Mr de Klerk has gone on record as recognising that Mr Mandela has leverage in government decisions.
The deference the government is showing him points to the recognition, finally, that Mr Mandela is the symbolic leader of the disenfranchised black majority, and that he is, accordingly, a key player.
By extension, so is the ANC, whose influence successive South African governments have attempted, frantically and quite without success, to wish away.
Mr Mandela, thus, has already begun on his own the negotiating process that Mr de Klerk's government claims to seek with black leaders.
Maybe without fully recognising it, the government has, in fact, started talking to the ANC — for if there is one thing Mr Mandela has made clear throughout his long incarceration, it is his unwavering allegiance to the movement, whose foremost leader he remains.
Mr Mandela's hand was discernible in the ANC negotiating proposal put out in August; in the successful campaign of mass protest before the 6 September white election; and in a silent scheme by some of the leaders of the black ‘homelands’ to flat-foot Mr de Klerk by publicly declaring that the country cannot be partitioned along racial and tribal lines.
The conclusion is irresistible that Mr Mandela is exploiting the government's growing dependence on him to extend his influence to the many black organisations whose adoptive leader he is.
Where there is possibly a meeting of minds between him and the government is in the desire not to release him into a political vacuum.
In the eyes of both, it would make sense not to have him roaming the country generating huge gatherings with a politically futile, and possibly violently anarchic, outcome.
Mr Mandela needs a ready-made negotiating structure in which he can play the decisive role that his authority requires.
Someone close to Mr Mandela described him yesterday as a chess player five moves ahead of anyone else in the game.
E German leaders set limit to reform
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
EAST GERMANY'S Communist leaders said last night they were prepared to discuss ways of improving life in their country.
But they flatly refused to relinquish their grip on power.
In a long statement read out on television after the evening news, the Politburo admitted for the first time that it was ‘not indifferent’ to the mass exodus of its people to West Germany.
It promised to discuss issues including better economic performance, ‘democratic togetherness’, better goods, opportunities to travel and a healthy environment, but rejected any idea of reforming the system.
There was no confirmation of an agency report that Erich Honecker, the East German leader, might resign, although he has postponed a planned visit to Denmark.
Until now Mr Honecker has rejected any idea of change, but Kurt Hager, 77, East Germany's oldest and most authoritative Communist ideologue, said yesterday that the party's immediate task was to work out ‘a precise idea as to how to bring about a necessary renewal’.
Further pressure came from Poland's announcement yesterday that it had stopped sending home East Germans who crossed the border illegally with the aim of reaching West Germany.
Teenagers happy at home
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
THE BRITISH teenager is happy at home and one in three do not want to leave the parental nest ever, according to a survey carried out by The Indy this week.
The weekly paper for the young and independent, published today, asked 500 12 to 15-year-olds how happy they were at home and 79 per cent said they did not want to leave before the age of 18.
This week's 20-page colour issue of The Indy also has a quiz for young people to test where their parents come on the embarrassment scale.
The paper also reports on the role of the police, talks to people who make a living out of trivia question machines and has an exclusive interview with Lenny Henry, in which he reveals his top jokes.
There are reviews of the latest films and the week's new records.
The Indy costs 40p and is available from all good newsagents this morning.
‘The Independent’ wins awards
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
For the third year running The Independent has been named overall sport pages winner in the national daily newspapers category of the Linotype-Printing World newspaper design awards.
The newspaper was yesterday also named joint winner, with the Bucks Free Press, of the 1989 Allen Hutt award for the outstanding use of photography throughout the newspaper.
The Independent was the overall national newspaper winner in 1988 and 1987.
Oliver Gillie, deputy editor of The Independent Magazine and formerly medical editor of the newspaper, won a special award for the paper's health page, in yesterday's first presentation of the Caroline Walker awards, created in memory of the campaigning nutritionist who died last year.