

Letter: Mourning delivery
From Ms SARAH COHEN
Sir: I note the new unpriced first-class postage stamps are black.
Are they in mourning for the first-class service?
Leading Article: The weight of a victim's evidence
From Ms SARAH COHEN
AN OLD BAILEY jury yesterday found PC Peter Anderson guilty of rape.
He was sentenced to seven years imprisonment by Mr Justice Jowitt.
The penalty was imposed primarily as a result of evidence provided by the victim and in spite of the tenor of the earlier summing-up by the judge who had told the jury that it was dangerous to convict on the evidence of an alleged victim alone.
Moreover Mr Justice Jowitt had spoken of the temptation on the part of women to ‘exaggerate or fabricate’ when questions of sexual misconduct were involved.
He did not apparently find it necessary to explain the reasons for this sexist-sounding conclusion.
Last week, in contrast, a Florida jury cleared a vagrant accused of the rape of a 22-year-old woman who had been snatched from a Fort Lauderdale restaurant car park while wearing a white mini-skirt and, so the jury was informed, no underwear.
The foreman was quoted as saying that the woman in question had shown ‘everything she had’.
She was ‘advertising for sex’ and therefore ‘deserved what she got’.
Without going into the detail of the Old Bailey case, two general points emerge from it and from the Florida case.
They involve the authority to be given to the unsubstantiated evidence of a woman in a rape case and the question of her character, real or assumed.
On the former point yesterday's Old Bailey judgment says a lot about contemporary British social mores.
The accused, a 40-year-old police officer with a wife and a recently discarded mistress, claimed that the woman in question, to whom he had casually given a lift, offered him sex in return.
The victim said that the policeman had forced himself on her.
Counsel for the prosecution invited the jury to decide between the suggestion that the officer had ‘gone to the very depth of deceit’ by imposing his attention on the woman or whether she had made ‘a wicked and false allegation’.
Given this stark choice, the jury decided that the policeman had been deceitful rather than that the woman had been ‘wicked and false’ in her evidence.
The Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police might care to ponder why it is that juries increasingly dismiss the sworn evidence of his officers in favour of those accusing them of gross impropriety.
More fundamental however, is the assumption that women who wear mini-skirts, accept lifts from strange men late at night or even offer casual sex in return for a ride, are therefore somehow inviting rape.
They are not, in the immortal phrase of the Florida juryman, ‘asking for it’.
Provocative dress and casual promiscuity (which are by no means the same thing) may be abhorrent to juries in the southern states of America or to judges in this country.
But they do not constitute invitations to sexual assault, least of all by officers of the law.
It may be ill-advised of a young woman dressed in a titillating manner to accept lifts from a stranger, just as it would be foolish for the owner of an expensive motor car to leave his vehicle parked overnight in an ill-lit side-street.
Yet such lack of judgement does not justify the thief who breaks into the car and steals the radio or the hooligan who takes off on a joy ride.
Citizens going about their lawful occasion merit the support of the police and the courts, not their moral disapprobation.
Miles Kington: Around the M25 in Eighty Days
By MILES KINGTON
AT RONNIE SCOTT's Club last night I was chatting to some of the members, insofar as one could hear one's self talk above the noise of the musicians, when the subject of London transport came up.
Someone said London would seize up before Christmas.
Someone else said it had already seized up.
Nonsense, said I; it was still perfectly easy to get around London.
‘In less than 80 days?’ said somebody.
There was laughter.
Before I knew where I was, I had been wagered a great deal of money that I could not do it, and shortly before midnight I was leaving the hallowed portals of Ronnie Scott's Club.
Ahead of me lay an historic mission: to circumnavigate London using hired transport, and return within 80 days.
I took a taxi home and went to sleep.
DAY TWO.
I have packed and bought my maps.
It should not be too hard.
I aim to get a bus to Heathrow, then circle south from there along the M25.
First of all, I must get to a bus stop that serves Heathrow, which means heading towards Kensington and the Bayswater Road.
From here, that means a short cab ride, and I phone a mini-cab firm whose card I find in one of my pockets, the Ace Express Super Silver Service.
DAY THREE.
The mini-cab phone finally answers.
A man says: ‘Hold on, I've just got in, be right with you…
‘. After another 10 minutes he is with me.
‘Right,’ he says, ‘a nice cup of tea, I was dying for that, what can I do for you?’.
I explain.
No problem.
He rings off.
An hour later nobody has arrived.
I am reduced to sitting staring out of the window with nothing much to look at but a young man, presumably a salesman or political canvasser, patiently going from door to door down the street.
I am glad I don't have to work door-to-door.
My doorbell rings.
I rush downstairs with my luggage.
But it is only the young man.
‘Whatever it is, I don't want it,’ I tell him.
‘I'm just waiting for a cab.’
‘You must be the passenger I'm looking for,’ he says, studying a bit of paper.
‘They didn't give me a house number.’
Ten minutes later we're off.
Eight minutes later we're lost.
He hasn't got a map and has never been to Bayswater before.
On closer questioning, I find he has never driven a cab before; he is an economics student filling in for his brother.
His brother has never driven a cab before either; this was going to be his first day.
Philosophical question: can you actually fill in for someone who has never done the job?
‘Why don't you take me back to my house and I'll try some other way?’
I suggest.
‘I think that is a very good idea,’ he agrees.
The return to my house is strained by the thought that he still has not the faintest idea where he is going.
Suddenly, I emit a cry of recognition.
Yes, after we had given up all intention of going there, we have arrived.
I pay him.
I await the bus.
It comes.
It is full of Americans.
So is the next.
But the third lets me on, and I am finally en route to Heathrow.
The bus stops again at the Kensington Hilton, a hotel so much on the edge of Kensington that had it been built 10 feet to the west, they should have called it the Shepherds Bush Hilton.
It is much frequented by aircraft crews and the sort of businessman who jogs instead of having breakfast, and you'd be lucky to meet anyone in there whose native language was English.
All this I learn from the bus driver who chats to me as we wait for the traffic ahead to move.
‘Blimey,’ he says, as we find ourselves still sitting outside the Hilton after 20 minutes.
‘I've never known it this bad.
Are you going to Terminal One?’
‘No.’
He gives me what the French call a curious regard and asks me to explain myself.
‘I am going round London in 80 days,’ I say, ‘and intend to pick up a local bus at Heathrow’.
‘Then you can get out of my coach,’ he says.
‘This is for bona fide air travellers only.’
DAY FOUR.
All day at home, planning a better route.
Still 76 days to go.
It must be possible.
More soon of this exciting saga, which is due to be turned into a TV epic or will be if we can fix up a deal with anyone.
Leading Article: A fracas which demeans Europe
By MILES KINGTON
THE European Community has the parliament it deserves.
As long as the latter enjoys only modest powers, the election of its members will not be taken with full seriousness.
Last June's vote led to the creationof a 17-strong block called the European Right, consisting of members of Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front from France, the Republicans from West Germany (led by a former Waffen-SS officer, Franz Schonhuber), and a Belgian from the wilder shores of Flemish nationalism.
Given the appalling historical baggage which the European far right carries with it, it is not surprising that their inclusion in the Strasbourg assembly has begun to create serious difficulties.
The last two days' scenes of disarray, including some fisticuffs, caused by the exclusion of far-right MEPs from the leadership of two delegations to foreign parliaments, are demeaning to the European Parliament, and bode ill.
Under the assembly's system of apportioning positions on committees and on the 26 standing delegations to foreign parliaments, mathematical logic made it inevitable that far-right members would receive a few sensitive posts.
It was bad enough that a National Front MEP should emerge as chairman of the delegation to the Swiss parliament; worse still that one of Mr Schonhuber's men should be vice-chairman of the delegation to Israel's Knesset.
The trouble broke out when other party leaders voted to change the rules and thus enable delegation members to elect their chairmen (as committee members have long been able to do).
Before long West Germany's Bundestag may confront the same problem: the federal elections late next year could give the Republicans enough votes to achieve representation — and not necessarily at the expense of Hans-Dietrich Genscher's Free Democrats.
For the voice of resurgent German nationalism to enjoy such a platform would send shivers through continental Europe.
Even if Republican members could somehow be excluded from sensitive parliamentary posts, their presence would embarrass both the Bundestag and the Federal Republic as a whole.
The chief danger from the resurgence of the far right in Western Europe lies not in the likelihood of its achieving any real influence, but in the reactions to it of centre right parties.
The ambiguity of Jacques Chirac's attitude to the National Front helped destroy his bid for the Presidency last year, and with it the credibility of the opposition to President Mitterrand.
The leadership of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Bavarian partners, the Christian Social Union, is now making a similar mistake.
Made jittery by the successes of the Republicans, the CSU is pandering to the far right by questioning the legitimacy of Germany's post-Second World War frontiers.
In Britain the 15 per cent scored by the Greens in last June's European elections had a salutary effect on both main parties.
But in West Germany, Republican successes pushed the centre-right government towards more illiberal policies.
In France, the Communist Party appeals to reactionary working-class prejudices almost as strenuously as does Mr Le Pen.
If European Parliament elections continue to be treated semi-frivolously, such extremists as Mr Le Pen will be over-represented in Strasbourg.
Letter: Statistical integrity
From Dr JANET LEWIS and Mr ROBERT MARKLESS
Sir: The Royal Statistical Society's concern ('Moves to monitor use of statistics by Government', 9 October) has long been shared by the social science community in this country.
Last year the Association of Learned Societies in the Social Sciences and the Association of Social Research Organisations set up the Social Science Forum (SSF) to campaign on issues that were affecting social scientists.
We launched a manifesto promoting positive aspects of our field, including a call for a clear statement of principle for the collection and use of official statistics.
Later this year we will be publishing a more comprehensive paper on this topic outlining what we feel needs to be done to ensure the integrity of official statistics, but in general we believe that there are three principles: 1.
Decisions about data collection should be determined by the need for an informed society as well as for the concerns of government; 2.
All statistics collected with public funds should be in the public domain; 3.
Britain should conform to international standards.
The SSF supports the call for the establishment of an independent body which would monitor the use of statistics by any government and would establish a set of acceptable principles for their collection and use.
We know from our informal discussions with politicians of all shades of opinion that we have a long way to go, but many have been sympathetic to our aims.
As more and more concerned organisations make their voice heard, the greater is our chance for a more informed society.
Letter: The goals of the universities are the crucial issue, not the cost
From Professor Sir GRAHAM HILLS
Sir: Shame on you, Ngaio Crequer, for deserting the cause of educational reform (5 October).
I expected better from someone half my age.
Just because you had the good fortune to pay nothing for your very expensive university education does little to justify a system of higher education which, at the same time, excluded 85 per cent of your age group from the privileged position you evidently enjoyed.
It really is not good enough for you to preen yourself in this way while Britain continues to suffer from the consequences of a largely uneducated workforce.
In effect, you are like all those in the lifeboat — cosy, complacent and unwilling to give up their privileged position.
You may not think that access cards for greater access are a good idea, but what are you proposing should be done to double the age-participation rate in this country?
If your only answer is to pour more money on the problem then I would direct your attention to the parlous condition of other more deserving sectors of our society.
If your answer is simply ‘lobbying harder for increased funds for higher education’, then please look back over 10 or 15 years to see whether that is remotely likely to succeed.
Letter: The goals of the universities are the crucial issue, not the cost
From Dr MICHAEL COLLINS
Sir: In the debate about the funding of higher education, it is essential that the purpose of the universities and of the education that they provide should not be neglected.
It is one thing to demand efficiency and the just use of public resources; it is quite another to impose conditions where the universities cannot provide what the nation requires.
The nation should not need to accept lower levels of achievement among all its graduates in order to widen access to higher education.
A university education should be characterised by the fact that one ‘learns to learn’ rather than‘learns by being taught’.
It may be fashionable to decry Robbins — and many of the universities' problems stem from the rapid expansion of the 1960s which followed his report — but his pertinent description of the aims of higher education is no less valid today than when it was written.
To quote: It is the distinguishing characteristic of a healthy higher education that, even where it is concerned with practical techniques, it imparts them on a plane of generality that makes possible their application to many problems.
To achieve this necessarily takes time and it is thus the means and goals which we should examine today rather than the setting first of arbitrary (financial) parameters.
Some undergraduates seek simply to broaden their horizons and develop analytical skills; others wish to acquire a more specialised knowledge to be used in a subsequent career.
Why should both groups follow the same course?
And should we introduce a common core as in American universities?
As the educators of a larger student body, we should expect to ensure that arts graduates are numerate, scientists literate, and both fluent in a foreign language.
One option is to have ‘basic’ degree courses, followed by an extra year which would be taken by those wishing ultimately to pursue a career related to their chosen subject.
The teaching of specialist options is relatively expensive; this might enable universities to maintain intellectual standards at a lower unit cost for the majority of undergraduates while still serving those who need more advanced knowledge.
The debate should not, however, centre on cost, but should hinge on the ultimate benefit to the nation.
One assertion which has been made in support of student loans is that a student should be prepared to take a loan in respect of his or her enhanced earning capacity as a graduate.
But, if this argument is valid, then taxation ensures that the Government is itself a very substantial beneficiary.
Furthermore, graduates can be expected to make fewer demands on the public purse in later life.
The education of the nation is no less important than its defence.
The Universities Funding Council has an ‘unfettered right to provide advice (to the Secretary of State), whenever it wants, on any aspect of university education’.
The vice-chancellors should enlist its support, but the universities must first have a clear view of what is needed in the future, and the model need not be uniform.
While it is a major function of universities to educate, this cannot be taken in isolation.
Robbins observed also that the world, not higher education alone, will suffer if ever they cease to regard (the advancement of knowledge) as one of their major functions.
This observation again is timeless, and the burden of education must never be such as to place this role at risk.
Letter: No room for fantasy
From Ms RUTH VALENTINE
Sir: Nicholas Baker's perception of adoption (letter, 10 October) perpetuates the destructive secrecy and denial that afflict all the people involved in traditional adoption practices.
The birth parents, adoptive parents and the child itself are at present all encouraged by the law, the professionals and common prejudice to deny the reality of their situation.
Under this pressure, all ordinary human ambivalence and doubt is outlawed: adopters become guilty or angry when the relationship does not proceed according to the fantasy or reality of ordinary parenting; children suppress their fantasies of an alternative life with birth parents — or hold on to that fantasy all the more tenaciously — and birth mothers, in particular, are pushed into a denial of their own experience and feelings.
Does Mr Baker really believe that such dishonesty and repression provide a ‘strong family background’?
Adoption is hard, and everyone involved has disappointments, longings and anger that cannot easily be dealt with.
But the only way to start, and to prevent those neglected feelings souring the endeavour, is to be open and accepting of them.
A child's need to understand its situation is not going to destroy the new relationship: trying to live out the fantasy that this is exactly the same as a birth relationship may well do.
Letter: Channel link safety
From Mr A. B. MARTIN
Sir: I am surprised that Mr Prescott did not contact me to air his concerns on the independence of the Channel Tunnel Safety Authority (12 October).
As the article explains, Mr Bailey's inquiry was made on behalf of the Department of Transport which shares his services with the authority.
Neither I nor any other member of the Authority knew, or needed to know, that he had made the inquiry in question.
The Authority necessarily has a close relationship with Eurotunnel.
We have to examine and discuss in great detail its proposals for an immensely complex engineering project.
However, ‘cosy’ is not the word I or, I suspect, Eurotunnel would use to describe our relationship.
All that is of little consequence.
What is important is to tell your readers that the Safety Authority is quite independent of the influence of Eurotunnel and of the Government when it comes to the advice we give on safety standards of the tunnel and its railway system.
Our primary duty is to the travelling public.
We recognise this and we are determined to achieve a transport system which is as safe as it can be made while still remaining effective.
We have been given the status, resources and expertise to do so — on both sides of the Channel.
Letter: Of Pharisees and Philistines
From Rabbi Dr FRANK HELLNER
Sir: I fail to understand the somewhat confused parallel that the Ven William Paley (letter, 5 October) has sought to draw between the Pharisees and Jews on the one hand and the Philistines and Arabs on the other.
Permit me to set the record straight.
The Pharisees were Jews.
The Philistines, however, were a non-Semitic, Aegean, sea-faring people who settled along the coastal region of Canaan (not Palestine as he suggests) sometime in the twelfth century BC.
The term ‘Palestine’ was coined over 1,000 years later by the Romans who renamed the country after the ancient Philistines in an attempt to de-Judaise the Holy Land and expunge all Jewish references.
The Philistines have nothing to do with the Arabs, a Semitic people, who invaded the Holy Land from Arabia in the seventh century.
Letter: The freedom to question received wisdom
From Mr JOHN HYAMS
Sir: Shabbir Akhtar (10 October) himself makes what he might call a pardonable error in thinking that to liberals — genuine ones, not the compromisers so regretfully limned in John Torode's article (3 October)-freedom of speech is an absolute value.
Belief in its importance is in fact a consequence of the recognition that people, including priests, are fallible, so that the right to challenge their views is a necessary condition of arriving at valid opinions.
It is reinforced by the further recognition that what is now valid may well not be in the future, and that some people see earlier than others when changes in accepted opinions and values are needed.
These people are entitled to use ridicule as a weapon to provoke such folk as the sweetly unreasonable Mr Akhtar and the rest of us into wondering whether our beliefs, including our most deeply held convictions, are actually tenable.
Since our beliefs strongly influence our actions, getting them right is socially very important, and therefore the freedom to question received wisdom, especially in fields that affect the behaviour of large numbers of people is, indeed, in the liberal view, a hugely important means, if not a vital precondition, of ensuring that ‘the interests of weaker individuals and groups’ are not harmed by ‘the irresponsible attitudes and actions of the more powerful’.
All that liberals cannot tolerate is pretension to infallibility.
Mr Akhtar's ex-cathedra statement that The Satanic Verses and The Life of Brian should be ‘removed from public knowledge’ because their particular mode of subversiveness is not, as he puts it, ‘right’proves the regrettable gulf between religious fundamentalism and the requirements of a secular society like ours.
I suppose we have to be grateful that Mr Akhtar grudgingly refrains from asking us to ban the works of Voltaire, which seems a major concession from him.
One suspects he would not make it were Islam a majority religion in Britain.
Letter: Bull Ring plans
From Mr JOE HOLYOAK
Sir: Why on earth do architectural critics maintain the fiction that large collective schemes are the creation of individual architects?
Jonathan Glancey's article on the Bull Ring (11 October), while covering the issues excellently, and clearly sympathetic to our cause, misleads your readers in implying that the People's Plan is all my work.
The true significance of the People's Plan is that it is a model of democratic participation, challenging the authoritarianism of the developer's proposal.
It is by and for citizens, representing the real interests of the people of Birmingham.
Letter: Mysterious lines
From Mr CHRISTOPHER MORGAN
Sir: Thank you for the photograph (10 October) showing the ‘railway’ cash till at Grouts drapery shop in Palmers Green.
I was reminded of a similar mechanism at Evan Roberts department store which fascinated me as a boy in Cardiff during the early Fifties.
Dylan Thomas immortalised such machinery in Draper Mog Edwards' soliloquy in Under Milk Wood: I have come to take you away to my emporium on the hill, where the change hums on wires.
The allusion must mystify younger readers.
Letter: Theatrical survival
From Mr ROBERT BRECKMAN
Sir: In extolling the virtues of the one-man show, Mark Steyn (7 October) misses the real point of their popularity — cost.
With the theatre now under financial siege, these are the only shows now possible to make ends meet.
One only has to look at the diminishing casts in productions all over the country.
The proliferation of these diminutive shows will soon be in inverse proportion to the theatres still open to receive them.
Survival is now an art form.
Letter: Vote-losing courage
From Mr DAVID WOLFSON
Sir: The Chancellor's decision to raise interest rates yet higher has today been defended by Mr Baker, the Conservative Party chairman, as ‘courageous and right’.
Might I remind Mr Baker of Sir Humphrey's wise advice to his minister?
A controversial decision may cost you votes, but a courageous decision will lose you the election.
Letter: Bottled water on the Tories' platform
From Mr LES FREEMAN
Sir: How sad that on the day details were announced of the incentives available to investors in water authorities the Government gave virtually a vote of no confidence in the industry's product.
Only polished bottles of water appeared before Mrs Thatcher and her colleagues on the platform when the Conservative Party conference opened in Blackpool.
It would have been cheaper — and certainly better PR — if speakers had been offered jugs of iced water, the liquid being supplied by North West Water.
Hasn't anyone told Mrs Thatcher that bottled water can cost a thousand times as much as water from the tap?
And surely her ministers have convinced her that tap water really is safe and wholesome to drink.
Lawson's luck meets its nemesis
By PETER KELLNER
MOST crises have three components.
What is remarkable about the present sterling crisis is that the Government — and for all practical purposes, that means the Prime Minister — has declined to tackle any of them.
The three components are political, tactical and strategic.
Each component raises a question needing a clear answer.
Who is in charge?
What immediate decision is needed?
What goal is being attempted?
Those issues all interact, of course; like those fiendish three-dimensional puzzles that children can often do more easily than adults, the pieces have to be put together simultaneously, or the whole thing falls apart.
But it is possible to dissect most crises and examine each component in turn.
In September 1976 when — as this week — Blackpool's Winter Gardens played host to a government in turmoil, James Callaghan and Denis Healey had to confront what became known as the IMF crisis.
From the outset, Prime Minister and Chancellor stood shoulder-to-shoulder.
They quickly extinguished any hopes, or fears, that anybody else in the Cabinet or the party would divert them.
That prevented a potentially violent political explosion.
Their tactical decision was equally clear: to borrow money from the International Monetary Fund.
And strategically, Mr Healey cut public spending and brought the domestic economy back into balance.
A similar analysis applies to April 1982, when Argentina invaded the Falklands.
Lord Carrington resigned as Foreign Secretary, pre-empting a distracting row about who was to blame, leaving the Prime Minister unambiguously in charge of policy.
An immediate tactical decision was taken to send the Task Force to the South Atlantic.
A clear objective was set and adhered to: recapture the islands.
The point of those brief excursions down memory lane is not to laud Mr Healey's public spending cuts or to justify war-war rather than jaw-jaw.
Both episodes offered alternative options.
What is hard to dispute, however, is that the Callaghan government in 1976 and the Thatcher government in 1982 managed dangerous crises with care and skill.
They tackled their political, tactical and strategic problems swiftly and directly; and, incidentally, their poll ratings rose strongly.
Contrast then with now.
Politically, it is impossible to tell who is in charge of economic policy.
For almost 18 months Margaret Thatcher and Nigel Lawson have been at loggerheads over sterling.
The consequence has been to diminish the credibility of both; for nobody can have any confidence that what either of them says one week will still be government policy the next.
In his speech yesterday to the Conservative Party conference, Mr Lawson did nothing to resolve the uncertainty.
He said: ‘I will continue to take whatever action is needed, however unpopular it may be, to keep our economy sound and strong.’
That ‘continue'is especially rich.
It implies that the Prime Minister has permitted him the freedom ‘to take whatever action is needed’ in the past.
This is manifestly not the case.
Mr Lawson's words might have reassured the financial markets had he carried conviction as a man in complete charge of short-term economic policy; instead he sounded faintly ridiculous.
Few can have been surprised that the markets reacted by marking sterling down.
Political paralysis has prevented the evolution of either clear tactics or a coherent strategy.
The main tactical issue is when to join the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
There is a case for going in; there is a case for staying out; there is even a case for setting clear, robust conditions for when to go in.
Mrs Thatcher and Mr Lawson tell us that government policy is the last of these: Britain will become a full member of the EMS when France and Italy abolish exchange controls and when our inflation rate is similar to that of other EMS members.
It is a policy that has signally failed to persuade either the financial markets or the rest of the European Community, mainly because neither Mrs Thatcher nor Mr Lawson shows any serious sign of being persuaded by it.
They honour it in the manner of warring tribes observing a precarious truce, waiting nervously for hostilities to reopen.
At that moment the terms of the truce between the Downing Street neighbours will be conveniently forgotten.
It makes as much sense to bet on the survival of the Government's EMS policy as to look for tranquility in west Beirut.
To the failure of politics and tactics must be added the most serious shortcoming of all: the absence of a defensible strategy for lifting the British economy out of its present crisis.
This seems mainly to be because Mrs Thatcher and Mr Lawson — for once in agreement — refuse to admit the existence of the crisis.
Politicians are always at their most vulnerable when they believe their own propaganda.
In his speech yesterday Mr Lawson dismissed sterling's troubles as ‘turbulence’ of the kind that grown-ups like him, who have seen a thing or two over the years, expect from time to time.
He observed that the economy had expanded steadily since 1981, and repeated something that Kenneth Baker had said earlier in the week: that there was ‘no precedent for eight years of sustained growth’.
That is nonsense.
The economy grew steadily for 11 years from 1946 until 1957, and then for 15 years from 1958 until 1973.
In peacetime, growth is the normal condition of the economy.
Besides, it is playing fast and loose with the statistics to take 1981 as the baseline for the Government's claims.
There are three reasons for this.
First, it omits the first two years of the Thatcher government's record, when output fell 3.5 per cent.
Second, no respectable economist derives a trend by comparing a trough year (1981) with a peak (1988): sensible figures can only be obtained by contrasting peak-with-peak or trough-with-trough.
Third, even growth rates obtained by comparing similar points in successive economic cycles must be treated with caution if the end-year shows a massive balance of payments deficit.
Any fool can boost spending by taking out an overdraft; no bank manager would deduce from such figures that the same growth could, or should, be extended indefinitely.
Mr Lawson boasts that between 1981 and 1988, Britain's growth rate of 3.5 per cent a year was the highest in Europe.
But if the full peak-to-peak period, 1979 to 1988, is counted, our average growth rate is just 2.1 per cent— the same as for the OECD countries as a whole.
If last year's consumer boom had not been allowed to boil over, our nine-year growth rate would have been below two per cent.
True, there have been some achievements.
Productivity in manufacturing has risen faster than in the past.
Some distortions in the tax system have been removed.
But the costs — to the poor, to the quality of public services, to the trade balance — have been considerable.
Now hubris has been succeeded by nemesis.
Mr Lawson's luck has run out.
He and Mrs Thatcher are having to face up to a crisis they have made worse by trying to deny it, and now they cannot agree on who should do what or how or why.
World View: So close yet still far apart: Timothy Garton Ash reflects on what it means when Germans start behaving like Poles, and Poles like Germans
By TIMOTHY GARTON ASH
What is the difference between Poles and Germans?
The Germans can make any system work.
The Poles can destroy any system.
Such humorous generalisations about ‘national character’ are, of course, deeply suspect, and will soon be banned by Unesco.
Yet in our bones we all know that there is such a thing as national character, even if only a fool or a racist would attempt to define its precise ingredients.
We all exclaim ‘how very French’, ‘how marvellously Irish’ or ‘how ridiculously English’, and we know what we mean.
In the same way there are qualities we recognise as quintessentially ‘Polish’ or ‘German’.
And these qualities contrast.
It is hard to think of two other nations in Europe which are so close and yet, still, despite many noble efforts on both sides, so very far apart.
In the last month, however, our expectations have been disconcerted.
On the streets of Leipzig and Dresden Germans have begun — just begun — to behave like Poles.
In the economic ministries of the new Polish government, in workshops and backyards, Poles have begun — just begun — to behave like Germans.
Germans have stood up for freedom.
Poles have sat down for efficiency.
And the rest of Europe must cry: three cheers for both!
The crisis of the GDR is a novelty in the Eastern Europe of the 1980s.
For it is in essence a political crisis without an economic crisis.
In Poland, Hungary and the Soviet Union, the dramatic political developments were directly precipitated by economic crisis.
The story has then been one of the dynamic interaction of politics and economics, with political change affecting the economy — so far mainly for the worse — and economic crisis sharpening the political struggle.
In the GDR, by contrast, one cannot talk of ‘economic crisis’ in the sense that one can use that term for Poland, the Soviet Union, and even for Hungary.
True, real growth has been slowing.
The deferred tasks of modernisation are accumulating.
Shortages have got worse.
Relatively speaking, the West looks more attractive than ever.
But it was not economic distress that precipitated the present crisis.
Of course Western prosperity is one reason why East Germans want out.
But it is wrong and deeply offensive to suggest — as Robert Maxwell recently did after meeting with Erich Honecker — that this is the main reason they are fleeing.
We have hundreds of testimonies from escapees who left behind a nice flat, two cars, country cottages, yachts…
No, what they want is perfectly expressed in the simple banner held up during the Leipzig demonstrations: ‘Freiheit!!!’
The East German crisis — or should one say simply the German crisis?— is thus essentially a political crisis, and the answers to it, if there are answers, must also be political.
The Polish crisis, by contrast, is now essentially economic.
For almost exactly nine years, from the late summer of 1980 to the late summer of 1989, Poland lived through a political crisis.
That political crisis both drove and was driven by the economic crisis: but again and again it emerged that the key lay in politics.
In attempting to influence political developments in Poland, the West was reduced to using precisely those instruments that the Bonn government (and Social Democratic opposition) is now belatedly attempting to apply to the GDR: first, a symbolic politics recognising the Church and opposition as partners no less important than the communist authorities who claim to be, but are not, identical with ‘the state’ and, second, the conditional offer of economic help (politely called ‘co-operation’) as a goad to political change — neither pure ‘carrot’nor simple ‘stick’, but a carrot-cum-stick.
These are crude instruments.
But in such circumstances they are all we have.
Despite the chaotic and inconsistent way in which they were applied to Poland, they had, on balance, an ultimately positive effect.
In Poland today, however, we face a quite new situation.
The basic political crisis has, in effect, been resolved.
Government, Church and Solidarity are united in the person of the Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki.
Of course there are endless inconsistencies, tensions and conflict.
Of course there is chaos.
Yet politically the new constellation arrived at by elections and negotiations over the past six months — a strong presidency held by Jaruzelski, a Solidarity-led ‘grand coalition’ government, a real parliament -is somehow working.
But while all this was being thrashed out, over six months, over nine years, the economy was getting worse, and worse, and worse.
The challenge to the West here is thus,— at the moment — primarily economic.
For the West, as for the Poles, there was a time for obstinate political defiance.
That time is past.
To adapt Edmund Burke: the age of chivalry is gone.
That of economists and calculators has succeeded; and the glory of Europe hangs in the balance.
Almost as soon as he was nominated, Mr Mazowiecki said ‘I am looking for my Ludwig Erhard’.
The German model.
And just a few weeks ago the man he found, Deputy Prime Minister Leszek Balcerowicz electrified the finance ministers of the developed world with a seven-page plan to ‘transform the Polish economy into a market economy’.
No one has tried to do this before.
No one knows whether it can be done.
How do you turn a clapped-out Lada into a Mercedes while driving down the motorway?
The wise men from Harvard fly in and tell you: ‘It will have to get worse before it gets better’.
But the man in the street will say: how can it get worse?
And: why should it get better?
The idea of the ‘big plunge’ is that you rapidly create an economic environment in which producers will spontaneously respond to demand, and the change of profit.
But beside all the problems confronted by such strategies in, say, Latin America, there is a whole set of even more basic structural problems specific to a post-war East European ‘socialist’ economy: the lack of capital, real money or real banks.
And beside the basic structural problems there is a further set of problems connected with such an economy in crisis: energy shortages, or assembly-lines standing idle for want of one or two spare parts.
One can all too easily imagine a situation in which, within a few months, Poland will have the worst of all worlds: hyper-inflation and acute shortages and high unemployment, all at the same time.
According to Lech Walesa, one can also imagine people exploding in sheer desperation — tomorrow.
Faced with this unprecedented, unique and, above all, fearsomely complex challenge, the West is just beginning to come up with an unprecedented, unique, and also fearsomely complex response.
In the end it may be a Marshall Plan in scale, but not in kind.
Already in July, the Group of Seven (G7) top industrial nations asked the EC to co-ordinate the efforts of the 24 member nations of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)— a hitherto unheard-of construction.
Some food aid is already going in.
The European Investment Bank will make available up to Ecu 1bn (£685m) for loans to Poland and Hungary — another first.
The traditional multilateral institutions, IMF and World Bank, are gearing up for a major contribution.
The British government has established a small fund for bringing the ‘know-how of pluralism’ to Poland: in management, accountancy, banking, local government, tourism and even (God help us) journalism.
As so often with British policy, it is the right thing, but not enough of it — although Nigel Lawson promised in Washington that we would do more.
The French have offered modest new credits.
The Americans have announced food-aid, know-how and investment support schemes, and $200m of credit which may go towards the $1bn ‘stabilisation loan’ requested by the Polish government.
Much of this is conditional on an IMF seal of approval.
Everyone is waiting for the Japanese.
Everything depends on everything else.
But in all this vast, slow, cacophonous orchestra, the most important single player is West Germany.
The Kohl government is profoundly aware of this responsibility.
Despite some domestic political resistance — from its own right-wing rather than the opposition — it is determined to produce a major ‘package’ for the Chancellor's visit to Poland later this year.
To its critics, it can argue that this is in the German interest in three ways.
In the short term, it will secure rights and recognition for the remaining German minority in Poland.
In the medium term, a success for the attempted transformation in Poland would be a very major encouragement for fundamental reform in the GDR.
In the long term, all West Germany's Western neighbours and partners would feel a great deal more relaxed about a coming-together of the two Germanies if her immediate neighbours to the East were capitalist democracies, themselves gradually integrating into a larger Western European community.
Thus in the short, medium and long term, to help Poland is to help Germany.
It is only a slight exaggeration to say that, at this extraordinary historical moment, the future of Poland depends on the Germans; the future of Europe depends on each behaving a little more like the other.
BOOK REVIEW /The gentleman who did the dirty work —‘The Time of My Life: Denis Healey’— Michael Joseph, 17.95 pounds
By JEREMY PAXMAN
DENIS Winston Healey is having a certain amount of characteristically mischievous fun with journalists at the moment, on the question of whether he will or will not stand at the next election.
Whatever his decision, this book of memoirs reads like his valedictory.
In the last decade, Denis Healey has developed from prop-forward bruiser to everybody's favourite uncle.
Mike Yarwood and the catchphrase ‘Silly Billy’ had a lot to do with it, but more important is the fact that the Labour Party now belongs to a younger generation.
How many people now remember his humiliation as chancellor of the Exchequer, turning back on a trip to Heathrow en route for a meeting of the International Monetary Fund in order that he could draft an application for a loan from the same organisation, then appearing in the Blackpool bear garden to be publicly abused?
A weaker person might have buckled under the strain, but Healey bounced back, and it is his considerable inner strength which gives this account of his life in politics its particular charm.
Recent years have seen a succession of second-rate political memoirs illuminated by the self-serving clarity of hindsight, stashed with dutiful acknowledgements to dreary constituency agents, padded out with hack accounts of official visits to one foreign country or another.
This is in another class altogether: literate, thoughtful, at times profound, and shot through with wit.
Edward Heath was a contemporary at Balliol, where Healey became a communist.
Healey recalls walking in the quad with him.
‘I happened to mention that a mutual friend was going to Bibury with his girl for the weekend.
Teddy looked at me with horror.
‘You don't mean to say they're sleeping together?’ he whispered.
‘I don't know.
I suppose so,’ I replied.
‘Good heavens,’ said Teddy, ‘I can't imagine anyone in the Conservative Association doing that.’
Heath's lack of imagination in this field,’ Healey observes, ‘was to have consequences for some of his cabinet ministers later on.’
Healey is, of course, the man who likened an attack by Sir Geoffrey Howe to being savaged by a dead sheep, and his one-liners are terrific.
Harold Wilson had a ‘short-term opportunism, allied with a capacity for self-delusion which made Walter Mitty appear unimaginative.’
Richard Crossman was ‘a heavyweight intellect with a lightweight judgement.’
Roy Jenkins's appearance had ‘the sleek pomposity of Mr Podsnap.’
And of the party in the Fifties: ‘the Great Debate in British socialism has so far consisted in one side talking nonsense and the other side keeping mum.’
No one would accuse Mr Healey of retiring modesty.
Documents declassified under the 30-year rule tend to confirm the wisdom of his early years in politics.
Few mistakes are admitted to, and events which don't reflect well upon him, like the highly dramatic resignations of the Navy Minister and chief of Naval Staff in protest at his decision to scrap aircraft carriers, are dismissed in two illuminating sentences.
Quite how a man who could not bear to hurt a living thing after seeing the damage his childhood air-rifle did to a starling could serve as defence secretary is something of an enigma.
Yet this was not only his most effective period in office but also the job he enjoyed most.
The Suez debacle had been the great emblematic event for Healey, as for many others of his generation, vividly demonstrating the gulf between imperial pretence and potential.
His time in the Ministry of Defence was one of constant retrenchment — the withdrawal from East of Suez, the aircraft carrier decision, the scrapping first of the TSR2 aircraft project, to be replaced by American F111s, themselves then also cancelled.
Whatever the subsequent rationalisations, all decisions were forced upon him by shortage of cash.
Healey always seems a man at the receiving end, full of great ideas but with little or no room for manoeuvre.
As chancellor he inherited an economy with the skids under it after the Barber years.
Soon, inflation was running at 26 per cent and the trade unions were grasping for whatever wage awards they could.
His forecasting staff in the Treasury might have been better suited to dreaming up horoscopes, and at times officials seem to have been deliberately distorting figures for political ends.
In the circumstances, his failure to win the leadership of the party seems unsurprising.
He was a pragmatic loner from first to last, and by now had devised his own answer to the student chestnut ‘Who will do the dirty work under socialism?’:
Denis Healey would.
His explanation for this defeat in the leadership elections -that some right-wing MPs voted for Michael Foot in order to justify their subsequent defection to the SDP — looks fanciful to say the least.
But his failure represents a great lost opportunity to have avoided both the damaging interlude of the SDP and the antics of the loony left which kept Labour out of the office for a decade.
He twice turned down the chance to become Secretary General of Nato, and the ideas on defence and deterrence outlined here compare favourably with much of the output of the Beltway Bandits and their fellow theorists in Paris or Moscow, save only that they are more readably expressed.
The prospectus for the Nineties with which his book concludes is a thoughtful text which could with benefit be read by anyone interested in foreign affairs.
The whole manuscript is illuminated by a genuinely cultured temperament.
His final, understated comments on the worthwhile qualities of a career in politics are as good an apologia for a much-derided trade as I have read recently.
He emerges as a man with a big heart and a clever mind who did the best he could in difficult circumstances.