

Bar examination results
By A. M. JOHNSON
The following have been awarded a Conditional Pass.
The section they have yet to pass is shown in brackets against their name.
The Council of Legal Education Trinity Bar Examination 1989 Additional Pass List The following candidate has been awarded a III been awarded a III Class Pass in the Bar Examination 6017 Andrews, JR (I) The Council of Legal Education Michaelmas Bar Examination 1989 Overseas Pass List The following candidates have passed an Individual Section to complete the Bar Examination.
Law Report: Divorce award recognised wife's contribution to wealth of family: Gojkovic v Gojkovic — Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Woolf, Lord Justice Russell and Lord Justice Butler-Sloss), 12 October 1989
By PAUL MAGRATH, Barrister
In assessing the financial relief to be awarded to the former wife of a millionaire after their divorce, pursuant to section 25 of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 (as amended by section 3 of the Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984), the court should not calculate the wife's share solely by reference to her needs, but could take account also of any exceptional contribution she had made to the creation of the husband's wealth.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the husband's appeal from Mr Justice Ward who, on 17 February 1989, had ordered him to provide his former wife with a maisonette worth £295,000 and a lump sum of £1m.
Nicholas Wall QC and Judith Hughes (Hamlin Slowe) for the husband; Bruce Blair QC (Michael Freeman & Co) for the wife.
LORD JUSTICE BUTLER-SLOSS said that the husband, who was a Yugoslav, arrived in England in 1966 at the age of 23 with a small sum of money in his pocket.
He worked his way up from kitchen porter, assistant cook, employment at a casino and by painting and decorating.
The wife also came from Yugoslavia to England in 1966 and took menial jobs in a hospital and as a waitress.
They met in 1968 and began to cohabit in 1969, although they did not marry until 1978.
The judge described their life together as a story of high achievement and glorious success, which had come through unrelenting hard work, unlimited self-sacrifice and absolute determination.
They started by working on a property while they were carrying on other employment, and then turning that property into hotel accommodation.
It was agreed that the wife was the chatelaine par excellence.
The husband's brothers became involved in enterprises with him, and their business expanded into other hotels and properties.
Other members of the family became involved in these businesses.
The wife spent her time running one of the hotels, while the husband and his brothers devoted their skills to property speculation with considerable success.
By the time of the divorce in 1986, the assets of the family were considerable.
The husband's share was £4m but the wife's legal interest was very small.
The judge found the wife's contribution to be ‘exceptional by ordinary standards, if not exceptional as measured against the (husband's) contribution.
In terms of doing what is expected of them I find they performed equally.’
The wife had played a unique role in the hotel business and had, the judge concluded, ‘earned a share of the assets that have been produced’.
Following the divorce, the wife now desired to buy and run a small hotel.
For this she required the £1m which was awarded her.
The husband agreed that the wife should have the maisonette, but appealed against the judge's award of a lump sum of £1m on the grounds (1) that the judge was wrong in principle to make an award to enable the wife to buy a hotel; and (2) that in any case the amount was excessive.
It was argued for the husband that the wife should have been awarded a lump sum of £532,000, calculated in accordance with the principles established in Preston v Prestion (1982) Fam 17 and Duxbury v Duxbury (1987) FLR 7, to provide sufficient income to satisfy the reasonable requirements of the former wife of a millionaire.
In both Preston and Duxbury, the Court of Appeal upheld the award of a lump sum, designed to provide the wife with a net income after tax of £20,000 and £28,000 respectively, without onsidering in any detail the level of income appropriate in such cases.
Moreover, her Ladyship did not read those cases as laying down an income bracket suitable for the needs of every former wife of a millionaire.
Although section 25, as re-enacted, no longer required the court to attempt to place the parties in the financial position they would have been in had the marriage not broken down, it did not, in her Ladyship's judgment, circumscribe the court's discretion so as to limit it to providing for the wife to become self-sufficient.
The new section 25A laid a responsibility upon the court to consider whether financial obligations should be terminated and to make orders designed to enable the spouse to adjust without due hardship to the termination of financial dependence on the other spouse.
A Duxbury calculation could not by itself provide the answer as to the sum to which the wife was entitled, though it produced a figure to which the judge was entitled to have regard in deciding what was the right answer.
Here, the judge found that the wife had made an exceptional contribution to the wealth generated during their relationship.
Her share was not to be calculated exclusively in relation to her needs.
If the wife's contribution was adequately taken into account by the figure offered by the husband, her desire, however strong, to have a greatly increased lump sum to enable her to run a hotel would not be reasonable.
But weight had to be given to the fact that this was a working wife with a recognised expertise in the managing of hotels.
A wife who was entitled to a lump sum on the ‘clean break’ principle was not obliged to deal with it in any particular fashion.
She was perfectly entitled to use it as working capital if that was the sum of money to which, taking into account her contribution and all other aspects of section 25, she was entitled.
But however great the wife's contribution, the order to her should not be out of proportion to the total assets and had to do justice between the parties.
The judge considered this aspect very carefully.
There was no suggestion that this order would be impossible for the husband to comply with or would cripple his business.
On joint assets of £4m he would retain £2.7m or so.
The award was not excessively generous.
The appeal should be dismissed.
Britain to hold first talks with Savimbi
By JOHN BULLOCH
IN A CHANGE of policy designed to help bring about a ceasefire in Angola, John Major, the Foreign Secretary, will today hold talks with Jonas Savimbi, the leader of the Unita rebels, writes John Bulloch.
Mr Savimbi is at the Conservative Party conference in Blackpool to address the Bow Group.
It will be the first time that the Unita leader has met a British minister, and only a few days ago the Angolan ambassador in London was assured by a Foreign Office official that there were no plans for such a meeting.
The Foreign Office view is that as the Angolan government has been in direct contact with Unita, there is no reason why other countries should not use their influence.
Mr Savimbi is to hold talks with President Mobutu of Zaire in France next week, and it is hoped that the meeting may result in a new ceasefire.
One of the difficulties is that the Angolan understanding of the agreement reached in June was that Mr Savimbi should not remain in Angola while elections are held, though he might return later.
Unita says that was not a condition.
The fact that the Foreign Secretary has decided to intervene would indicate that the US is prepared to take a strong line, and to use its influence to force Unita to accept the Angolan reading of the agreement.
Robert Hughes, the Labour MP and chairman of the Anti-Apartheid Movement, criticised the decision to see Mr Savimbi.
He said Unita was still blocking moves toward peace in Angola.
Viewpoint: Capitalising on high standards in egg industry: A group of nuns begin legal action today to prevent the slaughter of their chickens.
John Coles, chairman of the British Egg Industry Council, gives his views on the challenges facing the industry in the 1990s
By JOHN COLES
THE TIME has come for the egg industry to look forward to the 1990s.
After a disastrous year for British producers, they are now faced with a unique opportunity to capitalise on the benefits of an industry with the highest standards in the world.
The British Egg Industry Council (BEIC) fully supports the extensive legislation introduced this year to minimise the risk of salmonella and to re-establish consumer confidence in British eggs.
Every link in the egg production chain is now covered by stringent controls.
Nineteen different measures incorporate strict controls on feed suppliers, breeding and laying flocks.
All breeding and laying flocks have to be registered and are required to undertake extensive testing for salmonella at every stage of the hens' lives.
If salmonella is confirmed a flock has to be slaughtered and the laying house cleansed and disinfected.
Eggs laid by flocks in which salmonella is found cannot be sold for human consumption.
While supporting the principle of legislative measures to reduce the risk of salmonella, the BEIC has been actively lobbying the Government to ensure the British producers are not faced with an impossible burden.
We argued for — and won — amendments to testing procedures to reduce producers' costs without reducing the effectiveness of the measures.
We are continuing to lobby for full compensation for the commercial value of hens slaughtered and for equivalent testing legislation to be introduced throughout the European Community.
The measures introduced in the UK mean that, in the words John Gummer, the Minister for Agriculture: ‘The consumer can be confident that British eggs are protected by the most stringent safety regulations in the world.
We can eat British produced eggs with confidence.’
The challenge now for the egg industry is to communicate this message to consumers; to look forward to the 1990s with confidence in the knowledge that its product is the best in the world — not to waste time and money on the constant examination of its collective navel and on cries of ‘not fair’.
Assuming the Daventry nuns have been subject only to the same controls being applied to all other British egg producers, the protest by the United Kingdom Egg Producers' Association (Ukepra), the only organisation within the UK egg industry not represented among BEIC members, is potentially damaging both to egg consumers and to egg producers.
By entering ‘the race…to show that the Government is wrong’ Ukepra is clutching at straws and defying the accepted principle that marketing any product is all about listening to the demands of the consumer and satisfying those demands.
No matter how small the problem of salmonella within the British egg industry — and the BEIC has always maintained that any problem was minute and much smaller than last year's hysteria implied — the consumer has demanded that the problem be reduced to the absolute minimum possible.
The sort of cheap publicity gained by Ukepra over the past week will simply reinforce consumer concern about the integrity of the egg industry and the safety of its product.
Egg producers must recognise that they are competing in the sophisticated food industry of the late 1980s and that they have a responsibility to the consumer.
If the industry is not prepared to meet consumer demand, egg sales and hence egg producers will continue to suffer and the industry will remain in the Dark Ages.
Labour chief whip facing poll defeat
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
LABOUR MPs are predicting extensive changes to the Shadow Cabinet over the next month, with the increasing prospect that the party's chief whip will be defeated in an election contest next week.
Derek Foster, who has held the Commons chief whip post for four years, is being challenged by Ron Davies, the MP for Caerphilly.
The best prediction of the vote — to be counted next Thursday at the first parliamentary Labour party meeting after the summer break — is that Mr Davies will just beat Mr Foster by a handful of votes.
Last year Mr Foster won 107 votes to Mr Davies's 65, with Jeff Rooker, MP for Perry Barr, polling 41.
This year Mr Rooker stayed out of the race, and has nominated Mr Davies who is expected to pick up most of his votes.
Mr Davies's canvassing over the party conference period has found 70 MPs solidly backing Mr Foster — including most of the hard-left Campaign Group.
But the rest of Mr Foster's vote looks soft, with many of the 1987 intake of Labour MPs switching their support to Mr Davies in protest at what they see as Mr Foster's lax disciplinary regime over the parliamentary party.
In his letter to Labour MPs, Mr Foster has asked for backing on the grounds that he has seen the parliamentary party through the dark years, and now wants to guide them through better times.
Mr Davies, by contrast, has pledged specific reforms to regulate Labour MPs' time more strictly, while helping them plan their time outside Parliament more confidently.
It is also seen as significant in the Davies camp that Neil Kinnock, the party leader, is remaining neutral in the contest.
After the election for the chief whip, Labour MPs will vote for the restyled Shadow Cabinet, the elections for which are being weighted to ensure a minimum representation of three women.
The Tribune group has sent out a list of candidates who are bidding to join its slate for the 18 Shadow Cabinet places.
Analysis suggests that all five Tribune women will make the slate.
One woman outside the Tribune group — Ann Taylor, an environment spokesperson — is likely to top the poll among the women.
But at least three, and maybe four of the women on the Tribune slate are also likely to be elected, taking the total of women on the Shadow Cabinet to four or five, compared with only one at present.
The Tribune women who are regarded as certain winners are Joan Lestor, who speaks on overseas aid, Jo Richardson, who speaks on women's issues, and Margaret Beckett, who speaks on social security.
The other two Tribunites are Clare Short — who won a strong vote last year — and Harriet Harman, health spokesperson, who is standing for the Shadow Cabinet for the first time.
The extent of unpredictable change makes it very hard for Mr Kinnock to plan his Shadow Cabinet reshuffle in advance of the election results.
Museum opens food safety ‘hotline’
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
A TELEPHONE hotline on food safety, nutrition and diet will be opened today by the National Museum of Science and Industry.
The scheme — intended to let the public draw directly on scientific knowledge — has been partly prompted by recent panic over the contamination of food by listeria and salmonella, public concern about how to store and cook food, and issues such as food preservation through irradiation.
If the service, which is free apart from the cost of the phone call, proves successful, it may be supplemented by others dealing with information on areas of concern such as the environment.
The man behind the scheme is John Durant, Professor of Public Understanding of Science at Imperial College, London, and an assistant director of the museum.
He regards it as a way forward for the museum and a means of providing a window for many more people on Britain's scientific and technological expertise.
It will run initially for three months but may become permanent if it seems to fulfil a need.
‘There is a great public demand for information on food and nutrition — and we are not here to sell a particular line,’ he said.
Although staff will be fully trained, they will be able to seek specialist advice to answer more complicated inquiries.
As areas of concern emerge, information packs will be made up and sent out, again free of charge.
‘This is a way forward for the museum to offer a wider range of access points into the nation's science and technology,’ Professor Durant said.
The hotline scheme coincides with a new £1.2m exhibition gallery at the museum, ‘Food for Thought’ which is intended to entertain and to instruct visitors about the past present and future of food, food industries, eating out, and food fashion — ranging from Lyons corner houses and Palm Court tea rooms in the 1920s and 1930s to the coffee bars of the Fifties and McDonalds fast-food outlets of the 1980s.
It will aim to explain the limits of scientific knowledge in any given area, and will be updated as issues change and facts emerge.
Jane Bywaters, who has been responsible for much of the exhibition, said: ‘We need to give people information so that they can make up their own minds about food and not be dictated to by the media and media events.’
The gallery has its lighter side to arouse the interests of children — the ‘smellerama’ to test their sense of smell and relate it to certain types of food, the ‘food pyramid’to test their ability to build a healthy diet, and an ‘aerobicycle’which will demonstrate the amount of exertion required to burn off a given number of calories.
The telephone service, on (01) 938 8217, is open from 10am to 4pm, Monday to Friday, but closed on bank holidays.
The Conservative Conference: Sacrificial writers at work behind the scenes
By COLIN BROWN, Politcal Corrrespondent
‘GREATER LOVE hath no man than that he lays down his jokes for his Prime Minister,’ a Cabinet minister said in Blackpool on hearing of the sacrifice made by Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment.
Mr Patten, a former Tory research officer and the brains in the Thatcher team, has been involved in the great behind-the-scenes task of the week at the Imperial Hotel, Blackpool.
Along with with Robin Harris, past director of Conservative research department, who is joining the Downing Street policy unit, John O'Sullivan, editor of the US National Review and Sir Ronald Millar, playwright, Mr Patten has been helping to write the Prime Minister's speech for today's keynote address.
But this year, Mr Patten had to make his own speech to the conference for the first time.
Shortly before he was due to deliver that speech on Wednesday — a Burkeian lecture on economic growth and greenery — he realised that he had put some of his best lines in the draft for the Prime Minister's speech.
He did the decent thing, and dropped them from his speech.
Insiders say he has transplanted a large tract of greenery into the leaderene's speech, which will dwell on her commitment to saving the world from global warming.
The speech-writing team, locked away in a suite at the Imperial Hotel, are said to have made faster progress this year than at previous conferences, despite the need to do some hefty redrafting to echo the Chancellor's assurances on the economy.
Mr Patten played Cinderella last night and cancelled a private engagement to carry on the polishing while Margaret went to the Blue Ball.
But the great behind-the-scenes event of the Blackpool conference has been the secret series of meetings between Norman Lamont, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, and spending ministers to whittle down their bids for spending next year.
Ministers are sworn to secrecy about the talks — known by aficionados as Pesc (public expenditure scrutiny committee)— but Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Health, broke ranks by mentioning them in his conference speech.
Mr Clarke unknowingly stole the thunder of Douglas Hurd, the Home Secretary, who had been intending to make a veiled public appeal for more cash for the police services in the law and order debate.
In the end, Mr Hurd had to make a joking reference to Mr Clarke's audacity.
Although Mr Lamont has been staying in the Imperial Hotel with the rest of the Cabinet, he has held most of the talks in more down-market hotels along the Promenade.
He has used a fast government car to shake off at least one photographer, but there is a more prosaic explanation for Mr Lamont's perambulations around Blackpool — his civil servants could not get through the security around the Imperial.
As the civil servants are not party members, they have not been issued with security passes.
Mr Lamont was therefore forced to go outside the hotel to meet them.
One Cabinet minister, however, is likely to have saved some money on his hotel bill to go towards his bid for next year.
John Gummer, the Minister of Agriculture, has been staying not at the Imperial, but at a modest B-&-B at the back of the conference hall.
Mr Gummer has used the guest house for every Tory conference since his student days and he told friends that he has been rewarded for his continued custom with the best room in the house.
It is next to the showers.
Margaret Thatcher will address the final session of the conference.
There will be debates on drug abuse and on party publicity.
The Conservative Conference: Chancellor stands by interest rate strategy
By JUDY JONES
NIGEL LAWSON yesterday made clear his determination to keep interest rates as high as necessary to defeat inflation and provide a sound basis for continued economic prosperity.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer was given a two-minute standing ovation after he delivered an uncompromising defence of his policies and declared: ‘It is clear that the economy is already responding to the measures we have taken, and I have no doubt whatever that it will come right in good time.
There is no alternative and the policy will work.’
Mr Lawson told the conference that the damage inflicted by high inflation would be far worse than that sustained by home owners and businesses through high interest rates.
Labour demands for the Government to impose credit controls instead of high interest rates to curb borrowing were ‘a cruel deception’ because they were unworkable.
‘They would be child's play in the modern world to get around.
Nor is there any salvation in the rake's progress of perpetual devaluation.
All it does is to raise the price of things we buy from abroad.
And that means inflation.
‘In the world in which we live there are bound to be periods of turbulence on the foreign exchange markets from time to time.
We have been through them before.
But the Conservative Party never has been, and never will be, the party of devaluation.
‘The plain truth is there are no easy answers.
But I give you this pledge.
I will continue to take whatever action is needed, however unpopular it may be, to keep our economy sound and strong.’
The Chancellor said the British people had responded to privatisation, trade union reform, deregulation and tax reform with a dynamism that had surprised the world.
‘There is no precedent in living memory for the eight years of sustained growth and surging prosperity that Britain has enjoyed with this Conservative government.
It has been a rebirth — and all the more vigorous for being so long overdue.
‘That vigour has been reinforced by something else: confidence, a belief in Britain's future.’
The Government's most pressing task now was to see that inflation was brought down still further.
To achieve this, there would have to be a period during which growth slowed down, and with it the growth of imports.
‘But there is no need whatever for this to mean recession, providing business and industry keep a firm control of their costs, including wage costs in particular.
‘So when will interest rates come down again?
Just as soon as it is safe to do so but not before.
For we will take no risks with inflation.
There are too many forces we do not control — nor indeed seek to control.
A free country in a free world is always at risk from high winds and rough seas.
Calm waters only belong to stagnant pools, and there is nothing stagnant about the new Conservative Britain.’
The rulers of Eastern Europe had been forced to recognise the failure of their system and that ‘socialism is economic poison’.
‘What will sustain the reformers of Eastern Europe is that great yearning for freedom that has started them off.
And it is significant that for many of them, the beacon of light is Britain — yes, Margaret Thatcher's Britain.
We showed that at least the British version of socialism could be reversed and that a nation could win back its prosperity and its pride.’
The Chancellor won substantial backing from speakers in the economic debate.
However, Jacky Davis, who runs a business with her husband in North West Hampshire, sounded a dissenting note.
‘My husband and I have just taken out a massive loan to finance the purchase of offices and manufacturing equipment.
With the latest rise in interest rates and speculation that more may be to come, that loan is becoming a millstone.
We must make savings to finance the extra cost of borrowing.
‘We are happy to do this but it is a struggle to meet our debt.
I really cannot see how high interest rates which penalise investment…help in the fight against inflation.’
She urged a two-tier system of interest rates, aimed specifically at curbing consumer borrowing.
Andrew Oxley, of Langbaurgh, said high inflation hit the less well off hardest.
Refering to the Archbishop of Canterbury's recent attack on ‘Pharisee’ values prevalent in Britain, he said: ‘It is hardly a Pharisee society which puts the interests of these groups at the top of its priorities.
If the effective choice is between higher mortgages and unemployment, which would you choose?’
Andrew Crisp, from Winchester, said it was nonsense to suggest that the Government had abandoned the entrepreneur by raising the cost of borrowing.
‘The rise in interest rates provides clear leadership, a challenge to be faced and overcome.
In my business, either I cut my costs or I find new business.
When interest rates start to fall again, then my business is stronger, with a greater competitive edge.’
Peter Bassett, from Chelsea, said that the present economic difficulties bore no relation to that which pertained under the last Labour government when the country had to be bailed out by the International Monetary Fund.
‘Now is the autumn of our discontent.
But life under Labour would be like a nuclear winter.’
John Horam, of Fulham, a former Labour minister, believed the Chancellor was pursuing the right policies.’
High interest rates are clearly necessary to clamp down demand and bring the money supply under control.
The CBI says the extra 1 per cent will drive us into recession.
Frankly that is drivel.
The basic health of the British economy is far better than ever it was.’
The Conservative Conference: Faithful display common purpose
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
THE TORY faithful crowded into the Empress Ballroom, the spear-carriers on the set of Nigel Lawson's epic production.
But they knew their role well and they delivered.
Only when the inevitable standing ovation was over, and their work was done in the conference hall, could they relax.
And here and there, a small private groan at the harshness of the Chancellor's economic message could be heard clearly.
‘It is all right for us, it is the younger generation I feel sorry for,’ a Devonshire councillor told her companion.
‘Mary didn't know whether she was going to stand up.
Her son has a small business, and he doesn't know if he will be able to carry on.’
In another knot of constituency representatives, someone observed: ‘Mrs Thatcher did not clap him very hard, did she?’
However, the debate and the reception accorded to Mr Lawson's speech was a striking demonstration of the Conservatives' capacity to close ranks: proof, if proof were needed, of their party's most formidable political resource.
As one Cabinet minister remarked, on the eve of yesterday's crucial debate: ‘This party is interested in power, above all else.
It knows how to behave.’
The ornate hall, its balconies and aisles were crowded to overflowing.
As they rose to cheer the Chancellor, marching onto the platform with Margaret Thatcher again ostentatiously at his side, their common purpose was clear.
Speaker after speaker endorsed the anti-inflationary weapon of high interest rates.
Andrew Crisp from Winchester was applauded loudly for describing the rise in base rates as a sign of ‘clear leadership’; and each reference to the central plank of Mr Lawson's strategy was a signal for a demonstration of approval.
It seemed to be genuine.
The speaker who complained at the burden on small businesses was clapped by just a handful.
For lengthy passages of the Chancellor's speech, while Mr Lawson addressed his wider audience in the City and the country at large, their on-cue responses seemed more mechanical than enthusiastic.
The acclaim was loudest, and most heartfelt, when Mr Lawson derided the inability of the Opposition to offer a convincing alternative formula.
Outside, Tory representatives were ambushed by camera crews and reporters, and nearly all strove to re-echo Mr Lawson's message in fulsome terms.
‘It was brilliant and encouraging,’ Carol Jamieson, a trainee party agent from Leeds, said.
‘He explained the whole situation well.
The Opposition has nothing to offer.’
Tom Gower from Southport, though, seemed to have been as anxious for reassurance as he was to express solidarity.
‘This party needed explanations,’ he said.
‘He gave them this morning.
We will be absolutely loyal to any minister as long as that minister explains the situation to us.’
Backbench Tory MPs added their weight to the straining chorus of approval.
Privately, MPs with divided views on Mr Lawson's chosen course agreed that the Government was effectively boxed-in to its position, and now had to tough it out.
‘Lawson's speech was quite good,’ one said.
‘He said nothing, but what could he say?
We are tied to him anyway.
Either he gets it right or we all go up the Swanee.’
Another said: ‘He is the best man we have got by far.
The sooner the Prime Minister and her horde of Americans get off his back the better.’
The Conservative Conference: Brittan urges entry to ERM
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
BRITAIN should enter the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System as soon as the present turbulence in the foreign exchange markets has died away, Sir Leon Brittan, the European Commissioner, told a Bow Group fringe meeting last night.
Sir Leon added that the Government should also adopt a more active policy of support for progress towards European monetary union, with a central banking system, while resisting other forms of unnecessary economic union.
Similarly, he argued, Britain should seek to create a Social Charter of its own liking, rather than merely oppose the adoption of any social charter at all.
He advocated an approach of saying, ‘Yes, but’, rather than‘No, perhaps,’ in relation to the European Community.
For example, on the controversy over the removal of frontier controls, Britain's Commissioner proposed that controls should be replaced with police and Customs officer powers to check any traveller on suspicion of drugs or terrorist offences.
The Government has been resisting the removal of frontier controls because of anxieties about drugs and illicit arms traffickers.
On the EMS, Sir Leon said that the Government's primary criterion for entry -that of falling inflation — had already been met.
He strongly applauded the decision by Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor, to raise interest rates last week, and argued that a sharper rise of two percentage points might have been more immediately effective.
But he did not believe that Britain should wait until next summer's removal of capital and exchange controls throughout the Community before entering the exchange rate mechanism.
‘I think we should join well before next summer, but I do not think…that the time to join is this week,’ Sir Leon said.
‘You don't join the EMS at a time of turbulence in the foreign exchange markets.
You join something like that when there is a measure of stability.’
Entry should not be a reaction to short-term problems, but a considered response to long-term needs.
‘We should join after the turbulence in the foreign exchange markets has died down,’ Sir Leon said.
He believed that membership of the exchange rate mechanism would give greater certainty to business and industry, help the battle against inflation, and secure lower rates of interest.
The Conservative Conference: Food safety directorate to be set up
By JUDY JONES
A FOOD safety directorate is to be set up in the Ministry of Agriculture to co-ordinate research and monitoring and improve public awareness of food issues, Judy Jones writes.
John Gummer, Minister of Agriculture, told the conference it would bring together existing strands of work and report directly to David Maclean, the junior minister responsible for food.
‘I shall also be reviewing the way we get independent advice, so that the public will be able to see absolutely clearly that I act on the best possible evidence, without fear or favour.’
The formation of the directorate will be seen by critics of the Government's food policy as a tacit admission that its response to recent food scares has been muddled and sometimes too slow.
Mr Gummer rejected appeals from consumer groups and Opposition parties for a separate Ministry for Food that would act independently of farming interests.
‘The farmer has just as great an interest in safe food as the customer.
If his customers are not fully satisfied, he won't sell his products.’
The Conservative Conference: Sunday trade reform issue put on ice
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
REFORM OF the law on Sunday trading was put on ice for at least another year yesterday despite a clear demand for liberalisation by rank-and-file Tories, writes Stephen Goodwin.
Timothy Renton, Minister of State at the Home Office, told the conference the Government would not push to legislate while neither shops nor shoppers could agree on a solution, pressure groups could not agree, and Parliament could find no consensus.
Mr Renton said he hoped, maybe by the next conference, to have found agreement.
But his emphasis on the opposition to options considered by the Home Office suggests there will be no Bill before a general election.
On a show of hands, representatives rejected a motion against any legislation incompatible with ‘the traditional character of Sunday’.
Moving it, Joyce Simpson, Ilford South, said Sunday should be used ‘to rest from the stress of our galloping society’.
But Jacqui Burns, Newham NW, said people would not be forced to shop on Sunday.
‘If the shopkeeper wants to sell and I want buy, what business is it of anyone else?’
The Conservative Conference: King attacks Labour on defence
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
LABOUR'S new arms policy was condemned by Tom King yesterday as ‘an appalling shambles’ which would cripple Britain's conventional forces, scrub nuclear weapons and leave the country well and truly defenceless.
The Secretary of State for Defence roused his audience with a fierce attack on Labour over its Brighton conference decisions on defence and the appearance at a fringe meeting there of Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader.
The country should recognise what some members of ‘the new model Labour party’ were like, Mr King said.
‘They are the ones who invited Mr Adams to address them just 500 yards from the Grand Hotel which some of us have cause to remember; to address them less than two weeks after the time when, along the coast at Deal, 10 young musicians in the Royal Marines were foully murdered.
‘He described that murder of unarmed musicians, at that meeting, as a ‘legitimate tactic’, and what did those Labour Party members do?
They gave him a standing ovation.’
To shouts of ‘shame’, the Secretary of State went on: ‘Protest all you want Mr Kinnock, wave as many red roses as you want, those were members of your party that did that, and the country must never forget it.’
He ridiculed the Labour conference endorsement of the policy review shift from unilateral nuclear disarmament as a fudge that failed.
It had been followed by a motion from Bruce Kent, chair of CND, to reduce Britain's defence spending to the European average of Nato countries.
That would mean a cut of £5bn, Mr King said — roughly the same as the annual cost of the Royal Navy.
The Army and Royal Air Force each cost £6bn.
‘What shall they do?
You can do it by scrubbing the Navy.
Or share out the misery?
Halve our ships, ground the fighters that defend this country and disband half the regiments of the British Army as well.’
The final twist was that Mr Kinnock was committed to negotiating away nuclear weapons at the earliest opportunity, Mr King added.
Likening Tony Benn to the Erich Honeker of the Labour Party, he said the left-wing MP got it right when, after the multilateralist vote, he commented: ‘Who will believe us on this?
Who will ever believe us on anything?’
The Conservative Conference: Parkinson raises new doubts on BR sell-off
By COLIN BROWN and JUDY JONES
RENEWED doubts about the possibility of privatising British Rail were raised yesterday by Cecil Parkinson, Secretary of State for Transport.
After speaking at the conference, Mr Parkinson told journalists: ‘It (BR privatisation) has never been at the top of my agenda.
It was never going to happen before the next Parliament, if ever.’
His remarks will disappoint many right-wing Tories who have been pushing hard for the Government to give a firm commitment to privatisation.
Studies on the options are still going on, and the Government's decision to increase BR's profit targets had been seen as part of the ‘fattening-up’ process.
Mr Parkinson also appeared to distance himself from the BR route for the Channel tunnel link through Kent, saying that it was ‘for Parliament to settle the way forward’.
In the transport debate Mr Parkinson said more investment in Britain's railways would not solve the problem of congestion on the roads.
And he rejected the demands of environmentalists and opposition parties for measures to discourage car use in favour of public transport.
‘People must be free to make choices not bludgeoned, bullied or bribed,’ he said.
Mr Parkinson told representatives: ‘Railways cannot deliver goods to Britain's high street shops.
They can't take children to the school door.
They cannot take people to the outpatients’ clinic…
Roads will continue to meet most of the needs of British people and businesses.’
Mr Parkinson also announced approval for a new £200m air traffic control centre to be built by the Civil Aviation Authority by the early 1990s.
‘It will increase our handling capacity by 50 per cent.
People are fed up with airport delays.’
The Conservative Conference: Conference quotes
By COLIN BROWN and JUDY JONES
‘The rise in interest rates provides clear leadership, a challenge to be faced and overcome.’
— Andrew Crisp from Winchester, during economic policy debate ‘Any party that has Dennis Skinner as its chairman and Neil Kinnock as leader, badly needs a hero.’
— Cecil Parkinson, Secretary of State for Transport ‘The Prime Minister was worried about my appointment.
She thought I might be too old.
Too staid.
Too well-known.’
— John Major, Foreign Secretary ‘What will sustain the reformers of Eastern Europe is that great yearning for freedom that has started them off.
And it is significant that for many of them the beacon light is Britain — yes, Margaret Thatcher's Britain.’
-Nigel Lawson, Chancellor of the Exchequer ‘Politicians are poor prophets, but the unlucky creatures have to try, because we are elected to look at least some distance ahead.’
— Douglas Hurd, Home Secretary
The Conservative Conference: Major announces 25m pounds aid package for Hungary
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
JOHN MAJOR, the Foreign Secretary, yesterday announced the setting up of a £25m aid fund for Hungary as he set before the conference what he called a ‘common sense’ approach for Conservatives in Europe.
With some Tory representatives still smarting over their humiliation in the European Parliament elections, Mr Major said it would be a terrible mistake for Conservatives to become defensive or defeatist about their role in the Community.
‘It is our show.
The Community is carrying out our programme,’ he said.
Handing the credit to Margaret Thatcher, he said Britain had put the single market at the top of the EC agenda and put the torch to ‘a veritable bonfire of petty obstacles and niggling controls’.
In restrained terms, Mr Major echoed the Prime Minister's distaste for the Commission's ‘grandiose’ social charter, a European central bank and a common currency.
‘We can't accept those ideas, but there are other ideas to discuss and we will put them forward,’ he said.
‘We Conservatives are realists.
We know that the best way to achieve our objective is for countries to work with their national traditions — not against them.
We want companies and workforces to come to their own arrangements.
‘Above all, we want decisions to be taken by those who have to live with them.’
Mr Major ranged beyond the EC and spoke of a feeling in the air of a better Europe to be built.
‘A Europe more secure, more prosperous, more free.
‘All Europe stands on a threshold — and we Europeans now have to make a choice.
We can turn our backs on the divisions of the past, and tear down the barriers that divide us.
Or we can cling to the old certainties — and go on as before.’
The fund for Hungary mirrors that set up by Britain for Poland.
Worth £25m over five years it is intended to help run elections, launch newspapers, form political parties and build businesses.
The hour-long debate on Europe brought criticism of the party's election campaign and of Edward Heath, the former prime minister.
Harriet Crawley, London Central Euro constituency, said the campaign had been negative and the advertising ‘dismal and downhearted’.
‘That gloom and doom cut no ice with Conservative voters.
They stayed away,’ she told representatives.
The party lost 13 seats in the European Parliament.
James Clappison, Yorkshire South, said Mr Heath's intervention in the campaign had not been a conspicuous success.
To loud applause, he said the message to Mr Heath from the grass-roots should be: ‘We all respect your vision and your achievements, but please remember that the overwhelming majority of Conservatives totally reject the idea of European union and a federal Europe.’
Sally Illman, a student at Oxford University, had a message for Jacques Delors, President of the European Commission: ‘Hands off free-enterprise Britain'.
She said the British people wanted the opportunities of the single market, but they would not accept ‘nanny state meddling’.
Riot police hit by back problems
By MIKE PRESTAGE
RIOT policemen are suffering from bad backs caused by hours sitting in vans, according to a survey.
Avon and Somerset Police, concerned by the growing number of officers taking sick leave due to back trouble, discovered in the survey that 15 per cent of the ricked backs were caused or aggravated by sitting in police vans and personnel carriers.
Over one four-month period, 25 policemen were affected.
The problem is caused by the spartan nature of the seats in riot vans, and because police rarely get the chance to ease aching muscles with a stroll.
Police officers are to be taught how to minimise backache by sitting properly, and vans with more comfortable seats are being bought.
David Shattock, the Chief Constable of Avon, says in a report: ‘Vehicles currently being purchased have greatly improved seating.
These seats will hopefully not only prove more comfortable for my officers, but will also reduce the aggravation that poor seating can cause to backs.
In addition, an input in posture is to be made into the training of officers to educate them in ways of preventing back injury.’
Ron Scriven, a spokesman for the Police Federation which represents police officers, said: ‘If the Avon and Somerset report is forwarded to us we will study it and consider circulating the 43 forces in England and Wales with its findings.
Then we can see if other forces are experiencing the same problems.’
Vi Gillman, spokeswoman for the National Back Pain Association, said the problem was caused by the way seats were designed and the posture of the people sitting in them.
‘Police officers may also be working in stressful conditions and stress plays a part in back pain,’ she said.
Horses preparing for parade in Cumbria
By MIKE PRESTAGE
Horses exercising on a walker at Rosthwaite Farm, Windermere, Cumbria, to make them supple for pulling the 160-year-old coach in the background.
It is to feature in a parade of coaches at Boroughbridge, North Yorkshire, in weekend celebrations commemorating the arrival of the market town's first mail coach 200 years ago 
M50 murder victim ‘tried to staunch flow of blood’
By DAVID THOMAS
THE motorway murder victim Marie Wilks used her Red Cross training to staunch the flow of blood from her jugular vein after being stabbed in the neck, a court was told yesterday.
But she lapsed into unconsciousness after being dumped down a 15ft embankment on the M50 where she suffered a series of blows, one of which broke her jaw, Dr Peter Acland, a Home Office pathologist, told Shrewsbury Crown Court.
Dr Acland said she became progressively weaker through blood loss and died within 10 minutes.
She had no defensive injuries and had not been sexually assaulted.
The absence of a blood trail from an emergency telephone was consistent with the 22-year-old pregnant housewife staunching her own blood, Dr Acland said.
He believed that she pressed a clenched fist against the 2in deep knife wound during the three-mile journey in her killer's car from the telephone to the embankment at Twyning, Gloucestershire.
The court was told that Mrs Wilks, of Warndon, Worcester, had trained for six years with the Red Cross.
She was on duty regularly at horse races and stock-car races.
Her instructor, Sally Sheffield, described her as a competent first-aider who did not panic.
She had detailed knowledge of how to deal with bleeding of all types.
Edward Browning, 36, a nightclub bouncer, of Cwm Parc, Treorchy, Mid Glamorgan, denies murdering her.
Tagging ‘first step to community jail’
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
ELECTRONIC tagging of remand prisoners, seen as the first stage towards plans to introduce community-based punishments, was attacked by probation officers yesterday.
Tagging, house arrest, tracking offenders, curfews and other restrictive punishments being considered by the Government for its Criminal Justice White Paper, would be a ‘trip wire’ into custody for those who would not have been jailed, they warned.
Tougher non-custodial measures and centralisation of the Probation Service were the likely groundwork for privatisation of punishment in the community, John Roberts, chairman of the National Association of Probation Officers, said.
He warned that the private security companies, which would monitor the offender, would be the only ones to benefit.
Punishment in the community would not ease prison overcrowding, he said, unless some form of sentencing restrictions were introduced to ensure courts did not impose jail sentences for minor offences and infringements of parole or bail restrictions.
Home Office figures showed plans to lengthen the time before a prisoner became eligible for parole and to introduce longer parole periods would mean the prison poulation could expand by between 4,000 and 5,000.
‘The proposed changes will not have the effects intended.
Instead of thousands of offenders, inhumanely contained in Victorian slums, we would have thousands of offenders being punished in the community and confined to their homes.
Punishment measures will be used instead of existing supervision…multiple orders will mean multiple demands, which in turn will lead to multiple breaches.
The prison population will again rise.’
He told Napo's annual conference in Bridlington, Humberside: ‘Electronic surveillance, house arrest tracking, restrictive and punitive community supervision cannot be part of any real living community — they simply transfer the techniques of imprisonment into the world at large.’
Wife's 1.3m pounds divorce settlement upheld
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
A hotelier was ordered yesterday to make a £1.3m divorce settlement to his wife, a former waitress.
The Court of Appeal refused to cut the award made in February to Radojka Gojkovic, 49, in the Family Division of the High Court.
Her lawyers believed it was highest settlement made in an English divorce court.
Lord Justice Butler-Sloss said the award, £1m cash and a London maisonette valued at £295,000, was ‘not excessively generous’.
Risto Gojkovic, 45, said to be worth £4m, had argued that his wife should receive the maisonette and £532,000.
But Lord Justice Butler Sloss, sitting with Lord Justices Woolf and Russell, ruled that Mrs Gojkovic had ‘earned her share’.
Mrs Gojkovic, of Sloane Terrace, Belgravia, London, and her husband, of Eardley Crescent, Earls Court, west London, arrived separately in Britain from Yugoslavia in 1966, the court heard.
Mr Gojkovic, who was then 23, worked his way up from kitchen porter, assistant cook, casino worker, and painter and decorator.
Mrs Gojkovic took ‘menial positions’ in hospitals and as a waitress.
They met in 1968, lived together from 1969, married in 1978 and were divorced in 1987.
They had no children.
Lord Justice Butler-Sloss said that while still working for others, they bought a property and turned it into an hotel, with Mrs Gojkovic working hard alongside her husband.
‘It is agreed that the wife was the chatelaine par excellence.’
She refered to comments made in the High Court by Mr Justice Ward, who said of the Gojkovics' success: ‘This is a story of high achievement and, many would think, glorious success.
That success came through unrelenting hard work, unlimited self-sacrifice and absolute determination.’
Mr Justice Ward had added that Mrs Gojkovic had ‘played a unique role’ in building up the hotel venture, which now included 13 hotels.
Mrs Gojkovic said later: ‘What I now want is to get a middle-of-the-range hotel to cater for the tourist trade in London…this is going to enable me to do this.’
Trade ban aims to protect threatened species of orchids
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
THE INTERNATIONAL trade in threatened species of wild orchids is set to be banned, it was announced yesterday.
The ban is expected to be part of a series of new measures to tighten control of the illegal horticultural business which is worth billions of dollars a year.
The large numbers of wild orchids being traded threatens some species with extinction.
Plant experts at the meeting of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) have agreed that more than 80 species of ‘slipper’ orchids — the genus paphiopedilum from Asia and the genus thragmipedium from South America — should be listed on the CITES Appendix I, which bans all commercial trade.
The decision is expected to be endorsed by the full CITES meeting next week.
Concern over the trade in wild plants has been heightened by the activities of Henry Azadehdel, who was jailed in Britain this year for smuggling orchids taken from the wild and imported without the proper permits.
Up to 100,000 thousand wild orchids are exported every year from Asia, and many thousands more are imported into America from countries such as Peru.
The ban will have no effect on the sale of propagated hybrid orchids, and botanists hope it will encourage the horticultural industry to switch from wild specimens to greenhouse-grown plants.
Botanists yesterday welcomed the agreement by the CITES plants committee to press for a wild slipper orchid ban.
Grenville Lucas, of the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, said: ‘Weight for weight, rare plants may be more valuable than ivory.
This move will help us combat the traders putting many rare plants at risk.’
In another action to conserve endangered plants, the Netherlands — the world's centre for the plants trade — is to second one of its leading botanists to the CITES secretariat to improve the campaign to enforce tighter controls.
Dr Ger Van Vliet, scientific director of the Botanical Gardens in Lieden, said his tasks in the next three years would be to make customs officials more aware of endangered plants, reducing the illegal trade, and help countries supplying wild plants to sell correctly propagated specimens.
However, Mr van Vliet is at the centre of a disagreement within CITES over how to best protect snowdrops — the genus galathus — another plant worth millions in the trade, which is being endangered by sales of wild stocks.
The vast majority of snowdrop bulbs on the world market have been picked from the wild in Turkey.
Turkey exports up to 50 million bulbs a year with the majority passing through the Netherlands.
Rarer species of snowdrops are being indiscriminately harvested along with the more common ones.
The Dutch horticultural business is resisting proposals for snowdrops to be listed on CITES Appendix II, which would bring greater regulation and monitoring of the trade, a move backed by the plants committee with the exception of Mr van Vliet.
The traders say that the main species they import — galathus elwesii — is not endangered.
They have offered as an alternative to a formal listing, a system of self-regulation.
This would include cultivation of sample bulbs by Kew and Dutch Botanical Gardens to check if rarer species are being collected.
A final decision on the trade in snowdrops will be made next week.
CITES is also expected to back a British proposal for Appendix II listing of Turkish exports of winter daffodils.
Victoria Chipeto, Zimbabwe's Minister for Wildlife, yesterday defended her country's intention to continue selling ivory by culling its herds of 52,000 elephants.
She said the trade in ivory was a problem for Africa and the decision on it could not be made by ‘people outside with their emotional campaigns’.
Peer denies requesting repatriation by force
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
LORD ALDINGTON denied in the High Court yesterday that he was responsible for seeking permission from higher command to use force to repatriate unwilling Cossacks from Austria only days after General Dwight Eisenhower, Supreme Allied Commander, offered to arrange their peaceful evacuation in May 1945.
General Eisenhower's offer to accept 150,000 surrendered German personnel, including 45,000 Cossacks, into the US-controlled zone was made on 19 May after a request by Allied forces for help in clearing the area.
But, according to documents revealed in court yesterday, four days later Lord Aldington's V Corps wrote to Eighth Army requesting ‘a free hand’ to use force if necessary ‘to honour our verbal agreement with Soviet forces’and return all Soviet nationals to Soviet forces.
Lord Aldington — formerly Brigadier Toby Low — who is suing for libel damages over allegations that he is guilty of war crimes, denied a suggestion by Richard Rampton QC, for the defence, that he was responsible for drafting the 23 May request.
He said the request was drafted by Brigadier Edward de Fonblanque on the day after he left the area to return to England.
Lord Aldington's departure date is disputed by the defence, who claim Lord Aldington left either on 23 May or early on 24 May.
Lord Aldington agreed with Mr Rampton that the date on which he left V Corps area was important.
But he said: ‘Even if I had been in Austria longer, I would still be able to defend myself against the outrageous charges of behaving like a war criminal — a charge made against no one else.’
Lord Aldington said he spent the nights of 22 and 23 May in Naples before flying back to England on the 24th.
He visited his mother, staying the night of 24 May with her, before meeting on 25 and 26 May with Sir Anthony Eden, the Foreign Secretary.
Lord Aldington said his earlier statements that he left the area between 25 and 29 May were made before he had properly researched the matter and before he realised his departure date was crucial.
Lord Aldington, former deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, who lives at Knoll Farm, Aldington, Ashford, Kent, is claiming libel damages over allegations in a pamphlet that he arranged the repatriation of 70,000 Cossacks and Yugoslavs, knowing they would be massacred.
Count Nikolai Tolstoy, 53, of Southmoor, Oxfordshire, and Nigel Watts, 51, of Tunbridge Wells, Kent, deny libel.
They claim the pamphlet is true, although they contest Lord Aldington's interpretation of it.
Mr Watts circulated 10,000 copies of the pamphlet among staff and parents of pupils at Winchester College, old boys, MPs, and others in 1987 in an attempt to force Lord Aldington's resignation as college warden.
Count Tolstoy provided much of the information for the pamphlet.
Lord Aldington, ex-chairman of Sun Alliance Insurance, has told the jury he is the victim of a campaign of harassment by Mr Watts who was annoyed by the company's failure to pay out on the death of his brother-in-law.
The hearing continues today.
Farmers to curb straw burning
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
FARMERS voted yesterday for a tough licensing system to curb straw burning, after complaints about smoke pollution at the end of this year's harvest.
The National Farmers' Union Council backed the idea of licences, with penalties of up to £2,000 and the refusal of future permits for offenders.
The proposal came amid fears that the Ministry of Agriculture might introduce tougher restrictions or even an outright ban.
Proposals for the licensing system will now go forward to the ministry for approval.
More than 400 letters complaining about straw burning were sent to the ministry, and 120 MPs protested after the harvest.
The protests were the highest since the early 1980s, the council's quarterly meeting was told.
In Oxfordshire, smoke from burning staw obscured roads and led to a pile-up.
The NFU's president, Sir Simon Gorlay, said: ‘We have got to put our house in order.
We have got to work towards a situation where burning is no longer the routine disposal method for getting rid of surplus straw.’
He said there had to be a curb on the ‘smut’ straw burning left on people's homes, their clothing and on other farmers' crops.
The council decided the cost of administering the licensing scheme should fall to the cereal growers who burned straw.
Woman, 74 sees off developers
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
KATHLEEN MACK, a 74-year-old stud owner, has forced a development company to amend its plans for a new overspill village for Cambridge by turning down a £6m offer and chasing the company's surveyors off her land with a shotgun, writes Christian Wolmar.
Mrs Mack owns the 90-acre Lower Hare Park Stud four miles away from Newmarket which is on the site of a proposed 3,000-house scheme by Charles Church Developments, one of nine suggested sites for new settlements in the Cambridge area along the A45 corridor.
All are subject of a planning inquiry due to begin in February.
Mrs Mack said she could not accept the offer: ‘£6m would not buy what I already have, which I want to keep.
They might have gone higher but this is a matter of principle.
Newmarket is the centre of the horse racing industry and this development would ruin it.’
When surveyors started sizing up her land, ‘I got my shotgun out and showed them the gate,'she said.
Richard Hay, land director of Charles Church (East Anglia) Ltd, agreed that Mrs Mack had been approached but said the scheme could go ahead anyway.
‘Our original proposal was for 840 acres but we're now going to file an amended proposal for 750 acres,’ he said.
Civil service time ‘misused to cost Labour programme’
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
LEAKED memoranda from the Department of the Environment were yesterday used by Labour to protest at the alleged abuse of civil service time to cost Labour's programme.
But the Treasury issued a counter-statement saying that nothing improper had been asked of civil servants by ministers.
Labour frontbenchers said they had been shown a note written by Sir Terence Heiser, Permanent Secretary at the Department of the Environment, to Nicholas Ridley, the then Secretary of State.
The note, headed ‘Costing Labour's Programme’ and dated 17 July 1989, says: ‘The Labour review document has been drafted much more carefully than on some earlier occasions.
The promises do not readily lend themselves to precise costings.
And in some cases the assumptions you have asked us to cost are vulnerable to counter attack from the Opposition.
You will want to consider whether to stick to the assumptions, and if so, how far to make use of the costings in public.’
Sir Terence adds that he is enclosing for Christopher Patten a copy of the rules which the Cabinet Office has issued for the guidance of officials ‘on such exercises’.
Gordon Brown, Labour's shadow to the Treasury chief secretary, said yesterday that he and Jack Cunningham, Labour's environment spokesman, had been shown additional internal Government papers which proved that the Conservative Party had asked the Treasury and individual departments to cost Labour's policy review according to Tory Central Office assumptions.
Mr Brown refused to say how the papers had been shown to him or to disclose their further contents.
But he added that government departments had been asked to complete forms and return them to the Treasury.
‘What the documents conclusively reveal is that ministers asked the civil service to cost the Labour review using figures and interpretations provided by the Conservative Party.
Civil servants were not asked to cost Labour's policy review, but to cost Conservative Party fabrications about the review.’
Mr Brown said that in other parts of the documents civil servants had described the Conservative Party assumptions as ‘remote from Labour's proposals’, and ‘implausible’.
He urged Sir Robin Butler, the Cabinet Secretary and Head of the Home Civil Service, to issue new guidelines preventing further attempts ‘to drag civil servants into the party political arena’.
The Treasury, however, issued a statement saying that ‘civil servants have not been asked to do anything they have not been asked to do under previous Governments of both parties, in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Cabinet Office’.
‘Ministers, assisted by their political advisers, are responsible for specifying the proposals to be costed, and for supplying any further interpretations or assumptions necessary.
Officials merely provide factual material, as they would in answer to similar questions from an MP, drawing attention to any technical assumptions that have been made.’
PC is jailed for raping woman in patrol car
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
A POLICEMAN was yesterday jailed for seven years for raping an 18-year-old woman in his marked patrol car while he was on duty and in uniform.
Sentencing Constable Peter Anderson, 41, Mr Justice Jowitt told him he had done ‘great damage to the trust in police’.
Anderson, married with two children, attacked the woman in a deserted allotment, after agreeing to give her and a boyfriend a lift home from a discotheque.
He first dropped the man off and then drove to the allotment.
He threatened her by forcing his truncheon under her chin and then raped her.
She said he only refrained from inserting his truncheon into her, after she begged him not to.
Afterwards he told her not to report the incident because he could have her ‘nicked’ for soliciting.
She did not report it because she did not think she would be believed.
Police investigated after an anonymous report.
The victim, now 20, said she had drunk nine or 10 Pernods with blackcurrant and was merry, but knew what she was doing and saying.
She said she tried to push him off, but he was too forceful.
Mr Justice Jowitt told Anderson: ‘I accept that you were not on the prowl looking for a victim and that it was by chance that this young lady got into your car.
I accept that there was no great degree of violence used by you.
‘But you took her against her will in your car to the place where this rape happened, and one of the very disturbing and serious features of this case is the way you abused your position as a police officer in uniform on duty.’
The judge added: ‘This girl plainly trusted herself in your company, as she was entitled to.
The public expect that they can treat the police with confidence.
You did great damage to that trust in the police when you behaved in this way.’
Anderson, who had pleaded not guilty and claimed the woman had handed him ‘sex on a plate’, was convicted by a 10-2 majority of raping the woman on 4 April, last year.
He claimed she had instigated the intercourse by first, and without invitation, performing oral sex on him.
He said he had only offered to use the truncheon as a sex aid but desisted when she shook her head.
Jean Southworth, QC, in mitigation, said: ‘This was not a case of him taking away the virginity of this young woman.
‘He has lost his pension rights and the personal affection of those dear to him and also, when a police officer goes to prison, he often carries an extra load for his misdoings.’
Verdict restores women's faith
By HEATHER MILLS
THE CONVICTION and jailing for rape of Constable Peter Anderson was yesterday welcomed by law reformers and women's groups, who said it should serve to encourage other rape victims to come forward and report crime, writes Heather Mills.
Coming in a week, when an American judge told a rape victim she ‘deserved what she got’ for wearing a lace mini-skirt, and an English judge dropped a rape charge because his 16-year-old alleged victim had the mental age of seven, yesterday's case has gone some way to restore their faith in the justice system.
The latest figures collated by Women against Rape show that only one in twelve women who are raped report the offence to police.
Of those cases reported, less than half are prosecuted through the courts and only 23 per cent result in convictions.
Pressure groups argue that women, already reluctant to report rape, will be further deterred when their attacker is a policeman, for fear that the charge will not be investigated impartially.
The outcome of yesterday's case could help dispel these fears.
But many believe that in spite of a growing public awareness of the trauma of rape, the legal process still fails women.
Sara Calloway, of Women Against Rape, said the 18-year-old victim's character had been put on trial and not the police officer's.
‘It shows the low value placed on women's lives.
‘They have to account for and justify what clothing they choose to wear, if they are on the Pill, their behaviour, and lifestyle.
‘In this case, the victim's character was torn apart.
He (Anderson) played on a sexual stereotype, saying she was young, black, ‘the best sex he had ever had’— anything that could be used as an excuse.’
Although the judge, Mr Justice Jowitt, had questioned the victim about the length of her skirt — it was a mini-skirt — Ms Calloway said he had twice intervened on the victim's behalf.
The first time it was to stop the defence counsel from questioning her about her sexual history, the second time it was to stop Anderson referring to the victim by her last name, as if talking about a defendent.
Helena Kennedy, a barrister, said the law should be changed in rape cases to compel the defence to ‘reveal their hand’, in relation to any attack made on an alleged victim's character.
This would give the victim chance to rebutt it.
In all sex offence cases juries are warned that that it is ‘dangerous’ to accept the word of the alleged victim alone and that they should look for corroboration.
Ms Kennedy said that coupled with the suggestion — left over from a case in 1976 — that woman and boys tend to lie, this initial suggestion of doubt can be an ‘appalling’ for the victim, who was already having to relive the ordeal in court.
Anderson had employed Jean Southwark QC, one of only a handful of leading women barristers.
Ms Kennedy, who is writing a book on women in the criminal justice system, said it had become common practice in rape trials to employ women lawyers for the defence.
‘It is somehow seen as trying to soften the cross-examination of an alleged victim, and is somehow seen as more acceptable.’
Art Market: Asian sculptures withdrawn from auction after tests reveal fake
By GERALDINE NORMAN
THE MOST important Khmer and Thai sculptures were withdrawn from Sotheby's major sale of Asian art yesterday after one of the pieces was found to be a fake.
The large group of sculpture, including sandstone figures and bronzes, had been sent for sale from America.
After the catalogue had been sent to the printer, Sotheby's asked the Oxford Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art to try thermoluminescent dating on two pieces.
A Thai bronze figure of the Walking Buddha, which had been catalogued as dating from the fourteenth or fifteenth century and estimated at £25,000-£30,000, turned out to have been made within the last 150 years.
‘The patination looked right,’ Brendan Lynch, Sotheby's expert, said.
‘But there was something slightly odd about the style.’
In the case of an eighth-century Pre-Khmer bronze figure of a Bodhisattva, estimated at £40,000-£60,000, the body had been tested and proved ancient but it was clear that the head had once been broken off and re-attached.
Tests of the head do not definitely identify its age and Oxford has asked for a second sample.
When Sotheby's told the owner that both pieces would have to be withdrawn from sale, he decided to withdraw his collection.
The results of the rest of the sale were wildly erratic with 36 per cent left unsold.
Sex appeal dictated the top price, £46,200 (estimate £25,000-£35,000) for an eleventh or twelfth-century Indian sandstone relief carving depicting two lovers under a tree.
A ninth or tenth-century carved stone panel depicting the Seven Mother-Goddesses was sold for £7,700 against an estimate of £15,000-£18,000.
Sotheby's sale of books about the Orient from the Blackmer library have made £2.2m over the last two days with less than one per cent unsold.
There are two more sales today.
Greek bidders descended on the sale yesterday and drove up prices.
A collection of 12 large drawings depicting views of Constantinople and the Bosphorus, by Clara Mayer, dating from about 1790, made the top price at £71,500 (estimate £40,000-£60,000).
The catalogue of Sir William Hamilton's collection of antiquities, published in Naples in 1766-67, secured £39,600 (estimate £18,000-£20,000).
It was on this work that Josiah Wedgwood based his neoclassical pottery designs.
Only 500 copies are said to have been printed.
Still Life with Gladioli, a 1913 painting by the Dutch artist Leo Gestel, sold for 460,000 guilders (£137,765), a record for his work, at Sotheby's Amsterdam sale of modern paintings.
Police use church video in barracks bomb hunt
By JACK O'SULLIVAN
KENT POLICE began re-interviewing 1,500 people in Deal yesterday in an unusual move to develop leads on last month's bombing of the Royal Marines' barracks in the town.
Hundreds arrived to be registered at a special inquiry centre in St Saviour's church, which will be open from 10am to 10pm until tomorrow night.
A video showing the alleged IRA safe house at 17 Campbell Road, asked people viewing it to try to remember whether they had seen, inadvertedly had drinks with, or queued at shops with members of the IRA unit.
Police believe the unit wandered openly in the Deal area and may have visited local pubs.
Drawings of three suspects, two men and a woman, are posted in the church.
Lists of questions ask about possible suspicious sightings of people and vehicles around the barracks and taxi rides to and from the area to pubs or Dover docks.
Det Chief Insp Nick Biddiss said: ‘People may still know things they have forgotten to mention and we hope this exercise will jog their memories.’
Officers sat in booths in a side chapel for people wanting to give confidential interviews.
Police hope to identify men seen several times in the Campbell Road area in the six days between 16 September, when the IRA unit apparently left the safe house, and the bombing.
The officers know that time is against them as new descriptions from members of the public may be distorted by sight of the published artist's impressions.
They are interested in at least a dozen taxi journeys reported between Dover and the Campbell Road area in the month before the bombing.
The officers are also anxious to hear from people who noticed any suspicious strangers seeking rented accommodation in the Deal area during the last 18 months.
Their latest lead is a white transit van reportedly seen near the barracks in the week before the bombing.
This could provide a clue as to the bombers' whereabouts between 16 September and the bombing, which killed 10 bandsmen.
A light brown Mk II Cortina is believed to have broken down when used by the IRA unit and a black E registration Nissan Micra was seen near the barracks the night before the bombing.
Among those expected to be re-interviewed are Kathy Brown, 47, who usually cleans the Campbell Road house, which was let as a holiday home.
She said yesterday that the three-bedroom property was capable of sleeping five people comfortably.
Mrs Brown last cleaned the house at the end of July and was away when the IRA suspects used it.
Another resident, Williamine Dyson, 65, who looked after spare keys for the holiday home, said yesterday she saw a man lingering near the base at the end of August and then walking up Campbell Road.
She added that she never saw the suspected occupants of the house.
ITV set to sign Juno contract
By MARY FAGAN
ITV is this weekend expected to sign a deal believed to involve about £3m for exclusive coverage of the British astronaut project, the Juno mission, writes Mary Fagan.
It will allow the network to cover everything from astronaut training in Moscow's Star City to life on the Soviet space station Mir.
But Juno, which will cost about £16m, has yet to raise any money apart from the ITV deal.
The project is being underpinned by the London-based Moscow Narodny Bank, making television coverage all the more important in the effort to attract sponsors.
Several big British companies are said to be ‘extremely interested’.
Their involvement, if it materialises, may be anything from straightforward advertising on the equipment, on Mir, and even on the astronaut, to support for scientific experiments.
A Soviet delegation arrives this month to discuss the experiments and the choice of astronaut.
Child transplant challenges liver surgeons
By CELIA HALL, Medical Editor
A GIRL aged two was in a critical but stable condition last night after undergoing a 10-hour liver transplant operation at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge.
Linda Prime is in the paediatric intensive care unit after the technically successful surgery.
The operation was conducted by three surgeons, led by Mr Peter Johnston, senior lecturer in surgery at Cambridge University.
Although Linda is not the youngest child to receive a liver, the Addenbrooke's team carried out a successful transplant on a seven-month-old baby two years ago, her size and the fact that she has received previous surgery for her condition complicated the procedure.
The surgeons had to join blood vessels of only two millimetres in diameter and use suturing materials no broader than a human hair.
The stitching is done holding the needles with tweezers with the surgeons wearing special operating glasses.
Linda suffers from biliary atresia, an abnormality in which the bile duct is blocked.
This means waste matter cannot be discarded through the system known as the biliary tree, one of the four major vessels connected to the liver.
This damages the liver leading to sclerosis and scarring.
She had already been given an operation for biliary atresia which is designed to unblock or bypass the blockage leaving scar tissue which is more likely to bleed.
At the same time the body develops ways around the scarring to maintain blood supply ‘growing’ little extra blood vessels into the gut and stomach wall.
All these have to be untangled before the damaged liver can be removed.
Linda received a liver from another child so surgeons did not have to cut an adult liver to size.
The main vessels that are cut and connected to the new liver are biliary duct, the hepatic artery which supplies the liver with blood from the heart, the portal vein which drains blood from the stomach and the gut and the hepatic vein which takes the blood back to the heart.
The success rate for liver transplants in children is about 75 per cent.
Government ‘committed’ to solicitors' legal rights
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
THE Government is committed to allowing solicitors as well as barristers to represent their clients in the higher courts, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, said last night.
But he refused to give details of possible limits on these new rights.
Despite recent pleas from the Bar and solicitors, the Lord Chancellor declined to say explicitly whether he backed the idea of special restrictions in some cases.
While making no overt concessions, he told lawyers and judges at the Middle Temple in London that discussions between a proposed advisory committee, the Law Society and senior judges ‘may lead to different conclusions for different types of case, and most important of all, our conclusions may change in the light of experience’.
Following a speech by Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, to barristers this month, there have been fears that senior judges involved in drawing up rules would effectively block the use of the new rights in practice, by insisting that preparation of some cases and their presentation in court should be handled by different people.
Such a rule would prevent solicitors handling the client's case from start to finish.
But in a series of remarks broadly encouraging to solicitors, Lord Mackay said the lay-dominated advisory committee would be likely to consider what happens in other countries where there was no enforced separation of the two functions.
‘I suspect that the advisory committee will wish to consider also the fact that solicitors are able now to prepare and present cases in the magistrates’ and county courts and in chambers in the High Court.
Some of these cases already involve difficult questions of law and fact,’ he added.
The committee would be likely to consider a suggestion by Lord Donaldson that case separation might be needed where the public had an interest in the outcome of a case but it would also play a role as representative of those who actually used legal services, he said.
Lord Mackay warned that it was ‘misleading and unfair’ to read Lord Donaldson's speech as an indication that judges would block solicitors' rights.
Any decision that preparation and presentation should be separate would have to be justified to the public and be open in the last resort to judicial review.
‘For those who think that this is window dressing, I pause to remind you that not so long ago the Lord Chancellor was himself the subject of judicial review proceedings,’ he added.
But Walter Merricks, assistant secretary general at the Law Society, said: ‘We have urged the Government to think again about the framework.
We think it could lead to a stalemate.
He should adopt the approach outlined in the Scottish White Paper.’
Lord Mackay supported a recent suggestion by Lord Donaldson that small claims procedures should be easily operated by the do-it-yourself litigant.
He added that there might be a sufficient pool of volunteers to act as a new breed of ‘civil justices’.
Loan sharks ‘thriving on inner-city poor’
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
(First Edition) LOAN SHARKS enticing people into debt, then inflicting violence on them when they fail to pay 100 per cent interest rates, are a growing and deeply disturbing aspect of inner-city poverty, a conference was told yesterday.
Dr Bob Holman, a National Children's Home neighbourhood worker on the Easterhouse Estate in Glasgow, told a conference in London on growing up in the inner city organised by the Thomas Coram Foundation and chaired by Lord Scarman, that most of the 44,000 people there lived in poverty.
Many had to borrow money, a need that had grown since last year's replacement of social security single grants for urgent needs or repairs by social fund loans.
People could borrow from the social fund, he said, and get money that was interest-free, but money was taken from their income support immediately, even though that support was meant to be the lowest level of income on which one could cope.
Increasingly, people on these and other estates were turning to loan sharks, who offered money even without being asked.
He said: ‘The rate is a pound for a pound and the whole within a week.
If you can't pay pressures are applied, first verbal, then your windows are smashed, then violence.
So children grow up in an atmosphere of harassment and greater poverty.’
He said his flat on the estate had been robbed by a man whose knees had been smashed with a baseball bat after falling foul of a loan shark.
Police had made video films of such people, but there were few arrests as most victims were scared to testify.
The best answer, Dr Holman said, was credit unions, local organisations of residents who save and lend to each other at low interest rates.
Peter Brown, chairman of the Thomas Coram foundation, said: ‘Unless the human imperative of individual dereliction is addressed alongside the more visual investment in environmental dereliction, and however well we spend it this means more money, the country will find itself in a downward spiral of inner-city social decay that could well substitute Drug Alley for the Gin Lane of Coram's and Hogarth's day.’
Pollution curb
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
The National Farmers' Union proposed a licensing system to curb straw burning, after hundreds of complaints about smoke pollution at the end of the harvest.
Van deaths
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
Police were investigating the deaths in a fume-filled van of two cousins who had apparently connected a hose from the exhaust pipe to warm themselves.
The bodies of Alex Stewart, 28, and Hugh Stewart, 21, from Reading, Berkshire, were found on Wednesday at Barley Mow Lane, near St Albans, Hertfordshire.
Health awards
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
The Medical Journalists' Association 1989 award for the most outstanding contribution to medical journalism has been won by Nicholas Timmins, The Independent's Health Services Correspondent.
Other winners of the award, sponsored by Reckitt and Colman, included Cherrill Hicks, a freelance journalist who works on The Independent's health page, for her book Who Cares; Looking After People at Home.
Insulin ‘plea’
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
The British Diabetic Association has urged diabetics not to stop taking genetically-engineered ‘human’ insulin.
The association has had calls from hundreds of sufferers after a report that 17 people on human insulin have died this year.
Brown selected
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
Ron Brown, Labour MP for Edinburgh Leith, was reselected last night as his local party's parliamentary candidate.
He won 54 per cent of the ballot against two challengers.
Disease threat to beet crop
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
A farm in Norfolk has been placed under strict quarantine after the discovery of rhizomania or ‘root madness’, which attacks sugar and other beet crops, reducing the yield.
Ministry of Agriculture inspectors fear that the disease has spread from the Continent, and are carrying out detailed checks around Wood Farm, near Aylsham.
Doctors soften protest
By DAVID LISTER, Cities Correspondent
Patients who dislike the Government's NHS plans are to be urged by the British Medical Association to visit their MPs' surgeries and write to their health authorities.
Seven million new leaflets are being sent to 35,000 GPs as the next stage of the BMA campaign against the NHS White Paper, which has now cost more than £2m.
The leaflets, softer in tone than much of the BMA campaign, suggest that hospitals that fail to compete in the new NHS market could go bankrupt; GPs will be forced to compete for patients, with those that take on more having less time for patients; while ‘opted out’ hospitals may drop some specialist services if they are not financially viable.
Home Office grants delay in deportation of Kurdish refugee
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
A HOME OFFICE minister yesterday intervened at the last minute to delay a Kurdish refugee being flown back to Turkey.
Selahattin Ozberk, who had been booked on an afternoon flight from Heathrow to Istanbul, will now be sent back next Tuesday evening unless another country can be found to accept him.
The decision by Timothy Renton, Minister of State, came after an urgent representation from the London office of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees on Wednesday.
The looming enforced removal of Mr Ozberk, 30, has the makings of a diplomatic incident.
The commission now has the task of finding another country to take him in the next five days, and it is not optimistic.
Jean Pierre Hocke, the commissioner of the Geneva-based organisation, has made it known he is concerned about the case.
The commission believes Mr Ozberk has good reasons to fear being returned to Turkey and qualifies as a genuine political refugee.
Amnesty International and several other groups have given their support.
Mr Ozberk had already been taken, handcuffed and escorted by police, to the police station at Heathrow airport from the Haslar detention centre, near Gosport, Hampshire, when Mr Renton's new orders were given to the Immigration Service.
Another Kurd who was with him, Halil Guzel, won no reprieve and was put on a flight to Istanbul.
The UN had not said he deserved political asylum.
About 60 Kurdish refugees tried to mount a demonstration in Terminal 2 but were led away by police who said it was illegal under airport by-laws.
Mr Ozberk has now been moved to Pentonville Prison which is nearer the airport.
Michael Hanley, his solicitor, said: ‘He will be isolated, with no other Kurds to talk to, and I fear it will make his mental state even worse.
He is on the brink of breakdown, sobbing and incoherent.’
An attempt in the High Court to get the decision to remove Mr Ozberk quashed failed yesterday afternoon.
Mr Justice McCullough said the UN High Commission for Refugees was entitled to its view that he was a political refugee, and so was Amnesty International.
But, on the same evidence as they had, the Home Secretary had reached a different view quite lawfully.
The court heard Mr Ozberk had told immigration officials that in April he had been arrested by Turkish police seeking information about his brother, a member of an outlawed Kurdish independence organisation.
He was held for four hours and beaten with a truncheon.
A few weeks later he flew to Britain.
Six other Kurds at Haslar face imminent removal.
Over the next few months it is likely that the Home Office will order out hundreds more of the 3,500 Kurds who arrived in May and June and now live in north London.
Some are economic refugees who came to Britain seeking a better life; the rest are trying to escape oppression and even torture.
Therapy aids cancer patients' survival
By CELIA HALL, Medical Editor
A GROUP of American breast-cancer patients who were given supportive therapy and taught self-hypnosis to deal with pain survived for twice as long as women who received routine cancer care.
In all the cases the cancer had spread to other organs, giving poor survival chances; but on average the patients who received pyschological treatment lived for 37 months while those who did not lived 19 months on average.
The three women who were still alive after 10 years had all been in the therapy group.
The attempt to answer claims that psychological attitudes affect survival in cancer patients is reported today in The Lancet from researchers in California, but they add that other factors may have influenced the results.
They say that more of the therapy group were married, and married people with cancer are known to survive longer; that help with pain control meant they were more likely to remain active and continue with exercise; and that they tended to eat better.
The 50 women received group therapy for a year, in three groups visiting hopsital weekly for their sessions.
The psychiatrists from Stanford University and the University of California reported ‘intense bonding’ among the women who were able to share their experiences.
‘Thus the groups countered the social alienation that often divides cancer patients from their well-meaning but anxious family and friends,’ they write.
Doctors at the Royal Marsden Hospital and St Bartholemew's Hospital, London, have discovered that a cocktail of anti-leukaemia drugs achieved complete remission in half the patients and a response in another quarter.
All the patients had multiple myeloma which affects bone marrow.
Shakespeare's Globe unearthed
By DAVID KEYS, Archaeology Correspondent
THE REMAINS of the Globe Theatre, where Shakespeare acted and at least a dozen of his plays were premiered, have been discovered by archaeologists excavating on the south bank of the Thames in central London.
Shakespeare partly-owned the Globe, which was built in 1599 and rebuilt in 1614 after a fire in 1613 started by a cannon used as a prop.
It was demolished in 1644, two years after the Puritans banned theatrical performances in England.
The current excavations are the first time that the theatre's remains have been seen since that destruction.
So far, excavations near Southwark Bridge have unearthed part of its outer and inner walls, and any further investigations could reveal its exact design.
Historians have long debated what the Globe looked like.
Theories have been put forward that it had anything from 6 to 24 sides, and even that it may have been circular.
The remains unearthed consist of chalk block and brick walls, and even some timbers.
‘This spectacular discovery should once and for all prove what shape the original Globe was,’ Martin Clout, the theatre architecture historian, said.
Mr Clout was one of the founders of the Rose Theatre Trust, which championed the preservation of the late Tudor theatre's remains.
These are adjacent to the Globe site.
The current excavation at the Globe is merely to assess the site's archaeological potential.
It is not known whether there will be a full archaeological investigation of the entire site, or even of a large part of it; the excavation ends today.
Some of the Globe's remains lie beneath an officially protected early nineteenth-century listed building.
If a full excavation of the Globe were to take place, the building would need to be demolished first.
This would pose historians and conservationists with a dilemma.
Only a three-yard stretch of the theatre has been unearthed, and it is not known whether any more will be excavated.
However, the archaeologists and the site's owners, the property developer Hanson plc, are co-operating.
The Museum of London and Hanson are to ask Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment, to schedule the site as one of national importance.
It is believed to be the first time a developer has urged the Government to schedule an archaeological site.
David Trippier, the heritage minister, confirmed yesterday that the Department of the Environment would ‘be considering very carefully, with advice from English Heritage, the need to schedule the remains’.
However, scheduling will not only protect the site from damage through property development, but is also likely to prevent further archaeological excavations being carried out — at least without special government authority.
Hanson and the Museum of London say that ‘as soon as practicable the site will be open to public view for a limited period.
‘The Museum of London will then temporarily fill in the site to preserve and protect it while it is decided how it might be put on permanent display.’
Pupils over 16 ‘should get loans’
By PETER WILBY, Education Editor
LOANS SHOULD be offered to sixth-formers, and university and college students, a report commissioned by BP suggests today.
Professor Alan Smithers and Pamela Robinson, of Manchester University, say it is vital for Britain's economic future that more young people are persuaded to stay at school after 16.
‘A college education should be regarded as everyone's birthright.’
Given constraints on public expenditure, it is unlikely that the Government could be persuaded to introduce maintenance grants for 16 to 18-year-olds.
It will bring forward legislation in the coming parliamentary session to introduce student loans, partially replacing grants, from autumn 1990.
The authors also propose that A-levels and other exams for 16 to 18-year-olds should be reformed to be more like the GCSE.
‘The problem lies with our present system of academic examinations where candidates compete against each other for grades so that there are winners and losers.
‘It would be better to ask young people to show what they could do against explicit criteria so that the challenge would be between the person and the task, not between individuals, with one person's success being another's failure,’ the report says.
Degree exams should be reformed on similar lines.
Orders for secret trials challenged
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
FOR THE first time in English legal history, judges' decisions to close their doors to the Press and public have been challenged in the Court of Appeal.
Three Old Bailey judges were accused of ignoring the principle of open justice, and wrongly holding secret hearings.
They are the first tests of legal reforms introduced two months ago to allow judges' secrecy orders to be reviewed.
The person to bring the first challenge was Tim Crook, a radio journalist, whose campaign for more open justice to the European Commission led to the reforms contained in the Criminal Justice Act 1988.
However, believing that the reforms do not go far enough, and backed by the National Council for Civil Liberties (Liberty) and The Independent, he is still pursuing the campaign to the European courts.
Andrew Nicol, for Mr Crook, told Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, sitting with Mr Justice Macpherson and Mr Justice Pill, that his client had been ‘zealous’ in trying to preserve the principle of open justice.
Mr Crook is appealing against two secrecy orders imposed last month, and applying for leave to appeal against another also made last month.
At the close of yesterday's hearing, the court reserved judgment on the two appeals and gave leave for Mr Crook to pursue the third — but not until the first judgment had been given.
The judges concluded by imposing a publicity postponement order on the day's proceedings under the Contempt of Court Act.
Lord Lane said: ‘No mention is to be made of any of the facts upon which these three orders were founded until after the conclusion of the last of the three trials involved, whenever that may be.’
He added that this order would leave it open to the Press to deal with the questions of principle so far as they did not apply them to the facts.
Mr Nicol said that in each of the three cases the restriction of access to the public conflicted with the principle of openness which applied to all legal proceedings.
If there was a potential prejudice in reporting any of the proceedings it could have been dealt with by the lesser measure of a postponing order.
He told the appeal judges it would not be ‘just an empty gesture’ to vary the orders complained of and instead impose postponement orders.
The appeals were opposed by Robert Harman QC, who argued that to have allowed the Press to stay in court, subject to a postponement order, for the disputed hearing would have served only to satisfy the ‘inquisitiveness’ of Old Bailey journalists.
Stunning victory puts Yusupov on level terms
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
ARTUR YUSUPOV scored a stunning victory against Anatoly Karpov yesterday to level the scores in the Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-final, writes William Hartson.
Playing an unusual opening variation, Yusupov secured some advantage, but with accurate play Karpov fought back.
Just as everyone was expecting a draw, however, Yusupov made a an unexpected sacrifice of a bishop.
In time trouble and under severe pressure, Karpov was unable to find a defence as Yusupov's queen and rooks swarmed into his position.
Karpov resigned at move 37, facing inevitable mate.
It was the first time Yusupov has ever beaten Karpov, and leaves the scores level with three games left to play.
In the other match, Jonathan Speelman claimed a time-out, taking a break in order to think himself into the right frame of mind to fight his way back into the match.
He trails Jan Timman by one point with two games left.
Irishmen arrested in hotel raid
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
FIVE Irishmen arrested in an early-morning raid on a Cheltenham hotel yesterday were last night being held for questioning under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.
Gloucestershire police said there was no evidence to connect them with recent bombings such as the attack on Royal Marine bandsmen at Deal, Kent.
Police said the arrests came after a tip-off from a member of the public.
The Prime Minister and other ministers are expected to attend a Conservative conference in Cheltenham next spring.
Armed police went to the hotel shortly before 7am to make the arrests, and sniffer dogs were later used in a search of the premises.
Under the Act, the men can be held for up to seven days.
The hotel's owner said nine Irishmen had been staying at the hotel since June, all of them apparently working as builders.
In Belfast, a brother of Gerry Adams, West Belfast Sinn Fein MP, was remanded in custody on charges arising from a gun attack on an RUC station last weekend.
Sean Patrick Adams, 30, and Anthony Gillen, 27, were accused of attempting to murder members of the security forces in west Belfast, and of possessing an AK 47 rifle and ammunition with intent to endanger life.
Daniel Joseph McBrearty, 36, from Londonderry, is to appear in court today charged with possessing the explosive RDX, according to Scotland Yard.
He was arrested last Thursday in London.
Five held in Brink's-Mat inquiry
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
TWO MEN and three women were being questioned last night by Scotland Yard detectives investigating the laundering of proceeds from the £26m Brink's-Mat bullion robbery.
They were arrested during early morning raids on nine addresses in London and the Home Counties and taken to Cannon Row police station in central London.
A Yard statement said the five were being questioned in connection with the alleged dishonest handling of £16m of the £26m in gold bars stolen in November 1983 from the Brink's-Mat bullion warehouse at Heathrow airport.
The statement said the arrests were made by the force's organised crime task force, headed by Det Chief Supt Graham Melvin, after several months' inquiries.
The task force was set up after detectives discovered that some of the money had been used to finance drugs and property dealing in the United States and even invested in London's Docklands, realising millions of pounds in profits.
About £20m of the original money is believed to have been accounted for, although about another £6m is still missing.
A number of people have already been sentenced to long prison terms in connection with the robbery.
Gordon Parry, 44, is in detention in Spain awaiting extradition proceedings to Britain in connection with the case.
He was arrested in Marbella in April by Scotland Yard detectives and Spanish police.
Villagers get lessons in rural protest
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
EVENING CLASSES are being used to educate rural protesters in the best ways to defend the countryside from polluters and developers, writes Christian Wolmar.
Villagers are being shown how to lobby for change by learning how to write press releases, organise protests and run clean-up campaigns.
The Action for Communities in Rural England (ACRE) has published a handbook, Doing by Learning, which explains how to start a course.
Ian Scott, co-ordinator of its rural adult education project, said that at times the enthusiasm of the groups being taught had to be dampened: ‘At the opening class of a course being run in Co Durham, the students frightened the tutor by demanding that there should be a march on County Hall.
In fact, they ended up learning that there were much more effective ways of organising.’
The organisers of the courses, which have been run in 60 villages across 20 counties, often find they have to overcome opposition within the village first.
Bernard Lane, one of the authors of the handbook, said: ‘The students find that there is much more that can be done in the village than was thought.
The local parish council has often been in the hands of a group leading the area into decline.
The courses are powerful because they provide a link between the newcomers and the local indigenous population who find that working together can help them learn to influence the decision makers.’
Ambulance action rethink
By BARRIE CLEMENT
(First Edition) AMBULANCE union leaders are to consider stepping up industrial action after it became clear yesterday that management had made no concessions in talks with Acas, the conciliation service, writes Barrie Clement.
Representatives of the five unions involved will meet on Tuesday to discuss the options, which will range from reballoting to allow for limited strike action to less disruptive forms of escalation in the four-week pay dispute.
Acas officials briefed union leaders yesterday on discussions with management last Tuesday, but there appeared to be no possibility of an early breakthrough.
Union sources thought last night that an all-out strike was unlikely, although various forms of non-co-operation might be considered.
Privatised BR ‘low on agenda’
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correpondent
(First Edition) RENEWED doubts about the possibility of privatising British Rail were raised yesterday by Cecil Parkinson, Secretary of State for Transport, in a speech to the Tory party conference.
Although his predecessor, Paul Channon, sounded a note of caution at last year's conference, there were high hopes that the party would include privatisation of BR in its next manifesto.
Mr Parkinson told journalists later: ‘It has never been at the top of my agenda.
It was never going to happen before the next Parliament, if ever.’
His remarks will disappoint many right-wing Tories who have been pushing hard for the Government to give a firm commitment to privatisation.
Studies on the options are still going on, and the Government's decision to increase BR's profit targets had been seen as part of the ‘fattening-up’ process.
Mr Parkinson, after devising the privatisation of the electricity industry, is under pressure to avoid creating a private monopoly with BR services.
He also appeared to distance himself from the BR route for the Channel tunnel link, saying that when BR brought forward the Bill for its preferred route through Kent, it would be ‘for Parliament to settle the way forward’.