

Football: Why Robson must discover innovation: Patrick Barclay, Football Correspondent, on England's overriding need for understudies now a place in the Italian sun has been secured
By PATRICK BARCLAY, Football Correspondent
THE LATE Jock Stein laid down a strategy for the World Cup when he said that a team could wear working clothes to qualify, but needed to find evening dress for the event itself.
This has always seemed to make sense, despite the Scots' own tendency to be caught with a wardrobe of empty coat-hangers and crumpled piles, and one's fear on behalf of England is that they are running out of time in which to find a dinner jacket.
The boiler-suit stage was completed in Chorzow on Wednesday, when Bobby Robson's team made sure of a place in Italy next summer with a goalless draw, their third in six qualifying matches; having kept a clean sheet in the other three, all won, they are entitled to regard themselves as the most workmanlike team in Europe.
And that, of course, goes to the heart of England's next problem.
By qualifying, they have changed the criteria.
They looked plain ordinary in Poland.
For an hour they were outplayed by a recast side whose pace and touch, if not finishing, evoked uncomfortable echoes of England's embarrassments in the European Championship.
As Terry Butcher admitted afterwards, Peter Shilton's goalkeeping ‘kept us in the World Cup’.
Shilton did a sort of Jan Tomaszewski in reverse with the Polish hero of 1973, now an assistant to the national manager, watching in frustration.
Five weeks earlier, in Stockholm, the 40-year-old Shilton had also made vital saves.
But he cannot be relied upon for ever.
Far from resting happily on this team, Robson ought immediately to disrupt it, to set aside his obsession with results, to experiment with players and tactics.
And yet, early yesterday morning, when the squad returned to Luton, the indications were that he would keep changes to a minimum for the friendly against Italy at Wembley next month.
Loyalty or conservatism?
Whatever you call it, Robson's refusal to jettison the bulk of the side that returned from Germany in shame had been vindicated by Wednesday's outcome.
He has rebuilt confidence and, on the triumphant journey home, the captain, Bryan Robson, was applauded for thanking him ‘for sticking to his principles’.
The danger now is of being lulled into a false sense of family security.
Football can be a cruel game and the undeniable, unpalatable truth is that Robson's key players are not getting any better than they were two years ago (with the arguable exception of Shilton), and certainly no younger.
If the side that did duty this week trots out in the Italian sunshine in June, it will have an average age of 29½, which is ill-suited to the punishing conditions of a concentrated tournament in midsummer.
Each of the last three World Cup-winning sides, two from Argentina and one from Brazil (and, for that matter, the victorious Dutch in the last European Championship), were dominated by men in their mid-twenties.
England's projected backbone will be Shilton (40), Butcher (31), Bryan Robson (33) and Peter Beardsley and Gary Lineker (both 29).
This is not to suggest that all, or indeed any, should be discarded; if England have to go for maturity and hope for the best, so be it.
But they must all at least have plausible understudies, as experienced as possible, by early next year.
For Robson to throw away the opportunity to experiment against Italy, the first of seven countries England will meet before the World Cup, is dangerously wasteful.
Robson says he intends to assess young players in the B internationals against Italy (the night before the main match) and Yugoslavia.
Well, England made a B tour last summer, from which it was deduced that Terry Hurlock might have a full international future.
It was disturbing to hear the manager remind questioners of what happened when he made ‘sensible’ experiments in Saudi Arabia late last year: ‘We got a 1-1 draw and a nasty headline.’
In the name of Allah, things have come to a pretty pass if the tabloids are influencing England's selection policy.
Surely Robson has no need to fear them now.
He must start planning for contingencies, which means dropping stalwarts as well as those over whom questions still loom.
What, for instance, is the point of playing Shilton against Italy?
The sooner Chris Woods, if fit, or David Seaman is brought in, the closer England will be to having an insurance policy should misfortune befall the great keeper, as in the infamous case of Gordon Banks in 1970.
In Stockholm, denied Bryan Robson, they discovered that Steve McMahon has genuine potential.
But blessings cannot simply be expected to come along in disguise.
Has Tony Adams, such a raw youth in Germany, become an adequate challenger to Butcher?
Or is Paul Parker a safer bet?
Until they play against teams of the quality of Italy and Yugoslavia, we shall not have a clue.
Tactically, the worry is that England's 4-4-2 system remains too rigid.
The Poles played 3-4-3, with a sweeper, and looked by far the more flexible.
Robson tires of pointing out that England always have a spare man, but unfortunately this often turns out to be Gary Stevens, an orthodox full-back, perhaps incorrigibly so.
Michael Thomas, a midfielder with experience at right-back, should be tried there.
Up front, Steve Bull, who scored on his debut against Scotland, merits a chance, after two more goals for the Under-21s in Poland, to show that his rampaging style can disconcert the best of defences.
Tony Dorigo must cease to be a non-playing member of the squad, Paul Gascoigne to be an unsolved riddle.
Continuity has served its purpose.
It cannot be allowed to drift into complacency.
The shot that came back off Shilton's bar in the last minute in Chorzow — a couple of inches lower, and England might have been on their way out of the World Cup — was a symbolic warning.
May: Rous Cup (dates to be arranged): Scotland (home); a South American country, possibly Paraquay (home).
June: Match and date to be arranged (away).
Golf: Beck refuses to enter into the spirit
By TIM GLOVER WENTWORTH
WHAT on earth, you may ask yourselves, was one Aki Ohmachi doing in a tournament which carries the title of the World Matchplay Championship?
The answer is that it is a small world, at least in terms of golf in October.
Another reason, of course, is that the 29-year-old Ohmachi is Japanese and so is Suntory, the company that sponsors the championship.
Its attractive format appeals to the BBC but, more to the point for Suntory, Japanese television shows three hours of play a day.
One of Suntory's products is whisky and Japan cannot get enough of the stuff.
They estimate an average annual consumption of 15 litres of whisky per head of the adult population.
Therefore it is only natural for the sponsors to indulge in a little nepotism and provide its Japanese audience with somebody they can identify with while they are enjoying a nightcap.
Unfortunately Ohmachi could not sustain the connection and the rising son went down 8 and 6 on the Burma Road to Chip Beck in the first round yesterday.
Beck, unbeaten in the Ryder Cup with 3½ points out of four, is the sole American survivor in what is clearly a non-vintage field for this year's championship.
Jose-Maria Olazabal, 23, and Ronan Rafferty, 25, the youngest players in the championship, put out Scott Hoch and Mike Reid.
Olazabal, despite feeling like death warmed up, defeated Hoch, the runner-up in the Masters, 4 and 2 in a match in which the Spaniard was never headed.
Olazabal, unshaven, was suffering from a headache and fever and had had a sleepless night.
‘What I need is a nice girl,’ he said.
‘Well it's Woosie tomorrow,’ said the press officer with immaculate timing.
The unlucky loser was Reid but then that's been the story of his season.
Reid, who lost winning positions on the final day in the Masters and the US PGA, was beaten 3 and 2 and when he bowed out on the 34th green he was nine under par for the day.
Rafferty, however, was 12 under.
The Northern Irishman, second in the Order of Merit to Olazabal, went round in 66 to Reid's 67 in the morning and when the American, at the 22nd hole, had his eighth birdie, Rafferty's response was an eagle three.
He had eagled the same hole earlier.
Rafferty, who had reached the turn in 33 first time round, went out in 32 in the afternoon by which stage he was two up.
Reid was faultless but Rafferty was better.
In the quarter-finals today Rafferty plays the holder Sandy Lyle; Olazabal meets Ian Woosnam; Beck threatens Seve Ballesteros and David Frost will do the same to Nick Faldo.
Beck, a physical fitness fanatic, believes he has the confidence and the form to go all the way in this championship.
A graduate in journalism from North Carolina, he is 33 but says we have not yet seen the best of Beck.
‘I'm looking forward to my future,’ he said.
‘I hope Seve is at his best.
Beating him would be a feather in my cap.’
His cap was a black and white check to go with black and white shoes and a black and white striped shirt.
Ballesteros should provide some badly needed colour, not least for the television sets of the patrons in Japan.
Rugby Union: Wasps shuffle pack
By BARRIE FAIRALL
WASPS come to attention in the league tomorrow by calling for the old guard in an effort to repulse Gloucester's rugged raiders at Sudbury.
For the first time this season, Paul Rendall and Jeff Probyn are paired together in the front row in a switch of policy aimed at tightening up the pack.
Wasps are prepared to sacrifice the mobility which Gary Holmes and Paddy Dunston provided when Rendall and Probyn, the England props, made a delayed start to the season after taking part in the World XV tour to South Africa.
Having begun their Courage First Division programme with a 29-12 home win over Leicester, Wasps then lost direction and the match when they took on Harlequins at The Stoop.
On the same day, Gloucester stole a march by beating the champions, Bath, at Kingsholm in a fierce encounter during which another England prop, Bath's Gareth Chilcott, was sent off for punching.
Meanwhile, news concerning Mike Teague — the Gloucester back row forward who in South Africa aggravated a shoulder injury which had caused him problems during the Lions tour of Australia — is not brilliant.
Although Teague has resumed light training, he looks certain to miss England's match against Fiji on 4 November and has told his club that he does not expect to be fit until the middle of next month.
England are still awaiting news on another back-row man with shoulder problems — Leicester's No. 8, Dean Richards, who will not be making this weekend's away day to Orrell, whose coach, Des Seabrook, is in hospital recovering from a mild heart attack.
The Tigers, who will also be minus the magic of the holidaying Les Cusworth, are relieved to hear that their England centre, Paul Dodge, and the England B flanker, John Wells, have recovered from hamstring injuries in time for the trip.
Dodge and Wells return in place of Alan Warwood and Adey Marriott while Jez Harris, who also played in last weekend's hefty win over Coventry when Cusworth kicked his heels on the bench, remains at stand-off.
In the second row, Malcolm Foulkes-Arnold loses his place to Alex Gissing, a 21-year-old, 6ft 5in former England Colt.
Vince Cannon, a long-serving England squad member, has decided to retire after 438 games for Northampton.
Cannon, 39, had intended to play on for one more season, but he has a back injury that may require surgery.
Cricket: Boycott set to reopen county strife
By DEREK HODGSON
GEOFFREY BOYCOTT signalled the opening of a new phase in Yorkshire's internecine strife when he called a press conference yesterday morning to criticise the club's general committee.
Stung by comments about his walk-out from the committee meeting at Headingley on Tuesday, the 49-year-old former England opener and member for Wakefield, fired back in a modern hotel on the Wakefield side of the M1 in front of a local television crew, a radio reporter and five Yorkshire-based reporters.
‘I left in exasperation,’ he declared.
Angered by suggestions that his conduct was inexplicable and that he had not offered any constructive criticism during a 3½ hour inquest into Yorkshire's dismal summer, Boycott claimed that the cricket sub-committee would not accept any form of responsibility: ‘They have been in charge for five of the last six years but will not agree that they are at least partly to blame for the fact that Yorkshire cricket is in a mess.’
He said he could not serve on that sub-committeee (consisting of Brian Close, Bob Appleyard, Phil Sharpe, Bryan Stott, Tony Woodhouse)‘when I do not see eye to eye with them on any subject’.
He also attacked Brian Walsh, the chairman, whom he called ‘a clever dick’, a somewhat foolhardy reference to a Queen's Counsel.
‘The hierarchy are now under fire because of the team's performance and are seeking to deflect criticism by blaming me.
It won't work.
I won't be the whipping boy,’ Boycott said.
Boycott has called a meeting of his own Wakefield members for next Tuesday and seems set on leading a campaign to unseat the majority of the committee, something he managed once before, in January 1984.
Whether he will be as successful again is open to doubt, because his own playing career was then an issue and he had substantial sympathy backing both inside and outside the committee and membership.
At present, he cannot count on more than five or six votes in the 23-strong general committee, while outside his once well-organised Reform Group/Members' 84 Group has disbanded.
Peter Briggs, who proved to be an astute campaign manager, has resigned his membership.
Five years ago, two of Boycott's supporters were Walsh and the present public relations chairman, Sid Fielden, both now among his strongest critics.
But while Yorkshire fail on the field there will always be discontent, and Boycott, after a period in which he appeared to have submerged himself in a media career, may head the opposition once more.
If he succeeds in stirring up tabloid backing again with ‘the people's champion against the gin-and-tonic brigade’, the theme of 1984, then Yorkshire are in for another incendiary winter.
Rugby Union: Fox set fair for Cardiff
By ROBERT COLE
THE WELSH used to be a hindrance rather than a help to the All Blacks but, by giving Grant Fox permission to practise his goalkicking at the Arms Park prior to tomorrow's game with Cardiff, they might be contributing to their own downfall.
Like so many in the New Zealand tour party, Fox has never experienced the intimidating atmosphere generated at the great sporting shrine and may have taken time to slip into the groove.
After today's practice session, that seems unlikely.
‘It's good to get your bearings and get a feel of the atmosphere and conditions of a ground before you play on it.
I generally ask to have a few kicks before a big game,’ Fox said.
‘I've already had a brief look at the Arms Park and it seems a great ground.’
The attention to detail displayed by Fox reveals much about New Zealand's attitude to the game, nothing being left to chance.
Not content with spending an extra half hour after training running through his technique yesterday, when two wayward kicks brought immediate self-rebuke, the 26-year-old Aucklander aims to put in a further 50 or 60 shots in his Arms Park warm-up.
In Fox's case, practice obviously goes a long way to making perfect.
He is the quickest man in Test rugby to reach 100, 200 and 300 points.
He has now scored 302 in 18 internationals, has an average of 17.5 per game since becoming the No. 1 kicker, and goes into tomorrow's game having stretched his top-grade tally to 2,533 in 188 matches.
Cycling: Yates disputes drug test
By ROBERT COLE
SEAN YATES, the Briton who won this year's Tour of Belgium, tested positive for steroids during the race, his lawyer said yesterday.
A Belgian cycling union official confirmed that an unnamed rider had tested positive and said that if it were Yates, he would receive a 10-minute penalty that would lose him the race.
Yates could also be fined 3,000 Swiss francs (£1,140) and banned from competition for three months, though the ban would automatically be suspended.
Yates's lawyer, Philippe Grollet, said the rider, from Forest Row, Sussex, tested positive for nostestosteron, a proscribed muscle-building substance, after the first part of the split first stage of the tour on 9 August.
But he said Yates denied taking steroids and that there had been irregularities in the testing procedures.
Grollet said Yates was informed of the test result on 6 September, a delay of several weeks, instead of the eight-day delay provided for under the rules of the International Cycling Union.
Yates was also tested in each of the next five days of the Tour of Belgium as standings leader and each time tested negative.
‘If he had taken that product, he would also have tested positive those other days as well,’ Grollet said.
Grollet said a laboratory in Utrecht had carried out a second test on 14 September and that, too, had been positive.
But the laboratory's report pointed out that the sample flask did not bear Yates's signature, casting doubt on its authenticity.
‘That's even more bizarre, which makes us believe there has been a mix-up of flasks,’ Grollet said.
‘We are now examining a few contradictions and will decide on the matter next week,’ a spokesman for the Belgian cycling union said.
It was disclosed a week ago that the Frenchman Laurent Fignon had failed a test after a race in The Netherlands last month.
He later described his three-month suspension as too lenient.
Scott's hard sell in the theatre of sport: Neil Wilson on the recruiting officer whose daunting mission is to win the Olympics for Manchester
By NEIL WILSON
MARTIN EDWARDS has not been the only man in Manchester trying to sell something of a sporting nature.
In the heart of the city, Bob Scott is further still from closing a deal.
By comparison, Edwards's task was child's play.
Selling Old Trafford to a first-time buyer on a 100 per cent mortgage would be easier than selling Manchester for the 1996 Olympics.
‘Preposterous is a word I've heard used,’ Scott admits.
But tomorrow the British Olympic Association holds its annual meeting in Manchester, the first time in its 85 years that the meeting has taken place outside London, and the reason is that Scott asked.
‘Simple as that,’ he says.
Scott, a 45-year-old theatrical impresario, is the sort of man who does not ask why, but only why not.
When he heard a breakfast-time radio report that the Government thought the Olympics should return to Britain, he recruited an eminent bid committee within two hours and had the news splashed in that day's first edition of the Manchester Evening News.
Private enterprise-led, of course, as the Government would have wished.
Five years later, and after an initial ‘thrashing’ by Birmingham for the British nomination, the bid is more substantial than a local headline, £2 million more, the Duke of Westminster and a dozen of Britain's blue-chip companies and corporations each persuaded by Scott's vision of a North-west renaissance to dip into their accounts for at least £100,000.
Mancunians will pay next to nothing, which is only right since they were not consulted.
Scott expects ‘pockets of horror’ among those who hate sport or would do not relish a stadium at the foot of the garden, but he senses excitement generally.
‘It's a popular subject.’
There is powerful support, too, from the Princess Royal, the BOA's president, ‘not your traditional Royal patron but a formidable worker for the cause’.
She will be in the North-west for the next three days, for the annual meeting, briefings on Manchester's bid, a Royal Gala evening at one of his theatres and an Olympic bid dinner in Liverpool.
She then gives Scott and his team a lift to a congress in Budapest in the early hours of Tuesday in an aircraft of the Queen's Flight for further lobbying of her fellow International Olympic Committee members.
Scott sees her as Manchester's star turn.
Bobby Charlton, many foreigners' first two words of English, is the other.
‘Thirty-nine IOC members give football as their first interest,’ Scott reveals.
He and Charlton plan a South American tour soon.
But behind it all is Scott, who is self-appointed and unsalaried producer, director and spokesman for an enterprise that never occured to British sport itself.
That remains a mystery to him.
The potential benefits in facilities alone should have been obvious to all, he thinks.
‘When I first became involved, getting the Olympics to Britain wasn't on anybody's agenda within sport, not the Minister's, not the Sports Council's, not the BOA's or any sports body.’
Even now, a year before the deciding vote, he does not believe that sport here understands what getting the Games would mean.
‘They are geared to the narrow dimensions of their own sports.
They don't appreciate how massively they will be affected.’
But in that, he says, Britain is not alone.
He detects tensions everywhere between national Olympic committees and their candidate cities, ‘certainly within the US and Australian candidacies, and within Britain's’.
Those who briefed him on the successful Los Angeles bid — Manchester retains the same American consultants — reported similar problems.
Sports people have learned their place, and the limitations on them.
The entrepreneurial types who lead Olympic bids know none.
‘My difficulty is that I haven't spent 40 years as an umpire or whatever, and there is a tension between people like that and those like me.
It's not uncreative.
They are not resistant.
But I'm having to learn to live with it.’
He finds nothing perverse about a man of the arts fighting sport's corner.
‘They are terribly similar.
I get as big a kick out of watching Seb on the top curve as I do watching a ballet dancer.
It's art.’
Indeed he sees little place for ‘so-called culture’ surrounding an Olympics.
‘If you have spent a day at the stadium, the one thing you don't need is to spend an evening at the theatre.
You've had your theatre for the day.’
Keeping a foot in both camps is made easier because the bid committee's offices are on the same floor as his own at Manchester Theatres Ltd.
‘The only way I could organise my time,’ he explains.
And the leases are not short.
If the bid fails next year, he will back again, and again, however long it takes.
‘I have this wonderful warm glow that we are going to get it.
I don't think it will be 1996 but we might and I'll fight that corner.
My certainty is longer term.
Just so long as we maintain the candidacy.’
Windsurfing event in the Hebrides
By NEIL WILSON
The old man and the sea: more than 50 windsurfers in the Pripps Energy Tiree Wave Classic in the Hebrides hold the attention of an island crofter.
Britain's leading wave-jumping event, in its fourth year, is staged in Tiree because the swells most resemble Hawaii's.
The event, which awards points for style, degree of difficulty and bravery, reaches its acrobatic climax todayPhotograph: Keith Dobney 
Rugby Union: How club colours the issue
By ALAN WATKINS
EVERYONE I have spoken to about the New Zealand tour of Wales agrees that, if they are going to be beaten by anyone, it will be by one of the clubs rather than by the national side.
However, I should not care to put any money on even a single defeat.
The apparent paradox is that, on the evidence provided by such teams as Neath and Llanelli, the clubs individually are more powerful than the country collectively.
I write that the paradox is apparent because there have been signs of the same phenomenon in England over the past few seasons — and also because it is not at all surprising when you come to think about it.
Players will tend to perform better when they are among friends than when they are placed in unfamiliar surroundings.
This remains so despite regular attendance at squad sessions and strenuous visits to sunny Portugal.
There have been only a few exceptions to this general rule.
Thus there were complaints about Jonathan Davies ‘not trying’ when he was playing for Llanelli (and previously for Neath) as he tried when he was playing for Wales.
On the whole, however, players were — and still are — happier turning out for their clubs.
This is not only a matter of familiarity but of the connected conditions of relaxation and self-confidence.
Rob Andrew has, as he himself admits, only recently begun to display his Wasps form for England — and this after 26 caps, an English record in the stand-off half position.
Les Cusworth was never as comfortable in a white jersey as he was in Leicester's Christmas-tree outfit.
Dusty Hare, true, played as well for England as he did for his club, and deserved to win even more than his 25 caps.
Bath players of recent years have never appeared as convincing for England as they regularly do for Bath; while if they are part of one of those curious South-West sides their form goes down yet another notch.
Indeed, the experiences of the South-West Division would seem to argue against the thesis of this column: that national selectors, in England as much as in Wales, should build their teams more around clubs and less around people.
The combination of Bath, Bristol and Gloucester does not succeed because they are an awkward lot down that way.
In France it has long been the practice to build the national side round successful clubs.
Or it used to be so.
One of the many adverse criticisms of Albert Ferrasse and Jacques Fouroux is that, for involved reasons of French rugby politics, they have ostracised the Toulouse club together with such players as Denis Charvet and Eric Bonneval, who would walk on merit into any northern hemisphere XV.
Again, the Lions combination which won the series against Australia was — despite differences in the forwards' techniques — essentially England and Scotland plus Robert Jones.
He, however, is becoming increasingly petulant and argumentative, playing scrum-half like a thwarted 15-year-old on the netball court.
In a pique against Harlequins last Saturday he flung the ball at the opposition tighthead prop and was lucky not to be sent off.
Admittedly the referee was a foolish fellow who kept re-penalising Swansea for failing to retreat 10 yards when he did not give them the remotest chance to do so.
In such circumstances, it was inevitable that Swansea tempers became ragged at the edges.
I did not see Richard Langhorn being kicked by Ian Davies.
But it is humbug for the Harlequins to make a great song and dance about it — and for Jamie Salmon to imply that the New Zealanders never kick anyone.
Their whole game depends on getting the man on the ground out of the way, if necessary with the boot, if he is so unfortunate as to be between them and the ball.
Ian and Stuart Davies and Alan Reynolds form an impressive back row who will clearly not be cowed when the men in black arrive at St Helens.
But I shall not be putting any money on the men in white.
I think Llanelli are the most likely to pull it off.
Sport in Short: Tennis
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Snooker
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Sailing
By ALAN WATKINS
ALEXEI GRYSHENKO, the Soviet yachtsman whose body was found hanging from a tree in Uruguay's Punta del Este on Wednesday, committed suicide, Tass news agency said yesterday.
Gryshenko, co-skipper of the yacht Fazisi, which finished sixth in the first leg of the Whitbread Round the World race, left a note to his wife and parents.
Tass described Gryshenko as ‘an introvert, a reserved man who spoke little.’
Fazisi will continue in the Whitbread race.
Sport in Short: Rugby League
By ALAN WATKINS
SHAUN EDWARDS, the Great Britain international, was found not guilty at a meeting of the Rugby League's disciplinary committee in Leeds tonight, following his sending-off during Wigan's Lancashire Cup semi-final defeat by Oldham last week.
Sport in Short: Rallying
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Motor Racing
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Judo
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Ice Hockey
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Hockey
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Golf
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Football
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Equestrianism
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Cycling
By ALAN WATKINS
THE WOMEN'S Tour de France, traditionally held in July at the same time as the men's race, will be held in the first two weeks of September from next year.
Sport in Short: Cricket
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Boxing
By ALAN WATKINS
DUKE McKENZIE, Britain's former world flyweight champion, beat the American, David Moreno, on points at the Elephant and Castle last night.
McKenzie was fighting for the first time since losing his IBF title to Ulster's Dave McAuley.
TONY WILSON's win over Steve McCarthy in the British light-heavyweight title eliminator at Southampton last month, when McCarthy refused to continue after Wilson's mother attacked him in the ring, has been officially ratified by the British Board of Control.
FRANK WARREN, who manages both Gary Stretch and Chris Pyatt, thinks it unlikely that the two light-middleweights will meet in a world title eliminator.
On Wednesday Stretch made a successful first defence of his British title against Derek Wormald.
Sport in Short: Athletics
By ALAN WATKINS
THE Amateur Athletic Association's five-strong committee to investigate appearance money and other payments to athletes and officials will be chaired by Wing Cdr Dan Davies.
Hockey: Fitting beginning for new trophy
By BILL COLWILL
IT IS appropriate that, for the first staging of the Heineken Trophy, hockey's answer to football's Charity Shield, the country's two foremost clubs should meet: Hounslow, the Hockey Association Cup-winners, and Southgate, the National League champions, writes Bill Colwill.
Southgate, who took the League title on goal difference from Havant, will be out to avenge their penalty-stroke defeat by Hounslow in the League Cup final at Luton last April, after the teams had drawn 2-2 at the end of normal time.
Under Sean Kerly, Southgate have got their act together quickly, even allowing for the loss of such players as Richard Dodds and Robert Clift, Peter Boxell and Jagdis Barber, and through injury, Rupert Welch and John Shaw.
Hounslow have been more fortunate.
With last season's squad intact, now that their goalkeeper, Veryan Pappin, has recovered from injury, they have added Paul Bolland — yesterday recalled by England for the game against West Germany next Wednesday — to their squad.
With both clubs in Europe next year, the generous sponsorship of this event will help them with their expenses.
Perhaps the only disappointment is that the money is to be shared equally, when a winning bonus would give the event the edge it deserves.
American Football: Dallas trade Walker to Minnesota
By BILL COLWILL
HERSCHEL WALKER, the outstanding running back of the Dallas Cowboys, was traded to the Minnesota Vikings yesterday for five players and up to seven draft choices.
Walker, who won the Heisman Trophy for the best college player and is regarded as one of the leading rushers in the NFL, was exchanged for Darrin Nelson (running back), Issiac Holt (defensive back), David Howard and Jesse Solomon (both linebackers) and Alex Stewart (defensive end) plus a first-round and up to six other draft picks in the next three years.
Ice Hockey: Durham move on Europe
By STEVE PINDER
DURHAM WASPS take their first steps into European competition today when they face Rotterdam Pandas, hosts of the four-team first round in the European Cup.
Wasps, present as last season's Heineken Premier Division champions, also face the champions of Poland and France, Polonia Bytom and Francais Volants, in the three-day round robin league.
Before joining Wasps as coach in August, George Peternousek's coached the Dutch national side.
So his experience makes him ideally placed to plot Durham's tactics: ‘The Dutch tend to be steady, defensive and go for the breakout while the Poles rely on disciplined passing.
But they don't like physical hockey, unlike the French, who are capable of very physical hockey.
‘We're going to play a physical, passing game and we must keep the score low to stand a chance, so we need to slow the game down, not allow the opposition any space and keep possession.
We'll be playing three-line hockey, with the third line led by Ivor Bennett, but I'm realistic enough to know it is going to be a very difficult situation against three strong teams.’
As well as the imports, Rick Brebant, Brad Beck and Robert Forbes, Wasps can count on talented British players such as the brothers Johnson — Stephen, Anthony and Sean — and Paul and Damien Smith.
Wasps' foray comes as the sport prepares to move into the next decade as a leading spectator attraction.
Despite the demise this summer of Richmond Flyers, Tayside Tigers and Birmingham Bulls, nearing completion are rinks at Alexandra Palace, Milton Keynes and a new home for Ayr Raiders.
Stewart Roberts, of the British Ice Hockey Association, has another six pencilled in, with news of more coming in weekly.
‘Most of them are in the south of England, which could, in the next 10 years, see the top teams coming from Chichester or Eastbourne,’ Roberts said.
‘They are towns where there is no other big sporting tradition, so ice hockey can attract fans who are eager for any sport rather than have to compete against existing sports.’
The two top leagues still have two more years of a lucrative sponsorship deal with Heineken, and teams are also commanding local sponsorship.
The signs look good for ice hockey in the Nineties.
Judo: Mills bombs out in weight game
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
IN THE final of the British Open in April, Sharon Mills took Diane Bell, Britain's world middleweight champion, to full time and lost only on a decision.
She underlined her potential yesterday in the World Championships here when, though moving up a weight, managed to work her way through to fifth place.
Even Bell could do no better.
Weight — or the lack of it, in the case of Mills — is generally a crucial factor in judo.
Part of the time, she happily balanced the books with skill and vigour.
Her style is to run around the mat, changing direction at a moment's notice, and then fly in for a throw.
She did this to Marianne Prommeger, a tall Austrian, in her first fight to earn a decision.
However, against Taiwan's Mei Ling Wu, her whirlwind pattern paid off.
She struggled and was nearly countered, but then negated Wu's defence and slipped in for a one-armed shoulder throw.
Wu, caught by surprise, went partly on to her back and conceded a waza-ari (seven points).
Power did count in the end, though, for try as she might Mills could not contain the might of Italy's Emanuela Pierantozzi, the European champion, who stood a head taller and reached over with a powerful grip.
The British girl held out until being caught in a hold 30 seconds from the end.
The situation was much the same in the bronze medal fight against Jimenez Reve — Mills gamely avoiding a score but never in contention for the match.
Diane Bell's path was similar, but less spectacular.
Clearly suffering from the after-effects of a hip injury, she was knocked down for a koka — just three points — by the Soviet Elena Petrova, but it was enough to wipe out her hopes of a third consecutive world title.
David Southby, the light-middleweight, lost his first fight against the eventual winner, Korea's Byung-Ju Kim.
Here, lack of confidence was at fault more than anything else.
He did superbly in his first repechage fight.
A koka down against East Germany's Torsten Brechot, who threw Neil Adams in the 1988 Olympics, he gained a yuko (five points) with a rolling sacrifice throw three seconds from time.
Then, though ahead on attacks against the American Jason Morris, a lapse resulted in a footsweep for three points and defeat.
Rugby League: Rovers have another return
By PAUL WILSON
Featherstone Rovers.
.18 Castleford…….18 THE NOTE in the programme wishing Graham Steadman success in his quest for an international cap was not entirely altruistic.
Rovers stand to pick up an extra £25,000 if their former player makes the Great Britain side.
Castleford are unhappy enough about the £145,000 a tribunal made them pay for Steadman, though even with his presence, they were unable to defeat their neighbours, as the second successive Yorkshire Cup semi-final went to a replay.
Steadman's contribution in the first half was restricted to three penalty goals.
Paul Newlove, a Featherstone player who did gain a place in this week's Test squad, scored the first try at the other end, following Barry Drummond's kick.
Two minutes later, Mark Knapper gave Rovers the lead.
Castleford rallied quickly however, and a third try in eight minutes arrived after a mistake under a high kick by Chris Bibb.
Tony Smith broke clear and found room for Steve Larder to outpace the home cover on the left.
Bibb atoned for his error at the start of the second half, when after Castleford lost the ball in front of their own posts he pounced quickly and beat three tacklers for the third Rovers' try, Knapper adding his first goal.
Bibbs' effort was cancelled by Larder's second try on the hour, Steadman managing to hit an upright with the kick from under the posts, and although Knapper was successful with two further penalties, David Plange tied the scores when Gary French squeezed a pass out of a tackle on the line 12 minutes from the end.
Rallying: Biasion in the van of Delta force
By PAUL WILSON
MASSIMO BIASION, of Italy, driving a works Lancia, yesterday squeezed past his team-mate, Alessandro Fiorio, to win the San Remo Rally and lift the world title for the second year running.
The 31-year-old Biasion pushed his new 16-valve Delta Integrale to the limit in making up the half-a-second per kilometre he needed in the fourth and final overnight stage.
Biasion, who also won last year in San Remo, finished with a total time of 6hrs 48min 30sec — only five seconds ahead of Fiorio, who was driving an eight-valve Lancia Delta.
Having won 15 of the rally's 33 special stages, Biasion became world champion with the Ivory Coast and British rallies still to be run in a season spanning 13 events.
The San Remo produced another strong performance from the Lancias, three finishing in the top four places.
Last season, they swept the board with all four leading places.
But this time Carlos Sainz, who had held the lead since Tuesday, came third in a Toyota.
The Spaniard finished only 25 seconds behind Fiorio, while Dario Cerrato of Italy, in another Lancia Delta, was placed fourth overall after breaking front and rear differentials.
Cricket: Hard work the England ethic: Martin Johnson reports from New Delhi
From MARTIN JOHNSON in New Delhi
IF ENGLAND fail to win the Jawaharlal Nehru Centenary Cricket Trophy — the grand title (which is accompanied by the unofficial suffix of ‘Mini World Cup’) presumably intended to persuade the public that they are about to witness something cosmic rather than just another one-day tournament — it will not be because of being under-prepared.
Despite having dispensed with sundry items deemed essential to sustain European stomachs on their World Cup visit in 1987 — doctor, diet sheets, microwave oven and Tesco-sponsored tuck-boxes all left them flushed, as it were, with lack of success — England have been here almost a week, practising every day in sauna-bath temperatures for their opening match against Sri Lanka on Sunday.
England's change of captaincy since the end of the summer and the make-up of their various winter tour squads suggests a belief a that hard work is the first component in the rehabilitation plan.
Allan Lamb, the vice-captain, now finds himself short of a quorum for the easily-bored touring club, which usually takes the form of a private knockabout well out of earshot of Micky Stewart.
No one, however, seriously believes that the omission of both David Gower and Ian Botham from the main event in the Caribbean is based entirely on cricketing form.
There are few better exponents of the art of looking as though life is a complete grind than Graham Gooch, who invariably begins his day with a long-distance run, and Stewart is altogether more comfortable when the ship is being run more like a galley than the Skylark.
The England manager is a slave to slip catching practice, difficult though it is to recall the last time one of his bowlers located an outside edge.
Today England, having demolished a Railways XI containing no opposition of any note, take on a team sponsored by Air India, which looks almost as weak.
The locals field one former Test player, Madan Lal, and although Maninder Singh — last seen being swept to oblivion by Gooch in the Bombay World Cup semi-final — was practising at the England net yesterday, he has yet to come to terms with an attack of the yips.
It is a problem which seems curiously common to left-arm spinners, and manifests itself with the bowler either failing to release the ball, or propelling it vertically into the air.
It finished (as a bowler) the former Derbyshire player, Fred Swarbrook, who gave up the unequal struggle when, peering frantically around to see where a delivery had gone, he found out only when the ball dropped out of the stratosphere and hit him on top of the head.
All three of England's players who did not play against the Railways on Wednesday — Gladstone Small, Eddie Hemmings and Alec Stewart — get a game today, although there is a slight doubt about Phillip DeFreitas, who suffered a reaction to an elbow injury sustained during fielding practice.
Lamb is another minor casualty; he is all right to bat, but he can only throw in underarm at the moment because of a niggle, which at first was thought to be a reaction to an inoculation, but is now believed to be a minor ligament problem.
The Nehru Trophy is already attracting widespread media attention, and is regarded as an important event, not least by the Prime Minister.
Mr Gandhi has an election coming up and a big one-day cricket tournament not only goes down well with the electorate, but also goes a long way towards providing a short-term solution to the unemployment problem.
The avalanche of red tape surrounding events such as this (the entire population of New Delhi appears to be employed handing out forms to fill in) has to be seen to be believed, and it is by no means certain that, come 1 November, there will be any paper left to provide the winners with their cheque.
The Sharjah Cup one-day tournament in Dubai involving West Indies, India and Pakistan was delayed yesterday due to the death of the United Arab Emirates deputy prime minister, Sheikh Hamdan.
The opening match between West Indies and India will now start today.
Next Friday's date for the final remains unchanged.
Football: Bingham's heated argument: Joe Lovejoy reports on Dublin's faith in a reserved passage to Italy
By JOE LOVEJOY
‘IT'S now a certainty — almost.’
No prizes for grammar, but yesterday's Irish Press headline said it all.
The combination of results needed to deprive the Republic of their first appearance in the World Cup finals is so fantastic that the possibility can be discounted.
Chickens were being counted even before Wednesday's 3-0 victory over Northern Ireland, and the inventory was completed when Jack Charlton received congratulatory telegrams from the Taoiseach, Charles Haughey, and other luminaries including Liam Brady, who will miss the trip to Italy after falling out with Charlton last month and announcing his retirement from international football.
Billy Bingham, whose make-do-and-mend team were no match for their southern neighbours' withering power game, added his good wishes.
And a warning.
Northern Ireland's experience in Spain and Mexico in the last two World Cups taught them that heat can pose more problems than the opposition for British-based players.
Bingham said: ‘The Republic have the potential to do well in Italy.
Just how well will probably depend on the temperature.
They play a physically demanding pressing game which is very effective under normal conditions, but they won't be able to maintain the pressure if it is very hot.
‘In extreme heat you have to take a breather and slow things down.
Players can't sustain that sort of aggressive running for the full 90 minutes in Mediterranean summer temperatures.
The Republic blitzed us, but it will be difficult for them to put on that type of performance in Italy.’
Charlton is aware of the problem, of course, and is planning a pre-tournament acclimatisation trip to Malta and early-summer friendlies in Portugal and Turkey.
The Republic are much in demand these days.
Their reputation is growing with each new victory, and it seems everyone is keen to test themselves at Lansdowne Road, where the Irish have been invincible throughout Charlton's three-year managership.
Yugoslavia and France are due in Dublin for friendlies in December and February, while the date England hope to fill in March is also wanted by Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Colombia.
The result apart, the principal sources of Irish satisfaction on Wednesday were further encouraging signs that Tony Cascarino can become the goal-scoring striker the Republic have lacked, and the quality of their football in midfield.
Instead of transferring the ball from defence to attack with the trajectory of a mortar shell, they passed it to feet, and were even allowed to run with it.
George Best travelled fearing the worst, but was pleasantly surprised.
He said: ‘I don't agree with Jack Charlton's long-ball tactics, but there were glimpses of the way I would like to see the Republic play.
In the second half Ronnie Whelan, Ray Houghton and Kevin Sheedy showed some lovely skills, and the North couldn't cope.’
Best believes Brady's return to the fold would enhance the prospects of Irish success in Italy, but the most gifted Irish footballer of his generation insisted last night that there was no question of him changing his mind and resuming his international career.
Brady explained: ‘Jack Charlton wrote to me, saying he was sorry about the way it had ended and expressing the hope that we could still have a decent relationship.
I wrote back thanking him and assuring him that there were no hard feelings on my part, but my decision is unchanged.
There is no question of me going to Italy as a player.’
Brady will go to the ball, but in the same role as Best and Johnny Giles: media pundit.
The all-Ireland press team should draw quite a crowd.
Golf: Feherty feeds on friendly advice
By JOE LOVEJOY
DAVID FEHERTY played what he considered to be the best golf of his life in the BMW tournament in Munich yesterday, thanks largely to a tip from a friend.
The 31-year-old Ulsterman, who was the leading Briton in the Open at Troon last July, had a 10-under-par 62 to lead by three strokes in the first round from the American, Davis Love III.
‘I've shot nine under three or four times, but never 10 under,’ Feherty said.
He then gave a couple of reasons for his spectacular performance, which included 11 birdies.
‘I felt numb from the neck upwards, which is the ideal way to play this game,’ he said, ‘and I had a little lesson yesterday from my friend David Jones.’
Jones, a fellow-Irishman who had a 75, told him that he was not lining up his putter squarely.
‘It worked for me,’ Feherty said, confessing that he had not seen the back nine of the course before because his practice had been restricted by bad light.
Love, 25, had two eagles and four birdies in a round which he said would probably not have been played on the USPGA tour.
‘We Americans are spoilt,’ he said, ‘I doubt whether we would have played in the cold and soaking conditions we had here today.’
Howard Clark, who played for Europe in the recent defence of the Ryder Cup, the Australian Peter Fowler, Sweden's Ove Sellberg and the American, Gary Koch, shared third place on 66.
Golf: British outshone by Moon
From JOHN BOLTON at Stoke Poges
BRITISH professionals were upstaged in the opening round of the Laing Charity Classic when Sweden's Sofia Gronberg and Susan Moon, the American challenger, led the field with six-under-par rounds of 67 here yesterday.
On a day of low scoring, they finished a stroke clear of Xonia Wunsch from Spain, winner of the Italian Open two weeks ago.
Britain's Dale Reid and Debby Dowling were on 69 together with Leigh Mills, another American.
It was on the par-five hole that Gronberg and Moon made their rounds.
Gronberg, a powerful hitter who won the Rome Classic in the first tournament of the season, gathered an eagle and four of her six birdies at the long holes.
Gronberg lost 50 per cent of the sight in her right eye following a car accident six weeks ago.
Since then she has abandoned her contact lens in favour of glasses, having been told that in time her sight will return to normal.
Starting from the 10th, the Swede only once moved over par.
Three putts cost her a stroke at the 18th, which she followed with an eagle three at the 430-yard first when her seven-iron second finished only two feet from the hole.
Moon, who led by two strokes half-way through the third round of the Italian Open, made birdies at all five of the long holes.
Like Gronberg, she had only one bogey and her two remaining birdies came at the 10th and 18th holes.
Football: Roxburgh has the flak flying: Don Lindsay looks at a buck-stopping inquest into a hiccup in Paris
By DON LINDSAY
IT IS pretty rare to come across a football manager brave enough to hold up his hands the day after a beating and invite criticism.
Andy Roxburgh, the Scotland coach, broke the mould in the wake of Wednesday's reverse in Paris by admitting both he and his players had to accept the blame for a defeat which jeopardises Scotland's chances of playing in a fifth successive World Cup finals.
‘There is no way we can sit here and waffle,’ Roxburgh told the press corps which had assembled in Glasgow the morning after the nightmare of Scotland's 3-0 defeat at the Parc des Princes.
‘Sometimes we can argue, but on this occasion we'll have to throw ourselves on the mercy of the court because once again, and this was the second time running, simple, basic errors cost us the game.’
It was not long before the flak was flying, and the principal targets were the Scotland captain Roy Aitken, the Liverpool utility player Steve Nicol, and Jim Leighton, the Manchester United goalkeeper.
‘It's easy for people to sit here and say get rid of Roy Aitken.
I know Roy's limitations, as does he, but there must be a physical presence to offset the rest of the midfield’ was the coach's verdict on a man who is one short of 50 caps.
Roxburgh felt that Nicol, as an integral part of a superb club side, had difficulty in realising his potential in the wider arena, but ‘you keep hoping and hoping, because you know he has it to give.’
Leighton's error in allowing Didier Deschamps to beat him at the near post and present France with an advantage they did not deserve was crucial to the outcome of the match.
Scotland, with Paul McStay at his decisive best, had controlled the game until then.
It was the collective madness which gripped the Scots after the French defender Eric Dimeco was dismissed which proved their downfall.
Scotland careered forward, leaving vast gaps in defensive areas.
Eric Cantona's goal was caused by Richard Gough and Nicol being marked absent yards from where they should have been.
‘What lost us the match was a rush of blood to the head when they had the man sent off.
It was terrible, Charge of the Light Brigade stuff,’ Roxburgh admitted.
All this leaves Scotland needing to draw against Norway to make it to Italy, a point taken by the Scottish League, who yesterday agreed to postpone three Premier Division fixtures four days before the decider.
Aberdeen v Rangers, Celtic v St Mirren and Dundee United v Hibernian, due to be played on 11 November, will be switched to a new date.
‘I see it as an opportunity rather than a pressure,’ Roxburgh said.
‘If we don't draw against Norway then we don't deserve to go to Italy.
It will be a big, big occasion, another one of those nights of mayhem at Hampden.’
Football: Allen's chance to score
By DON LINDSAY
MALCOLM ALLEN, who has not been able to get into the Norwich first team this season, showed that Wales' absentee forwards, Ian Rush and Mark Hughes, had better beware of him.
Wales's 2-1 defeat to The Netherlands at Wrexham on Wednesday night meant almost certain qualification to the finals in Italy next summer for the Dutch — but left Wales bemoaning another failed campaign.
For Allen, however, the game, his fifth international appearance, provided a chance for him to prove that Wales have a viable attacking alternative to Rush and Hughes, both missing through suspension.
Allen, who had a goal disallowed, was one of the few players to perform well for Wales on a night when they were generally outclassed.
The 22-year-old Norwich forward is now aiming to keep his place in the side for the game in West Germany on 15 November: ‘It was a good experience for myself and Iwan Roberts last night.
Rush and Hughes have done it all over the years.
It is great to get the chance to play.
It's now up to me to use the opportunity to breakthrough.’
With Wales notching only six goals in the last year, and with none coming from Rush and Hughes, Allen knows he has every chance.
Allen's success was noted by Terry Yorath, the Wales manager, who also commented favourably on Mark Bowen, who notched the 88th-minute consolation goal after Graeme Rutjes and Johnny Bosman had put The Netherlands two goals up.
Squash: Parke has character to match his ability
From RICHARD EATON in Singapore
ENGLAND earned a seeding position in the quarter-finals of the World Team Championships here with a 3-0 victory over Egypt yesterday.
They also acquired more knowledge about Simon Parke, one of the best pieces of selection ever made.
Parke, aged 17, had already showed us with two wins in the previous two days that he has great ability.
This time he showed us that he has character as well, struggling his way to a 10-8, 9-6, 4-9, 5-9, 9-2 victory over Amir Wagih.
The young man had the highly charged presence of Jonah Barrington to help him.
Barrington's words erupted from behind the court like venom.
‘Push’, ‘discipline’ or ‘dig in’came hissing forth, and were once followed with a hilarious bellow when Parke made an injudicious shot selection: ‘brain'.
Parke certainly has a brain and showed he could use it under pressure.
But nobody coaches or motivates quite like Barrington and his personality, almost as much as Parke's burgeoning promise, was written all over this enthralling match.
Otherwise the Egyptians offered but modest resistance.
Once the greatest squash nation in the world and a major influence upon the development of the game, they have yet to show signs of a revival.
Today, in the final group match, England meet the Australians.
That will decide who goes into Pakistan's half of the draw.
It will also, as Barrington says, tell us the facts of life.
Non-League Notebook: Historical twist to the South Bank show
By ‘PARK AVENUE’
A HUNDRED years ago, Gladstone celebrated his 80th birthday vainly trying to get himself and the Liberals back into power.
Not much change there, though England's cricketers actually won both Tests in South Africa.
The really important event, however, was J T ‘Pussy’ Richardson's two goals in South Bank's 3-0 defeat of Auckland Town — soon to be Bishop Auckland — in the inaugural Northern League fixture.
The world's second oldest league is celebrated in a new book that is an essential purchase for anyone who loves the game's nuances.
Northern Goalfields, a 466-page labour of love by Brian Hunt, is a rich seam of statistical information, but dig deeper and a wonderful social and sporting history of the North-east emerges.
There is the ‘Crook Town Affair’ of 1928, when 350 amateurs were suspended for accepting excessive ‘tea money’; West Auckland's ‘World Cup’triumphs in Italy in 1909 and 1911; the origins of Brian Clough's first club, Billingham Synthonia (named after an agricultural fertiliser!); and the brief flowering of the wonderfully named Thornaby Utopians.
Part of the modern football experience is the rush of excitement when the local pink or green ‘sports final’ arrives.
Many a train trek is enlivened by scrutiny of the myriad reports and results over a BR BLT and coffee.
Last week's Birmingham Sports Argus was especially rewarding.
Talk about cosmopolitan.
Diaz breached Atherstone's defence at Dorchester; Raji and Gonzales were in tandem for Boldmere St Michael's at Walsall Wood; while Oldbury and Rocester, in the FA Vase against Hinckley Athletic and Burscough respectively, looked to Rossi and Anastasi for goals.
Shades of Juventus…could they be, in any way, related?
The picture painted by the reporter at the Beazer Homes League match between Redditch and Willenhall was priceless.
‘Redditch conceded an own goal after 90 seconds,’ it began.
‘Smith, awarded the Player of the Month trophy before the game, was under no pressure when he turned Wainwright's cross into his own net.’
Whoops…
Let's must hope Smith's mind is on the game tomorrow, when Redditch are at Hitchin to contest a place in the FA Cup's final qualifying round before the Third and Fourth Division sides enter.
The outstanding ties are the visit of Barnet, who almost made the Fourth Division twice in recent seasons, to Cambridge City's four-year-old stadium; a derby between Dover and Folkestone, who had four players sent off against Redhill in the previous round; and, by a nice coincidence, the meeting of Bishop Auckland, defectors to the HFS Loans League, and South Bank, loyal to their roots, almost exactly a century on from their historic match.
Netball: Aspiring England accept invitation to test the best
By LIZ ROUND
ENGLAND have accepted an invitation to take part in a Test series against the leading netball countries New Zealand and Australia in Australia next June.
The Tests for the Johnson & Johnson Cup will take place in Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney from 9 to 19 June.
The England squad — ranked fourth in the world — will be selected following trials in December, and the team's coach, Betty Galsworthy, will relish the prospect of pitting her team against the world champions from New Zealand and second-ranked Australia prior to the 1991 world tournament.
Trials for the England Under-21 and Under-18 squads begin this weekend, with the Northern trials in Sheffield.
The Southern trials will be at Crystal Palace in a week's time, with the final trials also at Crystal Palace in December.
Some 30 hopefuls from each age group will be selected for the finals, with the players competing for places in the Under-21 matches against Scotland and Wales, and the Under-18s United Kingdom and England tournament in Scotland.
There is also the possibility of a young England tour of Jamaica, which the All England Netball Association hope will give the young players some experience of the Caribbean game before the world tournament.
The first round of the National Clubs competition has now been completed with the holders Linden, of Birmingham, drawn against Nottingham's Cliftonettes in the second round.
The closest match of the first round was between Essex Wanderers and Vauxhall Golds with Vauxhall finally clinching a 36-35 victory.
The second round matches have to be played by 5 November.
Football: Turks fail to delight with foreigners ban
By LIZ ROUND
GOALKEEPERS Toni Schumacher and Jean-Marie Pfaff are among 46 foreign players who learned yesterday that their lucrative attachments to Turkish clubs will be terminated at the end of the season.
Schumacher, the former West German international who plays for Fenerbahce, and Pfaff who gives a Belgian flavour to Trabzonspor, have fallen foul of a Turkish federation ban on imported players.
‘The decision has been taken for the good of Turkish football and its players,’ a federation spokesman said.
‘We cannot back down from the decision, which we believe is rightful and just.’
Meanwhile, Northampton Town yesterday spent £70,000 — a record cash buy for the Third Division club — to buy the winger Bobby Barnes from Bournemouth.
Birmingham City have completed the signing of Doug Bell from Shrewsbury Town.
The fee for the 30-year-old midfielder will be decided by tribunal.
Nicky Johns, the Queen's Park Rangers goalkeeper, has joined Maidstone United on a month's loan, while Leeds have granted a transfer request by the central defender, Noel Blake.
Leeds play Sunderland tomorrow and police have appealed to supporters without tickets to stay away from Elland Road.
‘Anyone without a ticket will not be allowed in,’ a police spokesman said.
Racing: Scudamore keeps up a record pace
By JOHN KARTER, Racing Correspondent
PETER SCUDAMORE, who breaks records as easily as a psychotic disc jockey, was at it again yesterday, shattering his own mark for the fastest 50 winners by a National Hunt jockey when he rode In-Keeping to an easy victory at Wincanton.
Scudamore has reached the half century in 12 fewer days than during last season's fantastic voyage into jumping history.
In that campaign, which he ended with a score of 221, he also rode the fastest 100 by a jump jockey, smashed Jonjo O'Neill's record seasonal total of 149, and not only became the first man to ride 200 winners over jumps, but the first to do so under either code since Sir Gordon Richards did so on the Flat in 1952.
William Hill quote Scudamore at the seemingly generous price of evens to reach 200 again this time.
To put those odds into perspective, however, it should be remembered that apart from having at his disposal the incredible equine resources of In-Keeping's trainer, Martin Pipe — who himself broke all records for a jump trainer last season — events conspired very much in favour of the four-times champion jockey.
There were exceptionally few meetings cancelled and Scudamore stayed remarkably free of injury.
After In-Keeping, the 11-10 favourite, had stormed to a five-length success, Scudamore refused to take any of the credit for his latest statistical breakthrough.
‘Martin and his team keep kicking the ball into the penalty area and all I have to do is nod it into the net,’ the 31-year-old rider said.
And, having been presented with the customary bottle of champagne by the Wincanton executive, Scudamore added that he felt a lot less pressure than he had last season.
He also made it clear that any thoughts of topping the 221 mark are being put firmly on the back burner, with the fastest 100, set last year in mid-December, his next target.
as if to prove that the National Hunt supermen that brought off this latest feat are in fact human, Pipe admitted that he got it badly wrong over his assessment of In-Keeping.
Two days after the filly arrived in his yard, the Somerset trainer told the owner, Helen Read, that the horse would never win a race.
‘The filly was desperate, even falling over walking on to the gallops,’ Pipe explained, adding that he puts more work into training In-Keeping than three normal horses.
‘She's a right madam and I'm always afraid she might kill someone in the paddock,’ he said.
Allen Webb, the jump jockey, will be out of action for a week after injuring his neck while riding out.
Webb, who has trapped a nerve, hopes to be back at Cheltenham on Wednesday.
Another rider, David Wonnacott, missed the winning ride on Lizzy Longstocking at Wincanton yesterday as he has trapped nerves in his right shoulder following a fall at Taunton.
Racing: Bookmakers in the dark over Light
By JOHN KARTER
BOOKMAKERS, whose intelligence service makes MI5 look like a bunch of amateur sleuths, for once appear to have led themselves rather than punters up the garden path over the well-being of Travelling Light, the favourite for next Saturday's Cesarewitch Handicap at Newmarket.
William Hill yesterday quoted Travelling Light as their 7-2 market leader (from 4-1) but added a ‘with a run’ proviso as they had heard that all was not well with the three-year-old, who is trained by Lynda Ramsden at Sandhutton near Thirsk.
Mrs Ramsden's husband, Jack, whose successful punting exploits have regularly had the bookies reaching for the valium bottle, was at first stunned and angered by the suggestion that anything was wrong with Travelling Light, whom he has backed at 33-1 for the second leg of the Autumn Double.
‘That's typical of the bookies.
They wind people up just to see their reaction,’ Ramsden said, confirming that Travelling Light was absolutely fine.
‘They're not really bookies these days, they're just debt collectors.
They won't lay anyone a decent bet if they think he's capable of backing a winner.’
Graham Sharpe, spokesman for Hills, who cut the second favourite, Double Dutch, from 7-1 to 6-1 and Royal Square from 16-1 to 10-1 yesterday, countered by saying: ‘We have often been criticised for including in our ante-post lists horses that trainers later said were never intended runners.
So when we received persistent telephone calls from our clients asking whether we had heard that all was not well with the horse, we had to take a view.
We were laying other horses in the race, sometimes taking bets from people who had already backed Travelling Light.
Anyway, punters don't lose their money if Travelling Light doesn't run.’
Having been reminded that the bookies' smoke signals usually signify a lot more than just grandiose waves of their Havana cigars, Ramsden then revealed that he himself might have been inadvertantly responsible for the Travelling Light rumour.
‘I suppose it could be the fact that I backed Double Dutch at 10-1 as a saver simply because I think she's good value and certainly not because there's anything wrong with my horse,’ Ramsden said.
‘I didn't even back her under my name, so I don't understand how they could have known.’
That last statement sounds uncharacteristically naive on the part of the former stockbroker whose shrewd reading of the form book has been greatly instrumental in providing the wherewithal to build possibly the most up-to-date training establishment north of Watford Gap.
With an all-weather gallop, equine swimming pool, blood-testing lab and weighing facilities, the 35-horse power yard is run very much on the lines of Martin Pipe's hi-tech winner factory in Somerset.
So far, the Ramsdens have sent out 30 winners this season and they are hoping that they can snap up a tasty hors-d'oeuvre before the Newmarket feast by saddling their first winner at Ascot this afternoon when they run Line Of Vision and Hunter Valley.
Line Of Vision, who finished second to the highly rated Argentum at Nottingham, should do best of the pair, but may fail to hold the impressive Brighton winner, Alysardi (3.40), who at $205,000 as a yearling, cost almost 10 times as much.
Alysardi could be the second leg of a double for Alec Stewart, her trainer, and Michael Roberts, her jockey, who may earlier have won with ELEGANT RAINBOW (nap 3.05).
She ran a marvellous race when third to Runun over the course recently.
Racing: Trainer given 20 year ban
By JOHN KARTER
THE JOCKEY CLUB yesterday meted out the stiff punishment of a 20-year ban from racing to Chris Willett, a point-to-point rider and trainer, who served a three-month jail sentence earlier this year for his part in a betting coup involving a ringer.
At his trial in April, Willett admitted registering the useful Flat performer Cecconi as Champagne Lover with the Arab Horse Society, and then taking the animal to Market Rasen for a Society race.
Champagne Lover was backed from 16-1 to 2-1 and beat 18 rivals by 12 lengths.
Bookmakers and officials realised something was amiss and Willett, who had hoped to net £21,000 from his coup, got away with just £1,964.
Veterinary examination revealed the true identity of the horse and led to a spell in Maidstone jail for Willett.
At yesterday's meeting of the Club's Disciplinary Committee, Willett, 33, was declared a disqualified person for 20 years.
This means he is banned from attending any form of racing in Britain, including point-to-points.
‘I think I had an extremely fair hearing,’ he said afterwards.
The Committee also handed out a four-week suspension to Bruce Dowling, the jump jockey, for forging a doctor's signature.
Dowling, stable jockey to Richard Lee, admitted signing the name ‘Dr R Dowling’ in the medical record book that accompanied Laurence Todd's application to become an amateur rider.
Last year, Dowling was given a three-week ban, together with Peter Scudamore, after the pair were involved in a barging match at Newbury.