

Mandela frames conditions for talks
From JOHN CARLIN in Johannesburg
NELSON MANDELA, the imprisoned leader of the African National Congress, is in favour of negotiations with F W de Klerk's government, but feels strongly that the black majority of South Africans should be in favour too, before embarking on such a venture.
Accordingly, he has drawn up a document outlining his position on negotiations which he means to make public, so the people are fully apprised of the proposals that would be on the table.
This, the clearest public indication to date of Mr Mandela's views on talks with the government, emerged from an Independent interview yesterday with Albertina Sisulu, who, together with anti-apartheid leaders, met Mr Mandela at his prison house for four hours on Tuesday.
‘It was his feeling that in any country, even if there is war, there is time for negotiations,’ said Mrs Sisulu, whose husband, Walter, a former secretary-general of the ANC and a close friend of Mr Mandela, is to be freed from prison.
‘If the people were ready for negotiations, he wouldn't be against it.
But he said the people must be well educated on this and everything must be explained to them before any steps are taken.’
She said Mr Mandela told them that he had written a document setting out his views on negotiations, the prospect of which President de Klerk has been promoting since well before the National Party returned to power in the 6 September elections.
Mrs Sisulu, co-president of the United Democratic Front, said her husband would resume his leading role in the anti-apartheid movement and would not waver in his commitment to the ANC — considered a criminal organisation by the government.
At a press conference, also yesterday, given by leaders of a loose coalition of anti-apartheid organisations known as the Mass Democratic Movement (MDM), the point was restated that the political prisoners whose unconditional release Mr de Klerk announced on Tuesday — the exact day they will be out is not known yet — would take up their political activities under the banner of the ANC.
Cyril Ramaphosa, president of the National Union of Mineworkers and one of the group who met Mr Mandela on Tuesday, said that after their release the ANC men would demand passports so as to visit ANC leaders abroad for consultations.
Mr Ramaphosa said that the prisoners' release should not be construed as an act of goodwill by Mr de Klerk, but as a reflection of the ‘dismal’ failure of ‘the apartheid regime’to emasculate the will of the black majority.
He warned Margaret Thatcher, as she prepares for a Commonwealth heads of government conference next week where the issue of sanctions on South Africa is expected to be central, against insisting that ‘the regime’ was moving in the right direction.
Mr Ramaphosa said marches would be held in various parts of the country on Saturday to celebrate the homecoming of ‘our leaders’, for whom the MDM is preparing ‘a welcome befitting their greatness’.
Mr Mandela, for his part, according to Mr Ramaphosa, had ‘a unique greatness’, a magnetism which he felt in his presence on Tuesday before he had even looked him in the eye.
Ryan case dropped for ‘insufficient evidence’
By ALAN MURDOCH and COLIN BROWN
PATRICK RYAN, the Catholic priest whose extradition was unsuccessfully sought by Britain last year, will not face prosecution in the Irish Republic, it was revealed last night.
The Irish Director of Public Prosecutions, Eamonn Barnes, said in a statement that the evidence provided by the British Crown Prosecution Service was ‘not sufficient for the purpose and accordingly a prosecution could not be justified’.
Anglo-Irish relations were strained last year when Ireland refused to extradite Mr Ryan, who is wanted in connection with terrorist charges including murder and conspiracy to cause explosions.
Dublin claimed allegations made in Parliament and the British Press linking Mr Ryan with the IRA meant he would not have faced a fair trial.
However, since then Mr Barnes has been considering starting proceedings under the 1976 Criminal Law Jurisdiction Act, which allows for prosecutions of individuals in the Republic for offences allegedly committed in Britain.
Last night's statement said Mr Barnes ‘has given careful consideration to the material furnished by the CPS’.
Initial documents were sent to Dublin from Britain in January, but Mr Barnes has since revealed that more documents were supplied by London as recently as July.
At Mr Barnes' request further inquiries into the case have also been made by the Irish Garda.
‘On the question of whether the material which has been made available is sufficient to justify the initiation of a prosecution against Patrick Ryan he (Mr Barnes) has come to the clear conclusion that it is not sufficient for that purpose and that a prosecution would not be justified,’ the statement said.
Senior ministers were clearly disappointed last night at the news, but said they wanted to study the papers before commenting publicly.
However, the Government is unlikely to allow the Ryan affair further to upset Anglo-Irish relations.
Charity set to fund sex survey vetoed by PM
By STEPHEN WARD
BRITAIN'S BIGGEST survey of sexual behaviour, vetoed by Margaret Thatcher a month ago, is set to go ahead with private funding from the Wellcome Foundation Trust.
The announcement has been delayed until next week, to avoid clashing with the Prime Minister's speech to the Conservative conference today.
Reliable data to help to predict the spread of the HIV infection are seen as vital by the Department of Health as it draws up strategies for fighting Aids.
The £750,000 survey — in which 20,000 adults will be asked detailed questions about the frequency and nature of their sexual activities — was to have been funded by the Department of Health, the Health Education Authority and the Economic and Social Research Council.
But Mrs Thatcher said it would be a waste of public money and an unjustified invasion of privacy.
She was also said to have doubted whether it would produce accurate information.
Imperial College, London, two medical schools and a research organisation called Social and Community Planning Research were standing by to carry out the project after two successful pilot studies earlier this year.
When government cash was withdrawn they applied to several charitable foundations for funding.
The Wellcome Foundation Trust, a charitable arm of the Wellcome drug company set up to fund medical research, has agreed in principle to a request to pay for the three-year investigation.
Peter Williams, director of the trust, confirmed that the trustees had met this week but insisted no decision had yet been taken.
‘There will be a press release next week if discussions are favourably concluded,’ Dr Williams said.
Wellcome has produced AZT, the first drug licensed for the treatment of Aids, and its share price has risen as a result.
Markets may force Thatcher to take the hated alternative
By PETER JENKINS
BLACKPOOL — The Chancellor's entrance to the platform was greeted with a standing ovation.
After his speech the conference clapped and cheered as if he had announced the abolition of the income tax.
In between these demonstrations of loyalty and discipline under fire he had said nothing to clarify the Government's policy for combating inflation other than that there was no alternative to what he had been doing.
That phrase ‘there is no alternative’ has a special meaning in the vocabulary of Thatcherism.
Margaret Thatcher herself said it so many times in reply to‘wet’ critics that it became known, not very affectionately, as Tina.
Mr Lawson's summoning of Tina may have been his subtle way of saying that her policy for combating inflation was no alternative to his.
He was firm in saying that devaluation was no solution but imprecise as to what further action he might take to prevent it.
The speech consisted of little more than bullish assertions of the underlying dynamism and strength of the British economy.
When the final draft was completed, shortly after midnight in his suite at the Imperial Hotel, it was made known that he would have nothing to say to markets on this occasion.
His sole purpose was to defend his stewardship and reaffirm his policy before the audience of the loyal in the ballroom of the Winter Gardens.
If he has other things to say they will be said at Mansion House next Thursday, an occasion by tradition for the Chancellor to speak on monetary policy.
Glaringly absent from yesterday's speech were any mention of the balance of payments, the recent excitement on the money markets, exchange rate policy or the European Monetary System.
The first omission was regarded by some of his ministerial colleagues as an eccentricity bordering on the provocative, especially after the injunctions from Michael Heseltine and Sir Geoffrey Howe to take more seriously the balance of payments figures and what they said about the manufacturing base of the economy.
The absence of reference to exchange rates and the EMS was presumably because there was nothing he could say without exciting renewed speculation or reopening divisions at the top of the Government.
The City and the Confederation of British Industry had been looking for some indication of earlier participation in the exchange rate mechanism of the EMS.
It had been thought here that Mr Lawson might at least repeat the formula of the Madrid summit, which defined when the time would be ripe for the pound to join with the words ‘once inflation is again on a downward path and we have seen the removal of exchange controls by our Community partners’.
But he said nothing at all.
One explanation is that he wanted to keep open an option should the pound run into fresh trouble, as well it may.
Then he could confront the Prime Minister with the choice of still higher interest rates or a relaxation in her opposition to the pound's joining the ERM.
If that is so, markets have the potential power of forcing Mrs Thatcher's hand.
At the Madrid summit last summer, Sir Geoffrey Howe, who at the time was collaborating closely with Mr Lawson, tried to insist that she name a date after 1 July next year on which Britain would join.
She refused and still today has no intention of tying the pound to the deutschmark this side of a general election, if ever.
Further troubles on this score are inevitable.
There is growing unease among members of the Cabinet at the way in which Mr Lawson's task is being made more difficult by the Prime Minister.
The events of the past few days have led several ministers to recognise the difficulty of restoring full authority to the Chancellor while the Prime Minister persists in her hostility to the EMS.
According to a senior and influential backbencher who specialises in financial affairs, the great bulk of the parliamentary party is behind Mr Lawson.
Meanwhile, there is mounting pressure from the City and from industry in favour of an earlier move towards full participation in the EMS.
Mr Lawson may win in the end.
Lawson insists on high interest rates
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
NIGEL LAWSON yesterday won a respite from political and City pressure on his anti-inflation policy with a firm pledge to defend the pound against devaluation.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer told the Conservative Party conference in Blackpool that there was no alternative to his policy of high-level interest rates in the ‘paramount’ fight against inflation.
The policy was working and inflation was falling, but Mr Lawson said he had to admit that it was ‘proving a slow process’.
As for fears of a recession, he said that would be avoided if business and industry kept a firm grip on their costs, particularly wages.
But in a clear attempt to dispel City uncertainty over the pound, Mr Lawson restated his commitment to exchange rate stability, saying: ‘The Conservative Party never has been, and never will be, the party of devaluation.’
Asked about the recent fall in the pound, he explained in a later BBC interview: ‘On the average, the exchange rate today is pretty well the same as it was three years ago.
So I don't see how you can say that that's devaluation.’
He also ruled out what an ITN interviewer called a ‘gentle readjustment’ of the pound, saying that was an unacceptable soft option.
Mr Lawson said later that the stability of the pound and high interest rates were inextricably linked in keeping inflation down.
His conference speech was marked by the absence of any reference to membership of the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM), and in a BBC interview he added that he would have ‘no announcement to make about that’ in his key speech at the Mansion House next week.
John Major, the Foreign Secretary, said in another BBC interview that nothing had changed since the EC Madrid summit last June: Britain would become a full member of the European Monetary System (EMS) when inflation fell to ‘the approximate rate’ of European competitors, and when France and Italy abolished exchange controls.
Mr Lawson received a standing ovation for his low-key conference speech, but that appeared to be more of a defensive rank-and-file reaction to widespread media reports of party dissent than enthusiasm for the unflinching substance of the message.
Significant passages of the speech, particularly on interest rates, were received in silence and other keynote statements were given only polite applause.
Last night, the mood of conference representatives was a mix of public solidarity and private unease.
John Smith, the shadow Chancellor, said last night: ‘What he doesn't seem to realise is that interest rates mean that it will be much harder for industry to get on its feet to help us overcome the balance of payments deficit.
And he refuses to recognise that high interest rates are the price we pay for that deficit.’
Paddy Ashdown, the leader of the Democrats, called the speech ‘dangerously complacent.’
Sir Leon Brittan, Britain's EC commissioner, told a Bow Group fringe meeting last night that the Government should enter into the ERM as soon as turbulence subsided in the foreign exchange markets.
He said: ‘I think we should join well before next summer, but I do not think…that the time to join is this week.’
Mr Lawson began his speech by going right to the heart of the political problem — last week's 1-point hike in interest rates.
He told the conference that his priority was to curb inflation, and that was why he had raised rates.
It had to be done, and he had known it would not be popular, but he added: ‘Anyone who becomes Chancellor in order to be popular has chosen the wrong job.’
Replying directly to a businesswoman's plea during the debate for ‘one more little miracle’ to ease the impact of the new rate on firms, Mr Lawson said to muted applause: ‘The answer is that there is no alternative, and the policy will work.’
Borrowing had to be curbed, and the only way was to make it more expensive.
Labour's advocacy of credit controls was ‘a cruel deception’.
But there was no applause when he added: ‘I have to tell you that credit controls simply wouldn't work.’
It also took representatives some moments to applaud the next phase of the speech, in which Mr Lawson responded to ‘turbulence’ in the money markets.
He warned that there was no salvation ‘in the rake's progress of perpetual devaluation’— all that did was increase the price of imports and bring still more inflation.
Mr Lawson said: ‘The plain truth is that there are no easy answers.
But I give you this pledge.
I will continue to take whatever action is needed, however unpopular it may be, to keep our economy sound and strong.’
Labour's lead over the Conservatives increased to 9.5 points after its party conference and the rise in interest rates last week, according to a Gallup poll in today's Daily Telegraph.
It gives Labour 47.5 per cent support, compared with 38 per cent for the Tories.