

Much the same old beast, slightly tamed: The new Porsche 911 looks very familiar, says Gavin Green
By GAVIN GREEN
ALTHOUGH you would never know it, a new range of Porsches has gone on sale in Britain to replace the rear-engined 911, the longest-lived sports car in the world.
Visual clues to the new model include body colour bumpers, small side skirts and a rear spoiler that rises automatically at speeds of more than 50mph; at low speed or when stationary it retracts, leaving the handsome sweep of the car's tail clean.
But in every other way, the new 911 looks identical to its predecessor.
That Porsche can show so little imagination when launching a new model is a corollary both of the popularity of the old 911 (the only model unaffected by Porsche's recent slump in sales worldwide), and of the conservatism at the top of the Stuttgart company.
Predictably, the styling rework has done the look of the 911 no favours: rehashing a beautiful original rarely does.
The front bumpers look heavy and bulbous, the side skirts look like add-ons.
The whole effect is as if an aftermarket body-kit specialist has had a go at embellishing a 911, with the predictable result.
Still, the new 911 is a better car than the old one, as you'd expect.
It's more aerodynamic, the interior has been improved (although not nearly as much as it should have been), the new engine has more power and yet is no thirstier, and the new suspension means safer, more predictable, handling.
The first Mk2 911 to go on sale in Britain was the Carrera 4 — the four-wheel drive version.
Unlike the 959, the transmission of the Carrera 4 is quite conventional.
Instead of the 959's computer-controlled variable front-rear power split, the Carrera 4 gets 31 per cent of the torque fed to the front wheels and 69 per cent to the rear.
It retains a five-speed gearbox: the 959 had six speeds.
As with the 959, anti-lock brakes — not available on old 911s — are now standard.
This is particularly welcome: the 911 had so much weight concentrated over its tail that it was prone to locking front wheels in the wet.
Alas, the great mass of weight over the tail also meant that, at high speed on damp surfaces, the 911 had a habit of disappearing off roads, backside first.
Get the car slightly crossed-up and the pendulum-like effect of the heavy tail could turn a twitch into a slide.
The Carrera 4 still has its engine sited behind the back axle, VW Beetle-style, in no man's land where no self-respecting car designer would ever site the engine of a truly new car.
But clever suspension changes and, more important, the four-wheel drive, have tamed the beast.
The Carrera 4 on damp surfaces is probably the fastest and most predictable car in the world.
The new 3.6-litre engine, of flat-six configuration like its predecessor but otherwise totally new, also ensures the Carrera 4 is one of the fastest sports cars in the world in a straight line.
It has, too, an inspirational engine: wailing gloriously when revved hard, yet still docile enough to pull the car along tamely in traffic.
Twin spark plugs per cylinder are one novel touch.
As with the old flat-six engine, the new motor is still air-cooled.
Power is increased from the old 3.2 litre engine's 231bhp to 250bhp.
As ever: the gear change and clutch are heavy; the throttle response terrific.
As ever: this 911 feels small and responsive, at your beck and call.
Small inputs are rewarded with a change in behaviour, not with mechanical slop.
Power steering is now standard, but it does nothing to blunt the feedback coming from front wheels to steering wheel: the old wrist-snapping kickback over bumps is largely eradicated but the important messages are translated as crisply as ever.
The cabin is small, a little cramped.
You can just about excuse Porsche for not altering the external shape, but forgiveness is impossible when it concerns the interior.
The old 911 had the worst laid-out cockpit of any new car.
The Carrera 4 inherits the title.
Although redesigned, the cockpit is obviously supposed to retain the character of the old 911.
And that means fiddly switches scattered haphazardly across the dash and centre console like bits of shot fired from a blunderbuss.
They are difficult to locate and activate.
The dash also looks uninviting.
Many cars costing a third as much have a more upmarket fascia, better quality trimmings and more comfortable seats.
At least the ventilation is improved.
Comfort levels are not high.
The ride is very firm: the Carrera 4 drops its wheels into bumps with real venom.
Yet this low-speed firmness can transform itself: on undulating secondaries taken at speed the chassis composure of the Carrera 4 is faultless.
It is a noisy car.
The tyres roar at high speed and a faint transmission whine — common on four-wheel drive cars — now joins the 911 cacophony.
The noise is not unpleasant.
It soundslike a fast, powerful car, and many would rather that than silence.
The new Carrera 4 is a significantly better car than the old rear-drive 911.
It handles better, grips better and has better brakes.
It shares most of the virtues of the old car: superb build quality, mechanical durability, compactness, good visibility, inspirational engine note, responsiveness.
As with the old 911, this is a super-car that can be used every day.
It is happy pottering through Sloane Square or belting around Silverstone.
That is not true of any Ferrari or Lamborghini, or of any other cars with this much performance.
Its only drawback, apart from the slightly adulterated styling, is that the Carrera 4 is not as much fun to drive hard as the old 911.
It is less entertaining, less of an untamed beast.
Driving this new 911 hard and safely is easy.
Bright new bonnets on show at the fair: Brett Fraser says that, for once, the London Motorfair is the place to catch a glimpse of the latest ideas from the world's car makers
By BRETT FRASER
THE WORLD debut of three British cars, and the first British showing of important models from around the world, should help to ensure that the London Motorfair, which opens on Thursday, is the most interesting and significant for years.
Traditionally, the biennial Motorfair plays poor cousin to the Motor Show, held at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham in the alternate years.
Seldom is anything genuinely new shown at the Earls Court venue, normally used more as a glorified car showroom by the manufacturers than as a showcase for forthcoming cars and innovative ideas.
This year it is different, and well worth catching a glimpse of the latest from the world's car makers.
Here we offer a guide to what is worth pushing your way to the front of the crowd for.
Nissan 300 ZX.
From being among the dullest of Japan's manufacturers, Nissan has blossomed into one of its most creative and capable.
At Motorfair, Nissan shows its new 300 ZX for the first time in Britain.
Not to be mistaken for the previous car to wear that badge, which was rather short on driver appeal, the new 300 ZX represents a serious threat to Europe's sports car makers.
It looks fantastic, muscular yet svelte.
And it has the firepower under the bonnet to do its appearance justice.
It is powered by a fuel-injected, 3.0-litre V6 engine which, if Nissan's figures are correct, give it a top speed of 156mph and a 0-60mph time of 5.6 seconds.
Not bad for a car which weighs as much as a Range Rover.
In Japanese tradition, expect equipment levels to be high.
There is no word on prices until Motorfair, but availability will limit sales of the 300 ZX in this country.
Lotus Elan.
In the 1960s, Lotus produced a delightful little sports car called the Elan.
It was fast, fun to drive and, despite a high price, had an enthusiastic following.
Its successor makes its world debut at Motorfair.
Although the new Lotus Elan is similar in concept to its popular predecessor, its styling is far removed.
It takes a while to get used to the looks of the new car, but it is clear that Lotus is seeking to advance sports car design rather than just repeat past successes.
It is a brave move.
Lotus will not reveal full details of the new Elan until Motorfair, but it is likely to have a Japanese Isuzu engine driving the front wheels.
This is a break with tradition: there is an unwritten law which says sports cars for the ‘enthusiast’ market have rear-wheel drive.
The engine is turbocharged and, according to Lotus, will shoot the Elan from 0-60mph in 6.7 seconds, and give a top speed in excess of 135mph.
Expecta non-turbocharged version, too.
The Elan's bodywork is of glass-reinforced polymer, as are all the Norfolk-based company's cars.
Lotus is a world leader in the development and manufacturing of this material, so expect the fit and finish of the Elan's body panels to be excellent.
No prices have yet been announced, but the Elan will probably leave a £17,500-£20,000 hole in your bank account.
You will have to be quick, for Lotus produces only small numbers of cars and demand is likely to be high.
Vauxhall Calibra.
For years the coupe market, once the preserve of the European manufacturers, has been dominated by the Japanese.
Recently the Europeans have been fighting back: Volkswagen with the Corrado, Audi with its 90-based Coupe; now Vauxhall with its sleek new Calibra.
The Calibra was first shown at the Frankfurt Motor Show in September and, for the moment at least, is the world's most aerodynamic production car.
It is pretty, too.
And unlike many coupes which have, at best, room only for children in the rear, the Calibra will seat two adults comfortably in the back.
It also has a large boot and a split folding rear seat, to add practicality to its virtues.
Underneath the Calibra's slippery body lies the floor pan and mechanicals of the Cavalier.
This gives the Calibra a big advantage when it is launched midway through next year, in that all its running gear has a proven track record.
Sometimes, when new cars are launched, it takes a couple more years of development before problems are sorted out.
The Calibra shares the Cavalier's 2.0 litre engine, in both its 8-and 16-valve forms.
In its 16-valve guise, the Calibra is claimed to reach 140mph; the less powerful 8-valve engine pushes it to 126mph.
Also borrowed from the Cavalier is a four-wheel drive system on the 16-valve car.
What assures the Calibra's success is its pricing: the base model is predicted to cost less than £14,000, while even the 16-valve four-wheel drive flyer should be on the right side of £17,000.
Panther Solo.
Panther is one of Britain's lesser-known car manufacturers.
Currently its sole model is the Kallista, a sort of replica of a 1930s open-top sports car.
At Motorfair, this retro-mobile will be joined by the Le Mans-racer-style Solo, which makes its world debut, in production form at least.
Those with long memories may recall that the Solo made its first appearance at the 1987 Frankfurt Motor Show, but that was only a mock-up prototype.
Built at Harlow, Essex, the Solo features a composite body shell bonded to a steel underbody.
The advantages are lightness coupled with great strength.
The Solo's engine is mounted just behind the optional rear seats, well towards the middle of the car, to help achieve more even weight distribution.
The engine itself comes from the Ford Sapphire Cosworth and is turbocharged.
Panther claims it will blast the Solo from standstill to 60mph in less than 6.0 seconds and take it on to a top speed in excess of 150mph.
Four-wheel drive is standard on the Solo, as are anti-lock brakes.
Given the power of its engine, and the traction and road-holding afforded by its four-wheel drive system, the Solo should prove exceptionally fast on anyroad.
A conceivable problem for the Solo is its price — £39,850 is a lot to pay for an unknown quantity.
But as only 100 of these hand-built cars are allocated to Britain for next year, it is unlikely that Panther will have much trouble shifting its stock.
Citroen XM.
Think of executive cars and your mind turns to Ford, Vauxhall, Rover, BMW and perhaps Alfa and Lancia.
The marque unlikely to feature in your list is Citroen.
Its executive car contender, the CX, is too old and idiosyncratic to warrant much attention on the British market, and is further disadvantaged by chronic depreciation.
Against this background, Citroen is launching a new executive car, the XM.
Citroen's designers had an unenviable task when styling the XM.
It had to look ordinary enough to appeal to a much broader market than the CX, but quirky enough to attract 15 years' worth of loyal CX owners.
If anything, the big Citroen's styling leans more towards the quirky camp — there'll be no mistaking it for anything else on the road, love it or hate it.
As unusual as its styling is the XM's suspension system.
Instead of merely reacting to differences in the road surface, as a conventional suspension system does, it anticipates bumps and bends.
It does this through sensors which monitor speed and body movement, and this information is passed on to a computer.
For normal driving conditions the computer chooses a soft suspension setting, but at speed and during sharp handling and emergency manoeuvres, it switches automatically to a firmer setting.
Power for the XM comes from a pair of 2.0-litre engines (one of which is fuel-injected), a diesel, a turbodiesel and a 3.0-litre V6.
It remains to be seen how the XM stacks up against traditional executive fare, but the chances are that it will be too exotic for the British palate.
Land-Rover Discovery.
It's not often Land-Rover launches a completely new car.
The last was the Range Rover, 20 years ago.
So it's something of a treat that the Discovery has its first British airing at Motorfair.
The Discovery is Land-Rover's challenge to the Mitsubishi Shogun, Isuzu Trooper and Daihatsu Fourtrak, which have hit the British firm hard in the burgeoning four-wheel drive leisure market.
The traditional Land-Rover is simply too agricultural to compete against the Japanese, especially as these vehicles spend more time ploughing round town than wading through mire.
As in the Land-Rover and Range Rover, the Discovery's body, except for the roof, is made of rust-resistant aluminium alloy.
The Discovery has the same wheelbase as the Range Rover but, thanks to advances made in interior packaging, has much more room inside its well-appointed cabin than its big, expensive stablemate.
The Discovery also shares the Range Rover's suspension system.
This should ensure it rides more comfortably than its Japanese rivals on the road.
It should out-point them on the rough stuff, too, for the Range Rover is still king of the wild frontiers.
Another advantage the Discovery has is permanent, rather than part-time, four-wheel drive.
There are two choices of engine for the Discovery.
One is a carburettor version of the V8 which powers the Range Rover.
The other, sure to be more popular, is a brand-new turbocharged diesel engine developed by Land-Rover.
Although prices have not been announced, Land-Rover is said to be keen that the turbodiesel Discovery should undercut the £17,859 Mitsubishi Shogun five-door turbodiesel.
Rover 200-series.
Rover launches its new car, the 200, to the world at Motorfair.
It's the second car designed, developed and manufactured in collaboration with its part-owner, Honda.
The Rover 800-series, to which the new 200 bears a strong family resemblance, was the first.
Some time ago, Rover's management declared its intention to move all its cars up-market, perhaps to produce them in smaller volumes than in the days of Austin Rover, to charge higher prices and make more profit per unit.
The idea was to create a British version of BMW or Audi; the new 200 is that idea's realisation.
The 200 is a five-door hatchback and is one of the new breed of Escort-class cars to offer almost as much room inside as a Sierra.
Also on offer is a hefty helping of class — the 200's interior design owes a lot to its big sister, the 800, and even shares its wood trimmings.
The interior has that feeling of solidity normally associated with German-built cars.
The 200 must be perceived as a refined car, if Rover is to justify charging slightly more than the going rate for its class.
Two engines power the 200; a 1.6-litre, designed and built by Honda, and a brand new 1.4-litre unit, designed entirely by Rover.
Known as the K-series, the Rover engine contains many innovative features to aid performance, improve economy and reduce service costs considerably.
Yugo Sana.
While the so-called ‘superminis’— cars like the Peugeot 205 and the new Ford Fiesta — grow larger and more expensive, the Eastern bloc car makers have quietly crept in to capitalise on the market for more affordable transport.
Laugh, if you must, about Skoda, but its market share is increasing at a time when some ‘serious’ manufacturers are in decline.
The Yugo (nee Zastava), built in Yugoslavia, managed to escape the Iron Curtain car jokes but at the same time escaped, completely, the attention of press and public.
(Skoda, if you think about it, received priceless publicity, and emerged from its leg-pulling in surprisingly good shape.)
But Yugo hopes to change all that at Motorfair, when it gives its new five-door family car, the Sana, its first UK showing.
The rest of the Yugo range is based on old Fiats from the 1970s, but the Sana is a completely new design.
It maintains a link with Fiat, though — its 1.4-litre engine is the same as that used in the Tipo.
And there's another Italian connection: it was styled by one of the world's leading car designers, Georgio Giugiaro, whose portfolio includes the Fiat Uno, Seat Ibiza, and the first-series Lotus Esprit.
Inside, the Sana is extremely spacious, and though the quality of its cabin materials cannot match that of west European cars, it is better than some eastern rivals.
Prices will be announced at Motorfair, but as with Skoda and Lada you should be able to buy this Escort-size car for less than a Fiesta.
Motorfair, Earls Court Exhibition Centre, west London; 19-29 October.
Open 9.30am-7.30 pm, except on the last day, when the show closes at 5pm.
On preview day (19 October) tickets are £10; for the rest of the show, £5 for adults, £3 for children and OAPs.
After 5pm adult tickets £3.