

Leading Article: An alternative emerges
By GERALDINE NORMAN
IS THERE an alternative?
That question has dominated the proceedings in Blackpool this week.
For the purposes of the Conservative Party conference, it was enough that the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer denied the existence of an alternative economic strategy.
The Labour Party's lead in the polls and the doubts which the Conservatives themselves cannot help feeling about the state of the economy, both made the audience in the Winter Gardens anxious to demonstrate unity by giving standing ovations to the architects of the Government's economic policy.
The wider, less devoted audience in the country will not be so ready to express approval.
Several weaknesses undermine the Government's position.
The first is that the Prime Minister has always said she regards the fight against inflation as paramount.
Why then, people wonder, is inflation so much higher here than in our main competitor countries?
By her own standard, Mrs Thatcher has failed.
She tightened her grip on the great enemy, only to loosen it again.
It is one thing to win the support of electors by defeating an enemy for the first time; it is quite another to expect admiration for slaying the same dragon twice.
Mrs Thatcher yesterday had the honesty to admit that inflation is ‘far too high’, but she no more deigned to explain what has gone wrong than the Chancellor had the day before.
The second weakness in the Government's position is that in an important respect it is ambiguous.
The Prime Minister opposes entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System; the Chancellor favours it.
Instead of adopting one or other of these policies, they have tried to hide their difference beneath an uneasy and evasive compromise.
Neither Mrs Thatcher nor Mr Lawson was able to mention the subject from the platform.
This is bad politics as well as bad economics.
Indeed, the division itself is as much about politics as economics: Mrs Thatcher's hostility to the ERM springs from her hostility to the European Community, which she did not mention yesterday.
The third weakness is that the method adopted to conquer inflation for the second time — raising the interest rate — only works by inflicting pain on borrowers, both corporate and domestic.
Hence the longing for an alternative policy, and the determined claims that one does not exist.
The contrast with other fields of policy is striking.
Here, alternatives are already being found.
Discontent with the introduction of the poll tax and the reform of the National Health Service can be assuaged by spending more money.
The reforms themselves can be modified: ‘The National Health service will not be privatised,’ Mrs Thatcher declared in her speech yesterday.
She claimed, indeed, that it was ‘never going to be privatised’, though the aspiration certainly existed.
The project proved impolitic: the public would not stand for it, so the Government discarded or diluted ideology to avoid unpopularity.
The same has happened at the Department of the Environment: Christopher Patten has conducted himself this week as the antithesis of an ideologue.
No such retreat exists with the economy (though Mr Lawson did abandon pure monetarism).
Ministers can merely attack the Labour Party: the only passage in Mr Lawson's speech on Thursday which moved his audience to genuine enthusiasm was his attack on Neil Kinnock.
Labour is, however, becoming a less vulnerable target.
To deride the party's ‘mass conversion’ from its former belief, as Mrs Thatcher did yesterday, raises a cheer from committed Conservatives, but floating voters may reckon that it is intelligent to abandon wrong-headed policies.
The Labour Party's advocacy of credit controls remains unconvincing, but by supporting negotiations to join ERM, it has stolen a march on the Conservatives.
In short, an alternative is emerging, not one which enables the country to avoid the pain of high interest rates, but one in which these can be concentrated on their proper function: reducing domestic demand.
The ERM could provide a stronger framework for the maintenance of a stable currency.
Mrs Thatcher's heart would not be in that approach, any more than the Labour Party has yet taken the need for high interest rates to its bosom.
But at the end of the conference season, it is possible to see a political market-place reviving in Britain, albeit a market-place containing only two parties.
In the new battle against inflation, the old claim that there is no alternative has started to sound out of date.
Quote Unquote
By GERALDINE NORMAN
The messages on our banners in 1979 — freedom, opportunity, family, enterprise, ownership — are now inscribed on the banners in Leipzig, Warsaw, Budapest and even Moscow.
Margaret Thatcher.
Polluted rivers, filthy streets, bodies bedded down in doorways are no advertisement for a prosperous and caring society.
Michael Heseltine.
Propping up the pound is like trying to get water to run uphill.
Sir Rhodes Boyson The market isn't enough, and I don't think that Tories have ever believed the market is enough.
We've always believed that the market has to be regulated.
Chris Patten Without the Winter of Discontent, I would now be running my third government.
Denis Healey Greater love hath no man than that he lays down his jokes for his Prime Minister.
Cabinet colleague on Chris Patten, scriptwriter to the PM We are an easy target, just 14 defenceless women with no expertise.
Sister Catherine, of Our Lady of Passion monastery, Northants, on the order to slaughter the nuns' salmonella-infected chickens I have never regarded the term ‘do-gooder’ as a criticism.
On the contrary, this nation's deep-rooted and flourishing tradition of doing good by voluntary service is something which enriches our community.
Douglas Hurd Can you take me to your planet?
Pavel Mukhortov, the Russian reporter who claims to have had a close encounter with extra-terrestrials He (Nelson Mandela) was trying to explain to us how he feels about negotiations, how it was his feeling that in any country, even if there is war, there is time for negotiations.
Albertina Sisulu Elderly people need to take more time over love-making and be less ambitious.
Dr John Kellett, specialist in geriatrics.
If you can't stand the heat, spend this winter with an old age pensioner.
Glasgow graffito
Sex, money and Golden Oldies: Profile: Katharine Hamnett, fashion's fireball
By GERALDINE NORMAN
Amid the tension and gossip of this weekend's London fashion shows, Katharine Hamnett, rebel, provocateur and most likely candidate for the title of British Designer of the Year, is conspicuous by her absence.
Having declared London ‘shabby and out of the way’, Hamnett has decamped to show in Paris, leaving a trail of controversy in her wake.
Hamnett's defection comes at a time of high anxiety in the British fashion industry — but then she's a woman well known for choosing her moments.
Her talent for publicity is acute and often unsettling.
Possibly the only person ever to have succeeded in upstaging Margaret Thatcher in a photo-opportunity, Katharine lined up to shake the Prime Minister's hand wearing a T-shirt declaring ‘58 per cent Don't Want Pershing’ at a Downing Street reception in 1984.
It was a coup not only for CND sentiments but for Hamnett personally, shooting her to instant fame around the world.
She claims proudly that one news agency had more requests for that photograph than any other that year.
Katharine Hamnett is a contradictory, impulsive figure: a feminist who sells on sex, a vegetarian hedonist, a Labour voter with two sons at private school and a £20m turnover.
Some find her inconsistencies maddening, failing to understand how a right-on feminist could have done such a thing as using Mandy Smith in her show at the very height of the tabloid fuss over Smith's under-age relationship with Bill Wyman.
(Though it certainly got Hamnett's clothes in the papers).
Katharine Hamnett's instinct for kicking against the Establishment comes partly out of the mind-set of her own particular generation, partly out of a reaction to an upper middle-class upbringing.
She was born Katharine Appleton in Gravesend in 1948 into a diplomatic family, and remembers herself as ‘the girl on the reception line’ at dull diplomatic occasions in various European embassies while her father carried out his duties as an air attache.
Her deliberate breach of protocol at No. 10 might be construed partly as a late revenge for those teenage tortures, though her anger, now transmuted into political sloganising, runs deeper than mere petulance.
She was profoundly scarred by her father's suicide in 1976, and blames the tragedy on the mental stress caused by the Wilson government's reneging on a fighter bomber deal he had set up with Sweden.
He was, she says, ‘a moral man’.
Hamnett was educated at Cheltenham Ladies College and went to St Martin's School of Art to study fashion design in 1965; she made an indelible impression there.
Elizabeth Suter, then Head of Fashion, remembers her as ‘an outstanding character, a marvellous girl, always amusing and sparky.
If she walked into a room, one was always aware of her’.
Though her radicalism had not begun to develop, her individualistic streak was already fully formed, as Miss Suter recalls: ‘It was about the time we were beginning to have trouble with student sit-ins, and Katharine stuck out against it.
She wanted to get on with her work.’
Katharine's quick-fire tongue and irreverent nature have often got her into trouble.
As a new graduate, she blew the chance to work for Yves Saint Laurent when she clashed with a fearsomely chic woman while visiting a textile company.
The woman was wearing a red hat which Katharine impertinently asked to try on.
The request was imperiously declined, to which Katharine retorted, ‘Red hat, no drawers!’
The woman turned out to be Lady Claire Rendlesham, director of Yves Saint Laurent in London.
After making her way into the fashion business as a freelance designer and as a partner with Ann Buck in Tuttabankem from 1969 to 1974, Hamnett set up Katharine Hamnett Ltd on a £500 loan in 1979.
It was her way with the pithy and quotable phrase that drew media attention to her work on the London catwalks in the early Eighties, a knack she called on again in her last collection, studding ‘Clean Up Or Die’ on to the backs of leather biker jackets.
She sees red, however, when the slogans and other aspects of her designs are copied and bowdlerised; she has sounded off a great deal about suing the culprits, a litigious reflex often apparent in her career.
Critics have sniped that the dividing line between the political and the profit motive has never been too sharply defined on Hamnett's agenda, a feeling provoked by such off-the-cuff comments as her enthusiasm for an idea that will ‘make me rich and won't hurt animals’.
One politically committed ex-collaborator comments: ‘In the beginning what she was doing was an interesting exercise in radical chic.
But there's no real logic to hold it together.
And her behaviour could prove dangerous to the causes she speaks for.’
Recently, however, Hamnett has improved her credibility by funding a Friends of the Earth research project into the environmental costs of clothing production.
Hamnett's design reputation is contradictorily positioned somewhere in the avant garde, even though her work is steeped in nostalgia.
School uniforms, Sixties starlets and rockers have all been her inspiration, while the slogan T-shirts themselves were less of an invention than a Woodstock revival.
While Hamnett may be seen as the campaigning Bob Geldof of fashion, in design terms she is more the Tony Blackburn, making a living, like him, out of replaying Golden Oldies.
Her shows, which generate something of the atmosphere of rock concerts, with her interpretations of fashion's greatest hits of the past 25 years, are rampantly sexy and commercial.
Her cleverness, as always, is in the timing, her feeling for identifying the exact moment when a certain slice of the past will have most resonance in the present.
Katharine Hamnett now has manufacturing deals with one Japanese and two Italian companies, the key to international distribution.
If all goes smoothly, she now has the chance to become the first ‘young British designer’ to be internationally recognised (oddly, in the fashion business, designers are believed to be as young as their clothes look, which, in Hamnett's case, is about 19).
It is to be hoped that her business is now sufficiently stable to realise the opportunity, for she has clocked up three managing directors in the past few years.
An inter-regnum was filled by her boyfriend, Nick Rosen, a freelance journalist, who is widely believed by friends and former associates to have a strong influence on Katharine's decision-making.
Rosen was introduced to Katharine Hamnett by John May, a Face journalist who worked with her on the ill-fated Tomorrow, a magazine that was to be, bravely, ‘a mix of fashion and politics’.
Hamnett and Rosen became so close so quickly that May's magazine was scrapped at the last minute in favour of a version reworked by Rosen.
Tomorrow survived one issue.
Its short life is not remembered in Hamnett's current biography.
Long memories are rare in a fashion world where thoughts are more concentrated on what's happening next than on the past.
Yet those who have come off the worse from their dealings with Hamnett may have sharper recall, among them London's high fashion retailers Joseph Ettedgui and Peter Bertelsen.
Ettedgui, who had supported Hamnett by selling her first clothes in his shops, was upset when she abandoned him in favour of Bertelsen, an oil-rich entrepreneur who arrived in London offering designer deals and retail arrangements in 1986.
Hamnett's relationship with Bertelsen foundered early last year, but only after he had opened an extravagant shop the size of an aircraft hangar for her, designed by Norman Foster in trendy Brompton Cross, South Kensington.
The shop had no window to attract the public and cubicle-sized changing rooms without mirrors.
Concerned when turnover did not match the grandiose scale of the shop, Bertelsen tried various tactics to get the merchandise moving, including putting on an early sale.
Hamnett became irate and, alleging breach of contract and damage to her image, threatened to sue him for a £500,000.
No one is willing to go on record with their feelings about Hamnett's sometimes capricious behaviour, but one says privately: ‘Like many creative people, she can be impossible to reason with, and the experience can be very painful.’
Yet Katharine Hamnett has many friends who accept her quirks and continue to admire.
Colin Barnes, the fashion illustrator, who has known her since St Martin's, says, ‘Of course outspoken people tread on toes, but they are often the ones who make waves and achieve something.’
It will be a piquant moment if Hamnett indeed wins the title of British Designer of the Year at the first televised Fashion Awards ceremony at the Albert Hall on Tuesday night.
The award and the ceremony itself were instigated by the British Fashion Council, which tried every tactic it could -including the setting up of a smarter venue at The Duke of York's Barracks -to persuade Katharine Hamnett to show in London.
Plans were at an advanced stage when Hamnett, having vacillated for some time, phoned the BFC to say she had decided in favour of Paris after all.
In spite of the mixed feelings that will undoubtedly be provoked on Tuesday night, Hamnett's move should be assessed in a cooler and more general light.
She is launching herself into Europe with at least as much conviction as any other British businessperson has so far shown.
Having spent many years arguing for government support for the British fashion industry — and getting nowhere — she cannot be blamed for opting to manufacture and show abroad.
Where supporters call her brave and detractors selfish, it is perhaps nearer the truth to see the passionately political Katharine Hamnett as developing all the pragmatic hallmarks of the hard-nosed businesswoman.
The advantages of higher perches
By DUFF HART-DAVIS
THE Black Sumatra has done it again.
Or perhaps I should say, ‘Another of the Black Sumatras has done it’— for our three sooty chickens of this exotic breed are indistinguishable from one another, and we cannot be sure which of them has excelled itself.
Either way, a second miracle has just occurred.
I have often noticed that in any flock of genuinely free-range chickens there are one or two high-layers: that is, birds which seek out nesting sites in elevated positions, on inaccessible window-ledges or the tops of bale-stacks.
No doubt age-old instincts tell them that altitude gives a measure of protection, but often the fact that a site commands good views seems a positive recommendation, as if a distant prospect of fields or farmyard is in itself an aid to production.
Of our present flock, the high-layers favour various niches, among them one in an old pheasant crate resting on rafters in the old cow-shed.
But above all they seem to like an eyrie just beneath the eaves of the barn roof.
It cannot be very comfortable, for it consists merely of an uneven depression on top of the stone wall, barely softened by dust and a few wisps of hay.
Nor does it have much of a view, since it looks down into the stable.
But it does offer security and freedom from disturbance.
Recovery of eggs from such an eminence presents certain problems.
Unless one goes to the bother of fetching a ladder every time, the only way up is to scramble chimpanzee-like via a window-sill, the top of the stable partition, the nearest iron roof-girder, and finally the barn wall itself, along which one has to shuffle sideways, sitting down.
Since both hands are needed for the descent, as much as for the climb, one cannot keep hold of any eggs that one finds.
Nor is it much use to put them in a pocket, for the rigours of the downward journey are such that they arrive at ground level in the form of an omelette.
The best solution, I have found, is to throw them down, one by one, on to the horses' deep bed of wood-chips, off which they almost always bounce unscathed.
In spite of these hazards, I generally visit the wall-nest every two or three days; but now and then, I have to admit, it escapes my attention.
Some time in the summer we noticed that one of the Black Sumatras had started to incubate aloft.
How long she had been there, we could not be sure, for if she sat with head and tail aligned along the wall, she was invisible from below, and only when she turned sideways did she come into view.
We had owned the Sumatras for just a few months, but already we had seen that they are volatile and eccentric birds, much given to sudden screech-ups and bouts of cackling, which in other chickens would denote the arrival of an egg, but from them seem to signify only that they have given themselves a fright.
In appearance they are distinctly corvine, being not only crow-black, but slender, small-headed and powerful about the beak.
For various reasons, we expected little of the sitting hen.
For one thing, I thought I had cleared the nest recently, and that if she was sitting on anything at all, her clutch could not number more than two or three eggs.
For another, the padding beneath her was pitifully insubstantial.
As a boy I was always taught to use a sod of turf as a foundation, so that the eggs would remain slightly damp, and to build a snug nest of hay on top of it -and the barn wall was knobbly, draughty and dry as dust.
The worst hazard, though, was that as the days went by the Sumatra seemed to become increasingly irresponsible.
She spent more and more time off her eggs, parading about the yard, cackling as if demented and taking sudden rushes in whatever direction she happened to be facing when each fit of frenzy overcame her.
Nevertheless, she kept returning to the nest, and one morning I had a sudden feeling that she was about to hatch something, after all.
Sure enough, a high-pitched peeping drew me to the stable, and there on the floor was the hen with one minute black puff-ball of a chick.
More peeping sounded from high up, and on top of the wall, to my amazement, I found eight more toddlers, five black and three white (the father is a silver cockerel of mixed descent).
As the first one had managed to flutter down, it seemed that the rest should be able to do the same, but I judged it safer to load them into a cardboard box and lower them gently.
Once united with her brood, the mother became maniacally fierce.
Her protective instincts were wonderful to watch.
At the approach of any intruder — even a human being bringing food — she would screech, raise her wings in threat, weave about and retreat into a corner.
Less comforting for the chicks was her habit of scratching violently backwards with one foot after the other, which often sent the babies hurtling out of the way like fluffy ping-pong balls.
For the first few days we kept the family shut into the cow-shed, to protect them from the cats; but I really think that if any cat had had the temerity to put in an attack, the hen would have chased it half-way to Gloucester.
Soon the chicks were big enough to be out and about, and once they had left their mother, they began to exhibit her wild characteristics, wandering recklessly far up the fields into territory frequented by foxes.
Yet somehow all nine have survived, and now they are practically full-sized chickens.
This week, believe it or not, another, almost identical saga began.
This time we had not noticed any incumbent on the barn wall.
Thinking the site had fallen out of use, I had ceased to monitor it.
Then one morning came a tell-tale peep, peep.
Again there was a Black Sumatra and one chick on the ground, but this time there were nine others aloft, all more or less black.
Once we had got them down, we found that one could scarcely stand up.
It was certainly too weak to stagger along with its fellows.
Was it malformed, or merely hypothermic, the last to hatch?
On such occasions it often seems foolish to intervene, for nature has a way of eliminating stragglers.
Yet we felt we should give this fellow a chance, so my wife put it in a box and set it on top of the Aga.
For the chick, it must have been like suddenly landing in the Sahara.
At first it did not respond.
Maybe it was stupefied by the abrupt rise in temperature.
But then, at about 9pm, it suddenly set up a fortissimo peeping, and from that moment never looked back.
In the morning we slipped it back under the hen, and at once it was part of the family.
The mother, as I say, may or may not be the hen which hatched the first brood; but from her behaviour, which seems slightly less frenetic, I reckon she is someone else.
So another 10 puff-balls are starting life, and the summer's production totals 19.
Past experience suggests that one or two of them will come to rest in the belly of a fox, and of those that survive several, I fear, will turn out to be cockerels.
These will end up in the pot, a bit skinny from their hyper-active existence, but tasting five times as good as any bird you can buy.
Yet with any luck we shall have a dozen bold new hens to lay eggs for us next year -and even if only half of them manage to emulate their mothers in the matter of bringing up families, by mid-summer we shall be positively over-run.
William Donaldson's Week: Drug-induced terror is no match for ‘That's Life’
By WILLIAM DONALDSON
I have had a religious experience — which is not to say, of course, that I am claiming a religious explanation for it.
What is incontrovertible is only that I had it, not that it was caused by anything ‘out there’ beyond my experience.
I do typically, however, have a need to describe it to total strangers.
This is what happened.
Lunching with Lord Dynevor, I told him of my settled feeling that I am playing in the final of the FA Cup, that there are three minutes to go and that my team is 0-4 down.
How to play out the last few seconds?
Do facetious back-flips?
Pick up the ball and run around with it?
Kick the referee?
Or strive to go down with one's dignity intact?
The important thing, he said, was to stop the opposition scoring four more goals, but I left the restaurant unconvinced.
Then, walking home, I was easily overtaken by Mrs Matthews, who is 93 and lives next door.
She asked me whether I'd taken the cat to the vet, and I admitted that I hadn't.
‘Wake yourself up, dear,’ she said, and she hurried on.
I squared my shoulders, returned to the flat and cleaned the kitchen.
Then I rang the vet.
Then I thought stuff that, I'd rather go to Ibiza with my literary agent, Alison, and take some Ecstasy.
We flew out on Saturday and went straight to the Mar Y Sol to meet Tanit the Island God.
Apart from carrying enough controlled substances in his G-string to keep Spain happy for a year, Tanit has the divine attribute of being everywhere at once.
Whatever time it is, Tanit is where you are.
Once I asked him when he slept.
‘I sleep when you sleep,’ he said.
That stumped me.
Anyway, Alison and I went to the Mar Y Sol and Tanit wasn't there.
There was a nice-looking American at the next table, however, so I asked him whether he was a drug-fiend, dealing in human misery, in which case, I said, I'd like some Ecstasy.
He took 15,000 pesetas off me and said he'd come to my apartment later that evening.
That seemed all right, but over dinner Alison began to act oddly — as if she was enjoying herself — so I scowled at her and asked her what the problem was.
I did, actually.
She wasn't meant to be happy, she was meant to be with me.
Then she said she felt happy enough to skip the Ecstasy experiment and, instead, to have an early night, so I refused to talk to her for the rest of the meal — rightly, I think — and on the way home I walked stiffly three yards ahead of her.
When my American friend pitched up with the news that we had to meet his contact at Ku Disco, Alison said she'd like to come too, but I sent her to bed.
‘You're tired,’ I said.
‘Remember?’
She looked a little startled, but she did as she was told.
I and my new friend then went to Ku where he took another 15,000 pesetas off me — the price had gone up, he said — and he parked me by the dance-floor and said he'd be back in five minutes.
After two hours I began to wonder if he had stitched me up and then, worse, whether he was back at the flat with Alison.
I hurried home and was relieved to find her asleep in bed.
The next morning, she asked me how my night had been.
Brilliant, I said, pretending that I'd just got in.
My new friend and I had picked up two mad women, I said, and we'd taken lots of this and that and one thing had led to another, as often happens when young people get together.
She let me finish and then she said: ‘That's odd.
Five minutes after you left he was back here throwing stones at the window.
I told him to bog off.’
I didn't speak to her for the rest of the day, of course, and this made her laugh, I don't know why.
Then, late in the evening, my new friend turned up with a little white pill for each of us.
Alison wasn't keen to take hers, but I managed to persuade her, pointing out that since I hadn't been asked for any more money these were almost certainly aspirins.
After 10 minutes or so we both got the most appalling horrors.
Chemically-induced terror can be dispersed, I've found, by concentrating on horrors in the real world, so I thought of That's Life and VAT and Mrs Thatcher, and after a while I began to feel better.
I went into the bedroom where Alison was lying down in what seemed to be a state of shock.
I was about to call a doctor and then, suddenly, I had a feeling which I can only describe as — excuse me — ecstatic.
I felt that the world and everything in it was benign, that Alison was infinitely precious and that Dummett's argument from value — that we know there is right and wrong — to a transcendent being was certainly sound.
I said all this to Alison, and I've been saying it to her ever since, and, back in London, I've been saying it to anyone else who'll listen.
On Wednesday I met Mrs Matthews in the street and she asked if I'd taken the cat to the vet and I admitted that I hadn't.
‘Pull yourself together, dear,’ she said.
‘Don't tell me to pull myself together,’ I said.
‘I've had a religious experience.’
She looked appalled.
‘I don't want to hear about that,’ she said.
‘At my age I've got enough to worry about.’
Keith Botsford in America: Know Nothings put a zip on art
By KEITH BOTSFORD
Robert Mapplethorpe was utterly American: flat-edged, suburban, Catholic and wary.
Also homosexual.
Also undoubtedly a major figure in the history of photography, in subject matter, style and technique.
In the last year of a brief life at the heart of a kind of doting celebrity that knew the value of success, he fell into notoriety of the sort that is just as American as his life.
He ran into the Know Nothings.
For all his coinciding with the world of fashion, with the glamour and risks of the pederasty he helped publicise, Mapplethorpe's pictures remain alien to the canons of American good taste and to meat-and-potato American ideas about art.
As part of a sexual sub-culture which conservative America would rather did not exist — but fears to attack in the open — Mapplethorpe was an obvious target for the new Know Nothings.
The original Know Nothing party arose in the 1860s (its name refers to the fact that it was a secret party and its members, if interrogated, said they knew nothing about it).
It was a ‘nativist’ party resentful of the alien, and dangerous, ideas immigrants, especially Catholics, could introduce into the American bloodstream.
Like the sort of heterodox culture which Mapplethorpe incarnated.
The occasion that brought the Know Nothings back to life in June was a 60in x 40in Cibachrome print of a wood and plastic crucifixion aswim in the artist's, Andre Serrano's, urine.
Serrano's Piss Christ (which he termed ‘a protest against the commercial invasion of sacred images’) brought an outburst which continues to this day.
‘We need to clean up our culture,’ thundered conservative columnist Patrick Buchanan.
‘As a poisoned land will yield up poisonous fruits, so a polluted culture…can destroy a nation's soul.’
That sort of language encouraged the many resentments Americans harbour against high culture (remember the disparagement of Adlai Stevenson as an ‘egghead’?) and led to such curiosae as the Chicago attack on an Eric Fischl painting in which a fully clothed boy looks at a naked man swinging a bat.
Protesters claimed it promoted child molestation.
It also brought up the art quote of the year, from one Ziff Fistrunk (no, I do not make up the name), director of the Southside Chicago Sports Council, who organised the protest: ‘I have trained players in Little League and semi-pro baseball, and at no time did I train them naked.’
In the end, the Know Nothings, led by Senator Jesse Helms, managed to force Washington's Corcoran Gallery to cancel a 150-picture Mapplethorpe retrospective and started a full-scale attack on the kinds of artistic projects which the National Endowment of the Arts (no radical force) reluctantly and sparingly backed.
During debates in the House, the offending Mapplethorpe photographs were not brought on to the floor lest they offend the ‘decorum’ of the House.
Why the commotion?
First, there is no tradition in America for public or state funding of the arts.
High culture has always been privately funded, either by individuals or by foundations.
Not for America the massive state pump-priming of the arts such as exists in the two Germanys or in France and Italy.
Second, such support as there is, via the National Endowment for the Arts (currently it is funded at $130m, which to the federal government is peanuts), is the more visible for being infinitesimal and therefore vulnerable.
The debate over 1990 funding for the NEA, and Jesse Helms's attempts to cut off federal funding for art that he and the fundamentalist lobby find obscene, continues.
Censorship, the pious say, is not involved, only federal funding of art offensive to the majority.
Few Americans take congressional silliness seriously.
But what of the larger question?
Mapplethorpe's photographs — whether of flowers or male nudes -are profoundly erotic.
Are they pornographic?
His celebrated ‘secret’ works, mainly from his early years, include a series of masochistic self-portraits, subjects in the terrible gear of subjugation and self-disgust, studies of penis and pistil, and move with astonishing art to consideration of the body (usually seen only in part) as a piece of classical relief.
One of the most celebrated is the 1980 Man in a Polyester Suit.
It shows a man in a suit and waistcoat from lower lapel to mid-thigh, a tuck of shirt emerging from his fly and casually nearby, his large (black) penis in repose.
The picture's erotic charge lies in the juxtaposition of the external world and the (normally) concealed, in its urinal's-eye-view.
As one critic puts it, the picture is ‘forensic’, not pornographic.
His work is the exact opposite of Helmut Newton's neo-Victorian titillations.
It is not prurient but cruel, hip and disturbingly beautiful, intimate and playfully referential, as in Thomas and Dovana, where a naked black man and a ball-gowned white woman are caught, dancing, in a pose that both mocks and reveres the myths and fears of Gone with the Wind.
A culture unzippered.
Clearly stuff to trouble a Know Nothing.
Obviously alien.
The more sophisticated will decry the malaise of the unwashed millions.
I feel a certain sympathy for their wallflower purity, none for their legislators' regard for the morals of others, and most for Mapplethorpe's prophylaxis.
Loneliness of the long-distance candidate
By ANTHONY HOWARD
There are two schools of thought about the rules by which politicians ought to campaign.
The Kennedys always maintained that the secret of running for any office was a matter of pacing.
To succeed, you needed to take great care that you peaked just as the winning-post hove into view.
Richard Nixon, even when he was running against John Kennedy in 1960, took an entirely different view.
For him, from the moment you entered the race, there could be no respite.
The imperatives of competitive politics required that you ran flat-out from the start.
To judge by the events of the past week, Michael Heseltine has now enrolled in the Nixon school.
It is a long time since any potential national leader in Britain leapt up from the starting-blocks in quite such a dramatic way.
For a backbencher, it has been a remarkable performance.
To lead in all the polls as the favoured candidate for the Tory succession, to persuade your own party that you offer a distinctive viewpoint without being in any way overtly disloyal, to convince even the cynics of the Press that you pose a realistic alternative to the present leadership — no phenomenon like it has been seen in British politics for 50 years.
The achievement has been bought at a price.
To be blunt about it, the challenge confronting Mr Heseltine is how to maintain his momentum.
Under a parliamentary system, the ‘outsider’ will always be at a disadvantage.
Policy initiative, set-piece engagements with the Opposition, even a starring role from the conference platform (Heseltine has not delivered a speech there since 1985) remain the prerogative of those within the citadel of government.
The only area an exile hopes to cultivate is what the Americans call ‘the chicken and peas circuit’— those endless dinners, lunches and buffet suppers by which the Conservative Party binds its supporters in a form of social cement out in the sticks.
By now Heseltine has probably got about as much mileage out of such occasions as he can reasonably expect.
He has certainly demonstrated that he is a ‘draw’: there must already be some 250 Conservative MPs in his debt for turning out an audience at least double that which they would otherwise have been able to collect.
Part of the Heseltine strategy is, no doubt, based on the calculation that these debts one day can be collected — and certainly, within the Conservative Party's electoral college of MPs, he ought to have established some impressive lines of credit.
It is a nave aspirant party leader, though, who pins his faith to gratitude.
Politicians tend to act from baser motives, of which the strongest of all is an instinct for their own survival.
It is over this that Heseltine bumps up against what is both his opportunity and his problem.
If he is to persuade his colleagues that he can win for the party, he will need to seize every available chance for exposure over the next two, three, or even four years.
I noticed his saying in a magazine interview that he could never have survived these past few years without the help of Fleet Street — and that struck me as an unusually candid confession for a politician.
But the stakes are bound to get progressively higher.
Even to maintain his ratings at their present level — with 22 per cent in one poll choosing him as their preferred Prime Minister in a field that included Mrs Thatcher — he has no choice but to be constantly audible and visible.
And the easiest way to ensure that — a readiness to criticise the Government at each and every turn — is the one temptation he has at all costs to resist.
Within the Tory Party, what ultimately matters is not how many friends you have, but rather the power and strength of your enemies.
In America they call it ‘the antipathy quotient’— and no ambitious politician can risk allowing it to get too high.
In Heseltine's case, it must already be approaching the danger level; he needs to be vigilant that nothing he says or does reinforces it.
What he cannot afford to bring into play is the kind of leadership veto that operated all those years ago against both Rab Butler and Iain Macleod.
Of course, Tory politics has changed a great deal since those days.
One memorable article by Macleod blew away ‘the magic circle’; new leaders no longer emerge by ‘the customary processes of consultation’.
One should not exaggerate the significance of the change.
Formal rules are one thing; human instincts quite another.
The reason why I continue to believe that Heseltine's best chance of getting the Tory leadership lies in the aftermath of an election defeat has nothing to do with inside knowledge.
It is based entirely on personal instinct.
To my mind, it is simply not plausible that a party already securely in government would allow ‘an outsider’ to bound one fine morning into the Cabinet Room and take charge of 21 individuals — all of whom, unlike him, would know not only what happened there last week but the battles of previous years as well.
The British Cabinet system simply does not lend itself to that sort of Novices' Handicap.
For that reason alone, I remain totally unpersuaded that the enterprise Michael Heseltine has embarked upon symbolises any effort to displace or dislodge Mrs Thatcher.
Even if she were to go voluntarily before the next election, that could only be very bad news for him.
At the very least, he would have to reckon on the 21 votes in the Cabinet being stacked up against him.
Why, then, should he have risked even giving the impression of having thrown his hat into the ring a full two years and more before the next election is due?
One explanation could be that the prospect of defeat now seems to him, if not inevitable, then at least sufficiently likely to be worth a contingency wager.
But that is a highly vulnerable position for any politician to take -and I doubt if it offers the whole answer.
The clue to that, I suspect, lies in Heseltine's increasing adoption not only of a Churchillian warning stance but of an almost Churchillian speaking style as well.
What he will not have overlooked is that Churchill — for 10 years (between 1929 and 1939), the only comparable ‘outsider’ within the Tory Party — did not vault straight into the prime ministership.
He got to No 10 because he had 18 months earlier forced Neville Chamberlain to readmit him to the Cabinet.
What we witnessed at Blackpool may have been the start of a campaign for the leadership.
But it was also something else.
Like every shrewd politician, Michael Heseltine has placed a two-way bet.
The other half of it lies in mobilising party and public support sufficiently strongly to leave Mrs Thatcher with no choice but to readmit him to the Cabinet if the Tories do return to office after the next election.
That way at least, the ultimate prize should remain within reach whatever happens inside the polling booths -always provided, of course , that he has not ‘peaked’ too soon.
Letter: Paradox in Eurotunnel forecasts
From Mr STEPHEN PLOWDEN
Sir: Eurotunnel's latest revenue forecasts for the first year of the tunnel's operation are virtually unchanged from the forecasts made a year ago, and the long-term forecasts are up.
These are paradoxical results in the light of the substantial cost increases.
The traffic forecasts are made in two stages.
First, the total amount of traffic in each market segment (eg, cross-Channel holiday trips by car) is forecast.
Then this total is split between the competing routes and services.
Total traffic is related to general economic variables such as GDP and car ownership.
Neither the price nor any other characteristic of the transport system enters into it.
Thus the model cannot take account either of changes in operators' costs or of developments such as road pricing or a carbon tax which could be in place in the medium or long term.
The model used to allocate traffic between competing services is, however, very sensitive to relative prices, so, one would expect increases in Eurotunnel's costs to give rise to a lower market share and hence to lower revenues.
The reason this has not happened is that Eurotunnel's fares fed into the model are not based on its costs.
Instead it has been assumed that Eurotunnel's fares will always be the same as those of the ferry services.
This may have been a reasonable starting assumption for the initial round of forecasts made in 1985, but it is not adequate now.
Eurotunnel should produce traffic and revenue forecasts based on the assumption that its fares will have to rise above those of the competition to reflect the increases in its own costs and in the cost of the rail link to London.
On safety, Eurotunnel's latest report states: The extended series of studies and tests required to support our proposals for non-segregation of passengers and their vehicles have continued.
The Safety Authority is kept fully informed of these proceedings and of their results.
All Eurotunnel's traffic and revenue forecasts published so far have assumed that passengers will remain with their vehicles.
Eurotunnel should now produce calculations showing what the effect would be if the Safety Authority were to insist on segregation.
Letter: Episcopal success
From The Very Rev MICHAEL MAYNE
Sir: Sir Frederic Bennett's letter (12 October) criticising the Archbishop of Canterbury is too clever by half.
To impute that Dr Runcie has been an unsuccessful archbishop by quoting falling numbers in that part of the Anglican Communion which is the Church of England is to ignore a whole complex of reasons for a reduction in church-going, including, no doubt, the encouragement of a highly competitive and success-orientated society.
Numbers have dropped consistently for 60 years, and if that is the litmus-test of an archbishop's success, then Archbishops Lang, Temple, Fisher, Ramsey and Coggan have also been failures.
Sir Frederic's suggestion -that as (in his terms) an ‘unsuccessful’ archbishop, Dr Runcie speaks of the ‘successful’in his Director interview out of self-pity, bitterness or resentment — is unworthy.
The interview admirably combines the prophetic and the pastoral, and it is charitable throughout.
Westminster Abbey being a Royal Peculiar and not falling within the Archbishop's domain, I write as one who like you, Sir, is happily independent.
Letter: A mother mourns a victim of terrorism
From Mrs BARBARA ZWYNENBURG
Sir: I appeal to mothers around the world of all religions and cultures to teach and nurture their children to respect life and not to destroy it wantonly.
Today, 14 October, is my son's birthday.
He would have been 30.
Unhappily, he will not celebrate it this year.
He was murdered because of a bomb placed on Pan Am flight 103, just prior to last Christmas.
We know that all of us will eventually die from disease, natural disaster, accidents or whatever.
These deaths are largely out of our control.
But the intentional mass murder of innocent people is not.
This is incomprehensible to the vast majority of humanity.
I do not understand the motives, beliefs and values of terrorists.
I do understand intense misery and sorrow after losing a child to a terrorist's bomb.
I feel sure all mothers worldwide will understand my grief.
No doubt I will shed many tears today, as I do every day.
What purpose is served by such senseless and heinous acts?
As we all know, killings beget more killings.
Terrorism is totally unacceptable in a civilised world.
It is essential that all nations and their institutions co-operate with one other to bring about an end to this madness.
At the recent economic summit in Paris, leaders of the world's major industrial nations focused on the need to eradicate terrorism.
Government authorities in Scotland, Britain, Germany and the US are all co-operating and conducting independent investigations to identify and bring to justice the terrorists.
I personally beg all mothers to insist that their governments work towards this end.
Terrorism knows no borders — it is an international problem and demands international co-operation.
This is my way of memorialising my beloved son's life.
He gave much happiness to his family and friends during his abbreviated time on this earth.
Letter: Noise: the acid test
From Professor MARY CARTER
Sir: Tony Colston-Hayter of World Wide Productions (letter, October 11), in defending ‘dance music warehouse parties’ and welcoming the licensing of such parties, suggests that ‘so-called ‘acid parties’' are a ‘sensationalist fantasy of the gutter press’, and that their massive popularity is ‘partly due to the fact that we offer all-night dancing’.
He mocks the perception of a ‘drug-crazed youth cult’ as part of this gutter-press fantasy.
The salient fact is that what is uniquely on offer at these parties is not all-night dancing or a few boutique drugs, but fantasy-sensation itself: the orgiastic effect of thousands of people mainlining heavy acid rock at the level of total sound.
That sound is the drug.
And the problem is that its effect on the neighbours — within a radius of miles, given the capability of modern sound systems — is severely damaging.
Mr Colston-Hayter warns darkly that if laws are introduced to prevent all-night parties, the ‘right to freedom of association’ would be compromised, and calls on the Government ‘committed to freedom’to reconsider.
One of the most basic freedoms anywhere is the right to peace, and the choice of quiet over noise.
The licensing of noise erodes that basic right.
One solution would be to license the promoters of warehouse parties on condition that they provide adequately soundproofed buildings, parking facilities and stewards for the surrounding areas.
Letter: Video surveillance
From Sergeant GRAHAM FOOT
Sir: Following your article on video ‘spy’ cameras (11 October), I feel compelled as a police officer to balance the National Council for Civil Liberties's views on the issue of video surveillance.
I work in a small shire force with a special responsibility to preserve public order on Friday and Saturday nights.
Frankly, I often struggle to control large gangs of hooligans who spill out of the pubs looking for blood.
I simply do not have the manpower to make arrests in the teeth of such concerted action.
It is also difficult to see more than a small part of the action while defending oneself, and difficult to convey to magistrates the naked aggression displayed.
The use of video cameras in police vehicles and at town-centre trouble spots could change all this.
I applaud the decision of my local council to install cameras around the centre.
There is a danger that it may displace some trouble elsewhere, but on balance it is a great step forward.
I see no immediate need for the regulation of such systems which are in themselves merely a means of gathering evidence.
It is true that such equipment has a limited intelligence application, but the knowledge that Joe Bloggs uses McDonald's twice a week is indeed of little value.
Now, if it were Ronnie Biggs…
The Orwellian nightmare portrayed by the NCCL is already five years late and sounds, itself, what they call an ‘extravagant claim…based on anecdotal evidence’.
The fact is that the only reasonable method of securing conviction of individuals among a rioting football mob or crowd of lager louts or gang of shoplifters is to use video.
I welcome the public debate the NCCL is trying to stir up because I know I'll get the support of the majority who are frustrated and frightened by deteriorating public order.
Isn't it high time the NCCL thought of protecting their rights?
Letter: Pedestrian appeal
From Mr TONY KAY
Sir: If John Prescott thinks that higher taxes on motor vehicles, lower speed limits, charges for urban road use, cuts in tax perks for company cars, random breath testing, enforcement of parking restrictions, revitalised public transport and a general prejudice in favour of pedestrians, cyclists and public transport at the expense of cars will win the Labour Party votes, he's darn right.
Letter: Prime of life
From MRS DIANA STILES
Sir: Another item for your Margaret Regina file which may have escaped the notice of some of your readers.
Centenarians, as well as the traditional telegram from the Queen, now receive an additional one from Margaret Thatcher.