

Train sit-in leader arrested
By JULIA STUART
COMMUTERS who staged a sit-in on a British Rail train they claim is cancelled frequently were ejected by police, and their leader arrested, at a station last night.
Passengers on the 5.18pm train from Waterloo in London to Alton, Hampshire, were enraged when it stopped at Woking, Surrey, and the driver said it would not go further.
Their leader, Peter Bancroft, 36, said: ‘We have been struggling with British Rail's shortage of drivers for months and have christened our regular train home the ghost train.’
He added that when platform staff asked the commuters to leave the train, ‘we refused and I borrowed a portable phone to ring Waterloo to complain.
An official I spoke to said there were no staff to take the train on and we had to leave and wait for another to come along.’
British Rail said the train was halted because there was no relief guard.
‘We are human and understand why people's feelings run high…
But we would point out that this sort of sit-in action doesn't help resolve anything.’
Scientists resolve quest for the heart of all matter
By WILLIAM BOWN
THE AGE-OLD search for the fundamental building blocks of matter has been resolved by results from the new particle accelerator, or ‘atomsmasher’, at CERN, the European centre for particle physics in Geneva, just three weeks after experiments there began.
Since the fifth century BC, when Democritus of Abdera first put forward the idea, scientists and philosophers have speculated on the nature of the fundamental constituents of matter.
Excited physicists packed a seminar at CERN yesterday to hear that tests in the recently-opened LEP (Large Electron-Positron collider) had showed all matter is made from exactly three families of sub-atomic particles.
The results confirm the so-called Standard Model, the theory which physicists have built up over the past 15 years to explain both the nature of matter and the forces which govern it.
They are a dramatic success for CERN and confirm Europe's primacy in sub-atomic physics.
LEP's Californian rival, the Stanford Linear Collider, has been trying, and failing, to get this result for more than two years.
Dr Terry Sloan from Lancaster University, who is working on LEP, said: ‘Everyone is overjoyed.
We got what we wanted.
This is proof of the Standard Model.’
LEP is the most powerful atomsmasher in the world.
It accelerates pencil-sized beams of electrons and their anti-matter equivalent, positrons, to near the speed of light in opposite directions around a 17-mile circular tunnel, roughly the length of London Underground's Circle line.
At a few selected points, the particles crash together head-on, generating energy of an intensity matched only by the first moments of the explosion physicists believe created the universe.
The energy generates a cascade of new particles.
The one of most interest to physicists is called the Z or Z-naught.
In less than a month, LEP has produced more than 11,000 of them, compared to a few hundred detected in California.
The Z particle decays into other particles too quickly to be detected directly, but by measuring the speed and direction of the tracks of the particles into which it decays, physicists at CERN have been able to measure the Z particle's vital statistics with unprecedented accuracy.
It has a mass of 91.1 GeV (a thousand million electronvolts)— roughly 100 times the mass of the proton — to within an accuracy of 0.06GeV.
From this and from the particle's measured lifetime, physicists at CERN have deduced that there are only three families of fundamental particles.
Each family contains four siblings: two fundamental particles known as quarks and two known as leptons.
Quarks bind together to make up larger particles such as the protons and neutrons found in the atomic nucleus.
Leptons include particles such as the familiar electrons, which orbit the atomic nucleus, and the mysterious neutrinos, which are almost undetectable particles capable of passing through the entire earth untouched.
Yesterday's results represent a great advance towards physicists' ultimate goal, a Theory of Everything, or TOE, which would explain the innermost workings of the universe — and put particle physicists out of a job.
A guest arriving at Westway Studios, west London, yesterday for the opening catwalk show of London Fashion Week
By WILLIAM BOWN
A guest arriving at Westway Studios, west London, yesterday for the opening catwalk show of London Fashion Week.
The first designer to unveil his collection for the spring season was Rifat Ozbek, whose successor as designer of the year, is to be announced on Tuesday at the British Fashion Awards at the Royal Albert Hall.
More than 1,500 buyers and journalists attended Ozbek's two shows.
Katharine Hamnett, fashion's fireball; page 16 
Foot to step down at next election
By STEPHEN WARD
At the age of 76 and realising that the lifetime of the next Parliament would take him into his eighties, he has decided to make way for a younger man.
Neil Kinnock, who like Mr Foot is an MP for a south Wales constituency and came to the leadership from the left of the party, described his mentor yesterday as unique and irreplaceable: ‘Michael is as fit and fiery as ever.
His marvellous personality in the Commons and his brilliant books confirm that.’
Mr Foot took a principled but electorally disastrous stand against nuclear weapons in the 1983 election, and has always vehemently rejected the charge that he or Labour are unpatriotic.
He was first elected in 1945, lost his Plymouth seat in 1955, then represented Ebbw Vale and Blaenau Gwent from 1960.
But he came to the front bench late, as Secretary of State for Employment from 1974 to 1976, and leader of the House of Commons from 1976 to 1979.
He defeated Denis Healey to become Labour leader the following year.
He is a prolific author and writes regularly for newspapers.
He has not said whether he will consider taking a peerage.
Crucial game for nervous Speelman
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
THE Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-finals will resume at Sadler's Wells, London, this afternoon with both matches delicately poised.
Jonathan Speelman must avoid defeat in his seventh game against Jan Timman to stay in the match.
One down with two to play, he will need to conquer his nerves and indulge in the creative style that brought him this far.
The semi-final between Anatoly Karpov and Artur Yusupov has come alive following Yusupov's win in the fifth game.
Before the match began, Yusupov was quoted as a 5-1 outsider.
But Karpov's play has been far below his best and Yusupov's brilliant equalising victory has generated a murmur of a possible upset.
When Karpov fought back to near equality after a difficult opening in Thursday's play, commentators were all expecting the game to drag on towards a turgid draw, but as both players came into time-trouble, Yusupov played a remarkable piece sacrifice to expose Karpov's king.
With 10 moves to the time-control Yusupov had six minutes to Karpov's four.
Neither player could calculate all the possibilities, but Yusupov's judgement and bravery paid off.
Aldington denies lie over dates
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
LORD ALDINGTON yesterday denied that he had lied to a High Court libel jury about the date in May 1945 on which he left the British Army's V Corps in southern Austria.
The former wartime brigadier, who is accused of being a war criminal ‘with the blood of 70,000 Cossacks and Yugoslavs on his hands’, insisted that he left V Corps on May 22.
The defence allege he was still there the next day and had insisted on the compulsory repatriation of Cossack prisoners to Soviet forces.
Richard Rampton QC, who is defending Lord Aldington's libel action against historian Count Nikolai Tolstoy and property developer Nigel Watts, suggested that the peer had given false evidence because it was ‘essential’ to his case that he was not in Austria on 23, 24 and 25 May.
Lord Aldington replied: ‘This will be the hundredth time you say what I've said is a lie, and it is the hundredth time you have made me very angry.’
He said that after more than two years of searching through war documents he was now certain that he flew from Klagenfurt on 22 May.
It was a memorable flight because the wings iced over, forcing the pilot to dive, and left Lord Aldington feeling that ‘we came close to death’.
The aircraft returned to Klagenfurt and then went on to Naples where he spent two nights before flying to England on 24 May, he said.
Mr Rampton read extracts from Sir Anthony Eden's May 1945 diaries which Lord Aldington agreed showed he could not have had dinner with the minister on 25 and 26 May as he had claimed.
The diaries contained no reference to Lord Aldington until 9 June.
But Lord Aldington insisted: ‘I most definitely saw him on May 25 and I remember having dinner with him on two successive nights around this time.
But that must have been later.’
Count Tolstoy and Mr Watts are alleged to have libelled Lord Aldington in a pamphlet distributed to staff, pupils and other people connected with Winchester College, where he was warden.
The Week in Review: Home News
By DAVID LISTER
ET TU, BRUTE.
Nigel Lawson awoke at the start of the Conservative Party conference to find himself described as ‘This Bankrupt Chancellor’ on the front page of the Daily Mail.
‘Would you give this man a job as chairman of a bank?
Or as city editor of a national newspaper?
The Daily Mail certainly would not,’ its front-page editorial said.
Deprived of this option, Mr Lawson decided to soldier on as Chancellor of the Exchequer, claiming in his speech on Thursday that there was no alternative to his economic policy.
Exuding confidence that there might be an alternative — notably himself — to Tory policy, Michael Heseltine told a fringe meeting: ‘Polluted rivers, filthy streets, bodies bedded down in doorways are no advertisement for a prosperous or caring society.’
Another advertisement figured in the speech by Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Health, who parodied a British Medical Association poster which asked: ‘What do you call a man who will not take medical advice…
Kenneth Clarke.’
The minister asked the conference: ‘What do you call a man who will not take medical advice…healthy.’
This witticism received rapturous applause and left his speechwriters beaming, no one seemingly bothered by the fact that it made no sense.
Archaeologists claimed to have found the remains of Shakespeare's Globe Theatre, where Hamlet was given its first performance.
The site's owners, Hanson Plc, promised to preserve the site, to spare it from the two perennial dangers of the era — being covered by an office block or, worse, being renamed the Branagh theatre.
A survey showed that four out of five of Britain's biggest firms have introduced no smoking areas at work as a result of worker pressure.
It also showed that the greatest health worry of many companies for their male employees was smoking, but added that computers and visual display units (VDUs) were rated greater health risks for women.
Whether or not we will shortly have a passive computer lobby, it certainly gives a new meaning to the hacking cough.
Another survey, by The Indy, the weekly paper for young people, found that the British teenager was happy at home and one in three did not want to leave the family nest.
In a week when government figures showed that cases of people infected with the Aids virus are now increasing at a rate of almost five a day, one could see their point.
Newsagents seek money in magazine ‘shelf wars’
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
MAGAZINE publishing is bristling with talk of ‘shelf wars’, as companies haggle with newsagents over which titles get best positions on overcrowded racks.
Some of Britain's 35,000 newsagents are asking for payments, called retail display allowances, to give magazines special treatment.
This may include placing new titles in prime positions by the till — in the way that sweets are put next to supermarket checkouts.
Publishers are also being invited to pay for four or five copies of a magazine to be lined up against each other along a shelf, so the title appears to be a fast seller — a common US practice.
Even magazine publishers such as the Radio Times are producing a range of cardboard ‘shelf talkers’ and ‘shelf wobblies’bearing the name of the magazine, designed to catch the browser's eye, and guide the hand.
Customers may find it more difficult to locate their favourite magazine, as money, rather than popularity, influences what goes where.
Brian Jackson, trading director of Martins the Newsagent, with 850 branches, said: ‘Publishers are offering us inducements, advertising support money.
The tactics of the supermarkets are starting to rub off on newsagents.’
The practice is intensifying among women's magazine because many circulations are falling owing to sustained competition from new titles, and the reduction in consumer spending.
‘They are all fighting over the same cake.
Meanwhile, the long-standing players are coming back in to defend themselves,’ Mr Jackson said.
Andy Rand, product group manager (news) for W H Smith said no one was charged to get titles into any of the company's 450 branches.
But it did sell ‘prime promotion space’— the shelves at the end of each island unit that faced customers as they entered the door, and allowed four or five copies to face outwards.
‘No one can book a spot for two consecutive issues.
If we went along with retail display allowances only the richest publishers would benefit,’ he said.
David Shields, marketing manager of the American-controlled National Magazines, publishers of Cosmopolitan, Good Housekeeping, Country Living, She, and Harpers & Queen, said of retail display allowances: ‘It is not something we would like to encourage here.’
However, the company plans to buy shelf space in the New Year, when it launches its new title, House Beautiful, as a monthly magazine.
Travel firm delays plan for air cruises
By FRANK BARRETT
A TRAVEL firm has postponed plans to launch a programme of lavish air cruises to Paris, Vienna, Cairo, Moscow and Peking in two specially designed Boeing 727 aircraft — the latest casualty of the rapidly growing recession in the package holiday business, writes Frank Barrett.
The Imperial Air Cruising Company said that due to‘the troubles in the Soviet Union and China’, the holidays — which cost up to £7,000 each -would start next year.
The company had planned to begin its programme of holidays this month, which would ‘signal a return to the style and elegance of travel in the Twenties and Thirties’.
But the travel industry is presently experiencing a Thirties- style depression, with probably its worst slump in bookings.
The severity of the depression was highlighted this week by the decision of the Automobile Association to pull out of the retail package holiday market, creating 400 redundancies.
Andrew Johnson, general manager of AA Travel, said: ‘It frankly became pointless to continue to compete in the overcrowded, heavily discounted and ultimately unprofitable air-package holidays business.’
Thomson Holidays, Britain's biggest package holiday company, this week made a fresh effort to stimulate bookings for winter holidays by cutting prices on 100,000 holidays.
In the short term, the situation for the industry is serious.
In the long term, with bookings for next summer arriving in a bare trickle, the prospects are disastrous.
Science comes to defence of the chapati
By TONY HEATH
SCIENTISTS in Wales are helping to boost production of one of India's staple foods — the ubiquitous chapati, writes Tony Heath.
In areas of the sub-continent where pearl millet — the basis of the unleavened bread — is grown, soil temperatures often soar to 120F or more, killing seedlings and setting in train crop failures and food shortages.
Now experiments at the Welsh Plant Breeding Station near Aberystwyth on the Cardigan Bay coast are under way to find which strain of millet can best withstand the intense heat.
From more than 80 strains, four have been singled out to be grown from seeds which are tested for protein, which helps them to withstand heat.
Art Market: Tokyo sale of prints makes 5.5m pounds
By GERALDINE NORMAN
SOTHEBY'S first attempt since the 1970s to sell art to the Japanese on their own ground, a modern print sale at the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo yesterday, was a sensational success.
It made 50 per cent more than expected at £5.5m and every lot was sold.
Since prints are multiples, their prices can normally be predicted far more accurately than other works of art.
By taking the prints to Japan, Sotheby's was selling to rich Japanese collectors without a retailer as an intermediary and the retailer's mark-up was subsumed into the auction price.
While bidding was strong throughout the sale, prices for selected artists went through the roof.
These included: Bernard Buffet, the French post-war limner of spiky flowers and views of Paris; the best Chagall portfolios (but not individual plates, for which prices were normal); David Hockney; a group of modern Americans including Jim Dine, Sam Francis, Frank Stella and Donald Sultan (but not Jasper Johns, who sold on estimate); Alphonse Mucha, the ornamental master of Art Nouveau; Andy Warhol; and Picasso.
The star lot was Picasso's most famous Blue Period etching, Le Repas Frugal of 1904, at 61.6m yen (£275,369), three times pre-sale estimate.
His almost equally famous, brightly coloured linoleum cut of 1958, Buste de Femme d'apres Cranach, was a close runner-up at 57.2m yen (£255,699), almost double estimate.
Christie's meanwhile set a new auction price record for a stamp in its New York dispersal of the Weill Brothers' stock.
A block of four 1918 24-cent stamps featuring an early aeroplane, from a famous sheet of 100 on which the aeroplane was printed upside down, sold for $1.1m (£705,128), against an estimate of $600,000-$800,000, to an American broadcasting executive.
This block is widely considered the most important item in US philately; a second block of four from the same sheet made $528,000 (£338,462), in line with estimate.
The original sheet of 100 was bought in a Washington post office by William T Robey on 14 May 1918; it had changed hands for $15,000 within the year.
Saatchi sneezes and the art world shivers: Charles Saatchi has been selling paintings and the dealers are worried.
Andrew Graham-Dixon reports
By ANDREW GRAHAM-DIXON
IT HAS BEEN in the air for months: Charles Saatchi, according to New York's uniquely garrulous and paranoid clan of dealers and artists, is selling, and he is selling in a big way.
The possessor of what is unquestionably the world's largest and finest collection of contemporary art, Saatchi has sold before — but never, according to the rumours, on anything like this scale.
During the past six months, hardly a week has gone by without yet another whisper about a sale from Saatchi's collection.
Major works by Anselm Kiefer previously thought to be in Saatchi's possession were, it was said, changing hands for prices in excess of $1m; Saatchi was rumoured to be selling equally major pictures from his unrivalled holdings of works by Georg Baselitz, Francesco Clemente, Julian Schnabel and others.
Saatchi, the most spectacular collector of recent times and probably the most active collector in British history (with the exception of King Charles I), had bought their work in greater bulk and more intelligently than any other individual or institution.
Now, as one New York dealer put it a week ago, ‘the word is that he's cashing in.’
While a good many artists and dealers have clearly been upset by Saatchi's actions, no one feels absolutely confident about the motives behind them, and Saatchi himself absolutely declines to discuss his dealings, whether in art or business.
While he may not be collecting as actively as he was a few years ago, his name still inspires sufficient awe in most art world people for them to request complete anonymity when discussing him.
Earlier this week the rumours hardened into fact.
On Wednesday a spokeswoman for the Saatchi Collection told The Independent that ‘approximately 40 to 50 works have been sold’, but she was equally insistent that the motive behind the sales was Saatchi's desire to shift the emphasis of the collection more towards British art.
Over the past two years, she pointed out, Saatchi had purchased major works by many of those British painters whose rise to prominence has been such a striking feature of recent years: Saatchi has bought work by, among others, Frank Auerbach, Lucian Freud, Leon Kossoff and Howard Hodgkin.
The sales of work by other artists in no way signalled a lessening of commitment to the collection and its future.
Art prices have now spiralled to the point, it was suggested, where even a collector of Charles Saatchi's great wealth can no longer afford to buy without selling.
What we were seeing was simply a ‘rationalisation’ of the collection, a ‘refining process.’
Further investigation suggests that while that may be part of the story it is almost certainly not all of it.
Inquiries among certain dealers in this country have established that while Saatchi has been selling extremely heavily during the past six months he has actually bought very little British art.
He has also, inquiries revealed, sold rather more than the 40 or 50 paintings suggested by the Saatchi Collection spokeswoman in mid-week, and the pattern of his sales suggests that what we are seeing is rather more radical than a ‘refinement’ of the collection.
Saatchi has made no secret of his admiration for the work of the German painter Sigmar Polke, yet he has sold at least 17 works by the artist in his collection, including what many regard as Polke's finest work, Paganini; according to three separate sources of information, Saatchi has only one Polke left in his collection.
Investigation revealed the sale of at least 63 works in the past six months; yesterday a source close to Charles Saatchi was prepared to concede that the volume of sales was higher than previously stated, and that the works disposed of account for some 10 to 12 per cent of the collection, which suggests a true figure of between 70 and 100 individual sales.
Saatchi's extremely active deaccessioning has caused a stir partly because so many major artists and dealers have a personal stake in his collection -and have, in some cases, risen to prominence as his collection has expanded -but also because his collection is almost unanimously regarded as the greatest of its kind in existence.
Prominent figures in the British art world are naturally concerned by the possibility that they could be witnessing the beginning of the end of the Saatchi Collection.
Many feel that the pattern of the sales, given Saatchi's known admiration for the work of the artists involved suggests that choices are being made at least as much on the basis of the market as on the basis of taste.
When you sell 10 Kiefers, it becomes questionable whether you are refining or decimating your collection.
When the Saatchi spokeswoman's explanation of the sales was put to one New York dealer, his response was crude but succinct: ‘They're full of shit.
They're selling the work of artists who are on the crest of the wave in the market; every indication is that they're selling to raise capital.
If you want to refine a collection, you sell off in much smaller quantities than this — and you certainly don't sell your finest works by an artist everyone knows you admire.’
'He's a collector,’ says another, ‘but he's really operating like a dealer.
Look at the stuff he's holding on to: he isn't selling any of his great Minimal works, his Carl Andres or Donald Judds, but those are works that are still climbing in value.’
Four years ago the Saatchi Collection issued a lavish catalogue of much of its contents, a boxed set with the title Art of Our Time which comprised four beautifully illustrated volumes that retailed at the not inconsiderable price of £100.
A guide to the collection, it seemed to many to underline, too, the extent to which the Saatchis had superseded the Tate Gallery as the most adventurous and successful purchasers of modern art in this country.
Even its critics concede that the Saatchi Collection has had a profound effect on the visual culture of this country, but it has always occupied an uneasy position — it has the status of a national institution, yet it is in private ownership.
According to reliable sources, the Tate Gallery greeted the expansion of the Saatchi Collection with a mixture of relief and complacency: it was felt that it would inevitably, one day, be bequeathed to the nation, and since that was so, the underfunded Tate Gallery need not bother to acquire major work in the same area as the Saatchis.
If the Saatchi Collection were to be dispersed, it is true to say that a whole era of international art would be effectively lost to the nation.
Artists and their dealers are always bitter when a major collector decides to sell, but the level of bitterness aroused by Saatchi's deaccessioning is, as one New York dealer puts it, ‘something else’.
It is not merely the fact of Saatchi selling works that has upset the dealers, but the manner in which he has done so.
It is common practice for a collector wishing to resell works that he owns to do so through the gallery of origin, for a variety of reasons.
For one thing, the gallery knows very well which other collectors may be interested in making a purchase; for another, the gallery, since it represents the artist, likes to have some control over where a major work may be placed.
Saatchi has sold exclusively through a dealer called Larry Gagosian, well known in New York as a ruthless specialist in what is known as the secondary market.
Gagosian does not represent artists or their interests, he simply buys and sells works on the market, and he is known to be spectacularly good at it.
Gagosian's tactics, according to one New York dealer, have earned him ‘a questionable reputation’.
Interviewed last year, Gagosian responded to the accusation that he had made transparencies of paintings reproduced in art magazines and offered them for sale as ‘a scurrilous charge’— but he went on to admit ‘Well, I may have done it once.’
Saatchi's decision to sell through Gagosian is understandable purely on business terms, but other aspects of the sale are less readily explicable.
‘There is no doubt that Charles has been offered major works at good prices’, says one dealer, ‘because people wanted to see those works in his great collection; artists have sold him paintings that they would not have sold to anyone else, and they feel betrayed.’
Dealers and artists complain now, but it should be remembered that they were happy to sell to Saatchi in the first place, and doubtless reaped the benefit of having placed work by their artists in such a prestigious collection in terms of increased prices.
In many cases, one suspects that dealers are simply jealous of Gagosian for getting Saatchi's business, but in others there do seem to be justifiable grievances.
In at least one case, an artist has requested the option to buy back his own work, only for his letter to go unanswered; Saatchi is known to have split up one series of paintings which were sold to him on the strength of verbal assurances that they would stay together.
Several major galleries now claim that they have ceased trading with Saatchi -‘I wouldn't sell him a napkin,’ said one prominent figure in the New York art world — but since no one is prepared to go on the record with such an assertion, or to have their name directly linked to a quote, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that dealers and artists are hedging their bets.
Nevertheless, the fact that Saatchi has been prepared to offend so many dealers and artists does seem to have seriously damaged his credibility in the art world.
The four volumes of Art of our Time, it can fairly be said, no longer represent the Saatchi Collection, now that so many of its glossy pages reproduce what have become absences.
Given the most cynical interpretation, although one that seems to be surprisingly widely held in New York, ‘those four beautiful books have become the most glamorous mail order catalogue in history.’
There are some grounds for optimism about the future of the Saatchi collection.
Saatchi is known to have purchased five major Warhols in the last six months, for extremely high prices, which few would argue is the action of someone dispersing their collection.
A source close to Saatchi insists that there is ‘absolutely no intention of dispersing the collection’ and is equally adamant that ‘the collection will be greater in five or 10 years time than it is now.’
It is to be hoped that is so.
The Conservative Conference: Tory generals underestimate the old enemy: As the final party conference of the year ends, Colin Hughes evaluates the positions of the parties
By COLIN HUGHES
TWO FEATURES dominate the post-conference political landscape.
The first is that both Labour and the Conservatives emerge more or less united — the former striking an attacking pose in the foreground, the latter stoutly closing defensive ranks behind.
The second is that, electorally, the Democrats, Greens and SDP look like distant follies on a faraway hill.
It is hard to escape the view that this scene will remain, in essence, unchanged.
This is the mid-term moment when rivals turn their banners towards the general election battlefield and start marching.
It is clear that there are only two armies.
An ICM poll in The Guardian this week showed Labour and the Tories picking up three percentage points, while the smaller parties fell yet further behind.
At Brighton a month ago we watched Paddy Ashdown keep a tight enough grip on his party to ensure that it does not slip away into the political undergrowth.
But he had to reformulate its strategy on the run.
The idea that the SLD exists to replace Labour carries little conviction, and so he had to bow to those of his followers who advocate an outright anti-Thatcher stance.
In Wolverhampton we learned that the Green Party, it seems, has no strategy.
It had one for last June's European elections, but few prominent Greens have any clear idea of where they go now.
But the party did have the sense to remove the figures from a policy commitment to halve the UK population.
There is no way of knowing, yet, whether the Greens at the next election will be playing Pan pipes in the background, or piping briskly into the fray.
The SDP, by contrast, has a fully-formed and firmly articulated strategy.
It must seek every conceivable way of persuading the next government to introduce proportional representation — for without PR, the SDP is dead.
It is the untainted success of Labour at Brighton which dominates the view of the conference season.
Brighton 1989 was the most smoothly achieving conference Labour has held since 1963, and probably since the 1940s.
The one point rise in base rates on the Thursday added an unexpected garland to Neil Kinnock's design.
But even without that gift from the political gods, Labour would have ended its conference in confident composure.
In retrospect, Labour's leadership team miscalculated: they could have wrung more from a week when the party was so eagerly compliant.
In Blackpool the strongest feeling among representatives has been one of relief that the party sang in harmony under stress.
But the Tory anthem is loyalty, not joy.
The most striking aspect of the past week is the degree to which the Government is underestimating Labour's post-conference political strength.
Among Tory MPs there is calm trepidation.
Among ministers the mood seems unbelievably complacent.
The Tory calculation is that Labour's unity is a facade which will crack the moment it is exposed to stormy assault.
Elements of Labour's new programme are vulnerable: nuclear defence, trade unions and industrial relations law.
But these are not fatal flaws.
Labour has not only neutralised most of those policy areas which make it unpopular; more importantly, it has virtually erased the opportunity for Tories to accuse Labour of being run by the ‘loony left’.
Ask ministers privately what they perceive as Labour's terminal weakness, and they will reply: Neil Kinnock.
They cannot imagine him as a Prime Minister, and they cannot imagine that the British public can be persuaded to elect him to that post.
They forget that many people once felt that way about Margaret Thatcher.
Conservatives are foolishly lulling themselves with their own rhetoric if they think that the reformed Labour Party is an image-makers' fantasy.
The change will not endure another election defeat; if Labour loses next time the party will probably tear apart.
But it will survive right up to polling day — and, if Labour wins, far beyond.
The transformation of Labour is not an invention of Peter Mandelson; it has been delivered by Mr Kinnock himself.
If Mr Kinnock can lead his party this far, it seems at least possible that he can now turn himself outward, away from the party, and begin to project himself as a potential national leader.
The central point is that he and his advisers recognise that this is now the main task.
Mr Kinnock is uninterested in finding a visionary ‘big idea’ for the party; he is convinced that Labour's values remain popular.
The real problem is to persuade the people that there is a big Neil Kinnock.
Chris Patten has drawn some of the venom from the poll tax this week, but not all: it will still bite individual losers hard.
Privatisation of electricity and water will not be easy in a tightened economic climate.
Health reforms have yet to travel through the system.
And even if Nigel Lawson contains inflation and brings interest rates down over the next year, Labour will be able to remind voters ‘Don't forget’.
And on the ideological plane, the Conservative Party itself is having to revise its own ‘big idea’.
Unbridled market competition is plainly not going to be the prevalent 1990s tone: but the Conservative Party only this week began its reversion to a faith in conservative stewardship, as opposed to laissez faire liberalism.
Margaret Thatcher has allowed her ministers — notably Mr Patten — to speak of intervention and regulation again.
She has witnessed the party applaud.
But she is not yet using the same language herself.
On what, then, does Tory optimism continue to rest?
Very simply, on a 102-seat majority.
Any Conservative you care to converse with will predict a close contest at the next election.
But, they will assure you, there are just too many seats that Labour has to win, in all the wrong parts of the country.
The one factor that still tilts general election predictions in the Tories' favour is that their hillcrest position seems ultimately impregnable.
They think they will stay on top with a 20 to 30-seat lead.
The Conservative Conference: Conference quotes
By COLIN HUGHES
‘To win the next General Election, we must stop being so darned nice.’
-Elizabeth Rex, chairman of the Harwich Conservative Association ‘You only have to look at the way we have annoyed the Establishment and the professions to gauge the success of our populist policies.’
— Tim Loughton, of Battersea ‘Now my name's Binge and I like a party, but these parties are something else again.’
— Brenda Binge of Burnley calling for a ban on acid house parties ‘I went to Oxford University, but I've never let it hold me back.’
-Margaret Thatcher ‘I would ask you to reserve any demonstration of support and affection which I know we all have for her until the end of her address.’
— Viscount Whitelaw, introducing the Prime Minister ‘What happened in Russia in 1917 wasn't a revolution.
It was a coup d'etat.’ -Margaret Thatcher ‘As for the leaders of the former Alliance parties, I will say no more than this: they have never learned what every woman knows — that you can't make a souffle rise twice.’
— Margaret Thatcher ‘Although it is uncomfortable, the note which is being sounded is not bad; it is one of being prepared to take occasionally rough and unpopular decisions in the belief that they will work through successfully.’
— Douglas Hurd, Home Secretary
The Conservative Conference: Calls to legalise drugs scorned
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
INTELLECTUALS calling for legalisation of drugs ought to know better, Peter Lloyd, Under-Secretary at the Home Office, told the conference yesterday.
It would be ‘an unmitigated disaster’ and a course the Government would never follow.
Replying to an emergency debate on drug abuse, Mr Lloyd echoed the view of one Tory that ‘people who are soft on drugs are soft in the head’.
‘What do they look for?’
Mr Lloyd asked.
‘Boots and Sainsburys selling heroin and cocaine in neat little packets with helpful little leaflets saying it may be lethal to exceed the stated dose?’
No respectable retailer would dream of stocking any such products, he said.
Supply would remain in the hands of crooks who would continue to push, but with total impunity, not just to their existing customers but as hard as they could to new ones as well.
‘If we have learned anything from the last few years, it is that availability is the main occasion and the trigger for experimentation among the young.’
Mocking supporters of legalisation writing in ‘sophisticated newspapers’, the minister said perhaps they believed that suppliers, unmolested by the police, would, ‘as an act of Christian charity’ reduce their prices so their customers did not have to steal and prostitute themselves.
‘Of course the traffickers would do no such thing.
They will continue to charge as much as that market will bear.
It will just be a very much larger market, that's all.’
The debate also brought demands for the Government to ban ‘acid house’ parties.
Ronald Clements, South Leicester, suggested the ‘thugs posing as security guards’ were the pushers at parties where drugs were portrayed as harmless amusement.
‘These awful events create a drug culture which can never be a part of our culture, and they must be stopped,’ Mr Clements said.
The Conservative Conference: Activists attack lack of Central Office support
By JUDY JONES
THE TORY hierarchy was urged by the rank-and-file yesterday to ‘get off its butt’ and give more practical support to constituency activists in the run-up to the next general election.
During a debate on party organisation, some representatives complained that Conservative Central Office was not providing Tory workers with the necessary back-up to sustain and win support at the grass roots.
Tim Loughton, of Battersea, accused the party headquarters of running ‘a shambolic campaign’ at the European elections in June.
The Tories were heading for disaster if they continued to delude themselves that only a little fine tuning of presentation was required to secure a fourth consecutive general election victory.
‘It is not enough for blue-suited ministers to rush for cover into the ivory towers of Whitehall every time a controversy blows up.
How much better it would be for ministers to be seen in the constituencies giving us the ammunition we need to fight on the doorsteps.’
He urged Kenneth Baker, the Tory Party chairman, to ‘get Central Office off its butt, and put the Government back on the beat’.
Elizabeth Rex, of Harwich, raised the Tories' much-criticised European elections poster whose message read: ‘Stay at home on June 15 and you'll live on a diet of Brussels.’
She said: ‘We must have pithy, punchy posters which make their point in one, and no more daft adverts like that diet of Brussels rubbish.’
The party could not rely on the achievements of the past decade to win the next election.
‘Voters will look for continued improvement in the quality of life and we must show exactly how Tory policies will provide it.’
Andrew Tinney, chairman of the Young Conservatives, pointed out that in the 18-24 age group.
the Tories trailed Labour in opinion polls by 37 per cent.
‘We have sown the seeds, but we have failed to reap the harvest.
If we are going to win, and win again, we must be as vigorous in promoting our cause as the Labour Party.’
Simon Lee, of Stratford-upon-Avon, said that although the party machine was ‘getting a little bit tired’, every member should accept their share of the blame for recent dents to the party image.
But dozens of representatives shouted ‘Yes’ when he recalled the European election campaign and asked them: ‘Can any of us say in all honesty that we did everything we could?’
Much of the blame for their slide in popularity could be attributed to ‘Cabinet ministers arguing over their official residences, and backbench Tory MPs taking an independent line to further their own political careers’.
Replying to the debate, Mr Baker said the task for Conservative Associations in 1990 was to recruit 10,000 extra committed supporters.
He also urged them to remember Tory supporters living overseas at the next election.
‘There could be as many as 4-5,000 in some seats.
Their votes could make all the difference.’
The Conservative Conference: Labour takes lead in council by-elections
By PETER KELLNER
LABOUR achieved a clear lead over the Conservatives in local council by-elections held during the conference season, according to an analysis by The Independent.
The Social and Liberal Democrats also performed well — in contrast to their poor opinion poll showing.
Where they fielded candidates they won 25 per cent support on average.
Green candidates won 7 per cent where they stood.
Altogether 70 by-elections have been held since 7 September.
The Conservatives won 20 (gained 6, lost 9); Labour won 29 (gained 10, lost 4); the SLD won 17 (gained 6, lost 5); the SDP lost both seats it previously held; independents won 4 (gained 3, lost 5).
There is nothing new about the centre doing better in by-elections than polls, but the difference is now particularly marked.
One indicator of the SLD's campaigning strength lies in its performance compared with that of the Greens.
Candidates from the two parties fought each other in 11 seats.
In nine the SLD scored the higher number of votes, while in two the Greens did better.
Overall, SLD candidates outscored Greens in head-to-head contests by almost four-to-one.
David Owen's SDP made little impact on council elections during the conference season.
It fielded four candidates who averaged just under 10 per cent where they stood.
The Conservative Conference: Hats flop deafeningly into leadership ring
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
RITUALISTIC as it was, the Tory grass-roots' orgiastic display of support for their leader came from the heart yesterday.
If it were up to the faithful in Blackpool, Margaret Thatcher would go ‘on and on’.
But all the stamping and cheering in the Empress ballroom might almost have been a vain attempt to muffle the sound of hats flopping intermittently into the leadership ring.
This week arguably saw the first real skirmishes of that impending struggle for succession: the sub-text of set-piece deliveries by Sir Geoffrey Howe, Kenneth Baker, Michael Heseltine et al.
To some around the Winter Gardens, it was all an unwanted distraction from the ‘real business’ of rallying the party to deal with a wayward economy and an Opposition united as never before.
But the sound of leadership campaigning had been clearly audible even to the doughtiest Thatcher-devotees, and most were prepared, if pressed, to take sides.
‘We are not looking for a leader,’ Douglas Wilson from Burton said.
‘As far as the grassroots are concerned we have got one, and I hope we have her for a very long time.’
His own preferred choice, rather untypically, was Norman Fowler, the Secretary of State for Employment, who had made a ‘resounding and superb’ conference speech.
The local activists have no constitutional role in choosing their leader, a task alloted exclusively to Conservative MPs.
But they were as aware as anyone of the variables of timing and electoral fortune which could dictate the succession or lead Tory MPs to ‘skip a generation’ and look to such figures as John Major and Chris Patten.
And although the names of all the contenders could be heard, high-profile politicking appeared to have paid off particularly in the cases of Kenneth Baker and Michael Heseltine, who were cited frequently as the ‘obvious’ front-runners.
To Victoria Roberts, a young full-time party worker from London, they were the only two in serious contention and she was backing Mr Heseltine: ‘Mrs Thatcher is a strong leader, and we will need a moderate Tory who will be equally strong — there goes my career.’
Charles Barwell, a Manchester University student, was rather more effusive: ‘It is difficult to choose between Baker and Heseltine.
‘But Britain will need a world leader of fantastic proportions.
Mr Heseltine obviously has that potential.’
In both camps, there was agreement that an orderly succession with the Conservatives faring well would tend to favour Mr Baker.
A narrow election victory, or a defeat, could spur a change of image and direction to the advantage of Mr Heseltine.
Some Baker supporters, and those backing John Major, Tom King and Michael Portillo, a long-term, right-wing long shot, dismissed Mr Heseltine's claim with equal vigour.
Time and again, his resignation during the Westland affair was held against him.
‘I don't want a leader of the country who walks out on the job when things are not going as he wants.
I would go for Ken Baker.’
So would Mary Freeman from Oxford East, who was deeply sceptical of Mr Heseltine's efforts to cultivate grass roots support.
‘Where he used to cut them dead, he now helps them on with their coats.’
‘I don't believe this is a Thatcherite party.
I belong to the Conservative party,’ said Sandra Gilfillan from Newcastle upon Tyne.
‘Are we going to be called Bakerites?.’
The Conservative Conference: Thatcher lays claim to torch of freedom: Vision of Eastern Europe inspired by Tory ‘turning point in history’ stirs outburst of wild adulation
By STEPHEN GOODWIN and JUDY JONES
MARGARET THATCHER yesterday portrayed her Conservative government as the pioneers of a world revolution, sweeping socialism from Britain and now inspiring the people of Eastern Europe to throw off their chains.
‘The messages on our banners in 1979 — freedom, opportunity, family, enterprise, ownership — are now inscribed on the banners in Leipzig, Warsaw, Budapest and even Moscow,’ she told the enraptured Tory faithful at the close of the Blackpool conference.
But the Prime Minister also sought to reject the charge of having created a selfish society.
‘For every Pharisee our system produces, you will find at least three good Samaritans,’ she said in a direct response to criticism by Dr Robert Runcie, the Archbishop of Canterbury.
She pledged never to privatise the National Health Service, reaffirmed the party's commitment to protect pensions against inflation and her intention to take a lead on world environmental problems.
On interest rates, Mrs Thatcher repeated the stern message of the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the conference on Wednesday.
‘I know what a worry high interest rates are for families with mortgages and for those involved in farming and small businesses,’ she said.
‘But when the choice is between high rates now or persistent higher inflation later, with all the damage that would do, the choice is clear.
Inflation will come down through the use of high interest rates, as it has in the past.
And so it must, for the rest of the world isn't standing still.’
Nor should industry expect ‘to find refuge in a perpetually depreciating currency’, Mrs Thatcher said, underlining Nigel Lawson's opposition to devaluation of the pound.
Only by steadily improving efficiency would Britain win and keep its share of the world's markets.
But she said Britain's economy was strong and would be stronger still when inflation was beaten.
Acknowledging that yesterday's inflation figure of 7.6 per cent was ‘far too high’ for a Conservative government, she promised it would be brought down again.
She told representatives the new inflation figure was the one used for the pension increase next April.
Therefore the single pension would go up by £3.30 and that for married couples by £5.30.
A full two hours before Mrs Thatcher delivered her address, Tory representatives had occupied every seat in the Empress Ballroom and were reserving standing places.
At its close, they cheered for 13 minutes, stamping, waving flags, chanting ‘10 more years’ and singing ‘Happy Birthday’.
It was the Prime Minister's 64th.
As she repeatedly pointed to the backdrop slogan, ‘The Right Team for Britain's Future’, Viscount Whitelaw, the former deputy prime minister, tried to bring the adulation to close by bellowing ‘No more, no more’ and ringing the chairman's bell.
Describing 1989 as ‘a fantastic year for freedom’, Mrs Thatcher said 1979 had been a turning point in history and Conservatives were the pathfinders.
‘We did not know it at the time but the torch we lit in Britain, which transformed our country — the torch of freedom that is now the symbol of our party — became a beacon that has shed its light across the Iron Curtain into the East.
Today that beacon shines more strongly than at any time this century.
You can see it reflected in the faces of the young people from the Communist countries who have reached the West.’
Mrs Thatcher said no one could know the direction in which free nations would progress.
But she went on: ‘This we do know — and dare not forget.
Only those whose commitment to free enterprise and opportunity is a matter of conviction, not convenience, have the necessary strength to sustain them.
Only those who have shown the resolve to defend the freedom of the West can be trusted to safeguard it in the challenging, turbulent and unpredictable times that lie ahead.’
Labour at Brighton last week had shown itself a party of disposable ideals and throwaway conviction.
She did not believe Labour was now the party of home ownership, strong defence and financial rectitude: ‘If it's that easy for the Labour leader to give up the principles in which he does believe, won't it be even easier for him to give up the principles in which he does not believe?
‘The truth is nothing has really changed.
Labour just wanted power at any price and they'll say anything to get it.
Labour's real prescription for Britain is the disease half the world is struggling to cure.’
Socialism was a secular creed which had utterly failed, she said, citing the migration of East Germans and the dismantling of Communism in Poland and Hungary.
‘What happened in Russia in 1917 wasn't a revolution.
It was a coup d'etat.
The true revolution is what is happening in Russia and Eastern Europe today.
In 1979, we knew that we were starting a British revolution; in fact, we were the pioneers of a world revolution.’
Countering those who painted wealth as selfishness, she said only by creating wealth could poverty be relieved.
It was what one did with wealth that counted, and in the last 10 years voluntary giving had doubled.
The Prime Minister praised Nigel Lawson and Sir Geoffrey Howe as the two finest Chancellors of the Exchequer since the war.
‘Their achievements have enabled us to provide more resources where they were needed — for schools, hospitals, pensioners and disabled people.’
But money could not achieve everything.
People had to be given the chance to exercise choice over schooling, hospital treatment, and housing.
‘What could be more democratic than to give people a direct say in these things?
What could be more arrogant than to deny it to them?’
Mrs Thatcher was at pains to emphasise the Government's commitment to the National Health Service.
‘In every year since I became Prime Minister, more money has been spent on the health service.
In every year, more doctors and nurses have been recruited and more patients treated.
These are the actions of a Government determined to make the health service one of the best in the world.
‘The NHS will not be privatised.
No matter what the emergency, accident or disease, no matter how long or complicated the treatment…the health service will always be there, to provide the finest care.’
In education, the Tories had erected ladders for children to climb.
But there remained too many blocks to opportunity after schooling, and prejudice about the age at which people could begin a new career.
‘I started being a prime minister at the age of 53.
I had never been a prime minister before.
But I adapted to the work.
I did my best.
And my employers have twice asked me to stay on.’
She went on to emphasise the growing need to tackle environmental problems: ‘It is no good proposing that we go back to some simple village life and halve our population by some means that have not yet been revealed.
‘It is prosperity which creates the technology that can keep the earth healthy.’
People had been awe-struck by the pictures sent back to earth by Voyager 2 of arid lifeless planets and moons.
‘They were a solemn reminder that our planet has the unique privilege of life.
How much more that makes us aware of our duty to safeguard the world.
The more we master our environment, we more we must learn to serve it.’
On defence Mrs Thatcher said: ‘Times of great change are also times of uncertainty and even danger.
The lesson is that you must always keep your defences strong so that you are prepared for any situation.
Some of us remember all too well what happened in the 1920s and 1930s when we allowed our hopes for a peaceful world to outrun our judgements on the need for defence.
The world paid a terrible price.’
President Gorbachev well understood the need for weapons reduction by negotiation, without jeopardising common security.
‘From our very first meeting he has always told me that he would never do anything to put the Soviet Union's security in danger — and he knows that I would never endanger our security.
Nor would the Government I lead.
Labour, however, would endanger Britain's security.
‘Labour's supposed conversion to multilateralism is no more than a confidence trick to try to make Labour electable.
You don't reach Downing Street by pretending you've travelled the road to Damascus when you haven't even left home.’
Informers recruited to prevent bombings: Mark Urban analyses the intelligence war against the IRA in Europe
By MARK URBAN
INTELLIGENCE documents obtained by An Phoblacht, newspaper of the Provisional Sinn Fein, and said to describe British attempts to recruit informers on the Continent, mark a new stage in the overseas war between the IRA and the Army.
It began with the bombing of eight barracks in West Germany in 1978.
More bombs were used the following year, and it was this, according to MI5 documents obtained by the IRA, that prompted efforts to recruit informants among Irish people in Europe.
The Provisionals realised that the Army's poorly-protected barracks were easier targets than fortified bases in Northern Ireland.
It was normal for sentries to be given no bullets.
This changed in 1980 after a major died in one of two shooting attacks against soldiers.
The Army ordered sentries to wear flak jackets and constructed many sandbagged emplacements, although most barracks were still protected by little more than chain link fences.
The IRA did not choose to attack again until March 1987.
A possible reason is that it was difficult to get arms and ammunition to the right place, despite the virtual absence of border controls between Germany and its western neighbours.
Communication with an ‘active service unit’— two to 10 terrorists — far from Ireland was a further obstacle.
Another reason could be that the IRA had become aware of British intelligence's drive for informers.
It appears that starting in 1979, the Intelligence and Security Group (G), an Army Intelligence Corps unit based at Rheindalen, West Germany, had recruited five informants within the Irish community.
These informants were turned over to British intelligence in 1981 under an operation code-named Ward.
Both Britain's Security Service, MI5, and the Secret Intelligence Service or MI6, appear to have been involved.
The number of sympathisers able to support IRA operations on the Continent is smaller than in Northern Ireland, so the recruitment of a few informers may have had a disproportionate effect.
There has been no official confirmation that the documents are genuine, although sources suggest that they are.
This raises a question of how long the IRA have had them.
It can be speculated that the informants recruited in Operation Ward may have been known to the IRA for months or even years.
The IRA says the more recent of the documents is dated 26 January 1984.
Indeed, it may be that the collapse of the MI5/MI6 informer network in Germany and other European countries restored the IRA's confidence in its ability to resume operations on the Continent from March 1987, when it placed a car bomb at Rheindalen.
The IRA's campaign broadened in March 1988 with the attempt to plant a bomb in Gibraltar.
The attack was foiled and three terrorists killed in a joint MI5/SAS operation.
It is likely that this group was betrayed by an informer.
Two months later the IRA launched a bomb and shooting attack on RAF servicemen in the Netherlands, killing three.
In July last year a German border guard apprehended two Irishmen with Kalashnikov assault rifles.
Attacks have continued every few months since then.
Last month a soldier's wife was shot dead near Dortmund.
It appears that about 20 IRA members, organised into several units, are operating on mainland Britain and the Continent.
In July, Europe's counter-intelligence agencies scored a coup with the apprehension of five IRA members.
Leonard Hardy and Donna Maguire were arrested in the Republic of Ireland carrying bomb-making materials on a trip from France.
Five days later three terrorists were apprehended by the DST, French counter-intelligence, as they drove towards the German frontier.
Police said that their two accomplices arrested in Ireland had been carrying several addresses of safe houses in France.
It seems remarkable that the three who remained in France did not abandon their mission following the arrests in Ireland.
It may be that the IRA, fearing informers, had gone to such lengths to restrict the knowledge of where the ‘active service unit’ was that it was unable to warn them that their presence was compromised.
Spy network changes target: Security groups liaise on tactics
By MARK URBAN, Defence Correspondent
OVER THE past few years Britain and her European allies have been trying to adapt a system designed to catch Warsaw Pact spies to the task of hunting international terrorists.
Information on the IRA threat flows through a myriad of British and West German organisations — each with its own headquarters, staff and acronym.
Many organisations might be involved after an attack on British forces.
The illustration above however, shows only those bodies involved in combating the IRA threat in West Germany.
The attacks which took place in Belgium and The Netherlands involve still more organisations.
The British Army of the Rhine and Royal Air Force Germany have their Joint HQ at Rheindalen in West Germany.
Each organisation has its own intelligence and counter-intelligence units.
There is also a unit of Ministry of Defence civilian intelligence specialists called the British Services Security Organisation (Germany) or BSSO.
One of BSSO's major functions is to liaise with the Security Service (MI5), which is particularly active in trying to stop IRA terrorism on the Continent and in mainland Britain.
BSSO is also the liaison point with the West German equivalent of MI5, called Bundesamt fur Verfassungsschutz — the State Office for the Protection of the Constitution or BfV.
However, it appears that in sensitive operations where the military does not have a ‘need to know’ MI5 and BfV's Section 7, which is active against terrorist groups, have their own direct channels of communication.
BSSO's director, heads of Army and RAF intelligence, the chief British military policeman in Germany and MI6's chief of Bonn Station sit on the Joint Intelligence Committee (Germany).
JIC(G) meets occasionally, is chaired by a senior diplomat from the British Embassy in Bonn, and leaves the daily work of assessing the IRA terrorist threat to a sub-committee, the Joint Security Group.
The Joint Security Group takes intelligence about possible forthcoming terrorist attacks — usually provided by MI5 or BfV — and puts Army and RAF units on to a higher state of alert.
When the intelligence experts feel the threat has receded, the state of alert of military units is reduced.
At provincial and city level there are also many ties between the Royal Military Police, other British units, and the local West German police.
The Bundeskriminalamt or BKA is supervising the hunt for the IRA units which have attacked British servicemen and their families in recent months.
BKA has wide-ranging powers to supervise local police operations.
Secrecy is exploited by terrorists
By MARK URBAN, Defence Correspondent
INTERNATIONAL terrorism has been able to exploit the natural competitiveness and secretiveness of Europe's counter-intelligence organisations.
Claims that the West German authorities have mishandled inquiries into the Lockerbie bombing have caused ill feeling between officials.
In recent years the British Government has attempted to extradite terrorist suspects from Belgium and The Netherlands after they had been discovered by British intelligence.
Britain has reacted angrily when it felt other European governments were not co-operating in these efforts.
Intelligence sources in West Germany say that efforts to stop the current wave of IRA attacks have not been hampered by rivalries and that different organisations have been co-operating well together.
Nevertheless, the large number of organisations involved and the fact that their activities are not centrally co-ordinated as in Northern Ireland, suggests that there may be scope for confusion or conflict between them.
In 1978 and 1979 a series of changes began in Northern Ireland which resulted eventually in the direction and co-ordination of intelligence gathering activities by the Royal Ulster Constabulary Special Branch.
Although the Army and MI5 still retain some independent intelligence gathering capabilities in the province, the system is now largely centralised and works well — the IRA itself has admitted that one of the reasons it has exported a growing proportion of its violence to the continent and mainland Britain is because it has become increasingly risky for them to operate on home territory.
But in the mid-1970s there was an acrimonious conflict between the different intelligence gathering agencies in the province.
Matters became so serious that in August 1979 Sir Maurice Oldfield, the former Chief of MI6 — and model for John Le Carre's fictional spy master George Smiley — was sent to Northern Ireland to cover the differences between MI6, MI5, Army intelligence and the RUC.
Sir Maurice reportedly decided to reduce MI6's role in Ireland, although it still conducted operations on the continent and against IRA gun runners in North America.
During the 1970s intelligence organisations were often reluctant to share information from their best informants.
A participant in discussions between intelligence organisations in Ulster during the 1970s said: ‘There was an element of ‘if you tell them everything, we haven't got a position have we?’
In the intelligence business knowledge is power.’
This reluctance to share information is alleged to have led to several disasters where information was not passed to the right people in time, and where one organisation arrested the informants of another by accident.
Extra complaints against detectives went undisclosed
By TERRY KIRBY, Crime Correspondent
AN ADDITIONAL series of allegations that Serious Crime Squad detectives in the West Midlands Police fabricated confessions were not disclosed to the public and the Police Complaints Authority for more than a year.
Inquiries by The Independent have confirmed that while West Midlands Police were publicly acknowledging the existence of four or five complaints against the squad, its internal investigations department knew of three more in which serious allegations had been made against detectives.
Between July 1988, when it is now known the department knew of at least seven cases, and August 1989, when Geoffrey Dear, the Chief Constable of the West Midlands, purged his CID department — moving 39 serving and former squad officers into administrative roles — at least two more men were convicted on the basis of disputed confession evidence.
Mr Dear has said he did not take earlier action because he was told there was no evidence to suggest a wider conspiracy.
It is not precisely clear when he knew of the extra cases.
It is one of the tasks of the inquiry by the West Yorkshire Police, supervised by the authority, to discover how many of the 754 arrests by the squad since January 1986 may have resulted in convictions from fabricated confessions.
Two trials that went ahead during late 1988 were of Hassan Khan and John Edwards.
They were convicted of armed robberies and sentenced to 15 years and 14 years respectively.
Both say they were convicted on the basis of fabricated confessions.
No attempt was made to withdraw the prosecutions.
Clare Short, Labour MP for Ladywood, who raised the issue in the Commons in January, said: ‘I think the West Midlands Police were trying to brush the matter under the carpet and it was only pressure from MPs and the media that made them do anything.’
At the time, the force declined to name the five cases under investigation.
The authority knew of two where officers had been disciplined — the Paul Dandy and Clifford Jones cases — and one under investigation — the Brown case.
They knew of a fourth case, later confirmed to be that of Keith Parchment, and believed the fifth referred to the Brown case, which technically involved two separate trials.
The Independent has learnt that the complaints department knew of three more cases.
One involved a man called Raymond Fryer, whose name was shown up by tests on notes of an interview between a detective and Jones.
When interviewed by complaints department officers he made similar allegations about fabrication of admissions.
Earlier this week Fryer, while on home leave from prison, went missing, saying it was to draw attention to his case.
Fryer also alleged that a fellow prisoner, Ronnie Bolden, a car dealer, was claiming his alleged confession to two armed robberies was fabricated.
Bolden spent almost two years in custody before being cleared by a jury in June.
The third case involved Paul Fitzsimmons.
Charges against him were dropped in May 1988 after a meeting between the Crown Prosecution Service and the force complaints department, because his alleged confession had been given to an officer, Det Sgt James McManus, who was already under investigation in another case.
Because none of the men formally lodged complaints, the authority was not told of the three extra cases until after Mr Dear's purge.
A source close to the investigation said: ‘Although there was no obligation to notify the authority, one might have felt that under the circumstances they should have done.’
All the files will be examined as part of the inquiry.
West Midlands Police and West Yorkshire Police yesterday declined to comment.
Judge attacks jury ‘lottery’
By TERRY KIRBY, Crime Correspondent
SELECTING jurors is ‘a lottery within a lottery’ and can be unfair to the administration of justice, an Old Bailey judge said yesterday, as he fined a man £100 for failing to turn up for jury service on the second day of a trial because it was ‘not his scene’.
Vern Clarke, 19, a London Underground maintenance worker, caused the trial to be aborted, held up court proceedings for half a day and cost the taxpayer more than £7,000.
After hearing that he meant no disrespect, but had not felt emotionally and intellectually up to trying the case, Judge Robert Lymbery accepted Clarke was partly a ‘victim of the system’.
He said: ‘I think many people think the present system is really a lottery within a lottery to the prejudice of the Crown, defendants and justice alike.
‘But so long as the system remains as it is, those who choose to disregard their obligations must realise they may face a fine.’
Priest tells of foreign fundraising
By TERRY KIRBY, Crime Correspondent
PATRICK RYAN, the Irish Catholic priest sought by Britain on terrorist charges, said yesterday he had spent the 14 years since dropping out of active priesthood raising money from foreign embassies for the victims of the conflict in Northern Ireland.
He was speaking at a press conference in Dublin following the decision by the Irish Republic's Director of Public Prosecutions on Thursday not to bring a case under the 1976 Criminal Law Jurisdiction Act, allowing prosecutions in the Republic for offences allegedly committed in Britain.
Both the Republic and Belgium had earlier refused to extradite him to Britain.
Mr Ryan declined to name the embassies or the foreign countries he had approached or to specify what sums had been raised.
He refused to say whether these were Arab embassies and whether Libya was involved.
‘I have visited many countries.
As to what particular countries, in what particular circumstances, I would prefer to let that sleep.
‘I was approached by some of the victims of that situation (the Northern Ireland conflict) to help them in whatever way I could.
I approached the embassies of many countries for help.’
He added: ‘I was never engaged either in supplying or use of explosives or arms.
That was never part of my business or intention.
At no time did I supply money for arms.’
Asked if he intended resuming his duties with the Pallotine order, the Catholic missionary body he joined in 1954, he said his position had not yet been clarified.
Eamon O'Neill, Mr Ryan's agent in the June European elections, chaired the meeting.
He turned down several questions concerning his past activities on the Continent, saying they could affect 16 current libel actions.
Key witnesses in Ryan case ‘refused to testify’
By TERRY KIRBY, Crime Correspondent
THE DECISION of Eamonn Barnes, the Irish Republic's Director of Public Prosecutions, not to bring explosives charges against Patrick Ryan is believed to be due to the refusal of key witnesses to testify against him.
According to security sources in Dublin yesterday, the absence of two key witnesses had effectively determined Mr Barnes' decision not to press charges under the 1976 Criminal Law Jurisdiction Act, which allows for prosecution in the Republic for offences allegedly committed in Britain and Northern Ireland.
The two witnesses are said to be a retired Swiss shopkeeper who had business dealings with Mr Ryan in the early 1970s, and a British businessman who had dealings with Mr Ryan in Libya.
The first witness had decided at an early stage not to travel to Dublin; the second only recently made his decision not to give evidence.
The rest of the evidence against Mr Ryan is understood to be mainly circumstantial.
In a This Week interview screened by Thames Television in June, Mr Ryan, 59, admitted he was a republican sympathiser and that he had bought electronic equipment, which it is alleged found its way into IRA bombs.
He said: ‘I buy them the same as I buy anything else and pass them on.
It's none of my business — but I would stress that the IRA never requested that I buy any such items for them.’
Mr Ryan also admitted buying hundreds of Swiss memopark timing devices in the 1970s.
The devices are designed for parking meters, but are also the main timers used in IRA bombs.
The programme alleged that an electronic device bought by Mr Ryan was found in bomb-making circuitry in an IRA arms cache discovered in Salcey Forest, on the Northamptonshire-Buckinghamshire border, in 1984.
Identical circuitry was used in the 1982 Hyde Park bomb which killed eight people and injured fifty-three others.
Untransmitted tapes of the interview with Mr Ryan were handed over by Thames to Scotland Yard under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1989.
Dublin sources claimed yesterday that following recent examination of the evidence submitted by the English authorities, the Garda and the DPP had major misgivings about parts of it relating to the alleged discovery of bomb-making materials and documents in Mr Ryan's Brussels apartment in July last year.
There were fears that statements made by Belgian security service officers would not stand up in court.
Neither Mr Barnes nor the UK's Director of Public Prosecutions, Allan Green QC, would confirm or deny the claims.
Last year the Republic refused to extradite Mr Ryan to Britain to face terrorism charges, including conspiracy to murder and cause explosions, on the grounds that allegations in the Press and Parliament linking him with the IRA meant he would not receive a fair trial in Britain.
The 1976 Act allows charges of possession and handling of explosives to be brought in the Republic, but not charges of conspiracy to cause murder or explosions.
Schools ‘will have to modify entrance exams’
By SIMON MIDGLEY
BRITAIN's independent schools will have to replace or modify the traditional Common Entrance examination if they are to follow the new national curriculum, a former independent head warns, writes Simon Midgley.
A confidential paper considered this week by the Independent Schools Curriculum Committee, which represents all the main independent school associations, suggests that the Common Entrance exam be replaced in preparatory schools with assessment tasks designed for 14-year-olds.
The author, Gavin Alexander, until recently head of Hampton School in Middlesex, for boys aged 11 to 18 years, says it might be better for 13-year-old pupils to be assessed in this way rather than sitting the Common Entrance and then being assessed again a year later.
The national curriculum involves assessing pupils at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16.
Although independent schools are not legally obliged to follow the new national curriculum, which involves the study of 10 subjects, most are likely to do so.
Their problem, however, is trying to reconcile national curriculum demands with their desire to offer a second modern language, three sciences and perhaps Latin and Greek.
Kurdish asylum seeker detained by police
By SIMON MIDGLEY
A KURDISH asylum seeker forcibly returned to Turkey was detained yesterday for questioning by the political police, writes Nicholas Schoon.
Halil Guzel was taken into overnight custody by the regular police at Istanbul airport when he landed on Thursday.
The political police, the equivalent of Britain's Special Branch, detained him yesterday morning.
Last night there was no news about whether he had been released.
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees had called on the Home Office to reconsider Mr Guzel's removal on compassionate grounds.
It said another Kurdish refugee, Selahattin Ozberk, detained in Pentonville Prison, had good reason to fear ill treatment if he was returned to Turkey and should be granted refugee status.
The Home Office says he has until Tuesday evening to find another country to take him.
Two other Kurds in detention are expected to be sent back to Turkey over the weekend.
‘Mappa’ plan
By SIMON MIDGLEY
The Mappa Mundi will go on permanent exhibition at Hereford Cathedral next summer under a new rescue package, currently being negotiated, aimed at preserving the 14th century relic.
Brink's-Mat case
By SIMON MIDGLEY
Three people charged in connection with an alleged plot to launder more than £16m from the £26m Brink's-Mat gold bullion raid six years ago were remanded in custody by magistrates at Horseferry Road Court, London.
A fourth person was freed on £50,000 bail.
Party convictions
By SIMON MIDGLEY
Robert Darby, 25, a youth leader known as The General, and Leslie Thomas, 26, were yesterday convicted at Southwark Crown Court of permitting premises to be used for the control and supply of drugs in relation to acid house parties.
Darby was remanded in custody for a week.
Thomas will be sentenced on Friday.
Five freed
By SIMON MIDGLEY
Five Irishmen arrested in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, on Thursday under anti-terrorism laws were released without charge.
Drink-drive ban
By SIMON MIDGLEY
A motorist who was five times over the drink-drive limit, twice within 24 hours, was put on probation for two years, and banned from driving for three years by magistrates at Exeter.
Noel Birch, 37, was also ordered to spend 60 days on an alcohol education programme, and to take a driving test before reapplying for a licence.
Man accused
By SIMON MIDGLEY
Wayne Shaw, 29, was remanded in custody for a week by magistrates at Eccles, Greater Manchester, charged with attempting to murder a motorist, kidnapping two others, and three armed robberies between 25 and 29 September.
Cannabis case
By SIMON MIDGLEY
Four people will appear in court today charged with smuggling 1.6 tonnes of cannabis resin valued at £4.8m after a yacht was boarded off Falmouth, Cornwall.
The four are: William Sullivan, 45, unemployed, from Romford, Essex; his daughter Jenni, 22, unemployed, of the same address; William Elliott, 48, a photographer, from Watford, Hertfordshire; and Pamela Frank, 36, from Pennsylvania, USA.
Two more UDR men charged
By SIMON MIDGLEY
Edward Stewart, 32, and James William Edgar Neill, 46, both members of the Ulster Defence Regiment, were remanded in custody accused of firearms offences.
The two men were among 28 UDR soldiers arrested last weekend by detectives investigating the alleged leakage of security forces' information to Protestant paramilitary groups.
Six UDR men have now been charged.
Victim's view on sentence sought in sex case
By SIMON MIDGLEY
A JUDGE has put off sentencing a 26-year-old sex attacker in order to give the victim, a young mother, an opportunity to express her view on what the punishment should be.
Lord McCluskey's decision yesterday is believed to break new ground for a Scottish criminal court.
The judge described it as ‘a highly unusual circumstance’.
But he said he was ‘very anxious indeed’ to discover ‘the feelings’of the victim ‘in relation to the disposal of the accused's case’if she were prepared to assist.
The case before the High Court in Edinburgh involves a violent assault on the 25-year-old woman in her home last June while her husband was at work.
Brian McKenzie, a single man, of Beachmont Court, Dunbar, East Lothian, admitted attempting to murder her and assaulting her with intent to rape.
An earlier court hearing was told that the woman awoke one morning to be confronted by McKenzie, who was naked apart from a pair of underpants on his head.
He held a knife to her throat, sexually assaulted her and dragged her outside to the garden where she was forced to perform obscene acts.
She was taken back into the house and made to fill a bath and to get into it.
McKenzie tried to push her head under water but she pulled out the plug.
She was forced to refill the bath and McKenzie again held her head under water.
He cut her throat, stabbed her in the stomach and tried to poke out her eyes with his fingers.
The floor was covered with blood.
Although weak, the woman fought back.
She bit him on his shoulder and grabbed his testicles.
Eventually, he calmed down and began to cry.
He ran from the house saying that he was going to commit suicide.
The woman, who will be scarred for life, was treated in hospital for a number of injuries including a 3in cut to her neck.
McKenzie, who has never been in trouble before, was described by people who knew him as a pleasant individual.
At the earlier hearing Lord McCluskey had asked for a report from a sex-problems clinic after inquiring about pornographic material — 65 magazines and 45 videos — listed as exhibits in the case.
But Graham Robertson, McKenzie's counsel, told the court yesterday that the report emphasised that his client came from a stable background in the west of Scotland and had felt lonely for the two years he had lived in Dunbar.
McKenzie had told him that he had not looked at the videos or magazines for some years before the assault and felt they played no part in his behaviour.
Psychiatrists had been unable to find anything of significance to explain his actions.
Lord McCluskey described the case as ‘highly unusual’.
He felt he would be in ‘a better position to settle on the appropriate form of punishment’ if he knew the victim's feelings.
He added that it was entirely up to her whether she chose to assist.
There could be no hint of criticism on the part of the court if she felt she wanted nothing more to do with it.
He deferred sentence for two weeks.
His decision was described as ‘very innovative’ by Sue Moody, director of Victim Support Scotland.
She said: ‘This is not something that has happened before.
It's something that we regard as an interesting development.
We would wish to seek the views of our members on it.’
Sheriff Gordon Nicholson, a leading authority on sentencing in Scottish courts, said: ‘I am not aware of any precedent in Scots law.
I believe this sort of thing does happen in the United States and some other countries where one of the pieces of information put before the judge at the stage of sentencing is a victim-impact statement.’
Tests show nuns' hens ‘pose no health threat’
By LIZ HUNT
TESTS carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture on the flock of 5,000 hens owned by nuns at Our Lady of the Passion Monastery in Northamptonshire, showed that there was no danger to public health, it was claimed yesterday.
Mr Alan Rawley QC, for Mother Catherine, 82, the Mother Superior of the monastery, said that evidence supplied by the Ministry yesterday morning revealed that salmonella typhimurium had been isolated from a ‘bulked up’ sample of the intestines of five of the chickens.
‘An intestinal infection is of no significance whatsoever in the field of public health because such infection will not give rise to any problems to public health,’ he told Lord Justice Parker and Mr Tudor Evans during a judicial review of the Ministry's order to slaughter the chickens.
‘If it is the intestine which is infected, the infection is transient and will not reach inside the egg,’ he said.
Mr Rawley told the court that he had received full details of the scientific tests carried out by the Ministry that morning.
His request for an adjournment to consider this evidence and to produce scientific evidence that supported the nuns' claim that the flock was not a threat to human health, was granted by the judges until Tuesday.
Later, Mother Catherine, who attended the hearing, accused the Ministry of ‘moving the goal posts’ of the case.
The nuns' request for a judicial review of the order to slaughter the flock had been based upon John Gummer, the Minister of Agriculture, ‘failing to comply with natural justice’.
Until yesterday morning, the Ministry had not given the nuns any information on the tests they had made or what these had revealed.
The nuns, therefore, had no opportunity to determine whether the Ministry could have been wrong, she said.
Now that they had been presented with the information which they had requested all along, they had to prove that faecal contamination of the egg shell did not constitute any great risk to public health, Mother Catherine said.
Richard North, a local environmental health officer who has been advising the nuns, said that contamination of eggs through the shell via the faeces had never been considered a serious risk either by the working party who had submitted evidence to the Select Committee on Salmonella in Eggs, or by the Public Health Service Laboratories.
As a result there had been very few scientific studies which would make their case harder to win, he said.
‘We will continue with the fight for as long as we can,’ Mother Catherine said.
The nuns believed themselves vindicated both morally and scientifically, she added.
‘It is not for us because we are going out of this business.
It is for all the poor farmers.
I think someone else should have done it because it is not our vocation.
It just seems to have fallen to us — the Providence of God you know.’
The United Kingdom Egg Producers' Association, which is meeting the legal costs of the nuns' case, was ‘pleased and surprised’ with the ruling that the nuns should be paid the full market price of £1.42 each for the birds if they were slaughtered.
At present, compensation is paid on the assumption that all the flock is infected — 39p per bird — and not just the birds removed for testing.
The Ministry said that it would refrain from slaughtering the birds until the ruling on Tuesday.
Eggs are not being sold from the monastery at present.
Confusion over fate of Channel rail link
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
CONFUSION reigned last night over the fate of the £3.5bn Channel tunnel high-speed rail link and the route it will take through Kent to London.
It emerged yesterday that one of the two private consortia negotiating to build the line with British Rail had rejected BR's preferred route because it said it could cost up to £5bn.
The high-speed line proposed by BR would end at new terminals at King's Cross and Waterloo in London.
It is in discussions with two consortia led by Trafalgar House and the shipping and property group P&O.
However, environmental improvements demanded by ministers have increased the cost of this route three-fold to £3.5bn.
The alternative route, proposed by a consortia led by the American bank Manufacturers Hanover and the construction group Bechtel, would end at a terminal in Stratford, East London.
It is claimed this route would cost £1bn less than BR's.
It is understood, however, that P&O has now concluded that the link should terminate at Stratford.
As an interim proposal it has suggested a new line be built through Kent overground to a new terminal at Swanley, close to the M25, and the upgrading of the existing Waterloo line.
Trafalgar House, BR's favoured partner, is reliably understood to have rejected the idea of building a terminal at Stratford and to be sticking to the final route chosen by BR.
It has submitted final proposals to ministers along with a range of options as to how the link might be built.
These include a government cash injection by way of loan stock, linked to an equity participation which would enable the Government to recoup some of its money if the line is a success.
Computer viruses cause little disruption
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
THE PANIC world-wide over the Friday 13th computer viruses came as something of an anti-climax, with the Royal National Institute for the Blind emerging as the major casualty.
But experts warned computer users that Friday 13th viruses are only a tiny proportion of the 30 or so known types of virus which exist, and that they would be wise to keep taking precautions.
According to Owen Keane, a barrister and computer expert, one way to prevent infection is to avoid copying programs and games from friends or electronic bulletin boards, as the virus can spread through infected floppy dics.
Although there have been cases of viruses spreading on shrink-wrapped software, these are relatively rare.
One of the most notorious ways of spreading infection has been the computer game Leisure Suit Larry, which was widely pirated and became infected.
Pirated computer games are the most likely source of spreading infections, according to one expert.
Viruses can also spread if computers are linked by modems to the outside world.
But users who do not have modems and keep their data ‘hygienic’ by not borrowing software have little to fear, Mr Keane said.
The viruses often work by attacking a section of the disc known as the ‘boot’ section.
This block of data includes the index, and if the index is rendered useless then so is all the data on the hard disc.
It cannot be recalled in any coherent form.
The virus is activated when the computer program is ‘executed’ by running it on a computer.
It replicates itself, and each new copy, which is independent of the original, goes on to carry out the task for which the virus was designed.
Call for sacking of conservation convention chief
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
INTERNATIONAL conservation groups yesterday demanded the immediate sacking of Eugene Lapointe, the secretary-general of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, amid mounting controversy over the conduct and funding of the CITES secretariat.
The 18 organisations — from the Africa Wildlife Foundation to the World Society for the Protection of Animals — claimed there was a crisis ‘threatening the effectiveness of CITES.’
The convention meeting has been bitterly divided over proposals to ban all trade in ivory because of decline in elephant numbers from more than 1.2 million to 600,000 in the last decade.
Set up in 1975, CITES regulates trade by its 103-member nations in hundreds of rare and endangered species from orchids to orang utans.
Informed sources within CITES yesterday indicated that a number of allegations of corruption within the secretariat had been fully investigated by its standing committee without any evidence of wrongdoing being found.
It is, however, increasingly felt by members of CITES delegations and the many observer groups from the world of conservation that Lapointe's position is becoming untenable and he will be forced to resign — probably before the next CITES meeting, expected to be held in 1992.
The sacking demand by conservationists was contained in a letter to Dr Mustapha Tolba, the executive director of the United Nations Environment Programme, which is the supervising body for CITES.
The letter says: ‘Mr Lapointe and his staff have exceeded the responsibilities and mandate of the secretariat.
‘The owners of the poached ivory stock piles have been able to achieve a virtual monopoly of the international ivory trade, which was used to force prices up by as much as 300 per cent in three years.’
Demanding the ‘immediate dismissal ‘of Lapointe, the letter accuses the secretary-general of ‘a lack of leadership and judgement’.
One senior delegate, who asked not to be identified, said yesterday: ‘The problem is Lapointe is supposed to be the servant of CITES, not its boss.’
Commenting on the letter to Tolba, Mr Lapointe, who has previously insisted that his actions and those of his staff are entirely correct, would only say yesterday: ‘My comment is that I am fed up with all the garbage.’
In the convention discussions yesterday, delegates remained deadlocked on how to protect the elephant and discussion will now continue through next week.