

Getafix on Asterix, with Vitalstatistix: Albert Uderzo talks to Dalya Alberge about his creation of the mini-hero and his Gallic chums
By DALYA ALBERGE
THERE was no particular reason to have expected the creator of Asterix, the cuddly but cute Gallic mini-hero, or Obelix, the hefty menhir delivery-man, to be anything like his cartoon characters.
Yet it came as a surprise to find Albert Uderzo, the Parisian illustrator, is suave, sophisticated and softly spoken, a man whose idea of fun is racing one of his six Ferraris.
It was as a mere 12-year-old — forever doodling characters from favourite children's stories — that Albert Uderzo set his heart on becoming France's answer to Walt Disney.
Thirty years since Asterix came to life, sales of the books — 28 so far — have topped 180 million (Asterix's magic potion for superhuman strength enables them all to speak in 29 languages).
And France's answer to Disneyland — a £69m Asterix theme park in Picardy — received its millionth visitor within months of opening last spring.
This month sees publication of How Obelix Fell into the Magic Potion when He was a Little Boy (Hodder & Stoughton, £4.95) and the seventh film, Asterix and the Big Fight, opened yesterday in the West End.
The previous picture, Asterix in Britain, grossed $34m in cinema and video releases.
Unlike Felix the Cat or Mickey Mouse, brought to life in motion pictures, Asterix started off in a comic strip.
While some have pointed to political messages and deep moralising bursting from the cartoon bubbles, Asterix followers have simply enjoyed the fun and the humour.
Asterix inhabits a world of childlike innocence, peopled with characters such as Getafix, the venerable village Druid, Caco-fonix the bard and Vitalstatistix the brave chieftain, whose only fear is that the sky may fall on his head.
‘Its appeal lies in that the characters are very human,’ says Uderzo.
‘The story is not dependent on one character.
And it's a spiritual, intellectual humour.’
Asterix might never have been born but for a chance meeting in 1951 with another cartoonist, Rene Goscinny, at the Paris offices of a Belgian newspaper syndicate.
Uderzo's father was an Italian lute-maker who had moved to France shortly before his son's birth in 1927.
Uderzo, like Goscinny, was untrained.
He had endured a period in an animation studio, frustrated by being directed what to draw.
Goscinny had worked in America with Harvey Kurtzman of MAD fame: he had become dissatisfied as a draughtsman and chose to redirect his talents to story-telling.
Soon the Uderzo-Goscinny double signature was familiar to young readers of comic strips in Belgian newspapers.
Asterix was not an instant success.
He made a quiet debut in 1959 in Pilote, a comic magazine, and a book was published in 1961.
But it was only four years later that he became truly animated.
Their first attempts to invent an anti-hero strong enough to vie with the popularity of Tarzan and Superman, and soft enough to melt the hearts of children, did not quite come off: ‘I drew him bigger and more handsome.
It was Goscinny who suggested changes until we got him just right.’
Something approaching international humour has been achieved by Asterix, whose popularity in France is surpassed by sales figures in Finland.
It is the universal appeal of the character that convinces Uderzo the stories must be kept decidedly apolitical.
‘If we had made political statements, Asterix would be too French.
That would detract from his worldwide appeal.
‘But during the Gaullist years, people said it was propaganda for De Gaulle,’ he sighs, weary of denying either political message or moralising.
‘They linked the two names, interpreting the setting in Gaul as Gaullist propaganda, even though there was no intended connection.
We had very personal political views, but we didn't let them come through.
We never even had the courage to send De Gaulle a copy of one of our books.’
The Romans may be the chief enemies in the books, but they are not the only ones who would like to suppress Asterix.
There has been a sensitive reaction to the teasing of national stereotypes.
The Swiss, for example, feel blackened at being caricatured as the world's sweepers-up, and the Spanish smart at their portrayal as lazy gypsies.
But those who can take a joke have ranged from children to adults -something that the Uderzo-Goscinny team had never anticipated.
‘Funnily enough, we could detect how the readership was developing from book signings: initially it was the children who came; then mothers, mumbling that their children were at school, and then the fathers saying, ‘I want to know what my children are reading’; and finally, the parents on their own, no longer needing childish excuses.’
The Uderzo-Goscinny partnership came to an abrupt end with Goscinny's death in 1977.
Distraught, Uderzo resolved never to draw again, to kill off Asterix.
Moved by appeals from the public and the Press, he decided to write the text himself.
‘I considered finding another writer but, as I only wanted a talented writer, I feared such a person would want to change the characters.’
He composes the storyline first, from beginning to end, before putting illustrator's pen to paper.
‘That way, you get a better flow,’ he explains.
‘I learnt that from Goscinny.’
He relies on a team of illustrators to colour his drawings.
‘I do all the drawings, unlike other studios where you have someone to do the cars, someone to do the buildings.
I do everything from the Gaul huts and chariots to people.
I work in pencil, then outline it all in heavy black ink.’
Being colour-blind has not cramped his style: ‘Although, because I mix up greens and browns, I seem to have had lots of green hair.’
Sketching, says Uderzo, is a fast process.
It has to be as, apart from briefly translating ideas for a new character on to paper, he finds ‘there is so little time.
We're always behind on deadlines.’
His sketching speed was amply illustrated at our meeting: at the request of The Independent photographer for a cartoon to be positioned against a picture of him, within seconds a huge Asterix bounced off a sheet of paper.
Uderzo is never satisfied with the results, ‘but, again, there's no time to retouch’.
While the strip cartoons are produced with a small team, the latest multi-million dollar animated feature film has occupied an international team of as many as 300 artists and technicians for two years.
Uderzo says they preferred not to film in America: ‘They would have had a very different idea of how to approach the jokes.
Asterix is too intellectual for them.’
Instead, it was co-produced by ExtraFilm, Berlin, and Gaumont, Paris.
Although the books have been translated into Latin (the most gentle of language teaching aids), it is unlikely that the film's dubbing team will have to contend with ablative absolutes.
Voice-overs for the English-language version include Bill Oddie as Asterix and Bernard Bresslaw as Obelix.
The smooth-talking soothsayer is played by Ron Moody: ‘Doing the voice-over made me realise just how intelligent and satirical the writing is.
There are such sharp observations about people.
I don't know what it's satirising, but this is not a cartoon with superficial, naive characters.’
Style Update: Young M & S
By VINNY LEE
CHILDREN'S rooms are the latest target for the co-ordinated look.
Jumping on the pram, rather than the bandwagon, M & S has just launched Nursery and Young Living furniture with bedding, wallpapers and curtains.
The furniture range in utilitarian pine and kitchen-like white melamine offers a cot for £170, bunk beds £285 (excluding mattresses), desk £175, wardrobe £225, and chests of drawers from £150.
Decorating and bedlinen designs are a choice of ‘Dancing Bows’ with ducks and mice, or ‘Noah's Friend’with elephants, tigers and zebras.
Cot quilts £15.99, reversible duvet cover £10.99, wallpaper £6.99 a roll, borders £6.99 a roll, curtains from £45.
Style Update: Primarily paper
By VINNY LEE
TESSA FANTONI, wife of cartoonist Barry, trained as a bookbinder and used her knowledge of paper to develop a collection of beautiful albums and books covered with marbled and original 1930s and 1940s printed papers.
Mrs Fantoni is a paper-lover: ‘The world is divided into people who don't sniff paper and those who do.
I'm a paper sniffer.’
The handmade albums and plain-paged books (below) are ideal wedding or christening presents and come in red, blue or black bindings with co-ordinating cover-papers.
All the albums are refillable and come in large £29, medium £24 and small £16.50.
Fashion: Parisian poet clothed in wit: Charlotte Du Cann looks at an exhibition to mark the centenary of Jean Cocteau's birth
By CHARLOTTE DU CANN
COCTEAU, poet, painter, novelist, playwright, muralist, designer and film maker, whose centenary it is this year and whose ceramics are on show at the David Gill gallery in west London, was also one of the wittiest dressers of his time.
He designed for others (costumes for Diaghilev and embroidery for Schiaparelli), but he also ‘designed’ himself; his unquenchable desire for fame and his talent for self-publicity made him the most photographed man in Paris.
There are many photographs of Cocteau in his trademark suit staring with absolute assurance into the camera: Cocteau wearing a thick alpaca coat; Cocteau with a dark wool coat flung over his shoulders; Cocteau in dungarees; Cocteau in a duffel coat with Chanel.
He was photographed by Man Ray in a sharp, dark suit with a striped shirt and white collar.
He was painted by Modigliani and Picarbia in a white shirt and tiny bow tie.
His style was of the poet-dandy.
He was never merely flamboyant or vulgarly bohemian.
He never wore swirling capes or giant fedoras.
He wore his suits very tight and his collars very large.
He clashed striped shirts, check jackets and spotted ties.
His eccentricities were revealed in his habits of unbuttoning his suit cuffs and turning them back, or wearing one v-neck jumper on top of another.
His narrow shoulders were habitually draped by a challis scarf, his hands adorned by two Russian wedding rings.
There are many reasons why fashion has begun to look to Cocteau, not simply because it is his centenary and his Hellenic graphics have begun to adorn cult objects in designer stores (on white vases at Oggetti, on black watch faces at the Watch Gallery).
Even his ‘classics with a twist’ style makes him an obvious role model for this season's slim suiting.
In 1990 many people will prefer to look like Parisian poets than American businessmen.
Design: A game of follow-my-leader: Jonathan Glancey anticipates a jamboree on Designers' Saturday
By JONATHAN GLANCEY
FROM warehouse studios, down the narrow stairs of Soho attics, out of countless houses marked by metallic silver blinds, come London's design fraternity.
Alaia tops, Paul Smith suits, extravagant spectacles: the designers are an instantly recognisable breed.
Next weekend, on Designers' Saturday, they scurry from design showroom to design showroom, laden with colourful brochures, bags, posters, booze and designer snacks in a fleet of black cabs laid on free by the organisers.
Officially, those of you excluded from the league of designers are not meant to join in this day-long visual and alimentary orgy.
You are meant to follow in the wake of the stylised men and women with the Pentel pens on Monday 23 October, while design students only will be welcomed on the Tuesday.
Designers' Saturday is not an exhibition of how to furnish your home, but concerns itself with interior design as a whole.
Many of the designs on display are specifically for offices.
If more people bothered to bring decently designed office furniture to the attention of their office manager, fewer people would be taking days off with bad backs.
Designers' Saturday was transplanted from New York eight years ago.
The idea was an attractive one.
Designers from different disciplines would be able to meet one another in London's best modern design showrooms, linked by a chain of taxis, drink, food and music.
Yet, within a few years, the whole affair had degenerated into a foodies' free-for-all.
So delicious were the nibbles and munchies in some showrooms that designers and hangers-on appeared to have starved themselves for days, before descending on the groaning showroom tables like a flock of unusually well-groomed vultures.
Such were the quantities of alchohol consumed that it seemed only a couple more years before London saw its first designer louts and designer riots.
This year, under the benign influence of fizzy mineral water, visitors to showrooms are expected to behave in a well-designed manner.
This year the event has become positively altruistic, offering debate and charity as well as a party at the Design Museum open to all-comers.
Charity takes the form of talented young illustrator David Hughes who will be touring at least some of the 17 showrooms on Saturday (9.30-10am Baumann Kendix; 10.30-11.30am, Herman Miller; 12-1pm OMK Design, 2.30-3.30pm Vitra, 4-5pm Erco Lighting) and offering to draw gently satirical on-the-spot portraits at £25 a throw.
Hughes will forego the pleasure of trousering this money which will go to the Leukaemia Research Fund.
If you want to know why Phillipe Starck appears in just about every magazine, why Tokyo is still the in-place for designers, and why no one gives a tinker's cuss about public design, your chance to find out is at a public debate next Friday under the gaze of Rubens's corpulent characters on the painted ceiling of the Banqueting House in Whitehall.
Stephen Bayley, former director of the Design Museum, will chair a debate, taking questions from the floor (many pre-wrapped) and flinging them at a panel of designers, architects, patrons and critics, among them Peter Palumbo, chairman of the Arts Council, and Mies van der Rohe buff.
The debate will be held, the organisers say, in the guise of BBC television's Question Time.
The shops and showrooms themselves are worth visiting if you want to catch up on some of the latest modern furniture, lighting and fabric design.
Designers' Saturday has traditionally been used as a launching pad for designs and this year is no exception.
Scott-Howard is showing Vincent Fallon's elegant ‘Manifesto’ office range (compare with the spine-bending stuff most office workers still have to put up with); Erco Lighting is switching on Mario Bellini's highly sculpted ‘Eclipse’spotlight (light years removed from the near statutory clusters of white spotlights peddled by DIY warehouses); and Rodney Kinsman of OMK will be sitting on his own ‘Trax’seating, designed primarily with public spaces in mind.
If the whole notion of Designers' Saturday is altogether too much for you, or if your designer credentials are simply too thin to merit attendance, do not despair.
You could always look at a small selection of the best furniture on display, chosen by fashion designer Paul Smith and on show at his Avery Row and Floral Street shops from Monday 16 October.