

City gives sterling a respite
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
FINANCIAL markets displayed little enthusiasm for Nigel Lawson's speech to the Tory party conference yesterday but were prepared to grant the pound a respite from the hammering of the past few days.
There had been few expectations that the Chancellor would announce a significant change of course, but disappointment that Mr Lawson said nothing new on monetary policy sent sterling 0.50 pfennigs lower to close at DM2.9562.
Against the dollar, sterling finished 0.60 cents firmer at $1.5510, chiefly because of expectations of lower US interest rates.
Moreover, discreet intervention by the Bank of England helped to ensure that the pound's losses were slight.
The stock market chose to ignore Mr Lawson and instead turned its attention to potential bid targets.
The FT-SE 100 Index of leading shares gained 19.0 points to close at 2237.8.
But sterling's respite could prove short-lived.
Financial markets had expected Mr Lawson to give a clear signal on when the pound will enter the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System in a speech to the City at the Mansion House next Thursday.
But Mr Lawson later told BBC Television's Newsnight: ‘I have no new announcement to make about that, neither today nor indeed at the Mansion House.’
France yesterday stepped up the pressure on the Government to join the ERM.
Pierre Beregovoy, the Finance Minister, told a business meeting: ‘What is happening in Great Britain should perhaps show Mrs Thatcher and Chancellor Lawson that they should act more quickly than anticipated in terms of bringing the currency into the EMS.’
A well-rounded elder statesman: Denis Healey has a personal Hinterland, filled with poetry, history, classics and philosophy, which he fears may have made him an over-tolerant politician.
Yet this does not stop him being blunt about Rhoda the Rhino — otherwise known as Margaret Thatcher
By TERRY COLEMAN
‘What I think will puzzle people,’ said Denis Healey, ‘is all this bloody poetry.’
Mr Healey — the best leader Labour never had, and a man of such substance as the party no longer possesses — was regarding, from under shaggy eyebrows, the large and rollicking volume of his autobiography, just published, which lay on the table between us in his hotel suite.
It is largely the story of his political life, but poetry there certainly is: Shakespeare, Hopkins, Blake, Defoe, Auden, Cavafy, and lots of Yeats.
Well, I said, he'd always had what he called Hinterland (laughter here from his wife, Edna, across the room)— not just politics, but poetry, and opera, and painting, and what appears to be a mastery of half a dozen languages, and his family.
‘She,’ said Mr Healey, indicating his wife, ‘says Maggie (Thatcher) has no Hinterland, and she's right.
It's also knowing and being interested in the history of things, which I don't think Maggie has at all.
It's not possible really to understand Eastern Europe now unless you know a little bit about its history for the last 150 years.’
But could too much Hinterland be a political disadvantage?
‘It tends to make you over-tolerant, because, you know, you can think yourself into someone else's point of view.
Thatcher's great advantage is this laser sight which fixes in a very narrow, straight beam on one thing at a time.’
How much Hinterland had Neil Kinnock got?
‘Well, more than you think.
I mean, he's always been passionately keen on music, which I suppose is a very Welsh thing.
And when he was nearly killed when he crashed his car on a motorway he had a Brahms symphony on his radio, which he now uses as his theme tune.
Poetry, I don't know.’
He loyally went on to call Mr Kinnock happy, open, generous, and possessed of a thing you might not suspect, timing…
What had all that to do with Hinterland?
‘If you want me,’ said Mr Healey, in his Hinterland-enriched voice, ‘to stick to one subject at a time, well.
..‘(Laughter).
That being an impossible expectation, I went off on a tack and remarked that he'd been lucky, as a politician, that he was also a natural entertainer.
‘Developed it late, really,’ he said.
‘I was a very poor public speaker to begin with, wasn't I?’
Mrs Healey: ‘Used to lecture people.’
That was strange.
Because, when he'd seen Olivier, just after 1945, hadn't he said there was a man after his own heart?
‘Oh yes, he swings from the box, on a curtain, on to the stage, as Mr Puff.
Oh yes, absolutely.
I'm not a dull chap…
And, I mean, I like doing these ridiculous things like a song and dance routine with Roger Moore and the Australian cultural attache (Sir Les Patterson).
But my jokes when I was young tended to smell of oil rather.
And now I really make my jokes on the spot.
Like ‘savaged by a dead sheep’(said of Sir Geoffrey Howe).
That came into my mind — from ‘savaged by a pet lamb’ by Winston.
So I adapted it suitably.’
And what also ran through the book, I said, was a constant, happy appreciation of women.
‘I didn't notice that.’
No?
What about this photograph facing page 115?
‘Oh, that's of Edna.
I took that.
Edna's best in profile, and besides, if you have a soft skin like that, you really need an interesting background, and ivy on a wall's ideal for that.’
What about the young captain in the Female Auxiliary Nursing Yeomanry (FANY), with whom he spent weekends in Italy in the war, seeing with her some of the great Sienese paintings?
Mr Healey: ‘I did send her a copy of what I wrote about her to see that she didn't object.
She only asked for one word to be removed.’
Mrs Healey: ‘He's obviously fond of women.
But he's brilliant at old ladies, bright old ladies with shining eyes.’
And he even had some affection for Mrs Thatcher?
‘I said in the House we all had an affection for Mrs Thatcher but, but, but, and Edna never forgave me.’
Being a woman was central to Mrs Thatcher's political personality, and she knew it.
And he thought there was some chemistry between her and Lord Carrington?
‘Peter is the zoo-keeper; she's Rhoda the Rhino.’
And with Mr Gorbachev, who could charm the birds off a tree, she was, said Mr Healey, like a gushing schoolgirl with a crush.
Norman Mailer had found her very sexy, hadn't he?
‘Some men do like that type of woman.
I think she does appeal to the public schoolboy as the sort of mixture of the matron and many other things which psychiatrists could describe.’
This brought us to female suffrage and, indirectly, to dictatorships.
Mr Healey said that Labour, always having had a majority of men, would have won every election since 1922 if women hadn't been given the vote.
And as to dictatorships — in which he says two people in every 100 are interested in politics as opposed to three in a hundred in a democracy — you could argue that some dictatorships succeeded because they appealed to primitive instincts in people who were not interested in politics.
‘That was true of Mussolini and Hitler above all; and to some extent of Reagan, you see.
People would say in America, ‘He's given us back our self-respect.’
'I was objecting that, whatever you thought of Reagan, the United States was the archetypal democracy; Mr Healey was remarking how very few people bothered to vote there at all, only one in five of the eligible voters having been enough to elect Bush; and then we arrived obliquely at the part played in politics by exhaustion.
Mr Healey was arguing that the 1951 Labour government fell because its principal members were tired, having spent five years of the war, and five years afterwards, in government.
If Attlee had carried on for another year, and the economy had turned round, Labour might still be in power.
As Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the Seventies, hadn't Mr Healey often written in his diary that he'd gone to bed dog-tired?
If this were true of him, and if the animal stamina demanded of a Secretary of State were so great, didn't that disqualify good men who lacked only that stamina?
‘Well, in fact, they always disqualify themselves by dying.’
He named Gaitskell, Macleod, Bevan, Crosland, all dead before 60.
There was a lot of stress, and a political career was something you wouldn't undergo unless you enjoyed it all.
For himself, he enjoyed government but not opposition.
He enjoyed doing things.
Mr Healey had said he was himself knackered that morning, having returned the previous day, very late, from a seminar in Florence, and taken a dose of the cough mixture Benylin to get to sleep, which he found worked better than Mogadon.
At this point he was instantly revived by the appearance of a waitress bearing coffee, sandwiches, and a pint of beer.
‘That's lovely, dear.
Oh gosh.’
The waitress retired enchanted.
And so, refreshed, we passed on to Hong Kong.
Hadn't his book, in which he retained a belief that two systems in one country would work when Hong Kong went back to China, been rather overtaken by events?
He didn't know.
He thought the transition period had always been too long, because authority deserts a dying king, and neither China nor the Hong Kong people were going to take much notice of us by the time it got to the Nineties.
But it might still work.
And one of the oil men to whom he had been talking at that seminar in Florence had told him that the Chinese enterprise zone (Shenzhen), just over the border from Hong Kong, was still working.
But there had been no sign since Tiananmen Square that the Chinese had been in the least influenced by the disapproval of the West.
Well, take that Sino-British agreement on Hong Kong.
Let me put a wild thesis to him.
Now Mrs Thatcher had originally gone to Peking just after the Falklands war, full of vim, and taken a hard line.
The received wisdom was that the Foreign Office then rescued her…
Yes, but mightn't her show of determination have done better?
‘I doubt it.
She's not been good at negotiating.
She got a better deal, to be fair, out of the Common Market, because she was so difficult.
But only up to a point, you see.
And what's happening now, increasingly, is that the Europeans are saying, ‘Well, bugger her.
We'll go along without Britain.’
And they certainly will do…
‘Again, why the hell doesn't she say OK, and then handle it like everybody else, do the bits that suit her and not do the other ones?
That's what the others do all the time.
But the diplomacy of Alf Garnett allied to the economics of Arthur Daley is not good in international affairs.’
Mr Healey here went on about Labour's success in the Euro-elections; I said it was just mid-term and all that; and he said, With respect, no.
When he says ‘with respect’ he means you're barmy.
He said the Tories were openly divided.
‘It's like the Labour Party.
We've been bugged for 10 years by a reputation for extremism and division, which we're just getting rid of.
The Tories now are running into this.
They think she's extremist on many issues — poll tax, the health service.
And of course there's enough chuntering for them to appear divided as well.’
Very well.
But what socialist governments, in which countries, had ever worked?
This is a question I have often asked.
It excites strange answers.
Tony Benn once named Ken Livingstone's London: Mr Livingstone named Cuba.
Mr Healey said Sweden.
I accepted that but, having in mind Sweden's small population and great resources of iron and timber, thought it an untypical sort of country, and asked for another.
At which Mr Healey named Austria.
But surely, since Austria was tiny, and moreover neutral…?
‘Every time I produce an example you say it's unusual.
I think the Labour Party worked bloody well here after the war for five years, and I don't think a Tory government could have made the adjustment we then faced.’
And socialist governments had worked well in West Germany for more than 10 years.
Pretty social democrat, that?
‘Well, I'm not talking about command economies.
I don't believe in that.
And I never have.’
We came to the Shirt of Nessus.
The thing about Mr Healey's delightful book is not only the bloody poetry but the classical allusions.
After five years as Chancellor of the Exchequer, and after the lost election of 1979, he says he found himself wearing this Shirt of Nessus.
What about that?
‘The Labour Party in travail,’ Mr Healey explained.
‘I originally called all those chapters according to the Labours of Hercules.
But then I thought this might not be understood by many people, and also, by the time it got to the Augean Bulls and the Birds of Stymphalus, it would be a little recondite for people like Terry Coleman.’
Quite right; but I'd had a vague recollection, and looked it up, and although the shirt of the centaur Nessus, saturated as it was in his poisoned blood, had caused Hercules no end of pain…
‘Killed him,’ said Healey-Hercules cheerfully.
Right, killed him; but then surely he went to heaven?
‘Well, I'm going to heaven too, without the slightest doubt.’
(Laughter here, mine in admiration at Healey-Hercules's sheer lightness of footwork.)
By way of Nero and his brief successor Galba (who happened to be 73, which is Mr Healey's present age), we arrived at a picture, on page 483, of Mr Healey dressed as Father Christmas, which I suggested was deeply melancholy.
Mr Healey: ‘I rather like dressing up.’
Mrs Healey: ‘That is in no way a sad picture.
It could have been: ‘Here am I, a man of 70, dressed up like Father Christmas, but…’
' Mr Healey, merrily: ‘Don't keep harping about age.’
Mrs Healey: ‘But that is not what it is.
It's a boy.
He just likes being a child.’
So it was not melancholy?
All right.
But what that picture was leading me to ask was something he had quoted Plato as asking — whether it had all been worthwhile, his whole life?
At this Mr Healey was jolly pleased to see me trapped in the Thickets of Quotation, and, again merrily, said, ‘Plato?
That was Leonardo da Vinci.’
He then gave me the line, in Italian, from memory: ‘Dimmi se mai fu fatto qualque cosa?’—‘Tell me if anything was ever done?’
Well, was anything ever done?
‘Moments of doubt and uncertainty always arise, even with the greatest people.
I mean Leonardo, without question one of the most outstanding geniuses the world has ever known — but he said that.’
But on the whole politics had been worthwhile.
You had to go into politics if you wanted to change the world.
Technologists might, but they did not set out to do so.
Civil servants might, though in the end it was the politicians who decided, which was why he had declined the highest office with both Nato and the International Monetary Fund.
What about other people who might change the world, or had done?
Well, he thought Jesus Christ was no slouch there.
Marx, certainly.
‘But you have to be bloody lucky there.
It was an absolute toss-up whether that book (Das Kapital) caught on or not.
The Communist manifesto on its own didn't’
Harold Wilson always used to say he'd never got past page one, didn't he?
‘Well I've read a bit of it, mainly in order to be able to quote it at Communist opponents, who've never read it.’
Then he told me about chaology, which he called the new buzz thing.
The world was so complex that tiny events could produce enormous effects by a process of causality so complicated that no one could trace it.
The example always given was that the fluttering of a butterly's wing in the forests of Amazonia could change the climate of the north Atlantic, which might in theory be true because things very often changed just at the margin, and no one could trace quite how.
In other words, the world was too complicated to be comprehended in systems, but the trouble was that the chaologists were oversystematising even chaos.
‘But, you know, I'm not trying to explain the secrets of the universe in this book.
Just kissing the joy as it flies, the whole time.’
That was Blake.
I remarked that, of the politicians I had known, only Mr Healey and Mr Powell could and did talk philosophy.
Ah, said Mr Healey, Enoch had been with him at that seminar in Florence he'd mentioned.
Enoch had mellowed, but he had been terribly hurt at losing his seat in 1987.
‘What he really misses, he tells me, is the constituency, and the contact with the people.
I've given a whole chapter to my constituency.
Very few politicians write about their constituencies, do they?
But to Enoch it meant a very great deal.’
Then Mr Healey came to the changing of nations.
They did change.
He had bought a second-hand paperback about nineteenth-century English railway navvies.
They had built French railways too, and there was this Frenchman, watching them, who said: ‘My God, these English, how they work.’
Mr Healey said he would go round quoting that example to people.
Or, he said, take Heine.
When he was in England (circa 1830) he was given a steel screw at a factory.
He looked at this wonderful thing and said: ‘I wonder if our Germans will ever be able to make anything like this?’
For a moment Mr Healey recalled Mr Powell again, saying his own Italian was better than Enoch's.
We got up.
Mr Healey said: ‘Tout passe; tout casse; tout lasse,’ which I dare to translate as meaning something like ‘All is Vanity’, and then, to end the conversation, he half-sang a little, final, syncopated drumroll, which went something like this: ‘Da da de da di DUM.’
Identities of informers for MI5 ‘leaked to IRA’: Worst Ulster security breach suspected as secret operation in Germany is revealed
By MARK URBAN, Defence Correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT is facing the most serious leak of secret information in its 20-year war against the IRA.
The IRA says it has obtained documents detailing operations by British intelligence to recruit agents within the Irish community on the Continent.
It is understood that the documents include material identifying several informants.
The identity of what are known as ‘human sources’ within the republican community is among the most closely guarded secrets in the war against terrorism.
Such information is of greater intelligence importance than the photographs of IRA suspects, usually given the lowest levels of security classification, which have been leaked to various newspapers in recent weeks, triggering a political row and a big police investigation.
The loss of the documents appears to be a more serious breach of security than that which occurred in 1979, when the IRA obtained a copy of a secret Army intelligence assessment.
A major leak inquiry was launched following that loss.
On Thursday An Phoblacht, the Sinn Fein newspaper, specified two documents revealing details of an MI5 operation, code-named Ward, to recruit informers within the Irish community in West Germany.
The republican newspaper says it will publish next week the names of informants and further details of the operations, which it said were conducted initially without the knowledge of the Bonn government.
However a West German paper, the Tages Allgemeine Zeitung, published more details of Operation Ward on Thursday.
It says it has obtained a copy of a memorandum concerning co-operation between MI5 and its German equivalent, the Bundesamt fur Verfassungsschutz or BfV — the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution.
A spokesman for the British Army of the Rhine would not confirm or deny whether the documents were genuine, saying yesterday: ‘We do not comment about these matters.’
A former British government official who was in Bonn at the time of Operation Ward declined to comment on the authenticity of the material, but told The Independent yesterday: ‘It is obvious that if attacks are going on, you should try and get informers.’
The German newspaper says that the Army's Intelligence and Security Group in Germany recruited five agents following terrorist attacks against British forces during the late 1970s.
A page from the documents reproduced in An Phoblacht says that the Army's recruitment of agents in Germany ‘raised difficult policy considerations’.
Apparently the difficulties arose from the fact that the Army had not informed the West German government about its recruitment of agents.
In 1981 British intelligence took control of these agents under Operation Ward.
By 1984 the Ward team was running eight agents and had targeted another five people for possible for recruitment.
It appears from the German newspaper report that the Bonn authorities, in the form of BfV, were told what was going on following MI5 and MI6's involvement in 1981.
It is an established rule in intelligence circles that a country should not conduct intelligence operations on the territory of an ally without informing its government.
The fact that the Ward documents may contain the identity of sources may indicate that the informants had already been compromised and were no longer active by 1984, when the latter of the two memoranda was apparently written.
A source familiar with intelligence operations in Ulster said yesterday: ‘Nothing is more sensitive in the whole field of intelligence than their identities.’
If the sources were not already known to the IRA, the author of the alleged MI5 documents may have committed a grave breach of security by alluding to them.
It remains unclear why Sinn Fein has chosen to wait until next week before publishing the full content of the documents.
It may be that the IRA hopes that it will flush out current informants by publicising the fact that it knows the identities of some agents.
The page reproduced in the Sinn Fein newspaper also refers to the Secret Intelligence Service, MI6, an organisation the existence of which the Government still does not officially admit.
The Conservative Conference: Thatcher hits back at Kinnock
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
MARGARET THATCHER yesterday took on Labour's enhanced challenge to the Conservatives with a strong condemnation of socialist controls and Neil Kinnock's conversion to more palatable policies.
She told her party conference in Blackpool: ‘In 1979, we knew that we were starting a British revolution; in fact, we were pioneers of a world revolution.
‘So it's ironic that as enterprise and liberty rise from the dead ashes of state control, the Labour Party here is still trying to blow life into those old embers.’
The Prime Minister won a strong ovation when she added: ‘The trouble with Labour is that they're just not at home with freedom.
Socialists don't like people choosing, for they might not choose socialism.’
The speech was greeted with the customary jubilant and lengthy ovation — and a rendering of ‘Happy Birthday’ to celebrate Mrs Thatcher's sixth-fourth birthday.
But the Prime Minister's dominant recognition of the Labour threat was underscored by the fact that she chose to avoid the contentious issues of water and electricity privatisation, poll tax, the trade deficit, the European Community, and the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Mr Kinnock exploited political and City tensions over sterling yesterday with a call for the Government to enter immediate negotiations to become a full member of the European Monetary System.
John Smith, Labour's Treasury spokesman, is to tour a number of European capitals next week to hammer out the party's terms of entry.
But the gaps in Mrs Thatcher's address reflected her own standing instruction to Cabinet colleagues: to ‘calm down’ the Government's confrontational image.
That message, and yesterday's speech, contrast sharply with previous conference speeches in which the Prime Minister insisted that there could be no let-up in the long Thatcherite march.
Nevertheless, she did give outright support to the stand taken by the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Repeating yesterday's news that inflation had risen to 7.6 per cent, she said it was too high — it must and would be reduced.
She stressed, however, that that could be achieved only through interest rates.
There would be no resort to devaluation.
The overall theme of the speech was based on freedom and choice, something which coincided with a year in which ‘the people of half our continent’ followed Britain's trail-blazing lead and ‘began to throw off their chains’.
Relating that to Labour's ‘unprecendented mass conversion’ to moderation in Brighton last week, Mrs Thatcher said she did not believe her opponents now stood for home ownership, strong defence and financial rectitude.
In a personal attack on Mr Kinnock — a prime target for the Conservative counter-offensive — she added: ‘If it's that easy for the Labour leader to give up the principles in which he does believe, won't it be even easier for him to give up the principles in which he does not believe?’
As for Mr Kinnock's conversion to multilateral nuclear disarmament, Mrs Thatcher said: ‘How does one explain the Labour leader's contortions?
Is he being false to his convictions?
Or true to his character?’
She added: You don't reach Downing Street by pretending you've travelled the road to Damascus when you haven't even left home.’
Turning to what she called ‘the heart of the matter’, the Prime Minister said: ‘Remove man's freedom and you dwarf the individual, you devalue his conscience and you demoralise him.’
Labour painted wealth as selfishness, improved living standards as greed, but Mrs Thatcher insisted: ‘Only by creating wealth can you relieve poverty.’
Responding directly to perceived criticism from church as well as opposition leaders, she said: ‘For every Pharisee our system produces, you will find at least three good Samaritans.’
She then went on to address one of the underlying themes of the conference week: the ‘quality of life’ requirement to improve state sector service in health, education, environment, housing and social services.
Some senior party figures believe that theme itself represents a strategic political withdrawal to ground that can be more easily defended in the face of Labour's onslaught.
That shift, together with the emphasis on ‘the right team’ leadership and traditional Tory reserves of loyalty, undoubtedly helped the party to fend off the week's much-resented media attention to division and disarray.
Defiant rallying call to the old firm
By PETER JENKINS
BLACKPOOL — Since her first as leader of the Conservative Party, delivered here at the Winter Gardens in 1975, Margaret Thatcher and her team of speechwriters have made of the conference speech a minor art form.
Yesterday's, her eleventh as Prime Minister, was one of the very best -well-constructed, lucid, punchy and funny.
This year's production number was of particular interest and significance because the Conservative high command is planning to make leadership a key issue at the next general election, only two years away.
Hence the Prime Minister's scathing, almost vicious attacks on the sincerity and integrity of the Leader of the Opposition.
‘Not for us disposable ideas, not for us throw-away convictions, not for us rent-a-principle,’ she declared.
This contrast between her ‘conviction politics’ and Neil Kinnock's alleged lack-of-conviction politics is to be a recurrent theme of Conservative propaganda.
Intertwined with this line of attack on Labour, and running right through yesterday's speech, was another theme, that of freedom.
At Brighton last week Mr Kinnock had portrayed her as an anachronism as the Nineties dawned, ‘out of step, out of touch, out of date’.
Now she identified herself with the future, as freedom was breaking out everywhere, and Labour with the failed past.
‘As enterprise and liberty arise from the dead ashes of state control,’ she said, ‘the Labour Party here is still trying to blow life into those old embers.’
It was a characteristically defiant performance coming from the leader of a party trailing 8-10 points in the opinion polls, her own satisfaction ratings slumped beaneth her opponent's, and after a week which had rocked the credibility of her government's economic policy, on which all else depends.
Beneath Mrs Thatcher's defiant manner there was, I thought, a layer of hurt feeling.
This was her first big opportunity to reply to the barrage of criticism and, as she saw it, ingratitude which had marred for her the celebration last May of her 10 years in office.
So she rehearsed the triumphs and achievements of the Thatcher Revolution and laid lavish claim to having lit in Britain the torch of freedom for the whole world.
The loss of heart she experienced in May perhaps contributed to the loss of touch she demonstrated through the summer.
On the strength of this speech she is back in form.
Nevertheless, there is in the air at Blackpool a first whiff of post-Thatcher.
By general consent Kenneth Baker and Michael Heseltine finished the week as co-favourites in the succession stakes.
Mr Heseltine is slowly reaping the reward of the patience, persistence and self-restraint he has demonstrated since his stormy resignation in 1986.
He is the only major figure offering an alternative party programme which is not a watered-down version of Mrs Thatcher's.
Support for him is slowly growing among influential Tories.
While Mrs Thatcher yesterday celebrated the achievements of the Thatcher Revolution, a spectre of the past was hovering over Blackpool — decline.
Sir Geoffrey Howe delivered a sombre warning of the dangers of relapse.
Both he and Mr Heseltine warned against making light of the huge trade deficit and what it said about the manufacturing base of the economy.
For the first time since the end of the Falklands war there was, also, a less than total confidence among ministers in the certainty of the coming victory at the polls.
I put it no higher.
Ostensibly a new agenda for the Nineties is in preparation with the emphasis on the ‘quality if life’.
In the opinion of most ministers, however, the next election, like past ones, will be won or lost primarily in the pockets of the people.
‘The Right Team for Britain's Future’ was the conference slogan.
But the right team will be the old firm, hoping that the old magic can be made to work once more.
Saatchi sells 70 paintings
By ANDREW GRAHAM-DIXON, Visual Arts Correspondent
CONCERN is growing in the art world over the news that Charles Saatchi the advertising agency millionaire has sold between 10 and 12 per cent of his art collection in the past six months.
A source close to Mr Saatchi confirmed yesterday that between 70 and 100 works from the collection — the largest of its kind in the world — had been disposed of through the New York art dealer Larry Gagosian for up to $1m per painting.
A spokeswoman for the Saatchi Collection said the sales did not signal a lessening commitment to the collection, but had been made to finance new acquisitions.
However, the sales have been interpreted differently by many dealers, some of whom believe they presage the beginning of the end of the collection.
One said from New York yesterday: ‘If you want to refine a collection you sell off in much smaller quantities — and you certainly don't sell the finest works.’