

yINTERNATIONAL MARKETING: THE KINGSTON BUSINESS SCHOOL OPEN LEARNING MBA PROGRAMME.
David Sagar, Brian Coyle, Tim Newton, Jim Reeve
INTRODUCTION TO INTERNATIONAL MARKETING
Topics covered in this chapter
Terminology
The decision to expand from the domestic market
Evolution of general marketing ideas
Application of marketing ideas in an international context
International marketing strategy
Common worldwide marketing — the Levitt approach
Customising global marketing — an alternative approach
1 Terminology
When international marketing first appeared as a distinct subject few writers described it by any title other than that.
The implications of the title were simply that an organisation had extended its activities beyond exporting to consider markets distinct from its own domestic market.
With this limited view of ‘overseas operations’ there was little or no need to become trapped in a semantic jungle.
But as the subject developed first the term ‘multinational marketing ’ was coined and then ‘global marketing ’was added to the picture.
The implications of these terms are considered later but the use of terminology in this study text needs to be made clear at the outset.
International marketing is treated as a generic term covering the distinctions made in describing marketing activities as ‘international’ or ‘multinational’or ‘global’.
2 The decision to expand from the domestic market
Few companies, when first established, have the resources or expertise to operate outside their home market.
The decision to expand outside national boundaries is therefore usually taken at some later stage in their development, and this section reviews the factors that may be taken into account in arriving at a decision which fundamentally alters the nature and scope of a company's activities.
Five major factors may be involved in the decision to ‘go international’ and these are shown in the diagram on the next page.
A useful distinction can be made between the defensive factors that cause companies to look beyond their domestic markets (reactive factors) and proactive influences.
The distinction is useful because companies that seize an opportunity in markets outside their domestic base are more likely to be successful than those that react in response to an external factor.
Reaction as a reason for going international is often characterised by:
badly thought out international marketing programmes that rely on insufficient understanding of the new markets
poor quality marketing research
inappropriate distribution channels and
expensive, lengthy and difficult implementation that makes the company vulnerable to more perceptive competitors.
Reactive factors
Probably the most common reason for a company to ‘go international’ is insufficient growth in the domestic market.
This may come in one of two forms:
(a)
lack of growth because the market is mature.
In the developed world, industries such as processed foods and commodity raw materials (eg gas and electricity) typify the problem;
(b)
a company's growth expectations are higher than can be met from growth in the domestic market.
Computer hardware companies, such as Apple and Compaq, found themselves in this position, as did their software counterparts Microsoft, Lotus and Ashton-Tate.
In either case a company's growth objectives may make foreign markets very attractive.
Threats in the external environment also provide a compelling reason to expand beyond the home market.
Again, this may be found in two forms.
(a)
The impact of a foreign competitor in the company's home market.
When a competitor successfully enters the domestic market, the company may look to expand internationally; partly as a means of retaliation and partly in defence of its home market.
This is seen particularly in the USA, where the very large domestic market has provided a safe haven for many companies of substantial size.
The US telecommunications industry, which became subject to foreign competition on the dismantling of the Bell System, has reacted by attempting to enter foreign markets, especially those of Europe and the Far East.
(b)
Regulatory threat, which may make the domestic market less attractive.
The manufacturers of heavily regulated products, such as tobacco and alcohol, often find that promotion is less regulated and more cost-effective in less developed countries than in their own domestic markets.
In a business environment of increasingly rapid change, industries such as component manufacturers, that have a supplier relationship with another industry, may be forced to expand internationally to meet the changing needs of their customers.
Many international expansions are clearly the result of more than one of these pressures.
After the 1986 ‘Big Bang’ in the City of London, many of the players in the security trading and banking industries looked to expand internationally.
A change in the regulatory environment (the abolition of fixed commissions and easier entry for foreign competitors) provided the initial stimulus.
Equally, however, their customers had outgrown locally-based suppliers.
Adjustment to their customers' needs compelled them to establish an international presence that had hitherto been unnecessary.
The securities industry also demonstrates particularly well the dangers of going international as a result of external pressure rather than internally-perceived opportunities.
Many financial services firms paid high prices for established brand names in the sector without considering sufficiently the nature of the markets they were entering.
Heavy losses or, at best, inadequate returns on capital invested have resulted in ignominious withdrawals from the market.
Banking in particular, seems particularly susceptible to failures in foreign markets caused by reactive pressures — much of the Third World debt problems can be traced to banks looking for easy foreign expansion routes when faced by lack of growth in domestic markets.
In contrast, it will be interesting to see how far Deutsche Bank succeeds with its acquisition of Morgan Grenfell in 1989, having chosen not to react immediately to the Big Bang by acquiring a merchant banking subsidiary in London in 1986.
Proactive factors
The main proactive reason for expanding internationally is perceived economies of scale and positioning on an experience curve.
Black & Decker, the tool manufacturer, followed this course in expanding out of the USA.
The low cost strategy it employs is possible only with high volume production plants and low unit research and development costs.
Niche marketers usually develop an international outlook early in their development; in part because their domestic market is normally comparatively small, and also because their unique position in a product or market niche can be relatively easily extended.
Stihl, the West German manufacturers of chain saws for professional users, have developed an impressive international distribution network and are market leaders in most of the markets in which they operate.
Similarly, Dawson International, with its niche markets for cashmere and other woollen products (Ballantyne Cashmere, Pringle) depends heavily on overseas markets for its success, particularly the USA, Japan and West Germany.
Reactive and proactive factors: a list
Brooke and Remmers (1970) made a survey of 115 foreign subsidiaries operating in the UK, and identified a variety of reasons why overseas companies decided to create foreign subsidiaries.
They analysed the reasons into three categories.
(a)
defensive strategies — reactive factors (which were the most common);
(b)
aggressive strategies — proactive factors;
(c)
other pressures.
It is interesting to look in some more detail at what some of these factors were.
Defensive strategies, they found, arise in response to:
(a)
action by the national government to establish tariff barriers or import controls;
(b)
demands in the country for more manufacture by nationals (eg ‘Buy British’);
(c)
transport costs and delays in sending goods overseas;
(d)
difficulties with agents or licensees in the foreign country;
(e)
difficulties with after-sales service and other technical problems are more easily handled by a subsidiary than by an overseas head office and national agent;
(f)
the protection of patents;
(g)
the desire to protect supplies of raw materials (a natural resources strategy);
(h)
responding to competitors, suppliers or customers who have ‘gone international’ ie there is a fear that by failing to respond to what others are doing, a company will fall behind and lose markets;
(i)
the wish to protect shareholders from a recession at home by expanding or diversifying abroad.
Aggressive strategies include:
(a)
the search for other uses of under-employed resources at home.
Under-employed resources may be capital resources, equipment, personnel or ‘know-how’;
(b)
to gain access to foreign ‘know-how’ and methods;
(c)
the need to expand when domestic expansion is not possible (expansion in this case would probably be by acquisition);
(d)
a global strategy to control natural resources and corner overseas markets.
Other reasons include:
(a)
influence by the national government which may encourage foreign investors, grant tax concessions or cheap loans, offers grants or guarantees, or supply a building or factory free of charge;
(b)
pressure groups within the organisation which advocate expansion through overseas subsidiaries.
3 Evolution of general marketing ideas
Development of marketing theories
The basis for successful international marketing is a sound understanding of marketing in general.
And the modern focus on international marketing is reflected in the evolution of theories about ‘what marketing is about’.
Although change in conventional wisdom has been gradual, evolutionary rather than revolu-tionary, three general periods and approaches to marketing can be identified.
The old idea of marketing, which in many cases was little more than selling, focused on making a better product that was easier to sell.
Making a better product is naturally still an important element of marketing today and is forcefully demonstrated by the Japanese consumer goods manufacturers.
What made the pre-1960 period distinctive, however, was the almost complete reliance on this one objective.
The consequence of this approach was a tendency for companies to be inward-looking.
Standards were set within the firm rather than externally and so organisations were essentially static rather than dynamic.
During the 1960s the focus of marketing attention changed from the product to the customer.
Profit remained the sole objective but the means of achieving it was transformed.
Internally-set values based on the product were replaced by attention to the whole of the ‘marketing mix’: product, price, place and promotion.
And with this change came a transformation in the organisation's approach to its markets.
Because attention was focused on customers and their changing demands, the organisation became dynamic in outlook.
The 1980s has produced another shift in marketing ideas — the role of marketing as a strategic concept.
Attention is focused on the external environment and markets, rather than customers.
If marketing was partially dynamic when it focused on the changing needs of customers, the introduction of the external environment as a driver of marketing thinking forces firms to be fully dynamic in their approach.
Some marketing commentators also take the view that the objective of successful marketing has changed in the 1980s.
While profit used to be viewed as a sufficient objective in itself, creating benefits for stakeholders is seen as the ultimate objective.
Stakeholders are defined as any group or individual with an interest in the company's activities.
They include the financial owners, managers, lenders, customers and communities in which the organisation operates.
4 Application of marketing ideas in an international context
As companies ‘go international’ they need to pose the question ‘Are there differences between domestic and international marketing?’
Although significant differences exist, the basic similarities should be remembered.
The essential concepts and processes of marketing apply as much to marketing in the international arena as the domestic one.
So, when a company first looks to expand abroad, the same process needs to be adopted.
Too many companies enter foreign markets without analysing sufficiently either the customers or the competition in those markets.
International marketing differs from its domestic counterpart due purely to the differences in the political, social, cultural and economic environment between countries.
Most of this text is devoted to considering the nature of those differences and how the international marketing manager can overcome them.
How much they need to be overcome to implement a successful international marketing policy is a matter of considerable debate among marketing experts and section 5 of this chapter reviews the idea of the two main schools of thought.
The remainder of this section, however, considers how firms develop a structure best equipped to succeed in the international environment.
Stages in international marketing development
Keegan (1989) has developed a typology which he argues illustrates the development process that companies undergo in transforming their marketing activities from the wholly domestic to the completely global.
The diagram below outlines the key elements of his classification.
Keegan's classification begins with companies whose outlook and strategy is wholly domestic.
Their view of the world is contained in the belief ‘if it's not happening in the domestic market, it's not happening at all’.
And when, eventually, the international tide comes in on their market sector, they perish.
Stage 2 is really the tentative beginning of an international orientation.
Most of a Stage 2 company's strategy and efforts remain concentrated on the domestic scene.
And forays into international markets are planned, controlled and judged by criteria established in the domestic market.
Usually with an element described as an ‘international division’ the typical Stage 2 company's product policy is ‘extension’.
Little or no account is taken of alterations in product policy to suit the conditions of non-domestic markets.
A frequently quoted example of the companies at Stage 2 is the British motorcycle industry of the 1960s and early 1970s.
The industry lost first its export markets and then its domestic market to the Japanese because it was totally unprepared for the challenge from companies that operated on a truly international basis.
The mark of the Stage 3 company, often described as the multinational company, is the adaptation of each element of the marketing mix to the different markets in which it operates.
In essence it becomes a matrix of connected businesses that normally have much weaker direction from the corporate centre than a Stage 2 company.
Typically, the decentralised management applies not only to marketing policy but also to financial and operations management.
When a company evolves to Stage 4 it ceases to view geographical units as necessarily important in marketing terms and instead takes a global view of its marketing, financing and operations.
It concentrates on identified market segments, irrespective of the geographic location.
For example, both Ford and Toyota have developed ‘world cars’.
The principal customer needs are incorporated in a standardised design.
Product adaptation occurs (such as steering wheels located on the right or left), but is a refinement of the marketing policy, not the policy itself.
The emergence of the transnational company: Bartlett and Ghosal
Recent work by Bartlett and Ghoshal suggests that a further stage in corporate development will be required by the successful companies of the 1990s.
It is essentially an extension of the Stage 4 global company described by Keegan.
Bartlett and Ghoshal argue that Stage 4 companies are not truly global.
Although markets are treated globally, they assert that overseas operations act simply as delivery pipelines to a unified global market.
The distinctions Bartlett and Ghoshal make are illustrated below.
Key characteristics
Global organisational model
centralised hub
operational control
overseas operations treated as delivery pipelines to unified global market
Transnational organisational model
integrated network
strategic control
worldwide operations treated as integrated and interdependent
According to Bartlett and Ghoshal, the differing company structures that have been identified as a development sequence are, in reality, a function of different cultural management styles.
The ‘Stage 3’ multinational company, operating as a network of autonomous or semi-autonomous units, is seen as an outcome of European expansion before World War 2.
In this period barriers to trade were high and thus the multinational structure of operationally-independent companies was a necessity.
The international company, identified principally by its policy of product extension rather than adaptation, is viewed as essentially American in origin.
It was the result of efforts to transfer product systematically from developed to less developed economies, while at the same time retaining the essentially American management style of strong planning, coordination and control from the centre.
What Bartlett and Ghoshal refer to as the global company is alleged to be the result of Japanese practice developed in the 1960s and 1970s.
Lower trade barriers permitted their development, and Japanese government restrictions on overseas investment encouraged companies that treated markets on a global basis and benefitted from economies of scale.
According to Bartlett and Ghoshal, the transnational company is meant to be the vehicle for international marketing of the 1990s that integrates the strengths of the three former culturally-dependent types of company.
To some extent the difference between this view and the developmental approach is one of semantics: the term ‘global company’ does not mean the same to each.
Yet there is greater emphasis in the transnational company model on the complete integration and interdependence of operating structures.
This may occur in Keegan's ‘global company’ but there the emphasis lies more in the company's approach to products and markets, without the same global integration of flows of resources, ideas and people.
5 International marketing strategy
With the development of the concepts of what international marketing entails, a lively debate has developed as to how the international marketing manager should approach his task.
The argument centres around two distinct although connected items:
(a)
the extent to which a common worldwide marketing programme should be run; and
(b)
the degree of autonomy that should be given to ‘country managers’ in running the programme.
The two opposing schools of thought are represented on the one side by Theodore Levitt and on the other by John Quelch and Richard Hoff.
Common worldwide marketing — the Levitt approach
Theodore Levitt takes as his basic premise the belief that two forces are shaping business worldwide:(1) technology and (2) globalisation.
In his view, however, although human preferences may superficially appear to diverge due to social and cultural factors, in fact markets converge and economies of scale lead to reduction of costs and prices.
He uses this view to argue how forward-looking companies should act and contrasts strongly the modern global corporation with the ageing multinational corporation.
The globally-aware organisation is supposed to strive constantly for triple aims:
(a)
technical product innovation and leadership;
(b)
a streamlined product range which is promoted vigorously worldwide; and
(c)
low prices.
In his words the global corporation ‘sells the same things in the same way everywhere’.
By way of contrast, he writes disparagingly of the multinational company that concentrates on idiosyncratic consumer preferences, and gives two reasons why he believes such organisations will lose the long-term commercial battle.
He asserts that when faced with paying higher prices (and significantly higher prices) for the precise product specification consumers are supposed to want, those consumers will opt for the low-priced goods.
He doubts whether the consumer preferences reported by market research teams can be translated into products with sufficient accuracy.
It may appear that his ‘recipe for success’ involves a corporate strategy which has traditionally been viewed as extremely difficult if not completely untenable: the linking of high product quality with low prices.
Levitt simply asserts the opposite — that low-cost operations are the stamp of corporate cultures pervaded by the ethos of quality.
They are, he says, ‘compatible, twin identities of superior practice’.
There is another way of viewing Levitt's arguments; the relative importance of between-country and within-country differences to the marketing manager.
By implication, Levitt takes the view that a global market should be viewed as one with particular market segments that may bear little or no relationship to geographical boundaries.
In other words, variations in market homogeneity are more marked within countries than between them.
He backs this up with examples of marketing successes that have deliberately flaunted conventional wisdom of respecting the idiosyncrasies of particular national economies.
Smith Kline Corporation (now part of Smith Kline Beecham) intended to introduce its decongestant medicine to the Japanese market.
Having a highly fragmented retail distribution system, it was normal for companies to operate through about one thousand drug wholesalers.
Instead Smith Kline chose just twenty-five key distributors, with whom it maintained far closer contact than was usual practice.
The Japanese launch was a success, although it is open to question how much of the success can be attributed to innovative marketing and how much to the technical qualities of the product.
Komatsu, the Japanese manufacturer of farm machinery, provides a further example of success by ignoring conventional wisdom.
Intending to introduce its product range to the USA, it was confronted by a lack of a distribution system — the existing players in this market had tied it up.
It took its products to the southern USA, where lightweight machinery (in which it then specialised) was particularly suitable because soil conditions were sandier and so easier to work.
A new distribution channel was devised — construction equipment dealers.
Despite their lack of familiarity with the product type, the distributors managed to attract customers on the basis of Komatsu's product and price advantages.
Levitt considers many Japanese companies as the first truly global marketers and contrasts their practices strongly with the approach taken by Hoover in marketing automatic washing machines in Europe.
In the 1960s, Hoover was looking to increase the output of its manufacturing plant closer to its capacity level and so intended to boost its sales in mainland Europe.
Market research showed considerable differences in consumer preferences in various countries.
These are summarised below.
Hoover concluded that consumer preferences must be met by providing models for national markets that incorporated the specific features market research had brought to light.
The result of this decision was an increase in direct production costs approaching 20%, caused mainly by the relatively short runs for each model.
If one accepts Levitt's analysis, Hoover got their marketing badly wrong.
He notes that at the time that Hoover was engaged in this exercise, a basic Italian washing machine was gaining market share against a heavily promoted German product, in Germany.
Levitt concludes that the Italian's success demonstrates his belief that you should not provide consumers with what they say they want, because their behaviour demonstrates that they will take other features if the product is priced and promoted correctly.
6 Customising global marketing — an alternative approach
Quelch and Hoff represent an opposing school of thought to that put forward by Levitt.
In their view, global marketing as recommended by Levitt does not work because:
(a)
flexibility is essential;
(b)
customers and competitive conditions differ between countries; and
(c)
powerful local managers may not stand for centralised decision making.
They also add a new idea to the framework.
Whereas Levitt takes the view that the low prices permitted by scale economies in production offer the key to global marketing success, Quelch and Hoff suggest that the driving factor in global marketing should be the efficient worldwide use of good marketing ideas.
In the final analysis, Quelch and Hoff conclude, perhaps predictably, that the extent to which a standardised global product is practicable depends on two attributes:
economies or efficiencies in manufacturing and/or research and development; and
its cultural grounding.
For example, packaged consumer goods are inherently less susceptible than durable goods such as motor cars to either manufacturing or R/D economies.
Classic cases of successful global marketing by companies in the packaged consumer goods sector, such as Coca-Cola, may seem to contradict this view.
Quelch and Hoff, however, consider Coca Cola's tight global marketing co-ordination is driven principally by the intention of capitalising on the company's marketing ideas rather than potential economies of scale.
It may therefore be possible to reconcile the views of the opposing schools of thought by regarding global standardisation as the ultimate objective when substantial economies of scale are available but which may need to be modified in the context of the product concerned.
To determine the most appropriate international marketing strategy, products could be plotted on a chart similar to that below.
THE INTERNATIONAL MARKETING ENVIRONMENT
Topics covered in this chapter
Basic characteristics of the international market
Trade and consumption patterns
Development of markets
Political controls on international trade
Social and cultural factors
Legal framework of international marketing
1 Basic characteristics of the international market
The international marketing executive needs an understanding of the marketing environment in different localities of the world, in order to:
assess their market potential and
develop a strategy for marketing the company's products in each locality.
It was mentioned in the previous chapter that an awareness of the marketing environment has become a key element in the ‘modern-day’ approach to marketing.
Income
In assessing the potential market within a country for the majority of products, and in comparing the potential market of different countires, the most important factors are total income and income per head of the population.
It should not be assumed, however, that an analysis of the incomes per capita of various countries or regions will provide a precise measure of the market potential of each; income is a useful indicator, but it does not provide the full picture.
For example, a manufacturer of bathroom and kitchen taps might wish to assess the potential market for taps in country A and country B. The income per capita in country A might be three times the income per capita in country B, and so the manufacturer might assess the potential market for taps to be three times as large in country A as in country B. However, the inhabitants of country B might live in larger houses than people in country A, and the country B houses might have an average 1 ½ times more bathrooms/kitchens.
The manufacturer of taps would probably obtain better projections of the market for taps in each country by taking into consideration not just income per capita and population size, but also house characteristics.
Estimating comparative levels of per capita GNP between various nations is probably best done by assessing relative levels of purchasing power — what a currency will buy in the country in which it is issued, using comparisons between particular products.
Such comparisons are often difficult due to lack of available data, and comparisons are often made by measuring GNP per capita in local currency and using the exchange rate of the currency against an international standard (typically US $).
However, whilst this method of comparison relies on easily available information, it is not exact; exchange rates relate to goods which are traded internationally, whilst the the majority of the national product of most countries is comprised of goods which never enter the international marketplace.
The differences in real income can thus be distorted.
As just one example, agricultural goods are generally priced lower in relation to industrial products in developing countries than in industrial countries, and this may lead to an exaggeration of the apparent differences in per capita income.
Another potentially distorting factor is that whilst average incomes can be compared between one country and another, they do not of themselves reveal the true comparable standard of living, nor the comparable potential markets for all products.
Developing countries, for example, consume many of the same goods as industrialised countries, but may have little or no expenditure on heating, public utilities, medicine, etc.
Despite these potential distortions, certain conclusions can be drawn about global income distribution.
The most striking factor is that income is heavily concentrated in three regions of the world — Japan, Europe and North America.
These are therefore the key markets for most multinational companies.
The result of this relatively narrow income distribution is that a company can be truly multinational, doing business with a spread of nations with high levels of income, whilst confining its activities to a very small number of countries.
Doing business with a large number of national markets therefore implies that within most of these markets, operations will be relatively small in scale, because the markets will be small.
Population
Occasionally, population will be the primary factor which will influence the marketing of a particular product.
This will be so particularly in the case of goods which are of a very low price, so that there is little income barrier to their purchase.
2 Trade and consumption patterns
Trade patterns
International trade is predominantly between industrialised countries.
This explains the concentration of global income in these countries.
Consumption patterns
There is a clear connection between levels of income and the levels of consumption of various goods.
The studies of Ernst Engel in the nineteenth century, led to the conclusion that after income has risen beyond a certain level, there is a decrease in the percentage of total income that is spent on food.
The total spending on food still increases, but at a slower rate than the level of income itself.
‘Engel's Law’ thus relates to the relationship between changes in income and changes in demand for necessities and other goods.
As income increases and a greater proportion is spent on non-essential goods, the percentage of the population who own a particular product also increases.
In other words, the level of product saturation rises.
It should be stressed that income is only one factor in determining consumption patterns, however.
Often the sales of one product will affect the sales of another product, since the latter is used in conjunction with(or in consequence of) the first.
A society which does not use toothbrushes, for instance, will be an unlikely target market for the introduction of toothpaste, no matter how cheap.
3 Development of markets
There is a view that marketing is not relevant to the needs of less developed countries, since these countries require means of increasing basic levels of output, not means of directing changes of production to satisfy a changing marketplace.
Furthermore, it is argued, the needs and wants of a less developed country are so far in advance of that country's productive capacity that it is useless to waste resources focusing on them.
There is an opposing view, that the marketing process should be seen in a rather different way.
If one examines the needs and wants of a less developed society and relates this information to the production capacity of that country, ways may be found to develop products that consumers want and which the country is capable of producing.
Electrical household goods may be unsuitable for many countries, for example, but the application of a creative marketing process may lead to alternative inexpensive, manually operated machinery being developed which can be both produced easily and suit the needs of the population.
When marketing principles are applied to distribution as opposed to production, further positive results may be observed.
As an example, say that wine is normally sold in litre bottles stoppered with a cork, at a price of $2.00.
Within a particular country, this puts the product out of the reach of most potential consumers.
If a local merchant then buys wine and decants it into re-sealable quarter-litre bottles, selling it retail at $1.00 per bottle, two effects might be observed.
The merchant would make a profit, which can be argued to have no discernable social benefit for the society as a whole.
But in addition to this, wine would be made available to the local population at an affordable price, and in a condition that allows it to be stored without spoiling.
A third effect which could be added is that business experience would be gained by the local merchant, and thus the society begins to develop a pool of people with such business experience.
Experience of this nature may reduce the reliance of less developed countries on goods imported from abroad; local manufacturers may be able to satisfy local market needs by intelligent marketing, and thus gain a larger share of the local market than before, with consequent results for local levels of production and the economy generally.
A further element in this argument is the possibility that advertising can be used as part of a marketing strategy to shape the wants and needs of a less developed society in a direction that is clearly beneficial.
For instance, if a country concerned still employs traditional systems which, in the light of more modern techniques, appear to be detrimental to public health, it may be desirable to change patterns of behaviour in, say, nutrition or hygiene.
Often this will not be successful if the population is attached to its traditional methods and the new methods are radically different from the old; a careful marketing campaign to change attitudes can have a dramatic effect, particularly by presenting new products in a way that is not dramatically different from the old.
Stages in market development
Five stages of market development have been recognised, delineated by gross GNP per capita, but showing a number of other common factors.
(a)
Preindustrial
Generally situated in Africa south of the Sahara desert, these countries have a per capita income (on 1983 figures) of less than $ 400.
The economy is predominantly agricultural, often at subsistence levels, with very little industrial capacity, leading to great reliance on foreign aid.
Politically they tend to be unstable, with very high birth rates but poor education and very low levels of literacy.
(b)
Less Developed
Incomes here are between $ 401 and $ 1,635, with a degree of industrialisation in the economy, supplying cars, trucks, building materials etc.
Some exports are seen, and the pool of cheap labour and resources means that they may begin to pose a competitive threat.
(c)
Developing
Incomes are between $ 1,636 and $ 5,500, with the economy shifting clearly away from agriculture towards a significant level of industrialisation.
These countries can experience rapid economic growth and become strong competitors, since they benefit from a combination of large-scale industrial capacity combined with low levels of wage costs.
Education is well developed, and literacy rates are high.
(d)
Industrialised
Incomes range from $ 5,501 to $ 10,000.
The highly educated population, developed infrastructure and high levels of wages and costs mean that they are poised to move beyond their industrial base.
(e)
Advanced
Incomes are in excess of $ 10,000.
A number of factors have been identified which distinguish this sort of country:
(i)
innovation flows from the application of theoretical knowledge, not from random invention;
(ii)
the service secor is vitally important, accounting for over 50% of GNP;
(iii)
knowledge replaces capital as the most important resource.
4 Political controls on international trade
Controls may be imposed on international trade for a number of different reasons.
Imposing tariffs on goods which are imported, for instance, has several results:
revenue is generated for the country concerned;
local industry is protected from outside competition;
local business is developed to meet the market demand within the country;
the market price for the good will be higher than if no tariffs were imposed, and this will result in lower total market demand for the product.
For a developing country in particular this might be a desirable outcome in the case of non-essential goods.
Protectionism (exchange controls, import controls) is likely to be extensively applied by developing countries, but it may still be relevant in an industrialised country which is suffering a high level of unemployment, with consequent pressure on the government to take economic measures to remedy this situation.
Governments might also wish to protect domestic industries to maintain industrial activity within the country, or to maintain or develop the country's involvement in certain key industries, such as electronics, defence equipment and so on.
Identifying the underlying motives of a particular nation for taking any restrictive action on trade should be an essential feature of any international marketing plan.
Such an investigation allows both an understanding of the actions of the country concerned, and, as a consequence of this, a realistic attempt can be made to
predict its future behaviour
take measures to forestal adverse actions
lobby for more favourable treatment.
As an example, consider the difficulty experienced by overseas companies wishing to begin direct operations in Japan, where applications were vetted by the National Planning Authority to ensure that they fitted the national economic plan of Japan.
At best, admission was obtained only on the basis of a joint venture with a Japanese company, and entry of any kind was often impossible to obtain, at least until the Japanese themselves had established a strong presence — domestically and internationally — in the market sector concerned.
This situation has been ameliorated to a degree, in the face of overseas pressure to change the system, not least because of the Japanese need to maintain its market position in other countries, and concern about retaliatory measures against Japanese imports.
This sort of interdependence of interests is a feature of the relations between industrialised countries; having built a strong overseas market position, a country will be forced to take more account of external pressures if that strong position is to be maintained.
The future behaviour of Japan, then, may be analysed in terms of the balance between commercial self-interest and the basic protectionist nature of many of the trade restrictions which still exist.
Example: Whisky exports to Japan
Until late 1988, whisky spirits in Japan faced a special tax which was not applied to other spirits.
The tax meant that a bottle of whisky attracted taxes of up to 220%, the equivalent of Y 2,000, or about $ 15.70.
In theory, the tax applied equally to Japanese and imported whisky spirit, but in practice the position was radically different; imported scotch attracted the full tax, but the local spirit ('whisky') was in fact only 10% whisky spirit (which did not unduly worry the consumers, since they drank it as mizuwari, highly diluted with water).
The obvious course of action — to dilute the imported spirit in a similar way with other spirits — was not an option, since importers were banned by law from doing so.
The result was to put imported scotch at the top of the spirits price range, so that it was a valued gift, but was not bought to drink under normal circumstances.
The abolition of the domestic tax differential (an example of a response to external pressure) brought a soaring import market.
In 1987 the share of the total market accounted for by imported whisky was a mere 11%; in 1992, the figure is projected to be 27%.
The change in price has been dramatic — in 1986 it was estimated that it would be impossible to distribute imported whisky free of charge at a cost of less than Y 2,600 a bottle.
Today many brands are sold commercially for far less.
The Japanese have not been inactive however; Suntory have linked up with Allied-Lyons, and Takara have bought the large Tomatin Scottish distillery.
Takara now sell low priced 12 year old Scotch specially blended to Japanese tastes.
The process demonstrates both response to external pressure and the action that can be taken between companies which are both based in industrialised (and therefore interdependent) countries.
Until recently, high trade barriers have existed between countries of the Communist East and those of the capitalist West, stimulated by both the clear political opposition of the ‘cold war’ and the incompatibility between the free market system of the West and the centrally planned and controlled system of the East.
Trade has been stimulated by the process of detente, and the moves towards ‘democratisation’ of the Eastern Bloc can be expected to continue this process.
Practical problems, such as the lack of exporting systems and expertise in the East will, however, continue to be a difficulty for some time to come.
The process of bringing the Western markets and the Eastern bloc markets together is evident in the announcement by the multinational company General Electric (November 1989) of its intention to purchase a majority stake in Tungsram, the Hungarian lighting equipment manufacturer.
The Financial Times commented:(20.11.89)
‘GE…is acquiring Tungsram with the aim of eventually integrating its management within its global empire.
Previous deals have concentrated on western companies providing eastern allies with help on sales, distribution and marketing.
GE intends to provide Tungsram with sophisticated production technology and management training.
Yet the deal's significance extends well beyond this.
For it is the clearest signal yet of how political reform in eastern Europe could redraw the contours of European industry, extend the geographic and political boundaries of the EC's 1992 programme and alter the global strategies of such companies as GE.’
The future behaviour of a less developed country will, however, be more difficult to predict.
The flow of investment between such a country and an industrialised nation is one-way, not reciprocal, and the stake which the less developed country has in overseas interests is minimal (or possibly non-existent).
The restrictions on that country's course of action are therefore less powerful than in the case of the Japanese example above, and its future behaviour is less suited to accurate prediction.
An open policy to trade may be maintained if the nation is doing well economically, but a less successful economic position may lead to swift and much more extreme action to erect trade barriers and bring in other sanctions.
Nationalisation (in effect, confiscation) of overseas interests is not unknown, despite the bad feeling generated by such a measure.
The effect of nationalism on international trade relations should, therefore, not be minimised.
Nationalist feelings may well be ameliorated in relations between industrialised countries by the interdependence discussed above; this will not be the case when the industrialised country is dealing with a less developed state, yet it is in this latter kind of country where nationalism may be most strongly manifested.
A further consideration for market development is political stability.
The more volatile the political situation in a particular state, the more difficult predicting its future actions will become.
In times of political unrest, the danger that extreme measures will be taken increases.
An incoming government, fresh from the overthrow of an old regime, is quite likely to take measures for nationalisation, or on exchange controls and import controls.
5 Social and cultural factors influencing the international marketing environment
Culture may be defined as those ideas, traditions, points of view and modes of behaviour which exist amongst a particular people, and which are transmitted, through learned behaviour, from generation to generation.
This is not a question of instinct — culture is learned, not inbred, and does not refer to basic human needs.
Thirst, for instance, is not a cultural issue, but the means selected by the individual to slake his thirst — tea, coffee, fruit juices, etc — is influenced by his cultural background.
Some nations are predominantly tea drinkers, others will generally prefer coffee.
Culture influences almost every aspect of the reaction to a particular product — texture, colour, desire for innovation or respect for tradition and so on.
Although some cultural differences, such as meaning attributed to basic patterns of syntax in otherwise similar communication patterns are difficult to spot, a long list can be compiled of easily identified cultural seperations.
More difficult to identify are the basic factors which are common to all human beings, but it is in these that the international marketer will be most interested, since they provide a basis upon which to market goods in a way which should have broad appeal.
Some cultural universals can be observed from the work of A H Maslow, who hypothesised a hierarchy of needs, whereby the satisfaction of a lower need will result in its being replaced by a higher need.
The hierarchy is as follows:
Maslow's hierachy of needs 
The first three levels are relatively self-explanatory.
On level four, however, the need for self-esteem on comparison with others emerges.
Once one has satisfied the needs for, say, food, drink, safety and social relationships, one becomes a target for goods which are status-enhancing.
These will range from larger cars in some Western countries to the possession of brassieres in some African nations.
It should be noted that although the need itself is culturally universal, the means of its satisfaction is culturally determined.
The marketer must therefore turn his attention to how to identify these factors so as to be able to construct an effective strategy.
Assessing cultural factors
Perception of the needs of cultures in other countries can be clouded by the point of view of our own cultural background.
As far as possible, this should be avoided, and an objective standpoint be taken.
One method of achieving this, at least to a relatively successful extent, is that suggested by James Lee in 1966:
Identify the issue, and define it in the terms of your own culture
Do the same in the terms of the culture which you are trying to examine
Compare the two formulations, which should allow you to identify the influence of your own cultural values (your self-reference criteria) on your assessment
Refine your formulation for the foreign culture, removing the self-reference criteria which you have identified, and use this assessment to solve the problem.
Having made this assessment, the marketer should be aware of the potential problems which exist in communication within different cultures.
Language differences are obvious, but a more subtle distinction can be made between lowand high-context cultures.
Low-context cultures are characterised by the predominance of verbal communication; little reliance is placed upon the background context in which the words are used.
Formal documentation, legal contracts and direct, to-the-point negotiations are features of this kind of culture.
Examples include the United States and Western Europe.
In a high-context culture, however, much more depends on ‘who you are’, personal relationships and the idea that a person's word is his bond.
In a high-context culture business meeting, for instance, the parties may spend much more time establishing friendship and mutual trust rather than discussing the particular item of business.
The Japanese, South Americans and the Arab nations are particular examples of this kind of cultural style, and Western Europeans often have significant difficulty understanding how a meeting can be productive when it hardly addresses the business deal at stake.
The crucial issue which this sort of situation emphasises is the vital importance of perception between persons of different cultures, which can only be partially ameliorated by the procedure suggested by James Lee.
In making your assessment, you may find that an appreciation of the common factors in the process of adopting a new product, of innovation, and of the potential purchasers themselves will be of assistance.
It seems that each of these can be broken down into five identifiable stages.
Adoption of a product involves the following:
Awareness — which largely comes through advertising and other such media
Interest — having become aware of the product, the potential purchaser actively seeks information about it
Evaluation — where the potential customer decides whether or not to try the product out
Trial — which will involve purchase, accepting a free gift, or in the case of a more expensive product, a demonstration to test the evaluation of it
Adoption — having gathered information and tested it out, the purchaser either continues to buy the product ('repeat purchase') in the case of less expensive goods, or makes the single purchase which the producer of the product intends.
If the product is an innovation within the marketplace, the following features of the product itself will influence the rate at which it is adopted:
Relative advantage over other existing products — the importance here is whether the potential consumers perceive advantage in the product, which can be for many reasons
Compatability — does the product fit with the customs, values and experience of the consumers?
Complexity — difficulty in understanding a product can hamper its adoption.
This will be so in developing countries with little experience of technology, but may operate to the product's advantage in more developed areas.
In the United States, for example, there is a discernable preference for products with the technological appeal of a ‘gadget’
Divisibility — the range of income levels in diverse marketplaces means that the divisibility of a product (so that trial purchase may be made easily) will be very influential
Communication — the value of the product must be communicable to the potential consumers.
The adopters of the product — the consumers themselves — can be categorised into:
innovators — the first 2.5% of the purchasers of the new product, those who are most open to new ideas;
early adopters — the next 13.5%; these people are critical in the process, since they tend to be influential, and are the people willing to be influenced by external information (such as advertising).
They do not merely follow others who have already adopted the product, as do the following three catagories;
early majority — the next 34%;
late majority — the following 34%;
laggards — the final 16%.
A further striking difference between countries which is partly cultural in origin can be found in the differing legal rules which apply to business relationships.
Individuals from different cultures may not only contract together using different cultural assumptions, but using an entirely different legal framework.
South Korean culture
In spite of moves by the South Korean government to open up its long-and-heavily protected domestic economy to foreign imports, efforts by many multinational companies to break into South Korean markets have run into trouble.
A US company that set up a film importing subsidiary in South Korea was subjected to intensive intimidation, including the release of snakes into cinemas to deter cinema customers.
A market for imported grapefruit, that grew from zero to several million dollars worth in a few months, was destroyed even more quickly.
Demonstrations by Korean housewives against the import of farm products helped to destroy the market.
The causes of this consumer (and local business) opposition to imports appear to be partly nationalism, partly cultural and partly political.
South Korea has a Confucian-style society which has a tradition of respect for hierarchical authority, but also one of egalitaranism and an expectation that rulers have a duty to treat their people fairly.
Materialism has until recently been virtually unknown in Confucian societies.
The rapid expansion of the South Korean economy brought wealth which has been unevenly distributed; many of the wealthy have started to purchase high priced goods (that is, imported goods from Japan and the West) and popular resentment of this materialism and unfair wealth distribution could explain the hostility to imported products.
6 Legal framework of international marketing
International law can be defined as the framework of legal obligations which states view as being binding upon themselves.
This definition suggests two of the major deficiencies of the international legal system — firstly that there is little one country can do if another fails to abide by the rules, and this is made worse by the second factor, the lack of a comprehensive single body of law that could form the basis of a truly coherent system.
There is a growing move towards such international codification, but the process is not greatly advanced.
The international marketer, therefore, is still faced with a multitude of differing legal environments, about which information may be difficult to obtain, and once obtained may be very difficult to interpret.
The best procedure to follow, then, is to attempt to avoid situations in which such conflict is likely to arise.
In doing this, attention should be paid to the following factors.
(a)
Jurisdiction
The conditions under which trade may be carried out may not be as simple as they might at first appear.
For instance, an individual may be under the jurisdiction of his own laws even when in a different territory.
Bribes to officials are part of the culture of some areas of the world (and therefore necessary to obtain business), yet US citizens are forbidden by law to offer bribes to officials of foreign governments, no matter where in the world the citizen happens to be at the time.
(b)
Patents and protection of trademarks
There is no such thing as an international patent, so it is essential to register a product under the laws of each country in which it will be sold.
Some agreements do exist (the International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property is observed by 45 countries, for instance), but great care should be taken.
(c)
Legal jurisdiction and arbitration
Court actions in foreign countries expose a company to a number of risks:
(i)
unfavourable publicity may be generated;
(ii)
the court may be ill-disposed to foreign companies;
(iii)
many courts will be unfamiliar with international law and with the customs and practices which the business community take for granted.
For this reason, most international contracts contain a clause establishing the country in which any legal action under the contract must take place (a jurisdiction clause), and/or a clause establishing that disputes will be referred to arbitration.
There are a number of recognised arbitration agencies established internationally.
(d)
Taxation and incorporation
Tax rates differ enormously from country to country, and therefore the territory in which taxation is levied on a company is of great importance.
One particular factor to be taken into account is the country in which incorporation is deemed to have taken place; the criteria for this will vary from state to state, so care must be taken over this issue.
(e)
Control of the company
There is often political pressure on a company from the country in which it operates to allow a greater degree of control to be exercised by the country concerned.
Although a transfer of the ownership of a company is unlikely to be well received by the board, care should be taken before making the decision on how to react; agreeing to increase national control can be less harmful than (for instance) withdrawing from the country altogether.
The ultimate sanction a country can levy — nationalisation (expropriation) of operations is not unknown, but is less frequent than is sometimes believed.
It is, however, a real threat outside of the Western industrialised states.
(f)
Antitrust laws
The point of antitrust laws is to prevent restrictions on competition.
The principle developed in the United States, but is increasingly used elsewhere, notably in the European Community — although the EC exempts many areas of business to allow them to compete effectively in market sectors where the United States and Japan are strong.
(g)
Bribery
Bribery is a difficult area; what is illegal in one place may be almost mandatory in another.
The question is how far a company exports the mores of its own country to another (as the US tends to encourage by devices such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, although this does at least exempt ‘greasing the palm’ of minor officials).
Responses range from bribing (as your competitors do) to refusing to bribe at all, but making adjustments (for instance to price) that will compensate for the bribe being offered and allow competition for a contract to be real.
(h)
GATT (The General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade)
GATT is an attempt to create stability in international trade relations, to which 92 governments are party.
The system exists on three principles:
(i)
each member must treat each other member's trade with equal consideration;
(ii)
protectionist measures are outlawed, so that open markets are guaranteed;
(iii)
export subsidies on manufactured goods are prohibited, and limited on primary products.
These principles are not completely applied.
One view of the system is that although formally an international agreement, it serves more to allow governments a way of countering internal pressures on trade than to regulate international trade relations.
PLANNING FOR INTERNATIONAL MARKETING
Topics covered in this chapter
Market opportunity
Global marketing information system
International marketing research
Some techniques for international marketing research
Marketing strategy alternatives
Competitive strategy
Marketing planning
Japan, the USA and the European Community
Marketing opportunity
A market opportunity exists when:
(a)
potential customer demand can be identified, and
(b)
the company believes that it is in a position to provide a product or service that would satisfy this demand profitably.
A story that is sometimes used to explain market opportunity concerns the managing director and marketing director of a shoe-making firm, who were visiting a less-developed country.
They found that a local custom in the country was to walk around barefoot at all times of the year and in all weathers.
The managing director commented, in despair, that the company could never sell shoes in this country, because demand for shoes was non-existent.
The marketing director, in contrast, replied with delight that an enormous marketing opportunity for shoes existed, because the entire population were potential customers.
This story draws attention to two points.
(a)
There is a difference between existing and potential markets.
A potential market might exist when there is not yet any such market in existence.
(b)
It is often the unresearched opinions of individuals that identify potential markets and market opportunities abroad.
(Research has suggested that this seems to be the case in many US and UK companies).
A more ‘scientific’ approach to researching market opportunities ought to be taken.
Ansoff has made a distinction between:
Existing demand Customers' needs are being met by existing products.
Demand can be measured or estimated.
Latent demand Customer needs are there already, but are not being met by existing products.
Demand cannot be measured or estimated, but demand will materialise if a suitable product and marketing mix are introduced.
Incipient demand Customer needs do not exist yet, but they will emerge if current trends continue.
Latent demand will then come into being, which can be exploited by a suitable product and marketing mix to turn into actual demand.
Internationally, incipient demand is important for marketing, because by projecting trends into the future, companies can estimate when latent demand will emerge, and can develop a marketing plan in advance accordingly.
The key elements of marketing
The key elements in marketing can be listed as:
(1) Customer needs (2) Product, price and place (3) Value (4) Promotion/communication.
Customer needs.
Identifying customer needs can enable a company to develop a product and marketing mix that give the company a competitive advantage over its rivals.
Needs will often differ from one country to another, or from one market segment to another.
Product, price and place (channels of communication).
These are three of the ‘4Ps’ in the marketing mix, the fourth being promotion.
These are elements in marketing that help to establish the company's market share and competitive performance.
Value.
A company's success depends on being able to provide greater value to customers than rival companies can.
Value can be defined by the formula:
V = Q + F /P where V = value provided by the company's product Q = quality of the product, as perceived by the customer F = features of the product that are valued by the customer P = price of the product to the customer.
Promotion/communication.
The company must be able to communicate to potential customers the way in which its product would satisfy their needs, and provide competitive value.
The strategic aim of marketing for a profit-oriented company should therefore be to identify market opportunities, in which:
customer demand can be created and met
in a way that gives the company a competitive advantage over rivals
and provides the company with a satisfactory return/profit.
Scarcity of resources and marketing opportunities
Companies are restricted by a shortage of resources from pursuing every identifiable marketing opportunity.
A number of choices have to be made, for example:
(a)
Should the company try to move into markets in different countries?
(b)
Which countries should be chosen for market development?
Opportunities ought to be compared and contrasted.
A function of marketing research is to provide information that will help opportunities to be identified, evaluated, compared and selected.
Market selection
Market selection means choosing the foreign markets in which the company will operate.
Paliwoda ('International Marketing') comments:
‘It is a regrettable fact that the existing literature on the subject points to market selection as being an informal decision.
Often it is the result of a competitive move; or a chance sighting of a product from that particular market; the result of a business conversation or a chamber of commerce seminar; or a market is chosen simply because the target market is a pleasant location, the people are ‘nice’ and the managing director's wife enjoys going there on holiday!
Curiously, more attention appears to be paid to ‘industry talk’ than to the reports and publications produced by different trade and governmental bodies.’
Global marketing information system
Any company that has plans for international marketing must build up or have access to marketing information about a large number of different countries.
(a)
Information is usually abundant in developed countries, and the problem is to choose reliable and sufficiently comprehensive information sources.
(b)
Information is usually difficult to obtain or unreliable in less-developed countries, and the problem is obtaining enough of it that is relevant and trustworthy.
Primary data will often be expensive to collect, and so companies will rely quite heavily on secondary data, despite its unreliability or scarcity.
The subjects or areas for which information about a country is required will vary according to the specific needs of each individual company.
It is not proposed to provide an exhaustive list of information requirements, but a broad guideline is suggested below.
Subject for a global marketing information system
Subject area Comments
A Market information
1.
Market potential Information about existing demand for existing products, the status of existing products, potential demand.
Current prices.
2.
Customer needs and attitudes.
3.
Channels of distribution.
What these are.
How well or badly they function.
4.
Communications and promotion.
What are the available media for sales promotion, and how effective/costly are they?
5.
The market place.
Where are the products actually bought and sold?
What form do the markets take?
B Competition and competitive strategy
1.
Competition Details about actual and potential competitors and their operations.
2.
Competitive strategy What is the company hoping to achieve in each target market?
What is its marketing strategy?
How well or badly is current strategy working?
C Foreign exchange aspects
The strength of the country's This will need to be assessed from matters such as currency the country's balance of payments, its inflation rate, real and nominal interest rates, the government's economic policies, and so on.
Exchange controls Controls on the outflow of foreign exchange, notably on the payment of dividends or fees to foreign companies, or the transfer price payments for goods from another part of the group in another country, or the transfer to the foreign holding company of proceeds from the sale of entire subsidiaries.
Restrictions availability of foreign currency to pay for imports.
Subject area Comments
D Taxation, legal and regulatory matters
1.
Rates of corporate taxation in Rates of tax on profits.
Taxes on dividends paid, the country abroad.
Tax allowances on new investments.
2.
Laws Laws that affect the operations of companies within the country.
3.
Regulations Regulations on product standards, safety requirements, and so on.
4.
Import controls Controls over imports from abroad, notably the supply of raw materials to companies from a foreign parent company, or the prices that can be paid for such imports.
E Resource information
1.
Men The availability, skills and cost of labour in the country.
2.
Materials The availability and cost of domestically-produced or imported raw materials and parts.
3.
Machines The availability of capital equipment.
New investment in the country.
4.
Money The availability and cost of finance in the country's financial markets.
5.
Companies, other organisations What other companies or partnerships operate already in the country, that might be a suitable target for a takeover, merger, joint venture, licensing deal etc?
F General conditions
1.
Political conditions 2.
Social and cultural conditions 3.
Economic conditions 4.
Other factors.
Information will be analysed by ‘units’.
A ‘unit’ might be a group of countries, a single country, or a region within a country (eg California, the Southern States).
How much detail is needed?
The amount of information that is needed for a company's marketing information system will depend on the extent of its current involvement or potential interest in an overseas market.
W J Keegan ('Global Marketing Management') makes a distinction between:
surveillance, which is the ‘passive’ acquisition of information that becomes available, and
search, which is an active seeking out of information.
Investigation is an active but fairly informal search for specific information.
Research is an active and formally organised search for specific information for a specific purpose.
International marketing research in the gathering of information from search activities into international markets.
Sources of marketing information
The sources of ‘surveillance’ information, in practice, are mainly people rather than documentary sources or external data banks.
Source of information Comments 
1.
People
1.1 Within the company
In a multinational company, the main source of information about foreign markets comes from executives of the company, especially executives who are based abroad in the company's foreign subsidiaries.
Companies appear to rely on the perceptions of their own managers on the spot, with a loyalty to head office.
Head office managers often rely on obtaining information in face-to-face discussions with subordinates, and will happily assign large sums of money to travel budgets in order for meetings with executives abroad to take place.
1.2 External to the company
Distributors, suppliers, customers, government officials etc.
2.
Documentary
There are a number of publications and organisations that can provide market information about different countries.
(1) Official statistics will often be published on international consumer spending etc.
(2) There are trade directories and official market reports.
(3) Journals and periodicals often publish articles on foreign markets, and these are available at some libraries,
(4) Assistance for exporters is available from organisations such as(in the UK) the Department of Trade (British Overseas Trade Board) and even banks.
Personal perception
An executive might have a limited opportunity to see for himself/herself conditions in a foreign country.
Direct perception involves travel and time out of the office.
3 International marketing research
Marketing research involves a more active search for information than reliance on the sources listed above.
International marketing research can be defined as ‘research conducted to aid in making decisions in more than one country’.
International marketing research differs from domestic marketing research because of:
the need for more information about environmental conditions and business conditions in the countries researched;
the need to carry out research in a variety of different contexts, environments (and languages).
It can be carried out by:
in-house staff or
an international marketing research organisation.
Since most organisations will not employ large research teams, in-house research will rely mainly (or entirely) on secondary data.
For primary data, a marketing research organisation is likely to be used.
‘The diversity and complexity of the international environment, coupled with the frequent lack of familiarity with a foreign country, underscores the importance of undertaking research prior to making decisions.
This is true whether with regard to initial market entry decisions, product positioning or marketing mix decisions’.
(Douglas and Craig: International Marketing Research).
Research can help a company to develop its global marketing strategy.
Research can help to prevent inappropriate market entry strategies, such as selecting an advertising campaign that fails to appeal to customers.
Research can help to avoid the missing of a market entry opportunity.
Research can help a company to re-formulate its product to suit national tastes.
Nestlé, for example, vary their instant coffee to suit the tastes of coffee drinkers in different countries.
Research can help a company to position its product in the market.
An example described by Douglas and Craig is the launch of the Renault 5 car some years ago.
A humorous advertising appeal was used in the domestic French market.
Research indicated greater concern in Italy with road handling and performance, and the car was launched there as ‘citizen of the world’ a comfortable car with good road-handling capabilities.
Research showed that West Germans were more concerned with technical reliability than good performance, and so advertising there was directed at technical features such as bodywork, engine power, braking performance, speed, petrol consumption and so on.
Research showed that Swedish customers were concerned about safety, and so the car was launched in Sweden with a campaign that emphasised safety mechanisms.
A further interesting example is the initial failure of an attempt by a US manufacturer of dishwashers to sell its product in Switzerland, promoting the dishwasher (without prior research) as a household convenience.
Swiss housewives rejected this appeal, apparently put off by the idea of being replaced in their homes by machines.
A subsequent successful re-launch of the product, based on research that revealed a Swiss pre-occupation with cleanliness, emphasised the germ-killing and hygienic aspects of the use of dishwashers.
A marketing research team should carry out its research within the following broad guidelines.
It should establish
what information is needed
why it is needed
how quickly/when it is needed.
It should try to collect the information as cheaply as possible.
Start with desk research, and use the company's own files or readily-available library sources, official statistics, databases, trade associations and so on.
If the information isn't available ‘locally’, move on to secondary data from overseas sources.
When data is not available from published statistics, studies, existing reports and other secondary data, move on to direct collection of information (primary data), if this appears justifiable on cost/benefit grounds.
Only collect information if its actual or potential value exceeds the cost of collecting it.
Douglas and Craig (International Marketing Research) make a distinction between:
(a)
research information for strategic decisions such as the allocation of company resources between countries, products and markets.
As such, this information goes beyond pure marketing requirements;
(b)
research information for tactical decisions.
Tactical information
Marketing mix item
Type of research
Product policy decision
Qualitative research to generate ideas for new products.
Surveys to evaluate new product ideas
Concept testing.
Test marketing.
Product benefit and attitude research.
Product formulation and feature testing.
Pricing decisions
Price sensitivity studies.
Distribution decisions
Surveys of shopping patterns/behaviour
Surveys of distributor attitudes/policies
Advertising decisions
Advertising pre-testing
Advertising post-testing.
Recall studies.
Surveys of media habits.
Sales promotion decisions
Surveys of response to different types of promotions.
Sales force decisions
Tests of alternative sales presentations.
Secondary data
Secondary data provide an excellent starting point for many international marketing research projects.
Data
is readily available
is fairly inexpensive to acquire
can be analysed/consulted fairly quickly.
As a starting place for research, secondary data can pinpoint areas where investigation should be carried out in further depth, and so can help to provide the direction and focus area for further research.
‘Secondary data also provide information relating to a wide variety of different aspects of international operations.
They cover, for example, economic data relating to the general business environment in a country.
They include specific industry data with a worldwide coverage.
In addition, other sources contain data relevant to specific marketing strategy decisions, such as information about demographic, economic, geographic, technological and sociocultural characteristics.
Also, they provide information about political, financial, foreign exchange, legal and regulatory data; data relating to the availability and character of distributive and communication networks and service organisations; and data about other physical, human and capital resources, which are needed in making market entry and investment decisions.
(Douglas and Craig International Marketing Research)
Direct research: surveys and samples
Information for strategic decisions will come mainly from secondary sources, but information for tactical decisions will rely more heavily on primary data.
When the direct collection of primary data is used in marketing research, the methods of survey (interview, questionnaire, observation) and the methods of sampling are broadly the same as for any ‘domestic’ marketing research exercise.
It is worth commenting, however, that any questionnaires should be designed with care.
The questions should be easy to understand and easy to answer.
This could be particularly important in less-developed or developing countries.
Embarrassing questions should be avoided.
What is embarrassing to respondents in one country might seem normal and ‘acceptable’ to respondents in another, and so there should be some ‘local knowledge’input into questionnaire design.
‘In multicountry research, the extent to which questions are formulated in precisely the same terms needs to be considered.
This is more likely to be feasible in relation to questions relating to demographic and other background characteristics, than for behavioural or product market data.
Greatest difficulty is likely to occur in relation to attitudual and psychographic data.'
(Douglas and Craig) Foreign market research will include an enormous scope for error, unless local nationals are used to gather data in the country concerned, because of ignorance about local markets and conditions.
Paliwoda (International Marketing) mentions the testing in China of the advertising slogan ‘Come alive with Pepsi’.
Due to ignorance about the local language, the slogan was expressed in Chinese so as to mean ‘Pepsi re-awakens your dead relatives’.
Data, once collected, should be analysed in two stages.
(a)
At country level, for the county unit.
(b)
By multi-country comparisons.
Comparisons between countries might be based on qualitative judgement, but a variety of quantitative techniques can be used for analysis.
Some of the simpler techniques will be mentioned later.
Problems with international marketing research Instead of analysing just one national market, international marketing researchers must analyse a number of national markets.
Each national market will have its unique characteristics.
Data will be more readily available for some countries than for others, and sources of data will differ.
Comparability
The research data from different countries will not always be directly comparable.
Official statistics are gathered and recorded in different ways between one country and another.
Even survey data gathered by the same multinational company might differ significantly between one country and another.
‘Since decisions such as selection of target markets, segmentation strategy, or standardising marketing mix tactics cover several countries, it is important that the information on which decisions are based be comparable and consistent from one country to another.’
(Douglas and Craig)
Example.
Suppose that Milwaukee Way Chocolates Inc is a multinational producer of chocolate bars, carrying out a market research survey into consumption of its chocolate bars in four different national markets.
The research data might be as follows.
In this example, the marketing research data might be useful for the management of the individual subsidiaries in Mexico, Canada, Spain and France, but management at Milwaukee Way's headquarters would not be able to extract data for global marketing information and inter-country comparisons.
The different age groupings, in particular, would make accurate comparisons impossible.
The research framework should be constructed to provide comparability of findings between one country and another.
(a)
Products in one country might not serve the same function as the same product in a different country.
Bicycles, for example, are used mainly as a method of transport in Holland, but for recreation in the USA.
Products that compete with bicycles differ between the two countries.
(b)
Concepts, attitudes and types of behaviour vary between one society and another.
Research into consumer attitudes and behaviour should recognise such differences.
(c)
Categorising data cannot easily be standardised.
As just one example, the grouping of occupations into ‘social classes’ might call for variations between one country and the next.
Products might be categorised differently too.
As just one example, beer might be seen as a soft drink in some countries (around the Mediterranean) and as an alcoholic drink in others.
Problems of comparability: examples.
1.
Car ownership per 100 of population.
In a country such as the UK, many cars are company-owned but available for private use.
This distorts the car ownership per 100 of the population to a low level compared with other countries.
2.
Population per square kilometre.
This can be distorted to comparatively low levels in countries with non-inhabitable areas, such as high mountain ranges, large deserts or extensive lakes.
3.
Retail systems.
Retail chains vary from being very long to very short.
In France, for example, there was a ‘quantum leap’ from small shops to hypermarkets, by-passing the ‘supermarket phase’in retailing evolution.
Some techniques for international marketing research
There are several techniques that might be used in international marketing research that would not normally be used for research into ‘domestic’ markets.
Some techniques will be described here.
They deal mainly with the analysis of secondary data, rather than multi-country analysis of survey data.
Regional lead-lag analysis
This method of analysis works on the assumption that demand patterns in country or region B will follow demand patterns that have already been experienced in country or region A. The demand in country A can therefore be used to predict how demand will change in country B.
Obviously, the countries A and B must have similar social, economic and cultural climates, but with a sufficient time lag in demand to enable predictions to be made.
For example, it might be possible to predict the demand for desk-top minicomputers in West Germany or France from earlier demand for the product in the USA.
Lead-lag analysis is a fairly simplistic method of demand forecasting, and is not widely used.
(a)
There is a difficulty in measuring the time lag with sufficient accuracy.
(b)
It is questionable whether demand volume estimates based on lead-lag assumptions will be sufficiently accurately and reliable.
Estimating market demand by analogy
This technique might be used when there is no data available for estimating the total market size for a product.
It is only a rough-and-ready estimating method, but one which can be very useful (if its limitations are recognised).
(1) Cross section comparison.
A cross-section comparison works on the assumption that the current markets in country A and country B are analogous, and a relationship (correlation) exists in both countries between:
(a)
demand for the product; and
(b)
another factor.
Let Ax be demand for product A in country X Ay be demand for product A in country Y, which we are trying to estimate Fx be a factor for which data from country X correlates closely with demand for product A in country X Fy be a factor for which data from country Y correlates closely with demand for product A in country X.
It is assumed that: Ax = Ay Fx Fy
Thus, if values can be obtained for Ax, Fx and Fy, market demand for product A in country Y can be estimated as  A problem might be to identify the factor (Fx and Fy) for which data does correlate closely with demand for the product in country X.
(2) Displacing time comparison.
This allows a comparison to be made between markets in countries that are at a different stage in their development, but it is assumed that their development will follow a similar pattern.
Let Ax be demand for product A in country X in time period 1 Ayz be demand for product A in country Y in time period 2 Fx be a factor for which data in country X in time period 1 correlates closely with demand for A in country X in time period 1
Fyz be a factor for which data in country Y in time period 2 correlates closely with demand for A in country X.
It is assumed that  If Ax\, Fx\ and Fyz are known, then market demand for product A in country Y in time period 2 can be estimated.
Estimating market demand by analogy has some obvious weaknesses.
(a)
It assumes that a single factor can be found that correlates closely with demand.
(b)
It assumes that the countries' markets are analogous.
(c)
It ignores the difference between actual demand and potential demand.
Even if it can estimate potential market demand in a country, actual demand will not materialise unless a similar situation applies to product availability, pricing, quality etc in both countries.
Income elasticity measurements
This approach to total market demand forecasting analyses statistics over time in a number of countries for:
(a)
gross domestic product (GDP) per head of the population, as a measurement of average income; and
(b)
the percentage of total manufacturing output (or total industrial output) made up by each major sector of the industry — for example, the percentage of total output made up by food and drinks production, textiles production, electrical goods, chemicals, metals and engineering, and so on .
The diagram above sketches this concept.
It is found, typically, that as GDP per head of the population rises from low levels, there is a rising percentage of total output made up of engineering goods, electricals, chemicals and so on, and a falling percentage of total output made up by ‘necessities’ such as food, drink and clothing.
Income elasticity measures the percentage change in demand for a product (eg electrical goods) given a small percentage change in GDP per head of the population.
Income elasticity of demand for any product will change as income per head rises, but when income per head is currently at a certain level, income elasticity of demand for a product can be estimated from the statistical analysis.
For example, suppose that the income elasticity of demand for electrical goods is +2.0 when GDP per head of the population is, say, $3,000.
Country A currently has a GDP per head of $3,000, which is expected to rise by 4% next year, and total market demand for electrical goods is currently $5,000,000 per year.
We can estimate that total market demand for electrical goods will rise by (2.0 O 4%) = 8% next year to 1.08 O $5 million = $5,400,000.
Regression analysis
Regression analysis is a statistical technique for predicting demand for a product (a dependent variable) from the value of one or more other factors (independent variables).
With linear regression, and using historical data (from countries for which such data is available) we can derive estimated values for a and b in the formula:
Y = a + b X where Y = demand for a product, typically expressed as the number of households per 1,000 of the population that own one of the product (a car, television, video recorder etc).
X = an independent variable, typically GDP per head or GNP per head of the population.
Demand for the product next year would be calculated from the formula by taking the difference between projected total number owned next year and total number owned currently.
The reliability of the statistical estimates can be measured by a coefficient of determination, Rs.
For example, the ownership of cars per 1,000 of the population might be estimated from historical data as follows.
(The figures are hypothetical).
Multiple regression analysis computer programs can be used to introduce other independent variables that might increase the statistical reliability of the regression equation (increasing the value of Rs towards 1.0)— in our example, perhaps, the cost of cars, the cost of petrol, the total length of roadway in the country, and so on.
Linear regression analysis is simpler, however, and the statistics from several countries can be combined together to produce a ‘conglomerate’ linear regression equation.
This can then be used to estimate demand for the product in another country for which statistics are not available.
Continuing with our example, suppose that the statistics for Brazil, Venezuela and Mexico are combined to produce a linear regression formula  where Y is the number of cars per 1,000 of the population and X is GNP per head of the population in $.
Now suppose that a car manufacturer wishes to estimate the demand for cars in Panaragua, a South American country, for which no data is available.
The current GNP per head of the population in Panaragua is $5,000, but this is expected to rise to $5,500 in the next 2 years.
The population of Panaragua is 4,000,000 people.
The ‘conglomerate’ regression equation could be assumed to apply to Panaragua.
The prediction would be for the ownership of cars to rise by 52,000 in 2 years, and so total market demand for cars in Panaragua in this period would be about 52,000 (or slightly more, allowing for old cars being scrapped).
Research has shown that in relation to many basic industrial commodities, such as paper, glass and cement, there is often a close relationship between total consumption (market demand) and GNP.
Douglas and Craig (International Marketing Research) comment that in some countries, there may be different market segments for the same product, where:
(a)
different factors influence demand, or
(b)
each segment is at a different stage of market penetration.
In such cases, it would be appropriate to use different ‘indicators’ of demand for each segment.
(a)
In the case of demand for diesel engines for small boats:(i) one market segment could be demand for pleasure boats, which might vary with income per head of the population;(ii) another segment could be demand for fishing boats, where demand might be dependent upon estimated sizes of fish haul, or length of coastline.
(b)
In the case of demand for hotels, market segments would be tourist visitors and business travel.
Factors influencing demand might be numbers of tourist visitors and growth in GNP respectively.
Comparative analysis
Comparative analysis is an international marketing research technique that is used to analyse the effectiveness of marketing expenditures.
Multinational companies will gather data about different countries in which they sell their products (and different regions within countries).
If there are thought to be sufficient similarities between the markets in two or more countries, comparisons can be made of selected statistics from each.
The selected statistics would probably include:
(a)
Total GNP
(b)
GNP per head of the population
(c)
Population size
(d)
Land area
(e)
Population per square kilometre
(f)
% dwelling in towns, % in rural areas
(g)
Television sets per 100 of population
(h)
Number of newspapers
(i)
Number of journals
(j)
Telephones per 100 of population
(k)
Road mileage
(l)
Largest cities, populations of each
(m)
Passenger cars per 100 of population.
If it is thought that there are some similarities between country A and country B in the market for microcomputers or car telephones or videocameras etc, a multinational company can analyse its market expenditures within both countries, comparing the effectiveness of these expenditures in each country.
From this analysis it can then try to identify ways in which marketing expenditure can be made more effective in each country.
S J Paliwoda (International Marketing) draws attention to the need to evaluate political risk in a country before taking a decision to set up operations within that country.
Although recognising that many such ‘Go, No-Go’ decisions are made after a brief examination by one or two executives, he argues that more ‘scientific’or ‘realistic’comparative methods of assessment should be used.
Business Environment Risk Index (BERI).
This is an index that assesses conditions for investment in each of about 50 countries.
Each country is rated (by a panel of local experts) on 15 economic, political and financial factors, on a scale of 0 to 4.
Each of the 15 factors is given a weighting, so that the total weighting for the 15 factors comes to 25.
The BERI value for each country is assessed by giving the country a score for each factor and applying the factor weighting, so that index values could in theory range from 0 (0 O 25) to 100 (4 O 25).
A score of over 70 can be taken to imply an already-advanced economy, and so not a particularly favourable climate for new investment.
A score of 55–70 will imply, mainly, developing countries with investment potential.
A score of 40 — 55 would include high risk countries, but with some possibility perhaps for profits that are reasonable in view of the high investment risk that would be involved.
A score of under 40 would indicate a very high investment risk, and so only in unusual circumstances would investment be worthwhile.
The Country Environmental Temperature Gradient.
This is an analysis of countries' environmental characteristics, and the classification of countries as ‘hot’, ‘moderate’ or ‘cold’on the basis of these characteristics.
(Countries can also be graded on a hot  cold scale).
(Litvak and Banting: 1968)
The categorisation of countries is re-assessed regularly.
The implications of this analysis are that:
(a)
in hot countries, the markets are dynamic, and a multinational company ought to seek greater control over the activities of the ‘middleman’— ie over selling.
Companies are likely to seek ownership of operations within the country;
(b)
in cold countries, markets are not dynamic and investment would be more risky and difficult.
An international company is likely to rely on agents to sell its products to the country's markets.
Univariate and bivariate analysis
Statistical techniques can be used to compare survey data (primary data) collected in one country with survey data from another country, in order to test for similarities or differences between the countries.
Some of the simpler techniques are mentioned here.
Cross tabulation.
Survey responses from two different countries can be tabulated, and chi-squared tests used to assess the similarities/differences between them.
Illustration.
Which member of the family, husband or wife, makes the decision about the purchase of a dishwasher for the house?
(Hypothetical figures used for illustration).
Research findings 
HW = Husband sees it as the wife's decision HJ = Husband sees it as a joint decision HH = Husband sees it as the husband's decision WW = Wife sees it as the wife's decision WJ = Wife sees it as a joint decision WH = Wife sees it as the husband's decision.
Here, chi-squared analysis would show a significantly greater decision-making role for the husband in Italy compared with the USA.
T-tests.
T-tests are a fairly simple way of testing for significance in the difference between the mean or proportion of a sample drawn from country A and the mean or proportion of a sample drawn from country B.
For example, a survey of 1,800 working women in France might show that 38% read at least one magazine weekly, and a similar survey in West Germany of 940 working women showed that 47% of them read at least one magazine weekly.
A t-test would show whether German working women appear to be significantly greater readers of magazines than their French counterparts.
Any significant differences could have implications for the selection of advertising media/overall marketing mix in each country.
Cluster analysis.
Cluster analysis is used to group variables, objects or individuals into groups or clusters of variables, objects or individuals that have certain similarities with each other.
In international marketing research, cluster analysis can be used to
group countries into clusters
identify different sub-groupings within all the countries researched.
Typically, countries are clustered on the basis of macroeconomic data such as GNP per head of the population degree of urbanisation, population size or density, between levels and so on.
Who should control international marketing research?
It might be apparent to you from a description of marketing research techniques that many of these techniques depend on comparisons between different countries.
For effective and useful comparisons to be made:
(a)
international marketing research efforts ought to be controlled from the headquarters of the multinational.
Research tasks will be delegated to operating subsidiaries in each country, but co-ordination and control should be tasks of head office;
(b)
the head office of the multinational should try to establish standard methods of research, so that data collected in each country will be more readily comparable;
(c)
head office will then have to channel the results of international marketing research back to its operating subsidiaries.
The marketing manager responsible for worldwide marketing research will:
(a)
respond to local conditions in each country, and arrange countries into groups or ‘clusters’ of countries with similar characteristics;
(b)
plan research programs that are tailored to the needs of each different ‘cluster’ of countries.
Marketing strategy alternatives
A company which decides to become ‘international’ or ‘multinational’has to make some basic strategic choices.
(a)
About markets
Which product markets will be targeted?
In what sequence will they be targeted?
Which countries will be selected?
Which market segments in each country will be selected?
What objectives will be set for sales volume, market share and profits?
How should marketing operations within each country be organised and implemented to achieve these objectives?
(b)
About resources Decisions must be made about R & D, production, delivery, pricing, promotion, direct marketing, profit margins and so on.
Where will the resources to make/supply the product come from?
Will materials, components, and the product be made internally or purchased from outside?
Where will the materials, components or product be made?
Or where will they be supplied from?
Setting up production facilities in a new target market will often be risky, even though labour might be much cheaper in the targeted country.
Exporting is often the cheapest and safest initial strategy.
As the market develops, setting up production facilities in the country will become a more financially-viable option.
(c)
About investment, finance and control
How much investment is required in each country, and how much is the company willing to invest?
As an alternative to 100% ownership and control, what about alternative arrangements such as a partnership or joint venture?
Will local partners help to overcome the company's lack of knowledge of the market?
Is there a legal requirement in the company for a minimum ‘local’ ownership of businesses in the country?
You may recall from your studies of Corporate Strategy that the identification of a market opportunity should result in the development of a product/market strategy.
For a manufacturing company, alternative product/market strategies are set out in the tables below.
Market expansion strategies 
Example: market entry strategy in the USA for high-technology products
A survey by the London Business School into small British high technology firms in the USA found that:
management of such firms nearly always under-estimate the costs and lead times involved in establishing a market position in the USA
companies should concentrate initially on regional markets within the USA or specific market segments.
The entire US market is too large for small foreign firms to tackle
for innovation high technology products, success will depend on identifying a few early adaptors of the product
for established products, success may depend on winning a key customer, whose decision to buy will then influence other purchasers.
Marketing efforts should therefore be directed at one or two such potential key customers.
——————————— many international marketing research projects.
Data
is readily available
is fairly inexpensive to acquire
can be analysed/consulted fairly quickly.
As a starting place for research, secondary data can pinpoint areas where investigation should be carried out in further depth, and so can help to provide the direction and focus area for further research.