

OUTDOOR ACTION
WALKING.
WHERE TO GO.
EQUIPMENT.
TESTS
September 1991 £1.40
Gear test
Best selling boots
Weekend breaks in Pembrokeshire
Walks and activities in every region
Dinghy sailing learning the ropes
Top treks Great backpacking routes
Win £1000 of gear
OUTDOOR ACTION
WALKING.
WHERE TO GO.
EQUIPMENT.
TESTS
On the trail
14
BACKPACKING ROUTES we look at some of the best
24
MOUNTAINS IN FOCUS the Czechoslovak Tatras
29
BOOK OFFER special deal on new guide to Czechoslovakia
30
WALKING around Scotland's ‘Queen of the Mountains’
31
GREECE walking on the Greek island of Thassos
50
FLORA AND FAUNA watching nature in September
Keeping track
5
COMMENT the editor sets the world to rights
6
ACTION UPDATE what's happening where and when
8
WALK TALK a look at the lighter side of walking life
9
LETTERS readers air their views
9
QUERIES your outdoor questions answered
10
OUTDOOR UPDATE all the latest news from the countryside
19
SCOTLAND IN FOCUS challenge for conservationists
33
COMPETITION £1000 of Camping Gaz gear to be won
53
ARMCHAIR UPDATE essential reading for the outdoors
73
NEXT MONTH what to look forward to in October
74
A DAY OUT WITH Pathcraft manager Keith Wilson
75
SUBSCRIPTION OFFER great free torch for new subscribers
Action stations
21
WEEKENDER walking and cycling in Pembrokeshire
34
LAKE DISTRICT walking holiday on the classic peaks
35
OUT AND ABOUT a walk and an activity centre in every region
44
EYE TO EYE with obsessive traveller Mark Shand
46
DINGHY SAILING all you need to know to take to the water
Gearing up
54
BUYERS' GUIDE outdoor products in the spotlight
56
EQUIPMENT TEST leather boots are put through their paces
60
GEAR GUIDE all you need to know about sleeping bags
65
MARKET ROUND UP wise ways to whip the wet
Comment
Raising money for charity has got to be worthwhile.
But sometimes it's difficult to sort out which causes are the most deserving of support.
However, there is no such dilemma with Climb For The World .
Here the organisers have set up an international event where walkers, climbers and people everywhere can do something they enjoy doing and benefit others at the same time.
On September 21–22 people from all over will join together to walk or climb one of the designated summits.
For some it will be a treacherous ascent of a sheer rockface, for others an easy stroll up a small hill.
Some will be in far-flung climates, others in their local patch.
The physical difficulty nor the location matter.
If you take part you will be showing solidarity with the poorest nations in the world and letting governments everywhere know that you care about the environment and its undeniable rush to destruction.
Hopefully you will also be raising money through sponsorship to help selected projects in countries far worse off than our own.
You'll find more details and information on how to register and select a designated peak on page 11.
At last doing something worthwhile can be the same as having fun!
Look out for the Outdoor Action team when you do go and tell us what you think of the magazine.
Laura McCaffrey 
Action update
Orienteering in the south east
September 14–15.
Now's the time for all would-be orienteers in the south-east to get out there and have a go on a Try Orienteering Weekend.
Events are being organised at venues throughout London and the south-east aimed at beginners of all ages and levels of fitness.
Members of orienteering clubs in the region will be on hand to help you get started.
Individuals and groups are welcome and entry fees range from free to £2.
Wear long trousers/tracksuits and sturdy footwear.
Bring a red biro and a see-through bag for your map.
For more information contact: Jack Richmond) 81 776 0831 (eves).
Cycling in Nottinghamshire
September 8.
Investigate the oak and beech woodlands of one of the most wooded areas of England on a five hour cycle ride along bridleways and minor roads in Nottinghamshire.
The route will also take you to some of the finest areas of heathland in the country and will include a tea stop at Clumber Park Tea Rooms.
The ride begins at 10.30am outside the main gates to Sherwood Forest Visitor Centre.
Bring a picnic lunch.
Contact: Phil Keynes 0623 823202 for further information.
Walks around the country
September 29.
Assert your right to walk on land to which access is denied by taking part in the Ramblers' Association Forbidden Britain Day.
Walks are scheduled to take place all over the country taking routes which highlight various problems which have arisen from landowners denying access to the countryside.
National events will take place at six venues.
To find out more details about these and local events send a SAE to The Ramblers' Association, 1/5 Wandsworth Road, London SW8 2XX or telephone 071 582 6878.
Deer spotting in Lancashire
September 3 and 5.
Don't miss these two chances to see red deer and roe deer as they leave the cover of their reed beds in the Leighton Moss Nature Reserve.
The early evening watches will start at 7.30 pm until dusk, when you should see the deer and maybe some otters from the observation hides.
The watches will be led be experienced wardens who will also tell you about the species of deer you will see.
Bring your own binoculars or hire them for 80p at the reserve.
The watches cost £1 for adults and 50p for children.
For more information contact: 0524 701601.
Navigation in the Lake District
September 6/8/13/15/22/29.
If you already know the basics of map and compass work but want to improve your skills, why not take part in one of the day courses organised throughout the Lake District National Park?
The practical courses are an informal opportunity to learn more about hill navigation, route planning and preparation, and walking across different types of terrain.
Places on the courses are limited and advance booking is essential.
Price £2 for adults, £1 for accompanied children.
Bring lunch and a 1:25 000 leisure map and compass if possible.
Contact: 09662 6601 for details.
Charity walk in Hertfordshire
September 29.
Put your best foot forward and walk all or part of a 25 mile route from London to Ware in Hertfordshire to raise money for the Heart Research Charity.
The walk covers flat terrain, following the Hertford Union and Lee Navigation towpaths through the Lee Valley Park.
The whole route is estimated to take eight hours but there will be checkpoints along the way for refreshments.
The walk starts at 8am at St Mark's Gate, Victoria Park in London and ends at Ware College, Scotts Road, Ware, Herts.
Entrants should be over 16, although younger experienced walkers accompanied by adults will be considered.
For further information, sponsor and entry forms send a 9in x 6in SAE to Lee Valley Park Countryside Centre, Abbey Farmhouse, Crooked Mile, Waltham Abbey, Essex.
Tel: 0992 713828.
Closing date for entries is September 9.
Picking poor packed lunches gets people in a proper pickle
Paper sandwiches don't reach the parts proper packed lunches penetrate, laments Ken Ward.
Chalk and cheese
You wouldn't dream of going into a restaurant and just ordering ‘a meal please’.
So it's surprising that when we're staying in a guest house on a walking holiday we're content just to order ‘a packed lunch’, and hope for the best.
Why do we do it?
I've had some packed lunches which were perfect, but I've also been sold some horrors.
The problem seems to be that the people who prepare the lunches have never actually opened one sitting on a hill.
Consequently there are several things they do not know.
Firstly they don't seem to know there's a good chance that the ‘picnic’ will be taken in unfriendly weather.
The collection which they have prepared may have looked wonderfully appetising in the kitchen.
A couple of bread rolls perhaps, a little plastic pack of butter and a pack of paté, nicely finished off with a plastic knife and a paper serviette.
All very civilised.
But on the hill, crouched against a stone wall which may or may not be providing protection against wind-swept rain, such a dainty arrangement fast loses all its attraction.
In such conditions what is needed is something which will fill the hunger gap quickly and with as little movement as possible — when passing food through the little Niagara Falls running off the hood of my waterproof — deeply envied those astronauts who can squeeze a whole meal into their mouth from a plastic ‘toothpaste’ tube.
Oh how I have longed sometimes to crouch with my head in my rucksack and give myself a squeeze of self-heating steak and kidney pudding, followed by a quick squeeze of hot custard and delicious spotted dick.
But it is not just bad weather which takes the gilt off the packed-lunch gingerbread.
On those rare days when the weather has run out of rain and the sun has driven away the clouds, the wrong packed lunch can be just as disastrous.
When the morning walk has been a hot, hard climb and all breathing has been in gasps, you can arrive at lunchtime with a mouth as dry as a salt mine.
You have probably been perspiring quite impressively too, and you are beginning to have fantasies of pints of a cool drink.
You fall with relief upon your packed lunch ‘mystery parcel’— and what do you find?
Sandwiches of bread as dry as Weetabix, enclosing a slice of ham with the texture of a piece of old lino!
With courage, you take a mouthful and begin to chew.
Soon the chewed mass has sponged up any moisture left and your dry tongue is clanging against the side of your mouth like the great bell of Notre Dame.
When ordering my lunches these days, I try to avoid the use of the term ‘packed lunch’ and merely ask if I can be supplied with certain items in a bag to take away.
My list may include a tomato, a buttered roll, a chunk of moist cheese, a slice of fruit cake, and an orange.
It usually works…but not always.
Earlier this year I led a party of Americans on a walking tour in the Scottish Highlands.
The June weather had included rain, sleet and three inches of snow!
Then in typical fashion the sun came out and dried the heather till it crackled and Scotland recorded the highest temperature in the British Isles.
Walking during this heatwave was bound to be warm work and I was determined to avoid sandwiches of chalk and modelling clay.
So I had a word with the hotel chef.
He was most understanding about the needs of our party.
‘How about a buttered roll and a chicken leg each wrapped in tinfoil?’
Great!
‘And perhaps some cold new potatoes which had been glazed in mint flavoured butter?’
Wonderful!
‘A fruit yoghurt to finish?’
Magnificent!
The next morning's walk was superb, with the altitude providing just enough breeze to stop everyone from boiling over.
The thought of the delicious lunch gave me the extra boost I needed to reach the summit.
Once there I handed out the packs and sat waiting for approval.
What had we got?
Two cheese sandwiches and a Kit Kat!
Emergency wanted A few years ago I wrote a little book called Discovering Backpacking .
Just before Christmas I was intrigued to get a letter in careful dictionary English from Kenya, saying that the sender had read my book and was now putting some kit together along the lines I had suggested.
However one piece of equipment was causing him a problem — a ‘survival bag’.
Where could he obtain one, and how much would it cost?
In reply I sent him a cutting from the catalogue of a well known UK mail order equipment company.
Earlier this year I received another carefully written letter from my correspondent.
‘Dear Mr Ken Ward, I made an order for the survival bag as you kindly indicated.
Unfortunately when it arrived, it was empty.
Can you please advise my what should have been contained, and explain how it is used?’
So, again I wrote, telling the would-be backpacker that having the survival bag was a bit like taking out insurance — it only became useful if he had an emergency.
And yes, you've guessed it — a few weeks later what should I discover among my mail but a letter: ‘Dear Mr Ken Ward, where may I purchase an emergency…
The First Nöel Guidebook In April I had the pleasure of meeting the TV personality Noel Edmonds in Grasmere, and we talked briefly about guidebooks for walkers.
He is chair of the Unique Group Limited which has just launched a new Guide to the Countryside .
The guide should be well received by those who love the countryside, and particularly by those who walk.
And I think it will be a great success.
Of course Noel is an expert in publicity and the use of the media.
In a mail-order advertisement for the book he makes a unique offer: ‘Tick box if you would like your boob personally signed by Noel Edmonds.’
I have been producing guidebooks for fifteen years and I have never thought of that.
Letters
Coasts at risk
Some of the highlights of my summer are occasional weekend camping trips with friends.
On a recent trip to Somerset, I became aware that no one was swimming along what is an impressive and beautiful stretch of coastline.
A look at the may told me why — we were just a few miles away from Hinkley Point nuclear power station.
However, according to locals, there is actually more of a risk from the conventional pollutants that are pumped into the sea than from the power station, and this stopped people swimming in it.
I find it very sad that the traditional weekend by the sea cam now be considered a health risk.
Linda Weston, London
An end to toxic algae
As a keen watersports enthusiast I was greatly alarmed to read in your news pages about the high quantities of toxic algae currently present in many of our inland waterways.
What are things coming to if it is no longer possible to spend time sailing and taking part in other water sports without subjecting yourself to the risk of such symptoms as rashes and vomiting?
Codes of practice set out by bodies such as the RYA to avoid the effects of contaminated waterways are all very well, but shouldn't we be taking direct action upon the problem itself — rather than making the best of a bad job?
I also find it quite interesting that the National Rivers Authority are urging people not to overreact to the problem.
I would have thought that overreaction would at least be preferable to the apathy currently being shown by both the government and general public alike.
I for one will be approaching my MP to see what they can do to help end this appalling threat.
Rowena Ridgeway, Wiltshire
This month the £10 prize for the best letter goes to Richard Wallis from Twickenham
Caravans spoil the view
I was very interested in your article on West Dorset in the August issue.
It is an area I have visited many times, especially the coastal areas which are superb for walking.
Although it has been designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, several things blot the landscape.
The main blot is the increasing number of caravan sites which spoil the views from Lyme Regis in the west to Abbotsbury in the east.
You don't notice them when you are in the valleys, but after an invigorating climb up Black Ven or the Golden Cap, it is a huge disappointment to be confronted by rank upon rank of square box-shaped caravans.
What is worse is that the caravans are painted white so that they stand out against the green landscape.
Of course people need places to stay when on holiday and I'm all for economical breaks such as caravanning, but I have a few suggestions which might help to improve the look of unsightly caravan parks.
Firstly they could be painted in camouflage to lessen the visual impact or alternatively, they could be dispersed among trees and in copses, so as to be out of sight from the very well used coast paths.
Better still, would be to think again about the best sort of accommodation for these sensitive areas.
Chalets made from natural materials would be a big improvement and could look really attractive.
Such chalets have been used in other parts of the country and are also common on the continent.
With the drop in agricultural support from the EC and with the policy of Set Aside taking land out of farming production, local farmers should be encouraged to use their spare land in Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty more sensitively.
Why not drop us a line here at Outdoor Action ?
We want to hear your views about any issue affecting the countryside.
A £10 prize will go to the best letter published each month.
Write to Outdoor Action , 13 Park House, 140 Battersea Park Road, London SW11 4NB.
Queries
Q I wish to take up a career in outdoor activities and am looking for information on the qualifications and training needed for this kind of work.
Whereabouts do they run courses and do you know if any centres provide training while you work?
Mark Jones, Surrey
A You'll find the Mountain-walking Leader Training Board (MLTB) a useful source of information.
They have a very comprehensive information sheet giving details of qualifications and training courses relevant to a career in outdoor pursuits.
The most basic qualification which is generally required to work anywhere is the Mountain Leader Course (summer award).
This offers training (minimum age 18) and assessment (minimum age 20), qualifying you to lead others on summer hill walks on British mountains.
The Scottish MLTB also run a winter award.
The governing bodies of other sports such as the Royal Yachting Association (RYA) and the British Canoe Union (BCU) operate similar awards to qualify you as an instructor of their own particular sport.
Contact each of these bodies directly for more details.
The Sports Council at 16 Upper Woburn Place, London WC1H 0QP.
Tel: 071 388 1277 should be able to supply you with the relevant addresses and telephone numbers.
The MLTB information sheet also lists universities and colleges which offer suitable courses and it gives a list of useful bodies to contact concerning employment in outdoor activities, eg Glenmore Lodge National Outdoor Training Centre, PGL, Outward Bound etc.
To get a copy of the information sheet contact the MLTB at Crawford House, Precinct Centre, Booth Street East, Manchester M13 9RZ.
Tel: 061 273 5835.
Q I have been trying with little success to get hold of a list of camping barn and bunkhouse type accommodations.
Do you know if such a list exists and if so where I might get hold of it?
O Edwardson, Hertfordshire
A The Countryside Commission are the people to contact.
They produce a leaflet called The Accommodation Barns Guide 1991 which contains useful information and lists of camping barns and bunkhouses grouped according to county.
This guide is available free of charge and can be obtained by sending a 4 x 8in SAE to Countryside Commission Publications.
Printworks Lane, Levenshulme, Manchester M19 3JT.
Alternatively you will also find a section on independent hostels, bunkhouses and camping barns in The Rambler's Yearbook 1991 , available from bookshops priced £3.50.
The section lists all such accommodation in the UK.
If you have a query about anything concerning the outdoor world why not write to us at Outdoor Action ?
Send your query to Outdoor Action , 13 Park House, 140 Battersea Park Road, London SW11 4NB.
Outdoor Update News
1 Walkers speak out
Walkers are challenging the government to prove their green credentials in Scotland after the shock resignation offer of a senior government conservation officer.
Sir Frederick Halliday offered to resign from his position as chair of the Joint Committee for Nature Conservation — a body set up four months ago to supervise Britain's conservation standards following the break-up of the Nature Conservancy Council.
The resignation follows a government decision to back a Scottish landowner's amendment to the Scottish National Heritage Bill (as reported in last month's issue of Outdoor Action .
The Bill, which has now received Royal Assent, will review all the Nature Conservancy Council's previous work in setting up hundreds of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Scotland.
Speaking on behalf of may walkers and climbers, the British Mountaineering Council (BMC) argue that the resignation shows a clear crisis of confidence in the government's commitment to nature conservation.
BMC Information Officer Brill Wright said ‘This is further evidence of the government's need to take new initiatives to restore its countryside and nature conservation profile.’
In practical terms they call for the government to help buy and protect the Mar Lodge Estate — 77 000 acre plot of land in the Cairngorms which has been up for sale since May.
They also want the government to support proposals for national parks in Scotland.
They are strongly opposed to the government-proposed National Heritage Areas which Wright argues would be completely ‘toothless’.
Footpaths win more cash
The Countryside Commission has contributed a grant of £75 000 towards the cost of improving Lancashire's network of footpaths and bridleways.
The sum of £30 000 will go to the Country Council's highways department for signposting and other capital costs, while £22 500 will be spent on footpath maintenance and improvement.
The grant also includes £15 000 for the appointment of two temporary staff to update maps showing legal rights of way.
Commenting on the grant, Alex Wright of the Commission said, ‘We welcome this grant and we hope it will assist Lancashire County Council in opening up the rights of way network by dealing with several major problems and paths that need modifications.’
Bird success
Birdwatchers are more likely to catch sight of Britain's largest bird of prey, the white-tailed sea eagle, following its most successful breeding season since being reintroduced in 1975.
The eagle had become extinct in Britain in 1916.
Four pairs of white-tailed sea eagles raised a record seven young at specially guarded nests in Scotland.
This brings the total number of birds in the UK to around 40.
There was mixed success however, for a similar reintroduction project for red kites.
The RSPB reports that although a record number of the birds bred in Wales this year, the number of surviving young was disappointingly low.
76 pairs of red kites nested in the valleys of south-west Wales this year but only 62 young survived to maturity — eight less than last year.
The kites' breeding success was affected by a cold wet spring, accidental disturbance and the theft of eggs from six nests.
Egg theft would have been far worse had it not been for round-the-clock protection from the army at the end of the season.
Competition prize winners
Kathryn Winkler of Dundee, your lucky number is up.
You're the winner of our July competition and will receive a wide selection of goodies from Burton Mc Call including a Karoo tent, a Snowfox sleeping bag and a pair of Trezeta Vajolet leather walking boots.
The five second prize winners, who will each receive a pair of Trezeta boots, are Grainne Lynch of Sutton, F Eatwell of Peterborough, Joanne Barwise of Whitehaven, A Huggett of Mexborough and Dave Cluley of Nottingham.
No fewer than twenty lucky readers have won our third prize of a Recta D0310 compass and a 905 Liquipak.
They are A Baker of Hasbury, N Sutton of Stone, A Brazier of Suffolk, I Forster of Newton Aycliffe, J Drake of Boxford, S Tulett of Wallsend, G Burke of Cheadle Heath, CA Fearnyough of Great Sutton, B Fenton of Farndon, Kate Doughty of Shieldaig, J Revill of West Bridgford.
J Quinton-Zorn of Salisbury, B Anderson of North Shields, Paul Wilson of South Glen, Geraint Roberts of Tynant, JE Adams of Nunthorpe, Christine Heath of Bowness-on-Windermere, S Bunn of Burnley, A Spencer-Jones of Kidderminster and M Morrison Shrewsbury in Shropshire.
If you weren't lucky in July turn to page 33 for details of yet another bumper competition with £1000 of Camping Gaz gear up for grabs.
There will be 29 winners who will each receive outdoor gear.
New walk guides are released
Footpaths in south Somerset and Kent will be easier to follow with new publications by the respective country councils.
Walks in South Somerset gives full instructions and a detailed map for
ten walks ranging from 2–1/2 to seven miles long.
It is available from the Leisure and Arts Department, South Somerset District Council Offices, Brympton Way, Yeovil, Somerset BA20 1PU.
It costs £2.35 plus 25p p&p.
The BMC are calling for urgent action to preserve some of Scotland's most beautiful countryside areas
Red kites had a mixed year
Climb for the world
Over 25 000 walkers and climbers are expected to climb as many as 600 summits in the UK in a bold initiative to support conservation and human rights around the world.
Climb For The World will take place from noon on September 21 to noon
on September 22 when participants will climb to one or more of the designated summits.
The official summits will be outlined in an OS publication which will be available in bookshops in August, and through Climb For The World registration packs.
Summits include Parliament Hill in London and the Old Man of Coniston in the Lake District National Park.
Once participants reach their chosen summits they'll be able to get their world passports, available from Climb For The World , stamped with an official commemorative stamp.
They'll also sign a ‘Plea of People's’ petition calling for world governments to cooperate with the United Nations (UN) to eradicate basic poverty by the year 2020; secure the environment against global warming, ozone depletion ‘and other grave threats to its health’; to provide enough human, financial and other resources to make sure these aims are met.
This petition will be delivered to the UN Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, at the 1992 United Nations conference on environment and development, to be held in Brazil.
At the summits there will be invigilators, primarily Venture Scouts, who will maintain a 24 hour vigil with lanterns lighting up the night sky.
Participants with experience of the wilderness will be welcome to bivouac through the night.
Registration costs £5 and a form is enclosed with this month's issue of Outdoor Action .
To coincide with the Climb For The World event there will be a major inter-continental climb of the Eiger in Switzerland.
Several teams will climb routes from all the compass points of the mountain including the North Face route.
Each team will carry a lantern and a section of the flag of flags — made up of each flag of the UN member states.
And when the teams and flag are reunited on the summit, a message from the Secretary General of the UN will be read out.
Other Climb For The World events are planned in Argentina, Kenya and Brazil.
A Canadian expedition will also be taking a Climb For The World flag to the summit of Everest.
It is hoped that £1m will be raised worldwide from the event through sponsorship and donations.
The money will help a number of UN-recommended projects worldwide including a soil erosion programme in Bolivia, a women's tree planting project in Kenya and a clean water campaign in Cambodia.
This event follows the success of a pilot Climb For The World last year.
It is hoped that the idea will snowball around the world.
It is planned to be held as an annual event until the end of the decade.
Director of Climb For The World , Edwin Drummond said ‘We are promoting the concept that we are citizens of one world.
It's about individual people realising they can do something beyond what they may normally expect to achieve.’
Further information and additional forms are available from Climb For The World, Brincliffe House, 861 Ecclesall Road, Sheffield S11 7AE.
Tel: 0742 663869.
We at Outdoor Action will be climbing one of the summits on the day.
Hope to see you out there.
News from the National Parks
Road threat in the Brecon Beacons
The Welsh Office are proposing the construction of a bypass to Crickhowell, an attractive small town to the east of the Park.
The proposals would take the bypass to the south of the town, which would involve a major new road and two river crossings of the River Usk.
The picturesque thirteen-arched stone bridge would be dwarfed by the modern bridges and the new road would encourage greater and much faster traffic.
There is much local opposition to this scheme and a public meeting has been held to get a campaign going.
The problem of traffic congestion in the town should not be solved by building a major new road through this sensitive landscape in the Brecon Beacons National Park.
Estuary survey of Shelduck
Potential conflict between recreation and its associated development and the conservation value of the beautiful Dugleddau Estuary in Pembrokeshire Coast National Park is looming large.
The National Park Authority and Dyfed Wildlife Trust have carried out a survey into the summer population of shelduck.
The results confirm the importance of the estuary for shelduck and identify particularly sensitive areas for breeding.
The data collected will be used by the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park when considering future management policies for the Estuary.
Village information scheme for Exmoor
Exmoor National Park has decided to set up information agencies in selected village shops.
These will have the dual benefit of providing an information service for visitors and supporting village shops, an essential element of the local community.
Each shop will be identified by a window sticker and leaflets will be displayed inside the shop.
The pilot scheme will involve shops in five selected villages for the first year, and if successful will be extended and developed for a further three years.
EC money boosts conservation scheme
The Yorkshire Dales National Park has been awarded a European Commission grant of more than £50 000 to help conserve the traditional Dales farming landscape.
The grant gives a significant boost to the National Park Authority's Barns and Walls Conservation Scheme to protect drystone walls and scattered stone field barns in upper Swaledale and Arkengarthdale.
The demand for grants has consistently outstripped the National Park Authority funds.
News supplied by the Council for National Parks 
It is hoped that £1m will be raised through events staged in this country and across the rest of the world
Walkers protest for greater access
Members of the Ramblers' Association (RA) recently staged a symbolic trespass on Thurlstone Moor in the Peak District in a move which heralds a more militant approach to increasing access to some of Britain's most beautiful countryside.
Through this mini trespass the RA are hoping to encourage hundreds of members to stage a mass trespass on the moor on September 29, as part of Forbidden Britain Day — an annual event with nationwide protest walks calling for greater access to the countryside.
But this is the first time that RA members are being so actively encouraged to trespass.
And the momentum is set to continue after the day of protest with the publication of a trespass guide to the Thurlstone Moor area.
Chris Hall of the RA said this will be the first in a series of ‘mini-trespass guides’ to closed land around the country.
He said the RA expected it to be long campaign but were prepared to give it as long as it took to secure their aims.
‘Trespassing is not a criminal offence and we want more people to understand that.
It is a weapon of last resort where landowners and grouse shooters are unreasonably keeping walkers out of parts of the Britain's countryside.’
News in brief 
Wildlife booklet
The Forestry Commission have published a new booklet Forests for Wildlife which details some of the wildlife conservation projects the commission carries out around the country.
Copies are available free from Forestry Commission District Offices or by contacting the Public Information Division, Forestry Commission, 231 Corstrophine Road, Edinburgh.
Tel: 031 334 0303.
Bike challenge Polaris All-terrain Clothing are hosting a unique mountain bike event on October 5–6 this year.
The MTB Challenge is a two day self-supported trip across a wilderness area testing two-person teams, their bike skill, endurance and abilities to survive.
Full details are available by sending a large SAE to: Polaris International, MTB Challenge, 87 Hollin Springs Avenue, Dronfield, Sheffield S18 6RP.
Special dinghy
Diana Campell, originator of special trimaran dinghy for disabled sailors, has just launched the updated Challenger II at Cowes.
She went on to officially hand it over to OXRAD, the disabled sailing group based at Farmoor Reservoir near Oxford.
Diana, herself a keen sailor despite being confined to a wheelchair for the last 45 years, hopes the boat will encourage more disabled people onto the water.
Green grants
The Open Spaces Society, Britain's oldest national conservation society, has awarded grants from its Creech Jones Fund to local groups from Blackpool, Bournemouth, Southampton, Crawley, Dulwich and Bovingdon for their efforts to protect threatened open space.
Army attacked
The Ramblers' Association (RA) have condemned as ‘shameful’ the government's approval of an army plan to take over for training 900 acres of common land at Holcombe near Bury, Manchester.
David Beskine of the RA said ‘This is not private land but open moorland over which the public has for many years had a right to roam.
The public will now be denied their rights.’
Trust launched
The Kent Times-side Groundwork Trust was officially launched in July this year.
The Trust aims to create a better living and working environment in the boroughs of Gravesham and Dartford by promoting conservation action.
It was set up in partnership with local authorities, industry, businesses and community and voluntary groups to produce effective solutions to environmental problems in north-west Kent.
The launch took place at the site of the Trust's first major project, a disused clay pit at Bean, near Dartford, where work has started to create an 80 acre country park.
In a message of support Michael Heseltine, Secretary of State for the Environment said ‘I am confident that the Trust can play a major role in the regeneration of the area.’
Bellamy opens youth hostel
YHA hostel Ilam Hall in the Peak District National Park has been reopened following major refurbishment to the tune of £472 000.
The hostel, located in a National Trust country mansion, was officially reopened by YHA President David Bellamy.
Bellamy led over 200 children on a nature trail around the grounds of the hostel before cutting the ribbon to declare the hostel officially open.
Work to modernise and improve Ilam Hall took place during the last two winters.
A wing was converted in keeping with the existing architecture of the hall to provide accommodation for families and disabled guests.
Toilet and shower facilities were improved and a new cafeteria was also built.
Work at Ilam Hall is part of an ongoing YHA programme to refurbish its hostels.
Veteran campaigner Benny Rothman (left) leads fellow trespassers across Thurlstone Moor in Derbyshire
Countryside under threat
Urgent government action is needed to stop proposed wind farms being built on some of Britain's most beautiful countryside, according to a report from the Council for National Parks (CNP).
Proposed sites for wind farms include areas bordering on the Yorkshire Dales, Lake District and Snowdonia National Parks.
There is also a plan for over a 100 turbines in the Cambrian Mountains in Wales.
Amanda Nobbs of CNP says one of the major problems stems from the government subsidies offered to wind farm developers.
As these will stop in 1998, developers are favouring projects which give a rapid return on their investments.
This means building farms in higher areas where the wind is strongest, but which are unfortunately some of Britain's best areas of countryside.
Nobbs argues that the problem has been compounded because the government hasn't issued any planning advice to guide the industry.
In the report CNP calls for a number of proposals including — abandoning the 1998 deadline for renewable energy subsidies; enabling grants to run for 15 years from the start of any one project; issuing planning policy guidance on how to deal with planning applications, and giving encouragement to offshore wind generation which they claim could provide 50% of energy needs.
The report warns that unless the government acts quickly much of the natural heritage could be severely damaged.
Gravel pits help wildlife
Excavation of sand and gravel may scar the landscape but it does increase habitats for wildlife.
This is the conclusion of a new RSPB report Gravel pit restoration for wildlife — a practical manual .
Over 3700 acres of land each year are left available for other uses following excavation work by industry.
In the last 40 years an estimated 25 000 acres of these scarred landscapes have been flooded, providing important nesting and roosting sites for many waterbirds.
Over 50 per cent of the little ringed plovers in the UK nest on gravel pits, as do a third of great crested grebes and just under a third of the tufted duck population.
The flooded pits also provide a suitable habitat for other types of wildlife such as otters, fish, bats, butterflies and dragonflies.
The guide also suggests how excavated areas can be made into wildlife havens through the addition of features such as trees, islands and marshy areas.
An RSPB spokesperson commented: ‘careful planning and design can produce attractive sites which are enjoyed by people and wildlife.’
Call for more open spaces
A new document concerning the future of open spaces in London has just been published.
It is the result of research by four leading environmental organisations concerned with planning in the City — the Countryside Commission, English Nature, the London Ecology Unit and the London Wildlife Trust.
The document has been launched to aid borough councils throughout the capital as they draw up development plans for the future of the City.
It calls for councils to adopt key policies in their current planning which will affect the future of the city until the year 2000.
The Green Capital document urges that Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land be protected, wildlife sites safeguarded and the management of greenspaces improved.
It also calls for reduction in the amount of pollution, greater protection and planting of trees and easier access to greenspace.
Environmentalists believe that the mere designation of areas as greenspaces is insufficient.
The argue that if the environment is to be properly safeguarded policies must be formulated which will encourage favourable ongoing management.
Pop star stops stag hunt
An 84 acre commercial conifer woodland near Exmoor has been bought by Paul McCartney and given to the League Against Cruel Sports as a sanctuary against hunting.
News of McCartney's intention to give the woodland, known as Sir John's Allotment, to the anti hunt protesters was strategically released just days before the opening meet of the Devon and Somerset Stag Hounds.
The purchase of the land is believed to have cost McCartney around £140,000, and was inspired by his keenness ‘to stop this barbaric so-called ‘sport’.
Commenting on his purchase, McCartney is said to be delighted that the land is now ‘free from the huntsmen.’
However other reactions have been less positive.
One local farmer commented that for McCartney to put an end to the hunt might not necessarily be in the best interests of the deer.
He said ‘The farmers have always tolerated the hunt because it controls the deer, but whenever it's stopped the deer have died have died out very quickly.
I'm sure that's not what the McCartneys want.’
New grants
Grants to help offset the out-of-pocket expenses incurred by volunteers in geological conservation work have been announced by English Nature — the English branch of the now disbanded Nature Conservancy Council.
Money will help volunteers involved in an English Nature initiative.
RIGS (Regionally Important Geological Sites)— set up to build a network of local voluntary groups to collect geological information on their areas.
This includes identifying sites of particular importance and liaising with local authorities, site owners and tenants to improve protection and access.
English Nature will be offering up to £500 per RIGS group, once information on the key sites has been passed to the relevant planning departments.
Badger victory
Wildlife campaigners are celebrating after winning an 18 year fight to protect badgers from badger baiting.
A new bill, which will become law in October, will close a legal loophole which allows unscrupulous badger diggers to avoid prosecution by claiming they are digging for foxes.
The bill will also stop landowners and developers from bulldozing badger  setts.
Wind farms could soon become an unsightly blot on Britain's landscape
Top treks
Britain's long distance paths offer some of the most wonderful countryside.
Cathering Moore picks six of the very best
Over 300 long distance backpacking routes wind their way around Britain and we've picked out six of the best for you to try.
We've deliberately stayed away from the official national trails in England, Scotland and Wales.
The national trails, including paths like the Pennine Way, the Pembrokeshire Coast Path and the West Highland Way, tend to be the best known routes and deserve a rest after the summer of pounding they had.
Anyway, they represent only a fraction of the long distance paths Britain has to offer.
The paths we've chosen are all recognised long-distance routes and some are waymarked for their entire length.
They're all fine routes for backpacking holidays but local youth hostels or bed and breakfasts are also available.
At least one guidebook giving precise route descriptions has been written about each of the walks and without exception they'll take you through some of the loveliest countryside we have.
The Cambrian Way
Start: Cardiff Castle
Finish: Conwy Castle
Distance: 274 miles
This is a  grandaddy of a long distance path which traverses Wales through some stunning and remote mountain country.
This high level route is not for the faint hearted — as well as being longer than the Pennine Way it involves much more climbing.
It should only be tackled by fit walkers who know what they're doing with a map and compass.
From Cardiff the route snakes up through the valleys south of Caerphilly, over the Ebbw River, through the Ebbw Forest and on via the mining town of Risca to Pontypool.
The Way continues up into the Black Mountains going over Sugar Loaf and up onto the main escarpment.
Crossing over Table Mountain the Way goes into the Brecon Beacons via the small market town of Crickhowell.
Here you get to scale some classic Welsh summits like Corn Du and Pen y Fan.
It's spectacular wild country.
From the mountains it's on to stunning waterfalls as you follow the Afon Hellte to Ystradfellte.
However it's soon back to mountains as the Way enters Mynydd Ddu, the Black Mountain region.
Here are the hauntingly beautiful lakes, Llyn y fan fawr and Lyn y fan fach and the windswept ridge of Fan Hir.
From Mynydd Ddu the Way pushes northwards through the town of Llandovery and up into the Cambrian Mountains, passing close to the shores of the huge reservoir, Llyn Brianne.
Despite its beauty this whole area is little visited.
This loneliness makes it an ideal home for the red kite — a  rare and nervous bird.
If you are lucky enough to see one, observe it from a distance.
You'll be moving into largely featureless moorland here so compass skills are necessary as you make your way up to the Teifi pools which feed the Teifi river.
From here it's on to Plynlimon with its high point of Pen Pumlumon Fawr at just under 2500ft.
Close by are the sources of the rivers Severn and Wye.
More classic Welsh scenery lies to the north as the Way continues on to Cader Idris in the Snowdonia National Park.
And to get to its end point of Conwy Castle you travel right through the heart of Snowdonia taking a stunning high level route crossing peaks like Rhinog Fach, Rhinog Fawr, Glyder Fawr and Snowdon itself.
It's a tough section to finish on but the rewards are tremendous.
And at the end of it all you'll really know Wales.
A Cambrian Way by Richard Sale.
£8.99.
Constable.
Two Moors Way
Start: Ivybridge
Finish: Lynmouth
Distance: 102 miles
This route gives you a good flavour of the West Country.
It starts at Ivybridge in south Devon, takes you over the wilds of Dartmoor through mid-Devon and on across Exmoor to finish at the coastal resort of Lynmouth.
The walk is waymarked for some of its length — look out for the MW symbol.
However there are no waymarks where the route crosses open moorland so it's best if you can use a map and compass.
The terrain is very varied from the great expanse of Dartmoor to the gentler stretch of Exmoor.
And the route passes through wooded river valleys and along green lanes.
Some road walking is included especially in the middle section between moors.
It is acceptable to wild camp on Dartmoor provided you're around a mile away from a road.
If you prefer not to go camping you'll find youth hostels at Bellever, Exford and Lynton.
This is a walk full of interest aside from the scenery.
On your first day you'll cross Ugborough  Moor and see several bronze age stone rows and hut circles.
The Way runs next to one of the best preserved bronze age enclosures on Dartmoor at Grimspound.
Further north and nearby on Hamel Down you'll find ancient burial mounds.
You'll also see remnants of Dartmoor's obsolete industries, warrening/rabbit breeding — and tin mining.
After following field tracks and minor roads across mid-Devon, passing through quaint villages, you arrive in Exmoor.
As well as sections through open moorland a lovely stretch of the walk follows the River Barle through rich woodland to Tarr Steps.
Two Moors Way by Devon Ramblers' Association.
£1.20 plus 40p postage
and packaging.
Available from The Ramblers' Association, 1–5 Wandsworth Road, London SW8 2XX.
Tel: 071 582 6878.
The Cumbria Way
Start: Ulverston
Finish: Carlisle
Distance: 70 miles
The Cumbria Way is a marvellous route running from south to north across the Lake District National Park.
It's large a low level route, sticking to valley bottoms and passes rather to going up on the fells.
As you'd expect in this part of the world, the route passes through spectacular countryside.
The route follows public footpaths and bridleways for the most part which are signed conventionally with yellow marks for footpaths, blue for bridleways.
From the south the route leaves Ulverston near Morecambe Bay and makes its way up to Coniston Water where there's some wonderful lakeside walking.
The lovely scenery continues as the walk travels along woodland paths to reach the little lake of Tarn Hows and goes on past Elterwater to Dungeon Ghyll.
Walking over Mickleden the route leads up to Stake Pass and goes around the shores of Derwent Water to Keswick.
From Keswick to Way goes to Carlisle via Caldbeck, passing over the lower slopes of Latrigg and the highest point of the Cumbria Way at High Pike (2159ft).
Woodland routes and paths following first the River Cardew, then a railway line, lead you to Carlisle.
You could backpack the route or stay at youth hostels as there are plenty nearby — Coniston, Elterwater, Longthwaite, Derwent Water, Keswick, Carnock Fell and Carlisle.
The Cumbria Way by John Trevelyan, £3.50.
Dalesman.
Isle of Man Coastal Path
Start/Finish: Any coastal town
Distance: 96 miles
The Isle of Man Coastal Path or Raad ny Foillan (Way of the Gull) is a route that doesn't get half the publicity it deserves.
It's easy to follow, hugging the coastline and waymarked with white gull signs.
It takes you across lonely beaches and over wild cliff-tops.
If you're not camping there are plenty of b&bs in the coastal towns.
Many people choose to start the walk going south from Douglas, the island's capital.
It doesn't take long once you've left town before you're walking along the cliff-path with spectacular views.
The first stretch to Castletown takes you past sights such as the smugglers' hideout at Jackdaw Cave and a treat for birdwatchers at Derby Haven where huge flocks of birds feed in the bay.
Birdwatchers should also stop to look at The Stack on Scarlett Point — a favourite with seabirds.
At times where there is no clifftop or beach path the route heads across fields and minor roads.
One of the most spectacular parts of the route is on the stretch from Port St Mary to Port Erin where the rocky cliffs soar from the sea.
The Chasms, an area designated by the Manx National Trust for ‘Public Ramblage’, is especially breathtaking.
And offshore rocks like the Sugarloaf and Burroo Rock add interest.
Moving on from Port Erin there's a mountain section over the three summits of Bredda Hill, Lhiattee ny Beinee and Cronk ny Arrey Las with the western sides of the hills falling down into the west side of the island to Point of Ayre there are long sections of lonely beach walks.
You round the Point to make your way south to Douglas — first on beaches, then on cliff and meadow paths.
The Isle of Man Coastal Path by Aileen Evans £4.95.
Cicerone Press.
The guide also includes descriptions of the other two long distance paths on the Isle of Man — the Millennium Way and the Herring Way.
The Dales Way
Start: Ilkley
Finish: Bowness-on-Windermere
Distance: 81 miles
The Dales Way is an especially beautiful walk through the Yorkshire  Dales and the south-eastern Lake District.
In the south the route follows the River Wharfe, going on to follow the River Dee and River Lune before finishing up at Lake Windermere.
Though it travels through some wonderful hill country the Way isn't a tough route — much of it follows level footpaths with plenty of riverside walking.
If you're not camping there are bed and breakfasts along the route and youth hostels at Linton, Kettlewell, Dentdale, Kendal and Windermere.
There are also six camping barns along the route.
From the start of the Dales Way at Ilkley Bridge the path travels beside the River Wharfe passing Haw Pike and following woodland paths near Bolton Priory.
The path continues to the Strid — a spectacular chasm where the Wharfe reaches a frantic pace.
More riverside and woodland paths lead to the town of Grassington, continuing on to Buckden.
This action of the Way passes through wonderful limestone scenery including the impressive mass of Kilnsey Crag.
The Way then leads to Langstrothdale over to Oughtershaw and carries on to cross a section of the Pennine Way, giving fine views of the Three Peaks en route.
The path continues along Dentdale and follows the course of the River Dee, pretty waterfalls characterising its upper reaches.
Following next the River Lune, the Way goes into the Lake District.
The final miles are among the best of the whole route through Lakeland fells giving marvellous views of Windermere.
The Dales Way by Colin Speakman. £3.95.
Dalesman Books.
Dales Way Handbook (gives accommodation information) 75p plus 30p postage from Ramblers' Association, 1–5 Wandsworth Road, London SW8 2XX.
Tel 071 582 6878.
The Isle of Wight coast path
Start/Finish: any coastal town
Distance: 65 miles
This is a gentle and beautiful route ideal for the whole family.
If you're backpacking there are many campsites to choose from, especially on the more popular east side of the island.
And there are three convenient youth hostels open throughout the year at Totland Bay, Whitwell and Sandown.
As you'd expect on the Isle of Wight there's an endless list of bed and breakfasts.
The path is waymarked throughout its length and for the most part sticks to the coast, running over the chalk and sandstone cliffs which characterise the island.
Most people arrive on the island on the north side and from here it's best to travel east and walk from the port of Ryde over to the town of Seaview and down to Sandown.
The route follows minor roads, woodland paths, paths across fields and cliff-tops as you cross Whitecliff Bay to reach Sandown.
The section to the next town of Shanklin is built-up but the route improves dramatically on the way to and out of Ventnor.
As you approach St Catherine's Point and make your way up towards the Needles you'll fully appreciate the true beauty of this much lonelier west and south section.
Avoid Blackgang Chine which is over-commercialised and continue on to see some of the other chines — dramatic fissures in the cliff faces — such as Whale, Walpen and Shepherd's Chine.
Soon the route arrives at Tennyson Down, one of the highlights of the route, and on to Alum Bay which looks out over the chalky points of the Needles.
The path winds its way around the Newtown river and Clamerkin Lake providing some fine estuary walking and taking you inland a little.
Further to the north you take the ferry across from East to West Cowes to avoid a big detour inland via Newport.
The Isle of Wight Coastal Path by Alan Charles.
£3.95.
Thornhill
Best of the rest
Viking Way
140 mile route over Lincolnshire Wolds from the Humber Bridge to Oakham, Leicester.
Guide:The Viking Way by John Stead.
£5.95.
Cicerone
Coast to Coast Walk
Wainwright's classic 190 mile cross country walk from St Bees Head to Robin Hood's Bay.
Guide:A Coast to Coast Walk by A Wainwright.
£7.95.
Westmoreland Gazette.
Cotswold Way
Chipping Campden to Bath, a 100 mile route over the Cotswold Hills.
Guide:The Cotswold Way by Kev Reynolds.
£5.95.
Cicerone.
Glyndwr's Way
A 120 mile waymarked route from Knighton to Welshpool, mid-Wales.
Guide: Series of 16 leaflets and accommodation list, £2 from Powys County Council, County Hall, Llandridnod Wells, Powys LD1 5LE.
Heart of England Way An 80 mile route from Cannock Chase to Chipping Camden.
Guide The Heart of England Way Walkers Guide by The Heart of England Way Steering Committee.
£1.60.
Thornhill Press.
Forth and Clyde Canal
A 29 mile walk following paths from Bowling to Falkirk.
Guide: leaflet describing the canal from Forth and Clyde Countryside Ranger, British Waterways Board, Applecross Street, Glasgow G4 9SP.
Tel: 041 332 6936.
Wye Valley Walk
Beautiful, easy 75 mile walk from Chepstow to Hay on Wye.
Guide: Maps and route description £3.60 + 50p postage and packing from County Planning Officer, Gwent County Council, County Hall, Cwmbran, Gwent NP44 2XF.
Tel: 0633 832787.
Dyfi Valley Way
A 108 mile route along the lovely valley of the Afon Dyfi from Aberdyfi to Borth.
Guide:Guide to the Dyfi Valley Way by Lawrence Main.
£3.95.
Kittiwake Press.
Nidderdale Way
a 53 mile circular walk following the valley of the River Nidd.
Guide:Nidderdale Way by J K E Piggin. £2.95.
Dalesman Books.
White Peak Way
An 80 mile circular walk through the white peak area designed for walkers staying at youth hostels.
Start at Bakewell or Hathersage Youth Hostels.
Guide:The White Peak Way by Robert Haslam. £3.95.
Cicerone Press.
Fact file
Useful books
The Ramblers' Yearbook 1991 .
£3.50.
Ramblers' Association.
Long Distance Walkers' Handbook .
£7.95.
Long Distance Walkers' Association/A & C Black.
Contacts
Long Distance Walkers' Association .
For details send an SAE to membership secretary: Kevin Uzzell, 7 Ford Drive, Yarnfield, Stone ST15 0RP.
Long Distance Paths Advisory Service .
If you have questions about any
aspect of long distance walking routes contact: Gerald Cole, Administrator, Long Distance Paths Advisory Service, The Barn, Holme Lyon, Burneside, Kendal, Cumbria LA9 6QX.
Tel: 0539 927837.
The Cambrian Way takes in the best of Welsh hill country.
Here walkers travel in the shadow of Cribyn (left) and Pen y Fan in the Brecon Beacons
The Two Moors Way in Devon
Langdale is just one of the highlights of the spectacular Cumbria way
The Isle of Man coastal path at Bradda Head gives views to the Calf of Man
Looking to the impressive Kilnsey Crag on the Dales Way in Wharfedale
Freshwater Bay, Isle of Wight
News in focus Scotland
New property presents challenge for conservation group
The John Muir Trust needs to get the balance right.
Rennie McOwan reports
The sunshine on the Isle of Skye earlier this year was hotter than in Bombay.
But it was not just the short-lived weather which sent spirits soaring.
The rapidly growing John Muir Trust in Scotland had just bought the Torrin Estate on Skye.
The Torrin Estate provides a major challenge for the Trust because living communities exist alongside beautiful scenery.
As well as great views, it is home to a crofting community and a quarry.
Prince Charles is Patron of the Trust and is full of praise for its activities to date.
In a patron's letter delivered by video to the Trust's annual general meeting and repeated in full in the recent newsletter, Prince Charles said ‘The recent purchase of the Torrin estate is the best possible demonstration of what the Trust is all about.
A wonderful limestone landscape and its specialised flora will now be well-catered for, in co-operation with the crofting community’.
He also mentioned the increasing number of visitors to the hills, disturbance to wildlife, changing landscape and ugly estate tracks (of which Balmoral estate has some prime examples).
The Prince calls for everyone to realise that it is time to take adequate stock of such landscapes, our collective effect upon it and our responsibilities towards it.
I have written before about the controversy raised in Scotland over the National Trust for Scotland's mountain properties and breaking the ‘rules’ set by its mountaineering benefactor Percy Unna, who wanted the hills kept natural.
Prince Charles comments on this in the John Muir Newsletter and refers to Unna's wishes first expressed 50 years ago.
He says ‘His rules made good sense then and they make better sense now as the pressures grow inexorably, yet they have been ignored in certain sensitive areas, with results which are both plain and heart-rending to see.’
Prince Charles also supported the Torrin purchase financially.
The Trust's initial appeal to members raised £31,000.
Substantial cash help has also come from the National Heritage Memorial Fund (£40,000), the Countryside Commission for Scotland (£40,000), the Christopher Brasher Trust (£30,000) and many others.
Andrew Thompson has been appointed conservation officer with financial help from CCS, the World Wide Fund for Nature and the outdoor firm Graham Tiso.
For those who love wild places and are concerned for their management, the John Muir Trust presents an endearing and attractive face.
The Trustees include widely experienced people and it is good to see Jim Hunter of Skye — crofting expert, historian and author of the definitive book The Making of the Crofting Community — heading the management committee for Torrin, which also includes the energetic national director, Terry Isles of Dundee.
The Trust looks like becoming the premier wilderness organisation in Scotland.
If you want to join the John Muir Trust or help with the Torrin appeal, write to: Keith Anderson, Membership Secretary, FREEPOST, John Muir Trust, Edinburgh EH9 0LX.
Glen Coe Still on conservation issues, it came as a pleasant surprise to many when the news leaked that the Countryside Commission for Scotland, who built and own the controversial visitors centre on National Trust for Scotland ground in Glen Coe, had recommended that the centre be moved.
A consultant's report, which was not made public, put forward three options.
Firstly, that the centre and car parking be extended, secondly that the centre and parking space be removed entirely and the ground restored to its natural state and thirdly, that the centre be moved to the area of Ballachulish and Glen Coe villages, where there are already buildings and a tourism infrastructure.
This would reduce the Glen Coe parking space and keep the original building solely for rangers and related activities.
Much of the glen is owned by NTS and there has been increasing adverse publicity recently over a vast upsurge in visitor numbers, the centre's failure to stop indiscriminate car parking up and down the glen and increased mountain erosion.
The centre was also criticised for being in breach of the ‘Unna Rules’, which state that there should be no artificial structures on the property and no facilities for food and drink.
At this stage, the National for Scotland's response to the CCS decision is unknown.
This writer would certainly have preferred the option for moving everything out of the main glen, but the fact that the centre is now seen as being a mistake is encouraging and the partial solution is vastly better than the centre being a rapidly-growing monster.
Bennachie I recently reported the appointment of Fred Gordon as Gordon District Council's Ranger at Bennachie, that prominent hill near Inverurie.
Now comes the Bailies of Bennachie, the voluntary body which helps look after the hill, has almost topped an astonishing 4000.
Bennachie (pronounced pain-ah-hee) must be one of the most cared-for hills in the country.
It has an almost mystical appeal for north-east people, with its prominent blue peaks attracting the eye from so many quarters.
Life membership of the Bailies is at the bargain price of £1 (yet they say north-east folk are mean!)
Prince Charles, Patron of the John Muir Trust, gave financial support to help buy the Torrin Estate
Weekender Pembrokeshire
Pembrokeshire
Heather Barrett discovers stunning walks and great cycle routes in the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park
Cliffs along the rugged coast, golden sands, estuaries, wooded valleys, hills and harbours are just some of the features which make Pembrokeshire an area of such outstanding beauty.
The scenery is breathtaking and the feeling of isolation and ruggedness is easily found.
Pembrokeshire — Penfro in Welsh — translates as ‘Land's End’ and today lies within the new county of Dyfed, named after the ancient Welsh kingdom.
In 1952 a unique national park was created here.
Apart from being one of the smallest (225 square miles) of the 11 national parks in England and Wales, the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park is also the only park in Britain which is largely coastal and mainly covering lowland areas.
The area is quite densely populated and the majority continues to be actively farmed.
Many visitors naturally come to walk part of the 180-mile coast path which meanders around the peninsula, threading past high clifftops and dropping  into a succession of sandy beaches, rocky coves and inlets.
Opened 20 years ago, the Pembrokeshire Coast Path is a paradise for walkers, bird watchers and nature lovers.
The nearest island, Ramsey, is a nature reserve with superb seal and seabird colonies while to the south are the seabird islands of Skokholm and Skomer.
Far out to sea lies the gannet colony of Grassholm.
Inland the wild and vast Presely Hills which dominate the area are well worth exploring.
On top of these ancient hills, which are over 400 million years old, you will be rewarded by magnificent panoramic views.
Milford Haven lies to the south with the Bristol Channel and Lundy Island beyond.
To the west it is possible to see the Wicklow Mountains in Ireland and you can sometimes see the peaks of Snowdonia to the north.
Although justifiably most famous for the coast path there are plenty of other outdoor activities to enjoy in Pembrokeshire.
The dramatic headland of St Govan's Head is a firm favourite with climbers and there are many bridlepaths and riding schools.
The impressive tidal rapids of The Bitches have gained the region an international reputation for first class sea canoeing.
There are also calmer coastline stretches where novices and experts practise all kinds of watersports from windsurfing to jetskiing.
Inland there are attractive narrow rivers for gentle canoeing.
The area is steeped in history.
The first people to reach this remote peninsula were the Old Stone Age people who sought shelter in caves such as Hoyle's Mouth near Tenby and Priory Farm Cave at Monkton.
Through the ages these western seaways have been used as a highway by settlers and saints, pilgrims and pirates and traders and travellers.
Early settlers built large burial chambers and the solitary standing stones are memorials to the people who, it is believed, transported Bluestones from the Presely Hills to Stonehenge 4000 years ago.
Tenby was the first resort in the region to attract tourists and was fashionable in Georgian times.
Today it retains much of its charm and is a lively place full of good restaurants, cafés and pubs.
I was surprised at the mild temperatures in St David's and the surrounding areas.
While the rest of Britain was shivering in one of the most sodden, miserable June months on record, the west coast of Wales had been sizzling through a heatwave.
According to locals this is not unusual.
Although surrounded on three sides by the sea the warming influence of the North Atlantic helps give mild winters and good summers.
But take waterproofs just the same as rainfall is usually high — up to 60 inches a year in the Presely Hills.
The region's exposed position also means it's often notoriously windy.
Good weather is an added bonus but the real appeal is the fantastic variety of landscape within a compact area.
This makes it one of the most spectacular parts of Britain to visit.
Coast walk around Wooltack Point
One of the nicest things about walking around coastline peninsulas is that it is often easy to stick to the coastline without doubling back on yourself at the end.
We parked in the small village of Marloes and planned our route on the map.
We wanted to walk around as much of the coastline as we could in several hours.
We headed onto a small lane which took us straight towards Marloes' magnificent sands.
We were then on the coast path, near an old abandoned aerodrome and could see ahead in the distance Wooltack Point near a cluster of islands.
It was hot and sunny and the sea was as calm as a lake.
Keeping to the coast path — which goes very near the edge in places without any safety ropes — we passed close by Gateholm Island before meandering past craggy rockfaces.
The sea was far below and the view terrific.
Several times we spotted seals basking in the calm waters.
They would lie for hours, hardly moving, before a sudden noise startled them and they instinctively dived for cover.
Schools of porpoise, dolphin and sometimes even turtles can also be seen but we weren't so lucky that day.
However the birds were spectacular.
This is a fantastic place for birdwatchers — puffin, falcon, raven, gannet, guillemot and cormorants, to name but a few, make their homes along the coastline and on its islands for part of the year.
When we stopped for a picnic lunch we were pestered by a cheeky jackdaw which squabbled with seagulls for its share in the scraps of our sandwiches.
We reached a deer park almost on the Point but unfortunately didn't see any deer.
On the outermost point of the peninsula we  could see straight over to Midland Isle and just beyond that to Skomer Island.
Skomer itself is primarily a seabird reserve with over 320 000 birds and is owned and maintained by the Countryside Council for Wales.
We continued on to Musselwick Sands, where bathers were enjoying the beach.
And then, invigorated by the fresh air and natural beauty, we headed back towards Marloes.
Bike ride from Fishguard into the Presely Hills
Most visitors to this region concentrate on the coast but it is worthwhile heading inland where a large network of lanes provides some quiet cycling.
However it is important to avoid the A roads which are too narrow and busy to be much fun.
If you leave them behind and take to the lanes you'll rarely see a car.
We decided on a 25 mile circuit from Fishguard through the Presely Hills which offered a mixture of bare hillsides, wooded valleys and pastoral scenes of hedgerows and farms.
Soon after setting off we came to a forested valley along the banks of the Gwaun.
Large wooded areas are rare in Pembrokeshire due to the strong winds and salt spray, but Cwm Gwaun, a few miles east of Fishguard, is one of the notable exceptions to the rule.
We then cycled uphill to the town of Rosebush with its deserted slate quarries.
This is quite a steady climb but well worth it for the superb views.
From the heights of Foel-cwmcerwyn, just to the east, you are supposed to be able to see Exmoor, Snowdonia and the Wicklow Mountains in Ireland.
But the worsening weather conditions as we cycled destroyed any possibility of us seeing such stunning views.
We skirted the artificial Llys y-fran reservoir and chose a route back on the tiny lanes which connect the farms.
Most of these lanes have grass down the middle, testifying to the light traffic.
We timed the ride well because just as we cycled back into Fishguard the sky darkened and yet another downpour drove us none too reluctantly into a tearoom.
Walk from St David's around peninsula
No visit to this area is complete without a walk around one of Wales' most famous headlands.
We started with breakfast in St David's, the smallest cathedral city in Britain.
Before starting the walk we couldn't resist a peek at the 12th century Norman Cathedral, the oldest in Wales.
Suitably inspired by such a religious and historic atmosphere we rambled down the lane for a mile and a half towards Whitesand.
This is where many people choose to start the walk around one of the oldest geological areas in Britain — there is a large car park near the one mile long beach.
With a fair breeze blowing in from the sea, we kept the majestic peninsula in sight as we headed along the coast path.
Surprisingly there were few other walkers around, just a couple of locals walking their dogs.
The path was narrow and rocky in parts but caused no difficulties.
I'd heard it was a lovely area but wasn't prepared for its rugged beauty.
The flowers were amazing.
Bank upon bank of thrift and proud long-stemmed daisies intermingled with huge expanses of gorse and foxgloves.
It was a spectacular sight — the best I've had of wild flowers in Britain.
There were also remnants of late bluebells which were well past their best but must have been magnificent in spring.
Later in summer heather and bracken also cover the clifftops.
The mild climate and the many different habitats support a wide variety of birds and flowers, butterflies and moths.
We saw evidence of what would later promise to be a riot of butterflies with entire bushes covered by baby caterpillars and chrysalises.
We also saw several foxes' earths but weren't lucky enough to get even a glimpse of the inhabitants.
We stopped for a breather at Porthmelgan, a small sheltered beach tucked in on the south of the headland, before starting down the hill to look at the outline of St David's Head with its craggy 500 million year old rocks.
Just before leaving the path we heard a frantic rustle and spied a baby adder slithering away.
It was tiny but a reminder that there are still poisonous snakes in the region — a fact which is all too easy to forget.
Before reaching St David's Head we passed a massive rampart of stone stretching 200ft from cliff to cliff.
This was originally a defence system, known as Warrior's Dyke, which isolated the headland from attackers — another reminder of how vulnerable the spot was in ancient times.
The walk to the Head was easy, the views spectacular.
We could see right out to Ramsey Island and the deadly line of rocks known as The Bitches.
It's easy to sit up here for hours, feeling fresh and invigorated and envying the local people their beautiful surroundings, but we were keen to press on and see a Stone Age burial chamber sited just off the path.
The cap stone is about 12ft by 9ft and is supported by other stones.
Here we debated whether to abandon our planned route and continue along the coastline.
But time didn't permit and we reluctantly headed slightly inland, through fields, along dirt tracks and past more burial chambers, walking parallel to our earlier route back to the car.
Above: the craggy coastline offers new treasures at every turn.
Right: the deer park looking at St David's Head
Mountains in focus
Czechoslovak Tatras
Few countries can rival Czechoslovakia for mountain scenery.
Whether it's walking, skiing or climbing, the Tatras are definitely the place to go
Tourist Offices
Cedok is the official Czechoslovak travel agency — 17/18 Old Bond Street, London W1X 4RB.
For general enquiries and advice for independent travellers telephone the 24 hour answering service: 071 629 6058.
There are Cedok offices in most of the large towns in Czechoslovakia.
We recommend contacting Cedok once you know where you want to go as they can arrange package holidays as well as provide a great deal of information for the independent traveller.
Visas and Bureaucracy
The requirement of a visa was dropped in October 1990 as was the requirement to spend a set amount of money per day.
In the past you had to spend around £12 per day.
This proved almost impossible when camping, even eating all your meals in restaurants.
Language
There are two main languages in Czechoslovakia — Czech and Slovak — which are very similar and can be understood by anyone who speaks either.
Russian has been forced upon the country and many people are fluent.
Since the revolution however there has been an urgency to learn English, especially among the younger generation.
A few words of Czech or Slovak learned beforehand will certainly be a great help and in the cities German is often understood.
Where to Walk
The best known walking and skiing area in the country is the High Tatras in Slovakia.
It is very spectacular but tends to get crowded these days.
The main town in the area is Tatranská Lomnica — a good centre for skiing in the winter months and walking throughout the year.
The Low Tatra mountains and the Slovenský Raj National Park on the other hand remain more of a well-kept secret.
The easiest way to get there is by train from Prague.
The stations at Vydrník, Letanovce and Spisské Tomásovce just past the large town of Poprad in Slovakia will all leave you near campsites on the edge of the Slovenský Raj.
It is definitely worth flying to Prague and taking a few days to look around before you travel across the country to Slovakia.
Prague is a spectacular city with its churches, museums, castles and street after street of baroque — and many other — style buildings, many more than 200 years old with the façades at least still in good condition.
When to Go
The Low Tatras are accessible all-year round though you won't be able to do much walking in the winter.
It's best to go walking from May through to September.
Skiing is possible in winter.
How to Get There
There are daily flights to Prague by BA, tel: 081 897 4000 and CSA the Czechoslovak airline, tel: 071 255 1898.
The APEX fare is £222 return with either airline.
Rail travel to Prague costs only slightly less than going by air.
Internal Transport
Bus and train are much the same price at the moment though it's quicker to take the bus.
If you take the overnight train across the country beware of public holidays when they're very crowded.
International car hire organisation like Avis, Budget, Europcar and Hertz operate in Czechoslovakia and car hire is available  from Pragocar.
See Cedok for addresses.
Car hire for foreigners is very expensive, about £50 per day plus mileage, plus petrol.
Independent car hire companies are new setting up so ask around.
Currency and Prices
The currency is crowns (Kcs).
It is not possible to obtain any currency until you arrive in the country.
Exchange bureaux are sited at all main entry points.
The official exchange rate (at the time of writing) is around 50 Kcs to the pound.
The unofficial rate on the black market is much the same and you are more than likely to end up with either Polish money or old Czechoslovak currency which is not legal tender.
By warned!
Half a litre of lager (the real thing — Pilsner and Budweiser were invented here) will cost 7–10Kcs.
Transport is considerably cheaper than in the UK but prices are on the increase.
In fact all prices are increasing.
On the whole though, it is a very cheap country to visit if you don't stay in the big hotels.
Food
This is where a phase book is most important.
Menus are totally incomprehensible unless you understand at least some of the language.
Vegetarians have a hard time as the staple diet is meat and dumplings and fresh vegetables are difficult to find.
Where to Stay
Away from Prague and the big cities camping is the cheapest way to travel.
Most campsites also have huts for hire for a few pounds per night per person.
The huts provide beds, toilet and wash basin but you should bring your own stove and equipment, etc.
Campsites generally have a restaurant on site with good food.
The official travel agency Cedok can provide lists of places to stay throughout the country.
Maps and Guides
Strangely enough you need look no further than p29 of Outdoor Action for details of the very latest, full-colour guidebook on Czechoslovakia — so up-to-date it's not even in shops yet.
It's edited by Outdoor Action's editor Laura McCaffrey and we are offering it at a very special price.
Otherwise there's a limited selection at the Travel Bookshop Ltd, 13 Blenheim Crescent, London W11 2EE, tel: 071 229 5260.
They have maps of the country and guidebooks.
Stanfords are also worth a try, 12–14 Long Acre, Covent Garden, London EC1V 2PT.
Tel: 836 1321.
Maps of national parks and walking areas are available from book shops in the main cities and also from street kiosks.
You can buy maps and guides from campsites in the country areas.
Organised Walking
Explore Worldwide, 1 Frederick St, Aldershot GU11 1LQ.
Tel: 0252 344161.
Walking holidays in Low and High Taras.
Ramblers Holidays, Box 43, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire AL8 6PQ.
Tel: 0707 331133.
Walking tours.
Sherpa expeditions, 131A Heston Road, Hounslow, Middlesex TW5 0RD.
Tel: 081 569 4101.
Walking holidays in Polish and Czechoslovak Tatras.
Bike Events, PO Box 75, Bath BA11BX.
Tel: 0225 480130.
Cycle tours of Eastern Europe.
Tours of Czechoslovakia planned for 1992.
Alternative Activities
Don't expect the same kind of organised tourist activities you'd find in countries like Austria or Switzerland.
You'll have difficulty trying to get hold of a bike or a canoe in the Tatras.
It's best to go with an organised group if you want to cycle or paddle your way through the area.
There are caves to explore and some good areas for climbing with fine sandstone in the Slovenský Raj National Park in the Low Tatras.
The High Tatras are popular for skiing and skiing is also possible in the Low Tatras though not on such an organised scale.
Flora and Fauna
The Slovenský Raj is well covered by natural pine forests on limestone hills.
Larger numbers of roe deer live near there and Czechoslovakia still has bears and wolves roaming in the wild.
In the Slovenský Raj look out for black woodpeckers and storks.
Far left: The Hornad River in the Slovenský Raj.
Left: sometimes you need a cautious approach to appreciate the views.
Below: trekkers are helped on their way
Czechoslovak Tatras
Paul Glendell takes a trek through the gorges and waterfalls of the Slovenský Raj — aptly known as the Slovak Paradise.
Mention Czechoslovkia to walkers and most will think of the High Tatras, the well known and majestic mountains in Slovakia.
But a few miles south-west of these peaks are the Low Tatras.
And though they are popular with the people of Czechoslovakia they're little known outside the country.
Not far away is the Slovenský Raj National Park — translated it's Slovak Paradise.
Its steep, wooded, narrow gorges with 600ft cliffs and fast flowing mountain streams with waterfalls cascading literally hundreds of feet are enough to tempt any enthusiastic walker.
And in the Slovenský Raj the paths go through the steams and when you get to a waterfall, ladders have been built to take you to the top.
This is no place for a short Sunday afternoon stroll, the paths are very well marked but the going is tough.
One moment you are on a path by a stream, the next you are balancing on a carefully placed tree trunk to cross the stream for the hundredth time.
A few minutes later you are walking up a short wooden ladder, round the corner and you find a 200ft waterfall — bridges cross the torrent twice before you reach the top and continue along the path.
All this in the most magnificent scenery, a national park where the natural forest hasn't been logged for years and grazing sheep is prohibited so as not to upset the natural balance.
Wild camping in the forest is prohibited but numerous organised sites are available both within the park and around the edges.
It is possible to rent Scandinavian-style huts if you fancy a more comfortable night.
They have no cooking facilities but plenty of running water.
There's usually a restaurant and shop on site though.
With the paths so well marked it's easy to make up walks to suit your mood and fitness.
The walk from the campsite near Hrabusice gave us a real taste of Paradise.
From the camp we followed the path going south-west.
The start of the walk is very gentle with a wide dirt track taking you into cool woodland with spring vegetation and all shades of mosses on the banks by the side of the path.
There are wood anemones and violets much in evidence in the spring.
After an hour or so we reached a Slovak village with houses in the traditional wood construction with wooden roofs.
From here we carried on along a river and soon arrived at Sokol which has just one house — a traditional forester's cabin with deer antlers above the front door.
We continued to follow the Sokol river up the Velky Sokol into the heart of the national park.
The sides of the valley grew slowly steeper and steeper and the marked path (white-yellow-white markers) criss-crossed the river.
Our waterproof walking boots were really necessary here as we balanced on rocks to cross the gushing stream.
On more than one occasion our feet slipped in.
At the valley sides continue to steepen, the path spends more of its time in the river and the going toughens.
Wood ladders greeted us at the most difficult places across the stream.
As we walked on, patches of snow laying in the darker areas of the gully grew ever more frequent.
The sun must only be a rare visitor to this mysterious landscape where spring flowers push through the slowly melting ice.
The path through the still narrowing gorge by now had frequent ladders and sometimes chains so we could steady ourselves as we climbed crystal clear waterfalls — some stopped in motion, still under the all-encompassing spell of the powerful winter ice.
After two miles or so of this beautiful scenery we emerged at the top of the gorge into sunlight again and were greeted by a wonderful expanse of forest.
We followed as easy path through this still spectacular but very different scenery back to the campsite, picking up blue then yellow and finally red markers back.
They are clearly marked on the map from the campsite.
Along the way we noticed young pine trees with cloth wrapped around the top shoots to stop deer eating them.
Also dotted around were beetle traps — squares of cloth with collecting bottles below.
The presence of beetles is acknowledged as an indicator of the general health of the forest.
Look out for the huge holes in the trees made of black woodpeckers and with luck you will see the culprit and even hear it at work.
In the Sokol valley I was lucky enough to watch a stock circling above for several minutes.
I'd originally gone to Czechoslovakia to photograph pollution but I'm so glad I was  pursuaded by my Czechoslovak friends to spend three days out of my precious two weeks walking in the Slovenský Raj.
I returned with some spectacularly horrible photos of the country's many problems but also with a good many showing Czechoslovakia's stunning beauty.
Gorges give way to lush fertile valleys in the spectacular Slovenský Raj National Park
Royal ascent
The peaks if Ben Loyal, Queen of Scottish mountains, rise regally above a wild lowland landscape.
Caroline Lindsay reveals their majestic charm
Ben Loyal sits regally under the wing of the Munro Ben Hope in the northern quarter of the Sutherland wilderness near Tongue.
It fails to be a Munro by some 580ft, yet for me, it more than earns its title Queen of the Mountains .
It is best viewed from the north side, from where the four peaks dwarf the tiny Loch Hakel nestling at its feet and the three corries, home to wild deer, embrace the morning sunlight.
On a clear dawn or a copper sunset I know of no other mountain which has quite such dramatic appeal.
The long drive north may act as a deterrent to some, yet for those willing to make the effort the rewards can be breathtaking.
The area is as yet largely untouched by the ugliness of mass afforestation and still a paradise for lovers of the outdoors.
The peak itself has quite a past.
Its name come from a Gaelic word Lagh which meant Law —Mountain of Lawgiving .
Indeed one of its peaks is Sgurr a' Chleirich which means peak of the clerics .
As judicial proceedings are thought to have been held at prominent landmarks, legal decisions could have been held at prominent landmarks, legal decisions could have been made in the vicinity of Loyal centuries ago.
Another interpretation is from the English corruption of the Gaelic word Laogh meaning calf —Mountain of the Calves .
Ben Loyal dominates the Kyle of Tongue and holds a magnetic attraction for many hillwalkers.
Its magnetism is not only spiritual — in some quarters the rock pegmatite has a strange distorting effect on compass bearings.
So how best to approach and try to conquer the Queen?
There is an easy way to climb Loyal.
For those who wish to take a car close and then walk to the top of the hill without too much difficulty, take the A836 to Loch Loyal near Lettermore and climb straight into the corrie Loch Na Creige Riabhaich and on to the main summits.
The views are stunning, looking to the sea over the Kyle of Tongue, to Ben Hope dominating the west and the wilderness of North Sutherland stretching away almost infinitely to the south.
For those who want more of a challenge to their walking I recommend the following route via the shore of Loch Hakel for drama and scenic beauty.
Cross over the (at times boggy) moor towards the facing buttress of the Queen.
Try to pick a line through the birch forest on the northern slopes and look out for the wreckage of a World War II aeroplane on the north-eastern side.
This crashed into the mountain at the end of the war, possibly due to the magnetic anomalies the mineral  composits created in its compass readings.
Climb up into the first lost valley viewing the towering cliffs of Sgor Chionasaid and Sgor a' Bhatain on either side.
Go past the hugh boulders — some are the size of double decker buses — and ascend into the left col between the main summit of An Casisteal and Sgor Chionasaid.
Go east onto the tor of the main summit.
Approach this from the north or west side for the easiest ascent — its rather steep in places.
At last you will have conquered the Queen.
Treat her with royal respect though, for she can be fickle, given to sudden mists, blizzards and occasionally blistering sunshine.
Go well prepared with a map and compass and warm waterproof clothing.
Even in July the windchill factor can be intense.
Allow a full day or more, if you can spare it — there is a wealth of cliff, pinnacle and precipice to explore.
The beautiful underfoot carpets of blue gentium delight the eye and, above fly buzzards, eagles, skylarks and wheatears.
The farms below become dots as you climb and heather, alpine plants and red deer now mark you progress.
Though I have lived a lifetime in Scotland and several years in the Highlands, I never feel I am ‘at home’ until I see Loyal.
It's that sort of a mountain in a wilderness of splendid proportions.
The Queen may not be a Munro, nevertheless she is as regal a lady as any walker could wish to climb.
OS Map: Sheet 10 Strathnaver Stalking season: Usually Sept and Oct for deer and it is unwise to venture on the hills during shoots.
Some grouse shoots take place after Aug 12.
Enquire at Keeper's House near Lettermore if concerned, but note no shooting generally takes place on a Sunday .
Breaking Loose
Martin Bewsher leaves the Retsina and package tours behind to discover the charm of Ipsarion.
‘So how do we get up there?’
Beth asked, leaning on her elbows in the sand.
I raised my eyes, distracted for a moment by the blonde splendours of Golden Beach, to the more distant peaks of Ipsarion and its neighbour, Profitis Ilias, glowering over our idleness like the Old Testament patriarch whose name it bears.
Our first week on the Greek island of Thassos had been idyllic.
We had splashed in the clear Aegean Sea with the kids, explored the ancient ruins and thrown plates around the tavernas like regular tourists.
However in this second week the mountains were beckoning.
‘I'll ask Andy’, I said.
Our Scottish courier, a fount of knowledge on
all things alcoholic, proved disappointing on the subject of Ipsarion.
He thought he'd been there once but had no idea now.
‘There are snakes up there’ he muttered, and retired behind his shades.
Morning was a bad time to ask Andy about anything.
Next day I tried to question our landlady about walking to Ipsarion as she served us breakfast on the marble terrace under the walnut tree.
This proved tricky as Maria spoke little English and I even less Greek.
I pointed out the mountains.
‘Ipsarion?’
She nodded.
I indicated my chest and made like the Happy Wanderer up and down the terrace.
Her eyes widened.
She no doubt thought I'd been out in the sun too long.
She brought her husband to help but all he could offer was a shrug which was no comfort at all.
Shrugs were all I received from the Tourist Information Centre on the harbour.
Our neighbours, with whom we drank Metaxa and broke plates most evenings, thought they were trying to discourage tourists from venturing into the mountains because of the risk.
Much of the forest in the south east of the island had been destroyed by fire in recent years.
But I was beginning to wonder if Ipsarion had ever been climbed by uncloven feet, a suspicion intensified by studying the maps available in the local shops.
Relief and scale were not indicated.
Ipsarion varied in height between 3700 and 4200ft above sea level and was pinpointed with the ‘here be dragons’ accuracy of medieval manuscripts.
By this time I had developed a gut feeling for the topography of the island.
Thassos sits in the Northern Aegean like a soupbowl on a plate — the mountains rise steeply from a narrow coastal plain, gradually decreasing in height the closer you get to the centre.
Its one town Limenas and most villages cluster round its 60 mile perimeter, joined by the one decent road.
Limenas, or Thassos Town where we were staying, is on the north coast opposite the mainland.
Access to the centre of the ‘bowl’ is conveniently on the south coast where a track could be seen on the map heading for but stopping short of Ipsarion.
We booked a moped for penultimate day of the holiday allowing 24 hours for recovery before the flight home.
Our neighbours volunteered to keep an eye on the kids who were too absorbed in catching a tan and the biggest fish in the harbour, to come with us.
To avoid climbing in the heat of noon we decided to leave at daybreak.
So much for good intentions.
It was mid-morning when we set out nervously along the coast road on the first two-wheeled motor I had ridden for 20 years.
By the time we had reached Skala Maries and turned inland, I had mastered the gear changes sufficiently for Beth to relax the vice-like grip she had on my waist and enjoy the scenery.
Bright flowers stabbed the grey-green scrub.
The air was a warm soup of their scents.
In the village of Maries the surfaced road came to an end.
They we were half riding, half pushing up into the mountains.
At first the track was lined with bright terraces of beehives, their owners in makeshift tents busily extracting the honey for which Thassos is famous.
After that just forest, mile after mile of pines, the track worsening noticeably at each junction.
Eventually the boulders in the road became too large to dodge.
We abandoned the moped by a spring where clouds of orange butterflies came to drink the spray.
We too drank gratefully.
I was now hot so we filled our water bottle and set off up the track towards to skyline.
The terrain here was more open, like something out of the Wild West, with deeply eroded crags and ravines.
The rest was silence — a deep, beautiful silence.
Except for the flies that is which had the persistence of pit bull terriers.
Despite a decent map it had become obvious that we were approaching the high ridge of the mountains.
As we sweated up the final rise, the stern brow of Profitis Ilias came into view on our left.
Then we were crossing a rutted rock pavement, a trig point incongruously ahead.
Abruptly the ground fell away from our feet, an awesome void opened before us.
We looked at each other— we had finally reached Isparion's elusive summit.
We sat with our backs against the trig point and gazed down like Gods on the coastal plain of Thassos.
Far below us pine forest bearded the foothills, broken here and there by the scars of red roofed villages, sensibly sited well away from the vulnerable coast.
Pale roads snaked from them down to the newer tourist settlements by the sea.
And then two human torsos appeared in the distance.
They never reached the summit and we never say their legs.
Beth thought it was something to do with the heat haze but I know a centaur when I see one.
Our sense of achievement lasted the few hours until we collected the kids.
They and the neighbours were but mildly impressed and Maria clearly disbelieving.
But it was in talking to a fellow tourist at the airport on the return journey that we really came down to earth.
‘Yes,’ I told him casually, ‘And we did Ipsarion on Tuesday.
It was truly incredible.’
‘Really,’ he said, ‘never got round to that club myself.
Did most of my drinking at Georgio's.’
Winning Ways
A week of walking around the beautiful Lakeland Fells proved an energetic break for outdoor action.
Holiday prizewinner Michael Taggard.
The prospect of a week's walking in Borrowdale at the end of July would raise the spirits of any walker, but to spend a week there as Outdoors Action prizewinners was an added bonus.
Our break with the Countrywide Holiday Association (CHA) was spent at their Glaramara Centre, in a beautiful part of the ever popular Lake District.
We arrived on Saturday afternoon to a friendly welcome from Dorothy, our CHA hostess for the week, and Neil, one of the walk leaders.
Unfortunately we missed tea, which was a shame as it was wholesome, homemade and in vast quantities, like all of the meals at Glaramara.
On Sunday we rose early and after a good breakfast were eager to get out on the hills.
CHA make it easy by providing walking guides for groups — our group consisted of a rich mix of walkers of all ages and nationalities.
That day we walked from Glaramara to Castle Crags, where we had an excellent view over Derwent Water before crossing the valley to explore Grange Fell.
Monday began with yet another blaze of sunshine.
We set off through the lovely village of Stonethwaite and up the steep woodland path towards Great Crag.
Before reaching the summit we stopped for a snack at Dock Tarn, sure one of the most underestimated spots in the Lakes.
It is isolated yet beautiful.
From here we returned to Borrowdale via Jopplety Haw, grateful that the heatwave had transformed the moss into springy turf.
On Tuesday we opted for a more strenuous hike from Braithwaite village up the steep sloped of Grisedale Pike.
The long trek in hot weather sapped our energy and emptied our water bottles.
According to the itinerary Wednesday was a rest day but after a half-hearted attempt at browsing around the Keswick shops we decided that the call of the fells was too strong to resist and headed for the Langdales.
We started from the Dungeon Ghyll hotel and crawled up Mill Gill in the heat of the midday sun.
Several stops later we staggered to the side of Stickle Tarn for lunch.
Before us lay Pavey Ark like a vast seacliff and on either side lay several safe, if uninspiring, ascents.
But our aim was Jack's Rake, a tortuous climb running right across the cliff.
Jack's Rake is a difficult scramble and at one or two points positively frightening as we climbed the final yards we felt a great sense of achievement.
For many, the ascent of Great Gable on the Thursday was the highlight of the week.
We walked along Styhead Gill to follow the south traverse and crabbed our way across scree slopes.
We reached the much photographed Nape's Needle and skimmed up the short, yet difficult, chimney of boot-worn rock.
From here we worked our way carefully across the rock base until we reached the treacherous scree slope known as Little Hell Gate.
Although it is a difficult route to ascend by, we reached the summit and were rewarded by some spectacular views.
We approached our last day with mixed feelings.
We were looking forward to our walk but didn't want the holiday to end.
The easiest part of the day was parking the car by the Fish pub in Buttermere.
However the sudden steep haul up Red Pike quickly brought us all to our senses.
We rested for a while at Bleaberry Tarn which turned out to be a wise move.
The hot, dry weather was beginning to break, to be replaced by ferocious winds which seemed determined to pluck us off the mountainside.
After being welcomed to the summit of an amazingly red Red Pike by the rain, we were happy to descend to Scarth Gap.
We went to the nearest pub in our sodden clothes and reflected on our great holiday.
For mor information about CHA holidays, contact: Countrywide Holidays, Birch Heys, Cromwell Range, Manchester M14 6HU.
Tel: 061 225 1000.
Out & about in Britain
Every month we feature a great walk and visit an activity centre in your region of the country
Highlands and islands
Lowlands and borders
Northern England
North Wales and Central England
South Wales and the Midlands
South west England
South east England
1.
Very easy
2.
Easy
3.
Moderate
4.
Energetic
5.
Demanding
Highlands & islands
Southern Skye shores and Loch Slapin
Low coastline and some slightly boggy moorland.
Easily managed in comparison to most circular walks on the island; the 40 minutes walk along the A881 (very quiet unfenced road) can be avoided by catching the daily post-bus — check times at Broadford tourist office.
Some care needed with path junctions through quarry at start.
An intermittent moorland path to the coast, with a hard track for the last two miles before joining road; route-finding moderately easy.
Length 9 miles (14.5km(), 4–1/2 hours Difficulty 3–4 Start Ruined chapel at Suardal. 2 miles SW of Broadford, Skye.
Take A881 out of Broadford.
After 2 miles road passes three houses; cemetery is 1/4 mile further on right.
Roadside parking.
Grid reference NG617207.
OS maps: 1:50 000 32; 1:25 000 Outdoor Leisure .
Walk directions
Follow road towards Broadford.
Pass first house;(bungalow) then after 50 yds turn right through gate on to track.
Where track reaches old crofter's cottage bear half (no path) across stream, up bank, to reach grassy former railway track after 30 yds.
Turn right along this.
Keep to left fork after 1/4 mile.
Track passes through old marble quarry and rises for 1/4 mile (a).
Near end of quarry ignore wide grassy track on right (incline of old railway) leading gently downhill but bear half left on path passing large spoil heap after 50 yds.  30 yds after spoil heap ignore minor left fork.
Keep left on main path 100 yds later.
Path through moorland is boggy but passable and maintains same direction, soon crossing fence and continuing along bottom of small valley, then on right side of valley.
Reach shore, turn right along it (b).
First stream is crossed by stone bridge within walls of old croft (ruined)(c), subsequent streams can be stepped across and require no jumping.
Avoid walking on rocky foreshore; clear path runs just inland from it.
Metal (covered) sheep-pen comes into view; your objective is the stony track leading from far side of it.
Reach fence above the pen, turn right and follow fence.
Once level with deserted stone croft down on left, take small gate on left (the second passed) down to croft (d), by which turn right on track and follow for 2 miles (e).
Ignore driveways on right and 30 yds later, left.
Turn right on A-road; follow to start.
What to look out for
(a) A working marble quarry is passed at the end of the walk.
Flora Two types of Alpine flower — white-petalled mountain avens (May) and yellow mountain saxifrage (August).
(b) View Across Loch Eishort (a sea-loch) to the southernmost part of Skye.
17m SW out to sea lies the island of Rum.
(c) The ruined huts are all that remain of the old crofting settlement of Borreraig, an extreme example of the eviction of crofting communities in the 19th century.
(d) The croft is the last remnant of the settlement of Suishnish.
(e) View to Bla Bheim (3047ft)
Skye Environmental Centre
Address: Broadford, Isle of Skye, IV49 9AQ Tel: 04712487 Activities on offer: birdwatching, wildlife observation holidays/
The Skye Environmental Centre is a charity involved with a whole range of environmental works.
The centre has published a range of environmental guides to Skye, is closely involved in environmental education and acts as geological and biological recording centre, collecting valuable data for a range of surveys.
On site there's an environmental museum and an animal rescue centre.
As well as all this the Environmental Centre runs wildlife and birdwatching holidays on Skye.
The holidays are especially interesting since they are guided by environmentalists.
You can choose from a weekend (£95) or a week long holiday (£265) where you'll observe wild life while walking an average of six to eight miles each day.
Guests stay at the environmental centre in guest house accommodation.
There's an ‘honesty’ bar where you get your drinks yourself, and observation lounge which looks out over the lovely sweep of Broadford Bay.
Vegetarians are catered for.
If you're staying elsewhere on the island you can join the wildlife walks for a day or more.
Phone in advance to reserve your place — it cost £10 per day.
Or if you want to do your own thing you can use the centre simply as a guest house.
Lowlands & Borders
Craigend and Mugdock Castles
Leads from suburban Glasgow straight into moorland; further on are mixed woods, three lochs, two ruined castles, a reservoir path and a view of Glasgow, which feels miles away.
comes down to earth at a residential road close to Milngavie station.
All paths and tracks are well defined and mostly signposted; route-finding quite easy.
Length 5–1/2 miles (9km), 2–1/2 hours With extension 8 miles (13km), 4 hours Difficulty 1 Start Milngavie (pronounced ‘Mulguy’) station, 23 minutes by train from Glasgow Central.
Large car park.
Sundays: bus service only (to station).
OS maps 1:50 000 64; 1:25 000 NS 47/57 Refreshments Milngavie
Walk directions
With station entrance behind you, turn left under pedestrian tunnel.
West Highland Way (WHW) begins here (map displayed) and is clearly signposted or waymarked with thistle motifs.
Allander Way signposts are also followed.
Follow Station Road beyond tunnel, down main pedestrian street in Milngavie, turning right just after crossing river (signpost) down ramp, right on road then immediately left on signposted tarmac path.
After 300 yds turn left as signed (yellow arrow), then after 50 yds turn right along riverside (waymarked).
WHW turns right to leave river after 500 yds (waymark), turning left 300 yds later at T-junction (waymarked).
Straight on after 1/4 mile (signposted Mugdock Wood) at junction.
Follow to reach road after 3/4 mile.
Turn right on road,(For extension see below).
Turn right after 1/2 mile into Kyber car park, then turn left after 30 yds through gate (but first detour ahead a few yards for view of Glasgow) on track signposted Craigend Castle (a).
Turn right at Craigend Castle (signposted Mugdock Castle) and follow track for 1/2 mile.
. Turn right (signposted Mugdock Castle) to path, which leads into and across field to kissing-gate, beyond which fork right.
Reach T-junction with track (castle on left) and turn left to pass in front of castle (b).
200 yds later, keep on main track as it bends left down to lochside.
Track soon bends right into woods.
Just after passing level with house (visible away to left), avoid stone bridge on left leading to iron gates but fork left 20 yds later on to path which crosses stream and follows it then reaches road.
Turn right on road.
At bottom of hill pass through gateway in reservoir wall on left, then right along reservoir path (c); follow to buildings.
Turn left on road at far end, past waterworks building on left (d) then turn right at ornamental garden into driveway.
200 yds before (locked) gates ahead, take parallel residential road on right to keep in same direction.
Right at road junction at bottom into Moor Road.
Left at T-junction (Buchanan Street) follow back to start.
For extension , from , turn left on road, then right after 30 yds
through kissing-gate, continuing on WHW, track passes lake after 1/2 mile.
On reaching small lake on left, keep forward on track (waymark misleading at time of writing), reaching turning-circle after 100 yds. 50 yds later, turn sharp right through gate to leave WHW, and follow 1/2 mile to T-junction.
Turn right; track is obvious to road.
Right on road then first left into Kybner car park.
Resume route at .
What to look out for
(a) Craigend Castle Sinister ruin of a Gothic country house built c .
1816 by James Smith.
(b) Mugdock Castle A 14th century ruin (being restored at time of writing) previously belonging to the Earl of Lennox, David De Grahame and the Montrose family.
By it, a pleasant lily-covered loch.
(c) Reservoir Opened in 1859 and later extended.
The pipeline comes from Loch Katrine to supply water from Glasgow.
(d) Memorial (where you turn right at the ornamental garden) to one of the Water Board's founders, 1904.
In the art nouveau style, the lettering and bronze basin showing the influence of Charles Rennie Macintosh.
Northern England
Castle Howard Estate
Through the woods and landscaped parklands of one of England's great country houses, rising to the ridge of the Howardian Hills — a gentle escarpment overlooking the Vale of Pickering and the North York Moors.
Takes a quiet road at the start.
Paths mostly well defined; route-finding moderately easy.
Length 6–1/2 miles (10.5km), 3 hours.
Difficulty 2 Start large lay-by 1 mile N of Castle Howard by gatehouse on main estate avenue (100 yds S of crossroads where E turning is sign-posted Coneysthorpe), 5 miles W of Malton.
Free parking.
Grid reference SE 707712.
OS maps 1:50 000 100; 1:25 000 SE 67/77 Refreshments Shop at Coneysthorpe; cafe at Castle Howard, 1 mile off route.
Walk directions
Turn left out of lay-by then left at crossroads (signposted Terrington).
Follow road (very quiet for 3/4 mile.
Where road bends left, keep straight on, on track signposted bridleway.
After 300 yds, turn right on track waymarked by arrows.
Keep left at junction 150 yds later.
Left again at next junction 150 yds after this (waymarked) and keep right 20 yds later (waymarked).
Follow along until you reach gate .
Beyond gate, follow track across parkland to gate ahead, then uphill through woods (ignore cross-track after 100 yds).
Turn right at top of ridge by waymarkers.
Cross road to track opposite (a)(b).
After 1–1/2 miles path leads through small gate and follows right edge of field.
Leaving it by waymarked stile in righthand corner.
Head half right (farmhouse ahead) to corner of fence, then proceed alongside fence on left to stile .
Turn right on farm track.
At end cross road, take signposted bridleway via gate opposite and turn left in field; faint grassy path gradually diverges from hedge on left and where bank of trees immediately on right ends, track becomes very clear and zigzags downhill.
Castle Howard Mausoleum (prominent round classical building) is visible on skyline with (smaller) temple to right of it (c).
After 1/2 mile, keep right (left leads to farm).
10 1/2 mile later and 1/4 mile after woodland begins on left, turn right at junction of tracks as waymarked (ahead leads to gate marked private).
At gate at top (turn round for view of Castle Howard) turn left on road past Coneysthorpe hamlet (d) and back to start.
What to look out for
(a) An arresting view of Castle Howard.
The palatial house is of strikingly original design for the early 17th century.
No one really knows who designed it.
Vanbrugh was appointed as designer but at that time he is not known to have had any architectural experience; his career had until then been a military one.
Hawksmoor, who had already had a great deal of experience as an architect, was brought in as clerk of works and it is quite likely that the design was by both men.
Hawksmoor had been working for Wren since he was 18 and Castle Howard was very probably modelled on Wren's proposed plan for Hampton Court (which never got beyond the drawing board).
(b) Shortly after, view on left opens out across the Vale of Pickering (much of which is also owned by the Castle Howard Estate) to the N York Moors.
(c) Mausoleum and temple The mausoleum is huge and majestic, with 20 columns encircling a rotunda.
Designed by Hawksmoor in 1731, it was not completed until after his death.
The Temple of the Four Winds was built between 1724– .
(d) Coneysthorpe Built for the estate around an oblong green, at the top of which is a handsome classical chapel (1835).
The Diver Training College
Address: Malt Kiln Lane, Appleton Roebuck, York YO5 7DT.
Tel: 0904 84424 Activities on offer: diving.
This landlocked location isn't the first place you'd think of for a diving school but the Diver Training College is proving to be very popular.
It's run by the Fila family and is based on a purpose built centre with a 22ft (7m) dive tank, a decompression chamber and lecture rooms.
There's also a multigym, sauna and a bar on site.
For initial lessons students go to a swimming pool in York.
The college runs courses recognised by the British Sub Aqua Club and the Professional Association of Diving Instructors — an American organisation.
Courses cater for all levels of diver from the absolute beginner up to those who want to fine tune their technique.
Most beginners take the four day PADI Open Water Diver course which enables you to dive in open water.
This course will cost you £260.
There is no accommodation at the centre but staff will find you a local bed and breakfast.
North Wales and Central England
Tennyson's birthplace and the Central Wolds
Some of the quietest parts of the Wolds.
Six villages on the way, with the remotest of the scenery coming after Tetford.
Route-finding moderate.
Length 11 miles (17.5km), 5 hours Difficulty 3 Start Fulletby, 4 miles NE of Horncastle, by petrol station.
Grid reference TF 296733 OS maps 1:50 000 122, 1:25 000 TF 27/37 Refreshments Cross Keys Inn, White Hart Inn and shop.
Tetford Blue Bell, Belchford.
Walk directions
With petrol station on left, follow road to T-junction.
Turn right, then after 300 yds take track on left signposted bridleway.
Track descends; 150 yds before bottom of slope, where track bends to the left and immediately before copse begins on right, cross ditch on right and bear half left on other side, keeping close to copse on your left.
After 30 yds emerge into field; ahead is prominent triangular top of Hoe Hill.
Do not make for it but bear half right aiming just to right of nearest bushes.
On reaching them turn left and at corner after 30 yds turn right.
200 yds later, just before the end of the field, cross ditch on right by waymarker post and continue up slope ahead to reach edge of field 20 yds later.
Bear half left, aiming 100 yds to the right of group of trees, to find gate at right extremity of hedgerow.
In next field keep well to left of trees ahead by bearing quarter left (soon fence away to right comes into view).
Leave field by gate in far right-hand corner.
Turn left on road then immediately right, signposted Ashby Peurorum.
After 1/2 mile turn right, for Ashby Puerorum.
Keep left just before church then turn right at T-junction.
Take next right turn.
After 600 yds fork left just after large barn (signposted public footpath) and 50 yds later keep left passing between old brick barn (on your right) and modern barn (left), beyond which enter field to follow farm track downhill.
After 200 yds and immediately after track bends right through break in hedge turn left (waymarked) proceeding alongside hedge on left.
On reaching corner of hedge, right of way proceeds quarter left, aiming for left-hand side of small conifer plantation just in front of which  cross footbridge and proceed to left of plantation to pick up track leading uphill to village of Bag Enderby (a).
Turn left when level with thatched cottage on track.
On entering first field keep forward along right edge.
After 300 yds, by electricity post, cross neck of field to stile ahead.
Proceed down slope in second field to stile ahead.
Proceed down slope in second field to stile by electricity post, then ascend third field to gate in front of farm.
Enter farmyard, turn right and keep right, to pass through gate and on to road.
Left on road into Somersby (b).
Ignore right turn just before church and ignore left turn 1/2 mile later.
Road bends right then left, then passes small pine wood.
At end of pine woods, turn right on track (signposted) into right-hand of two fields.
Where track ends, continue forward with hedge on left.
Keep to left of sheds, follow left edge of two fields and proceed to road.
Turn right on road and turn right at next junction then left, signposted Louth.
Proceed through Tetford village, keeping left by church and right at next fork, then turn right by grassy triangle.
After 100 yds, where road bends right, forward on track (ignore immediate left fork to farm).
After 600 yds keep left at fork (signposted) and, where track ends, maintain direction alongside hedge on left to reach gate and footbridge , beyond which turn right (waymarked), very soon alongside ditch on right, then after 300 yds turn left on signposted grassy track.
After 300 yds keep forward cover cross-track, now with trees on right.
Where trees end, turn right (waymarked), ascending on track alongside ditch.
After 300 yds, when level with gate on right, turn left on track.
Reach farm road, turn right along it then left at T-junction.
Follow into Belchford.
After passing church turn left (Dams Lane) Viking Way (VW waymark), for path between fences.
Cross footbridge, take stile on right and turn left alongside fence, on clear track.
At top of field turn right on cross-track (VW waymark), and after 100 yds turn left through right-hand of two fields alongside fence on left.
At far corner of second field cross stile and turn left on track.
Fork right by signpost and electricity pole after 80 yds, continuing alongside hedge on right.
(VW waymark).
Cross stile just before bottom of rise and immediately turn left to cross second stile.
Bear quarter right to stile at bottom of field (VW waymark).
Forward in next field, making for lower of two radio masts.
Cross stile, to find stile in top corner.
Left on road, then take third turning right and first left by post-box to return back to start.
What to look out for
(a) Bag Enderby Attractive small village, where Tennyson's father was vicar (as well as at Somersby).
(b) Somersby Tennyson was born in the Georgian rectory (not open to the public) in 1809.
Tattershall Park Country Club
Address: Sleaford Road, Tattershall, Lincoln LN4 4LR Tel: 0526 43193 Activities on offer: waterskiing, windsurfing, sailing, rowing, canoeing, fishing, jet skiing, pony trekking, adventure playground, nature walks.
Despite the name, the Tattershall Park Country Club isn't a pricey place — admission is only £1 for adults and 50p for children.
This gives you access to the main centre's restaurant, bar, squash courts, snooker rooms, gym, sauna and solarium.
And then there's the nine lakes for watersports and the surrounding countryside for walking and pony trekking.
It isn't too good to be true though — your admission fee just gets you in there — all activities cost extra.
If you want to go canoeing or rowing you can hire out equipment.
There's jet skiing available too.
Contact the Wet 'n Wild Jet Ski Club on 0366 383746.
You can also hire out windsurfers, tuition is available and you can learn to sail here.
Contact Surflark for details on 0860 2941 or 0205 358062.
South Wales & The Midlands
Witley Court and Abberley Hill
Wooded hills and quiet farmland, later descends into Abberley Park.
Follow directions carefully, especially in woodland sections.
Length 6 miles (9.5km), 3 hours Difficulty 3 Start Hundred House, Great Witley, on A451 and A443, 11 miles NW of Worcester.
Grid reference SO 752662 OS map 1:50 000 150; 1:25 000 66/76 Refreshments Hundred House and post office shop, Great Witley
Walk directions
From Hundred House (a) cross road to gate by phone box with public footpath signpost.
Go through gate then bear right across field heading for stile that can be seen on skyline.
Go through gate on to sunken road and over stile on opposite bank.
Maintain direction across field to another pair of stiles.
Bear left on road beyond for 400 yds, until reaching minor road on left at house called The Old Turnpike .
Turn up minor road for  yds, then left through fate into field.
Cross field to well-defined path up shoulder of Walsgrove Hill, starting at corner of wood.
Ascend hill by path, through small fields with wide views to right (b).
At signpost, follow direction right, then left into wood till stile is reached.
Cross and continue up field, ignoring gate on right and bear slightly left to gate leading uphill to farm .
Pass in front of farm (c) then enter wood by gate.
Continue forward on path running just inside the wood, leading to Lippetts Farm.
Pass to left of farm, then re-enter wood by gate.
Continue around side of Woodbury Hill (d) on overgrown track and descend with path to stile and into field next to house.
Continue down field to stile and road .
Turn right along road for 300 yds, then left down tree-lined track and descend to derelict farm buildings.
Continue on track as it bends right then curves round edge of large field, then past a second building and up minor ridge, where it meets another track coming up from right .
Turn left on this and follow for 1/2 mile to junction with main drive of Witley Court.
Detour right to visit house and church (e).
Return along drive past points where it was joined earlier and descend into minor valley with pool on left, turning right onto another track as soon as drive starts to ascend again.
Follow track across field to road and cross to footpath signposted Redmarley.
Follow track over rise to Hillhouse Farm, then  swing around to right of farm buildings and descend steeply on tarmac road to another small valley, passing between pools.
Continue on road as it ascends to another main road and cross to footpath signposted Abberley Hill .
Cross field and when track divides at edge of wood take right-hand fork.
Follow this, keeping edge of wood on left and take next left fork which runs up on to a shoulder where another path joins from left and then ascends shoulder steeply (f).
At top of rise, turn left on track which after 200 yds descends slightly then turns to left while in minor valley.
At this corner (g) take somewhat overgrown path steeply uphill following valley, to summit ridge of Abberley.
Here join path which follows ridge and turn left .
Continue along ridge for 1/2 mile, ignoring side paths.
At obvious junction of paths keep right and at further junction just beyond, keep left.
When path picks up line of iron fence continue to follow this, keeping it on left-hand side, to reach trig point on summit.
Beyond summit, bear down slope to left to reach well-defined path below, leading down end of hill to join minor road just right of house .
Turn left on road and follow downhill.
At bottom, cross A443 and follow bridlewalk immediately opposite, signposted Stamford Road.
This runs directly below Abberley Hall clock tower (h).
At crossing of tracks turn left and immediately right on track, passing under footbridge and skirting school buildings.
Beyond buildings continue along sunken trackway.
At junction turn left to pass behind range of farm buildings.
At clearing with pond on left, turn right round back of house and over stile on to track leading shortly down to road.
Cross and turn right on footway back to Hundred House.
What to look out for
(a) Hundred House A substantial Georgian inn
(b) View Over the Teme valley.
The Clee hills are beyond and in clear weather the Black Mountains can be seen.
(c) There may be peacocks here.
(d) Woodbury Hill Large Iron Age fort.
(e) Witley Court Spectacular ruined Victorian mansion.
(f) View Back over the Severn Valley to Bredon Hill.
(g) This point has to be identified very carefully.
(h) Abberley Hall Home of William Walsh, an 18th century poet remembered chiefly for his friendship with Dryden, Addison and Pope.
Heart of England Balloons
Address: Cross Lanes Farm, Walcote, Nr Alcester, Warwickshire B49 6NA Tel: 0789 488219 Activities on offer: ballooning.
There are two approaches to ballooning.
You can just go up for a ride, letting someone else do all the work while you enjoy the sensation, or learn to pilot the thing for yourself.
Heart of England Balloons, run by Mike Gabb and a team of experienced balloon pilots, offer both options.
An hour's ride out across the surrounding countryside will cost you £117.50.
One session of pilot training will cost you £323 which will include ground training and a flight.
Ballooning isn't cheap.
The fuel is expensive and you have to pay the cost of a ground crew.
It will cost you about £3000 to reach pilot standard.
You have to fly at least 12 hours before your initial flight test and on average people fly around 20 hours before getting their licence.
Southwest England
Hooken Cliffs and Branscombe
Take the coast path out of Beer, passing Beer Head and descending into the undercliff to reach sea-level at Branscombe Mouth, then up West Cliff.
Here the sea views soon disappear but there is a panorama of the gentle green landscape around Branscombe.
Beyond the village there is one steep ascent on to Stockham's Hill before the leisurely drop on a green track down into Beer.
A little care is needed with the directions in section 7 otherwise the route is easy to follow.
Length 5 miles (8km), 2–1/2 hours Difficulty 2–3 Start Cliff car park, Beer (1 mile W of Seaton).
Follow main street to sea, keeping right behind The Anchor Inn on Common Lane.
Car park is 1/4 mile up, on left.
Grid reference 229889.
OS maps 1:50 000 192; 1:25 000 SY 08/18 and SY 29/39 (Pathfinder 1330 and 13161) Refreshments Plenty in Beer; café at Branscombe Mouth; shop and pub in Branscombe.
Walk directions
(a) Take Little Lane, signposted Coast Path to Branscombe Mouth, by car park.
This soon becomes path, bending left in front of caravan site and crossing edge of field before running close to cliff (there is always a fence between you and the edge).
After 3/4 mile, take stile on left, signposted Coast Path which descends into the undercliff (9b).
Later pick up track through caravan site but  leave it at cattlegrid (signposted Coast Path), descending to Branscombe Mouth.
Continue on coast path, keeping left (seaward side) of thatched café, then right immediately after it (signposted); path now ascends West Cliff.
At top, path bends right and enters woodland losing sight of the sea.
1/4 mile later, keep straight on by stiles and National Trust sign for West Cliff (facing other way).
350 yds later turn right by post with yellow arrow waymarkers leaving the coast path and descend to Branscombe church (first with fence on right, then after doubling back beyond stile down steps then along edge of field).
(c) Beyond church, turn right on road.
At road junction by houses, take cul-de-sac on right opposite bus stop.
Where this lane ends, continue forward through gate by National Trust sign for Manor Mill and follow left edge of field, at end of which keep to left of seat.
Go over footbridge and pick up enclosed path, then lane into Branscombe village centre.
Emerge at small square, turn sharp right (signposted to beach) and follow to T-junction.
Turn left on road then after 30 yds turn right on to enclosed path up steps by National Trust sign for Stockham's Hill.
On reaching stile into open ground, turn left, with fence and woodland on left (soon ignore stile on left) still ascending.
200 yds later, by another stile, fence veers half right, path turns right here, still uphill and now away from fence and bends right a few yards later up to stile into field .
Turn left and go alongside hedge on left side of the field and leave field by stile at far end (near corner).
Continue forward across second field to stile ahead, then  forward on track (which soon runs between hedges), eventually descending to pass car park on your left and Pecorama on your right , track has now become a road on outskirts of Beer.
At T-junction turn left, then where road bends left after 75 yds, take enclosed path on right (signposted).
Descend to road and take path opposite to reach another road .
Here either turn left for centre of Beer or take lane opposite (for cliff car park).
Ignore Higher Meadow on your left, then ignore right turn, soon picking up another enclosed path to reach road where turn right to car park.
What to look out for
(a) Beer Small resort, joined on to larger Seaton, with fishing still important.
Its past activities included smuggling, lace-making and quarrying; the latter dates back to Roman times.
(b) Hooken undercliff Spectacular rock towers and pinnacles, thick undergrowth and a broken terrain caused by landslips.
(c) Branscombe A village in two parts; in the 9th century it was owned by King Alfred and it later belonged to the Benedictine Abbey in Exeter.
River Dart Country Park
Address: Holne Park, Ashburton, Newton Abbot, Devon.
Tel: 0364 52511 Activities on offer: climbing, canoeing, orienteering, lightweight camping, archery, rifle shooting, obstacle courses, simulated parachute jump.
River Dart Country Park is a large and well run centre situated in extensive grounds with the River Dart running along one perimeter.
Home base is a lovely country house with accommodations for up to 104 people in dormitory style rooms.
The activity holidays on offer are really best suited to groups.
Some activities take place at the centre — initial canoe training is in the swimming pool and on the small lakes in the grounds.
There's archery on-site too as well as a simulated parachute jump.
The wilds of Dartmoor are close by for climbing, canoeing and lightweight camping expeditions.
Climbers also go onto the sea cliffs on the south Devon coast.
Prices vary enormously for group holidays but a typical price would be somewhere in the region of £25 per person per day.
As well as offering group holidays, during the school summer holidays the centre runs activities on a daily basis for anyone who wants to join in.
You'll need to ring and book in advance though because the activity days are very popular.
A day of activities will cost you £12.50.
If you want to be close to the centre there's a campsite within the grounds.
Southeast England
Everdon and Fawsley Park
Three attractive villages in orange-coloured stone amid rolling farmland and parkland are the high points of this route.
Length 8 miles (13km), 4 hours Difficulty 3 Start Prestor Capes church; turn off Maidford-Charwelton Road at Preston Capes, taking N turn signposted Daventry, down High Street and turn left into Church Way.
Grid reference 574548.
OS maps 1:50 000 152; 1:25 000 SP 45/55 (Pathfinder 999) Refreshments Pub at Everdon; pubs and shops at Badby.
Walk directions
(a) Return along Church Way to High Street and take path opposite and slightly to right through gates of Manor Farm.
Go forward (not on the track of the farm) across (first) field to where the wall meets fence to the right of the farm and here take gate into second field.
Keep forward alongside wall on left and then alongside fence on left to gate in corner.
In third field go forward to waymarked stile at far end, keeping just right of slight rise.
Proceed half right across fourth field towards another barn to reach minor road.
Turn left along road; after 200 yds ignore track on left up to barn, carry on along road to  just where, before field on lefthand side ends, take gate on left.
Go forward on track through field; in next (second field), proceed close to right edge, at end of field which is to right and beyond the hedgerow, turn right on track which leads down through gates and up left side of the third field.
Track bends left near top of field, through break into hedge, to follow bottom side of fourth field, past red-brick barn and along bottom of this field then, as enclosed track, eventually reaching Snorscombe Farm .
Keep to left of farm buildings on main track.
Beyond the farm, track dips down to gate and bends left.
Past next house on left (Snorscombe Mill), then  fork left.
Track crosses bridge, then immediately turn right to leave track and cross stile; cross another field to stile ahead.
Emerge into next field, where go forward and slightly left, passing to right of projecting corner of hedge coming down from left to take stile at corner of field into allotments.
Proceed through the allotments on track towards Everdon church, turning right on the road to enter village.
Turn left on Main Street, past village green.
Near end of village, fork left, signposted Fawsley. 100 yds after 30mph speed derestriction sign, take signposted stile up on right into (first) field.
Turn left, alongside hedgerow fence on left, to leave by stile in top left-hand corner.
In second field, the route proceeds forward with right edge of field about 30 yds away to reach waymark in hedgerow ahead; in third field go quarter right to cross right-hand hedgerow at waymark on tree which is 90 yds before far end of field .
Go diagonally across fourth field to stile in left-hand hedgerow.
Cross fifth field to prominent gate in hedge (keeping level).
Follow right edge of sixth field on defined track to gate in far righthand corner; turn left in seventh field downhill to farm in bottom corner.
Go through farmyard and on to road.
Turn right along road.
Turn left after 1/2 mile at crossroads and follow minor road 5/8 mile to Badby.
Go forward into village centre turning left at T-junction by green along Main Street.
After 200 yds turn left into Vicarage Hill.
At church follow road as it bends to right but immediately take enclosed path on left, signposted Knightley Way.
Path drops, rises and crosses stile into field, where bear right to waymarked stile.
Cross second field diagonally left up to stile at corner of Badby Wood (b).
Proceed on woodland path along inside edge of woods ignoring all left turns.
After 1/4 mile, leave woods by gate and immediately keep left over gate beside stile as waymarked, bearing ahead and slightly left across open area to waymarked stile into woodland.
Follow waymarks (slightly left and downhill) to stile, and descend through three fields to waymarked stiles below and slightly left.
Emerge on to estate road, turn right and  after 50 yds where road bends right, take gate ahead and cross parkland, passing just to left of Fawsley church.
At the church, note the direction of route which proceeds down between the two lakes and then keeps half left towards a barn and which is to left of and below distant tower of Preston Capes church.
Leave (first) field by waymarked stile, at point where power-line leaves field and 100 yds before brick ruin.
Go straight uphill in second field, initially with right edge and the barn 100 yds away; the route finally veers right to leave field by far right-hand corner.
Ascent third field slightly right then drop to stile.
Head straight to waymarked stile at end of fourth field.
Continue ahead to leave the fifth field by gate beside stile in far left-hand corner, giving on to road .
Turn right on road, up to Preston Capes.
What to look out for
(a) Preston Capes An ironstone village, with its church on the hill looking down towards Fawsley.
(b) Badby Wood Enchanting in spring for the spectacular shows of bluebells; also a habitat for foxes.
Draycote Water
Address: Kites Hardwick, Rugby, Warwickshire.
Tel: 0788 811107 Activities on offer: sailing, canoeing, fishing, walking and birdwatching.
At 650 acres Draycote Water is the biggest stretch of water in the south Midlands and offers a wide range of activities.
Most people who sail on Draycote Water are members of the sailing club, located on the lake shore.
Individual memberships costs £109.98 per year, family membership is £143.82.
And there's a £50.76 joining fee.
But there's no need to join to get out on the water.
The sailing club sometimes runs open days when novices can have a go.
Alternatively, if you're keen to sail the club will try to make arrangements for you to go out with a club member.
Occasionally RYA youth training schools are run on Draycote Water.
For full details 0788 811153.
There are also trout in the lake and boats available for hire.
To fish you'll need a rod licence and a fishing permit.
These are available from the fishing lodge at Draycote Water Tel: 0788 812018.
Eye to eye Mark Shand
Passage to India
From travels in search of head-hunting tribes in Indonesia to trekking across India on an elephant, Mark Shand's life has been one big adventure.
Henry Druce reports
As I was ushered into Mark Shand's spacious flat in South Kensington I saw lying on the living table a book called Living Dangerously .
How apt.
It was a biography of Timothy Dalton, the actor who plays James Bond — the epitome of adventure and excitement for so many.
With Shand you get a real-life Boy's Own character — a man who has had more than his fair share of adventure during 20 years of obsessive travelling.
And with his tanned skin, snake tattoo on his left arm and fit physique he certainly looks the part.
In fact he bears a vague resemblance to Crocodile Dundee, although his strong upper class English accent, roughened by a liking for Rothman cigarettes, quickly dispelled that image.
As he reclined in his sofa, surrounded by a treasure trove of knick-knacks collected from around the world, Mark said he had always had a taste for travel.
At the age of 16 he travelled through the Far East and went to Australia to work on a sheep station.
The travel bug had truly taken a firm hold.
To make a living he worked at Sothebys for two years and then set up business selling Cartier objects and  jewelry which involved travelling all around the world.
He also managed to go on some exciting trips such as following part of the old Inca trail in Ecuador on horseback.
And in 1977 he competed in the London to Sydney car race.
But as the business grew Mark became ever more restless.
His quest for adventure led him to give up the business and sail around the world with a friend in 1980 — but disaster struck.
Mark was hit by Hurricane Bernie in the Solomon Islands and left shipwrecked in the South Pacific.
‘It was the lowest point of my life I'd sold everything to do this trip.’
But Mark bounced back and in 1983–4 he went on an expedition in search of the head-hunting tribes of Indonesia, the Orang-hutan.
They are found in the most remote part of Indonesia at Irian Jaya where the renowned anthropologist Michael Rockefeller disappeared in the early sixties.
‘It was a very shaky area and we had one or two incidents with tribes who buzzed a few spears at us’, said Mark as he inhaled deeply on another cigarette.
On one occasion he and his travelling partner Don McCullin were lined up by Indonesians bearing automatic machine guns.
‘I thought they were going to shoot us.
I remember thinking, well this can't happen to me.
I remember looking at the back of Don's anorak and seeing Made in England and thinking, I wish I was back there.’
Mark escaped unscathed thanks to a fast-talking Indonesian who was with him on the expedition.
‘He was very clever and went into an entire theatrical about the whole thing and produced pieces of paper with stamps on them.
He befuddled them so much that we just ended up paying them off.’
Mark co-wrote a book Skulduggery about his experiences searching for the Orang-hutan tribes, but it is his most recent adventure — travelling through India on the back of an elephant — which has really captured the public's imagination.
In his book Travels on my Elephant , which topped the best sellers' list, he wrote ‘This idea evolved from a drawing I had discovered while clearing out my grandmother's house after she had died.
The drawing was of an infuriated male elephant about the charge a little mahout or elephant driver.
I took it out with me and forgot about it — at least I thought I had.’
But the idea germinated and slowly grew into an obsession.
Mark bought an elephant, Tara, for £4000 and embarked on a 600 mile trek with five eccentric Indian companions, from Konarak on the shores of the Bay of Bengal to Sonepur by the mighty River Ganges.
On an average day Mark and his entourage would cover 18 to 20 miles with Tara carrying half a ton of equipment on her back.
They also had a jeep to give backup support.
The normal daily routine involved getting up at around 6am and stopping for a long lunch at midday in order to avoid the most intense heat.
In the evenings they mostly camped.
Travelling with a huge mammal has its own special problems.
Not least of which was the vast amount of food she ate — between 400lbs and 600lbs of fodder per day.
Mark smiled and said ‘She would eat anything you gave her, I've never known an animal like it in my life.’
Tara also took quite a liking to rum which she was sometimes given to make her sleep.
Tara loved water which caused some  embarassing moments for Mark.
In the town of Keonjhar there was a small reservoir which Tara couldn't resist leaping into.
Mark leapt in after her shouting commands and trying to cajole her back to shore, but she wasn't listening.
‘I had the entire town around me, about six or seven thousand people.
They were all mimicking my accent and pissing themselves laughing.’
On another occasion Mark and his merry band were staying at the Raja's palace at Seraikella.
At the Raja's insistence Tara was chained up to a 500 year old tree.
The following morning Mark discovered that the tree and a nearby wall had been demolished.
Mark said that when the Raja saw the damage he was wearing glasses ‘which steamed up a bit.’
Learning to ride Tara proved a big challenge for Mark.
‘They're not like a horse where you have a rein.
With an elephant you can kick it till the cows come home but it's not going to worry about it.
It's a question of the elephant getting used to your voice and feel.
You have to develop that relationship because they can take advantage of you when ever and where ever they want.’
People reacted very differently to Tara than to Mark.
He said ‘you would thing that people were used to elephants, but they love them and would come out and be blessed by her.
Whereas the reaction to me was usually one of complete hilarity.
And the nice thing was that people used to join us.
We would come into a village and 20 to 30 people would come and join us for two or three days.’
During the journey Mark became increasingly attached to Tara and concerned about her future after the trek was over.
His original plan had been to sell her at the Sonepur Mela in Bihar, the world's largest animal fair and their final destination.
But he soon had second thoughts.
‘I had this thing in my mind that she had to be in a place where I could get to her and she would be well looked after.’
Mark's wishes couldn't have been better fulfilled as she ended up in a small tourist camp in Kanha National Park.
‘She's looked after like a little princess.’
Through his association with Tara Mark has become very aware of the plight of the Asian elephant.
Loss of wildlife habitats caused by population explosions means there are only between 30 000 and 40 000 elephants left in 13 countries.
He has been researching and trying to raise money for a documentary to highlight the problem.
This, along with research for a new book which is ‘under wraps at the moment’, will take him back to India for the next six months.
But how does Mark afford to live this enviable existence?
In the first instance he made money from his business.
‘Then when I started travelling seriously I used to go and be nice to my bank manager, which wasn't so easy.’
Now he is beginning to make money from his books, ‘although I never went out to write’ he adds.
Mark says that anyone can travel if they really want to.
‘You'll be faced with enormous problems but it's a matter of having a dream and following it through.’
And for budding young adventurers he says the most important thing is to have a sense of respect for the countries you visit and leave things as they are.
For Mark travelling is an addiction and a way of life.
He says the appeal is ‘the unpredictability of it — you never know what's going to happen next.
I'm an incredibly impatient person so travel is perfect, it never leaves you bored.
There's always an ever-changing scenery in front of you and people.
And people are the most important of all.
It's also the love of living outside.
I enjoy putting up a tent, I like campfires and food for me tastes so much better outside.
I'm a schoolboy when it comes down to it.
Mark Shand's account of his trip, Travels on my Elephant is published in hardback by Jonathan Cape and costs £14.99.
Tara the elephant's love of water caused some embarrassing moments
During the 600 mile journey Mark became increasingly attached to Tara
Setting Sail
Skimming across the water in small sailing craft can quickly become addictive.
Belinda Stannage of the RYA gives the low-down on how to get started
Surrounded by water and obsessed with the weather your average Briton has perfect credentials to be a very good sailor.
And indeed Britain has notched up an enviable record in the sport.
One of the few British medals at the last Olympics was in the Star two-man keelboat class, and our line-up for the 1992 Games in Barcelona is looking very strong in many of the ten different classes.
But you don't have to be an Olympic hopeful to enjoy the excitement of sailing dinghies — defined as cabinless boats with retractable centreboards that are kept upright by the weight of the crew.
It is a sport which has something to offer almost everyone, regardless of age, fitness, amount of leisure time or depth of pocket.
Dinghy sailing can be exhilarating and exhausting, exciting and relaxing, competitive and rehabilitating — all at the same time.
There is nothing like sitting out on a trapeze on a windy day, getting completely soaked by each new wave to make you feel cleansed of the city grime.
At time it feels like a matter of survival against the elements, keeping your boat upright in a strong breeze.
In complete contrast on windless days it is a case of using your ingenuity to make the best of favourable currents and limited sail capacity.
Every available stretch of water — be it river, sea or reservoir — is likely to harbour a sailing club.
They vary from the smallest tin shack propped up against a breakwater to the smartest yacht club in Cowes — but you will find the same enthusiasm for the sport in each.
The most common introduction to the sport is through sailing courses run at almost 500 RYA-recognised centres around the UK.
Some of these may be local authority centres, offering tuition on a sessional basis at between £2 and £6 an hour; others are professional sailing schools, usually situated in the popular UK holiday areas where a week's fully residential course will cost up to about £200.
Some are sailing clubs, aiming to attract new members by running beginners' courses over a number of weekends, with charges from about £20 to £70.
Your decision when choosing a course will probably be influenced by location, time restrictions and whether the way the course is structured suits you.
The most important thing to check is that the instructors operate to standards set by the Royal Yachting Association, the governing body for the sport.
Most sailing schools do run to these standards and it is quite rate to find one that doesn't.
RYA recognition of a sailing school, club or centre implies that you will be taught by qualified, experienced instructors in sea-worthy boats with adequate safety back-up and shore based facilities.
In addition, your course will follow a nationally agreed syllabus and will result — assuming you are successful of course — in an internationally recognised certificate.
Free lists of RYA-recognised sailing schools can be obtained by sending an SAE to the RYA Headquarters.
Having learnt the basics of dinghy sailing, the next stage for most people is to join a local sailing club.
Quite apart from the other benefits of club membership, inland clubs often have the only access to local water, while coastal clubs might have the best launching facilities in an area.
Both coastal and inland clubs offer dinghy parking areas, changing room, safety boat cover and the facilities you would expect of a club house, including catering and a bar.
In addition most clubs organise a full programme of races over the season which, once you've mastered the basics of sailing, can improve your skills very quickly by matching them up with other boats in the fleet.
Club racing tends to be fun and competitive, without being too serious, and usually becomes the principal activity for many dinghy sailors.
You don't even have to own a boat as most clubs will let you put your name forward as a crew member for a season.
The RYA produces a booklet called ‘Clubs for Newcomers’(£1.50 from the RYA) which lists over 400 clubs around the country which are open to new membership with a contact name of someone who knows the club well and could show you around.
By visiting two or three clubs in an area, you'll get a better idea of which one is best for your type of boating.
Catamaran sailing
Catamaran sailing is an exciting and fast growing side of the sport.
A dinghy sized catamaran has two thin hulls withe a sheet of canvas stretched inbetween for the crew to sit on.
They are high speed and fun, cutting through the water with little wake, and are raced and cruised all around the UK.
Most sailing clubs will have a few catamarans clustered together in one end of the dinghy park, but if you are keen to race one it is best to choose a club that has plenty of water space and specialises in a large multihull fleet.
Sailing and the disabled
Multihulls are also very useful for enabling the disabled to get afloat.
Diana Campbell, herself a keen sailor despite being confined to a wheelchair for the last 45 years, dreamt up the idea of a specially adapted dinghy sailing boat in the early seventies, and persuaded Roderick Macalpine-Downie to design it.
The first Challenger trimaran (three hulls) was produced in 1978 and there are now more than 120 in use throughout the UK.
The Challenger is ideal for disabled sailors because of its inherent stability.
In Diana's words it can provide ‘disabled people with freedom from the wheelchair they spend so much of their life in, making them as mobile as the next gust of wind’.
Buying a craft
Buying a dinghy of your own is rather like buying a car.
You have to decide which type you want, whether to buy it new or second-hand, whether to buy a two/three-person or single-handed variety, one hull or two.
The choice of dinghy class will depend on what you want to do.
Boats start from as little as £200 for a popular second-hand Mirror, right up to over £5000 for a state-of-the-art racing ‘machine’.
If you are keen to do some racing at a local club, the best thing to do is check out which classes have strong fleets in your area.
Although there is a widely-used handicap system for working out your place in relation to other types of boats, it is always more fun to battle against similar one-design boats, in which the only difference is the skill of the crew.
If you want a stable boat for the whole family to use and generally potter around in, you might choose a larger cruising dinghy.
Some come complete with a tent that fits over the boom to make a very snug overnight bedroom.
Whatever your preference, one of the most convenient places to look at all the different classes under one roof is Sailboat , the National Dinghy Show, which takes place at Crystal Palace Sports Centre on March 7–8, 1992.
Organised by the RYA and a collection of enthusiasts, it's Britain's oldest boat show and the world's largest all-dinghy exhibition.
What to wear
Don't go and buy all the kit until you know what sort of sailing you enjoy.
Most sailing courses can provide buoyancy aids and waterproof clothing, while a pair of trainers and shorts will get you by with a borrowed lifejacket while crewing in the summer.
Like all sports, when you get keen and decide to sail all year round, including the March ‘Frostbite’ Racing series, you will need some good kit — preferably wet or drysuit clothing — but there is not need to rush into it.
See what other people are wearing and what they recommend.
The sailing bug
The problem with dinghy sailing is that once the sailing bug is caught it grabs hold.
It catches you with the boathook and won't let go, seeping its salty tentacles into your very bones.
Some have sudden urges to take a year off and sail around the world — others sell house and home to sit in damp unstable quarters writing books.
Others pack up a tent, put the dinghy in the back of the car and disappear up to the west coast of Scotland with only a collection of Arthur Ransome books for company.
Be prepared for anything.
For details of RYA clubs and recognised centres and information on all aspects of sailing contact: Royal Yachting Association, RYA House, Romsey Road, Eastleigh, Hants.
Tel: 0703 629962.
Dinghy sailing has something to offer everyone regardless of age, fitness or depth of pocket
Nature watch
September
September lays a carpet of heather across the country and brings seabirds to our shores.
Richard Marpole is your guide
Wood mouse
The wood mouse (or long-tailed field mouse)apodemus sylvaticus is around three inches long with a tail of about the same length.
In preparation for winter it will be busy putting on fat by eating all the wild fruit that it can find, and by making a nuisance of itself feeding on produce growing in the kitchen garden.
This animal does not hibernate, but stores food for the winter, which means that the damage it can cause is out of proportion to its diminutive size.
Ling
At this time of year the moors turn purple with the flowering of heathers.
The most common is ling calluna vulgaris .
In the past this plant would only have been found on the better drained slopes leading to our moorland plateaux, but because of man's interference in this environment, by digging drainage ditches and lowering the water table, the plant has been able to spread onto the plateaux themselves.
Nutrients are still at a premium here, so the plants form an association with a fungus pezzizella ericae which enables the heather to have a higher nitrogen uptake and to be more resistant to elements of heavy metals found in the soil.
Bell heather
Bell heather erica cinerea has brightly coloured flowers which are bigger than ling.
This type of heather also grows better in a much drier habitat.
Oystercatcher
The oystercatcher haematopus ostralegus with its striking black and white plumage will also be making its journey south to winter grounds.
Predominantly a coastal bird, where it can usually been seen in large flocks from now until spring, in recent years it has spread inland to breed.
It follows rivers to find an area where there is suitable stony ground to make its nest.
Oystercatchers use their bright orange bills to open shellfish, but use two distinct types of opening techniques.
‘Stabbers’ and attack the muscle which holds the shell closed and ‘hammerers’simply bash a hole in the shell.
Young birds learn from their parents and will carry on the same method.
Badgers
Badger cub meles meles born at the beginning of the year are leaving their family  setts now and digging out their own homes.
It is a time when there are many fatalities on the roads as the inexperienced young try to dash across in the face of oncoming traffic.
Badgers' coats are also getting thicker as winter approaches and this put them at risk from diggers who sell their pelts to unscrupulous collectors.
Marsh lousewort
Flowering in September, the marsh lousewort pedicularis palustris can be found in boggy and marshy areas and wet grassland at altitudes up to almost 3000ft.
The two-lipped flower has two pairs of small teeth on the upper lip.
When in fruit the lower part of the flower inflates and the ripe seed inside can rattle around, giving this plant the alternative name of ‘red rattle’.
Great skua
The great skua stercorarius skua is an exciting bird to see along our coasts at this time of year as it makes its way from its northern breeding ground to its wintering area.
This bird is a real pirate of the air.
It harasses other gulls until they drop their hard-won food and then swoops down to catch it — often in mid-air.
Lycoperdon perlatum
One of the first fungi to show is lycoperdon perlatum .
When ripe these pear-shaped fungi are filled with dust-like spores which pour out of the small central opening at the slightest movement.
Lycoperdon perlatum are found growing in large groups on woodland soil and are edible when young.
Armchair update Books
A High an Lonely Place Jim Crumley
It is refreshing to read Jim Crumley's views.
He says what he believes to be true and even if one disagrees with him, his uncompromising stances are vastly preferable to some of the gobbledy-gook that comes from some sections of the countryside establishment or those who change their views from year to year.
In A High And Lonely Place he makes a trenchant analysis of the despoilation of the Cairngorms.
He puts forward the radical solution that the range be given almost total protection as a wilderness area or area of land where the hand of man is less evident.
This would mean an end to skiing facilities, a marked drop in the development of tourism, the removal of car parks and access roads and a strick control of land owning.
While this might seem rash or unreal to some, it is in fact already an accepted idea, supported by such prophetic figures as John Muir, Fraser Darling and Percy Unna.
Whether it can now — or should be — applied to the Cairngorms is open to argument.
The book is divided into three parts.
Crumley starts by analysing the piecemeal approach to development and lack of adequate environmental control in the Cairngorms.
He then tells of his love for the hills and their wildlife, in a celebration reminiscent of Nan Shepherd's famous book The Living Mountain .
The book ends with a conclusion which points to his aforementioned radical solution.
Scorn will heaped on the book by people who cannot think of the countryside as anything other than a marketable resource, or those who think they are being environmentally perceptive because they call a gate a  peripherial access point and a path a mountain access route.
Nevertheless, Crumley's is a starkly presented argument which should be read and studied alongside the barrage of soulless technical documentation already written on this emotive subject.
A High and Lonely Place: The Sanctuary and Plight of the Cairngorms by Jim Crumley.
Jonathan Cape.
£14.99.
Hardback. 157 pages.
Colour photographs .
 Rennie McOwan 
Bartholomew Walk Edinburgh & the Pentlands
This handy sized guide is an ideal companion for walkers wanting to explore this part of Scotland.
It is the 33rd in the series of Bartholomew walking guides.
Each of the 40 walks selected, which range from one mile to eight miles long, are illustrated with a simple map and easy to follow step by step instructions.
There is a summary of the walks and a useful fact file with information about the length of the walk, the height climbed, how easy or difficult the walk is and whether there are public conveniences or public transport.
The 14 page introduction gives a good background to the history of the area, which really makes you want to get out there.
This well written, concise guide is presented in a very easy to use A5 ring bound format.
Walk Edinburgh and the Pentlands by Richard Hallewell.
Bartholomew. £4.99.
Paperback. 64 pages.
Black and white with maps .
 Henry Druce 
British White Water
Few canoeists carry guidebooks with them, for obvious reasons, but this one certainly won't be left behind in the car.
Terry Storry's British White Water is the first canoeing guide to comprehensively cover the classic white water rivers of England, Scotland and Wales.
He writes clearly and lightheartedly about the 100 best rivers and gives his expert advice on how to navigate their reaches.
Each detailed river description is headed with a brief but exacting summary which helps in making a quick decision about which river to tackle next.
For a more leisurely read he has included sections on hydrology and the debate on access to rivers.
British White Water by Terry Storry. Constable £10.95. Paperback. 332 pages with black and white photographs, maps and illustrations .
 Erica Anderson 
Windsurfing in a week
I'm sure that if I'd had this excellent book when learning to windsurf my progress would have been much faster.
The book is divided into seven chapters/days, which guide you on from novice to competent windsurfer, with the help of written explanations and step by step photos and diagrams.
The opening chapter gives an in-depth and simple to understand account of all you need to know before taking to the water.
Royal Yachting Association (RYA) trainer Hart sets out to familiarise his reader with the equipment, rigging and de-rigging techniques and how to recognise a good sailing location.
Subsequent chapters are devoted to mastering various techniques and manoeuvres.
Goals are set and everything you need to know to reach those goals, from where to position your feet and hands to dealing with wind conditions, is clearly explained.
The book assumes the role of the most patient instructor.
It gives clear detailed instructions, answers queries and suggests ways to improve your technique.
Hart's approach is down to earth and realistic and the tone throughout is overwhelmingly encouraging.
The author acknowledges that you will have difficulties but then suggests and explains what you can do to prevent them.
Whether you choose to set yourself the task of becoming an accomplished windsurfer within seven days or opt to learn the sport at a more leisurely pace,Windsurfing in a week will prove as invaluable a companion as your buoyancy aid.
Windsurfing in a week by Peter Hart.
Hodder and Stoughton. £4.99. Paperback. 122 pages with colour photographs and illustrations .
 Vanessa Thompson 
Buyers Guide
Pioneer venture bike from Raleigh
This hybrid bike from Raleigh combines popular mountain and road bike features making it perfectly suited for people who like mountain bikes but have no intention of going near a mountain.
The Pioneer is different from a mountain bike in that it has a less rugged frame and thinner wheels and tyres.
This makes it well suited to road use while it is still sturdy enough to cope with bumpy paths and tracks.
The Aris Powergrip gears are excellent.
There's a generous 21 speed selection to ensure you always find the right gear to suit the terrain.
I found them very easy to use — you simply twist the grips on the handlebars and the indexed gears click into place.
I used the bike extensively around London and it was perfectly suited to dealing the city's often poor roads.
The bike's many gears, light frame and thinnish tyres also make it highly suitable for cycle touring, as I found out on a weekend's cycling trip in Normandy.
Most of the people I went with took mountain bikes and they envied me the Pioneer as I sped along with far less effort that they had to use.
The one minor gripe I have is that the Pioneer doesn't have mudguards.
Mountain bikes don't have guards because if you're using them on wet and muddy terrain you don't want to constantly have to stop to unclog the wheels.
At the Pioneer is designed for road or light off road use this wouldn't be a problem.
The bike gave good all around performance and at £250 is excellent value for money.
Contact: Raleigh Industries Ltd, Triumph Road, Nottingham NG7 2DD.
Tel: 0602 420202 Henry Druce
Berghaus sultra overtrousers
Design: lightweight breathable and windproof overtrousers.
The trousers have elasticated waist and bottoms and the waist also has an adjustable toggled drawcord.
Full length zips covered with press studded storm flaps run down the side of each leg.
Material: polyester shell bonded to Goretex, polyester lining Size: extra small — extra large Colour: assorted colourways Price: £129.95 Contact: Berghaus Limited, 34 Dean Street, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE1 1PG.
Tel: 091 232 3561 
Multi purpose tube from bivvy bug
The Tube is an interesting piece of equipment which can be used for at least six different purposes.
It converts into an individual or group survival bag bid enough for eight people, a two person high or low profile tent, an emergency cape and a wind break.
It is a 10ft long round tube make from PU coated nylon.
It opens at both ends and fastens with drawcords.
It has five small lightweight poles, eight shockcorded guylines and eight small pegs.
Small elastic loops, toggles and ring plate eyelets are attached to the outside of the tube.
Clips on each end of the guylines pass through the eyelets to double-up or shorten the guyline so that they can be used in a variety of different ways.
Single poles are used at either end to convert the Tube into a high profile bivi tent.
However, the high profile design is not very stable in strong winds — I preferred the lower profile design even though you don't get as much headroom.
One problem when using the Tube as a tent is that the lightweight alloy poles have a tendency to bend at the joints when under strong pressure.
The Tube is also prone to suffer from condensation due to its shape.
This can't really be avoided but can be reduced by letting in as much ventilation as possible.
However the Tube is not designed as anything more than a temporary tent so it shouldn't be expected to give normal tent performance.
The Tube is definitely a worthwhile inclusion among your safety and survival equipment.
It comes with taped seams for £89.50 or untaped seams for £79.50.
It weighs only 2 lbs 10oz and is available by mail order.
Contact: Bivvy Bug, Boscarhyn, Syra Close, St Kew, Highway, Bodmin, Cornwall PL30 3ED.
Tel: 0208 84649 Dave Weatherley
Delesman Delux Kiddykarrier
Design: lightweight self standing carrier with adjustable seat, padded frame and hip belt.
Material: nylon/aluminium Colour: sage or teal Price: £45.99 Contact: Dalesman International Limited, Dalesman House, Marathon Place, Moss Side Ind Estate, Leyland, Lancs.
Tel: 0772 453918
Panasonic Super Mini Compact Camera
Design: compact, lightweight cameral with built-in flash unit and a 34mm lens Features: The C625AF camera has five flash modes with two these modes designed to reduce the red eye effect.
The lens is protected by a scratchproof UV filter.
The camera has an auto focus and a programmed shutter.
It also comes with a free camera case.
Weight: 5.6oz Price: £99.95 Contact: Panasonic Business Systems, Panasonic House, Willoughby Road, Bracknell, Berkshire RG124FP.
Tel: 0344 853552.
Gear test
Best selling Leather boots
What sets some boots above the rest?
We took ten of the top trekkers through their paces
Daisy Roots Veta V
The first pair of real hiking boots I ever had were Daisy Roots and I've always been impressed by their comfort.
They've come a long way since those days though — the soles of that pair were completely worn through after 400 miles walking in the Andes so that I ended up walking in my socks!
In spite of this I still have fond memories of them as they were such a soft, comfortable pair of boots from day one.
There's not much chance of wearing through the Vibram soles of these Veta V Daisy Roots though.
After several hundred miles they are as good as new with a reassuring grip in most conditions.
My one reservation concerns their performance on wet rock — however I've never found a sole that really grips well on it.
The uppers, made of one piece calf leather with leather bellows, well padded tongue and collar, provided the comfort I remembered from the first day.
I liked the soft Cambrelle lining which incorporates the new Molto pren (MTP) interliner — it cushioned my feet without making the boots too hot or sweaty on a warm day.
I found the ankle cuff the right height and shape to provide support without restricting my movement.
It is slightly cut away at the rear and so doesn't put pressure on the Achilles tendon.
At the end of this test I can find no failings in the manufacture or materials of the Veta V. Despite all the use I've made of them they are as good as new.
They are also extremely comfortable and competitively prices with other leather boots on the market.
Price: £69.95 Material: one piece calf leather upper, Vibram dual density sole and Cambrelle lining Sizes: 36–47 Contact: Daisy Roots, Westfield Trading Estate, Midsomer Norton, Bath BA34XD.
Tel: 0761 417777.
 John Harrison 
db Mountainsport Bowfell boots
These boots are a fine, solidly made pair of traditional walking boots.
They have stiff calf leather outers, a leather lining and the collar is comfortably padded.
There's a removable shaped insole with a Cambrelle top to wick moisture away from the foot.
And the full bellows tongue is topped with Cambrelle covered padding.
When I first put the boots on I found them surprisingly stiff — given this solid feel I wondered why there wasn't a traditional square cut heel on what's quite a heavily cleated waterproof sole.
Many prefer this for hill safety.
Once I felt comfortable in them I wore them on a couple of long section of the Cotswold Way and they fared well.
And when I was lucky enough to enjoy some rare hot weather my feet stayed as cool as I could have expected.
Later in the test on very wet days they performed well and gave good support and grip on grassy hillsides and rough stony paths.
Price: £71.99 Material: Calf leather, Skywalk sole, leather/Cambrelle lining Sizes: 38–47 Contact: db Mountainsport, PO Box 30, 60 Highgate, Kendal LA9 4UT.
Tel: 0539 733842.
 Catherine Moore 
Zamberlan Trek Lite
During the past seven years I've worn fabric and plastic boots so my feet needed some encouragement to weather leather again.
After five minutes all those memories of breaking in came flooding back.
However, the boots soon moulded themselves to my feet.
The Trek Lite is a very well constructed lightweight boot which has an all-in-one upper and is well made with strong stitching.
It is one of Zamberlan's original lightweight and best selling boots.
The Trek Lite use a premium grade Hydrobloc leather which absorbs very little water.
I used them on many rainy days, and never once suffered from wet feet.
The boots have a Vibram dual density sole that gave me all the grip and comfort I needed over steep wet grass and rough ground.
The foot and ankle were also well supported inside the boot.
The boot is lined with soft Cambrelle in the front half while the heel areas has a soft leather lining.
I liked the lacing design.
With only four D ring eyelets and three top hooks on each side, this makes the boot easier to slip on and off.
Although primarily a three season walking boot, I would use the boots during the winter.
The sole of the boot is strong enough to attach articulated crampons.
Price: £95 Material: Hydrobloc leather, Vibram dual density sole, Cambrelle/leather lining Sizes: 35–48 Contact: Europa Mountain Sport, Ann Street, Kendal, Cumbria LA9 6AB.
Tel: 0539 724740  Malcolm Anderson 
GT Hawkins Dalesman
On my first walk testing the Dalesman boot along a stretch of the Pembrokeshire Coastal Path, I developed blisters by the end of the day.
I felt the boots were rather narrow and inflexible.
But after the initial blisters and a bit of breaking in, I've been fairly impressed with these boots.
A new Skywalk sole with an environmentally-friendly cleat pattern gives a good grip even on slippery rocks.
And extra adhesion is given by the positive heel step, which is quite distinct.
The one piece upper has kept my feet dry even when walking through peat bogs.
The leather also still looks good, although I've notices it wearing away at the top of the ankle seam.
The boots are lined with Cambrelle throughout which effectively wicks away any excessive perspiration.
The removable sole is fairly thin and when I took it out I noticed that several small staples protrude quite sharply through the inner lining, which could become a problem after more use.
Although these aren't as stylish as more expensive models they are good basic boots which will keep your feet comfortable and dry — without breaking the bank.
Price: £54 Material: Water resistant leather, techniflex inner sole and Skywalk sole.
Cambrelle lining throughout Sizes: 37–46 Contact: G T Hawkins Limited, Overstone Road, Northampton NN1 3JJ.
Tel: 0604 32293.
Heather Barrett
Vango Andalo
The Andalo is a well constructed boot designed for the wider British foot, which gave me many miles of trouble-free walking.
The upper is made from a one piece Pro-Aquaguard calf leather which has a low cutaway padded cuff around the ankle to reduce pressure on the Achilles tendon.
The Andalo is made with a medium stiff Torsion Flex 3 midsole which gives rigidity and strength without being too inflexible like some heavier leather boots.
The inside of the boot is lined with Cambrelle and has a removable high density footbed — this combination added extra comfort when I was pounding over rough and stony ground.
Made into the lower part of the boot is a special ‘water shed’ membrane which successfully helped keep my feet dry.
The double density Skywalk sole gives good all-around grip on most types of surface.
Throughout the three month test I didn't have any trouble with my feet apart from a few blisters after first wearing them.
Price: £69.90 Material: Pro-Aquaguard treated calf leather, Cima ‘Torsion Flex’ 3, medium still midsole, Skywalk double density sole.
Cambrelle lined.
Sizes: 37–46 Contact: Vango, 70 East Hamilton Street, Ladyburn, Greenock PA15 2UB.
Tel: 0475 44122.
 Pat Weatherley 
Brasher Hillmaster
The Brasher Hillmaster is a well established boot which has proved its suitability for three season walking.
Designed in conjunction with Olympic gold medallist runner Chris Brasher, these boots are extremely lightweight and comfortable from the moment you first slip them on.
In fact they needed little breaking in and after only a couple of long walks they were very comfortable indeed.
Comfortable feet are ensured by a proofed leather upper which is much softer than most other lightweight boots, while a shock-absorbing wedge in midsole cushions every step.
A deep cutaway padded ankle cuff also improves comfort although the low cut gives limited support.
I was a little disappointed by the grip even on wet and damp rock by the rubber-cleated and stud-pattern sole.
However I found they performed excellently on steep and wet grass.
On my second outing with the boots I was trying to assess how watertight they were as it was raining heavily.
After two hours with dry feet I stepped into a bog up to my knees — end of test.
Since then I have had no problems with wet feet though.
Price: £79.99 Material: Proofed leather upper, rubber cleated and stud-pattern outsole with a microcellular midsole.
Nylon lining.
Sizes: 3–13 Contact: Brasher Boots, c/o Reebok UK Ltd, Moor Lane Mill, Lancaster LA1 1GF.
Tel: 0524 580100.
 Dave Weatherley 
Daisy Roots Veta V: no failings in design — support without restriction
db Mountainsport Bowfell: traditional walking boots with a solid feel
Zamberlan Trek Lite: comfortable, supportive and good in the wet
Vango Andalo: strong yet flexible, and comfortable over rough terrain
Hawkins Dalesman: performed well after breaking in
Brasher Hillmaster: no problems with wet feet
High Country Brecon
My first outing in these tough looking boots was three miles in good weather.
For the first mile they were brilliant, very comfortable, but then the Big Bs struck.
Dreaded blisters on the back of both my heels.
Undaunted I was sure it would be worth the effort of breaking them in — and it was.
A few more short-ish walks and I had the boots fully under control.
In fact the leather is softer than in many boots on the market and so the rest of the breaking in was painless.
The Brecons have a one-piece upper and therefore fewer seams to let in water.
The lightly-padded bellows tongue and Cambrelle lining stopped any water seeping in under the laces.
In retrospect I would not choose a boot with such a low-cut ankle again.
The padded collar is comfortable enough and they look more like a tough shoe than a walking boot — designed, I suspect, to appeal more to women.
Personally though I don't mind hefty boots and would prefer to feel the greater support around my ankles offered by other boots in the High Country range.
Otherwise I had no complaints.
The Vibram soles gave plenty of grip, wet and dry, and the boots have become comfortable friends for distance walking over reasonable terrain.
Price: £59.95 Material: water repellent leather, Vibram sole, Cambrelle lining Sizes: 3–12, 36–47 Contact: Dalesman International Ltd, 29 Marathon Place, Moss Side Ind Est, Leyland, Lancs PR5 3QN.
Tel: 0772 453918.
 Laura McCaffrey 
S-L Attak — Performance Flex
The S-L Attak is a high quality boot from its Hydro-Stop 12 calf leather to the Trionic sole.
Even so I did not expect my feet to be trouble-free after using them for the first time on a full day's hiking in the Purbeck Hills.
What impressed me most was the support the boot gave — almost like a ski boot but with no compromise of movement or sensation of cramping.
The Hydro-Stop leather, designed to improve breathability, was very effective — my feet remained dry and not too hot despite serious drenchings.
Other features include the attachment design for the Yeti Attak Gaiter and Cambrelle inner lining.
Price: £99.95 Material: Hydro-Stop 12 calf leather, Cambrelle lining, Performance Flex Nylon midsole Sizes: 36–48 Contact: Berghaus, 34 Dean Street, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 1PG.
Tel: 091 232 3561  Simon Abbott 
MOAC Lightranger
The MOAC Lightranger certainly lives up to name being a lightweight boot but without sacrificing weight for durability.
The boots were very comfortable from new even when wearing a single pair of walking socks.
The uppers are made from durable leather with a padded leather ankle support.
The lining is calf leather and there is a comfortable insole of shaped close cell foam.
The bellows tongue is unpadded.
I was impressed by the good adhesion and grip of the Vibram soles, performing well even in wet and slippery conditions.
The boots also showed high water resistance.
I soon became a fan of these boots which remained comfortable and performed well.
Price: £69.96 Material: leather upper, Vibram sole, top grade calf leather lining Sizes: 36–47 Contact: Mountaineering Activities, MOAC House, Demmings Road Ind Est, Cheadle, Cheshire SK8 2PE.
Tel: 061 428 1178.
 James Harrison 
Black's Paterno Boot
Black's Paterno is a traditional sturdy walking boot which provides the foot with a high level of firm support.
In the early stages the rigidity of the boots did put pressure on the front of my ankles, making them uncomfortable to wear.
However with time this subsided and never once have the boots given my blisters.
The boots are constructed using a solid one-piece leather upper with padding around the ankle collar and on the suede bellows tongue.
The boots are suede-lined and have a thin contoured footbed.
They lace using four sets of D-rings and three sets of hooks.
The boots served me well in wet weather doing an admirable job in keeping my feet dry, but on some of the hotter days this year I did find that my feet got unpleasantly hot and sweaty.
These are the sort of boots I would prefer to use for autumn and winter walking when a tough and study boot is required.
The Skywalk sole adds to the general solidity of the boots and gives good grip even in wet conditions.
All in all these boots are tough and overall good performers.
Price: £59.99 Material: pu coated leather, Skywalk dual intensity blakesewn sole, suede lining Sizes: women's 37–40, men's 40–47 Contact: Black's Camping and Leisure, Unit 3, Stephenson Ind Est, Washington, Tyne and Wear NE37 3HR.
Tel: 091 417 8800.
 Vanessa Thompson 
High Country Brecon: soft but tough leather with good grip in the wet
S-L Attak: impressive support without compromise of movement
Black's Paterno: traditional support
MOAC Lightranger: lightweight but still tough and water resistant
Gear Guide
Sleeping bags
Nights of restful slumber or drawn-out agony can depend on your sleeping bag.
We help you choose wisely.
A comfortable sleeping bag provides the means to re-charge your batteries at the end of a long day so it's important to ensure you have the right one for the job.
A bag which is too hot can be as uncomfortable as one which is too cold and while you can always add extra clothing when the temperature drops, it isn't necessarily convenient or desirable.
Season Ratings This is the most common way of expressing the performance of a sleeping bag.
The scale goes from 1 to 5 with 1 being summer, 2 late spring, summer and early autumn, 3 spring, summer and autumn, 4 all year around, and 5 expedition.
The ratings are only approximate and even where manufacturers quote a temperature as ‘good down to…’ these refer only to valley performances so camping at higher levels will require a warmer bag.
As a rough guide for the UK you can reckon on adding an extra season rating if you intend to use the bag at high level.
Construction If the filling distinguishes between good and poor sleeping bags, the way they're put together is the other main determining factor.
Synthetic sleeping bags are insulated with layers of insulating wadding.
If just a single layer is used it will be stitched through to the outer shell of the bag at intervals and sometimes stitched right through to the lining on cheaper bags.
The obvious disadvantage here is the possibility of cold spots along the stitching and such bags tend only to be good for one or two season use.
Heavier weight synthetics tend to use a double layer of wadding with the outer layer quilted to the shell and the inner to the lining.
The stitch lines are offset to prevent cold spots occurring.
Down-filled bags use a system of internal baffles at intervals between the inner and outer shells to keep the down evenly dispersed and maintain loft.
Because it's a loose filling there can be problems with it shifting in a poorly designed bag.
The very best quality bags are made not with single large pieces of fabric for each side of the shell but in smaller strips sewing shell and baffle together.
This eliminates stitch lines along the outside.
Down bags have inner and outer shells differentially cut — in other words the inner shell is smaller than the outer and this again ensures the filling achieves maximum loft for better performance.
Fillings Not so long ago, the dividing line between quality and budget seemed to fall neatly between natural and synthetic fillings.
But the bulky fillings of ten years ago are now for the budget bags only with a new generation of low-bulk polyester waddings now available which turn in much better all-round performance than down.
Durability is still a point of concern because most tend to lose a certain amount of loft with extended use.
Despite the recent tremendous advances in synthetic fillings goose or duck down is still favoured by those after good performance, light weight and small pack size.
Down itself comes from the breasts of birds as a by-product — they're farmed mainly in China for food.
A down bag will suffer no damage if left compressed for a long time — a synthetic-filled one almost certainly will and this is a serious disadvantage.
Some sleeping bags are made from fibrepile which is not a filling as such.
The fibrepile is either used as a liner to uprate existing sleeping bags or on its own as single or double layer bags.
They're particularly useful where a layer system can be tailored to the individual's needs and they are very tough-wearing.
Size Some sleeping bags are available in a choice of sizes but sadly not enough manufacturers provide the choice because of the costs of production.
As with the shape of the bag, size plays an important role in efficiency.
Too small and you're likely to compress the filling and lose loft, too large and the bellows action of air as you move about in the bag will ensure you never keep a nice layer of still warm air around you, essential to keep you cosy.
Always try a bag for size before you buy it.
Apart from checking the length make sure you can do the hood up fully without pulling the bag tightly over your feet — check for width at the knees, hips and shoulders in particular.
Shape The most efficient sleeping bag would be one which followed the contours of your own body perfectly.
But the trouble is it would feel pretty uncomfortable trussed up like that.
The compromise shapes manufacturers use try to give the best insulation without restricting movement unduly — most lightweight bags are either mummy shaped or tapered.
Rectangular bags sold as family camping and caravanning bags are fine for summer camping but no use for cold conditions.
Foot A sleeping bag should have some means of accommodating feet which after all can't lie flat.
The most common way of doing this is to put in a box-shaped insert at the bottom of the bag.
The alternative is to simply stitch across the bottom of the sleeping bag  ‘tube’ but to make the bottom seam vertical rather than horizontal, producing a fish-tail shape.
Whatever sort you have, make sure there's enough room for your feet without compressing any of the filling within the bag.
Hood For one or two season use you can get by quite comfortably in a sleeping bag without a hood.
But in colder weather a hood makes a lot of difference.
The most basic bags have a curved flap at the top with a drawcord running around the circumference.
This is alright but it does tend to bunch up a lot when it's pulled in close to the face.
The best hoods are shaped so that when they're pulled in there's less material to bunch up which means a closer and more comfortable fit around your head.
Linings Most lightweight sleeping bags are made of the same shell material inside and out.
They can feel cold at first but they do warm up quickly and in warmer conditions the modern micro-fibre fabrics commonly used don't feel sticky in the way that older nylon linings did.
Some bags are available with cotton or polycotton linings and these are more comfortable but they weigh more.
Zips There are the most common way of fastening sleeping bags.
Some manufacturers give a choice so you can have a bag without a zip, with a short length zip or with one which runs the full length of the bag.
For the purists a bag without a zip is going to be the most efficient at keeping warmth in and will always be lighter than the same bag with a zip.
But it can be difficult to get in and out of and there may be times when it's too warm — then what do you do?
A short zip is a compromise but most bags now come with a full length zip, generally with a double puller which enables you to open it up from the top or bottom to allow air to ventilate in warmer weather.
Many full-length zip bags are available in left and right hand versions enabling two to be zipped together.
And it is important to make sure that zips have a generous baffle behind them to prevent cold spots.
Cheaper bags often have small thin baffles which can flatten away from the zip or none at all.
Some good quality bags also have an anti-snag strip sewn between the zip and the baffle to prevent the fabric itself becoming caught in the zip.
Damp This is often a problem with sleeping bags.
While most bags have stuff sacks very few can be considered waterproof, so always pack your sleeping bag in its stuff sack inside a separate plastic bag.
Sleeping bags can become damp through normal use.
The human body produces something like two litres of water vapour in an average night and in cold conditions this can condense inside the filling.
Extreme cases on high altitude expeditions have ended up with sleeping bags frozen solid!
It's important to air your bag thoroughly whenever possible.
Damp affects down particularly badly causing the fluffy tendrils to clog together and lose the ability to insulate.
Some bags use a silicone treated down to enable them to resist damp.
Even if yours doesn't you can get the same effect by treating it with Nikwax TX 10 which you can use in the washing machine.
Synthetic bags maintain their insulation even when wet and they dry out much more quickly than the down bags.
Glossary
Fillings Bonded polyester: polyester fibre, coated with resin and bonded flat.
Dacron Hollofil: bonded polyester, each fibre has a hollow core trapping still air and aiding warmth.
Dacron Thermoline: solid structure polyester fibre bonded into a thin sheet.
Hollowfibre: hollow core polyester.
Hi-loft: hollowfibre polyester, continuous filament.
Isodry: slimline bonded polyester with a high warmth-thickness ratio.
Neidhart: micro-fine high thermal.
Polar-Guard: hollowfibre polyester, continuous filament.
Quallofil: bonded hollowfibre.
Superloft: continuous filament polyester.
Thinsulate fleece: heat reflective fleece.
Materials Caravan Technology: fine weave lightweight nylon.
Gore-Tex: microporous membrane, glued to various fabrics making them waterproof and breathable.
Pertex: fine lightweight nylon.
Taffeta nylon: lightweight nylon.
Trilobal: lightweight nylon with a shiny finish.
Vesa Tec: densely woven, highly breathable superfine fibres.
Construction Box wall: filling held in position via ‘boxes’ between the outer and inner.
Off-set stitched: method of stitching used on bags with more than one layer of filling.
Stitching does not pass straight through the layers but is ‘offset’.
Shingle: sections of filling overlap each other for extra warmth.
Slant wall: filling is in slanted sections giving more even distribution.
Through stitched: stitching travels through all layers of the bag.
V-Baffle: filling is in a series of overlapping tubes — bags tend to be warmer as more filling can be used.
Foot construction Box: bags have a raised square end.
Elephant's foot: raised circular foot, usually with a special circle inset section.
Fishtail: tapered foot section.
Flat: straightforward flat squared end, sometimes with a zip across bottom.
Shaped: Caravan's shaped feet take basic elephant's foot without insert.
Key to specifications
Price: A typical selling price including VAT to the nearest pound.
This is a guide price only.
Ctry: Country of origin.
Au-Austria, Ch-China, FE-Far East, F-France, HK-Hong Kong, Is-Israel, J-Japan, K-Korea, N-Norway, S-Spain, SW-Sweden, T-Taiwan.
Length: The length of the sleeping bag in feet and inches.
Width: The width of the bag in inches.
Where two figures are shown this is the chest width and foot width.
PCKD size: The packed size of the sleeping bag in inches.
WGT: The weight of the bag in pounds and ounces.
Filling: The type of filling: BP-Bonded Polyester, D-Down, DD-Duck Down, DH-Dacron Hollofil, DT-Dacron Thermoline, DF-Down/Feather, F-Feather, FD-Feather/Down, FP-Fibre Pile, GS-Goose Down, GLT-Thermal Fibre, HF-Hollowfibre, Hi-Hi-Loft, Ho-Hollofil, In-Insul 200, Is-Isodry, Mi-Microsoft, Ne-Neidhart, Nov-Novaloft, PoG-Polarguard, Py-Polyester, PyF-Polyester Fibre, Qu-Quallofil, SD-Superdown, SHF-Siliconised Hollowfibre, SL-Superloft, SDP-SP27, Su-Superloft thermal fibre, TF-Thermoflect, Th-Thinsulate Fleece, TP-Thermal Polyester, W-Wool.
Material: The type of material used for the outer and inner cover of the bag: AluN-Alu coated nylon, BS-Balloon Silk, BTr-Brushed Tricot Flannel, C-Cotton, CC-Cotton Cambric, Cl-Caralight Nylon, CP-Cotton Polymide, Ct-Caratex (Caravan Fibre), FP-Fibre Pile, Go-Goretex, Fl-Fleece, M-Microlight Microfibre, N-Nylon, N219d-Nylon 219 Denier etc.
NV-Nylon/Viscose, PC Polycotton, Per-Pertex, PM-Polymide, Pno-Polynosic, PS-Parachute silk, Py-Polyester, Rp-Ripstop, T-Trinyl (Polyester cotton/nylon), Tf-Taffeta Nylon, TrL-Trilobal, Ve-Versa Tec, VP-Viscose Polymide.
Suit: Which season the bag is suitable for.
A number shows how many seasons.
FC-Family camping for caravans etc.
E-Expedition.
Const: The type of construction: BW-Box wall, DB-Double bag, D-Diamond Quilted, DL-Double layer, OS-Offset stitched, OSA-Offset stitched with Thermoflect (aluminised reflective barrier), RB-Radiant Barrier, RS-Random stitched, Sh-Shingle, SW-Slant wall, TS-Through stitched, VB-V Baffle.
Foot Const: B-Box, E-Elephant's foot, F-Fishtail, Fl-Flat, Sh-Shaped 
Market roundup
Waterproofers
There's plenty of products to help you beat the leaks and protect your outdoor gear
Nikwax waterproofing wax
A colourless non-softening wax giving abrasion-resistant waterproof coating to leather boots.
Price: 3.6fl oz/102ml — £1.60; 6.3fl oz/180ml — £2.30; 4.4lbs/2kg — £15.80.
Liquid Nikwax
A non-oily liquid wax which cleans as it waterproofs.
Nikwax penetrates deeply giving a natural sheen to leather equipment and increases suppleness in the leather.
Price: 4.4fl oz/125ml — £1.85; 17.6fl oz/500ml — £4.40
Nikwax non-tack wax
A polymer-reinforced wax for reproofing waxed cotton making it water repellent and hardwearing.
Price: 6.3fl oz/180ml — £2.90
Texnik spray-on fabric re-proofer
This non-aerosol spray restores water-repellency to the polyurethane-coated nylon of outer clothing, rucksacks, tents and all extreme-use equipment.
Price: 10.6fl. oz/300ml — £4; 17.6fl. oz. /500ml — £5.20 Nikwax Tx.10 wash-in waterproofing TX.10 waterproofs all natural and synthetic fabrics and fillings in the washing machine.
Once treated fabric will be quicker drying, less absorbent and better insulated.
Price: 10.6fl. oz/300ml — £3.75; 35.2fl. oz/1 litre — £7.50.
Contact: Nikwax Durgates, Wadhurst, East Sussex TN5 6DF.
Tel: 0892 88 3855.
Granger's G-Wax
A mix of Beeswax and other waxes which waterproofs and protects leather.
Also available in cream form for restoring and conditioning hard or new leather without over-softening it.
G-Wax can be polished to a shine.
Price: 1.13ft. oz/35g — £1.07; 2.09oz/82g — £1.41; 4.9oz/140g — £2.15.
Granger's Fabsil
A colourless spray containing silicone and other rainproofing agents for waterproofing cotton, nylon and polyester.
Designed for use on tents and awnings, raincoats and anoraks.
Price: 14.1fl oz/400ml aerosol — £2.68; 21.2fl. oz/600ml aerosol — £3.81; 17.6fl oz/500ml non-aerosol — £4.09.
Granger's Super-Pel
Waterproofs cotton, wool or nylon items in the washing machine.
Suitable for quilted garments and sleeping bags.
Price: 3.5fl. oz/100ml — £2.57; 12.36fl oz/350ml — £4.69.
Granger's Wax cotton dressing
A high quality wax for waterproofing and protecting cotton without affecting its colour.
come in solid or spray forms.
The solid wax gives heavier protection.
Price: 6.3 oz/180g tin — £2.37; 7.04fl. oz/125ml aerosol — £2.45; 4.4fl oz/200ml — £2.50.
Granger's Mapdry
A spray-on treatment which makes paper and cloth maps water-repellent and to some degree oil-repellent.
Available in aerosol and non-aerosol sprays.
Price: 7.04fl. oz/200ml aerosol — £3.08; 4.4fl oz/125ml non-aerosol — £2.96.
Granger's G-Sport
This spray-on waterproof contains a high percentage of silicone and is suitable for use on fabric, suede and leather.
Available in aerosol and non-aerosol sprays.
Price: 7.04fl. oz/200ml aerosol — £3.10; 4.4fl. oz/125m; non-aerosol — £2.89.
Granger's Superpruf
Spray-on Superpruf waterproofs laminated fabrics without destroying breathability.
Water and oil are repelled while sweat escapes.
Approved by W.L. Gore.
Price: 7.04fl. oz/200ml aerosol — £3.18; 4.4fl. oz/125ml non-aerosol — £3.03.
Contact: Granger's Ltd, Grange Close, Clover Nook Industrial Park, South Normanton, Derbyshire DE55 4QT.
Tel: 0733 521521.
Mars Oil Original Leather Dressing
Free from acids, resins or solvents this natural concentrated dressing restores, preserves and waterproofs all leather articles.
It soaks in completely leaving a dry feel to the surface.
For restoring old leather or for breaking in new boots.
It cannot be used on suede or synthetic materials.
The oil comes complete with brush.
Price: 50ml — £1.50; 125ml — £2.25; 500ml — £4.75.
Mars liquid was leather conditioner
This liquid cleans, conditions and waterproofs all kinds of leather articles from shoes to jackets and can be used on lightweight and pale coloured leather.
It can used with waterproofing wax and polish for extra protection.
Price: 120ml — £2.25.
Mars leather wax
A wax treatment for waterproofing modern lightweight and waterproof leather walking boots.
The wax penetrates the leather and doesn't leave a film.
Price: 100ml — £1.99; 400ml — £4.49.
Contact: Mars Oil Company, Drayton, Banbury, Oxon OX15 6EE.
Tel: 0295 262844.
You can revamp everything from boots to tents with today's specialist products
a day out with…
Keith Wilson
Constructing repairing and maintaining footpaths is all in day's work for pathcraft manager Keith Wilson
‘I'm Operations Manager of Pathcraft, a private company set up in 1990 which specialises in the care, maintenance, repair and construction of upland footpaths.
I have the authority for setting up jobs, making initial contacts, specifying work to be done and negotiating contracts with individual clients.
I also make sure that the five-strong work teams are up to strength and have all the equipment they need.
On completion of a job I give a report to the client, raise invoices and if necessary chase them up.
It's the whole  enchillada .
The worst thing about the job is dealing with bureaucracy while the best thing is the two or three days I spend each week out on the hill getting my hands dirty, visiting worksites and clients.
We work all year round but can't work on the uplands during the winter months — we might not see it for six to eight weeks.
In winter we look for work on the more difficult lowland sites such as coastal paths.
Most of our work is for institutional landowners and managers such as the National Trust for Scotland, Scottish Heritage and local authorities.
We also work for private landowners.
Our activities are restrained by the availability of resources of clients.
We have innumerable paths that need constant work but due to financial pressures the lucky ones might only receive around six weeks' work a year.
However it's developing.
To correct erosion damage we built paths to concentrate pressure on a thin line that is capable of taking it.
For example if we run a path through an area which has an erosion damage of 20 metres across you're focusing pressure from 20 metres to one metre — that leaves 19 metres to reclaim.
Every path has its own problems.
A five-person team could cover 50 metres in a day, if the work is of a minimal nature.
In some particularly difficult circumstances, such as constructing a footpath on deep peat, it could only be four to five metres a day.
To create a one metre wide path on peat you need to excavate a one metre wide trench with a depth of eight inches.
Two geo (artificial) textiles are laid into the bottom of the trench which is then covered with four to six inches of angular cobbles which are laid in by hand so they knit together: A two inch layer of fine gravel is then spread on top.
A lot of landscaping work is also done on the surrounding area to encourage walkers to follow the path.
For example strategically placed peat mounds might be created on either side of the path.
When constructing a footpath we follow rules of thumb.
We have a policy of not importing alien materials unless we have to, using stone, turf and gravels from the area.
If materials do have to be imported we make sure they're appropriate, for example helicoptering in a supply of gravel from a similar type of hillside.
We work on the basis that we are not inflicting a footpath on the countryside but developing a footpath that is part and parcel of the landscape.
If we do our work well walkers won't realise that they are walking on a reconstructed path.
That encompasses what we are trying to achieve.
The way official paths often come into being is absurd.
Instigated by people in offices who say let's put out a guidebook.
They look at a map, draw a line and produce leaflets but nothing is done on the ground to withstand the pressure of hundreds of people following the route.
You just need to look at the disaster situation on the Pennine Way.
Resources must be applied so that there won't be unacceptable damage.
Walkers should stick to obvious paths even if they're badly eroded.
They shouldn't walk on the edges as that is what causes them to widen and the erosion to spread.
I'm from the countryside and have always earned my living from it.
I was always involved in tree planting and general countryside employment before getting a job as Field Officer when Scottish Conservation Projects came into existence in 1984.
I got my current job in 1990.
My ambition is for Pathcraft to have permanent employees in remoter parts of the country doing vital work and earning a living.
I firmly believe that the quality of the Scottish countryside is our greatest sustainable resource but it must be looked after.
If we continue to use the countryside in an exploitative manner it will run out.
And once it's gone it's gone.’
Report by Henry Druce