

SOCIAL POLICIES
The business of compulsion is not something theoretical or peripheral; it is of the essence of a right, because there is no point in declaring a right to what everyone is going to have anyhow.
The whole object of declaring a right is to justify or commend the use of compulsion to alter the existing relationship between individuals is a society.
‘Human Rights’,Journal of Medical Ethics, 3, 1977 
‘HOUSING’ from One Nation , 1950
The first parliamentary Acts concerning housing in the nineteenth century were Public Health Acts, which laid down requirements as regards sanitation and public safety.
Detailed regulations for the construction of new buildings were laid down in a great variety of Acts and bye-laws.
In 1868 and 1879 the two ‘Torrens Acts’ made the owner of a house responsible for keeping it in a habitable condition, and gave powers of compulsion to the local authority.
Further steps forward were taken in 1875 and 1879 when the ‘Cross Acts’ were passed.
These empowered local authorities to clear and reconstruct unhealthy areas, with powers to purchase compulsorily and to limit compensation.
The Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, unified previous housing legislation and remained the principal Housing Act until the consolidating Act of 1925.
This Act of 1890 incorporated the ‘Cross’ and the ‘Torrens’provisions, and empowered urban sanitary authorities to erect workers' dwellings independently of clearance schemes.
Its powers were extended by the Housing Acts of 1894, 1900 and 1903, and also by the Housing and Town Planning Act of 1909, the first major housing measure not introduced by Conservatives.
These early Acts stemmed very largely from sanitary powers, and did not provide any financial assistance beyond powers of borrowing money.
In tackling the grave problem of dilapidated and overcrowded property by reconditioning old houses and building new ones at low rents, the way was led, as it has so often been, by private individuals and voluntary associations.
Pioneers such as Octavia Hill showed what could be done in altering and repairing sub-standard property and in new methods of housing management and rent collection.
Others such as George Cadbury, who initiated Bournville Village in 1897, and Joseph Rowntree who started New Earswick Village, York, in 1904, experimented in creating model communities of houses built at prices which would enable them to be let at rents within the reach of working-class incomes.
It was an important principle that these housing schemes should pay their way.
In Joseph Rowntree's words, this ensured ‘that residents should not be placed in the position of being recipients of a bounty’.
Octavia Hill, too, adopted the principle that her housing ventures must be self-supporting, and that the  tenants should pay an economic rent; she maintained that rate-aided housing might be a danger to poorer tenants, who would be in the position of having to contribute through the rates to council housing, when they could scarcely afford the rent for their own inferior accommodation.
Bournville and New Earswick were followed by other estates put up by Industrial Housing Associations such as Lever Brothers at Port Sunlight, and many more recent ones, to the present number of about fifty-four.
The Housing Associations or Public Utility Societies took many forms and have prospered to this day.
There are the Old People's Associations, about 100 of them, which do not pay dividends and, therefore, function as charitable institutions; also counted as charities are the Housing Trusts, such as the Peabody, Astor, Guinness, Lewis and Sutton Trusts, which started to build large blocks of flats in industrial areas at an early date.
Then there were the Garden City Trusts, such as Welwyn, Hampstead and Letchworth.
These pay a limited dividend and provide a variety of dwellings.
The various types of Housing Associations continued to grow after the 1914–18 war, and under the Acts of 1930, 1936 and 1949 they became eligible for subsidies under certain conditions.
The Inter-war Years
After the 1914 war the building industry was completely run down and the nation's building capacity was almost non-existent.
When Lord Addison was made Minister of Health he concentrated entirely on methods of financing council housing, and under the ill-conceived Housing and Town Planning Act of 1919 he guaranteed local authorities all losses over that covered by a penny rate.
The money was raised on long term, mainly for forty years, and carried a high rate of interest.
The annual payments in 1934 were about £6and3/4; millions.
But the worst effect of this Act was its inflationary tendency.
The local authorities had little encouragement to economise, and housing costs rose steeply.
In August, 1920, the average cost of a local authority house was £930, about two and a half times as much as before the war.
Mr Neville Chamberlain, in his Housing Act of 1923, changed the subsidy arrangement to one by which the Government undertook to give a definite and limited contribution of £6 per annum per house for a period of twenty years.
The grants applied to houses both for letting and selling, and the local authorities were empowered also to give help to private builders.
The Chamberlain Act also provided for subsidising slum clearance schemes.
The Acts passed by Labour Governments, the Wheatley Act (1924) and the Greenwood Act (1930) to assist local authorities, were both used very extensively by subsequent Conservative and National Governments.
The National Government's Housing (Financial Provisions) Act, 1933, by confining subsidies to those for slum clearance, provided the local authorities with an increased stimulus to clear away the slums.
For the first time a mathematical definition of overcrowding was given by the National Government in their Act of 1935, and a determined attack was made on this evil.
As a result the average number of people in a house, which was 4.0 in 1931, was reduced to 3.5 by 1939.
The basic Conservative policy between the wars was to encourage the speedy building of houses at low cost by every means and through every agency.
The building of houses was not put into the hands of any one authority or any one agency.
Local authorities, housing societies, private builders, all were encouraged to build or convert property, either to let or to sell.
By encouraging the private builder to build houses at low cost to be let or sold, houses were provided at the least cost to the community.
These operations were largely financed by the building societies, at a very low rate of interest.
Modernisation and repair of rural cottages were also made possible by grants.
As a result of the stimulus given by Governments, mostly Conservative, to the building of small houses, and the free play of competition in the building industry, costs fell greatly, till the average cost of a council house in 1939 was £380, instead of £930 in 1920.
The results of this policy were remarkable.
Ninety per cent of the houses built in the inter-war period were of low rateable value, not exceeding £26 (£35 in Greater London).
During 1938 and 1939 slum-dwellers were being rehoused at the rate of 1,000 a day.
In the five years 1934 — 8 an average total of 335,000 houses was built each year in Great Britain.
In 1938 the total was over 360,000.
The present
We do not condone the bad quality and deplorable appearance of some of the speculative building between the wars, nor the lack of physical planning and the wasteful development of land (often good farming land); we shall have more to say about this later in the chapter.
But Mr Bevan's ranting polemics on the subject would perhaps sound better in the mouth of a Minister of Health who was getting enough houses built.
We must now examine his record.
In the five years up to the end of April, 1950, the post-war housing programme had provided 686,018 permanent houses and flats in Great Britain.
To this must be added the 157,000 temporary houses (the provision of temporary houses has now come to an end), the  repair of war-damaged property, and the use of huts and service camps.
For the month of April, 1950, the output of permanent houses and flats was under fifteen thousand.
In his Budget speech in April, 1950, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that ‘for the three years 1950–2 we have decided that the programme for Great Britain should be at the completion rate of 200,000 houses a year’.
It so happens that this rate is exactly the output of the building industry, averaged over the previous three years.
In fact the ‘decision’ is not a decision at all, but an acceptance of things as they are.
Output of New Houses
The building industry has today an appreciably larger number of men at work than in the years immediately before 1939, though probably rather a smaller percentage of the total are building new houses.
Yet the output is little over half what it was in the last five years before 1939.
Even when allowance is made for a certain diversion of effort from new house-building to repair, and for the possibility that the average size of the houses built in 1947–9 is slightly above that of those built in 1934–8, the contrast remains startling.
If the production of houses could regain the level of the 1930s, the rate at which overcrowding, sharing, and sub-standard houses could be eliminated would clearly be greatly accelerated.
The important work of slum clearance has been virtually at a standstill since 1939, only individual houses having been demolished, apart from an area in London intended as a showpiece for the Festival of Britain.
Although there is no survey which would give the extent of overcrowding and involuntary sharing, the evidence of the local authority waiting lists and of everyone's personal experience shows it to be very great.
These conditions touch on many aspects of our national life: health threatened by overcrowded and insanitary homes; education retarded when children have no room in which to do homework, or arrive tired at school after sleeping in a room with several others; marriages broken up through the strain of sharing a home or making do in cramped and uncomfortable quarters; Borstal institutions, remand homes and approved schools filled by the products of an unhappy home life.
A home of the right size and in the right place and at the right rent is everybody's first need.
Less would need to be spent on the other social services if housing conditions were drastically improved.
Nothing short of absolute impossibility ought to prevent those measures from being taken which will as soon as possible restore the  — pre-war productivity of the building industry in new houses.
There is no such impossibility.
Alleged Limiting Factors
At various times three different factors have been alleged to justify the limitation of the production of houses: the ‘capital investment programme’; labour; and materials, especially timber.
None will withstand logical examination.
The capital investment programme is, or rather purports to be, a plan for the employment of available resources of manpower and materials.
If more output is obtained from the same manpower — which it is here contended could and should happen — then the allocation of resources so far as manpower is concerned will be unaffected.
There remains, therefore, only the factor of materials.
Home-produced building materials, such as bricks and other refractories, adjust themselves to the prospective demand indicated by the numbers of houses contracted for and begun.
Capital equipment (except in expanding lines like cement) and, to a large extent, labour employed, remain constant whether or not producing at full capacity.
Generally speaking, the home materials industry could support a greatly expanded building programme without an appreciable increase of labour or capital.
A commentary on the effect of Government planning in the last few years is found in the recent report of the Working Party on the Building Industry: ‘The producers of building materials…found that their assessment of the demand for their goods was liable to be upset by sudden changes of policy which they could not possibly foresee.’
There remain finally the imported materials, of which timber alone is alleged to be a real limitation.
The price at which timber for building is bought has been higher than it need be and the amount  much smaller for two reasons: Government buying and Government decisions.
Both must be changed at once.
With an average of nine months' notice, the timber trade — buying on its own responsibility — could procure, at a lower average price per standard than is being paid at present, enough timber for all the houses that the building industry can build.
As long as import licensing continues, the requisite permits to import from dollar sources (Canada) should, if necessary, be given.
It is not generally realised what a tiny percentage of our current dollar bill would be sufficient to buy another 100,000 houses' worth of dollar timber.
Dollar expenditure on tobacco alone is at present ten times that on timber.
Mass production
All turns, therefore, upon restoring the output of the house-building industry as soon as possible to at least its pre-war productivity.
How is this to be done.
The answer lies in a comparison between the conditions under which it worked before the war and works now.
Now, nearly the whole output of houses is built under contract to local authorities and the remainder — between a tenth and a fifth of the whole — are built by licence to individual order.
Before the war the preponderant output was produced in mass for a prospective demand.
At the ruling prices fixed in a market determined by competition to meet this demand, the local authorities placed their contracts for estates to be built for slum clearance and relief of overcrowding.
The contrast, as nearly as the character of the house-building industry admits of the comparison, is that between mass-production and individual work, and shows itself alike in cost and output.
Under ‘mass-production’ conditions the industry was obliged to keep its labour-teams steadily employed, moving in a planned succession from one undertaking to another, and progressively brought down its costs to reach an ever-widening circle of demand for homes to buy or rent at economic figures.
Council building reaped the benefit of the price set by private enterprise.
The building materials industry geared itself to meet the steady predictable demand of the house-building industry, thus eliminating one of the chief impediments to the output of houses.
If the conditions of the 1930s can be reproduced, the same effects will follow from the same causes.
Our task is to bring back the mass-production element into the house-building industry, which can be done only by enabling it largely to work on its own authority for a prospective demand — by ‘letting the dog see the rabbit’.
Two main changes are indispensable to this end: the complete or virtually complete abolition of the licensing system, and a drastic alteration of the principles of the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947.
Licensing
As long as the volume of work undertaken by house-building firms is dependent either upon local authority contracts or upon the doling out at yearly or half-yearly intervals of a meagre number of individual licences, so long will increased productivity, and the gearing to it of the output of the building materials industry, be impossible.
It is a mistake to suppose that abolition of the licensing system would now mean an excessive number of houses started, or a soaring of prices, or the cessation of council house building.
The builder will not start more houses than he can reasonably be sure of completing in an economically short period of time, nor at a price at which he will be unable to dispose of them.
So far from sending prices up, the abolition of licensing would immediately bring down the market price of existing houses and would in a short time begin to make an impression on the costs of new ones; for the pressure of demand for new houses at a cost of nearly £2,000 apiece for a council-type is, in our opinion, very limited.
There is no objection to retaining an upper limit on size, though in practice people desiring large houses would either purchase old ones or wait until building costs fall.
Nor, again, would local authorities be prevented from continuing to build at something like the present rate — though (as will presently be shown) for different purposes.
The contractors who mainly tender for local authority contracts would continue to do so, just as in the 1930s, when private building was unrestricted, they built close on 100,000 council houses annually.
The local authorities would, on the other hand, be able to take increasing advantage in their contracts of the competitive prices established in the private sector of house-building.
Town and Country planning
The Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, in its present form offers an insuperable obstacle to competitive private building for a prospective demand.
By nationalising the right to use land for a new purpose — in this case, to build houses on it — the Act has placed on all building  land a value which is both high (because monopolistic) and arbitrary (because determined not by the market but by the individual, unappealable decisions of the Central Land Board in assessing ‘development charge’).
Somehow or other, a competitive market value for land for development must be restored.
Only thus will land be made available at minimum instead of monopoly prices, and only thus will the would-be developer be enabled to foresee his commitments and calculate his risks — both essential conditions of ‘mass production’ in house-building.
The central idea of the Town and Country Planning Act was to make possible the control of development without incurring charges for compensation, by the device of nationalising all development rights in advance.
We regard nationalisation of the land for all but its existing use (which is what nationalisation of development rights means) as a long step towards the nationalisation of the land itself.
It may or may not be true that positive control of development, the compelling of development to conform to a particular plan determined by the state, is unattainable without nationalisation.
But we do not want planning in this sense.
We want rather to see the state intervene only to prevent such use of land as is clearly anti-social or wasteful, while otherwise development is guided and determined by choice and by economic forces.
Planning in this latter sense is, in our opinion, perfectly attainable without either nationalisation or an insoluble compensation problem.
Briefly, we would prescribe certain categories of development which were prohibitable without compensation, while allowing others to be prohibited subject to full or partial compensation.
Whether, or what, compensation accrued would be determined by impartial tribunals, judicial and expert.
This method would mean prevention of development which was definitely unsound upon recognised objective standards, and the community would still be able to engage in amenity planning under the salutary control of paying for any economic value destroyed.
It would be associated with exclusive powers to planning authorities to buy, redevelop and resell areas of ‘obsolete or unsatisfactory development’.
We believe that a Town and Country Planning measure on the lines indicated would give planning authorities all the scope which they need and which the 1932 Act failed to give them.
Private Building
The re-creation of a large and expanding sector for private house-building, in the manner outlined above, would yield valuable byproducts.
There are, no doubt, many modern methods of construction, including far-reaching standardisation and various forms of prefabrication, which, developed and applied over years, would produce permanent and substantial economies.
The building industry, given an open field, competing for purchasers and paying a competitive price for its materials, will automatically be stimulated to invest in developing these modern methods, knowing that the reward of successful enterprise will in due course be reaped.
Government assistance is not only unnecessary, but positively harmful.
Again, those elements of the house-building industry, both firms and individuals, which are at present to an alarming extent drifting into jobbing and repair work on account of the difficulty of obtaining licences, will find their way back into the housing field, and the existing danger of skilled house-building teams being broken up and not replaced will be avoided.
When a considerable proportion of the industry is working competitively for the market, the inducement to employees and employers to introduce and operate incentive schemes will be greatly strengthened.
Experience in the past two and a half years has shown both the general effectiveness of such schemes and the need for a much wider extension of them.
Finally, in location, size and amenities, the private builder (including to a large degree the housing association) necessarily builds to suit his customers and thus provides an index of demand.
The distortions which occur under a system of all but exclusively local authority house-building — the tendency to conform to the past rather than the future location of population (with consequent immobilisation of labour), the wrong proportion of houses of different sizes, and the provision of more amenities than those for which tenants are prepared to pay the economic price — these will naturally correct themselves when private building is restored.
To combat the opposite extreme of jerry-building, we would make membership of the Housebuilders' Registration Council's register compulsory upon all contractors for local authority houses, with a view to rendering the building industry eventually an industry subject throughout to publicly-approved standards.
Social policy
So far from disabling local authorities from pursuing a social policy and achieving the two great purposes of subsidised housing,
(a)
the abatement of overcrowding or undesirable sharing, when associated with economic need; and
(b)
the clearance of slum areas,
the abolition of licensing and the restoration of private building would again set them free to perform these tasks.
At present, local authorities are building not for the poorest, nor for the slum-dweller, but mainly for those better off.
While the really poor live in privately-owned, deteriorating homes — and about 90 per cent of the houses in Britain are still privately-owned — the new council houses are occupied by those who will pay up to twice or three times as much in rent, even after allowing for a subsidy of at least 8s. 6d. a week, and often far more, out of the general rates and taxes.
The vast waiting lists of the local authorities, as well as the existing local authority houses, contain large numbers of families who, with private enterprise building again at the rate and real cost of the 1930s, would be both able and willing to accommodate themselves at economic rents or prices.
There is no need to apply a means test to applicants for council houses when the building industry has been freed: the lists and the tenancies will ‘sort themselves out’.
At the earliest moment, local authorities should be required to submit a building programme for five or ten years to come, based upon a systematic plan to deal with slums and with acute overcrowding.
As the volume of private building increases over the two or three years following the proposed changes of policy, local authority housing must as soon as possible be restricted to these objects.
This is the logical consequence of bringing the building industry to full productivity; otherwise, the absurd situation is reached that housing, unlike any other normal necessity of life, is something with which a substantial proportion of the population can never be provided at a decent standard without subsidy.
The conclusion of the policy being pursued at present is that eventually everybody will be subsidising nearly everybody's housing.
It would be wrong not to draw attention to the grave problem which is being created for the future by the production of large  numbers of council houses at such rents that, if a fall occurs in building cost, difficulty will be experienced in letting them, despite the subsidy.
It seems that when this crisis breaks, drastic policies of rent-pooling and of sale may be necessary to extricate local authorities from their financial difficulties.
Rent Policy
We have referred to council rents, but, of course, these are the only ones which are not frozen by the Rent Restrictions Acts.
No housing policy can be sound which does not deal courageously with rent restriction as a whole.
In its present form, rent restriction is causing an appalling wastage of existing accommodation and condemning millions of families to ever-worsening conditions, by restricting rents to levels which render the repair and maintenance of premises impossible.
The general lines of reform must be to permit increases on prewar standard rents which will cover maintenance costs with a certain allowance for arrears; but these costs should be certified by the relevant local authority and only collectable upon that authority's certificate that the appropriate standard of maintenance has been attained.
As soon as possible afterwards, the existing legal obligations on landlords in regard to repair and maintenance should be put into full force again.
The system of rent tribunals for furnished and post-1939 unfurnished houses is in our opinion a disgrace to British justice.
A Court of Appeal from their decisions must be immediately provided.
The whole arbitrary system itself, which was a temporary measure of protection for tenants in a period of acute post-war scarcity, should be dispensed with as soon as the output of the house-building industry has regained a satisfactory level.
This measure of reform in rent restriction will save hundreds of thousands of homes from becoming slums.
By bringing restricted, council and ‘free’ rents closer together, it will also facilitate exchanges.
This will liberate an undoubtedly large reservoir of housing space at present withheld from full use by sitting tenants whom rent restriction prevents from moving.
Conclusion
It is abundantly clear that the homeless have nothing to hope for from the socialist Government, which promised them so much in 1945 and so little in 1950.
In the intervening five years the socialists have allowed the national stock of houses to deteriorate gravely, have  allowed the building industry to drift into an inefficient and wholly artificial pattern, and have done their best to disorganise the building materials industries.
They have created slums, not cleared them.
We believe that a Conservative Government, putting the provision of homes above the sanctity of unpractical doctrines, could stimulate a rate of building which would rise rapidly year by year.
But we recognise that, in addition to a much higher rate of new building, additional emergency measures are needed to reduce the tragic number of homeless people.
For example, it cannot be right that the Government should retain as offices private houses and blocks of flats while homeless families are dossed down in imperfectly converted workhouses, or forced to ‘squat’ in Nissen huts.
Similarly, it would seem that an excessive amount of expensive building work is being put into palatial Government offices all over the country.
We are as anxious as anyone to provide good working conditions for public servants; but would the public servants themselves honestly contend that working conditions during eight hours of the day should, in the present emergency, take priority over the living conditions of mothers and children for the whole twenty-four hours?
We can scarcely believe it.
At present, too many of the sacrifices are being borne by those who, for the sake of posterity, should least be called upon to make them.
‘THE WELFARE STATE’ Brighton Speech, 12 October 1961
The Roman poet says, ‘dutce est desipere in loco ’, ‘an opportunity for indiscretion is sometimes pleasant’.
If the doctrine of collective responsibility can never quite be forgotten or discarded, at least it weighs most lightly on the wearer in the bracing, not to say rarefied, intellectual atmosphere of the CPC.
Therefore I do not see why tonight I might not occasionally, if the argument should lead that way, be guilty of saying in office some of the things which I have said out of office.
The Plowden Report on Control of Public Expenditure contained, amongst other nuggets of wisdom, the following sentence which I should like to take as my starting-point: ‘The social changes of the last fifteen years have altered the incidence of hardship, so that there now may well be excessive social services for some purposes and inadequate ones for others.’
I should have thought that, in the abstract, no one was likely to quarrel with that statement.
Indeed, the reference to ‘the social changes of the last fifteen years’ makes it an understatement: for there is not a single social service today which was not framed more than fifteen years ago.
The conception of all of them, in more or less their present form, dates from the social revolution of 1942 to 1944.
Yes, you heard me correctly: I said 1942 to 1944.
The general election of 1945 was in some ways only a consequential recognition of the revolution which took place under, and inside, the Coalition Government at the height of World War II, and was announced to the outside world by a cloud of White Papers — on planning, social insurance, employment, a national health service — much as the election of a new Pope is first evinced by the smoke from the burning ballot papers.
But not only does the framing of the existing social services date back twenty years already.
The conditions in the light of which those services were then framed were the conditions of the inter-war years — the only available peacetime background for the wartime revolutionaries to use.
If the Plowden Committee had referred therefore to ‘the social changes of the last thirty years’ instead of fifteen, they would have been guilty of no inaccuracy.
Those thirty years span some of the sharpest changes of trend in modern history, from persistent deflation, for instance, to persistent inflation, or from unemployment  averaging 10 per cent to unemployment averaging 2 per cent , as well as a rise of at least one-third in national income per head.
It is therefore wildly unlikely that the Plowden Committee's assertion should not be well founded, that ‘there now may well be excessive social services for some purposes’.
It is also quite likely that there is truth in the other half of their assertion, which sounds as though it were consequential, but really is a quite unconnected proposition, namely, that there now may well be inadequate social services for other purposes.
However, without for the moment looking at the two halves separately, I imagine everyone would be prepared to accept the proposition in theory .
In theory, too, the Plowden Committee left it.
They did not — and it was admittedly no part of their business to do so — inform us for which purposes the existing social services are ‘excessive’; and it may be observed that other commentators, political and non-political, though they are frequently willing to indicate social services which in their opinion are ‘inadequate’, are extremely taciturn when it comes to illustrating the more obvious half of the truism with specific examples.
Admittedly the CPC itself, in its 1958 symposium on The Future of the Welfare State , and more recently the Bow Group too have ventured to step upon the tail of this coat.
But these are exceptions which prove the rule.
Inertia and Institutionalisation
Acceptance of a proposition in principle and rejection of it in practice is a perfectly normal human attitude, as common outside politics as inside.
It is, I suppose, one manifestation of man's indomitable urge to ‘have it both ways at once’.
None the less an examination of the special reasons why the Plowden proposition is accepted as a truism in general but treated as an abominable heresy in particular may be worthwhile.
The most obvious of these reasons are political ones, in the pure, party, vote-catching sense of that term.
In politics it is more blessed not to take than to give.
The termination of a benefit or a payment or a service is a sharp, specific assault upon identifiable individuals; it gives political opponents something solid to talk about; they can actually produce the bodies and point to the wounds.
By contrast, the failure to introduce new benefits, payments or services is a much blunter grievance: political opponents have only something hypothetical to discuss; individual electors do not easily identify themselves with the deprived.
As Pericles told the Athenians in the Funeral Speech: ‘It is not the lack of what we have never experienced, but the deprivation of what we are accustomed to, that we feel and regret.’
Ministers of Health would have incurred little or no extra  criticism if they had failed to provide the services which the £25 million yielded by the prescription charges have made possible; what criticism there was, would have been diffused over a hundred objects and none of it would have made a distinct impression on the mind of the electorate.
Yet the utility of those services to the public is out of all proportion greater than the continuation of prescriptions free or at one shilling each would have been.
Moreover, while the minus is always identifiable and indisputable, the plus is often not identifiable separately or not identifiable as a consequence of the minus .
No one, for example , can take hold of twenty-five million pounds' worth of health services and say that these, and these precisely, are owed to the fact of a prescription charge: you cannot point to the beds, the treatments, the nurses and demonstrate that these would not individually have been provided, however undeniable the fact may be in general .
Even if the equation could be established, the beneficiaries are not the same or do not see themselves as the same: the patients paying two shillings for their bottles of medicine do not identify themselves with the patients admitted to hospital sooner or treated more efficiently.
Similarly the citizen as a taxpayer does not identify himself — and indeed is only partially identical in fact — with the citizen as a recipient of tax-financed benefits.
Finally, there is the fact of human nature summed up in the saying, ‘There's no gratitude in politics.’
Even if there were equal numbers of equally identifiable gainers and losers, the political resentment of the losers would outweigh the political gratitude of the gainers.
When an addition is made to the system of state-provided services, it is only made because there is a general opinion that the time is ripe for it and that such provision is ‘only right’.
The beneficiaries thus regard themselves as having received no more than their due, to which they were entitled anyhow, while those whose benefits are discontinued regard themselves as cheated of what they had a right to and had been encouraged to expect.
Politically, therefore, the inducements to continue what the Plowden Committee call ‘excessive social services’ are much stronger than the inducements to discontinue them or to supplement any which may happen to be ‘inadequate’.
But it would be a cynical mistake to limit the forces of inertia to these narrowly political ones.
It is the characteristic of social services that they become rapidly and strongly institutionalised.
True, all acts of government policy create a presumption that they will remain in force and are an invitation to the citizen to adapt his private behaviour accordingly; but the tendency of decisions in the social service field to create vested interests is of a quite peculiar order.
Take, by way of comparison, the fiscal system: even here, as in all human affairs, it is easier to leave things alone than to alter them.
But look at the effective freedom which a Chancellor of the Exchequer possesses to make major alterations over a comparatively short span of time in the methods by which a given amount of revenue is raised.
Surtax, profits tax, fuel tax — none of them, not even Schedule A of the income tax, has achieved the independent existence and power of survival which belongs to an institution.
The institutionalisation of the social services is an interesting study in its own right, especially for Tories, who are the connoisseurs of institutions, and I should like to offer some case histories.
Subsidised Housing
I will begin with what I always think is the queerest of the social services, and the one with the strangest story — subsidised housing.
This was the social service which happened by accident.
The story is well known, but always worth retelling.
At the end of the First World War it was confidently and almost universally assumed that after a short time money would be back to its pre-war value and market prices (including market rents) to their pre-war levels.
Meanwhile, as a very temporary measure, wartime rent restriction was retained and, equally as a very temporary measure, since new houses would not be built to let commercially in these circumstances, a subsidy was introduced to bridge the gap — between pre-war and post-war rents.
We know the sequel.
Pre-war values never did come back; rent restriction never did cease to be considered necessary, even after the building of three or four million new houses; subsidies never were discontinued.
Instead, they became an institution, and a vested interest.
Mankind has a powerful desire to rationalise its actions; and when people found themselves ten, twenty years after the First World War still paying housing subsidies, this desire to rationalise, and perhaps a natural sense of shame, forbade them to recognise that they were doing so merely out of unwillingness to recognise that 1914 prices and money values had gone for ever.
So it began to be asserted that this was a social service, and that there was something inherently reasonable and even laudable about subsidising the price of rented house-room — though how it could be reasonable or laudable to reduce by arbitrary and locally varying amounts the rents of an arbitrarily selected minority of families who have no common economic or other characteristic, is something which no one to this day has attempted to explain.
It is as if we were to pay family allowances to every third family on a different scale in each place.
The natural history of the upas tree of housing as a social service, growing from the twin roots of rent restriction and indiscriminate subsidy, would be a fascinating subject for a long book.
At each stage the vested interests — of protected tenants, of council tenants, and of local and national politicians — in the system, grew stronger and more complex, so that the wonder is not that it lived so long but that two men were found at last, in Duncan Sandys and Henry Brooke, of sufficient courage and determination to lay the axe to the roots and start hewing a way back to sanity.
If anyone thinks my language exaggerated or highly coloured — and such there might well be, considering that no one here under pensionable age can have any recollection of a world without rent restriction or subsidised rents — let him recall another upas tree which we only managed to cut down in the nick of time ten years ago.
It was growing from the twin roots of controlled food prices and food subsidies.
Perhaps you have forgotten about the food subsidies?
Sir Stafford Cripps in 1950 pegged them at £410 million.
(But after all he also pegged the cost of the National Health Service at £400 million!)
If the incoming Conservative Government had not swept them away at once it would today seem no less difficult to abolish the ‘social service, of subsidised food than the ‘social service’ of subsidised housing.
Luckily we killed it before it became a full-blown institution and today no one seriously expects that food, or clothing, or even that overriding necessity, a television set, should be subsidised for all consumers, still less for a minority.
Otherwise, in the production and distribution of food we should have all the corresponding phenomena to those we actually have in housing: ten million family budgets based on artificially low rents; the machinery of house production divided sharply into two, councils building to rent, companies building to sell; the price of rented house-room a voting issue in local and parliamentary elections.
In short, the ration book would have become a national institution like the council house.
As I said, housing is perhaps the extreme instance of irrationality among all the social services; each has its own peculiar form of institutionalisation.
Health Service and Education
The National Health Service was created by nationalising the hospitals and placing comprehensive state contracts for medical, dental and ophthalmic services.
The new structure replaced the previously existing variety of organisations through which medical care had been financed: national health insurance, a multiplicity of forms of private insurance, local government finance, private contracts and payments, charity and endowment in all manner of guises.
Comparison with  other advanced countries, where medical care is financed in different ways, and with the trends in this country before the National Health Service, suggests that if the forms of organisation which the National Health Service replaced had continued and developed, the quantity, quality and distribution of medical care here today would not be very substantially different from what it is under the National Health Service.
This does not mean, however, that it is practicable to switch out of this system again.
The old channels through which the relevant resources flowed have dried up or been dug up.
Without underestimating the possibility that we may still witness some increase of private medical insurance, it would not be realistic to pretend that one can see how an alternative system could now grow up beside, or be substituted for, the channelling of this £1,000 million of the national income through government agencies.
Indeed, this institution is self-perpetuating positively, and not only negatively — not only through inertia, but through activity.
When the responsibility for providing medical care is focused and vested in a department of government, all the aspirations to improvement are bound to strengthen the institution.
In the hospitals, for example, a Minister of Health who is trying to do his duty must aim at increasing the corporate sense, morale and public esteem of the service, because he knows that this will be one of the ways of raising standards.
In proportion as he succeeds, the institution itself will be that much more deeply rooted.
In this respect the National Health Service is unique among the social services: it is the only instance where the great majority of a specific service is the direct responsibility of an organ of the central government.
This makes it very different from education, where only the supervisory responsibility is central, while direct responsibility rests with between one and two hundred executive bodies, deriving their authority from a local electorate.
Nor is the public education system historically the product of an act of nationalisation: it is the slow outcome of the fostering of voluntary, as well as the planting of state, establishments.
Moreover, the commitment of the state to provide education is still quantitatively controlled, in a sense in which the commitment of the National Health Service to provide medical care is not: for example, the state fixes a compulsory period of school attendance, defines the standards of provision in schools within the system, and indicates the stages and branches in which further commitments will be accepted.
It should perhaps be added that, although neither the National Health Service nor the education system is exclusive in the sense of prohibiting private provision, the prestige and importance of independent provision is immensely greater in the field of education than in that of health.
Pension Expectations
An interesting example of a different type of social service institution is that concerned with the provision of livelihood for those unable to earn by reason of sickness, disablement, lack of work, or above all, age.
Provision for the subsistence of those no longer working has always been made by the community.
It is the organisation for collecting and distributing that provision which changes.
The history of state insurance and assistance from the early years of this century is one in which social and demographic changes intertwine strangely with political theories and motives.
Socially and demographically the period has been dominated by two factors — the fall in the size of families and the increase in the expectation of survival to retirement, the effects of which are still far from having exhausted themselves.
These changes stimulated the search for some substitute for the individual proof of need or ‘means test’.
In very broad outline, the first stage (1908) was to pay, subject to means, a pension well below subsistence which would supplement income from other sources.
The next stage (1925) was to increase the pension but make it conditional on having paid certain contributions, which were compulsory below a given income.
The third stage (1946) was to increase the pension to what was intended to be subsistence level, but render it conditional on retirement and make contribution compulsory for virtually all.
Thus, leaving the graduated scheme out of account for a moment, the position we have reached today is that the state pays to all retired persons, without regard to means, a pension roughly of subsistence value.
It finances these pensions from a flat-rate weekly poll tax, called a contribution, and a levy on employers per head of employee, with some supplement from general taxation.
The amount of the pension is not related actuarial to the sums which each recipient has actually paid in contribution; but the right to receive it is treated as flowing from the possession of a contribution record, and indeed the pension rates are represented as related to the contribution rates, assuming contribution over a full working life.
In this social service, therefore, the institutional element consists not in the great organisation over which John Boyd-Carpenter presides, with its large and efficient staff and its famous calculating machine at Newcastle.
It consists in the expectation on the part of the whole population that they will receive from the state on retirement a pension sufficient for subsistence, whatever their income.
They have been indoctrinated for nearly forty years with the belief that their right to this pension does not arise simply out of a public decision to pay it but is a right vested in the individual by virtue of certain payments made by him, and analogous to what would be his  entitlement under a contract with an insurance company.
This expectation has rather been confirmed than otherwise by the superimposition in the last two years of an element of graduation in the contribution, the additional yield of which for many years to come will mainly help to finance the standard pension but which creates a right to additions to it which will gradually build up over the next forty years on an actuarial basis.
Meanwhile, assisted and deliberately encouraged by various tax remissions, an increasing number of people are covered, to an increasing extent, by non-state pension schemes, many of which provide benefits well above subsistence.
A priori it might have seemed logical that as these increase and spread, they would render the state pension superfluous and enable the system of compulsory redistribution which finances it to be discontinued progressively.
In practice, the state scheme contributions pre-empt a slice of incomes which would otherwise be available for saving through pension schemes, and thus to that extent would be expected to slow down the growth of non-state provision.
The great obstacle, however, to a withering away of the state pension is the fact that, although in economic reality current pensions are paid from current contributions and other taxes, the state pension scheme has been institutionalised as a structure of vested rights or expectations stretching forward over half a century.
Compared with the social services we have been examining, the residue present the institutional problem only in a comparatively mild form.
Even the family allowances, though based in their present form upon the experience and conditions of the inter-war years — when Seebohm Rowntree's surveys in York suggested that one male in four earned less than was necessary to maintain a man, wife and two children above the poverty line — consist of a simple system of payments and enter into budgetary habits and expectations no more and no less than the fiscal allowances, of which I once suggested to a CPC conference they might be regarded as an extension.
Coping with Crime
So let us turn from the obstacles to applying in practice the theoretical truism in the first proposition of the Plowden Committee — that ‘there may now well be excessive social services for some purposes’— and consider the second proposition — that there may now well be ‘inadequate ones for others’.
If we have blind spots, in what sectors will they lie?
What social services ought this generation to be constructing which the next or next but one will erect when the need for them is already yielding place to others?
Can we catch up, by a little clairvoyance, on the persistent tendency of state provision to come thirty  years late?
I will offer two guesses, in as many words — crime and age.
Ten years ago I remember I used to think that it was our mental hospitals which later generations would regard as the most staggering and incomprehensible blind spot of our time, on which they would look back as we do upon the generations which burnt witches or tried by ordeal.
Thanks mainly to two or three key discoveries in the field of medical science, we now have it in our power and, I hope and believe, in our will, to expunge this blind spot.
Treatment of the delinquent claims today the place which treatment of the lunatic but lately occupied, as a gross example of society's inadequacy to cope with its members.
I am not referring to the debate on methods: the disagreements of the floggers and anti-floggers are dwarfed by the appalling facts of prison provision and the deficiencies of our penal system.
It may not be a popular view, but I would dare to say that prisons are our most important, and also our most deficient, social service.
Here, whatever else is obscure, the need for a much greater commitment of resources is indisputable: without, for example, a massive renewal and expansion of physical provision, men and methods will not avail, though men are the essence of the service and methods cry out for more and more exploration.
New methods will come, no doubt, with the fruition of that research which the Home Secretary has urged and supported; but we cannot even claim to be using existing methods, when 7,550 prisoners are sleeping tonight three in a cell, and when policies which, but for the war, would have been on the statute book in 1939, and have already been on the statute book for half a generation, have hardly begun to be carried into effect for lack of premises.
Responsibility for the Old
It the maintenance of law and the management of delinquency are fundamental to any ordered society, responsibility for the old is scarcely less so.
It seems as certain as anything can be that the absolute numbers of the old, and for a long time also their number relative to the whole population, will be far higher in future than anything experienced in the past.
This large and increasing number of old, and very old, people will contain a high proportion of individuals who have either no family setting and connections, or at any rate none that is of practical relevance to their way of life.
The altered structure of society — the small family size, the small dwelling unit, the substitution of mechanical aids for domestic service — has contributed as much as the  mere increased expectation of survival to this striking phenomenon of a large and increasing number of aged and isolated individuals.
The problem which it presents is not primarily a financial one, but a physical one.
It is not a problem which is solved, or even touched, by another 10s. or £1, or £2, on the pension.
It is the problem of how the necessary support, in a physical and environmental sense, which in different circumstances the old would obtain in the setting of a family or a closely-knit village community, can be available to these millions of ageing individuals isolated in a modern industrial society.
I mean no disrespect to the geriatric branch of the hospital service nor to the domiciliary services or the rapidly increasing old people's houses and homes provided by local housing, health and welfare authorities when I say that I believe we are still groping and fumbling with this problem — all of us, social scientists and politicians alike.
I also believe that the size of it and the rate at which it is growing indicates the use of the central organising function of the state (which is one characteristic of a social service).
At the same time I doubt whether the state alone can solve it.
Of course, the problem can be expressed in economic terms — the maintenance of a given number of aged people in the conditions of modern society is relatively more costly than in the past: in accommodation, in service, and in attention — but, as I say, money benefits and subsidies are not the heart of the matter.
The heart of the matter is the provision of a physical and social environment through which the members of society may gradually withdraw from it as securely and as worthily as they enter it through the environment of home and education.
It is in this form that I would express the challenge of the social and medical revolution which has given rise to the modern problem of old age.
I question whether we have yet found the secret.
The more I see of provision for the old, the more irresistibly a thought rises in my mind, which, however hesitantly, I will try to express.
It seems to me that it lacks somehow a soul or a purpose.
As more and more survive and are kept alive beyond the utmost limit of working life, the economic or social function of the individual provides less and less of a motive or framework for his survival; and when we ask Why? we find ourselves thrown back upon purpose in a sense which is neither economic nor social nor even secular.
We are brought face to face with the question, ‘What is the purpose of human life itself?’
The monastic rule of the Middle Ages expressed an answer to this question.
‘The purpose of man,’ it declared, ‘is to praise God, and this, man's proper work, remains when all else is past or put aside.’
The rule was a framework within which this answer to the question could be lived.
I am conscious that I speak in parable; but all that vast  organisation and provision which must be made for the old in the coming generation will bring disappointment unless the purpose at the heart of it is one that satisfies.
Principles and Practice
But I am straying from my theme.
Enough if I have shown that if we care to do so, we can illustrate the second as well as the first half of what I may call the Plowden proposition.
We see a range of existing social services, entrenched to varying degrees in institutional form, reflecting to varying degrees needs and economic conditions which have passed or are passing away.
We see new needs, born of newer economic and social conditions, which call to be met.
We recognise that logically this demands a transfer of resources and effort from the former to the latter, that in the words I have so often quoted, some social services are ‘excessive’ and others ‘inadequate’— that it was bound to be so and that it is so.
The question for us, for the Conservative Party, is whether, having seen this, we put the file into the ‘Too Difficult’ tray and ‘pass by on the other side’.
I can see the expediency of that course; I can see the expediency of ministers not making addresses which explore this kind of territory and arrive at this kind of conclusion — except, of course, to the CPC, which is a living protest against the politics of expediency.
However, I confess that I do not believe a party, any more than the society which it serves, can fail to suffer if it knowingly allows institutions to fall more and more out of correspondence with contemporary needs.
In Britain of the 1960s this challenge of the Welfare State is not isolated: it is but one aspect of the challenge which confronts us throughout the whole political field.
The world wants to know if Britain can adjust to the facts of life or will allow old fears, old habits, old prejudices, old prides to weigh down its vitality and eat up its resources.
Dare I say, as a once member of One Nation, that the world wants to know if Britain dare make Change its Ally?
I don't know the answer, for only the people can give it; but I do know that it is our duty to ask them.
The question falls to be posed in different terms in the different fields of policy.
Here in the social services, which, in volume of resources involved, represent between one-third and one-half of the activities of the state, the question, it seems to me, cannot be posed by disconnected, spasmodic pluses and minuses but by presenting a broad and large conception of the manner in which resources ought to be redeployed to meet modern realities, and this will not be done without soberly assessing but boldly facing the in-built obstacles to that redeployment.
This evening I have attempted a contribution to  the work by taking the Plowden propositions and suggesting that if they are true in theory they demand recognition in practice.
Perhaps in this operation the CPC can give a lead to the party and the Government.
It would not be the first time that it had done so.
‘A VIEW OF EDUCATION’ 14 DECEMBER 1963
I rise to return thanks on behalf of my fellow guests and myself for the honour you have done us, and the pleasure you have given us, by asking us to share in this, your annual occasion.
As my own thank-offering I would like to try briefly to express some thoughts on education by which I have long been troubled and to which no place, for reasons which I will show, could be more appropriate than this.
One of the great moments in the literature of the world is a passage near the end of the second part of Dante's Divine Comedy .
It is, in a sense, the climax of the whole work.
The poet has ascended through all the regions of Hell and Purgatory, and now at last, on the threshold of Paradise, comes to his long-expected reunion with Beatrice.
Her greeting to him is a speech of rebuke so savage that at first he stands dumb, then bursts into tears, and finally falls insensible.
What was the fault that had deserved this punishment?
What was the error from which he could only be saved by the apocalyptic vision of the future world itself?
It was no more and no less than this: he had deserted the only proper employment of the human mind, theology, to go a-whoring after other studies and other learning.
The reproof of Beatrice is not, I conceive, as remote as it might seem from our own world.
On the contrary, it reasserts a central truth about education which ever and again we are tempted to forget or ignore, but a truth which we neglect at peril of our immortal soul: that it does matter infinitely what we teach and learn.
The silliest and the most sinful of the many heresies of pseudo-democracy is to pretend that all studies and all learning are ‘created equal’.
They are not.
It matters just as much to a person's education what he learns and is taught as it matters to his salvation what he believes.
True education does not consist in being taught just anything, any more than true religion consists in believing just anything.
This, like most truths, is ‘a hard saying’.
it does not indeed oblige us to assert that in 1963, unlike 1300, theology is education and all else vanity.
It does not even oblige us to assert that nothing but classics, or philosophy, or mathematics, or PPE is education.
It does prevent us from assuming that students are being educated because they are at a university, irrespective of what their studies are.
It does  prevent us from daring to say that a subject becomes part of education because you teach it in a school, or at a CAT or in a university.
There are two aspects to education: one is the content, the subject matter itself; the other is the manner in which, and the purpose with which it is studied.
‘All men,’ said Aristotle, ‘by nature desire to know.’
The pursuit of truth, the effort to comprehend, arrange, interpret some aspect or other of the universe we perceive is an activity of humanity which justifies, rewards and motivates itself.
The study of something for its own sake, for the sake of knowing, understanding, grasping it and for nothing else, is an essential characteristic of education, lower or higher, though more obviously of higher education.
The content of education must therefore be that which men would wish to know for its own sake.
The knowledge which men desire for its own sake is never mere information, mere acquisition of separate isolated facts, like trains in a timetable, or careers in Who's Who ?
It is knowledge of a kind which relates facts to one another and illuminates, however faintly, a part of the great scene of life.
It must therefore be acquired and taught in a way which gives it general significance.
These are the tests which determine what is education and what is not.
There are some things which no one would wish to know for their own sake, some subjects which have no possibility of being endowed with general significance.
In the words of the Robbins Report, ‘it is this that furnishes the criterion of what institutions of higher education may properly teach’.
Education is not the whole of life and there is much information that men must acquire and many skills they must learn which are no part of education.
No doubt people must learn hairdressing; but until the subject crosses into physiology — and ceases therefore to be hairdressing — it is not education.
No doubt people must study management or business; but until they cross the boundaries of the social or economic sciences — until the knowledge becomes such as is sought for its own sake and organised to illuminate human life and history — management and business studies are not education; and then they are management and business studies no longer.
We can apply the test to the technical and technological subjects, and not only those, but the professional subjects also; and the boundary line will run now on this side, now on that; but the things that it divides are different in kind, and only on one side of that line lies what we ought to allow to be education.
True, education is often also useful in its results — useful in the sense of promoting the creation of material wealth.
It is probably this incidental side-effect of education which has given currency to another widespread heresy of our times: that education is desirable  because it promotes economic growth.
The facility with which not only politicians but people who should know better argue for education in the name of economic growth is frightening.
Only a day or two ago in The Times , a high academic figure was complaining that ‘the nature of the demand for education, at least over the next few years, seems unlikely to correspond with any precision to the national need for more scientists and technologists’.
Why on earth should it?
‘Considered,’ say the Robbins Committee, ‘as an investment, there seems a strong presumption in favour of a substantially increased expenditure on higher education,’and they argue that there is a relationship of cause and effect between the education and the productivity of a community.
Simply as a proposition this is open to grave doubt.
If the citizens of modern London are more productive in a material, measurable sense than those of ancient Athens, it is not because more of them are educated or because they are better educated.
The times and places of striking advance in productivity have by no means generally been times and places of educational advance; nor, where they have been, is it clear whether this is cause and effect or, if so, which is cause and which effect.
But even if the proposition be true, it could not be the case for more and better education because of the nature of education itself.
Education is a good in its own right, something which men desire because they are men, and which they will therefore spend their effort and their riches to procure for themselves and to bestow upon others.
Being a good in itself, to provide it is a work of charity, an opus caritatas , which individuals and churches, cities and nations, may vie with one another to do, as they build hospitals or raise temples.
If they are rich, they can spend more on it, and will; but there is no calculus which can tell us the optimum amount that we ought to spend on education, any more than on the relief of suffering and the cure of the sick, or on the arts.
These things are absolutes and incommensurable.
The people who founded the Working Men's College understood all this very well.
The working men for whom this institution was created had a thirst for education in a way we can scarcely any longer imagine today.
It was not to pass examinations and qualify for better wages, not to raise themselves into a higher social class — though these are respectable ambitions and no doubt many of those early students felt them — but to get at knowledge for its own sake because without it their existence would be less worth to them, that the working classes demanded education and got it.
This was part of the good life, and they were not to be denied it.
To read and write, to borrow books and debate, to study the sciences and learn a foreign  tongue — all these were so many steps not of economic advancement but of human dignity.
All that vast enlargement of educational opportunity which has happened in the century since then and continues to accelerate has not robbed their vision of its truth nor their example of its value.
It may serve today as a living protest against the cheapening, the misunderstanding, the betrayal of education which programmes of expansion and popular education policies can so easily conceal.
The Working Men's College says today, as it said a hundred years ago: ‘We seek no greater good than education; we scorn to justify it save by itself.’
‘THE IRRESISTIBLE MARKET’New Society , 6 February 1964
Neddy meets again next week.
It last met on the 8th of this month.
You may remember that on that occasion the employers took the initiative in tabling a number of remarkable propositions about prices and profits.
I would like to examine them with you this evening, because they appear to me to contain much more than the permissible percentage of nonsense.
A little nonsense now and then is not a bad thing.
Where would we politicians be if we were not allowed to talk it sometimes?
But nonsense in massive doses, solemnly swallowed by large and representative bodies of men, and commended, without the flicker of an eyelid, to the nation at large, is very dangerous indeed.
It soon becomes respectable.
Before long no one who aspires to be taken seriously can dare to question it in public.
A conspiracy not to ‘let on’ is tacitly formed among those who know better, and those who do not take their cue from them.
Unfortunately nonsense remains, however many people accept or pretend to accept it; and it has a nasty habit of exploding in a nation's face with effects which can be as devastating as those of a nuclear weapon.
It is high time, therefore, to promote a test ban on this particular brand before dissemination has gone too far to be reversed.
It is indeed high time.
Already on the day following Neddy's pronouncement the industrial correspondent of The Times , whom I take as a representative of respectable opinion, was ecstatic with metaphors.
The employers' initiative had ‘opened the door for a new and fruitful phase in the council's activities’; the unions must now decide ‘whether to keep the door open, let it swing, or slam it shut’; the employers' action was ‘momentous in itself for British industry’, it was ‘nothing less than a confrontation’— the word had become indispensable for all of us, from French planners to Indonesian terrorists.
Let us look then at the propositions which earned these encomia.
They are as follows:
The employers acknowledged that management should accept responsibility for doing everything possible to keep prices stable or reduce them.
The employers acknowledged that, in addition to the force of public opinion, another way to curb prices would be to establish a body (probably  a prices commission) to examine particular prices and report on them publicly.
The employers acknowledged that if over a period profits should rise more than incomes, the balance should be redressed by taxation policy.
This last was expressed in other words as willingness ‘to see the ratio between profits and incomes preserved at a reasonable level by a tax which would become operative upon all industry when a certain figure was exceeded by profits as a whole’.
Now, when you find management — the representatives of enterprise and risk capital — standing up in public and saying that they have a responsibility to keep prices stable, or lower them, that individual prices ought to be reported on by a commission, and that profits ought to attract special tax penalties if they exceed a certain level, then it is a sign that either the millennium has arrived or else something is going very seriously wrong indeed.
I am afraid it is the latter rather than the former.
Let me now take the propositions in order, examine them individually, and then indicate how, in my opinion, the employers came to be talking this kind of tripe.
First then the proposition that management should accept a responsibility for doing everything possible to keep prices stable or to reduce them.
Management has no business to accept any such responsibility; or rather, since ‘management’ is merely a collective abstract expression, managements have no business to accept any such responsibility.
The duty of every management is to conduct the business, including the price policy of the business, in the way which in the opinion of the management is likely to maximise the return on the capital invested in the business.
A management which does not do this betrays more than the shareholders in the business; it betrays the employees and the nation as a whole.
The national interest lies in all the nation's resources being put to the most advantageous use possible.
Anywhere outside a Communist state — and perhaps the time looks like coming when even that qualification will be superfluous — this is done by seeking to secure the largest possible return on capital.
To maximise profits is for management not an optional exercise or a work of supererogation: it is management's basic duty.
If private enterprise in a capitalist society is not trying to do that, there is no point in private enterprise — nor, for that matter, in a capitalist society.
In some circumstances returns will be maximised by keeping prices stable or by reducing them.
But in other circumstances returns will be maximised by raising prices.
Wherever that is so, it is the responsibility and duty of the management concerned to raise its prices, whether in the home or in the export market.
There neither is, nor  can be, any general responsibility in managements not to alter prices, or if they alter them, only to lower them.
Of course, if prices generally do rise, the value of money falls with all sorts of unpleasant consequences for the classes who cannot raise their money incomes as fast as others, and, in the case of Britain particularly, for the national balance of payments.
But this is a general proposition, which cannot be translated into a practical guide for individual action by declaring it to be the responsibility of each and every management never to raise prices and if possible to lower them.
Indeed, stability of prices generally is perfectly consistent with the increase of some prices, provided others are reduced.
But then again, how is the individual management to know if it happens to be one of those which ought to acknowledge a responsibility to maintain or lower prices, or whether it is one of the lucky ones which can be let off that responsibility?
This brings us to the second proposition , which was evidently begotten of inability to answer that difficult, because inherently unanswerable, question.
Let us go, says the second proposition, and find somebody else, some wise man who will be able to answer the unanswerable, who can tell us which are the sheep who can properly raise their prices, and which the goats who ought to keep their prices stable or lower them; and then, when he tells us, we will all go and scream blue murder at the goats and make them thoroughly ashamed and sorry for themselves.
This is the meaning of the proposition that ‘another way to curb prices would be to establish a body (probably a prices commission) to examine particular prices and report upon them publicly’.
Anyone who has got as far as saying this, has already thrown the first proposition overboard, because if it is ‘the responsibility of management to do everything possible to keep prices stable or reduce prices’, then we would not need a commission to tell us that managements which raise prices are falling down on their responsibility.
All we would need to do would be to chop off the head of the price raisers.
But everyone sees that this is absurd.
One could imagine a ‘price pause’ for a limited time; but after that — is there something familiar about all this?— one would have to start discovering which prices ought to rise and which ought to fall to offset them, and this is just what we want a commission to do for us because we pretend that we don't know how to do it for ourselves.
(Actually we do know, perfectly well.
The apparatus is there all the time.
But for certain reasons, which I will mention presently, we don't want to use it; so we pretend that it does not exist and hope that no one will be guilty of such bad taste as to refer to it.)
However, more of this later.
Meanwhile, may I enquire how the commission would go about its task?
Management A has raised its prices.
‘Why?’ asks the commission.
‘Please, sir,’ answers the management, ‘my suppliers of components have raised their prices, and unless I raise mine too I shall make a loss and have to sack my employees.’
(A telling point, that; handkerchiefs at the ready!)
‘Oh, very well,’ says the commission, ‘you can maintain your margin as before — but not a penny more, mind.’
(At this point there is a disturbance at the back, while a small boy who shouted out ‘Why?’ is bundled into the street.)
‘And remember,’ continues the commission, ‘if you ever find yourself here again, you will be most severely dealt with.’
Exit Management A, concealing a grin of triumph.
Enter Management B.
‘Please, sir,’ says Management B, ‘I haven't really raised my prices; I have actually produced what is a new and better article, so much better than those of my competitors that, although my price is much above theirs, I have full order books and the retailers tell me they are accumulating waiting lists.’
‘Have your profits gone up?’ asks the commission.
‘Well, yes, I must admit,’ replies management, ‘that I am making a good thing out of this, the best break we have had for years — you see, my methods of production are so cheap and efficient.’
‘Wicked management,’ thunders the commission.
‘Have you not read that restraint of profits is just as important as wage restraint?
What would happen to us all if everyone were to behave like you?
We shall be obliged to animadvert most severely upon you in our report.’
‘May I ask just one question?’ says management.
‘If I cut my profits and prices to whatever lower level you prescribe — for I assume I shall have your guidance on what that should be — will you advise me about the basis on which I should ration the consumers of my article?
Ought I to restrict supplies to certain retailers only, or release them only on the certificate of a doctor or justice of the peace, or simply rely on those who can afford to pay getting them on the black market?’
‘These,’ replies the commission, in a state of much irritation, ‘are not questions for us.
We have no intention of interfering with the conduct of your business.’
Management B leaves the court wearing an expression like Joan of Arc at Rouen.
I will bore you with no more such little scenes.
They could be, and  would be, multiplied indefinitely.
The commission has no criterion, because it can have no criterion, to decide which prices ought to go up and by how much, or vice versa .
As long as the public is not prevented from choosing one thing in preference to another, people will express their choice by what they are prepared to pay for the one compared with the other.
Every change in the preferences of the public at home or abroad, every alteration in supply and demand — those dreadful archaic words had to be pronounced sooner or later — will express itself in a change of prices.
But the only way to find out which prices and how much change is to ‘suck it and see’.
Either the commission intuitively knows how supply and demand will change — in which case the commission is miraculous but unnecessary — or else the commission is applying some other unspecified standards and judgements of its own — in which case the commission will be a tyrant if it can impose its decisions and a laughing stock if it cannot.
Better try something else, then; and here it is, in the shape of the third proposition : ‘if over a period profits should rise more than incomes, the balance should be redressed by taxation policy’.
We accept then that, responsibility or no responsibility, commission or no commission, prices may behave in such a way that profits rise faster than a certain rate, that rate being the rate at which incomes other than profits — or perhaps incomes including profits?— are increasing.
Now, I leave entirely on one side the question why on earth the present ratio between profits and incomes generally is so supremely right that for all time it ought to be preserved, or at any rate allowed only to diminish, regardless of anything else that happens, such as the growth of savings and accumulation of capital.
I leave entirely on one side all the difficult questions which are concealed by that little phrase ‘over a period’.
I address myself wholly and simply to the proposal that there should be some form of excess profits tax — that profits above a certain level should be taxed away.
The first question to be asked is: would this tax be imposed business by business, or overall?
For example, if incomes were rising at 4 per cent , would any individual business whose profits rose more than 4 per cent have the excess taxed away?
Or does it mean that if total incomes rise by 4 per cent and total profits by 5 per cent, all profits are subject to a levy of one-fifth of their increase over the previous period?
This is a very obvious question.
Someone must have asked the employers which they meant, and so they had to plump.
They said it meant the latter; they said they were ‘prepared to see the ratio between profits and incomes preserved at a reasonable level by a tax which would become operative upon all industry when a certain figure was exceeded by profits as a whole’.
This is very difficult, however.
Because some people are making  large profits, and raising the total of profits by so doing, it is proposed to come down on the ‘innocent’ businesses, whose profits may actually have gone down, who have been being ‘responsible’and not increasing their prices; and their taxes will be put up — all because of the other bounders, who meanwhile are laughing their heads off.
And how, pray, will this affect the attitude of the ‘innocent’ who are made to suffer for the ‘sins’of the ‘guilty’?
The best thing for them to do would be likewise to get their profits up as far as possible above the datum line.
They have gained nothing by ‘restraint’; in fact, they have lost by it.
So no more restraint for them!
This is so stupid that you might wonder why the employers did not plump for the other alternative — until you come to look at it!
I dare say some of the employers remembered EPL and EPT and reminded their colleagues of them.
That alternative means taking a datum line for each business and limiting the rise of its profits above that datum line to a certain rate.
But unless the relative profitability of different enterprises on 1 April 1964, or whatever date you like to choose, is sacrosanct and uniquely right, it must be wrong to freeze that pattern in perpetuity.
‘SHOULD WE HAVE AN INCOMES POLICY?’
Inflation , 1968
The subject ‘Should we have an incomes policy’ is in fact yours rather than mine.
My first shot was ‘Incomes policy and exchange rates’ which rather reveals perhaps the track upon which I find my own mind has been running in recent months if not years.
Still, any stick is good enough to beat with.
I think we ought to start by definition.
Failure to define, at any rate in politics, is the principal factor which keeps us in employment.
If we could succeed in defining accurately and agreeing upon the meaning of the terms which we are employing, then I am afraid the House of Commons would be very largely deserted.
By an incomes policy I take it that, for the purposes of our discussion, we mean an attempt to influence the value of money by operating directly upon specific prices; and price of course includes earnings, i.e. the price of a quantity of labour in a particular application.
I do emphasise this definition, which relies upon the influence upon the value of money being direct, being exercised upon particular prices; for of course all economic policies have an effect upon the value of money and thus upon prices, including incomes.
It is therefore possible to say that any economic policy is an incomes policy, and in particular that any economic policy designed to prevent or reduce the rate of inflation is an incomes policy.
It is in this latter sense that very often it is claimed that the Conservative Party is advocating an incomes policy, by which is simply meant that the policies which we advocate would, we believe, have as a result the stability of money values and thus have the effect that increases in earnings were real and not merely monetary.
So that is the sense, in which I am proceeding to consider incomes policy.
Its object is concerned with inflation, with preventing or restraining a general fall in the value of money, as seen in a general rise in prices — however difficult it may be to attach a precise concept to a ‘general rise’ in prices.
So far as I know, one cause of a general fall in the value of money is not open to dispute, either as theoretically possible or as practically instanced within our own experience: that is the monetisation of debt, in other words, the process whereby part  of the expenditure of public authorities is financed by the creation of additional spending power.
You are as familiar as I am with the processes of monetisation of debt and of the part which the money market in the City plays in the operation of that mechanism.
So far as I know, no one has denied that inflation can be, and in fact often within our experience is, caused by the Government financing part of its expenditure by the creation of additional spending power which it then exerts.
I do not believe it is disputed that this factor has been powerfully in operation recently.
If that were not so, there would be little meaning in the Budget of last month.
The whole significance of that Budget was that it was designed to eliminate the need for, or the risk of, the monetisation of debt as a result of the level of Government expenditure in relation to the level of the national product.
If one looks at the figures presented at Budget time for the previous financial year, for the financial year 1967/1968, it is pretty clear in broad terms on what scale the process had been in operation.
The excess of Government expenditure in that year over the yield of taxation was forecast to be £1 billion and actually turned out to be just over £1and1/2; billion.
Since there was little or no lending to the Government during the year 1967/68, it follows that that billion and a half of expenditure was financed from one of two sources.
One was the inflow of pounds into the Exchange Equalisation Account as the counterpart of the loss of reserves.
The other — necessarily, by elimination — was the monetisation of debt.
Now, I don't think we know what was the exact Sterling equivalent of the fall in our reserves during the last financial year, but it can only have been a minority of that total of £1and1/2; billion of public expenditure which was met neither by the product of taxation nor by borrowing from the public.
We are accordingly reaping, and have been reaping, the effects of monetisation of debt during the last twelve months on that sort of scale.
But for the alteration in taxation in the Budget and also the minor alterations in projected expenditure which preceded it, we should have been facing 1968/69 with the identical prospect of a further creation of additional purchasing power.
I come now to what will be the first of many simplicities which I shall offer to you this afternoon; for I am sure you already realise from what you know of my speakings and writings — and it will be all the more painfully obvious in half an hour's time — that I am incurably simpliste.
This is partly due to my experiences as a politician, because I know as a politician that when you are doing something naughty, nothing is more effective than to muddy the waters with complication.
What you fear most is an opponent who will point to a few simple but undeniable facts, and this is why the economists, and above all that wonderful race of men the economic journalists great and small, are such indispensable allies to the politician: they enable the politician to fog up what he is doing, so as to escape the blame and often even criticism for his actions.
So I am encouraged in my perhaps natural naïveté, I am encouraged to be simpliste, by my knowledge of the value of complication in fogging up the real issues in politics.
My first simpliste proposition is this.
the natural deduction from what I have said so far would be for Governments to end the necessity of monetising debt and make sure that they don't put themselves in the position of monetising debt — at any rate in circumstances where there is not a substantial deficiency of demand for labour and where therefore the monetisation of debt would not be counterbalanced by an increase in real production.
Now see what has happened!
Here we have an undoubted theoretical cause, and also the undoubted fact that this cause has been in operation on a massive scale.
The natural reaction to that situation would be to say: ‘Well, let's take the cause which is admitted to be in operation, and stop it, and then see if things are all right afterwards.
If we find that when we have stopped it, either things are just as bad (which is improbable) or that they are still fairly bad, then indeed it will be easier, scientifically easier, to detect any other causes which may be at work.’
You may ask me then: ‘Why don't we do just that? why has there been this passionate search for some other method of preventing the fall in the value of money or controlling the fall in the value of money, if a cause and perhaps the major cause is undisputed, assessable and obvious?’
The answer is of course a political answer.
The answer is that we politicians exist to enable the public to have its cake and eat it.
This is a yearning which mankind insists shall be fulfilled and it has a specialised organ for doing this.
That organ is the politician.
The politician is the organ of society for having its cake and eating it, for escaping, if only for a moment, if only through a form of art — art is, after all, a means of escape — from the grimness of reality, from this grim fact that you can't have the cake and eat it, that you can't have public expenditure increased in excess of the rate of increase of the national product, unless private claims are correspondingly surrendered.
Now the most painful way to call upon the public to sacrifice its claims is by taxing.
That is the last recourse to which any politician comes.
Having read his Burke, he knows the aphorism which I will not insult you by quoting about taxation.
Naturally, if he can borrow he borrows; but that is a lark that hasn't been ‘on’ in this country, taking one year with another, for the last ten years or more.
Borrowing from the public is more or less finished, perhaps it is finished for our lifetime, but at any rate it has been finished for the last ten years or so; you may get in a bit one year but you lose it again the next year.
Therefore, if the Government can finance its expenditure without taxation by some other method, namely through inflation, by creating the additional spending power and infusing it into the economy, that is an ideal solution to an insoluble problem — how to increase public expenditure faster than the rate of increase of the national income without the rest of the community having to surrender any claims or expectations.
You do it of course by deceiving them.
It is a method of deceiving the public.
It is a method of fulfilling a deep desire of the public to be deceived by the politician into thinking that public expenditure can be increased faster than the national income is increased without their noticing any diminution of their own rate of increase in purchasing power and standard of living.
So, the answer is that the strongest motives restrain Governments from limiting the rate of growth of public expenditure to that rate which they could be sure of meeting within the growth of the national product and thus without any substantial increase in taxation but also without relying upon borrowing and without monetisation of debt.
It's a dangerous operation to set out on.
You might think the only safe course is straightforward, sound, economic government and you might wonder therefore why so rarely in recent years Governments have practised it, except when they have been hit over the head by external forces and events that they couldn't resist.
However, you know, there is a powerful law which operates in politics, the law of the Dutch auction.
Let us suppose that a Government, a party, observing that the rate of increase of the national income has been as high as 3 per cent in real terms over the last few years, were to decide to make plans which involve the growth of public expenditure at the rate of 2and1/2; per cent, so as to be a little within the recent happy experience.
Just imagine the abuse with which they would be showered by people who would tell them: ‘Since it is easily possible for the economy to grow at 4, 5, 6 per cent or any other figure you like, the public are being cheated of the growth of public expenditure which they have a right to enjoy by this niggardly Government which is only counting on being able safely to increase public expenditure at a rate of 2 to 2and1/2; per cent.’
When the late Conservative administration did its sums at the end of 1963 it found that its future programme worked out at an annual rate of increase of 4.1 per cent.
As this was higher than the average rate over such a period that had been experienced at any historical time, something had to be done.
There were two things that could be done.
One was, in the year before an election, to say: ‘Well, in that case the programme has to be scaled down; otherwise you will have higher taxation or inflation.’
That was one course.
The other course was to say: ‘It will be all right, boys, because we are going to grow faster, we gotta growth plan.’
Accordingly the Conservative Government — a non-planning party, mind you — announced that.
Of course, they only started by ‘examining the implications’ of growing at 4 per cent ; but presently they were planning to grow at 4 per cent , and soon they were promising to grow at 4 per cent .
This is the other way: you fix the expenditure first, and you hope afterwards; and if it doesn't come off (which it is unlikely to, if you are gambling on an improbability), then the result is the monetisation of debt with the consequences which we know.
So there is the psychological explanation.
We therefore have: 1) the malady if it is a malady; at any rate it is assumed to be a malady by the proponents of incomes policy; 2) a theoretical cause of the malady, which is not disputed; 3) the practical demonstration that this cause has been in operation; and 4) the psychological explanation why that cause is desired, fomented and sustained by Governments.
‘What need we more?’ the scribes and Pharisees said.
Nothing more, according to me.
That's why I am so simpliste.
In other words, so far as I am concerned, unless and until we are prepared to deal with this demonstrated cause of inflation and want to do so, we are wasting our time; and as soon as we want to do so, there is no reason to suppose that there will be any problem or therefore any reason for an incomes policy as defined.
I apprehend however that it would be disappointing to you — I can't think why — if I were to stop at this point.
I therefore pass to examine further — still in an entirely simplistic frame of mind — other theories which have been advanced to account for inflation.
Remember the strong vested interest of politicians in alleging other causes of inflation, because if they can persuade the public that other causes than their own behaviour are really at work, then they will be able to transfer the responsibility from themselves to other people.
In fact the principal political significance of incomes policy is as a device for transferring responsibility from the Government to others, something which politicians are expert at doing — which indeed is necessary for their survival.
Since the politician is blamed for what is not his fault, he couldn't survive unless he devised methods of blaming other people for what is his fault.
Hence the elaboration and the perfection of explanations for inflation which have nothing to do with Government is something in which you naturally find politicians of all schools, but particularly of the public expenditure school, joining with good will.
It is sufficient motivation.
Well, there is the theory of spontaneous generation — like worms  in Lucretius.
Lucretius believed that worms were spontaneously generated in mud.
There is for instance the theory that inflation is spontaneously generated by trade unions.
This is very popular in the country because upon the whole trade unions are unpopular, and therefore, if you can attach the consequences of your own actions (for which you desire to transfer the blame to other people) to somebody who is unpopular already and attribute it to him, you are almost certain to be home and dry.
The ‘worms in Lucretius’ explanation of inflation works as follows: a trade union, because of its bargaining strength with monopoly powers, secures an increase in the remuneration of its members, say, 5, 10, 15 per cent— what they call ‘excessive’or ‘unjustified’.
Then, says the theory, this naturally causes all the other wages and prices to go up too.
Now, the beauty of this sort of explanation, where you have everybody on your side, when you are dealing with somebody who is unpopular, when you are all desperately anxious to find a scapegoat, is that your argument is unlikely to be at all jealously scrutinised.
As Professor Housman used to say, ‘Stand on a barrel in the streets of Baghdad and say twice two are four and ginger is hot in the mouth and therefore Mohammed is the prophet of God, and it is unlikely that anyone would question your reasoning; but if he should be bold enough to do so, you could easily silence him by calling him a Christian dog.’
So it is, say I in my simplistic fashion, that the plain, screaming absurdity of the statement that trade-union action causes a general rise in wages and prices escapes scrutiny.
Of course I realise that the fallacy is so crude that it would be below the dignity of any academic economist to soil himself with such much.
I mean he has to take it seriously and occupy himself the effluvium which rises from it.
But it is absurd.
‘ENVY’The Spectator , 12 March 1970
It is time that envy was reinstated in its rightful place, as one of the basic data of individual and social psychology.
Treated by theology as one of the deadly sins and recognised and discussed without inhibition by philosophers, poets, psychologists and other observers of the human scene until the present century, it has all but disappeared from view in our own time and reference to its existence, let alone study of its function, has been sedulously avoided.
Helmut Schoeck, the professor of sociology at Mainz, explains the reasons why in a comprehensive analysis which restores the phenomenon of envy to a central place in social motivation.
His book is not particularly well arranged, and tends to heaviness and repetition.
One suspects that the language was no more beautiful in the German original than the English translation.
But it provides a powerful aid to the understanding of some of the more baffling political manifestations of our time.
Envy, the thesis runs, is universal and ubiquitous in human beings.
It is not dependent on any particular cause, so that, if that cause were removed, envy would disappear.
There are no circumstances, and no society, where envy does not find the material it needs to feed on.
In all societies, from the most primitive to the most advanced, envy and its counterpart, the fear of being envied, give rise to a whole series of often elaborate systems of behaviour.
Envy would not be so strong and indefeasible an instinct, unless it had an important function in the evolution and survival of human society, and therefore of mankind itself.
Like other such instincts, however, envy is both preservative and destructive.
Those societies survive and flourish which have discovered how to exploit its preservative effects while containing the destructive ones.
Envy-management, in short, can be life or death for a society.
The negative social effects of envy (including, once for all, the fear of being envied) may be to stultify and prevent all progress, by making variation between individuals and manifestation of individual superiority too dangerous to be persisted in.
This is characteristic of many primitive, taboo-ridden societies, and may be one of the explanations of economic backwardness.
Moreover, if the validity of  the envy motive is once accepted by a society, there is no limit to the sheer self-destruction which is possible, since no divestment of authority or privilege or difference is capable of neutralising envy:.
for instance, ‘it does not need an exceptionally vivid imagination to realise the extent to which people of different ages would become obsessed by the discrepancies arising in a society in which age was the only distinguishing feature’.
We are not far here from an insight into the deeper causes of current anarchical unrest.
On the other hand, it seems likely that a positive function in the evolution of human society has been exercised by envy in that it maintained variations of individual behaviour within tolerable bounds and maintained a mutual bond, policed by envy and the fear of envy, between all the differentiated members of a society.
Success or failure have thus depended on the devices by which a balance could be maintained between the preservative and the destructive effects of envy.
The notion of luck is one of the simplest of these devices.
Unknown to many primitive societies, it provides a lightning-conductor for envy, as may be seen from the readiness with which gains of pure chance are left outside an otherwise highly egalitarian (‘envious’) system of taxation.
The notion is the very opposite to that widespread but typically Greek attribution of envy to the universe itself, as divinely personified by the envy of the gods, who lie in wait to punish the good fortune or prominence of mortals.
Professor Schoeck identifies the counteracting of envy and of the fear of envy by Christianity as one of the decisive factors in Western progress.
Not only was the deity rendered benevolent (unenvious) towards men, but Christianity offered an interpretation of human life in which envy and the fear of envy became irrelevant.
When St Paul declared that in Christ there is neither rich nor poor, bond nor free, man nor woman, he was precisely not advocating egalitarian taxation, equal rights or the abolition of slavery.
That the Christian message is today thus misinterpreted — so as to destroy its envy-neutralising effect — is significant for the modern predicament.
Any policy which aims at exorcising envy and the concomitant sense of guilt — the reason why so many intellectually eminent individuals are attracted to levelling doctrines, because they aspire to purge the sense of guilt to which eminence itself is prone — by measures of social or economic equalisation is foredoomed to failure, because it rests on the false presumption that envy and envy-guilt exist only because they are ‘justified’, because the materials exist on which they feed.
It is not possible, because of human nature itself, so to reorganise economic or social life that by that means envy and resentment cease to exist.
The utopias which those most sensitive to  envy and guilt have devised throughout the ages for their own relief remain literally utopian: the question is not how envy is removed, but how it is lived with.
In a deliberately egalitarian policy it becomes actually less manageable, because envy fastens most upon the smallest, not the largest, inequalities and upon those who are nearest to ourselves, not furthest away.
Perhaps in the command to ‘love thy neighbour as thyself’, the word ‘neighbour’ is after all meant in the most precise and narrow sense.
One of the areas which the social psychology of envy illuminates best is the modem craze for policies of international aid.
One aspect after another yields to the open sesame of the envy theory.
The exorcising of guilt and envy at a distance — as between people and peoples, who have no knowledge of one another— is a recognisable method of evading the problem posed by neighbour envy: hence the often observed fact that international and long-range do-gooders are commonly highly uncharitable at close quarters.
The policies of international aid, which defy rational justification on either economic or strategic grounds, are at once intelligible when viewed as a collective purgation of the fear of envy, to which the ‘affluent society’— itself an envy-guilt coinage — is especially prone and which is more vivid to the donors than the imagined envy is to the recipients.
The result, of exacerbating both the fear and guilt of the affluent countries and the envy and hatred of the recipient countries, was perfectly predictable.
The fact that the receiver of a gift hates the giver is commonplace: the gift does nothing to remove the material for envy; on the contrary, the act of giving becomes both a justification for the envy and an additional ground for feeling it.
The parallel with policies inside multi-racial societies for banishing or reducing racial ‘discrimination’ or for exorcising by economic and social reorganisation the mutual envy and fear of envy between the races, does not need to be laboured.
When so large a part of modern politics, above all in America, is concerned with policies which an insight into the psychology of envy would reveal to be inherently futile, it is perhaps not surprising that the study of that psychology has been instinctively or deliberately neglected.
‘HANGING, LOGIC AND THE PUBLIC’Daily Telegraph , 1973
Few, if any, Members of Parliament who voted, as I did more than once, for the abolition of the death penalty, can have failed to revolve in their minds many times since then both the reasons for their vote and what cause there might be to repent of it or to vote otherwise on a future occasion.
Perhaps the only person who finds his course clear is someone with an absolute objection, moral or religious, to society taking the life of any of its members.
This has never been my own position.
I am ready to acknowledge that there can be circumstances in which the taking of human life is, humanly speaking, the lesser evil.
I have never been disturbed by the apparent anomaly that the death sentence remains in our law as the penalty for treason: I see no parallel or analogy between the punishment of crime within a society and the self-defence of a society against its enemies.
For me, therefore, the issue of the death penalty is primarily — though not, as I shall admit, wholly — a practical one.
If I were reasonably satisfied that, other things being equal, substantially fewer persons would be murdered if the death penalty were available than if it were not, I should have opposed its abolition and would support its restoration.
The words ‘reasonably satisfied’ and ‘substantially fewer’are selected deliberately; for the alternative is so grave that the choice ought not to be made on only a narrow margin of evidence or probability.
It is so grave, because, on any view, the putting to death of a human being by the society to which he belongs is an appalling act, calculated in itself rather to familiarise that society with the taking of life than to heighten the sense of life being held sacred.
The onus of proof must therefore lie heavily upon the advocacy of the capital penalty: the counterbalancing benefit must be clear and considerable.
It will not do to say, ‘If the death penalty will save a single life, it is justified.’
This brings me at once to what I have always found the most impressive fact about the evidence on this subject: its ambiguity, not to say its neutrality.
If the death penalty did deter, then so distinctive and so dramatic  is the sanction that its effect ought also to be too marked to overlook or dispute.
We might expect to find difficulty in relating, for example, the average length of prison sentences to the incidence of the crimes for which they are imposed; but to be at a loss to trace any clear connection between the prospects of being executed for murder and the prevalence of the crime of murder is startling and impressive.
The Royal Commission on Capital Punishment which reported in 1953 (Cmnd. 5932) examined the experience of countries throughout the world where the death penalty has been abolished, restored, abolished again or where it existed in some parts and not in others.
The outcome of the analysis of this mass of evidence was indecisive as the Commission reported:
This is an issue on which it is extraordinarily difficult to find conclusive arguments either way…
The general conclusion which we have reached is that there is no clear evidence in any of the figures we have examined that the abolition of capital punishment has led to an increase in the homicide rate, or that its reintroduction has led to a fall.
We also reviewed such evidence as has been submitted to us about the possible relation between the number of executions in particular years and the incidence of murder in succeeding years.
It is sufficient to say that we are satisfied that no such relationship can be established.
It was natural, but not logical, that when the capital penalty in Britain was first restricted (in 1957), and then abolished, the sequel was scrutinised in the expectation of finding confirmation or refutation.
By an irony of fate, abolition coincided with a period of rising crime, both violent and non-violent, in which Britain shared with most other countries on both sides of the Atlantic.
It is a period which has not yet manifestly reached its climax; and in the more recent past it has been characterised in Britain, as elsewhere, by a marked increase in the use of firearms.
To complicate matters further, substantial changes in criminal and penal law were made by the Criminal Justice Act, 1967.
In these circumstances facile and fallacious deductions about the consequences of having abolished the death penalty were bound to be rife.
There was, however, one perfectly clear and simple condition which had to be fulfilled if any rational deduction was to be drawn as to the effect of abolition.
That was that the crime of murder should behave distinctively.
If murders, however defined, followed no more unfavourable a pattern than other violent crimes or crime generally, then at the very least a verdict of ‘Not proven’ must be returned.
It would be mere superstition to attribute the increase in murders to the change of penalty and the increase in the rest of crime to some other cause or causes.
I realise that no series chosen to test this proposition can be free from some criticism or objection; but this fact is less serious when no such series has, so far as I know, been constructed which fulfils the condition of a uniquely unfavourable pattern for murder.
With that caveat I offer one table out of many, which illustrates the negative outcome.
Thus, in 1973, we are no wiser than we were in 1948: the experience of twenty-five years has shed no more light upon the question, does the death penalty deter? than was available at the beginning — except perhaps that the neutrality of the evidence, which I have explained I find so logically impressive, has been reinforced.
But has anything else that has changed in those twenty-five years — or, for that matter, in the years since abolition — been such that it ought to influence the mind of a Member who is unable to convince himself that capital punishment deters?
The questions and the answers are bafflingly subjective.
The most recent perhaps is the emergence of terrorism, and not only in, or connected with, Northern Ireland (where incidentally capital punishment is available).
I confess I do not find much relevance in this to the death penalty.
The terrorist is normally a person who, as such, risks death either by his own weapons or in the commission of his act, and is at least as likely to court what he might regard as a martyr's or patriot's death as to be deterred by it.
Much more difficult is the general fact of rising lawlessness itself, whether violent or non-violent; for, though I feel obliged to consider the death penalty primarily by the test of deterrence, I recognise that  the interrelation of crime, punishment and the opinion and behaviour of a society is something far more subtle and profound.
Without plunging into the moral and intellectual ‘deep end’ of the arguments about retribution, I suspect there is a relationship of cause and effect between the state of opinion and the incidence of crime, and further, that the state of opinion and the penalties of the law are interrelated — at least to this extent, that, other things being the same, milder penalties generally imply less reprobation.
An increase in seventy may betoken — even, more arguably, may occasion — a salutary change in the climate of opinion.
For this reason I am not averse from seeing a sharpening of sentencing policy within the present law.
Last and most impalpable of all is public sentiment.
It also presents the most difficult problem for those who, like myself, are convinced on practical grounds that a sufficient case cannot be made out for the restoration of capital punishment.
I should be the last to imply that a Member of Parliament ought to subordinate his judgement of what is wise or right to even the most overwhelming majority of opinion.
If he believes a thing harmful, he must not support it; if he thinks it unjust he must denounce it.
In those judgements the opinion of those he represents has no claim over him.
But capital punishment is not for me in that category: it is not self-evidently harmful, not self-evidently unjust.
I cannot therefore deny that in this context a settled and preponderant public demand ought to be taken into account or that at a certain point it would have to prevail.
I do not believe that point has been reached; but it would be disingenuous for me to deny that it could exist.
‘THE ROLE OF THE INDIVIDUAL’ Address to ‘The Challenge of Crime’, Police Federation Seminar, Cambridge, April 1976
Since I knew that I was to have the privilege of addressing this seminar, I have studied with great textual care the document issued by the federation under the title Dear Fellow Citizen because it appeared to me that it was ‘the brief’ for what I was to say to you.
I have done so with the earnest endeavour to be able to speak to that brief, but I have to start by declaring failure and announcing that the results have been negative.
So perhaps, if I spent my time explaining how and why I found difficulty, that must be some sort of substitute.
I take as typical of my difficulty a sentence from item six in your summary of your campaign: ‘The need for the silent majority to assert itself in order that politicians and judges fully understand the true feelings of the public.’
I have to tell you that this is a contradiction in terms.
It contains an inherent fallacy: you are expecting the silent majority to speak.
I am not joking.
I have really nothing else to say, except to draw attention to the inherently contradictory nature of that for which you appear to be asking.
For the silent majority will always be silent.
It can never become the vocal majority.
The majority never does speak.
It is always the minority, the specialised organs of a society, that do the speaking.
This is a similar fallacy to that of those in my profession who are constantly aspiring to bring everybody up to the average.
You can't do that, because unless everyone is identical, the average will always be somewhere around the middle.
For similar reasons, the majority will always be silent, and by definition, will not, at any rate by speaking in an overt way, assert themselves.
There is perhaps only one situation in which one can envisage the majority speaking, and it is not a voice which one wants to hear.
When the majority does speak, it becomes a mob.
The function of the majority in any society, like the function of the average, is to be silent or average.
That brings me to my next proposition.
In all society, and as a condition of the survival of society, there is a balance between human  characteristics.
Particularly there is a balance between courage and cowardice and the average between the two.
The average between courage and cowardice is the normal state of human beings and the characteristic of the silent majority.
I have the gratification, if such it be, that people not infrequently come up to me and say, ‘Mr Powell, I wish all politicians were like you,’ to which I reply, ‘God help you, the place would be a madhouse.’
Society would be ungovernable, Parliament would be unmanageable, if the majority of the Members had my courage and independence of thought and expression.
Society would be inconceivable under those terms.
It would be equally inconceivable that any army should be composed as to the majority of cowards, of gun-shy.
It is neither composed of VC holders or aspirants nor of those who in earlier days would have been shot for cowardice.
It consists principally of the in-betweens.
For the survival of a society you have to have a certain number at one extreme and, therefore, a certain number at the other extreme, for without cowards there are no VCs.
It is the same with the notion that you can bring everybody up to the average.
You can't, for if you are to have those who are above the average, you must have those who are below the average.
And if you are to have those who are far above the average, you must have those who are far below the average.
Some kind of mysterious balance of good and evil, of extreme good and extreme evil, is of the nature of human society and necessary to it.
Though I do not desire to stray into fields where others here are expert, I must point out that according to the first chapter of Genesis the world was so constituted from the beginning that good and evil were created together in it, and also that the knowledge of them existed before mankind.
I will go further, and say that crime itself has to be viewed from the same aspect of society as a balance — a balance that can be lost, like the physiological or chemical balance in an organism, in which cases the organism is destroyed, but a balance which is always there, whether being gained, maintained or lost.
Crime is part of society.
Delinquency is an indispensable part of society.
You can't have a human society without crime.
You can't have law and order without lawlessness and disorder, just as you can't have light without darkness.
A certain element of delinquency, like a certain element of altruism, is essential to the life and health of any society.
We need evil that there may be good.
I do not want to go too far into the philosophical or even the physiological aspects of the matter.
My object at this stage is simply to depose the concept of society as an organism in which, far more subtly than we can measure or identify (it is only recently that we  have begun to identify the chemical balance of the human organism of society), a certain balance between tendencies and elements, many in themselves dangerous, destructive and evil, has to be maintained as a condition of survival, but a balance which can be endangered, or lost, reversibly or irrevocably.
I notice that the federation talks about crime, about law and order and the breakdown of law and order as if they were single things.
Crime to me is not one.
The more I observe, the more different categories I think I discover, with different characteristics.
Consequently, if law and order are the opposites to the breach of the law and the creation of disorder, then law and order are also not one thing, but a great complexity of things.
I find it impossible to begin to think about the phenomena which are giving you anxiety and which, I assure you, are giving me anxiety, without some elementary attempt to classify those phenomena.
I am going to attempt such a classification not with the belief that it is either scientific — this University has a Department of Criminology, and I am sure that my attempts would be regarded as very crude in those august circles — nor with the idea that the classification will be exhaustive, but by way of illustration of my essential point that different criminal phenomena, or anti-law-and-order phenomena, require different types of reaction on the part of the rest of society and imply different prognoses.
Let me start with the case which you mention first, the growth of mugging.
Although there are aspects of mugging which are continuous, permanent, old-fashioned, the new word is describing a typically new thing.
That new thing, as is recently being admitted, is connected with the change in the composition of the population of certain of our great cities.
To use a crude but efficient word for it, it is racial.
Its prevalence is due to the fact that an implant into our society has changed a community that was previously homogeneous into a community which is no longer homogeneous and self-identifying.
I am fascinated to notice that your profession has at last started not merely to say that, but to criticise those who refuse to allow so manifest a fact to be stated in order that it may be examined.
I was delighted with the terminology of the Metropolitan Police report to the Select Committee on Race Relations and Immigration, a fortnight ago.
No politician could have bettered it: ‘Experience has taught us the fallibility of the assertion that crime rates amongst those of West Indian origin are no higher than those of the population at large.’
Splendidly expressed!
Beautifully expressed!
I don't think even the most jealous Committee of Privileges could do anything with such a sentence, but its meaning is clear enough.
Indeed the same evidence has been tendered, the same facts had been brought to the attention of the same Committee in 1972; but the Committee had reported to  Parliament in the opposite sense, stating the opposite to the evidence they had actually received from those who were competent to tender it.
Still, we have to this extent moved on, that not merely are we, in the context of this phenomenon, allowed to refer to the facts but we are actually now allowed to criticise those who suppress the facts.
This, I suppose, must be regarded as some sort of progress.
Here then is a criminal phenomenon that is associated with social disintegration — the fact that a society, the inhabitants of these areas of the great cities, who once regarded themselves as one, now no longer regard themselves as one, are not one, were one in the past but are not one now, and are still growing apart.
What is the prognosis?
What is the relevance to that public concern which you wish to stimulate here?
It is that there is no community to appeal to; for the phenomenon itself is the evidence that there is more than one community, or a divided community.
Consequently, the reaction of the host society to a growing imbalance, a growing injection of this particular form of crime, is not the natural reaction by way of the formation of antibodies, as it were.
Society is increasingly helpless to deal with it because it has ceased to be society.
No silent majority there to appeal to!
Indeed, it is because there is no silent majority, no single entity which is being attacked by a hostile element, that this form is increasing.
My prognosis is extremely grave and follows from the diagnosis, that these are consequences of a divided society.
There are those who believe that out of a divided society you can create a unitary section.
I do not see.
I see not the slightest prospect with the scale of introduction of these alien wedges into the population of our cities, of a community attitude growing up in the future.
On the contrary it seems to be that, as the respective numbers become closer together, or even tend to overbalance in the opposite direction, alienation is bound to progress.
So this is an area where no sort of remedy is obtainable from the attempt to invoke or elicit the natural response of a community to an attack upon its health.
If you are asking me where the remedy lies, my answer is that I have told you before and I shall go on telling you, and you know perfectly well what it is, though everybody thinks that it is too difficult and that therefore there must be a different remedy.
I leave my first category, therefore, and come to one where the prognosis is less gloomy.
You describe it in your notes as hooliganism, and you give the example of our national pastime (one with which I have never sympathised!) of watching football in large crowds.
There is no doubt that a form of parasitic violence has battened upon this pastime and flourished to such an extent that it has almost killed the host institution.
The phenomenon seems to me to be different in kind from the first.
I suggest — this is merely an illustrative explanation — that we are here dealing with a cyclical phenomenon.
The propensity to hooliganism is inherent in every society.
Historically we can establish that there have always been these waves of hooliganism in particular form.
You can read in The Spectator of two hundred and sixty years ago that the streets of London were not safe at night because of the Mohawks, gangs who terrorised London and beat up the Watch, who tarred and feathered innocent citizens.
It came and it went.
It did not go of its own accord.
Society reacted to it, the organs of law reacted to it and eventually but not as a result of direct cause and effect — it is something more subtle than that — it went out of fashion.
So here is an endemic form of crime and disorder, which becomes epidemic periodically under different forms and taking advantage of different fashions, such as the excursion train and the large football arena.
I would have thought it is very dangerous to get football hooliganism mixed up with mugging.
My suggestion to you is that the only connection between them is basic human nature itself, namely that the heart of man is incurably evil.
For your professional purposes, and mine as a politician, we have to keep them as far apart as we can — providing of course that my analysis is sound.
Exploiting further this notion of that which is endemic becoming epidemic, there is the phenomenon of the increased use of firearms.
This seems to me to illustrate what I would call the ‘Breakthrough Phenomenon’: the sudden discovery that something which has been assumed to be out of the question is not out of the question at all.
Unless my recollection is at fault, it seems to be that two generations ago it was accepted in our society that we did not use firearms.
There was no more objective reason why firearms should not have been used in burglaries and bank hold-ups thirty or sixty years ago than today; but it ‘wasn't done’— until it was discovered that it was done, that you could do it.
There was never any problem in getting hold of the firearms; but nobody wanted to get hold of them, because it was ‘not done’ to use firearms.
Then, after a bit, it becomes not something unacceptable, but something accepted or at least something which is demonstrated to be not out of the question.
So you have the sudden appearance of a Breakthrough Phenomenon.
After all, people have always wanted to do violence to those who stood in their way when they were attempting to commit robberies; but they have been bound by certain conventions of which they were unaware.
They have assumed that certain methods were not available to them.
Then something happened to destroy their former assumptions, and you have the phenomenon of the breakthrough.
Here again, I don't see why the prognosis is particularly gloomy; for self-adaption to changing  methods and circumstances is of the nature of a continuing society.
So again I exhort you to isolate yet another category of what you generalise as the deterioration of law and order.
As an extreme example of the Breakthrough Phenomenon, the scourge of hi-jacking is quite fascinating.
It presents the appearance of a contagious epidemic.
It is one of those forms of crime which appear to be ‘catching’, as a disease is communicated from one country to another and one continent to another, like the importation of smallpox from India into London.
What is happening is the discovery that a new method has made its appearance.
‘Wheresoever the carcase is, there shall the eagles be gathered together.’
When it is discovered that the combination of certain proportions of charcoal, sulphur and saltpetre produces disagreeable results, then there is no reason why the benefits of gunpowder should be restricted to China.
You can make it in the kitchen.
The ingredients are common.
They have always been there.
But someone discovered in China that you could put them together and it went off with a bang.
That seems to be the story of hi-jacking.
You only have to show that this act works for there to be takers everywhere.
It can be applied to all kinds of objective situations or none at all.
I am coming later to the ‘none-atall’ which is one of the more emphatic observations that I have to make, namely that one must not assume there is necessarily a rational purpose, or even a felonious purpose, in the breach of law and order and the commission of crime.
However, staying for a moment with hi-jacking, here we have a specialised form of the Breakthrough Phenomenon, which until the antidote is produced or produces itself, has quite startling pyrotechnic results, but collapses again as the antidote is devised.
It is rather like warfare, the seesaw of offensive and defensive, of tank armour and the high-velocity penetrating bullet.
In fact I think it possible that in the context of hi-jacking we are developing the anti-tank weapon — one which is largely a moral weapon and lies mainly in the hands of political authority.
This is my pivot on which to turn to the last, and I think most important category of what you call the breakdown of law and order, because it leads us to concentrate our attention not on the silent majority but on another point in society.
This last category is the thing that started, at least to the naked eye, in Berkeley, California about 1964, and swept around the world reaching its zenith about 1969–70 — just five years flat.
You can plot its movement on a map of the world and date the times of arrival of the outbreaks.
For instance, it arrived in Cambridge in November 1967: that can be dated almost to the day.
What is this thing?
I used to have a file, but I found that, as with so many files one opens, I was putting so much in it that it ceased to  be useful.
It was called, ‘The Thing’.
I used to tell my secretary: ‘That can go in ‘The Thing'’.'
It did not have to have a name.
It was the thing that started in Berkeley.
It took various forms: university disorder; civil rights movements; anti-apartheid activities; race and immigration protests.
The essense of ‘The Thing’ is that violence is used in order to subjugate the will of the majority by destroying its good conscience.
Let me take the university manifestation as perhaps the simplest.
Quite suddenly, students at universities begin to behave outrageously.
They break the rules, they break the things, they make life intolerable and impossible.
But this is done in such a way that it creates the presumption that the university and its authorities, the institution, are at fault.
It creates the presumption of grievance, of remediable grievance, and instantly shifts the onus of guilt from the wrongdoer to the institution which is under attack.
‘The Thing’ learnt how to make authority apologetic.
It is one of the great discoveries of mankind.
It will be looked back upon by history as one of the remarkable achievements of the human spirit to have discovered how a very little violence can destroy the good conscience of the major institutions of society, and interchange the positions of sense and nonsense, right or wrong.
Once the action and reaction grievance-violence-remedy of grievance has been set up, it goes on of its own accord.
For the remedy which is sought to be applied, the removal of grievance is not a remedy at all, because the grievance is not the case, on the contrary it is an aggravation, it is dynamic.
Another of the characteristics of ‘The Thing’ is that it doesn't have a rational cause.
It is not revolutionary in the old-fashioned sense of the term.
It is not the attempt of the sans-culottes to get some culottes .
It is not the revolt of the hungry against those who are hoarding food.
It is not the revolt of those who are denied the franchise against those who are monopolising the franchise.
It does not have a purpose in that sense of purpose.
Its purpose is to destroy.
This was stated in total emphatic form by the anonymous French student who retorted when General de Gaulle returned in haste from Romania and said: ‘La réforme, oui.
Le shie-on-lit , non’; the student said, ‘No, you have it wrong; Le shie-on-lit , oui.
La réforme, non.’
That is the essential motto of ‘The Thing’.
There is another secondary effect besides this establishment of the destructive spiral of violence-grievance-attempted remedy.
It is not merely the passivity but the subjugation of opinion.
Opinion, certainly overt opinion, has been on the side of the university disorder.
University opinion has been on the side of it, and public opinion has been on the side of it.
The teaching body in the university, so far as it has  not joined ‘The Thing’, has always preferred to accept the philosophy of ‘The Thing’ rather than reassert what it well knew was the requisite of any academic society.
Universities are now governed on the principle that it is right and natural for the management of a university to respond to the opinion of the students — a thing which is manifestly absurd.
It is an illustration of the way in which ‘The Thing’ works by substituting nonsense for sense, so that presently everybody is talking nonsense, and nobody can talk sense any more.
Nobody can draw attention, for instance, to the rational scholastic relationship between professor and student, without being considered a candidate for a mental institution.
I remember that in 1970 I was actually called deranged because I drew attention to the various forms of manifest nonsense on which ‘The Thing’ was battening.
The civil rights movement in Northern Ireland in 1968–70 was a classic example of ‘The Thing’.
It applied the methods of Kent campus to imaginary grievances in a divided, or divisible, community in Northern Ireland.
There were no grievances, and everybody knew there were no grievances.
But immediately the violence started, everybody said: ‘There must be grievances.
Authority must be at fault.
Therefore authority must remedy the grievances.’
When authority had remedied the imaginary grievances and the violence still went on, and got worse and worse, then people said, ‘Authority must be disposed of, because clearly it is evilly intentioned.’
(Maybe you think that is a partisan statement of the circumstances in Northern Ireland?
It is no more partisan than my description of what has happened in the universities.)
In Northern Ireland ‘The Thing’ eventually unchained some of the other phenomena that we have been discussing here, which are inherently separate: endemic hooliganism; the breakthrough of the use of the firearm; and the infinite potential for blocking the formation of antibodies, for blocking the natural reaction of a society to violence, which exists in a divided community.
The forms of criminal or lawless activity which have followed the civil rights movement which came and went in 1969–71 will disappear as and when there is a general conviction that there is going to be one society and one particular sort of society in Northern Ireland — that is to say, one state, one particular sort of state, and no other.
I will not go on to examine by the same criteria the other manifestations of The Thing, such as the anti-apartheid demonstrations, in which open breach of the law was widely condoned and encouraged by the organs of public opinion.
I need not even mention the agitation surrounding race and racialism and immigration in the unique circumstances of the last twenty years in the United Kingdom.
In all these cases the reaction of society as a whole in the face of ‘The Thing’ is  like that of an organism attacked by a parasite, or a specialised aggressor: it behaves in exactly the way which renders the aggression successful.
There is a general passivity, a loss of good conscience —‘they must have been doing something very wrong there’; ‘we must have been wrong’; ‘I suppose these new ideas must be right’; ‘I suppose we have got to get used to them’, etcetera, etcetera.
The overt expression of that passivity and self-condemnation is that a whole range of the voices of public opinion are on the side of what you and I call the criminals.
They are on the side of this new engine for society-breaking.
That has brought us back again to the conundrum which you posed to me and in the face of which I had to express my helplessness — namely, how do we make the silent majority unsilent since that is by definition impossible?
How does any society protect itself against this kind of comprehensive assault, which does not even need the charcoal, sulphur and saltpetre to make the gunpowder but can find the materials for the application of its marvellous discovery anywhere in the world and in any circumstances?
I will offer the best consolation I can.
I put to myself the question: ‘How then, does it come right?’
My first reply to that is: ‘It doesn't have to come right.
Societies do not have to survive.
There is no law of nature which says that human societies are bound to survive so that we could say ‘Cheer up, chaps!'’
Indeed, history proves the opposite.
There may be no answer, in the sense that there may be no available cure which will work.’
I am therefore reduced to asking: ‘If there were one, what would it be?’
In doing so I am rather like the doctor by the patient's bedside, who knows; although of course he does not tell the patient — that the outcome of the disease will depend upon something in the constitution of that patient which he cannot control nor further influence and which he cannot even ascertain, except by the event.
I have often thought that one of the most interesting things for doctors about their patients is to see whether they survive or not.
So we are referred to the chemistry of the reaction of society; and here we are involved inescapably in a circularity of reasoning.
If it is the sort of society that survives, it will react like this.
If it does not react like this, it is not one of the sorts of society that survive.
Not much consolation in that!
But at least one can attempt to say what form the reaction is going to take.
What one needs and has to have is a reaction.
What we are looking for is the politics of reaction.
I do not mean being reactionary, simply going back to a past state of affairs, I mean reaction as the antithesis of action.
That will not, by definition, come from the silent majority.
It must come from the minority of one.
Anything in this world which is any good comes  from a minority — above all, the minority of one.
If you doubt that, read the Old Testament.
I do not believe that reaction occurs except through individual resistance in the first place.
This, therefore, is not the business of the silent majority which you have presented as your target.
That's escapism.
That's an excuse.
You are really saying, ‘We must find a way to do the impossible.’
You are saying that the answer is to do that which is inherently contradictory, to make the silent majority speak, to make the average the exception and so on.
Reaction against the weapons of ‘The Thing’— I take that now, in concluding, as typical of some, though not all, of the classifications into which I have exhorted you to divide the breaches of law and order — reaction against its contradictions, its absurdities, its defiance of known, established, healthy reality, can only come from individual persons — and from individual persons who speak.
You will not find those individual persons amongst the majority, because by definition the majority is composed of individuals who do not speak.
You therefore need people in the minority who will speak, the heretics, not to say martyrs.
Indeed, martyrdoms you must have; for martyrdoms are a sign that the next generation will be orthodox.
Generation One you burn at the stake; Generation Two you decorate with the CBE.
Unless people go out into the open, the reaction cannot take place.
You ask, how do we set about organising that?
You can't.
There either are such people in sufficient quantities or there are not.
There either is room for them in this society, and an eventual hearing (whether pre- or post-martyrdom), or there isn't.
You cannot do anything about it.
Or can you?
That question is not addressed to an association or a federation.
Federations don't do these things.
Only individuals do them.
I don't know — perhaps it might be you .
But the you , remember, is in the singular.
‘HUMAN RIGHTS’Journal of Medical Ethics , 3, 1977
What are human rights?
In this article Enoch Powell, MP (a former Conservative Minister of Health), approaches this question through a critical discussion of Article 25 (1) of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Article 25 (1) of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, subscribed by the United Kingdom in December 1948, runs as follows: ‘Everyone has a right to a standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself and of his family, including medical care.,
The Declaration was — not surprisingly — unaccompanied by any mechanism for the enforcement of the rights which it declared.
In that respect it differed from the European Convention of Human Rights, to which the United Kingdom adhered in November 1950 under the auspices of the Council of Europe and which came into force in September 1953.
The Convention established a European Court of Human Rights, to which the signatory states accorded supranational powers, and before which at this moment Britain awaits judgment in respect of acts committed in Northern Ireland in 1971.
Significantly, there is no provision (yet) in the European Convention corresponding to Article 25 of the UN Declaration.
However it would be unwise to conclude that, just because it has no enforcement mechanism, the Universal Declaration is as harmless as it is futile.
Nonsense can never be talked with impunity by anyone; and when governments solemnly talk nonsense in the name of nations, harm is certain to come of it sooner or later.
Most of the contents of the Universal Declaration are not merely nonsense but pernicious nonsense; and Article 25 is in this respect typical, not least in being both nonsensical and pernicious in several different ways at the same time.
A right is a claim which is, or ought to be, enforceable against others.
An individual, apart from society, cannot be conceived as having rights — or if he does, they are rights as against God, which  is blasphemy.
Robinson Crusoe on a desert island may experience good luck or bad luck; but he can have no rights.
The concept of enforcement involves — as the word implies — the use of force, compulsion: one man's right is enforced by others being compelled to do what they would not have done of their own free will.
This is true even of immaterial rights: a right to free speech is a claim to say to others what they do not want to hear, and to do so, if necessary, thanks to the exercise of force against those who would like to interfere.
But the compulsion becomes specially evident when the right is a claim to something material, because what one has another must go without: a right to free travel is a claim to compel others to transport me at their expense; a right to a pension is a claim to compel others to transfer part of their income to me.
This business of compulsion is not something theoretical or peripheral; it is of the essence of a right, because there is no point in declaring a right to what everyone is going to have anyhow.
The whole object of declaring a right is to justify or commend the use of compulsion to alter the existing relationship between individuals in a society.
An existing right is a claim which the society already enforces.
A proposed right is a claim which the proposer would like the society to enforce.
In fact a statement of human rights is either a description of a society or a critique of a society.
The compulsion with which rights are concerned will be either arbitrary or lawful depending on whether the compulsion is exerted in known and foreseeable circumstances by known and foreseeable process.
For the compulsion to be lawful, the right must be ‘justiciable’; that is, it must be definable, so that it can be uniformly and predictably applied, upon known principles.
A right not stated in justiciable terms is tantamount to a claim to exert arbitrary compulsion.
Article 25 is exactly of this character.
The terms ‘adequate’ and ‘wellbeing’, not to mention ‘standard of living’and even ‘medical care’, are purely subjective: to prescribe a ‘standard adequate for wellbeing’is not to interpret a rule; it is to make an arbitrary decision, and an arbitrary decision about the compulsion to be exerted upon the members of a society.
The definition will be not the ruling of a judge but the manifesto of a revolutionary junta.
A ‘standard adequate for wellbeing’ is potentially unrestricted —‘the sky's the limit’— and therefore the actual limit imposed and the performance exacted are necessarily arbitrary, the decisions of brute force.
The arbitrary implications of undefinable rights are particularly evident where the right claimed is by its nature not capable of being satisfied by any degree of compulsion exercised within the relevant society.
However vague may be the concept of ‘medical care adequate for health’, the right clearly cannot be realised if there are no doctors.
However subjective the ‘standard of living adequate for health and wellbeing’, it obviously cannot be achieved if population is outstripping subsistence.
Unless therefore the right asserted is tautologous and meaningless — unless ‘adequate’ means simply whatever is available in the given circumstances — its assertion is a threat not merely of arbitrary compulsion but of unlimited and inherently futile compulsion: it is a programme of nihilistic aggression.
This is precisely the purpose with which it was framed by its authors in the United Nations.
The society implicit in any statement of a right is not, in the context of the United Nations, a national society.
The society intended is international — the so-called community of nations, or world society.
The compulsion to be exercised in the attempt to satisfy the claim of right is not purely or mainly internal to particular societies: it is compulsion to be exercised by some societies against other societies, coercion to be brought to bear upon an international scale.
The statement ‘everyone has a right to medical care adequate to his health and well-being’ is, in the Universal Declaration, tantamount to the highwayman's ‘stand and deliver’: if this right is not realisable within a society, it must be realised by compulsory redistribution and reorganisation as between societies, and if it is still impracticable even by compulsion on an international scale, so much the worse for the international community!
The implicit nihilism and aggression are global.
It is not accidental that the assertion of ‘the rights of man’ has been characteristic of revolutionary regimes which aspired to interfere with and overturn the systems of law and society of their neighbours; and there could be no more striking evidence of the antagonism of Soviet Russia to Trotskyism than that ‘human rights’have to be forced down its throat at Helsinki or Belgrade like spoonfuls of brimstone.
On the other hand it is possible to differentiate the nature and effects of the human rights ‘declared’ by the United Nations from those asserted as the basis of the American state in the second section of the Declaration of Independence.
A right to ‘life’ may be philosophically opaque; and right to ‘liberty’may mean anything or nothing; but a right to the ‘pursuit of happiness’is unmistakably individualist, a claim upon society for the absence or minimum of restraint upon oneself, counterbalanced by the renunciation of restraint upon others.
The right to the ‘pursuit of happiness’ and the right to an ‘adequate standard of living’are dead opposites, as opposite as the right to pursue something and the right to be given something, as opposite as the demand for minimum compulsion in society and the demand for maximum compulsion.
What a strange freak of human history it is that the Declaration of Independence  should be among the lineal ancestors of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights!
It is a paradox upon which a Tory may perhaps be permitted one parting reflexion.
The attempt to understand or to construct society starting from the individual is foredoomed to failure, if not to worse.
The initial word ‘everyone’ in Article 25 (and in most of the other Articles)— however illogically linked with ‘his family’— contains the same fallacy as ‘all men’in the Declaration of 1776: ‘rights’are not an attribute of individuals but a description of societies.
Those who, wittingly or not, use the concept of ‘human rights’ to attack societies from within or without find in the end that the result is neither health nor well-being.
‘GIVING AWAY THE ROD’The Spectator , 21 January 1978
I am opposed to judicial corporal punishment, always have been and, so far as I can see, always shall be.
I am even more opposed to the question of that penalty in the United Kingdom being submitted to a tribunal outside this country and to the decision of that tribunal being treated as binding.
Assuredly the verdict of the Fool upon King Lear has come home to us:
When thou gavest them the rod and
puttest down thine own breeches,
Men they for sudden joy did weep
And I for sorrow sung,
That such a king should play bo-peep
Ang go the fools among.
Indeed we have ‘given the rod’ to nations which have been better acquainted than ourselves with tyranny and inhumanity.
It was no good the Prime Minister telling the Bangladeshis last week that the making and administration of the laws of this country is our own business.
He had evidently suffered a fit of amnesia, and overlooked not only the European Communities Act, 1972, which tore a great hole in this country's legislative independence, but that much earlier aberration, the signature of the European Convention of Human Rights in 1950.
At least the European Communities Act, if I remember rightly, had been the subject of a debate or two.
The Convention of Human Rights did not even rate a half-hour adjournment.
The Attorney General of the day (one Shawcross), informed an inquiring MP that ‘it is not contemplated that any legislation will be necessary to give effect to the terms of this Convention’ because ‘I think we are entitled to say that the law of this country has always been in advance of the laws of most other countries in regard to human rights’.
All humbug is punished sooner or later; but Nemesis is notoriously slow, and it was a quarter of a century before she struck and the United Kingdom found itself, to the malicious glee of her neighbours, the first signatory state to the Convention to be found guilty of a breach of its terms, in Ulster in 1971.
And now we have come up before the beak for a second wigging, because on the application of  one of our own citizens we are accused of ‘degrading treatment or punishment’ inflicted in the Isle of Man.
It is impossible to exaggerate the revolutionary significance of the recognition of a binding judicial tribunal external to the realm.
There is no similarity between this and international arbitration, where a state voluntarily agrees in a particular case to accept the judgment of a tribunal, as two individuals might freely agree to accept the adjudication of an arbitrator.
International arbitration is no more a transfer of sovereignty than private arbitration is an ousting of the jurisdiction of the courts.
The European Convention is different in kind, and the British signatories of it, worthy predecessors to the signatories of the Treaty of Brussels in 1972, put an end to a period of more than four centuries during which no causes have been carried out of this realm.
It is a thousand pities that the writ of praemunire which Henry VIII used against Wolsey etc. was no longer available to prevent them; for despite the fair-seeming terminology of Human Rights, the result is incompatible with the elementary principles of justice and of democracy as we understand them.
The consequences strike at the right of the people of this country to live under the laws made and altered by their representatives in Parliament.
This ceases to be possible where a document accepted as binding is bindingly interpreted by an external court.
In order to arrive at its findings, the European Commission does what no court in this country can do, namely sit in judgment upon the policy and justification of an Act of Parliament.
What is more, and equally incompatible with our conception of parliamentary democracy, the judicial interpretation of the terms of such a document as the Convention is not susceptible to statutory control or modification.
In the system to which the European Convention belongs, the judiciary are the legislators, and their powers as such are the more sweeping because of the necessarily vague and general terms in which the socalled human rights are defined.
There is a further twist of the knife in the birching case.
it calls into question our right to maintain the peculiar forms of connection which exist between the United Kingdom on the one hand and the ‘Islands’,viz .
Man and the Channel Islands, on the other hand.
By accepting the jurisdiction of an external authority in domestic matters, the UK in effect converted her responsibility for the external relations of the Isle of Man into a total responsibility for its internal affairs, and abrogated by a sidewind the semi-independence of the Islands, which are under the Crown but not part of the United Kingdom.
I wonder if the Manxmen and the Channel Islanders understood that in 1950!
However, if we do not like being judged by an external tribunal, if we do not like our citizens being interrogated by foreign judges about acts committed in the United Kingdom, if we do not like our Acts of Parliament and our internal administration being scrupulously picked over by a European Commission, if we do not like the relations between the Crown and its possessions being altered over our heads, the remedy is in our own hands.
Do we really believe that the rights we enjoy under our laws compare favourably with those in other societies?
Then let us tell the world so.
If not, let us put our own house in order and not wait for others to do it for us.
In either case, let us call off our participation in the dangerous humbug of international conventions of so-called ‘human rights’.
I don't expect we shall — not yet.
But one day, if the long sickness of self-abnegation and denigration is ever over, we shall have to do it.
LETTER IN ANSWER TO SOLZHENITSYN'S HARVARD STATEMENT 21 June 1978
I am one of what must be an increasing number who find the portentous moralisings of A. Solzhenitsyn a bore and an irritation.
Scarcely any aspect of life in the countries where he passes his voluntary exile has failed to incur his pessimistic censure.
Coming from Russia, where freedom of the press has been not so much unknown as uncomprehended since long before the Revolution, he is shocked to discover that a free press disseminated all kinds of false, partial and invented information and that journalists contradict themselves from one day to the next without shame and without apology.
Only a Russian would find all that surprising, or fail to understand that freedom which is not misused is not freedom at all.
Like all travellers he misunderstands what he observes.
It simply is not true that ‘within the Western countries the press has become more powerful than the legislative power, the executive and the judiciary’.
The British electorate regularly disprove this by electing governments in the teeth of the hostility and mispresentation of virtually the whole of the press.
Our modern Munchhausen has, however, found a more remarkable mare's nest still: he has discovered the ‘false slogan, characteristic of a false era, that everyone is entitled to know everything’.
Excited by this discovery he announces a novel and profound moral principle, a new addendum to the catalogue of human rights.
‘People,’ he says, ‘have a right not to know, and it is a more valuable one.’
Not merely morality but theology illuminates the theme: people have, say Solzhenitsyn, ‘the right not to have their divine souls’ burdened with ‘the excessive flow of information’.
Just so.
Whatever may be the case in Russia, we in the degenerate West can switch off the radio or television, or not buy a newspaper, or not read such parts of it as we do not wish to.
I can assure Solzhenitsyn that the method works admirably, ‘right’ or ‘no right’.
I know, because I have applied it with complete success to his own speeches and writings.
‘SOCIAL SERVICES’The Times Health Supplement , 13 November 1981
The old Minister of Health, 1949–64, was responsible to Parliament directly for the hospital services, being almost wholly provided by the taxpayer, and indirectly for the health and welfare services provided partly out of the rates and partly out of taxes by local authorities.
He also answered for the general practitioner, dental and pharmaceutical services.
There is nothing in common between all this, which consists in ‘real, services, and the fixing and payment of money benefits, financed in great part by one special tax called ‘contributions’— at least there is nothing common to these two functions which justifies demands for their being the province of one minister.
Maybe deficiency of income affects health; but so do housing and the environment, and so do conditions of employment.
The unity of the consumer creates no presumption in favour of the unity of the supplier.
Unfortunately nowadays every departmental minister has to be a secretary of state, just as every unimportant diplomatic station has to be an embassy.
This, and the multiplication of that half-breed known as ministers of state, is a product of a political inflation which even the present Government has not attempted to control.
No longer therefore, apparently, can we have one minister for health services and one minister for social payments; but that would be more sensible, all the same.
So I must restate the question as ‘What would my priorities be if I were now what the Minister of Health was then?’
‘Then’ in 1960–3, eighteen years ago; and in the meantime, apart from summarising my reflections and discoveries before they passed from my memory in a slim volume entitled Medicine and politics , I have done what most ex-ministers do when they have a left most departments — given the subject a wide berth.
There is a good reason for this: with any luck, they will never be back there again, unless it was one of the great departments like the Treasury, Defence and the Foreign Office.
Your career politician is a generalist and eschews becoming ‘typed’.
In the case of Health, there is the special relief at having escaped from those incessant wrangles over money with income-orientated professions, whose members are taken by the general public for  altruistic servants of humanity, if not for angelic comforters.
Any past Minister of Health who wanted to be Minister of Health again would have very peculiar tastes.
So, ‘What would my priorities be if the bad dream came true, and I were Minister of Health now?’
If by ‘priorities’ is meant ambitions for changing the pattern and content of the service, I should be very reluctant to form any priorities.
That pattern changes gradually as medical practice and fashions change and as public demand changes.
The plant — hospitals, equipment, surgeries — being state-owned and state-administered, those changes do not come about by a gradual process made up of an infinite number of individual decisions: they happen in lurches, of which the most visible form is not the provision of new plant but the discontinuance of old plant.
It is the nature of this process that it is always being overtaken by further changes in medical practice and fashion and public demand.
One never, as a result, can get it right.
My mind goes back to the original fifteen-year Hospital Plan, published in January 1962.
It was based, because in the then state of medical opinion it could not be otherwise, upon the concept of the district general hospital, with the full range of specialities.
It was consequently characterised by the supersession of large numbers of small local hospitals, including those survivals from a byegone age, the ‘cottage hospitals’.
If rumour speaks true, the pattern on which the plan was based was obsolescent before the second five-year phase of the plan was far advanced.
Opinion and fashion had changed: to talk of the ‘district general hospital’ now stamped the speaker as a Rip Van Winkle.
In the flush of enthusiasm, if not youthful, at least inexperienced, I set myself in 1960 two major objectives: one was the development of extramural services —‘community care’ was the jargon — which would reduce the incidence of hospital care and counteract the institutionalism of long-stay hospitals; and the other, not unconnected, was to break down the huge mental hospitals inherited from the nineteenth century.
It is, as I noted at the time, a peculiar fact that most laymen who have had responsibility for the health service have interested themselves personally to a preponderant extent in the case of the mentally afflicted, both the mentally ill and the mentally handicapped.
I attribute that fact, rightly or wrongly, to the realisation of everyone who occupies that position that, while in every other direction insistent and vocal public and professional demand keeps up a constant pressure for expansion and improvement, it is frequently only his own influence and authority which will be exerted to redress the balance.
I shall return presently to this matter of the popularity or unpopularity of different aspects of the health service.
Meanwhile a sad reflection dawns upon the well-intentioned occupant of the ministerial chair.
Contrary to common assumption, community care is far more costly than institutional care.
Indeed, one of the reasons why it is superior is the much higher ratio of carers to cared-for, not forgetting the greater administrative cost of organising the one than the other.
It is vain to think that more of the load will be shouldered by voluntary effort.
Every health minister gets put into his mouth in his early months an ambitious and laudatory summons to voluntary effort.
In fact, the limits within which voluntary resources can be effectively used are narrow; and they can only be effectively used even within those limits if professional full-paid effort is put into making it happen.
Voluntary effort is not an easy option or a cheap supplement.
The only naturally efficient form of community care is the family — but that is quite another story.
Institutional care, therefore, especially of the long-term patient, is, however unattractive from some points of view, by far the most efficient in terms of manPower per patient.
Thus the endeavour to replace as much as possible of institutional with community care is a Sisyphean labour, which encounters the maximum obstacles, financial and organisational, quite apart from the fact that the responsibility for developing community care is fragmented and isolated through residing, in large part, with local health authorities and thus falling within a different system of finance and budgeting.
I would therefore be much more modest in my expectations and ambitions and would bear in mind one of the fundamental demand factors operating in the health service.
This is the law that demand increases proportionately to the improvement and increased acceptability of the service offered.
Demand that had been suppressed or masked by what the old Poor Law debates used to call ‘ineligibility’ emerges as effective demand in proportion as, for example, custodial and institutional care is replaced by community care.
The substitution is thus not only inherently costly, but it evokes increased demand or, if you like, creates increased need.
Nevertheless, I should be wanting, as twenty years ago, to lean with all my weight in that direction.
I should, again as twenty years ago, be the Chancellor of the Exchequer's best friend.
Let me hasten to explain what I mean.
The total volume of resources applied by the health services is essentially an arbitrary figure.
If it were 20 per cent greater, there would be no less dissatisfaction and unfulfilled demand at the margin; if it were 20 per cent less — I do not mean if it were reduced by 20 per cent but if it were now 20 per cent less than it actually is, nobody would be the wiser.
It is not a cumulative figure obtained by adding up the cost of treating a given volume of specific diseases and of restoring to health, or transferring to a better world, a given number of patients.
All the same, I would expect and (I anticipate) receive agreement from the Chancellor to two propositions: first, I would wish the ‘real’ budget to be maintained, though I would not argue for any test of ‘reality’other than the rough and ready conventional scale used for measuring inflation; and secondly, I would seek to agree a modest and gradual increase in that ‘real’budget.
Let me be clear about the reason.
This country has a static but ageing population and will continue to have one for some considerable time ahead even if the birthrate kicks upward again.
Such a population, especially if the average size of a family continues to diminish, calls for more looking after, medically and physically, than an equal population of lower average age: it does not die so cheaply and it does not, medically speaking, survive so cheaply.
Consequently, to maintain a constant level of satisfaction — or, what is the same thing, of dissatisfaction — with the health services, expenditure upon them ought relatively to increase somewhat in real terms.
The ‘somewhat’ is quite unquantifiable.
That is why I said I would ‘seek to agree’ with the Chancellor: there is little by way of logical leverage that I could bring to bear upon them.
Within that slowly changing real total, major changes of pattern will, as I have already said, take place under the pressure of changes in medical practice and changes in medical fashion, as well as more subtle social and environmental changes.
These changes of pattern take place by a process which bears much more resemblance to that in areas outside public provision and within the scope of market forces than is commonly supposed.
The new items of treatment or care are not superimposed as net additions upon what exists; they are, as it were, ‘shoe-horned in’ by the increased pressure of professional and public demand for them confronting types of provision of which the relative popularity and fashionableness is diminishing.
In this welter, such deliberate pressures as the responsible minister may himself exert are included and absorbed; but the less he purports or believes himself to be determining the outcome, the better.
This is where lies the virtue, in the organisation of the NHS, of a certain institutionalised paradox.
Although the minister is uniquely and personally responsible to Parliament for everything — everything, that is, outside clinical decisions — which is done or left undone in the health service, he administers it through a hierarchy of non-elective bodies on which  the professions are strongly represented and are influential more than in proportion to their numbers.
This enables him to preside over the process which I have described with the minimum of overt interference, the constriction of the budgetary limits performing much the same role as the balance of supply and demand in a market system.
Before I was Minister of Health, I was inclined to be sceptical of the utility of this hierarchy, especially of the tier interposed between the minister and the direct administration of the hospitals.
Reflection and experience changed that opinion.
I made it my practice, not without some official misgivings, to work through the chairmen of the regional boards as a collective body, behaving, though they were my appointees, as no more than their primus inter pares .
I would do so again, believing that that relationship corresponds best with the reality of the processes which determine the composition and content of care within the NHS.
TO THE MIDDLE COMMON ROOM BANQUET Magdalene College, Cambridge, 12 June 1991
Her Majesty's Government, by the mouth of the Queen's chief minister, has announced that no distinction is henceforward to be made between universities and other places in which students of similar age and attainments seek instruction and qualifications.
This is grievous news, grievous not only for this and other universities but for the nation; for it is a grave national misfortune to be governed by those who do not know what a university is and what distinguishes it from other institutions of learning and study, not to mention training.
The difference has been essential to European culture and civilisation since the Renaissance at least.
It would be shameful and alarming if the United Kingdom professed a deliberate intention to contract out of recognising that difference.
A university, as Western civilisation has known a university, is an institution which is peculiar in a precise and definable way.
It is a place where there live side by side in mutual intercourse persons whose life is dedicated to the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, regardless of the consequences or applications of the knowledge thus acquired.
The definition however does not end there; it has another essential element.
It is a place to which resort, during the formative years of early adult life, those desirous and capable of learning how people engaged in the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake go about their business.
A university is a place where there is research, teaching and learning; but not just any research, any teaching and any learning.
At a university the meaning of those terms is crucially qualified.
A university is a society — a society of those engaged in similar endeavour and for similar reasons.
They do their life-work the more successfully and enjoyably because, living together, they encourage, support and cross-fertilise each other.
It is possible to pursue knowledge for its own sake in isolation, in a hermit existence; but the outcome is impoverished and the happiness is diminished thereby.
I have already used several interchangeable terms for happiness.
Man is endowed with an insatiable curiosity about himself and about the world around him, in his perception of which his own nature finds  its reflection.
The attempt to satisfy that curiosity, because it obeys a deep and strong instinct, produces, especially in certain personalities, uniquely powerful sensations of pleasure.
In the last resort the only satisfactory answer to the question, ‘Why do you devote yourself to the attempt to understand?’ is, ‘Because I derive so strong a satisfaction from doing so.’
Joy is the note and the reward of all learning.
A university congregates together that type of personality and places it at the disposal of the succeeding generation.
The decision to make this process possible by the foundation of colleges or universities and the financial maintenance of students has been taken, down through the ages, by the sources of munificence in each succeeding period, until in our own day the lion's share is produced through public funds voted by central government and local authorities.
It has at all times been an act of faith and a declaration of belief, the faith and the belief that a society and a nation will fare best, in this world and the next, where the most promising of its youth are withdrawn at a critical period of their development to spend several years in close and intimate proximity with one another and with those whose talent and delight is the pursuit of knowledge of all kinds for its own sake and the communication of that talent and delight to their successors.
Like all acts of faith, it is not capable of mathematical or logical demonstration and can therefore be disavowed by those who do not share it.
To our sorrow we know now that it is disavowed by the spokesmen of this nation today, who publicly and proudly profess not to share it.
No doubt they are also the victims of a gross and barbarous fallacy.
The astonishing achievements of Western civilisation in controlling and exploring the resources of the world, and the consequent increase in material wealth and standards of living, would not have taken place if the procurement of knowledge for its own sake had not mapped out the paths of which technology and investment for profit thereafter took advantage.
If thought and study had been restricted to whatever held out the visible prospect of material advantage, that explosive corruscation of human achievement which is European civilisation would never have occurred.
Those who created nuclear physics were as innocent of ulterior motivation as those who distilled a knowledge of the administration and society of ancient Egypt and Assyria from cuneiform inscriptions or Greek papyri.
The fatal fallacy is to try to turn the world inside-out and make economic progress the criterion of the pursuit of knowledge.
That way lies futility and the strangulation of the human spirit.
It is easy to be misled.
Human physiology and biochemistry are no less appropriate subjects for understanding in their own right and for university study and research because they have become the tools of  the lucrative and utilitarian profession of medicine.
Jurisprudence is no less an exploration of society and human nature because the practice of a solicitor requires acquaintance with statutory codes and court procedures.
The philosophical implications of the physical universe are no less challenging to the human intellect because aero-engines and production lines function in obedience to the laws of physics.
The same subjects — at any rate, the same subjects nominally — can be part of a university education and of a course in technology.
That does not equate universities with polytechnic colleges nor university education with technical training, nor can any overlap between the two negate the essential difference in kind between them.
There is something about a university which is naturally antipathetic to the state.
That is its autonomy.
Those whose business is the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake recognise their fellows: there is a community between them which they acknowledge because their mutual cross-fertilisation depends upon the underlying unity of human inquisitiveness in all its manifestations.
‘Show me the results in advance,’ says the barbarian state, ‘and then I will give you money.
Provide me with a calculus of benefit, and I will justify distributing it.’
‘Not so,’ replies the university; ‘give if you will; withhold if you must but understand if you can what nature of community we are and do not deprive us of our freedom, the freedom to pursue, and to teach others to pursue, knowledge for its own sake in whatever guise it presents itself to us; for that is of our very essence.,
THE EMPIRE AND COMMONWEALTH
HOWARD:…you used to believe in the British Empire.
What caused you to change your mind?
POWELL: After the war…
I thought that it was still possible for there to be a political link between the United Kingdom and India.
I realised that that was an absurdity…after the evidence that India could not be part of the same political system, I still believed for a short time that an Empire of positions — that is to say the possession of points of communication around the globe — gave a significance to this country and a tenable and lasting position.
That too was wrong and my lesson was learnt.
‘Face the Press’, Channel 4 TV, 9 October 1983
‘THE MYTH OF EMPIRE’ Round Table 1910–1917
It is a solemn experience to sit in 1970 and watch the British people, seventy years before, being taught to ‘think Imperially’.
What is impressive is that the failure of all that was so busily constructed, attempted and imagined, was not merely predictable but predicted.
We are not being wise after the event in pointing to the reasons why Imperial consolidation was foredoomed.
They were known to our predecessors at the time and were expounded by them as clearly then as we can demonstrate them now; for the reasons were implicit in the facts of the world in 1900.
It therefore required no feat of prophecy to assert that long before the twentieth century was out, the United Kingdom would be a country without empire and not in the front rank in size and power, and yet that this would not be synonymous with disaster, dishonour or extinction.
Watching the spectacle, one has the weird sensation that the actors really knew all the time that their professions were illusory, and that there was a kind of gigantic tacit conspiracy to pretend.
Otherwise, one wonders, how could there constantly be those ‘asides’, which seem to reveal that the participants were actually aware the game was up or rather perhaps had never started?
One of the lessons to be drawn from the study of early-twentieth-century imperialism is the extraordinary durability of policies and programmes which lack all possibility of being realised.
The remarkable thing about political houses built on sand, or castles in the air, is how long they often take to collapse; and this very time-lag becomes an argument in their favour and a supposed refutation of those who draw attention to the absence of foundations.
‘There must be a foundation somewhere,’ says the populace; ‘for look, the building continues to stand up.’
There is yet one further stage of insight — and of pessimism — which awaits the student.
In studying a period and a phase in which what could be proved at the time to be shadows were so determinedly pursued, is he after all studying not an aberration, not a deviation from the normal, but the common behaviour of mankind?
Will it not be found that the political activity of societies consists ordinarily, perhaps invariably, in filling sieves and making sand ropes — sieves which those who fill them half know to be sieves, sand which those  who weave it into ropes suspect to be sand after all?
And the final reflection which suggests itself is that if this pattern of behaviour should prove to be normal, it should be assumed — at least until the contrary is demonstrated — that it is beneficial and has been evolved by trial and error as a preservative device or mechanism.
Nations, and perhaps humanity itself, would then be seen to owe their survival to their follies, or at least to an appropriate dilution of rationality with pretence and self-deception.
South Africa, for example.
A united South Africa within the British Empire was the purpose for which, almost from the beginning of the Boer War, Lord Milner laboured and assembled the galaxy of British talent soon to be known as his kindergarten.
In 1899 he was writing: ‘The ultimate end is a self-governing white community…from Cape Town to Zambesi.
There must be one flag, the Union Jack, but under it equality of races [i.e. British and Boer]and languages…but not before a loyal majority is assured’; or again, ‘if ten years hence there are three men of British race to two of Dutch, the country will be safe and prosperous; if there are three of Dutch to two of British, we shall have perpetual difficulty’.
He was as good as his word.
By 1908, when he saw that his stipulation was ruled out by the failure of British immigrants and the Liberal acceleration of colonial self-government — soon to be followed by South African union — he unhesitatingly drew the correct conclusion:
The policy to which we devoted years of labour must be regarded as a thing of the past.
The S. African British are entirely relieved from any obligations to the mother country.
They should devote themselves wholly to the problem of making life in South Africa, regarded as more or less a foreign country, bearable for self-respecting British men and women.
Mere logic and abstinence from wishful thinking had enabled Milner to summarise the story of the next sixty years.
Significantly, his kindergarten would not see — or would not look.
So they devoted themselves to promoting political movements which they could imagine would still reach the Milnerian goal.
‘Both races hope for prosperity, prosperity means expansion, expansion means immigration, immigration means British’; the syllogism was false, in logic and experience, but it was good enough for those who did not want to go where logic and experience pointed.
One is not prepared, however, for the discovery that Milner, so realist and clear-sighted about South Africa, was himself at the very same time an illusionist on a world scale.
In 1917 he could refer Garvin to a speech made in 1905 where he stated his ideal for the  British Empire: ‘we think of a group of states, all independent in their own local concerns, but all united for the defence of their common interests and the defence of a common civilisation, united not in an alliance — for alliances can be made and unmade — but in a permanent organic union' .
That anyone of Milner's mental power and insight could envisage a course of events which ran contrary both to the logic and experience of the actual British Empire over a hundred and fifty years is a staggering fact.
He retained, however, sufficient contact with reality to know, and privately to say, that such a development was incompatible with the British parliamentary system.
That given, the Burkian thesis must work itself out inexorably to the separation and independence not only of the great colonies (in the original sense of that word) but of every island and speck of rock on the globe: where there could not be representation in a common sovereign assembly, ‘unity’ would only be de facto and on sufference, and thus diminishing with the passage of time —organic it could never be.
Significantly the dream of an Imperial organic entity perished on the very battlefields of Flanders where the self-governing Dominions did apparently fight ‘for their common interests’:
The more realistic minds in the [Round Table]movement quickly saw that the sacrifices made by Dominion troops and the concurrent growth in Dominion nationalism were harbingers of a new imperial relationship unlike anything they had proposed (Nimocks).
And even that sombre assessment understated the inevitabilities.
Still, after all, Milner was a man who stood aside from politics and despised them, and his kindergarten were defiantly administrators, not politicians.
The power of the Imperial illusion is only properly appreciated when we watch the last phase in the career of a politician's politician of the first rank, Joseph Chamberlain.
He built out of that illusion a political cause which stirred the British electorate as it had not been stirred for decades and which has left its imprint on the Conservative Party and on British trade policy down to the present.
The story of how the Birmingham radical, turned ‘unionist’ in the United Kingdom context, became Colonial Secretary in a Tory administration is well remembered.
It is not so commonly remembered that for him too it was the South African experience of the Boer War and its aftermath from which he emerged ‘unionist’ in the Imperial context.
The sudden chill of isolation which Britain felt in a hostile world, and the thrill of Dominion contingents serving alongside troops from ‘home’, raised in new form what had long been a nagging conundrum — that the outlying parts of the  Empire which Britain defended bore no appreciable share of the burden, precisely because of the fundamental political syllogism: no taxation without representation; no representation without common responsibility; no common responsibility without sacrifice of separate independence.
Over and over again initiatives towards ‘Imperial union’ had broken into spray against the rock.
Was there perhaps some route by which it could be circumvented?
When Chamberlain returned from his post-war African tour to a hero's welcome in March 1903, he found to his hand a request from the Dominions themselves which, though it had nothing to do with Imperial unity, and indeed was rather symptomatic of growing independence, he seized upon and elevated into the first step towards ‘consolidation of the Empire’.
(It is a standard procedure of politicians, when embarking upon a course which lacks logical coherence, to disarm critics and criticism by describing what they do or commend as ‘only a first step’; for who can demand logic from ‘a first step’?)
Unlike the mother-country and its dependencies, above all India, the self-governing colonies were protectionist; but they were now prepared, and indeed in some cases were anxious, to afford the mother-country preferential treatment within their tariff system if the mother-country would reciprocate.
In order to do this, however, Britain must herself become in some degree protectionist and place tariffs on foreign imports of at least the things which the Dominions had to sell to her — above all, food, if not also raw materials.
It was thus a revolution in British fiscal policy which Chamberlain advocated in the name of Empire; and from his Birmingham speech in May 1903 until he was struck down three years later his advocacy of tariff reform and his Imperial theme dominated British policies.
Yet the Imperial side of the argument — whatever view may be taken of the fiscal, economic and domestic — would not stand up to examination.
If the Empire was to be welded into an economic unit, the parts of which would be interdependent economically because they were parts of the Empire, and if this unity was to stand in default or in anticipation of political unity, then what was necessary was Imperial free trade, a genuine Zollverein .
Yet this was the last thing the Dominions would contemplate.
They meant to build up their own industries behind their tariff barriers, and not to remain the permanent primary producers for the industrial United Kingdom; and when Chamberlain once incautiously disclosed this logical implication of his policy, he was forced to beat an instant retreat.
Nor could Chamberlain ever show how a preference within the low tariffs, which were the most that Britain would conceivably tolerate upon her food or raw materials, could make the difference, as he constantly reiterated, between Imperial consolidation and Imperial dissolution.
Nevertheless, the magic worked, and the narrowness and unsoundness of the practical basis did not prevent the most glorious imaginary structures being reared upon it.
Like the kindergarten, Chamberlain did not hesitate to invoke as a parallel the formation of the United States, transposing Alexander Hamilton's ‘Learn to think Continentally’ into ‘Learn to think Imperially’.
How can the blowing of such a bubble, and, once it was inflated and released, its durability, be accounted for?
The answer, in principle, is the same as for all political illusions which are successfully propagated — that vast numbers of people want to entertain them, that they fulfil a need.
And some of the needs which sustained Chamberlainite and Milnerian imperialism are not far to seek.
One was the need for reassurance in a world of visibly consolidating Great Powers — from the United States in the West to the Teutonic and Slav empires in Europe and the East.
The Recessional of 1897 was not the hymn of a nation strong in its own security.
In the 1890s the atmosphere was not of that settled calm with which it was credited by later and even more anxious generations.
However confident the mass of the population may have felt in the durability of Britain's world role, those who ruled in Britain knew full well the kind of dangers the country faced and the need to take steps to meet them…
It would need a profound belief in providence to make one refrain from wondering why a group of foggy islands off Europe's north-western shores, populated beyond the means of subsistence that the islands could provide, endowed with no great natural assets outside the coalfields, should have become both the centre of a world empire and a possible arbiter of European rivalries.
It might seem that so artificial a superiority was certain to prove as transient as the hegemonies that it had replaced, although those in whose hands power lay were for the most part undaunted by the new challenges to Britain's position that they sensed…
They took it for granted that the international world was one of competing powers and that their duty was to make the most of whatever assets were available to them.
I doubt, however, if it is right to limit these anxieties to ‘those who ruled Britain'.
The audiences of working men who acclaimed Joseph Chamberiain were not just afraid for their jobs, though the fear of German competition was real enough — the three men, in a speech of Chamberlain's, unloading trucks containing German wire, who remarked ‘this is rather hard: we used to make this’.
They also believed that other countries were overtaking Britain in every way;, and of course, as in the 1950s and 1960s, the fallacy of a ‘declining share’ of world trade etc. was easy to convey and difficult to expose.
Britain wanted to feel safe.
Strategically, the alliance with Japan and the entente with France were expressions of this instinct; economically, it released the yearning for a closed area within which Britain could be commercially safe, even if perhaps less well-off than if she could have outfaced her rivals in open competition.
But need she be less well-off?
The wish was father to the thought.
Could not imperialism go hand-in-hand with prosperity for the working man?
Here was the genesis of the myth, destined to lead to so many follies and disasters, that Britain was rich, as well as powerful,because of her Empire.
The close links between the Fabians and Milner's kindergarten on the one hand, and the personal link in Chamberlain's own career between radical reform and tariff imperialism — he wanted the Conservative Party to hypothecate the financial yield of the preferential tariff to providing old age pensions — are reminders that at the beginning of the century ‘social imperialism’ did not sound the paradox it does today, and that the forefathers of modern British Socialism are to be found in larger numbers in the ranks of the imperialists than of the Little Englanders.
Milner in 1907 was writing: ‘there can be no adequate prosperity for the forty or fifty million people in these islands without the Empire and all that it provides’.
It was the same idea of the Empire as a patrimony, or an estate, the source of a livelihood for the mothercountry, to which Chamberlain had appealed: ‘I know how our forefathers…bore themselves bravely in the titanic strife with Napoleon and came out victorious.
What is our task to theirs?
It is a mere trifle; it is only for us to keep the fruits of the victory that they have won’(Liverpool, 1903).
Weirdly, but by a traceable line of descent through Unionism and Socialism, almost the same accents recur after thirty years: ‘With the vast imperial resources which are the heritage of this country, the problems of poverty and want can easily be solved by a government empowered by the people to carry out their will.
While democratic governments are giving away the Empire which our fathers won, our people are abandoned to poverty and unemployment.
Yet the Empire belongs to you, the people of Britain.’
The voice is that of Sir Oswald Mosley in October 1936.
So easily did the rational fear of not being able to exchange their products so advantageously merge, for a whole generation, into the absurdity of supposing that they could somehow have access to a source of wealth other than their own production.
It was not for that generation to complain if the inhabitants of India and of the dependent colonies took them at their word, albeit a mistaken word: the myth of an Empire exploited by the United Kingdom was a plant  which grew in the same soil as the myth of an Empire that alone secured ‘adequate prosperity’ to the forty or fifty million inhabitants of the United Kingdom.
Curzon was wont to complain, and with justice, that Chamberiain ‘forgot all about India when he launched his scheme’, and whimsically mused on ‘what would have become of him and us if he had ever visited India…
The Colonies would have been dwarfed and forgotten, and the pivot of the Empire would have been Calcutta.’
The remark goes deep.
It was not only Chamberlain but all the Imperial consolidators and Milnerites and Empire Traders who ‘forgot India’— and with good season: they needs must.
The Empire which would be bound together by reciprocal preferences, freely accorded, and which would thence ascend, perchance, to the unity of common counsels and common institutions, was an Empire of independent ‘kith and kin’—‘the conception of the people of these islands as a great family bound by indissoluble ties to kindred families in other parts of the world’(Milner).
Yet the Empire which the British Navy defended, and which made Britain an Asiatic power, or a world power, or indeed a power at all, was not the few million kith and kin living in North America or in Australasia or mingling with the Dutch in South Africa.
It was overwhelmingly the empire of India.
But with India there could be no ‘consolidation’; its hundreds of millions were, necessarily, left out of the cosy computations of the Imperialists; and its membership of a community of independent yet united states was beyond the power of imagination to conceive.
Yet it was not beyond the power of reason and foresight to know that the days of the Indian Empire were numbered, if not in years, still in decades: the best and the wisest of the British in India had known and said it from the beginning.
Nevertheless, a whole generation and more succeeded in forgetting or ignoring it, in order to live with the imperial illusion —‘ideal’ was the kinder word — which they seemed to need.
‘A WEEK IN POLITICS’ Channel 4 TV, 29 January 1983
ANTHONY KING: I would like to bring in, ah, Enoch Powell (really?) who, who has ah — very much…
ENOCH POWELL: I do enjoy listening to other people talk.
I'm quite used to it in the House of Commons….
DENIS HEALEY: I've never noticed you enjoying it, Enoch.
POWELL: Oh yes, I enjoyed your speech the other day.
HEALEY: I'm so glad.
Yes, well you should.
KING: Mr Powell, what do you conclude from all this; you once described the Foreign Office as a nest of vipers.
Does listening to this conversation lead you to reinforce that conclusion?
POWELL: That — that nursery of traitors and nest of vipers. (clears throat)A phrase which has become classic if not an actual thing.
The authorised description for that Department since then.
What we've been shown in the Report, and what has, ah, emerged from this discussion, is that for some fifteen years, we engaged in a game of blind man's buff.
We engaged in the game of looking for something which did not exist.
Looking for something between sovereignty and not sovereignty.
Something which as the Argentines were in no circumstances, ah, going to settle for, ah, and anybody could have told them that, and anybody knew that.
There is nothing between sovereignty and not sovereignty.
But we hoped that something could be found.
You know, you go on looking for a solution to this difficult problem.
That's the formula by way — way — by which you get yourself nearer to disaster.
And in addition to that, as governments knew that the House of Commons would not be agreeable, ah, the ah, polite phrase is ‘had not been educated up to’, ah, the acceptance of a transfer of sovereignty of the islands, an additional ingredient was thrown in.
That this wouldn't happen, except it had the consent, sometimes — and I fear Nick Ridley fell into this — it wobbled over except aft — into — after consultation.
HEALEY: Even Mr Pym made the same wobble, yes.
POWELL: Yes, it's, it's a very dangerous wobble…
(Interest and wishes…
) And it helped to make the House of Commons very anxious and very angry.
KING: Are you saying in effect…
POWELL: Ah, ah, I, I am saying in addition that that either meant that the thing was going to be vetoed anyhow by the Falkland Islanders, and that therefore even if Britain wanted to get rid of, of sovereignty, she wasn't going to get rid of it in terms of her own statement; or that the Falkland Islanders were going to be put under so much pressure, ah — we needn't go into the details of what is meant in those connections, by pressure; I'm sure the Foreign Office will supply the details if requested — ah, would be put under so much pressure that eventually they would collapse and give way.
Now that was what we were doing.
We were playing a silly game, which had not a tragic outcome — it had, thanks to the mercy of providence, a fortunate outcome — but it had an outcome which is not one which ah statecraft should either aim at or be proud of having achieved.
KING: Simon Jenkins, you're the — you're the author of, ah, of the Battle for the Falklands , or the co-author.
Ah, you probably know more about this than just about anybody outside government.
Do you think that the Foreign Office, successive British governments, were playing a silly game?
SIMON JENKINs: No, I disagree with Enoch Powell on that.
Ah, I think the Foreign Office was trying to pursue the only sensible policy as it perceived it at the time, right through the entire period, um, since 1965.
And it…
POWELL: But it did exist.
‘COMMONWEALTH MORNING AFTER THE IMPERIAL NIGHT BEFORE’Daily Telegraph , 22 November 1983
With an impish glint of mischief in her eye the Muse of History looked down and watched the American Marines assault Grenada.
Grenada was the last tiny but bitter dreg in the constitutional cup which the United Kingdom has drained in the past thirty-five years; and bravely, though not without a grimace of disgust, did we swallow it.
Anybody who supposes that the events of 1983 in the Caribbean have left the humbug of the Commonwealth unscathed is as self-deceived as those who imagine that the humbug of the United Nations has been unscathed by the events of 1982 in the South Atlantic.
After World War II the Crown in Parliament of the United Kingdom well understood that it could no longer govern the King Emperor's non-British, any more than his British subjects who were not represented, and could not be represented, in Parliament.
With admirable diligence it worked away, renouncing its authority over one territory after another.
Thereby, in the eyes not only of the United Kingdom but of the world, each of these territories became a sovereign independent state, alias a nation.
As such it was duly added to the membership roll of the contraption known as the United Nations, which asserts that all nations are equal (albeit some more so than others), with one vote each, just as if they were individual human beings in a right-little tight-little democratic State.
We disposed of the big fish first, not even so without difficulty; for while some, like Ceylon and Jamaica, were islands, which was a good enough demarcation for rough and ready purposes, others, like the Indians or Nigerians, were not so unmistakable and quarrelled violently over who they were.
At times this caused quite a scuffle, especially when we tried to insist on lumping several together and pretending that the result was a nation, albeit a federal one — rather in the same way as the parliamentary managers of the eighteenth century used to bribe Scottish peers by the batch, half a dozen or a dozen at a time.
It was partly because these artificial agglomerations soon broke up that we were left at the finish with a lot of little scraps, which nobody, when not talking through the back of his head, could mistake for potential nations.
What to do?
We swallowed hard, stiffened our upper lip, and decided to ‘see it through’ by shutting our eyes and applying the same old formula regardless — a constitution, a mace, a copy of Erskine May, a Speaker's chair and national independence.
By 1982 we had swept up all but a handful of awkward items whose inhabitants, for varying reasons, didn't want to be or couldn't be ‘nationalised’— which was very untidy and inconvenient of them.
So, as I say, the Muse of History laughed when Britain, which had risen almost as one man to take the Falklands from the Argentine, then quite logically watched, passive and embarrassed, while the United States occupied the independent sovereign state of Grenada.
Shall I say what the Muse is waiting for now?
It is to see whether, when someone pinches Rockall, we shall sail to replant the Union flag upon it, exclaiming ‘Rejoice, rejoice,’ as when we repossessed the likewise uninhabited South Georgia.
The Grenada story is delicious on another account.
It exposes on a minuscule scale a widely misunderstood but tiresome fact which Australia, Canada and other nations spawned by Britain have learned and taught on a larger scale.
It is the fact that when people and territory previously ruled by the Crown in Parliament become a separate and independent state, we do not, because we cannot, endow it with a statehood like our own.
Britain is a prescriptive monarchy.
The sovereign power inherent in the British Crown, as exercised through Council and through Parliament, derives not from a treaty or document or compact, but from prescription, from the fact that it has been so from time immemorial — that it is immanent in the nation itself.
When we create a new nation, however, we cannot transfer to it this prescriptive authority which is the essence of our own state.
We can only pass an Act of Parliament and give it to them with a slap on the back and a ‘best of British luck’: ‘Here's your constitution,’ we say, ‘now do what you like with it; you can because you are now independent.’
Before 1948 we used to pretend that all such countries were just copies of the United Kingdom, except that, in place of the monarch, they had a Governor-General, who, we assured ourselves and them, represented the monarch.
We purported to atomise the person of the Sovereign, so that she was Queen of Canada, Queen of Australia, etc., and eventually, in the pantomime season, Queen of Grenada.
She was not, and she is not: the reference to ‘her realms’(plural) in the Royal Titles is spurious.
The Queen is the prescriptive sovereign  of one realm only, the United Kingdom: elsewhere neither she nor her so-called representatives the governors-general possess an ounce of prescriptive sovereignty.
The proceedings of Sir Paul Scoon after the American invasion were just as revolutionary — meaning validated by force not law — as had been the proceedings of the superseded military regime.
Putting the same point another way, Australia and Canada are as truly republics as are India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
There was a time, no doubt— it must have been before 1948, when the United Kingdom itself abolished allegiance as the basis of citizenship — when the pretence of daughter monarchies around the globe was harmless and even arguably beneficial.
People wanted to believe it, and no practical reality came into conflict with it.
Now the signals are flying everywhere that that time has gone.
The prescriptive monarchy of the United Kingdom stands constitutionally isolated in a world where some forty independent republics, large and minuscule, trace their historical origin from a period of rule under the British Crown in Parliament.
That common accident endows them with nothing else in common— nothing else in their own eyes, nothing else in the face of the world, nothing else in verifiable fact, nothing else except a fiction British-made for British consumption.
How long can we healthily continue the diet of delusion?
Not long, I think, now that internal revolution, disruption and secession, external interference, aggression and absorption are likely to be more and more the fate of these often unstable and highly artificial British ex-dominions.
Zimbabwe, Grenada, Cyprus — they are so many flares that mark the outline of a new path.
Their fates concern us in reality no more than those of other independent states which were never British dominions.
Our danger is to be beguiled by our own fiction into imagining otherwise.
Some time there will have to be an end to this make-believe.
Some day the queen's ministers will have to stop advising her to undertake another and yet another journey through the phantasmagoria of cheering crowds and empty ceremonies which mock the memory of a power that was but is no longer.
‘WHAT COMMONWEALTH?’
The Times , 26 January 1984
In a speech at Leicester last Friday I stated what I took to be a constitutional axiom: ‘All the public utterances of the sovereign,’ I said, ‘are covered by the advice of ministers.’
Immediately it was announced on behalf of the Prime Minister that there is an exception to this principle, namely, when the sovereign is addressing ‘the Commonwealth’.
The consequences of that assertion, if it is valid, are peculiar and alarming; but fortunately I can examine it without criticising the sovereign or impugning her judgement, because ministerial advice that ministerial advice is not requisite is also ministerial advice, for which ministers must take responsibility and stand question.
If the alleged exception is valid, it must be valid whenever and wherever the sovereign speaks ‘to the Commonwealth’: it must apply equally on the Feast of Stephen and on Holy Innocents Day; it must apply whether she addressed ‘the Commonwealth’ from London or Ottawa or Delhi.
Now, it has long been understood that the public utterances of the sovereign to the people of a realm overseas, be it Australia or Grenada, are covered by the advice of her ministers in that realm.
This proposition, admittedly, is not without its difficulties when the sovereign is the same person in two or more realms where her ministers may tender divergent or opposing advice on the same subject; but so far the possibilities involved in these different capacities of the sovereign have not caused embarrassment in practice.
The same principle however is scarcely thinkable in those countries of the Commonwealth which are republics and where therefore there are no sovereign or ministers.
In what capacity does the sovereign address the citizens of India?
As Queen of the United Kingdom, visiting India as she might visit France or Israel?
If so, her utterances are covered by the advice of her UK ministers, notably the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary.
Or is it as Head of the Commonwealth?
If so, there are no responsible ministers by whom she can be advised, because the Commonwealth as such has no government and no ministers, and she must be speaking therefore without responsible advice.
The difficulty is magnified when the sovereign is conceived as  addressing ‘the Commonwealth’ comprising some countries which she rules on the advice of the respective ministers and other countries over which she does not reign at all.
This is not merely a curious conundrum.
It is a situation which poses an insoluble problem for the Monarch, since there is by definition no common organ of consent and consequently no responsible ministerial advice on which she can constitutionally act.
Expressed in other terms, ‘the Commonwealth’ is not a political entity, or indeed an entity at all except in make-believe.
The title ‘Head of the Commonwealth’, against which from the government benches I registered a lone protest upon the second reading of the Royal Titles Bill in March 1953, enshrines a paradox which thirty years ago two countries in particular conspired for their own purposes to ignore: India, in order to become a republic while forfeiting none of the privileges which allegiance had conferred, and Britain, in order to feed its delusion that the Empire was being transformed into something brighter and better still.
The way had been paved, also deliberately, by the disastrous British Nationality Act of 1948, which purported to recognise a common citizenship based not upon common loyalty but upon adding together the citizenships defined by an ever-increasing number of independent states.
It was, incidentally, this severance of citizenship from political realities which made technically possible a huge and unintended settlement in Britain of Asian, African and Caribbean populations.
It is the same severance which has placed the monarch in a situation constitutionally inexplicable and indefensible.
There is no doubt where the blame lies.
It was upon the advice of the Crown's United Kingdom ministers that the chimera of the Commonwealth was invented and installed.
Without the legislation, the UK legislation, of a series of British governments, the paraphernalia of a Commonwealth comprising eighteen kingdoms, five other monarchies of which the Queen is not the monarch, and twenty-six republics, with our sovereign as its purported ‘head’, could never have come into existence.
There is equally little room for doubt who is responsible for its continuance and who alone could end the constitutional contradiction in which the sovereign has been caught up.
It is Her Majesty's ministers in the United Kingdom — who else?
‘END THIS FICTION’The Times , 17 July 1986
Certain Cabinet ministers told the press on Tuesday they feared a head-on constitutional clash between the Prime Minister and the Queen over sanctions on South Africa.
They did what they oughtn't.
The sovereign is under a constitutional duty to accept the advice of her ministers tendered through her chief minister so long as they command her confidence — so long, that is, as they command a majority in Parliament.
That being so, it is a gross breach of a privy councillor's duty to attribute to the sovereign personal opinions at variance with the advice of her prime minister or, worse still, to suggest that the sovereign might not accept that advice constitutionally offered.
The situation is in no way affected by the title ‘Head of the Commonwealth’, which, against my protest, was attached by Parliament in 1953 to the Crown of the United Kingdom.
There is no function corresponding to that title which the monarch can constitutionally perform, for one very simple and conclusive reason.
There is no constitutional source of advice to the sovereign as ‘Head of the Commonwealth’, because as such she has no responsible ministers on whose advice to act.
In those Commonwealth countries of which she is the sovereign, she or her representative acts in respect of those countries on the advice of their ministers.
In the republics or a country like Malaysia, which has its own monarch, she has by definition no function and receives no constitutional advice.
The Queen, I am sure, understands the constitutional position fully and would not contemplate acting other than constitutionally.
We have wronged her, and ourselves, by constructing the pretence of a political entity, the Commonwealth, and acting as if it really existed.
No amount of talk and pretence will make it reality.
Unfortunately, in the course of talking and pretending, the sovereign states can harm themselves in the real exercise of real power.
That is the nature of the self-punishment which Britain inflicted on itself by maintaining in its law the assertion that citizens of other countries, wholly independent and acknowledging a different head of state, were nevertheless in every respect members of the single category of ‘British subjects’, possessing within the United Kingdom the rights that attach to that category.
The consequences of that monumental humbug belong in this country to the realm of reality.
Thirty years of contention and legislation have been powerless to prevent or reverse them.
What we can still do is to escape at long last from the constitutional fiction which we once grasped to ease our transition from the capital of a worldwide empire to a nation state alongside other nation states, but which, having produced so much havoc here at home, has turned into an instrument for external duress to be brought to bear on our own political institutions.
Above all, I do not believe the people of Britain want to see our constitutional monarchy, the ‘eternal jewel’ with which our political liberties are bound up, brought into danger or contention by the deceptive device once adopted so ill-advisedly so many years ago for a purpose that is past.
‘THE CAUSES OF SUEZ’The Spectator , 26 July 1986
After thirty years the memory which abides with me of the Suez episode that began with Egypt's nationalisation of the Canal on 26 July 1956 is of complete bewilderment and the sense of watching an unintelligible drama It was not surprise that Egypt had appropriated the Canal.
It was astonishment that anybody could have expected anything else and consequently at the paroxysms of indignation which Government and opposition, press and public, exhibited.
What did they think was going to happen after the last British troops evacuated the Canal Zone on 13 June 1956?
I had been one of the twenty-eight (twenty-six plus two tellers) Conservative Members who voted on 29 July 1954 against the conclusion of the treaty with Egypt under which that evacuation took place.
But I had done so not in the belief that indefinite British occupation of the Zone was practicable but in protest against a treaty which purported to give Britain rights of reoccupation and a policy which proclaimed that Cyprus, Jordan and Kenya afforded adequate geographical alternatives.
The frisson of angry surprise and the instant impulse to prepare for a resort to arms which greeted the inevitable puncturing of those myths were therefore emotions I could neither share nor understand.
Hunched in a remote and subordinate cranny of government — devising a rent bill at the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, as a matter of fact — I was not disposed to go overboard when our armed forces were launched into the attack in November; but what on earth was intended to come out of it and how an occupation found untenable could be tenably restored and sustained by force was beyond the comprehension of this unmoved spectator.
How did it happen, and what did it mean?
And what if anything does it mean still?
William Clark, who was press adviser to Anthony Eden during his premiership, wrote, while under sentence of death from the cancer of which he died last year, a book of mémoires d'outre tombe in the unconventional yet quite literal sense of that description.
In them he included his diary entries of the days from Nasser's announcement to his own resignation on 6 November when  the ill-fated invasion was ignominiously terminated by a ceasefire.
As usual with any major historical event, the causes can be perceived at alternative levels, and as usual all are — partially — true.
In the situation which he occupied William Clark's eye-level was necessarily that of personalities, above all the personality of the Prime Minister, who combined the propensity to violently emotional reactions with deep anxiety about his alleged indecision.
The Prime Minister's wife, Clarissa, appears in the story as an aggravating factor: ‘He [the PM]rang up Clarissa, who is becoming his unofficial and wholly bad press adviser, and asked her advice.’
At this level of causation the outcome with a different personality at No. 10 would have been different; but is that historical reality?
‘The fact is,’ wrote Clark himself on 15 August, ‘that if we lose out in the Middle East, we shall be immediately destroyed.’
The entry on stage of the French is equally significant.
‘The French have been pressing Anglo-French union again [11 September].
We feel it is impossible at present because of the Commonwealth.’
Indeed, in the very thick of the Suez preparations (14 September)‘the Cabinet was about Plan G — the current plan for Britain going in with European federation ’; and then (18 September)‘the Cabinet held its second meeting on Plan G for British association with the Messina powers in Europe.
Clearly the general view is that it will be very dangerous for us to stay out because we risk a German-dominated Europe.’
The Suez event was a parting of many ways; but justice is not done to their complexity by perceiving it as merely the last spasm of an Empire-orientated Britain, a Britain conditioned to regard ‘losing out in the Middle East’ as immediate destruction.
Nor does the crude coincidence of the Suez episode with the run-up to an American presidential election tell all about the changes in Anglo-American relations which flowed from 1956.
The assumptions of total British dependence on the USA with which the Clark memoirs show successive British Governments operating in the aftermath of World War II and which were pleaded as necessitating the climb-down in November 1956 were already undergoing an examination which 1956 only accelerated.
The pattern of the 1970s and the 1980s was already beginning to be woven on the warp of America and the woof of the European continent.
‘A pleasant, cheerful FO character said [30 October]: ‘It's rather fun to be at No. 10 the night we smashed the Anglo-American alliance.’’
William Clark put his resignation in on the day of the ceasefire.
It is not altogether clear why.
‘I must go, clearly, because I cannot defend a policy I candidly dislike,’ he wrote on 4 November, having already told Sir Walter Monckton, the Paymaster General, on 1 November that ‘I felt I might have to resign as I thought the policy  bad and disastrous.’
Yet Clark had known all along of the military preparations ‘Musketeer I’ and ‘Musketeer II’and had been dismayed when Dulles seemed to have aborted them with his Suez Canal Users Club; and after the Anglo-French meeting in London in September he had put out ‘a dull communiqué, and no one has the least idea of what big things were abroad' .
The operative straw seems to have been his exclusion from the inner circle during the twenty-four hours of the joint Anglo-French ultimatum, though back in August Clark had recorded quite dispassionately that ‘a good deal of effort is going into trying to find a proper pretext for taking military action.
This is because we need to justify our action, though its real basis is salus populi suprema lex .’
So in the end what was wrong was the pretext.
Professionally that is understandable enough.
To the lay reader the revelation of Clark's memoirs is the complete self-assurance with which the effective influence of No. 10 over what does and does not appear in the national media is assumed, whatever slips may occur between cup and lip.
There reigned at No. 10 — and reigns no doubt to this day — the conviction that the press relations people can ‘fix it’ the way they are instructed to.
Yet the two professions remain deliciously distinct.
I do find the habit of ministers of being bloody when things go wrong a trying feature of this job.
Success is theirs, failure is ours.
I see now why civil servants get so desiccated.
Perhaps the secret of all these people at the top is that they have vertigo but out of a feeling of ‘the show must go on’ they smile in public and are sick off stage.
Not all of them, I think.
‘THE UK AND COMMONWEALTH’ Sydney University, 7 September 1988
There is no experience so uncomfortable for a nation as to run headon unawares into an axiom.
So unpleasant is the experience that nations adopt a variety of devices for coping with it.
The simplest device is simply to deny the axiom altogether; but that is by definition foredoomed to failure.
The alternatives are various kinds of pretence or self-deception.
The rebellion of the American colonies in the eighteenth century confronted the British with an axiom which, for reasons which are capable of being understood, they found so unpleasant that more than two centuries later they have still not ceased attempting to wish it out of existence.
It is a scene of national psychopathology that has its humorous moments as well as its deplorable aspects.
By the middle of the eighteenth century the Parliament of England first and then Great Britain had established de facto control over all aspects of government.
The people of Great Britain were governed, however tortuous and artificial the modalities, upon the authority of an elective institution which for historical and other reasons they were content to regard as representing them.
The axiom with which America confronted them was that a government so controlled could not govern any population not represented in that Parliament.
In front of a consequence so stark the deepest political thinkers recoiled.
In the noble eloquence of his plea for conciliation with the colonists, Burke, who based his case on the proposition that they had not been represented at Westminster, drew a strange and illogical conclusion.
His own argument involved the admission that no common government, no common state, comprising both Great Britain and the colonies could subsist.
Yet he proceeded to declare that by refraining from exercising in America the power of the executive which it controlled in Great Britain, Parliament would preserve the unity of the Empire:
The more ardently they love liberty, the more perfect will be their obedience.
Slavery they can have anywhere.
It is a weed that grows in every soil.
They may have it from Spain, they may have it from Prussia.
But…freedom they can have from none but you…
Deny them this participation of freedom, and you break that sole bond which originally made, and must still preserve, the unity of the empire.
It was magnificent; but it was nonsense, and self-contradictory nonsense.
The dying Pitt, rejoicing in the House of Lords that the grave had not closed over him before he could protest against ‘the dismemberment of this noble empire’, was a tragic figure; but the tragedy was in the absurdity of the protest.
After a few years the axiom had taken upon itself the shape of practical reality.
There was a new independent nation in the world, and its ambassador, striped waistcoat and all, was presenting his credentials to King George III.
The British forthwith addressed themselves to attempting to cope with the axiom nearer home.
Gloriously but illogically they rode off to tilt at another windmill.
Their trick this time was to pretend that Parliament was really only a legislature and not also in consequence the effective controller of executive government.
On that basis the Irish Parliament, whose legislative powers had since the fifteenth century been subject to the sanction of the executive in London, had that limitation removed from it and became a ‘free Parliament’, but a Parliament on which no executive, not even the local Irish executive, was dependent.
It was an ingenious idea; but the war with revolutionary France soon destroyed the fiction that there could be two Parliaments with but a single executive.
The defence of the British Isles was, and only could be, conducted by the Government in London.
The deduction was drawn that Ireland and Great Britain, like England and Scotland after 1707, must therefore have one single Parliament.
The Union of 1800 was a blamelessly logical acknowledgement of the deadly axiom.
It was not however for geographical reasons an acknowledgement that could have been applied across the Atlantic; and subsequent history in the British Isles emphasised a rider or refinement without which the axiom itself is not complete.
The axiom states that a population not represented in a parliament cannot share a government which that parliament controls.
However, ‘not represented’ must be understood to include ‘not willing to be represented’, as well as‘not able to be represented’— a qualification without which the very essence of parliamentary representation itself is denied.
From the mid-nineteenth century onwards it turned out that not the whole population of Ireland was willing to be represented at Westminster but only a portion, the portion namely in which sixteen out of seventeen constituencies still choose to send Members to Westminster today.
Meanwhile across the Atlantic Ocean an event had taken place  which was destined to have the most far-reaching consequences.
It was essentially a new attempt to revive the Burkeian fallacy of empire through freedom, obedience through liberty.
Its surname is Canada; and its christian name is Durham.
The immediate impulse was the prospect which arose in the 1830s that Canada might go the same way of rebellion as the American colonies.
‘We know better now,’ said the British.
‘We lost the American colonies because the colonial governments were not in all things answerable to the local parliaments but to the Parliament at Westminster.
So all we have to do is to tell the Governor-General of Canada to behave in relation to his local Parliament exactly as our monarch at home behaves in relation to her Parliament of the United Kingdom.’
Such was Britain's brave attempt to evade the dreaded axiom.
The fatal, fateful thing was that for a century the device appeared to work: Canada felt and behaved as if it was still part of the empire.
The impression which was made upon the British by what came to be known as the Canadian model was correspondingly deep and powerful.
They were highly self-congratulatory.
They had found the answer to the American conundrum, and they assured themselves that no other people on earth would have had the qualities necessary to do so.
In fact, they exhibited all the satisfaction of someone who has hit upon a method for causing water to flow uphill.
Of course they had not.
They were overlooking two facts.
As neighbours of the enormously powerful and expansionist United States, the Canadians had a direct and abiding interest in maintaining for their part the fiction that they belonged to the same political entity of the rich and powerful United Kingdom.
The fiction seemed a low insurance premium to pay for diplomatic and naval protection, the more desirable in a world where other predatory powers besides the United States were arising.
The premium and the insurance however gradually came to look less and less desirable; and when the nexus between them was finally broken in the Second World War, the fiction would be abandoned.
Meanwhile — and it was a long meanwhile — the British were delighted with themselves and with their statecraft.
The other fact which they had overlooked was of a different character but no less important in the long run.
The Governor-General had not, by acting like the sovereign on the advice of the spokesmen of a majority in an elected assembly, become the same thing as the sovereign.
He had become the president of a republic, exercising a defined formal and ceremonial function, and no amount of royal visits and royal Governors-General could alter the fact.
The British monarchy is the seedbed in which parliamentary authority germinated in the soil of England.
It is unexportable, because prescription, the  inherent authority of that which has always been so, is a writ which runs only where it has always been so and amongst those amongst whom it has always been so.
The British were mistaken in supposing that they continued to have the same sovereign and therefore the same national identity vis-à-vis the outside world as the Canadians.
They did not: the Canadians had one sort of sovereign, and the British had another sort.
The person who sits on the dais in Ottawa or Canberra and goes through the motions of opening a Parliament is not and can not be the same being at all as the person who does these things and has done them from time immemorial at Westminster.
The difference is subtle, but the difference is fundamental, even though for a hundred years the British managed not to realise it, because they desperately wanted not to.
The point is not, as sometimes supposed, that the sovereign had been made divisible.
That could be met by the division of the spheres in which the divided sovereign acted upon different collective advice.
The point is that by its nature the British parliamentary monarchy exists only in Britain.
However as the nineteenth century proceeded, even the division of the spheres of government — the separation of internal and external policy — became increasingly difficult to maintain.
If there was to be a common external policy, economic and strategic, which appeared more and more desirable, as between the parliamentarily self-governing populations around the world that were deemed all to be parts of one empire, the logical but crazy conclusion must be to defy the impracticability that had been so clear in the eighteenth century and to envisage an imperial parliament.
Sure enough, Joseph Chamberlain and others proceeded to do just that; and sure enough, it was the Canadians who patiently but persistently explained that they would have none of it.
A parliament is an institution which implies the common governability of those represented in it.
That was where lay the inherent strength of the axiom which the British imagined they had defeated.
A common desire and willingness to be subordinate to it is the essential pre-condition of a parliamentary state.
In their futile endeavour Joseph Chamberlain and his contemporaries were only re-enacting in modern dress the plot of the mideighteenth-century drama, by proceeding as if a common will and desire to be subordinate existed when it did not.
The Canadian model has a curious corollary, which was to have an unhappy future, extending almost down to the present day.
I refer to the federal corollary.
In Canada the British not only deluded themselves that they had defeated the axiom; they also imagined it was the federal ingredient that had enabled them to do the trick.
For the Canadian model to work, a unitary electorate analogous to that  of the UK is required.
Where populations, therefore, are incapable of sustaining a single parliamentary representation through their internal differences, the prescription runs: in that case, create a federation, give the federation a parliament, and you have solved your problem.
It is of course cheating.
But if cheating is necessary, you can commonly get away with it for a time.
So everybody had to go federal — Canada, Australia, South Africa and later on Central Africa and the Caribbean, where it all came unstuck.
I have run ahead of chronology however and in particular of the First World War, which the peoples that had entered it as parts of the Empire ended as free-standing independent nations.
Britain in 1918 was deeply impressed with the strategic and military contribution made by those nations to victory in Europe and assumed it to be proof of the success of the Canadian model, to which the second Labour Government in 1931 gave statutory form, rather like catching moonbeams, by declaring in the Statute of Westminster preamble that the common identity of the sovereign was of the essence.
The end of the First World War was accompanied by unmistakable evidence that the population of the greater part of Ireland had no intention of remaining within the United Kingdom; and when the attempt to force a home rule constitution upon them provoked a rebellion, Britain had to recognise defeat, but insisted upon the Irish Free State accepting what was called Canadian status by recognising the King Emperor as its representative for external purposes.
Thereby it remained, in Britain's eyes though not in its own, a part of the Empire, which was beginning about that time to be called the Commonwealth, and its citizens remained British subjects.
Crazy logic had reached the ultimate apogee of absurdity — or perhaps not quite.
The British in India had from the beginning of the nineteenth century seen clearly that so unnatural a phenomenon as the government of that teeming subcontinent by the parliamentary electorate of the British Isles could not be destined to be permanent.
What they did not profess to understand was how it could be terminated.
However, as the nineteenth century proceeded, two developments took place.
Britain became obsessed with the conviction that its very existence as a great power hinged upon the possession of India, to the extent that all major policies — Britain's activities in Africa, for example, or in the Mediterranean, and even its alignments in Europe — were deduced from the supposed requirements of the Indian Empire and the Route to India.
The other concurrent development was the growing and irrepressible conviction that the inhabitants of India would claim and must sooner or later obtain responsibility for their own government.
Fantastic though it may seem, in retrospect, the British proceeded  to apply to India the Canadian model, complete with its Burkeian fallacy, that liberty equals empire, and with its federalist corollary.
An Indian federation would continue part of a transformed Empire by dint of becoming a self-governed nation.
It is doubtful whether a more impressive specimen of mass self-delusion can be produced from any era of recorded history.
The final shattering of the delusion did not take place until the 1940s; but when it did occur, it prompted not the abandonment of the system of the delusion itself but a further and almost incredible elaboration of it.
The architects and future leaders of the Indian successor state were determined utterly to obliterate any trace or relic of former dependence on Britain and at the same time to maintain that political unity of the subcontinent which British rule had produced.
History sometimes exhibits weird symmetries between events distant from one another in place and time.
There is such a symmetry between the impossibility of a Canadian-style India and the impossibility of a Canadian-style Ireland.
In each case the Canadian fiction of a supposedly identical sovereign was repudiated; and in each case the continuance of a unity which had been due only to the former British connection was made a prior condition for even pretending to play the Canadian game.
However, 1948 was not 1921; and India, it may be added, was not Ireland.
In order to maintain the illusion that the Indian Union, though a republic in form as well as in reality, remained nevertheless part of the same political entity as the United Kingdom, the British in effect abolished their monarchy itself.
That may be an arresting statement, but it is hardly an exaggerated description of what they did.
In 1948 they abolished allegiance as the basis of the status of British subjects.
Henceforward British subjects were to be the sum total of the citizens of those territories — some independent and some not independent as yet— which had formerly been within the allegiance as dominions of the Crown.
This alteration in the basis of national status was to have devastating consequences for the present and future population of the United Kingdom.
With those consequences I am not in this lecture concerned.
More immediately, it meant that, as a matter of self-respect, nearly all the remaining territories of the former empire, as they successively became independent, were bound to become independent as republics.
In order that the element of farce might not be missing, it was recognised that the old trick with the Irish Free State and the King Emperor was now obsolete.
Rather however than acknowledge that the Irish state, which refused any longer to play the Commonwealth game and declared itself a republic, was therefore a foreign country, Britain proceeded to divide the world not as hitherto into two portions  — British subjects and aliens — but into three — British subjects, aliens and Irish.
By a crowning touch of irony, the last-mentioned were still to be treated in the United Kingdom as equivalent to British subjects.
The unitary monarchy, though itself (as I have argued) fictitious, on which the Statute of Westminster had insisted in 1931, had now vanished.
The reality that an independent nation could pick any sovereign it liked had to be recognised.
Still a device was invented to cover up the disappearance of an old landmark; and at the accession of Her present gracious Majesty, she was unlawfully proclaimed by a new title ‘Head of the Commonwealth’, subsequently legalised by the Royal Titles Act 1953, against which I am proud to recall that I protested in my place in the House of Commons.
I would not wish to underestimate the capabilities of my fellow countrymen for self-deception; but it is difficult to believe that there can be further instalments of the saga which began for the people of Great Britain with the successful revolt of the American colonies.
It is an amazing web of delusion which has been woven continuously from Burke in 1775 to, let us say, Fiji in 1987.
I am not able, as others may be, to find an aesthetic pleasure in admiring the pattern as it unfolded; for the spectacle is not to an Englishman a reassuring one.
Today the United Kingdom is the only prescriptive monarchy which remains on the face of the globe.
In it alone, from the Reformation Parliament of 1529 to the European Communities Act of 1972, the prescriptive and therefore undefined and unlimited authority of the monarch has been exercised through an equally unique representative institution.
It is an institution which until recently my fellow countrymen valued so highly as willingly to pay any price needful for its preservation.
Whether, as one generation succeeds another, that valuation remains intact, I have no means of judging; but there is a counterpart to the uniqueness of that inheritance.
The counterpart is that by its nature it cannot be shared with those who by disposition or location are incapable of being represented in the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
If parliamentary self-government is the essence of British liberty, the condition upon which we enjoy it is that the United Kingdom is politically distinct and separate.
It is easy to understand how irksome that condition has been felt to be and how strong has been the temptation to try to tamper with it.
There is something in the British character which predisposes us to push to the limit, and beyond, the resources of self-deception to create the illusion that we can enjoy incompatible advantages simultaneously and secure a prize without paying the price for it.
In this process the danger is that we destroy  the inner reality of that which we appear to be preserving.
To this anxious and not impartial observer, the United Kingdom today looks perilously near to destroying the inner reality of its inherited parliamentary liberty.