

THE CONSERVATIVE RECORD 1979 — 1989
THAT governments do make a difference is an important presumption of free competitive elections.
Citizens choose between different teams of politicians and whichever one wins enacts the programme on which it campaigned.
In fact only about thirty or so states in the world today regularly hold competitive elections and of these only a small number provide an outcome in which one party forms the government.
Many changes of government in Britain do not usher in a new set of policies in most departments.
Over the long term continuity is more apparent than discontinuity.
Historians might say that in the twentieth century in Britain only the reforming administrations of 1906 and 1945 provided a major change in direction to be followed by administrations which consolidated the changes.
In the future historians are likely to regard the post-1979 Conservative governments as also having produced a change in direction, one which reversed the direction of previous post-war administrations.
The Impact of Parties
Political scientists have for some time tried to grapple with the question: what difference, if any, does party control of the government make to political outputs?
Does a government of the left, for example, produce policy outcomes which favour the working class and organized labour, and shift power from the private to the state sector?
Do administrations of the right pursue policies which have the opposite effects?
A difficulty with conducting this type of research is controlling for outside factors, for example, international recession, or war, or a disastrous crop failure.
And how does one deal with counterfactuals, that is, what might have happened in the absence of the control of government by the particular party?
Might another party have followed similar policies?
The burden of  many studies, subject to such qualifications, is that on balance political factors like party or ideology or electoral competitiveness do not matter much, compared to a country's level of economic development.
In Britain there has developed a learned debate about the impact of party on government.
One school, led by S. E. Finer, claims that the parties do make a difference and that, because parties have become more partisan, this is regrettable.
These critics point to the discontinuity which followed changes of government in the 1970s in such areas as industrial policy, incomes policy, secondary education, industrial relations and law.
They also claim that these discontinuities were aggravated by the more frequent turnover of party control in the government in the 1970s and the influence exercised in both parties by its more partisan groups.
Britain, it is suggested, suffers from an adversary form of Politics , in which a party formulates in opposition — largely for ideological and electorally opportunist reasons — the policies which are then carried into government.
A new government's efforts to undo much of its predecessor's work is damaging and disruptive.
This style, critics allege, is accentuated by Britain's two-party system and unfair (because disproportional) first past the post electoral system, which produces virtually full power for the government and virtual impotence for the opposition.
A different view has been advanced by Richard Rose.
Rose tried to test if there were big shifts in the economy, as posited by the adversary model, or continuities, regardless of changes in party control of government.
Evidence of continuity is what Rose calls, unhelpfully perhaps,a consensus model .
Between 1957 and 1979 he found that on such economic inputs as minimum lending rate, public-sector borrowing requirement, and public spending as a proportion of GDP and on economic outcomes such as inflation, unemployment, and growth, the record showed long-term secular trends, regardless of changes of government.
Something stronger than party was clearly at work.
There are many reasons for parties failing to produce intended changes in outcomes.
One may point to the ever-present pressures of interest groups and lobbies, international forces beyond the control of a national government, the advice of  permanent civil servants inherited commitments in policy and public expenditure, and the flow of so much routine in policy.
These are not necessarily forces for continuity but they may act as barriers to government attempts to impose a new line of policy.
One might also point to the fear among many politicians of electoral retribution if radical measures turn out to be unpopular.
On the other hand critics of the consensus within the Labour and the Conservative parties are more likely to point to the failures of political will, courage, persistence, and policy preparation by their respective leaderships as explanations for the convergence.
Changes in government have led to discontinuities in policy, but trends towards convergence have also occurred, despite the parties in office attempting to carry out different policies.
Between 1945 and 1975, for example, there was a change in government policy on prices and incomes every thirteen months on average and between 1958 and 1974 a change in corporation tax every two years on average.
In 1970 the new Conservative government reversed its predecessor's policies on the reorganization of secondary education, aid to industry, prices and incomes controls, and pensions.
In 1974 Labour introduced new policies for each of these, as well as for the EEC, housing finance, and trade union law.
Yet by the end of its term of office each government had moderated its original policies.
By 1973 the Conservatives had moved to a statutory prices and incomes policy and massive state intervention in industry; the reorganization of secondary schooling along comprehensive lines proceeded, albeit at a slower pace than under Labour, and the trade union legislation under the Industrial Relations Act was effectively non-operational.
By 1978 Britain, under Labour, was still in the EEC, the government had an incomes policy of sorts and had curbed the growth of public expenditure, and private education remained.
What is important to note, therefore, is that governments often abruptly or gradually change their policies, generally around the mid-term of Parliament, and that continuities occur in spite of the parties' starting out with different policies.
This convergence may have less to do with ideology than with political ‘learning’ and having to cope with unanticipated events.
The adversarial critique may explain the early stages of a government's record but Rose's  ‘moving consensus’ is more relevant to an understanding of the long-term trends.
The Conservative Record
Conservative ministers and many commentators claim that there has been something of a revolution in British politics in the 1980s.
Supporters and many critics agree that the old policy agenda has been turned upside down.
This chapter considers the record of governments since 1979 in four important areas; welfare, privatization, the economy, and industrial relations.
Although there have been more comprehensive examinations of the record of the governments, the above four policy areas are of interest because the Conservative government pledged itself to change the direction of policy in them.
They do represent, however, only a part of the record of the government and in some other areas, notably education and central-local government relations, there have been significant changes.
Welfare
The thinking of Conservative critics of the welfare state has been coloured by three broad influences.
One is that the cradle to grave provision of welfare, implicit in the Beveridge proposals, has proved to be too expensive and that the demand for welfare has grown faster than has the national income to pay for adequate comprehensive services and benefits.
The choice, according to such critics, has been either to increase taxes to cover the public spending for the services — which was contrary to the government's tax-cutting policies — or to reduce the scale of state provision of welfare.
The critics argued that some cut-back or restraint in spending or provision was necessary, both to fund tax cuts and allow for the concentration of resources on the most needy.
They were selectivists rather than universalists in their approach to welfare spending.
A second influence has been the judgement that too dominant a role for the state weakens the values of individual self-reliance, family and community solidarity, and private charity.
people should be encouraged to make provision for themselves and their families, and state support should provide  a safety net for the very poor, without stifling private initiative and self-help.
Some Conservatives also suspected that the welfare ethic — by removing the risks and disciplines of the market, providing a cushion for failures, and undermining incentives for the ambitious — weakened enterprise.
In 1981 the then Head of Mrs Thatcher's Policy Unit, Ferdinand Mount (author of the book,The Subversive Family), set up a Family Policy Group, a committee of Cabinet ministers, with a remit to suggest ways for strengthening family life and promoting a sense of individual responsibility.
Among proposals which ministers made were more incentives for mothers to remain at home, education vouchers, curbs on the power of the professions, and greater encouragement for wealth creators.
But offsetting the above views was an awareness among party leaders that many welfare programmes, particularly old age pensions and the National Health Service, are very popular with voters.
In 1979 Mrs Thatcher made election pledges to increase old age pensions in line with inflation and to ‘protect’ the National Health Service, although she made no commitments about other areas.
Subsequently she and ministers boasted about their increased spending and claimed that the NHS is ‘safe with us’.
For much of the 1980s there was also a growing concern among ministers about the mounting financial costs of the system.
Social security spending expanded greatly after 1979 (see Table 8. 1) partly because of the unexpected and sharp rise in unemployment and partly because of the increase in people of pensionable age.
By 1988 — 9 the total spending on social security was £47.6 billion or 31 per cent of total public spending, up from 25 per cent in 1978 — 9.
Nearly half (43 per cent) of this total was spent on retirement pensions.
The other main categories of social security spending were family allowances (12.5 per cent), supplementary benefits (17.5 per cent ), and national insurance spending on those suffering unemployment or industrial injury.
For a government intent on curbing the growth of public spending, social security presented a large target.
The Thatcher government, like Mr Heath's in 1970, promised to review existing policies to get greater value for money, eliminate fraud, and reduce waste.
The earnings-related supplements to benefits for the unemployed, the sick, and widows, and maternity benefit and injury benefit were abolished.
In 1980 the government raised various benefits, including those for the sick and the unemployed, by 5 per cent less than the current rate of inflation, though the abatement was restored in 1983 when the benefits were made subject to tax.
In 1981 it cut the link between earnings and unemployment benefits and uprated benefits in line with price rather than wage increases (which have been higher for much of the decade).
Treasury concern about the financial consequences of the long-term impact of the steady rise in welfare expenditure and a slow rate of economic growth remained.
The famous 1982 CPRS paper examined the options with a low future rate of economic growth and made radical proposals for cutting the state provision of welfare.
The contents of the paper apparently horrified some ministers and, under some pressure, Mrs Thatcher withdrew it from the Cabinet agenda.
But not everybody accepted its startling assumptions.
For ministers to talk in gloomy terms about the future pressures on public spending risked calling into question the effectiveness of their economic strategy.
There was other evidence that, with a moderate (2 to 3 per cent) rate of economic growth, the demographic trends  would not impose pressures on the public purse until 2020 and a crisis would occur only if the economy failed to grow by 2 per cent or more.
A major worry to Mrs Thatcher and the Treasury was the future of the State Earnings Related Pensions (SERPS) which had been established by the Labour government in 1975.
This had become operational in 1978, although full earnings-related pensions were not due to come into effect until 1998.
At the time of its introduction it was hailed as a measure which placed pensions above party politics and was accepted by the Conservative spokesmen of the day.
By 1985 approximately half of the work-force was in the state scheme and half in private schemes.
The actual pension that was to be provided, about a quarter of average earnings, was rather modest in comparison to the pensions provided in most other Western European states.
In 1984 the Social Services Secretary, Norman Fowler, appointed four review teams covering pensions, housing benefit, supplementary benefits, and child benefits.
The results were presented in June 1985 in a Green Paper, The Reform of Social Security (Cmnd. 9517).
The Green Paper's major suggestion for saving money in the short term was to cut housing benefit, so reducing expenditure by some £500 million annually.
Its most controversial suggestion to cut the financial burden on the state was to phase out SERPS over the following three years.
The dependency ratio, that is the number of people of working age per pensioner, would improve from 2.76 in 1981 to 2.99 in 2000.
But the ratio would then fall sharply in the second and third decades of the twenty-first century.
Mrs Thatcher's own fears were revealed in an interview with the New York Times in late January 1984 when she claimed that the long-term social security spending commitments were a financial ‘time-bomb’ for Britain.
By the second and third decades of the twenty-first century the pension commitments would probably involve a major burden upon a smaller number of taxpayers, who might not be prepared to carry it.
It was also well known that Mrs Thatcher preferred to have people buying their own private pension scheme; here was an area in which the state might be rolled back.
In Parliament, opposition spokesmen condemned the  proposals as an attack on the welfare state and a break with the consensus.
That was expected but much of the reaction from employers, welfare groups, and the pension industry as well as Tory back-benchers was also hostile.
Revised proposals were presented in a White Paper in December 1985.
These were enacted in 1986 although most did not come into operation until April 1988.
The most significant change from the Green Paper was that SERPS would not be abolished but scaled down; the proportion of earnings on which the pension would be based was reduced from 25 to 20 per cent.
Although most of the proposed changes in means-tested forms of support were confirmed the review would now realize only marginal financial savings.
The government had retreated: radical Thatcherism backed off from fundamental reform of the system.
The appointment of John Moore in 1987 as Secretary of State at the DHSS was seen by some as a signal that the welfare programme would receive a dose of Thatcherism.
Moore spoke about his determination to end ‘dependency’, and drew on the work of the American Charles Murray, who was critical of many US welfare programmes.
Yet examination of the aggregate public spending figures on social security hardly justify charges of ‘an attack on the welfare state’.
On the other hand, uprating many benefits in line with prices rather than earnings means that recipients have not shared as fully as others in the higher living standards achieved in the 1980s.
The government's strategy increasingly appears to be one not of reducing expenditure but of containing the rise in costs, targeting benefits on the most needy, and encouraging a redistribution of the burden to the private sector.
Child benefit has not been uprated annually since 1987.
From the academic year 1990 — 1 students will no longer be eligible for Housing Benefit, Supplementary Benefit, and Income Support.
In 1988 the government established a scheme of Income Support and a Social Fund to replace Supplementary Benefits.
Whereas the Supplementary Benefits Scheme had given grants to people to cover essential items, such as cooking utensils, the Fund replaced this with loans.
There have also been symbolic measures (such as restoring pay beds in NHS facilities), minor cuts (such as withdrawal of supplementary benefits in vacations for students), some marginal privatization (from 1986 employers  were made responsible for paying sickness benefit for the first 28 weeks of an employee's absence from work), tougher criteria (people have to be ‘actually seeking work’ to be entitled to receive unemployment benefit and since 1 988 housing benefit is paid to fewer households), and an increase in the numbers relying on private medical insurance (from 4 to 8 per cent since 1979).
But overwhelmingly the state is still the main provider of welfare: Britain has a welfare state.
The story of marginal change is not dissimilar in the health service.
For all the talk of ‘cuts’, state spending on health has increased by nearly a third in real terms since 1979, and as a share of total public spending it has moved from 14 per cent in 1978 — 9 to 16 per cent in 1988 — 9.
However an increase is needed to take account of the growing number of elderly (heavy users of the NHS) and developments in health care technology, and increased spending has been more modest in some parts of the service, notably hospitals.
British health spending of 6 per cent of GDP is a smaller proportion than most other western states.
The government claims that total spending is larger in other western states because many have a larger private sector; in the United Kingdom it is just 0.8 per cent of total spending.
It wishes to promote more private health schemes although it has made clear that the NHS will remain a largely state-financed service.
The 1989 review of the NHS allowed tax relief for private health insurance for the over-60s but the rejection of other means of finance rules out any fundamental change in the near future.
The review abolished local authority representation in health service bodies, gave a greater role to the Audit Commission to ensure value for money, gave doctors budgets and linked a greater share of their salaries to the number of patients treated, and held out the possibility of hospitals ‘opting out’ and becoming self-governing.
But these largely managerial changes hardly amounted to a fundamental review; rather they were concerned to promote competition and value for money.
Over time the rhetoric of government spokesmen has changed to boasting of how much more manpower (doctors and nurses) and money is devoted to the NHS, compared to 1979.
The government's early arguments that ‘we can't afford it’ are less persuasive with the budget surplus accumulated in 1987  and 1988 and claims that tax cuts are better than greater state spending on social and health services have found fewer takers among the public (see below p. 297).
Privatization
The impact of the Thatcher government's new thinking has most obviously been felt in the privatization programme for the state-owned and state-provided services.
The programme covers both denationalization (or the sale of assets and shares owned by the state) and liberalization (or the relaxation or abolition of a service s statutory monopoly).
Perhaps in no other area of policy has the discontinuity between the present and previous governments been so marked.
Before 1979 the Conservative party had effectively acquiesced in most of the public ownership measures of earlier Labour governments.
Previous Conservative acts of denationalization, such as iron and steel after 1951 (later renationalized by Labour in 1967) and the sale of the Thomas Cook travel agency and Carlisle public houses under Mr Heath hardly refuted the broad continuity of post-war policy or Sir Keith Joseph's complaints about the ratchet effect in this area.
The privatization policy was consistent with the Prime Minister's beliefs that there should be a major diminution in state intervention in the economy and greater reliance on the free market.
The 1979 Conservative election manifesto claimed: ‘The balance of our society has been increasingly tilted in favour of the state at the expense of individual freedom…this election may be the last chance we have to reverse that process.’
Mrs Thatcher also believed that the publicly owned industries were inefficient and an obstacle to the creation of a more dynamic and adaptive economy.
Apart from the Labour party and public-sector trade unions, the nationalized industries had few friends by 1979.
Opinion surveys showed that public ownership won few votes for Labour and that even many loyal supporters disapproved ofthe party's commitment to further nationalization.
Yet a large public sector appeared to be an almost inevitable part of the modern economy.
Even when industries were not state owned there were various other instruments by which government  actually exercised a large measure of control over the private sector.
Government was a major actor through its policies in the public sector, periodic controls on prices and incomes, legislation on industrial relations, policies for regional aid, and the location of firms and trade.
The Heath government had taken statutory controls over prices, incomes, and dividends and its 1972 Industry Act permitted large-scale state intervention in industry.
By 1979, after another spell of Labour government the nationalized industries accounted for 10 per cent of GDP, 15 per cent of national investment, and 8 per cent of employment.
The public sector itself accounted for some 30 per cent of employment.
Attempts to roll back the state in industry (as well as welfare) seemed a hopeless task.
Within the Conservative party, particularly among local activists and MPs, there had long been numerous critics of the nationalized industries and advocates of a more market-orientated economy.
A more political concern was the legacy of the 1970 — 4 government's experience with incomes policies and public-sector wages.
Both free collective bargaining and incomes policies were difficult to operate in a situation where there were powerful public-sector trade unions, conducting centralized wage bargaining and virtually monopolizing. key services.
In industries like coal, railways, and power the unions were in a very strong bargaining position.
In the mid-1960s wage bargaining in the public sector became more politicized and produced frequent confrontations with the central government, regardless of whether it had an incomes policy or not.
The leaked findings during 1978 of an internal report for the Conservative party noted that in the case of strikes in key services and industries the government would simply have to pay up.
The party did not want a repeat of the disastrous ‘Who Governs?’ election of 1974.
Many Conservative spokesmen paint a view of two sectors.
On the one hand, a private sector which allowed free entry of producers, was subject to competition, sought profits, and had to respond to consumers or else go bankrupt.
On the other side was the public sector, enjoying a monopolistic and low-risk position, responding to political rather than consumer preferences, and pre-empting investment funds from more productive areas.
Since 1979 the programme of privatization has been  defended with a mixture of ideological and pragmatic arguments.
One is that such policies produce an extension of economic freedom and, thereby, political freedom.
The nationalized industries, it is claimed, deprive the consumer of choice and limit the taxpayer's freedom to spend his money as he chooses because of the industry's monopoly position and reliance on state subsidies.
Critics also pointed to the lack of competition, absence of commercial disciplines (although ministers could set external finance limits and financial ‘targets’ for return on capital), and threat of bankruptcy.
Another criticism was of the poor performance of the nationalized industries, particularly the low pre-tax real rates of return on the capital employed.
In defence of the industries, however, one has to make an allowance for the social costs of policies (such as maintaining an uneconomic rail service for a community or loss-making plants in areas of high unemployment) and for decisions on pricing, investment, and employment which are shaped in part by the political calculations of the government of the day.
At times (for example, under Mr Heath) governments have abandoned economic pricing as part of an anti-inflation programme; at other times, notably over the price increases in gas between 1980 and 1982 when the Thatcher government each year raised prices 30 per cent above the current rate of inflation, above ‘economic’ pricing levels and what the board wished.
The vagueness of guidelines and frequent and inconsistent ministerial interventions were frustrating for management of nationalized boards.
The government therefore initially turned to privatization in large part as an answer to the ‘problem’ of the nationalized industries.
One minister commented in March 1982: ‘Look, we're bloody fed up with them.
They make huge losses, they have bolshie unions, they are feather-bedded.
It seems almost impossible to do anything with them; therefore, the view has grown, get rid of them.’
‘Getting rid’ meant selling to the private sector.
Earlier plans for tighter financial control and greater independence for management had not been successful.
There did not seem to be a half-way house between public and private ownership.
Some industries acquired chairmen with a reputation for cost-cutting and a tough stand on labour relations.
Ian MacGregor was appointed chairman of British Steel in 1980 and of British Coal in 1983, John King of British Airways, and Michael Edwardes of British Leyland.
The remit ofthe last two included plans to prepare BA and BL for a return to the private sector.
The privatization programme has been recognized as a major break with the mixed economy consensus.
The verdict of one admiring authority on the government's performance is that, ‘In doing so, it has achieved the largest transfer of property since the dissolution of the monasteries under Henry VIII, a transfer from the state to its citizens.’
What is remarkable is how little political opposition there has been to the programme to date.
In spite of complaints by leaders of trade unions many of their members bought up the shares.
There were few strikes and in Parliament Labour's opposition was usually focused more on the ‘giveaway’ price at which shares were sold rather than on the principle of privatization.
Mr Kinnock has suggested that renationalization would not be a high priority for a future Labour government.
The government probably went further down this road than it had originally envisaged.
The 1979 manifesto had promised to restore to the private sector the recently nationalized aerospace and shipbuilding industries, sell off the shares in the National Enterprise Board and National Freight Corporation, and review the role of BNOC.
But by 1983 sales had been arranged for part of Britoil, Associated British Ports, Amersham International, shares in BP, and the NEB's shareholdings (Table 8.2).
These sales realized nearly £1.8 billion.
The programme then developed a momentum of its own.
In the 1983 Parliament, Sealink, Jaguar, British Telecom, British Gas, and British Airways were all privatized.
In 1985 — 6 alone, the sale of the rest of Britoil, receipt of the second British Telecom payment, and the sale of British Airways raised over £2.5 billion.
By 1988 the programme had shifted 600,000 jobs from the public to the private sector and reduced the nationalized industries' share of GDP to 6.5 per cent.
The latter will have lost the national telephone system, gas and steel industries, and the country's largest airline.
By 1990, it is planned that electricity and water, the core utilities, will also have been sold off.
Ministers claim that a fourth-term   Thatcher government would tackle the final two monuments of post-war nationalization — coal and railways.
Over time the original emphasis of the programme has broadened from increasing liberalization and competition to raising money for current spending.
In all, some £24 billion had been raised from sales by the end of 1988.
Sales of state assets helped the government to reduce the public sector borrowing requirement.
There are, of course, various techniques of privatization.
In one case the government simply sold the whole enterprise to private investors such as Amersham International and the Atomic Energy Authority.
In another it sold a part of the whole enterprise by converting the public  corporation into Companies Act companies and selling half of the shares: it did this, for example, by reducing its stock in BP from 51 to 46 per cent in 1979, then to 39 per cent in 1981, and again to 31.7 per cent in 1984.
A third technique was to sell off a proportion of the whole operation, as it did with British Telecom, British Gas, British Aerospace, and Britoil; and British Rail was made to sell off its hotels.
A fourth was to sell the shares to the work-force, as happened with the National Freight Corporation.
In some key sales, such as British Gas and British Telecom, the government retained a share of the equity to protect the national interest.
Yet another method was to liberalize entry or remove restrictions on firms wanting to compete in the provision of a service in the public sector.
A number of local authorities, for example, put out refuse collection to private tender.
The privatization programme also covers schemes to promote deregulation and competition in the economy.
Within the state sector, the statutory public monopoly of electricity supply and express delivery service has been ended.
The 1980 Transport Act, by relaxing controls over licensing and fares, has increased competition on long-distance coach routes.
In January 1986 any operator was automatically licensed to run on any route outside London.
Between 1981 and 1983 the government created twenty-four so-called enterprise zones in economically depressed areas.
This provided a package of financial incentives and exemptions from various laws and regulations to encourage businesses to set up in the zones.
In 1984 six freeports were established in areas near airports or the sea at Liverpool, Birmingham, Cardiff, Southampton, Belfast, and Prestwick.
The policy of increasing the role of the market sector has extended to contracting out services in the National Health Service and local government and the removal of the monopoly powers of solicitors (over house sale conveyancing), or barristers appearing in the high court, opticians, and financial services via Big Bang in 1986.
There is no doubt about the political and economic significance of this programme.
It has redrawn the boundaries between the public and private sectors in favour of the latter and raised substantial sums for the Treasury.
Although rarely  stated by ministers as a reason for privatization, the funds could be used to finance tax cuts and/or current spending.
In other words, it was a way of easing the dilemma of choosing between tax cuts or more public spending.
Some of the claims made by government defenders of the programme are, however, questionable.
The sales have done little to increase competition: BT and British Gas retain their monopolistic position, although their pricing policies are subject to review by government appointed regulatory bodies.
Dunleavy and Rhodes have noted that privatization in these sections has, ironically, involved an increase in regulation or re-regulation.
The electricity supply industry is to be broken up and sold.
Some of the more spectacular productivity gains (e.g. British Steel) have occurred prior to privatization.
Some observers also calculate that, if one takes account of the profits forgone from these enterprises in future years and sets them against the revenues raised now, the government may have sold the assets at too low a price.
Separate from but related to the programme of privatization of state-owned industries and deregulation was the scheme for the sale of local council houses.
The programme advances the traditional Tory theme of a ‘property-owning democracy’ and was started by the Heath government.
It was outlined in the Housing Act (1980), which gave council tenants with three years' residence the right to buy their properties at a substantial discount.
The discounts were extended by another Housing Act (1984).
By December 1988 over a million had purchased their properties.
The Economy
Arresting the cycle of the country's relative economic decline was the self proclaimed major task of the Thatcher revolution.
Conservative leaders claimed that by curbing the growth in public spending they would create the headroom for tax reductions which in turn would provide incentives and liberate the entrepreneurial energies of the British people.
By strictly controlling the money supply they would restore sound finance and squeeze inflation out of the system.
The government would not intervene in private sector wage bargaining but intended that its own example in the public sector plus strict control of the  money supply would encourage responsible wage bargaining.
Ministers also hoped that employers would cut out overmanning and root out inefficiency, even if this led to a temporary surge in unemployment.
Reducing the size of the public sector and number of regulations that hampered business would create the opportunity for the emergence of a more market-orientated economy.
Reforms of the internal practices of trade unions and legal changes in their status would provide opportunities for managers to regain authority and for the emergence of more ‘responsible’ and less ‘political’trade unions.
Finally, by reducing the budget deficit and government borrowing they hoped to bring interest rates down.
The ultimate objectives of this strategy were of course no different from those of previous post-war governments.
All governments have wanted to strike a balance between the economic aims of low inflation, rapid economic growth, a surplus on the balance of payments, and full employment.
But, increasingly in the 1970s, governments were failing to achieve the objectives (see above, Chapter 6).
It is important to realize, however, that what some commentators have called the ‘new realism’ did not start in 1979.
Mr Callaghan's famous speech to the 1976 Labour party conference (subsequently cited in many Conservative party publications) admitted that governments could not spend their way into full employment; that way only led to more inflation and eventually more unemployment.
A squeeze on public spending, adoption of money supply targets, privatization (sale of BP shares in 1976), and the priority accorded to fighting inflation, even at a time of historically high unemployment, were all in place under Mr Callaghan.
(i) Inflation
Of all the economic variables inflation is the one that the Thatcher government has said it is able to control.
According to the Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, in his Mais Lecture in june 1984: ‘It is the conquest of inflation, not the pursuit of growth and employment, which is or should be the objective of macro-economic policy.’
In many respects the ‘New Conservatism’ in Britain and the United States was born out of a reaction to the high inflation of the mid-1970s.
In the 1950s and 1960s the  annual rate of British price rises was modest by comparison with what was to follow in the 1970s.
Yet the average rate in Britain (4.1 per cent) between 1961 and 1970 was still higher than that in OECD countries (3.3 per cent ).
In the years 1971 — 80 the gap widened to annual averages of 13.7 per cent and 9. o per cent respectively.
Reducing inflation was, until 1989, the government's greatest achievement on the economic front.
The increase in oil prices combined with the 1979 June budget's increase from 8 to 15 per cent in VAT on many goods and high wage rises helped to push inflation up to 21 per cent in May 1980.
In the second half of 1982, however, Britain's inflation rate fell to the OECD average of 5 per cent and then steadily declined to 2.5 per cent in July 1986, the lowest figure since 1967.
The reduction was helped by the strength of sterling which became increasingly attractive as an oil-backed currency.
Although exporters fairly complained that this made their goods less competitive in price, it helped to lower the cost of imports and thus the prices of foreign goods sold in Britain.
In 1987 Conservative ministers boasted of their success while still claiming that the conquest of inflation remained the first objective of policy.
According to the election manifesto: ‘There is no better yardstick of a party's fitness to govern than its attitude to inflation.
Nothing is so politically immoral as a party that ignores that yardstick.’
After 1974 a growing number of Conservatives increasingly fastened upon the failure to control money sterling supply, M3 (notes and coins in circulation, with all deposits held by UK residents), as the main cause of inflation.
Monetarists claimed that there was a variable time-lag (of between eighteen months and two years) between an increase in money supply and the consequent price inflation and that the huge expansion in money supply (28 per cent in 1972, 27 per cent in 1973) caused the soaring inflation of 1974 — 5.
Politics joined with economics in the decline of incomes policy and the rise of monetarism as the appropriate weapon in the fight against inflation.
Monetarists argued that as long as the government refused to increase the money supply, even if unemployment was increasing, there could be no inflation.
Controlling and adhering to announced targets for money supply became a test of the government's will.
The announcement in the Medium Term Financial  Strategy (MTFS) in the 1980 budget of monetary targets — which would fall year by year (see Table 8.3)— was also regarded as a means of lowering the expectations of wage bargainers.
The ‘rational expectations’ school of monetarists argued that expectations of lower inflation would lead to a slow-down in the rise of wages, costs, and prices.
Yet the government's monetary policy was hardly successful in reducing inflation.
It had many difficulties in controlling M3, which proved to be an unreliable barometer.
An influential report by Professor Jurg Niehans in February 1981 argued that monetary policy was in fact excessively tight because the high interest rates were attracting foreign money to London and maintaining a high pound.
Difficulties in exercising control were also increased by the civil service dispute during 1980 and the increase in bank lending for mortgages.
Another measure, of ‘narrow’ money, was Mo, which covered cash, the banks' till money, and the Bank of England's operational cash, and the Chancellor set a target for this as well.
Table 8.3 shows that the government regularly exceeded its monetary targets.
The growth of M3 for 1980 — 1 (19.5 per cent) easily exceeded the planned 7 — 11 per cent , and between March 1980 and March 1984 M3 grew by 70 per cent , against its target 46 per cent .
By 1982 government spokesmen spoke less about money supply and were more concerned about monetary growth and the exchange rate.
In 1984 the target was concentrated on Mo, the narrower measure.
In the Lord Mayor's speech in London in November 1985 Nigel Lawson formally abandoned M3 and since 1987 gave more emphasis to broad money or M4 (which is M3 plus building society liabilities) though not setting a target range.
Monetarism was effectively abandoned.
Management of interest rates and the exchange rate were seen as more effective influences.
By 1989 monetarism was attracting more support, as Britain had one of the highest inflation figures in the European Community (8 per cent in April 1989).
M4 had expanded rapidly between 1986 and 1988.
(ii) Public spending
The government only gradually reduced the growth rate of public spending.
Control of spending was crucial to the  government's strategy because it wanted to cut governmental borrowing and taxes.
Yet in spite of several Cabinet meetings to make reductions, total spending actually increased in real terms and as a proportion of GDP.
Ironically, the government was widely criticized for making ‘cuts’.
Cutting public spending has always been a politically divisive process for a government, as ministers in the major spending departments battle to protect their budgets.
In the post-war period the only previous cuts in public spending as a proportion of GDP were achieved by Labour in 1975 — 6 and 1977 — 8.
The Conservatives' original goal in opposition was to stabilize the total public spending figure in real terms at its 1977 level and for that total to fall as a share of GDP as the economy grew.
The MTFS made a deliberately modest assessment of future rates of economic growth (1 per cent per annum 1980 — 3).
In his 1979 budget Sir Geoffrey Howe claimed that in the past public spending had been based on falsely optimistic expectations about economic resources: ‘It is this falsely reassuring belief that somehow the resources will be found to permit an uninterrupted expansion of public expenditure that this government challenges.
In planning public expenditure it is better to be prudent and make a deliberately cautious assumption on the growth of future resources.’
The MTFS in 1980 planned for a reduction in public spending of 5 per cent over the next four years; there was in fact an 8 per cent growth in real terms.
Given the party's pledges on pensions, defence, law and order, and other statutory commitments, particularly on social security, this meant that spending cuts would have to fall in a few areas, notably housing.
The increase was in large part caused by the   rising costs of social security, itself a consequence of the steep rise in unemployment, and the NATO commitment to boost defence spending by an extra 3 per cent per annum in real terms.
The failure to reverse the spending growth was a disappointing outcome for the advocates of cuts in the many bruising Cabinet battles over public spending between 1979 and 1982.
There have been marked shifts in spending between programmes since 1979.
It is worth noting, however, that the spending priorities have not been radically dissimilar from those planned by the outgoing Labour government, which also planned for cuts in spending on education and housing and an expansion in spending on defence, law and order, and social security.
Table 8. 1 above shows that between 1978 — 9 and 1988 — 9 there was a major and planned increase in real terms in spending on defence and law and order; spending on housing and industry were heavily cut, while on education (helped by a fall in numbers of school children) and on transport it stayed fairly constant.
For all the concern over the level of public spending the British share as a proportion of GDP in 1979 was only at the mid-point of most western states.
The Treasury fought and lost many spending battles in the first Thatcher administration; public spending increased from 39.5 per cent as a proportion of GDP, which the government inherited in 1979, to 42.5 per cent in 1984.
The record, until the middle of the decade, disappointed a number of Mrs Thatcher's more ambitious supporters.
According to The Times's leader ‘What is Thatcherism Now?’ on 16 January 1984:
But none of this is the essence of Mrs Thatcher's problem which is rather that, on the essential questions of economic management, the government gives the impression either of having lost its momentum or of having decided that it must settle for something well short of what Mrs Thatcher seemed to promise in the way of reducing the size of the public sector and also the burden of taxation.
The reduction in unemployment and continued economic growth gradually helped the ratio to fall.
But it was only in 1988 — 9 that the ratio (excluding privatization receipts) fell back to that of ten years earlier.
(iii) Taxes
In line with the government's objective there was a reduction in the top (from 83 to 60 per cent) and standard rates of income tax (from 33 to 30 per cent ) in the 1979 budget, and a shift to indirect taxes.
In that budget speech Sir Geoffrey Howe stated: ‘Our long-term aim should surely be to reduce the basic rate of income tax to no more than 25 per cent.’
The same budget increased VAT from 8 to 1 5 per cent.
Later budgets reduced the rates of income tax further; in 1988 the top rate was cut to 40 per cent and the basic rate to 25 per cent.
However, claims that the government has reduced the ‘tax burden’ need to be heavily qualified.
The main shift has been from direct to indirect taxes.
In 1979 30 per cent of government revenue was raised by income tax; by 1989 the figure was 24 per cent.
Less ‘visible’ increases in VAT and employers' national insurance contributions offset the well-publicized cuts in income tax.
Overall total taxation, including corporate taxes, increased as a share of GDP from 33.1 per cent to 37.6 per cent in 1988 — 9.
The rise is largely accounted for by rising incomes and profits which bring more taxpayers and companies into higher tax brackets.
In total the tax position is not much different from 1979.
Britain's share of taxation as a proportion of GDP has remained in the middle for the range of OECD states.
(iv) Distribution
The final report of the Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth drew attention to the stability in the distribution of income in the post-war period.
Some redistribution had occurred between 1938 and 1949, but if one ignores the top 1 per cent of income earners, there had been little change up to 1979.
Under the Conservative government, as noted, the tax system became less progressive, with the major reductions being made at the top end of the tax range and there were increases in national insurance and the nonprogressive indirect taxes.
The tax cuts for the top income earners, the increase in share prices over the decade, and the effects of the recession have sharpened economic differentials in the Thatcher period.
Although the Commission was dissolved  in 1979, the 1985 volume of Inland Revenue Annual Statistics found that between 1979 and 1983 the most wealthy 50 per cent of the adult population increased its share of total marketable wealth from 79 — 83 per cent to 80 — 4 per cent.
In the period 1979 — 87 the bottom 10 per cent of earners made net gains of 5 per cent, the top 1 o per cent gains of 28 per cent .
Analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies shows that richer households have benefited more than poorer ones from the government's tax and benefit changes.
Although most have gained, half of the total giveaway in terms of benefits and tax reductions has gone to the richest 10 per cent of households.
The single unemployed living on their own are the only group who have lost significantly from the changes — by an average of £2.16 a week.
(v) Unemployment
The lifetime of the Thatcher governments has been dominated by large-scale unemployment.
The government inherited a figure of 5.4 per cent(1.2 million) for unemployment which by November 1983 had reached 12.7 per cent (3 million).
The rise in unemployment frustrated the government's spending plans, because of the rising costs of social security; it also undermined the credibility of the government's claims that its economic strategy was working and that economic recovery was around the corner.
Industrial output fell by over 11 per cent in the course of the 1979 — 83 Parliament, a performance worse than in other western states which also suffered from the recession.
The main damage was done in the first twelve months, when GDP fell by 3 per cent, industrial production by 9 per cent , and unemployment doubled to 2.5 million.
The government redefined the categories of unemployed in 1982 and 1983, for example, excluding men over 60, counting only those claiming benefits instead of those registered as unemployed (this change excluded mainly married women seeking work, but not entitled to benefit), and various training and employment schemes for young people kept perhaps another 600,000 off the unemployment list.
The figure peaked at 3.2 million, excluding school-leavers in June 1985.
Thereafter it steadily declined, month by month and in January 1989 fell below two million (Table 8.4).
(vi) Economic growth
Backed by North Sea oil the pound was an attractive currency on the international money market.
In spite of complaints by business about the pound's appreciation (in May 1979 its effective exchange rate was 81.3 per cent and in January 1982 it was 92 per cent of its 1975 rate) the government came to rely on a strong pound as part of its anti-inflation strategy.
Contrary to declarations that there was no government policy for sterling and that it would be left to the markets to decide, by late 1981 the government intervened to reverse a fall in the exchange rate, and raised base rate to 16 per cent.
It did the same again in January 1985; when the pound fell to $1.12 banks were instructed to raise interest rates by 1.5 per cent.
The record high interest rates were attractive to holders of sterling even though they were also damaging to business.
The exchange rate policy was highly damaging to manufacturing.
Alt has blamed oil for this appreciation, while other economists have blamed the government's tight money policies and high interest rates.
Industrial output fell by 11 per cent between the second quarter of 1 979 and the last quarter of 1982, and between 1979 and 1985 industry shed 1.5 million workers.
The balance of trade in manufacturing swung from a surplus of £2.75 billion in 1979 to a deficit in 1984 of £3.75 billion and the years 1983 and 1984 were the first time in history that Britain's  trade balance was in the red on manufactures.
Non-oil imports increased by an average of 4.5 per cent per annum from 1979, while non-oil exports increased by 1 per cent per annum.
Only in 1984 did non-oil output recover to its 1979 level.
Some decline of the manufacturing trade balance was probably inevitable, because of the advent of North Sea oil at a time of floating exchange rates and the increased appreciation of sterling.
But the loss of international competitiveness was much bigger in Britain between 1979 and 1981 than in other western states.
There have been claims of a productivity miracle in British manufacturing and that the ‘British disease’ has been banished.
There are problems in assessing these claims, in part because of disputes over the starting date — 1979, when Mrs Thatcher came to office, or 1981, the low point of the recession — and whether comparison is made with the 1970s or 1960s.
Over the period 1979 — 88 manufacturing output per head increased by 4.2 per cent, faster than the 1960s.
But for the whole economy the increase is only 1.9 per cent, better than the 1970s but lower than the 1960s.
At last British output per head is now up to the European average, largely because the latter has slowed down so much.
But Britain still has a huge gap to close on her major competitors.
In defence of their economic record, government spokesmen have claimed that from the second quarter of 1983 the numbers in employment increased and that more jobs were being created in Britain than in the rest of the EEC states taken together.
At first they pinned most of the blame for the loss of jobs on the trade unions and the international recession, and then on high wage settlements.
Lower wage settlements, claimed the Treasury and the Department of Employment, would help to price people back into jobs.
But real wages steadily increased in spite of recession and high unemployment.
As the government exceeded its monetary targets and unemployment soared, so critics in 1980 and 1981 waited for a U-turn, or a change in economic strategy.
But Mrs Thatcher was adamant about not reflating and this resolution, in spite of the sharply increased unemployment, was important in sustaining the government's credibility.
Particularly important in showing that the MTFS was serious was the 1981 budget when the Chancellor increased  taxes by £5 billion, or 2 per cent of GNP, to protect his PSBR.
This was a major squeeze at a time of recession.
Maintaining the policy in face of previously unthinkable levels of unemployment became a test of ‘resolute leadership’.
In the first four years it nearly halved the PSBR, or borrowing requirement, from 5 per cent of GDP in 1978 — 9 to 2.7 per cent in 1982 — 3 and Britain had a markedly tighter fiscal stance than her Western European neighbours.
In spite of the recession the PSBR continued to fall, though not as fast as had been forecast.
Industrial Relations
The mood of ‘time for a change’ was certainly felt in the area of industrial relations, particularly in relations between the government and trade unions.
Formal incomes policies and the ‘social contract’ approach were hardly politically credible after the 1979 winter's disruption, and many features of the trade unions were as unpopular as ever (such as the closed shop, unofficial strikes, close relations with the Labour party, and mass picketing).
Under Mrs Thatcher, Conservatives were more outspoken in blaming the unions for low productivity, overmanning, restrictive practices, and strikes, particularly in the public sector where the unions were often able to exploit their monopoly position.
Because the government abandoned any formal incomes policy there was less call for it to maintain close relations with union leaders.
The government hoped that strict control of the money supply and the government's stated unwillingness to rescue financially troubled firms would help to inculcate a more responsible outlook among wage bargainers.
In the public sector the government would give each department a cash-limited budget, including a ‘factor’ for pay; ministers claimed that workers, by pushing for ‘excessive’wage rises which employers were unable to pass on in price increases, could price themselves out of jobs.
For the first two years, however, this strategy lay in ruins because of the consequences of accepting the ‘catching-up’ comparability awards of the Clegg Commission for public-sector pay.
The Clegg Commission was abolished in 1980 and eventually the government managed to squeeze down pay in the  public sector through its use of cash limits.
Rising unemployment and fear of job losses weakened the appeal of militants in the unions.
The government was the first to do without an incomes policy, and the absence of ‘norms’ or ‘targets’for incomes in nearly twenty years helped to take the issue of wages out of politics.
On the grounds of preventing young workers' wages rising to a level which might price them out of work it scrapped the 1946 Fair Wages Resolution, which required compliance with minimum wage standards for firms trying to secure government and other contracts.
In 1985 it also reduced the number of Wages Councils affecting the pay of young workers.
The government also took the view that the law had a role to play in redressing the balance in bargaining between employers and unions.
In retrospect many Conservatives felt that the ill-fated 1971 Industrial Relations Act had been too ambitious and that the ground had not been adequately prepared for such a sweeping measure.
Before the 1979 election the party took advantage of the Winter of Discontent to toughen its manifesto proposals, promising to curtail flying pickets, or picketing away from the pickets' place of work, and provide funds for pre-strike ballots of union members and for the election of union officials.
The ‘step by step’ approach was reflected in the two Employment Acts of 1980 and 1982.
These restricted lawful picketing to the pickets' own place of work and removed the unions' legal immunities from civil actions, so making them liable for damages up to a certain limit where they were responsible for unlawful industrial action.
The 1980 Act removed the provisions of the Employment Protection Act which affected small businesses, by increasing the qualifying period for complaints of unfair dismissal.
The same Act also provided compensation for people unreasonably excluded or expelled from a union in a closed shop, and required that new closed shops in future should be approved by four-fifths of the workforce.
These provisions were strengthened in the 1982 Act which provided that no closed shop should be enforceable unless it had been approved by a clear majority of employees voting in a secret ballot.
It made trade unions (rather than just individual organizers of strikes) liable for damages arising from unlawful industrial actions.
It also gave employers legal remedies against  industrial action in which no dispute exists between employers and their own employees or which is not wholly or mainly about employment matters.
The 1984 Trade Union Act provided government funds for the regular election of trade union officials and for elections on whether unions should have a political fund.
It also required that industrial action be supported by union members in a pre-strike ballot if the union was to be exempt from civil action for damages arising from the dispute.
A third Employment Act (1988) removed various closed shop immunities, extended the number of union officials to be directly elected, now by postal ballot, and gave legal protection to members who suffered ‘unjustified’ discipline by a union (e.g. for refusing to support industrial action).
The government successfully pursued a ‘hands-off’ policy in industrial disputes.
In the first term of office, strikes at British Leyland, British Steel, and British Rail, and lengthy disruption by civil servants and health service workers failed to move ministers.
Workers at British Leyland and in the coal industry rejected the advice of union leaders to strike over wages or job losses.
Perhaps the only two successful threats of action were by the water-workers in 1983 and the NUM over the Coal Board's threat to close uneconomic pits in January 1981.
The twelve-month strike by the National Union of Mineworkers against pit closures ended in April 1985 in failure and with the NUM split.
The NUM's main trouble with the courts arose over actions brought by its own members on the grounds that the union had broken its own rules (over a pre-strike ballot) and for contempt.
The government managed to make its legislation ‘stick’, in contrast to Mr Heath's experience, and has refuted the old ‘liberal’ view that the courts did not have a useful role to play in industrial relations.
The idea of unions balloting their members before taking industrial action took hold.
But most ballots endorsed proposals for industrial action and all of the union ballots held in 1985 on maintaining a political fund overwhelmingly endorsed the idea.
Although it was T U C policy for member unions to refuse government money for ballots, a number of unions defied it.
In 1985 the second largest union, the AUEW, was faced with the threat of expulsion from the TUC for breaking the policy.
The Electricians Union was  prepared to follow the AUEW and, already faced with the breakaway Democratic Miners' Union in Nottingham, the TUC was forced to find a face-saving formula to avert a possible split.
The electricians also incurred the displeasure of fellow trade union leaders by making no-strike agreements with employers, arranging private health care facilities for workers, and then secretly negotiating with the Murdoch press for jobs at the new Wapping plant.
They were expelled from the TUC in 1988 for the former.
In many respects the Thatcher years have been depressing for the trade unions.
The setbacks include mass unemployment, decline of Labour, loss of members, privatization of parts of the public sector, cash limits in much of the public sector, which limited opportunities for bargaining, government initiated incursions into their internal affairs, and minimal access to Whitehall.
In July 1987 Mr Lawson unilaterally announced a reduction in the meetings of the tripartite NEDC from ten to four meetings annually and in January 1989 the Secretary of State for Employment announced that the TUC would no longer be the sole body which could nominate trade unionists to the Training Commission and other official bodies.
Bargaining rights were weakened.
The Pay Research Unit for the civil service was abolished, as was pay bargaining for schoolteachers, and the role of Wage Councils was reduced.
In spite of threats of defiance, court-imposed fines were collected from the NUM, NGA, and Transport and General Workers' Union.
Union membership fell from over 13 million in 1979 to 10 million in 1986 (or from 54 per cent to 46 per cent of the work-force) and the main losers were the general unions in manufacturing.
Many analyses of the unions in the 1970s suggested that such political power as they possessed rested on their ability to defy incomes policies over time and veto (as In Place of Strife ) or render inoperable the policies or legislation which they did not like.
The Thatcher governments have gone a long way towards puncturing claims about the power of the unions.
They have not sought compromises with the unions over incomes policy or industrial relations; the unions are no longer an ‘estate of the realm’.
The creation of the legal framework has ended the ‘voluntarist’ tradition that has dominated industrial relations in the twentieth century.
The heavy fines imposed on Sogat 82  in its 1986 dispute with News International showed that the unions' inability to carry out secondary or solidarity ‘blacking’ weakened their bargaining power.
At the same time the government did not push its reforms as far as some supporters wished; it did not, for example, place the onus on union members to contract in rather than out of paying the political levy and has done little to break down national wage bargaining which pays little attention to different local labour market conditions.
Conclusion
A problem with the presentation of the foregoing data is to assess the amount of responsibility that the government has for the policies.
After all, privatization, deregulation, tax cuts, falling capital markets, and reducing union power have been found in other states in the 1980s.
There have been four different interpretations of the economic record of the Thatcher government to date.
The first is that the policies have largely been implemented as intended and that they are bearing fruit.
The lower inflation and freer market, it is claimed, has generated an economic recovery.
In the years between 1982 and 1988 the economy grew at an average of nearly 3 per cent per year.
The large increase in unemployment, though regrettable and unexpected, is largely the responsibility of the trade unions for exacting high wage increases and overmanning in the past.
The second interpretation is that the economic outcomes,unfavourable as well as favourable, have been a consequence of the government's policies.
For example, the massive recession between 1979 and 1981 was caused by too severe a financial squeeze.
According to Jackson ‘the recession of the 1980s was of the government's own making.
Overtight monetary and fiscal policies and the loss of overseas markets, due to an over-valued pound, resulted in an erosion of demand, falling investment, rising inventories, bankruptcies and an explosion in the numbers unemployed.’
Some economists calculate that only a small part (perhaps a quarter) of the appreciation of the exchange rate is attributable to oil but that the government deliberately pushed up the exchange rate (which appreciated 40 per cent between 1979 and 1980) by raising domestic interest rates and thereby weakening industrial competitiveness.
A third interpretation is to say that the strategy has not been implemented and therefore the government is not fully responsible for the outcome.
Control of money supply (M3) has been erratic, and it has proved difficult to establish a relationship between the changes in M3 and the fall in inflation.
A final line of analysis insists that the government has made little difference, particularly on unemployment.
james Alt argues that the increase in supply of North Sea oil provided a major boost for sterling which in turn resulted in a loss of competitiveness for British goods and a consequent loss of manufacturing goods and employment.
Hence the major cause of unemployment lies outside the government's responsibility and a Labour government would not have made much difference.
The balance sheet for managing the economy is, not surprisingly, mixed.
Over the years 1982 to 1988, economic growth has averaged a respectable 2.5 per cent, close to the figure for the 1960s.
But this followed the sharp decline in 1980 and 1981; over the period 1979 — 85 the annual average growth rate has been 1.9 per cent about the same as most other OECD countries — without the benefit of North Sea oil.
There have been some impressive cases of increases in productivity, notably British Airways, British Leyland, and British Steel, which have shed workers, but it remains to be seen whether the improvement will be durable or a once-only case of firms shaking out the least efficient workers.
Business profits have increased from 3 per cent in 1979 to 1 o per cent in 1987.
Unemployment over the decade has been a disaster though the total has steadily fallen in the last two years.
The much praised reduction on inflation only brought Britain back into line with the OECD average and in 1989 was again above it.
By May 1989 inflation at over 8 per cent was at the same level as at the 1979 general election and unemployment, though falling, was higher than in 1979.
The weakening of trade union power in the 1980s has been due to the interaction of government legislation, the rise in unemployment, and technological change.
It is too soon yet to make a judgement about the relative importance of these different factors.
The government's legislation on industrial relations and trade unions has taken hold.
Here is an area where the balance of advantage has changed since 1979, from  union leaders to employers and managers and from the consultative role granted to the unions to one in which they are virtually ignored by the government.
The reduction in restrictive practices and number of strikes have been other gains.
Rising unemployment was important in producing the reductions in unions' members, funds, and militancy.
But the unions' unpopularity in the wake of the Winter of Discontent and Labour's electoral decline also weakened the movement.
The legislation has made the creation of new closed shops more difficult, has restricted definition of what are legal strikes, and has exposed union funds to claims against unlawful industrial action.
The growth of part-time, female, and self-employment, as well as the growth of the service sector has created groups which the unions have long found difficult to organize.
Privatization is another area in which the government has been more radical than was anticipated.
But there is a limit to the number of profitable assets which can be sold.
Revelations in February 1986 that the government was prepared to sell off British Leyland and Austin-Rover to American-owned companies provoked opposition from Conservative MPs in the affected constituencies which killed the proposals.
Opinion surveys suggest that both the trade union reforms and the early privatizations were popular with the voters.
The support for the status quo in these two areas had been ‘soft’, with the public acquiescing because there appeared to be no politically workable alternative.
The planned private sales of the water and electricity industries in 1990, however, are unpopular with most voters and worry some Conservative back-benchers.
Some measures have ‘freed’ the economy for the operation of market forces.
They include the income tax cuts, union reforms, and ending exchange controls.
On the other hand Mrs Thatcher has jealously maintained tax reliefs for homeownership and private pensions (indeed, extended them for private health care for the over-60s) and privatization of gas and telephones have done little to increase competition.
The government has made minor cuts on welfare and some changes of a largely symbolic nature.
It has protected ‘real’ levels of spending on the NHS and welfare state, and attempts to contain social security expenditure were thwarted until 1986 by the massive rise in unemployment.
Although the government  has encouraged privatization at the edges of the health service and social security, the opportunity (presented by Mr Fowler's social security review and then the NHS review) to make a fundamental reform of the legacy of Beveridge was passed by.
Ministers have been worried about reactions among voters and among Conservative Mps and have so far shown little interest in pushing the more radical free-market policies advocated by the Adam Smith Institute and IEA.
By twentieth-century standards the Thatcher governments have been radical and successful — not only in winning elections but in achieving so much of what they intended.
In 1989 the government was still pressing on with further measures of privatization, reforming the legal profession and health service, resisting moves to greater integration within the European Community, and implementing the new system of local government finance and a reformed education system.
The experience is one to suggest an affirmative response to the question, ‘Do Parties Make a Difference?’
MARGARET THATCHER: A MOBILIZING PRIME MINISTER
MRS THATCHER was the dominant figure in British politics in the 1980s.
She has already established a number of landmarks in political history and psephology: the first woman Prime Minister in any major western industrial state; the first leader since Lord Liverpool in the 1820s to win three elections in a row, and Prime Minister for the longest uninterrupted spell in the twentieth century.
Alone of twentieth-century prime Ministers her name has been given to a political ‘doctrine’ and undoubted political style.
She was the first British prime Minister to mount a sustained challenge to post-war consensus politics and, more than any other post-war Prime Minister, she is often regarded as a figure apart from her Cabinet.
The attention that she has received (particularly the hype surrounding her tenth anniversary in office in May 1989) can tempt one to react and downplay the importance, if not the existence, of Thatcherism.
Yet her role in altering the political balance in the Conservative party and directing the government has been so important that she merits discussion in her own right.
Mrs Thatcher provides a mobilizing style of political leadership.
In some respects it resembles the wartime leadership style of Lloyd George (1916 — 22) and Winston Churchill (1940 — 5).
This bold personal style distinguishes her, as it distinguished Lloyd George and Churchill, from other Prime Ministers.
But unlike them she did not come to office during a wartime emergency nor head a coalition government.
The political style of British political leaders has varied, broadly, between the mobilizing and the reconciling.
The mobilizer emphasizes taking decisions, task performance, and changing the status quo, whereas the reconciler is more concerned to maintain the consensus and cohesion of a group.
The former is mainly concerned with the achievement of goals, not overly  concerned about opposition and the costs of disturbance; the latter is more concerned to represent and respond to diverse interests and is willing to arrive at compromises, if necessary sacrificing policy goals.
The earlier chapters of this book have shown how events and a growing sense of disillusion with many old policies paved the way for a new approach.
But influential politicians were still required to push the new policies.
Mrs Thatcher has been such a figure and, in spite of reverses, she has animated and directed governments with a sense of political direction.
Chapters i and 4 examined, respectively, her political beliefs and how she came to the leadership of the Conservative party.
This chapter analyses her record as Prime Minister; in particular it examines her political style and role in relation to the Cabinet, Parliament, the Conservative party, and the public.
British Political Leadership
Britain is widely regarded as having a political system which scores high on political institutionalization and low on personal leadership.
Disciplined political parties and a system of parliamentary and Cabinet government have been conducive to a restrained, impersonal style of political leadership.
This style has been reinforced by the values of partisanship and collective leadership of the Cabinet.
Unlike France or the United States, the political head of state is not the focus of regime loyalty.
Personal leadership is less appropriate for a British Prime Minister who is a servant of the Crown.
Lloyd George and Winston Churchill were exceptions, but exceptions that proved the rule.
Both were in some respects political outsiders who came to power during a breakdown of ‘normal’ party politics and exercised a personal leadership at a time of national crisis.
British political science has little or no literature on political leadership.
In Britain we refer rather to the office of Prime Minister and his or her performance rather than national leadership or individual leaders.
The academic literature on the Prime Minister has given rise to one of the few serious debates in British political science; the idea of Prime Ministerial government versus that of Cabinet government.
The first view is associated with the late John Mackintosh and Richard  Crossman and is regarded as being a trend, regardless of incumbent.
The post-war period had seen the transformation ‘of Cabinet government into prime Ministerial government’.
This view is reinforced by the mass media's tendency to personalize politics and by informal discussions of politics (for example, ‘Mrs Thatcher's Government,).
A rival interpretation points to the limits operating on any Prime Minister — for example, constraints of time, the greater departmental resources available to other Cabinet Ministers, and the premier's need to keep the Cabinet together, conciliate rivals, and manage the political party in parliament.
The British executive is collective and the Prime Minister's power is exercised in and with the Cabinet.
In addition, there are the inevitable pressures from the outside world, the difficulties of the British economy, and the various lobbies.
Limits on British government are limits on the Prime Minister.
Political Style
It is worth restating how radical a leader Mrs Thatcher has been for the Conservative party.
She was an accidental leader and in some ways did ‘hijack’ the party.
Conservative leaders have traditionally been accommodating to the major interest and sought compromises.
After 1951 Winston Churchill and his Conservative successors protected the welfare state, maintained full employment, and conciliated the trade unions.
Mrs Thatcher, on the other hand, claimed that previous Tory leaders had agreed on the country's problems and what needed to be done — cutting public expenditure and direct taxation, reforming the unions, and restoring the incentives and financial disciplines of the free market — but failed to carry through the policies.
She saw herself as providing the political resolution that had been lacking hitherto.
Mr Heath's U-turn in 1972, shifting from free-market policies to a statutory prices and incomes policy and state intervention in industry, is a negative example for her.
By the mid-1970s collectivist policies and the constraints on government they represented were so deeply entrenched that a virtual counter-revolution was required.
Her image as a confrontational politician stems from her conviction that British politics had become an important, even  a decisive, battle of ideas.
Mrs Thatcher is one of the few senior politicians who takes pride in stating her political convictions and insists that policies should derive from a coherent set of principles.
Without such a starting point, she argues, a leader is at the mercy of events and unlikely to produce coherent policies.
When questioned in August 1978 by the present author about the basis of her political strategy, she replied: ‘My political beliefs’.
An insight into Mrs Thatcher's character is conveyed by the kind of people with whom she feels comfortable.
She admires wealth-creators, entrepreneurs, and people who have taken a chance in the market rather than those who work in the public sector.
In her view the provision of resources for the public services depends largely on the efforts of the ‘doers’ and wealth-creators.
Yet the latter, she believes, are too often denigrated in the media and universities.
In contrast to the immediate post-war generation of Conservative leaders, Churchill, Eden, Butler, and Macmillan, she has little sense of guilt (‘bourgeois guilt’ was the phrase she used in New York to the Institute of Economic Studies on 15 September 1975) for the unemployment of the 1930s.
But such feelings were important among a number of One Nation Tories in the 1950s.
Harold Macmillan, for example, never forgot his experience as an MP in the economically depressed north-east of England in the 1930s.
As Prime Minister he accepted the resignation of his Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1958 rather than agree to modest public expenditure cuts.
But in the 1970s few self-made first generation Conservative politicians had personal memories of the 1930s, or were any longer inclined to conciliate the trade unions and make the avoidance of unemployment the main goal of economic policy.
In public and private she is a relentless educator.
An important task of leadership, in her view, is to win the battle of ideas, and this is done by frequently expressing basic beliefs and principles.
She seems to revel in arguments and loses no opportunity to declare her political principles.
Initially Shadow Cabinet colleagues were worried by her view of politics as an ideological battle ground and by her disavowal of many cross bench attitudes (Chapter 1).
They feared that she would be seen as (indeed is ) abrasive and lacking compassion.
She is  famous for berating and lecturing people, ministers, civil servants, TUC delegations, and the House of Commons; ‘rubbish’ or ‘what mean?’and other rude comments are annotated to civil servants' papers.
Phrases such as‘TINA’(‘there is no alternative’) in answer to critics of her economic policy, and ‘We want our money’(‘I cannot play Sister Bountiful to the Community’) to her EEC partners over the perennial problem of Britain's budget payments, sum up the spirit of what she feels and argues.
The warrior image is also aided by her forceful style of speaking and assertive personality.
Her self-confidence and certainty make her overbearing in discussion.
More than one sceptical senior colleague has been admonished, ‘Don't tell me what; tell me how.
I know what.’
It is as if political goals are what she decides and the role of ministers, civil servants, and advisers is to help implement them.
She is impatient at what she regards as generalities in memos from colleagues and civil servants — even when she agrees with them.
She wants advice about practical measures which can achieve objectives.
Even friends acknowledge that she approaches conversations as an intellectual exchange rather than as an opportunity to empathize; her invitations to colleagues to define their terms and to explain ‘precisely’ what they mean often disconcert the unprepared.
(Former schoolfriends recall an occasion when Mrs Thatcher, as a young MP, returned to her old school as chief speaker at a dinner for Old Girls, and corrected the headmistress, who was a classical scholar, on the pronunciation of her Latin.)
David Howell did not remember his time in Cabinet with much pleasure —‘some arguments just left such acrimony and ill-feeling that I can't believe they really could have been enjoyable…
I think the general atmosphere in the government of which I was a member was that everything should start as an argument, continue as an argument and end as an argument.’
Her frequent denunciations of high levels of taxation and public expenditure, of big government, and of the diminution of individual freedom and choice are passionate and deeply felt; they are expressed in attacks on the baneful, almost ‘immoral’, effects of inflation and of governments which debase the currency, or borrow rather than‘balance’ their income and expenditure.
For all the pejorative talk of her being an ‘ideologue’, however, she is a practical Conservative.
She traces her beliefs back to her upbringing in Grantham and to the personal experiences of the 1970s, rather than books.
‘We tried it then and look where it led us’, is her view of previous bouts of big spending, reflation, and subsidies to troubled industries.
Colleagues are impressed (and sometimes alarmed) by her willingness to link large philosophical issues with day to day matters; for example, high state expenditure and taxation mean less for the ordinary citizens to spend as they choose.
She has boasted of her tendency to draw analogies between running the economy and a housewife's weekly budget (which many economists dismiss as pre-Keynesian, naïve, and dangerous).
Some ministers were at first embarrassed at what they regarded as her ‘preaching’ and ‘moralizing’but in the end accepted it as part of the Thatcher style.
Unlike Harold Wilson she did not, until the Westland imbroglio in 1986, have the reputation of a ‘fixer’, compromiser, or manager in her Cabinet.
Indeed she once described herself as ‘the Cabinet rebel’.
Discussions with colleagues and interviewers are often interrupted by rhetorical questions, ‘Do you see?’ or ‘Have I made that clear?’
When taxed about her ‘bossy’ or ‘headmistressy’role in the 1983 election she replied: ‘Yes, I do believe certain things very strongly.
Yes, I do believe in trying to persuade people that the things I believe in are the things they should follow…
I am far too old to change now.’
Her own radicalism is clearly tilted against certain dominant institutions and interests.
On 18 January 1984 she told a gathering of parliamentary lobby journalists that she wished to be remembered for breaking the consensus and tackling traditionally ‘immune targets’.
These included the trade unions, nationalized industries, local government and, surprisingly for a Conservative leader, the monopoly professions like the solicitors and opticians and, no doubt, the civil service and universities.
In the same speech she said that she wanted her government to be remembered as one ‘which decisively broke with a debilitating consensus of a paternalistic Government and a dependent people; which rejected the notion that the State is all powerful and the citizen is merely its beneficiary; which shattered the illusion that Government could somehow  substitute for individual performance’.
Mrs Thatcher is also out of sympathy with thy previous Conservative leaders' looking for ‘deals’ with the major interests, conciliating the trade unions, and concerned to be ‘good Europeans’at almost any cost.
She has offended previous Conservative leaders like Mr Heath and Lord Stockton (formerly Mr Macmillan).
The extent to which her policies and style have antagonized the universities was seen in the decisive vote by Oxford academics not to give the university's most famous female graduate an honorary degree in January 1985.
Leaders of the Church of England have also attacked the ‘hardness’ of the government, only to be dismissed in return as ‘cuckoos’(see below, p. 289).
The image is of an aggressive radical tilting against many of the most powerful and conservative (even Tory) interests in British society.
Indeed, this is Mrs Thatcher's image of herself.
In a lengthy and revealing BBC radio interview on 17 December 1985 with Michael Charlton she defended her brand of Conservatism:
it is radical because at the time when I took over we needed to be radical.
It is populist…
I would say many of the things I've said strike a chord in the hearts of ordinary people.
Why?
Because they're British, because their character is independent, because they don't like to be shoved around, because they are prepared to take responsibility…
And for the ‘trimming’ of previous Conservative leaders she borrowed Kipling's words: ‘I don't spend a lifetime watching which way the cat jumps.
I know really which way I want the cat to go.’
But this determination was coupled with a prudence and caution in deciding which battles to fight.
In foreign affairs she is only one national leader among many.
She compromised with China in agreeing to the return of Hong Kong to China in 1997 and with the Zimbabwean nationalists over the Rhodesian negotiations, when it became clear that she could not get her way.
In June 1989, isolated in the European Community and under pressure from Cabinet ministers, she agreed to set conditions for British entry to the EMS.
At home in February 1981 she gave way and provided money for twenty-three uneconomic coal pits to remain open, when faced with the  threat of a coal strike.
By 1984 the government, however, was prepared for a lengthy coal strike and refused to compromise.
In 1982 she disowned a CPRS paper, which suggested drastic cuts in the welfare state including some privatization of the NHS, when the Cabinet reacted negatively.
In other words, Mrs Thatcher is prepared to wait for opportunities.
Cabinet Management
The formal duties and responsibilities of the office of a British Prime Minister are not laid down in a constitution or statute.
Yet a Prime Minister does face certain persisting role demands — chairing the Cabinet, answering parliamentary questions, making appointments, and choosing the time for a dissolution of Parliament.
Although Asquith (Prime Minister 1908 — 16) exaggerated when he said, ‘The office of the Prime Minister is what its holder chooses and is able to make of it’, the personality of a Prime Minister may give a distinctive character to his or her administration.
This is particularly the case with Mrs Thatcher.
Most recent Prime Ministers have usually presented themselves as representing a collective Cabinet viewpoint.
Mr Attlee, for example, saw his job as being ‘to collect the voices of the Cabinet’ and Mr Wilson compared his role as prime Minister at various times to a soccer ‘midfield sweeper’, or the ‘the conductor of the orchestra’.
The cases where Prime Ministers have tried to bypass the Cabinet on a major policy or acted without clear Cabinet support, as for example Neville Chamberlain's foreign policy in 1937 — 9 or Mr Wilson's attempted trade union reform in 1969, may have reinforced the principle.
Government in Britain is not presidential; it is a collective enterprise in which power is shared and for a beleaguered Prime Minister a power shared is a blame shared.
Mrs Thatcher has a clear view of her role as Prime Minister and sees herself as an activist rather than an arbitrator in Cabinet disputes or a spokesman for a collective Cabinet view.
There is a great difference between the Attlee concept and Thatcher's robust assertion of 1979: ‘It must be a conviction government.
As Prime Minister I could not waste time having any internal arguments’ or ‘Yes, I do drive through things which I believe in passionately — what else do you expect of a  Prime Minister?
I'm not here just to be Chairman, I'm here because I believe in things.’
(Panorama, BBC TV 25 January 1988.)
Her job is to push Cabinet ministers ‘to do what is right’; this involves reminding them of the Government's strategy laid down in the manifestos and combating what she regards as the inertia inherent in departments.
Given the government's commitment to control public expenditure and reduce taxation, her main troubles in the first term were with the major spending departments and with ministers who favoured some further reflation to ease unemployment.
In part, this was a consequence of her appointing some ministers who were sceptical of her economic strategy.
The most troublesome period concerned the budget in 1981, when Jim Prior, peter Walker, and Sir Ian Gilmour were so opposed to its deflationary thrust that they considered resigning.
Although they neither rebelled nor resigned, their disenchantment was soon widely known.
But the target of Mrs Thatcher's wrath was equally well known when the day after the budget in a public speech she said: ‘Now what really gets me is…that those who are most critical of the extra taxes are those who were most vociferous in demanding extra expenditure.’
This was a remarkably public statement of a Prime Minister's resentment of colleagues.
Since then problems with colleagues have centred on particular issues such as Westland (1985 — 6), exchange rate policy (1988), and British entry to the exchange rate mechanism ofthe European Monetary System.
Mrs Thatcher has insisted on particular lines of policy, even over the doubts of the responsible department.
She has strong views on a wide range of issues.
Her own policy agenda, as King notes, has often been separate from that of the Cabinet or Conservative party.
British Prime Ministers do not have a department to administer.
The opportunity this gives an incumbent to take a broad view is useful if he or she has the resources to know what is going on.
The support staff is tiny in comparison with that of a Cabinet Minister or US President — about eighty staffworking in Downing Street of whom the great majority (about sixty) are clerical and secretarial staff, messengers, clerks, or administrators of the machine.
For all the talk of Prime Ministerial government, one must remember the unequal battle which any incumbent, when confronted by more than a score of powerful  departments, faces.
The Prime Minister lacks executive powers and has therefore to work with and through ministers who have executive powers vested in them collectively.
Number 10 Downing Street, in the words of a former Political Secretary of Mr Heath is ‘a house not an office’.
Mrs Thatcher's Private Office consists of six fairly senior civil servants who help with official speeches and parliamentary business and liaise between herself and departmental ministers.
In addition, there is a Policy Unit of eight or nine political advisers.
This body was established by Harold Wilson in 1974 and has been retained by his successors.
Its members are political appointees and civil servants who contribute advice on policy and papers from other departments, liaise with the party, and help with speech writing.
They are particularly concerned to look for the policy and party political consequences of events and policies.
John Hoskyns headed the Policy Unit until 1982.
Hoskyns had built up a computer company and been active in the Centre for policy Studies before joining Mrs Thatcher.
He was a vigorous proponent of policies of controlling the money supply, cutting public spending, and reducing the legal privileges of the unions.
He retired in 1982 in some frustration with the civil service before eventually becoming director-general of the Institute of Directors.
Ferdinand Mount, then the Political Editor of the weekly magazine Spectator , replaced him.
He was followed in January 1984 by John Redwood, a historian turned merchant banker, who in turn was succeeded by an academic economist Brian Griffiths.
In 1970 Mr Heath had established the Central Policy Review Staff to deal with the long-term strategy matters and provide briefs for the Cabinet as a whole.
Mrs Thatcher did not have much time for the body and abolished it after the election victory in 1983 — an example perhaps of her dislike for so-called ‘professional’ advice that purports to be above party politics.
She had already decided to strengthen her Policy Unit and some CPRS members were recruited to it.
Her reservations about the senior civil service as a whole were well known in advance.
In January 1981, worried over failures to control money supply, she recruited Professor Alan Walters from the United States to provide economic advice which was independent of that of the Bank of England and  Treasury.
In particular, she felt in need of somebody like Walters who could argue with these two bodies about control of the money supply.
Her disenchantment with the Foreign Office, already evident over Rhodesia and the EEC, came to a head during the Falklands War and she brought in Sir Anthony Parsons (who had impressed her during the war when he was ambassador to the United Nations) to advise on foreign affairs and appointed Roger Jackling to advise on defence.
This clutch of appointments, together with her post-Falklands dominance in the Cabinet, was widely seen as heralding the introduction of a Prime Minister's Department.
There were predictable objections from departments which did not want to have their own policy advice scrutinized by outside experts.
In fact no permanent institutional reform came from the moves, and soon after the 1983 election Parsons and Jackling left, the latter returning to the Ministry of Defence.
Professor Walters left in 1985 and returned in 1989.
The changes were more a reflection of her anti-establishment outlook and determination to shake up the civil service hierarchy.
Shortly after the abolition of the CPRS, Professor George Jones noted: ‘While she has been strengthening her own personal staff resources, she has weakened those at the disposal of her Cabinet colleagues for the performances of their collective deliberations by abolishing the CPRS.
So she has tipped the system a little away from collective to presidential government’.
Jones adds, however, that ‘the tipping is only slight’.
But her reliance on non-official advice could also have significant policy consequences.
Mrs Thatcher's speech at Bruges in September 1988 which set out the government's view of its relations with the European Community was drafted by her Private Secretary and foreign policy adviser, Charles Powell.
Its forceful statement of British sovereignty offended many in the Foreign Office, which is more communautaire .
Professor Walters has reinforced Mrs Thatcher's opposition to British entry to the European Monetary System (favoured by Sir Geoffrey Howe and Nigel Lawson) and to her Chancellor's policy in 1988 of managing the exchange rate to maintain downward pressure on inflation.
In 1988 and 1989 the Public divisions between the Prime Minister and her Chancellor were Politically and economically damaging.
The view that Britain was moving to Prime Ministerial government was largely encouraged by Mrs Thatcher's dominant personality, which became more marked following the Falklands war.
But there were other factors as well: her ruthless dismissal of Cabinet dissenters in 1981 and sacking of the Foreign Secretary in 1983, the abolition of the CPRS, her close involvement in the promotion of Permanent Secretaries and her tendency, by publicly expressing her own views on controversial issues, to pre-empt Cabinet discussions.
She has reduced the number of Cabinet and official Cabinet committee meetings, and fewer papers are distributed to the Cabinet — the very stuff of collective decision making.
She has relied more on her Policy Unit and ad hoc groups, and intervened more in departments.
Mrs Thatcher is an activist Prime Minister and her Press Office is keen that she is seen as such.
‘MAGGIE ACTS’ or ‘MAGGIE STEPS IN’are familiar tabloid headlines as Mrs Thatcher convenes seminars of experts at Downing Street to cope with a pressing issue.
This has occurred with football violence, broadcasting, ‘green’ issues, schools, and the universities.
Yet this interventionism has not led to the creation of anything approaching an Executive Office.
Although there is a general trend for the private offices of many political heads of state to increase in size and influence, the British Prime Minister still appears to be less well endowed with this type of political support than leaders of most other states.
It is possible to argue that, compared to the staff available to previous Peacetime premiers, today's staff at Number 10 is actually smaller in relation to the greater burden of work.
Government decisions in Britain are made in the name ofthe Cabinet, in contrast to the United States where they are made in the name of the President.
The British Cabinet consists of most of the ruling party's political ‘heavyweights’, politicians who have either an acknowledged expertise, political following, reputation, or are close to the Prime Minister.
Most of the twenty or so men and women in the Cabinet are well known to one another and have worked together over some years.
But most are also rivals for political promotion to a higher office and, ultimately, for the Prime Minister's job.
Two points are noteworthy about Mrs Thatcher's early appointments.
First, in making her appointments in 1975 to the  Consultative Committee or Shadow Cabinet, Mrs Thatcher displayed conciliatory traits in retaining so many of Mr Heath's appointees.
All but three had already served under Mr Heath.
Of the twenty original members it is likely that only two (Sir Keith Joseph and Airey Neave) voted for her on the first ballot for the leadershiP election in 1975.
A Shadow Cabinet containing senior figures like Lord Carrington, Whitelaw, Prior, Maudling, and Pym — most of whom had already achieved office under Mr Heath, were associated with his policies, and owed little to her — was hardly right-wing.
Although her appointments were made with an eye to preserving party unity as well as recognizing ability, Thatcherites — often young and lacking ministerial experience — were not obvious candidates for promotion at the time.
The second noteworthy feature is her initial caution in refusing to reshuffle spokesmen.
Most of the ‘Shadows’ remained in post for the four years of opposition.
Michael Heseltine was moved from Trade and Industry to Environment.
But, Apart from the dismissal of Reginald Maudling as Foreign Affairs Spokesman, the only important reshuffle followed John Davies's resignation on grounds of ill health from Foreign Affairs in November 1978.
Francis Pym assumed this post, Norman St John-Stevas replaced Pym as Leader of the House of Commons, and Mark Carlisle in turn took over Education from Mr Stevas.
All the spokesmen were appointed to the Cabinet in 1979, usually to departments which they had shadowed in opposition.
Mrs Thatcher, like Mr Heath before her, clearly regarded Opposition as a time of preparation for government.
However, continuity also meant that Mrs Thatcher was in a minority over some policy battles in the new Cabinet.
Some ministers were Openly disgruntled with her style of leadershiP and the Treasury's economic strategy.
There was a clear separation between the Cabinet and Mrs Thatcher in the minds of many Conservative activists and observers.
Many right-wing back-bench critics of the government (but supporters of Mrs Thatcher) could voice their criticism without including her and liked to present her as a political prisoner of Cabinet ‘Wets’.
After a while, Mrs Thatcher herself, in coded language and indirect statements (through some of the Number 10 staff), may have provided encouragement for them.
But a  Prime Minister's power of appointment is not limited to the selection of ministers; equally important is the allocation to Particular posts.
Mrs Thatcher was careful on the whole to appoint her supporters to the important economic ministries.
Sir Keith JosePh went to Industry, Sir Geoffrey Howe and John Biffen to the Treasury, John Nott to Trade.
Such likely opponents of the economic strategy as Lord Carrington and Sir Ian Gilmour were banished to the Foreign Office while Francis Pym went to Defence.
She also ensured that she chaired the important Cabinet (later ‘EA’) Committee on economic strategy and that it contained a majority who supported the economic strategy of herself and the Chancellor.
During the course of 1981 Mrs Thatcher dismissed a number of notable Cabinet dissenters (Stevas, Soames, Gilmour, and Carlisle), Mr Prior was moved to Northern Ireland, and Lord Carrington chose to resign in April 1982 in the wake of the House of Commons' criticism of the Foreign Office policy preceding the Argentine invasion of the Falklands.
By autumn 1981 afl the major economic ministries (Energy, Employment, Trade and Industry), apart from the Treasury, had new ministers.
The reshuffle was a notable display of Prime Ministerial power but perhaps also of her frustration with the original appointments.
In the new government of June 1983 the move to a more homogeneous Cabinet was continued.
Francis Pym, a sceptic with regard to economic strategy, was sacked.
In 1987 another sceptic, John Biffen, Leader of the House, and one who publicly called for a consolidation rather than extension of existing policies, was dismissed.
Earlier he had been described by Downing Street officials as only ‘a semi-detached member of the government’.
There was promotion for Nigel Lawson, Leon Brittan, Cecil Parkinson, and Norman Tebbit.
All were younger middle-class or lower-middle-class meritocrats; they were tough-minded types of Conservatives, who supported Mrs Thatcher's policies, and owed their promotion to her.
Nicholas Edwards at the Welsh Office, George Younger at the Scottish Office, and Mrs Thatcher herself had remained in the same posts since May 1979.
With Lord Hailsham's retirement as Lord Chancellor in 1988, Mrs Thatcher alone had remained in the same post and only Peter Walker, George Younger, and Sir Geoffrey Howe had been in the Cabinet continuously.
Over time she gradually created a Cabinet whose members owed their promotion to her.
In 1979, the Cabinet of twentytwo contained only seven ministers (Edwards, St John-Stevas, Younger, Nott, Biffen, Carlisle, and Maude) who had not been in a previous Cabinet.
The leadership strata of the Conservative party in the 1980s has been shaped by Mrs Thatcher.
By January 1989 nineteen of her twenty-one Cabinet ministers owed their first preferment to her.
By this date, however, the political balance in the Cabinet had altered.
The results of the various appointments including the 1985 promotions of Douglas Hurd, Kenneth Baker, and Kenneth Clarke and the 1987 departures of Joseph and Tebbit gave the Cabinet a distinctly non-Thatcher look.
This was confirmed by the promotion of Chris Patten and the departures of Lord Young and John Moore in July 1989.
Apart from Nigel Lawson, Nicholas Ridley, Cecil Parkinson, and Sir Geoffrey Howe, it was difficult to think of other Cabinet ministers who would be regarded as economically ‘dry’ or ideologically ‘Thatcherite’, and both Lawson and Sir Geoffrey had well-publicized differences of opinion with Mrs Thatcher.
Mrs Thatcher's style certainly contributed to the Cabinet divisions between 1979 and 1981 and again after 1987.
She has strong views on most issues and her propensity to express her views boldly at the outset of a Cabinet discussion, combined with a sometimes dismissive attitude towards opposing colleagues, tended to change the atmosphere and polarize Cabinet discussions.
This contrasted with the approach of some other Prime Ministers.
Attlee, Macmillan, Wilson, and Callaghan often waited for a policy line in Cabinet discussion to emerge before committing themselves.
They also regarded their influence as a finite resource to be husbanded, used on major issues, and not frittered away on minor skirmishes or issues on which they were likely to be in a minority in Cabinet.
Mr Attlee was careful to position himself with the majority view in Cabinet.
Mr Macmillan was, according to colleagues, prepared to give way with good grace when he could not carry the Cabinet.
He intervened on ‘big’ issues or government initiatives (such as applying for membership of the EEC, and incomes policy, defence, and foreign and Commonwealth matters).
Mr Heath was a directive leader of the Cabinet but  confined, his interest to a few areas (EEC, incomes policy, and Northern Ireland).
By contrast, Mrs Thatcher leads from the front, has views on most issues, and is quick to voice them.
After 1987 she publicly disagreed with policies of her Foreign Secretary and Chancellor.
For much of her first term the thrust of economic policy was regarded sceptically by many colleagues.
Monetarism was a particularly controversial policy and a number of colleagues argued for a reversal of strategy, as unemployment increased remorselessly and the government's popularity in opinion polls and by-elections slumped.
For some months in 1981 the Chancellor, Sir Geoffrey Howe, had lost the confidence of Cabinet colleagues.
Mrs Thatcher's public speeches contained thinly veiled warning messages to colleagues who doubted the strategy.
Statements such as‘The Lady's not for turning’ and ‘Are we going to go back?
Hell, no, we've only just got here’ were directed at them.
In the first two years of office she had to give way to Cabinet pressure on pay rises for MPs, the scale of public spending cuts in November 1981, gas prices, the Rhodesian settlement, the compromise on the EEC budget (faced with the implicit resignation of Lord Carrington, who had negotiated it, if she did not accept) and, while Mr Prior was at Employment, action against trade union immunities and the closed shop.
She also had to bow to pressure from colleagues and permit Cabinet discussion of economic strategy in 1982 and to abandon Cabinet discussion in September 1982 of the paper from the Central Policy Review staff about the implications of the rising trend of public expenditure and its proposals for curbing welfare spending (see above p. 213).
It was a remarkable catalogue of rebuffs.
Her experience was not one which supported theories of the power of the Prime Minister.
She was also impatient with a number of departments for displaying less than whole-hearted devotion to her policies.
These included the Foreign Office (allegedly too pro-EEC and generally too prone to make diplomatic concessions at the cost of British interests), the Civil Service Department (too accommodating during the civil servants' pay strike in 1981), the Department of Employment (allegedly too ‘soft’ under Mr Prior), and Education (allegedly too sympathetic to the education lobbies).
Over time she appointed more congenial ministers  to run departments.
Her position, and that of the Treasury, was fortified by election successes and economic recovery.
But she has remained suspicious of departmental lines which resist changes, and her doubts about the Foreign Office have remained.
Whitehall departments have their own networks of interests, hierarchies of civil servants, attentive public and parliamentary groups, and specialist teams of mass media reporters.
As a consequence British Prime Ministers may have to work extremely hard to get them to change course.
They may intervene in the work of some departments but only at the cost of neglecting broad strategy and the work of others.
At the end of the day most departments have to be left alone to implement policies.
What is remarkable is that Mrs Thatcher has interfered in departmental matters to a greater degree than many of her predecessors.
She has busied herself in the promotion of senior civil servants (looking for people with energy and commitment) and regularly badgered departments about progress on particular policies —‘like a dog after a bone’ an adviser claims.
She suspects that ministers are too often ‘captured’ by their civil servants.
Having won the Cabinet's acceptance ofthe economic strategy, she has been more concerned with implementation and this appears to have given a greater role to her Policy Unit, members of ‘think tanks’, and ad hoc groups of officials, advisers, and ministers.
It is interesting to study how Mrs Thatcher eventually came to dominate the Cabinet, bearing in mind that many Cabinet ministers in 1979 were not supporters of her economic strategy.
An examination of some of the reasons may provide an insight into the sources of a modern Prime Minister's power.
One tactic she has used is to decide matters outside the formal Cabinet, either in committees or in informal groups.
She also exploited her control of the agenda of Cabinet and powers to appoint members of Cabinet committees or groups and draw up their terms of reference.
The appointment of supporters on the Cabinet committee dealing with economic strategy has already been noted.
She chairs two of the most important ad hoc Cabinet committees, OD, dealing with foreign affairs and Northern Ireland, and EA, covering economic strategy, privatization, trade union legislation, and the European Community  matters.
The reduction in the number of Cabinet meetings (45 — 50 per annum, about half of the post-war norm), and of Cabinet papers (60 — 70, or one-sixth of the figure in the 1950s), and the appointment of fewer Cabinet committees have reduced the opportunities for collective deliberation.
The purchase of the Trident Missiles programme by the government, for example, appears to have been effectively decided by a small group of Cabinet ministers, outside the Cabinet, in early 1981.
This involved a massive commitment of future financial resources, as well as deciding British defence policy for the rest of the century.
Once the Prime Minister and a few senior ministers had made up their minds, it then achieved what senior civil servants call ‘momentum’.
The presentation of annual budgets is left to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, though he is careful to consult with the Prime Minister about the strategy and discuss changes beforehand with ministers whose departments are likely to be affected.
The final contents of the budget are only revealed to the Cabinet the day before the Chancellor presents it to the House of Commons, when it is too late for any major changes.
But two budgets — 1979, which included a doubling of the standard rate of VAT on many goods and services and 1981, which was severely deflationary at a time when over two million were out of work — shocked a number of Cabinet ministers.
They complained about being ‘bounced’ into accepting last-minute decisions, were widely reported in the media, and they forced Mrs Thatcher to agree to a Cabinet debate about the economic strategy.
However, they had little effect on changing it.
Finally, the decision to ban trade union membership for workers at the intelligence gathering centre (Government Communications Headquarters) at Cheltenham in 1984 was taken outside the Cabinet and Cabinet committees.
The decision was initially taken by Mrs Thatcher, Sir Geoffrey Howe (Foreign Secretary), and Michael Heseltine (Minister of Defence).
A few other ministers were involved at a later stage.
Yet, according to The Times (7 February 1984), ‘The first most Cabinet ministers knew was when Sir Geoffrey Howe announced the decision in the Commons on January 25.’
Many later policies — the poll tax, abolition of the GLC and metropolitan counties, and the health service review have all had a  similar Prime Ministerial push.
She is not unique in this.
It is the scale of her interest in the work of other departments and working with ad hoc groups, that makes her distinctive.
Mrs Thatcher's position was also secure because the Cabinet ‘Wets’ were never a coherent group; the term mistakenly unified diverse critics.
Mr Prior, Mr Walker, and Sir Ian Gilmour opposed many of Mrs Thatcher's and the Chancellor's economic policies, and all three at some time seriously considered resignation over the 1981 budget.
But they differed over the emphasis they accorded to incomes policies, reflation, or tougher measures against the trade unions.
Willie (later Lord) Whitelaw was a loyal deputy.
He worked for compromises between the ‘Wets’ and Mrs Thatcher, but at the end always backed Mrs Thatcher.
His support was crucial.
The ministers who were dismissed seemed unlikely to lead backbench revolts.
But Peter Walker and Jim Prior, also well-known doubters, were retained (Prior until September 1984), no doubt for fear that they might prove troublesome on the back bench.
Outside the Cabinet the rejected Mr Heath became an even more isolated political figure.
It is very difficult today to imagine a Prime Minister in good health, being deposed by Cabinet colleagues.
The effort is likely to be politically disastrous, even if they can agree on a successor.
The above are all classic instruments by which a Prime Minister can outmanoeuvre the Cabinet.
The first two (deciding Cabinet membership and the members and agendas of committees) lie within the Prime Minister's control, while the third (events) and fourth (divisions among party dissenters) worked to her advantage.
There was also the undoubted increase in her personal self-confidence and stature as a result of the recapture of the Falklands and then the 1983 and 1987 election victories.
Mrs Thatcher's first government was plagued by leaks — a symptom of divisions and poor morale.
In so far as leaks advertise unhappiness about a line of policy they undermine the principle of collective responsibility, as well as the confidentiality of proceedings.
Although she has deplored leaks — and instituted more leak inquiries and prosecuted more civil servants for breaches of confidentiality than any of her predecessors her press office appears to have developed the technique  of leaking against fellow Cabinet ministers to a fine art.
Mr Prior frequently had reason to complain about hostile leaks from 10 Downing Street when he was in charge of Employment and then of Northern Ireland.
Francis Pym's dismissal from the office of Foreign Secretary was widely reported in advance during the 1983 general election; the dismissals of Patrick Jenkin at Environment and Peter Rees at the Treasury in September 1985 were extensively trailed over the summer; the same was true of Mr Biffen's dismissal in June 1987.
In the Westland affair her management of Cabinet was an issue, once it emerged that staff at Number 10 had connived with Leon Brittan's office to leak selections from a confidential letter from the Solicitor General to damage Mr Heseltine.
The high profile of her press officer Bernard Ingham and his disparaging remarks about Cabinet dissenters or ministers who are due to be sacked have angered some Conservatives.
Mr Biffen in 1989 compared the office to a ‘sewer’ and Mr Pym in 1983 spoke of ‘mischief-making by the Prime Minister's poisonous acolytes’.
After the Cabinet reshuffle in July 1989 and her press office's rubbishing of the significance of the title deputy prime minister for Geoffrey Howe, Conservative back-benchers went out of their way to show their support for Sir Geoffrey Howe in the House of Commons.
Mrs Thatcher also has taken risks with collective responsibility.
Mr Whitelaw, as Home Secretary was furious at her applause for critics of his policies at the annual party conference.
Mr Prior, at the Department of Employment, was publicly reprimanded by her, and her dissatisfaction with particular policies is usually well known.
This public image has been important in fostering a perception of Mrs Thatcher as somebody apart from the Cabinet.
Mrs Thatcher's direct, even confrontational style of managing the Cabinet became an issue in the circumstances in which Michael Heseltine resigned in January 1986.
For a month there had been a damaging public dispute between Mr Heseltine, who backed a European Consortium bid to link with Westland, the British helicopter company, and Mr Brittan, the Trade and Industry minister, who favoured an American bid.
In the past, Mrs Thatcher had easily fended off challenges from Tory ‘wets’.
When, however, internal opposition was determined, as Heseltine's was, the danger materialized.
In his resignation  press conference Michael Heseltine complained explicitly about Mrs Thatcher's style and performance as Prime Minister, claiming that she had acted unconstitutionally in refusing him permission to discuss the issue in Cabinet and in forbidding him to restate views he had publicly expressed in the past.
There is a long list of sacked ministers who have objected to her style.
Sir Ian Gilmour mourned ‘the downgrading of Cabinet government’.
David Howell complained that in Cabinet there was ‘too much argument and not enough discussion’ and regretted the trend towards ‘a huge argument where tremendous battle lines will be drawn up and everyone will be hit on the head’.
After the damaging Westland affair and the loss of two senior Cabinet ministers, there were even Conservatives who thought that it might be time to change the leader.
In its aftermath Mrs Thatcher apparently took greater care to consult the Cabinet more fully and was overruled by it on the proposed sale of British Leyland to the US-based General Motors.
After the 1987 general election victory complaints of high-handedness surfaced again.
Mr Biffen spoke of ‘Stalinism’.
What was remarkable was the public display of her willingness to second-guess her most senior ministers, including the Home Secretary, on measures to combat football violence, the Chancellor on anti-inflation policy, and the Foreign Secretary on a wide range of issues.
As noted earlier Mrs Thatcher was virtually vetoing European policies favoured by her two most senior ministers.
This is not, à la Harold Wilson, a determination to outmanoeuvre the Cabinet almost as an end in itself.
Rather it reflects Mrs Thatcher's determination to gain space and capacity to achieve her policy objectives.
Parliament
Parliament is the arena in which British political leaders are recruited and it is difficult to think of a successful Prime Minister who has not been able to command the House of Commons.
Compared to political leaders in other states, British Prime Ministers spend a good deal of time in the legislature.
The lengthy period which most party leaders have already spent in Parliament before gaining office certainly gives them time and opportunity to acquire suitable skills.
The  parliamentary set pieces like Prime Minister's Question Time (each Tuesday and Thursday when the House of Commons is sitting) and the major debates are great tests for the Prime Minister.
At Question Time the Prime Minister is backed by the civil servants who brief her and try to anticipate supplementary questions.
Mrs Thatcher takes these sessions seriously and goes to enormous lengths to prepare for them.
The noisy exchanges in the House of Commons and her determination not to be shouted down by the opposition make her sound hectoring and strident.
John Cole, the Political Editor of the BBC, commented in February 1985: ‘To see the Prime Minister, arms akimbo or leaning far across the dispatch box to bellow into the microphone, is to recall a Belfast working-class politician…who boasted that his Ma could beat any woman in the street.
This lady's not for shouting down.’
In the post-war period, foreign affairs and economic issues have tended to dominate the Prime Ministers' parliamentary attention.
Analysis of Prime Ministers' involvement in parliamentary debates shows that in the course of an average year they will participate in six debates and make six statements on policy, usually on the economy, foreign affairs, and government business.
Compared to earlier Prime Ministers, Mrs Thatcher makes fewer interventions in House of Commons debates and makes fewer set-piece speeches.
Involvement in these issue areas, together with the need to attend to management of the political party, means that she normally sees the Chief Whip, Foreign Secretary, and Chancellor of the Exchequer on political business more frequently than she does other Cabinet colleagues.
The Prime Minister is also the leader of a political party in Parliament.
In the British system, leadership of a major political party is the first requirement for being a Prime Minister.
A politician, however eminent or popular, who lacks that base will not reach or survive at the top.
A party leader who hopes to reach 10 Downing Street has to devote much time to party management, and policies and appointments have to be made with an eye on the reactions of party factions.
Of Conservative leaders in the twentieth century, A.J. Balfour (191 1), Austen Chamberlain (1922), Neville Chamberlain (1940), Sir Alec  Douglas-Home (1965), and Mr Heath (1975) were all eventually forced out of the leadership because of the lack of party support in Parliament; the last two as much because they had also lost general elections.
Party management in the Commons is left to the Whips, who rely on a mixture of patronage, appeals to party loyalty, and back-benchers' fears of letting the opposition into office to keep the party's majority intact.
For the Prime Minister and the Cabinet, carrying Parliament means, effectively, carrying their party's back-benchers.
Yet, her first government (1979 — 83) faced significant back-bench revolts on the proposed closed-shop amendment in the Employment Bill in 1980 and on unemployment benefit cuts in 1981, was defeated on proposed changes in immigration rules in 1981, and had to withdraw a proposal to impose a ceiling on local rates in the face of opposition.
Dissent increased in the 1983 Parliament, partly because of the government's larger majority, which enables rebels to dissent without jeopardizing the government.
Mrs Thatcher was rebuffed, again largely by her own backbenchers, over the choice of Speaker in 1983, MPs' pay, proposed housing benefit changes, rate support grant proposals, Britain's EEC contribution, and, most humiliating of all, over Sir Keith Joseph's plans to make major cuts in aid to students in higher education.
In July 1985 the government was nearly defeated in the Commons over a vote to reduce the Lord Chancellor's salary.
This was a Labour vote of censure on the government's acceptance of the proposals from the Top Salaries Review Board for large increases in the pay of senior public servants.
In April 1986 the government lost its Shops Bill, which had been designed to permit trading on Sunday.
A remarkable example of back-bench influence on the Prime Minister was seen in the resignation of Leon Brittan from Trade and Industry in the aftermath of Westland.
Mrs Thatcher had rebuffed suggestions that he resign and made it clear that he enjoyed her full confidence.
But it was vigorous criticism of him in the 1922 Committee by Tory back-benchers which convinced Brittan — and Mrs Thatcher — that he no longer enjoyed the confidence of the party in Parliament.
This was a hard period for the Prime Minister — she lost the confidence of senior colleagues, was widely regarded as an electoral liability  and lost battles in the Cabinet.
Within the first year of the 1987 Parliament a quarter of Conservative back-benchers rebelled against the government at least once.
There have been major rebellions against the imposition of charges for eye and dental tests, for an amendment to grade the poll tax according to ability to pay, and for the second reading of a private members' bill to liberalize the Official Secrets Act.
The divisions which accompanied Mrs Thatcher's election to the leadership in 1975 have, with one notable exception, faded.
Mr Heath, though lacking political influence, has remained a powerful defender of his own government's record — which Mrs Thatcher and some colleagues scorned.
His criticisms have become so predictable and strongly worded that they are counter-productive.
Mr Heath returned to the limelight in the Euro-election in June 1989.
He was bitterly critical of Mrs Thatcher's authoritarian leadership as well as her ‘negative’ attitude to the Community.
His views had some support in the party.
Over time, the wets who at one time favoured a change in economic policy virtually disappeared.
An attempt by Francis Pym and some thirty dissatisfied MPs in 1985 to form a Centre Forward group to press for such changes was short-lived.
The large number of Cabinet ministers who have resigned or been dismissed have not been a focus for dissent.
Mr Heseltine has been careful to support the government, while proclaiming a distinctive brand of Conservatism.
Another dismissed Cabinet minister, Mr Biffen is a frequent critic of Mrs Thatcher's tone and of the government's preference for tax cuts over greater spending on the social services.
But there is little organized dissent.
Mrs Thatcher has always realized that her power base lay with back-benchers and has tried to be accessible to them.
In opposition she particularly urged her front-bench spokesmen to be attentive to the party's back-bench committees relevant to their subjects.
In part the style is an acknowledgement of how she came to the leadership, and in part also a reaction to previous leaders.
Churchill, Eden, Macmillan, and Home had been political grandees; all emerged through the ‘magic circle, and not as a result of election by MPs.
Mr Heath was notorious for his remoteness from his back-benchers.
She also finds strong support among the party's grass roots.
Like many local constituency Conservative party officers, who are drawn from the professions and small business, Mrs Thatcher is self-made and does not come from one of the traditional Tory interests — business, land, or a political family.
Her open dislike of direct taxation, public spending, much of the public sector, and trade unions and her protective attitude to the tax reliefs for home-owners and investors and sympathy for farmers, small business, and the forces of law and order are all favourite Tory themes.
She has also proved more willing to allocate political honours to party workers than was Mr Heath who had been particularly niggardly in this regard.
Her invocation of themes and support for many policies favoured by the party's grass-roots supporters has made the party more radical.
She has given voice to those who thought that previous Conservative governments had been too tolerant or ‘defeatist’ about the unions, the welfare state, high taxation, and public spending, and too accommodating to other countries, particularly in the European Community and the Commonwealth.
This has been coupled with policies for a ‘strong’ state in defence and law and order, and more centralized control over local government spending and over secondary and higher education than any previous government has attempted.
She is unsympathetic to ‘liberal’ measures to promote more ‘open government’, greater press freedom, or trade union rights for government employees engaged in defence and security activities.
In this sense she is not a libertarian.
The spirit of Mrs Thatcher and the new Conservatism has been well captured by a Marxist, Andrew Gamble:
The state is to be rolled back in some areas and rolled forward in others…
The real innovation of Thatcherism is the way it has linked traditional Conservative concern with the basis of authority in social institutions and the importance of internal order and external security, with a new emphasis upon free market exchange and the principles of the market order.
In foreign affairs Mrs Thatcher has proved to be something of a ‘little Englander’.
In her early years as Prime Minister she largely left the negotiations over Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) and the EEC budget to the Foreign Office.
Her deep involvement in the Falklands war and determination to retain British sovereignty  over the islands has to be set against Britain's negotiated return of Hong Kong to China with effect from 1997 and refusal to support or condemn the US invasion of Grenada (part of the Commonwealth).
Indeed there is some evidence that only with the Argentine invasion of the Falklands and the deaths of British servicemen did the ‘Fortress Falklands’ policy emerge.
Britain has proved to be one of the least ‘community-minded’ members of the EEC and has for long been at odds with other states about the level of British contributions to the EEC budget.
Mrs Thatcher resisted attempts by Brussels to promote a Community-wide Social Charter, which she regarded as introducing ‘socialism by the back door’.
She also resisted the wishes of senior ministers for Britain to set a date for entry to the EMS.
Her strong views on national sovereignty and limiting the competence of the European Community — at a time when moves to greater unity were gathering pace — placed Britain in a familiar minority of one.
Yet she did compromise over the budget at Fontainebleau in 1984, signed the Single European Act in 1986, and accepted the Delors proposals for budgeting and agriculture reform in 1988.
On Europe the pattern has been one of resistance to proposals but, in the end, accepting compromise.
Although enjoying a warm personal relationship with Mr Gorbachev, the American and West German wishes to promote disarmament on NATO short range missiles in 1989 have left her relatively isolated in the changed climate.
Her greater sympathy for the Atlantic connection over the European one is not widely shared by colleagues.
In 1989 she described the relationship as ‘paramount’.
The close relationship was partly a consequence of her rapport with President Reagan, and is unlikely to be as close with President Bush.
Public Role and Image
British Prime Ministers are not popular figures (Table 9.1).
They are seen in a partisan perspective, a perception that limits the extent of their popular appeal.
Only for five years between 1945 and 1983 has approval for the Prime Minister exceeded that of his party by more than 10 per cent, and Harold Wilson, and Harold Macmillan are the only post-war premiers to have   retained the support of 50 per cent or more of the electorate for two successive years.
Mrs Thatcher's approval rating on Gallup fell to a record low of 28 per cent in October 1981.
Although the Falklands improved her standing, the approval ratings over her premiership are still lower than those for leaders in the 1950s and early 1960s.
Pre-Falklands, her average monthly approval score on Gallup was 36 per cent; after the war until June 1983 it was 47 per cent .
Thereafter it declined to pre-Falklands levels.
Political leaders, where they can be set apart from the party, may help to shape a party's image.
In Britain, however, they have a limited impact on voting behaviour.
In 1979 Labour decisively lost the election, although Mr Callaghan was more popular than Mrs Thatcher (and his party).
The traditional forces for voting, namely party loyalty and social class, though weakening, still depress the electoral impact of the personality of the leader.
Yet mass media coverage of general elections and parliamentary politics is highly personalized and concentrates on the party leaders.
General elections have become more presidential and the mass media virtually ignore the secondary party  leaders.
For the past quarter-century, the Prime Minister alone has regularly received more attention in The Times than the three leading ministers together — the Foreign Secretary, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Leader of the House of Commons.
Television and the popular press are even more likely to accentuate the pattern of The Times reporting.
The imbalance in coverage stems partly from the Prime Minister's engagement in more newsworthy activities and partly from the fact that, as leader of the government, he or she is newsworthy.
He has many opportunities to personify the government or, strictly speaking, to be presented as its spokesman.
In the mass media, on foreign visits, and in Parliament, the Prime Minister is regarded as the authoritative spokesman for Cabinet policy.
Political coverage on television necessarily promotes leaders because it usually has time for only one item per party.
Mrs Thatcher was particularly prone, as opposition leader and early in her premiership, to ‘make policy’ in television and other interviews, almost committing her Cabinet in advance.
This has continued as Prime Minister.
Aided by her Press Officer, Bernard Ingham, the media more and more present government policies as Mrs Thatcher's.
Ministers have complained about ‘the Number 10 publicity machine’.
Surveys indicate that Mrs Thatcher is not regarded as a warm or compassionate person.
But she has long scored highly on the qualities of being decisive, resolute, and principled, a perception helped by the Falklands war and the comparison until 1983 with Michael Foot, the Labour leader.
The Conservative election campaign slogan of ‘The Resolute Approach’ in 1983 leaned heavily on her image.
Not surprisingly, Mrs Thatcher has polarized public opinion more than other party leaders.
People are not indifferent; they either like or dislike her.
In the 1983 and 1987 elections many Conservative and Labour politicians reported the doorstep hostility to Mrs Thatcher, as well as the respect for her.
Her own perception of herself (courageous, persistent, and sticking to a course no matter how unpopular) is matched by the public perception, according to Gallup surveys on the personality images of various leading British politicians.
Table 9.2 shows that for nearly ten years now voters have agreed about her strength of personality and outspokenness.
But many also see   her as divisive, condescending, and a destructive force in politics.
The image of her as a ‘superwoman’ is also fuelled by eulogies in the sympathetic tabloid press, as well as the ‘devil theory’of Labour politicians.
It is a tribute to the importance of her personality that her advisers have spent much time on her image.
They were originally concerned that she appeared too aggressive, shrill, and unsympathetic.
Before the 1979 election her public relations adviser, Gordon Reece, coached her to lower her voice, speak slowly, and present a ‘soft’ image and tried to arrange television interviews with relatively non-aggressive interviewers.
On the whole she has been more attentive to the requirements of the arts of self-presentation and the requirements of the mass media and public relations than other leaders like Heath, Callaghan, and Foot.
A recent study has documented the many ways in which Conservative spokesmen have tried to manage the media and been conscious of the image of the government and Mrs Thatcher.
The study concludes that ‘She has become a mistress of the pre-planned, carefully packaged appearance.’.
The British Prime Minister is inevitably pushed to play a major public role — as head of the government in Parliament, as public spokesman for the government, as leader of the nation on visits abroad, and as chairman and summarizer of Cabinet discussions.
But compared, say, to a President of the United  States or France, the tasks of cultivating and presenting the Prime Minister's personality are probably less demanding.
On the other hand, tasks of party management and maintaining Cabinet cohesion are more insistent, though perhaps less so than for a German Chancellor or Italian Premier.
Conclusion
Mrs Thatcher has already proved herself a remarkable figure.
She has challenged certain long-established political assumptions: that a government could not be re-elected if it presided over a massive increase in unemployment; or that a government had to govern with the consent and co-operation of the major interests, particularly business and the unions.
Mrs Thatcher has successfully defied both beliefs.
Most British Prime Ministers and party leaders have gradually lost popularity over time and retired when their reputation was at a low point.
After a decade in office Mrs Thatcher was still an exception to this trend and was as popular as when she first became Prime Minister.
It is true that she has not always got her own way in Cabinet, particularly in the first years.
On a number of issues informed observers were able to distinguish her own preferences from those of most of her Cabinet, hardly a sign of successful political management.
Her remarkable statement in an interview, ‘I am the Cabinet rebel’ suggests that, if she gave a lead, she did not always have a majority of followers.
However the fact that she lost a few battles in Cabinet does not mean that she was not the dominant figure or that the Cabinet was supreme.
Reference was made earlier to the mobilizing and reconciling styles of leadership.
Effective political leaders have to take account of both role demands.
It is possible, however, to classify most British political leaders according to the relative importance they attach to these values.
In the inter-war years Stanley Baldwin and Ramsay MacDonald, by temperament and political conviction, were reconcilers.
They were relatively non-partisan and pursued policies which would least disturb the social fabric.
Gladstone.
Lloyd George, and Chamberlain were classic cases of mobilizers.
They were not respecters of party lines and the last two in particular were widely distrusted  among parliamentary colleagues.
The mobilizing style has a greater appeal when there is dissatisfaction with the status quo and a feeling that new policies are required.
There is little doubt that Mrs Thatcher belongs to the camp of the mobilizers.
She is impatient with the status quo and the traditional style of decision-making by compromising with the major interests.
She has repudiated policies associated with previous Conservative leaders and has divided public opinion.
She has been highly critical of many established institutions, such as the senior civil service, Foreign Office, Bank of England, universities, and local government.
She is also something of a populist.
Her views on capital punishment, immigration, and the trade unions resemble those of the right-wing tabloid press.
Yet, to a greater extent than other mobilizers, say, Joseph Chamberlain or Lloyd George, she has operated within the established political institutions of Parliament and party.
In Britain, the character of being a mobilizer or a reconciler is not related to being in any one party or being in opposition or government.
The movement between the two has often been cyclical, with one style breeding a reaction in favour of the other.
A leader may start out as a mobilizer but end as a conciliator.
In 1964 Mr Wilson presented himself as a radical figure, but by 1974 he was comparing himself to a family doctor, and hoped, in his own words, ‘to achieve…peace and quiet for the country’.
Mr Heath in 1970 was also a radical leader and many of his policies were enacted in the face of bitter opposition in and out of Parliament.
Yet by October 1974 the once radical Mr Heath was espousing the cause of conciliation and national unity, arguing that the grave problems facing the country and the necessary mobilization of consent required a cross-party coalition.
Mrs Thatcher, however, has remained a mobilizer; she clearly regards herself as Heath plus, providing greater political will and persistence.
Talk of a policy U-turn or reversal, associated with Mr Heath from 1972 onwards, or of ‘ungovernability’, so prevalent in the 1970s, has disappeared from the political vocabulary in Britain.
Mrs Thatcher prides herself on her reputation as an ‘Iron Lady’.
But she is also reacting against a political ‘fixer’ style of leadership associated with the  Labour Prime Ministers Mr Wilson and Mr Callaghan in the mid-1970s.
Philip Williams has drawn a distinction between Labour party leaders who are Path-finders , who look for new solutions or try to lead the party in new directions, and stabilizers , who are concerned above all with preserving party unity.
Labour, with its well-entrenched factions, egalitarian values, myths about the sovereignty of the party Conference, and separation of powers between the National Executive, Conference, and parliamentary party, has required coalition building skills of a high order.
Both Wilson and Callaghan were determined to keep the fissiparous Labour party together.
They thought that this required the abandonment of any directive or heroic leadership and the careful balancing of rival right and left political factions in the Cabinet.
Critics inveighed against the fudging, the soothing formula, the trimming, and the unheroic style, all designed to keep the party together.
The success of the mobilizer is to be measured in the accomplishment of goals; conciliators are more interested in unity and consensus — even if it is directionless.
It is always difficult to assess the political significance of an individual leader.
One approach is to imagine different outcomes in the past and ask ‘what if?’
For example, what if Mr Heath had won the February 1974 general election, as he nearly did, and carried on as Prime Minister?
What if Mr Whitelaw, the heir — apparent, had stood on the first leadership ballot in 1975 and won, as many think he would have?
Even to pose such questions reminds us that there was a large element of chance in the emergence of Mrs Thatcher.
Circumstances, or ‘luck’, have also been important in her later career, particularly the outbursts of industrial unrest in 1979 which so damaged the Labour government, the divisions in the Labour party, the occurrence of the Falklands war in 1982, and the divided non-Conservative vote in the 1983 and 1987 elections.
It is reasonable to associate a number of distinctive policies with the presence of Mrs Thatcher — the economic strategy, attempts to contain the public sector, toleration of high unemployment, reduction in the powers of trade unions, privatization, the vigorous prosecution of the war in the Falklands, the community charge, education reforms, change in the civil service, and Britain's refusal to join the EMS.
A number of  Cabinet colleagues had doubts about all these policies and many would acknowledge that things would have been different without her.
It is doubtful that she has transformed the role of the Prime Minister in British politics.
The office is not highly institutionalized and she has not made changes in this respect.
Her significance as Prime Minister is that she has set an example; by pushing to the outer limits of her authority, making decisions with small groups of ministers and advisers, and closely involving herself in Whitehall promotions and the policies of departments, ‘the repertoire of Prime Ministerial tasks has been extended’.
The very forcefulness with which Mrs Thatcher has projected her views and style, separate from those of her Cabinet, has also established a model of premiership.
It is one which, whether measured in terms of winning elections or carrying through policies, has been remarkably successful.
Thatcherism has been both a matter of style — combining impatience with much of the status quo and a relentless promotion of new attitudes — and policies.
Both Lloyd George and Churchill were helped by the fact that their style suited the temper of the times.
Historians may point to the downfall of Lloyd George in 1922 and Churchill in 1945; the achievements were recognized but declined in importance as the electorate responded to new issues.
Mrs Thatcher's achievements in taming the trade unions, reducing inflation, introducing privatization and more commercial values into the public sector, and recovering the Falklands gave scope for her adversary talents.
As past achievements are taken for granted and new challenges emerge, so voters may look for alternative leaders.
Mrs Thatcher's style of leadership has thrived on crises.
In such circumstances, the identification of an unpopular target — an Argentine General, Irish hunger strikers, or coal miners' leader Arthur Scargill — polarizes public opinion.
By being clearly against an unpopular figure, Mrs Thatcher has usually rallied public opinion to her side.
The same style is less suited to ‘normal’ politics or when the ‘enemy’is less obviously unpopular.
The support she may win in the crisis, where minor disagreements are sunk in the face of a much disliked enemy, can evaporate in everyday disputes, where the Prime Minister's views must compete with many other acceptable views.
Historians are certain to acknowledge that she dominated the political landscape of the 1980s and a number of her policies will leave a mark in post-Thatcher Britain.
The success is even more remarkable when compared to her predecessors.
With the possible exception of Baldwin in 1937 no Prime Minister in the twentieth century has left office willingly and on a high note.
They have been overthrown (Asquith, Lloyd George), stepped down because of old age, ill health, or policy failures (Balfour, Bonar Law, MacDonald, Chamberlain, Churchill, Eden, Macmillan), or were repudiated by the voters (Attlee, Heath, Callaghan).
It remains to be seen how, and indeed whether, Mrs Thatcher is able to manage her departure from office.
THE REORDERING OF BRITISH POLITICS
THIS last chapter evaluates, under six headings, the significance of the Thatcher governments in post-war British politics.
First, it discusses the government's impact on the Conservative party: has it created a new Conservatism?
Second, it analyses the changed relationships between the government and major interests and pressure groups.
Third, it analyses the influence on the political agenda and public opinion; has it shifted either of them to the right?
Fourth, it compares the British experience with trends in other western states in the 1980s, has the so-called Thatcher revolution been no more than the British reflection of trends apparent elsewhere?
Fifth, it examines whether recent elections have produced a realignment in the party system; have three successive handsome election victories now made the Conservative party the natural majority party?
Finally, it assesses the impact of party government in Britain in the light of the Thatcher record.
A New Conservatism?
Politicians live by rhetoric.
They often use words as tools for influencing public opinion, exaggerating or belittling policy achievements and even substituting for them.
The Thatcher record since 1979 has been accompanied by a good deal of inflationary rhetoric from both supporters and critics.
Admirers claim that the Thatcher governments have vanquished much conventional wisdom of the 1970s, such as the idea that the British were ‘ungovernable’, that the unions ran the country, or that there was a ‘British disease’.
Instead, it is claimed, Britain's economic decline has been reversed; in the process much of the post-war consensus has been broken, and a good thing too.
On the other side, critics (including some Conservatives) claim that in their zeal to break the consensus the governments have destroyed much of manufacturing industry, starved the welfare state of resources, and divided British society.
More detached observers suggest that in the next century historians may see Mrs Thatcher as a figure having no more long-term significance than Wilson, Heath, or Callaghan.
One sceptical commentator has reacted against the idea of there being something called ‘Thatcherism’, by claiming that ‘both opponents and supporters of the administration have created more of a pattern from disconnected events and policies than is warranted’.
One approach to debunking the distinctiveness of the Thatcher record is to argue that the post-1979 policies are merely a continuation of earlier trends, for example, of the early economic policies of Mr Heath's 1970 government or of the acceptance of monetary targets and abandonment of Keynesianism under the Callaghan — Healey regime in 1976.
There is, however, a distinction between the Thatcher policies and those of Mr Heath, which were short-lived, and those of Mr Callaghan and Mr Healey, which were reluctant, partly forced by outside pressures and largely confined to monetary targets and cuts in public spending.
To claim that the government's record since 1979 has been the product only of instinct or opportunism, displaying no coherence, is, I would suggest, to carry scepticism too far.
It is true that policy blueprints are rarely carried through perfectly.
Qualifications and amendments have to be made to the plans of the drawing-board as policy-makers confront changing circumstances.
Yet doubts about political patterns may be overdone and result in a denial of such phenomena as a New Deal in the United States in the 1930s, Gladstonian Liberalism in the late nineteenth century, or collectivist politics after 1945.
The setting of particularly high standards for uniformity and internal consistency makes it impossible to speak of the existence of almost any ‘ism’ in policy.
In terms of political style and policies there is something new and radical about the Conservative party under Mrs Thatcher.
The trade union reforms, the break with the ‘social partners’ approach in running the economy, the abolition of a tier of local government, the imposition of far-reaching central government controls over local government finance and policies and then the replacement of household rates by the community charge, and the large-scale privatization, all mark a major departure from the conventions of post-war politics.
The reactions of such leading Conservative figures as Francis Pym, Sir Ian Gilmour, Edward Heath, Jim Prior, and the late Lord Stockton, show that Thatcherism has offended many traditional Conservatives.
Their criticism is not simply the embittered jealousy of defeated leaders; it represents a feeling of betrayal.
For most of its history the Conservative party has managed to avoid the factionalism of the Labour party.
The leadership of Mrs Thatcher and her repudiation of some of the policies associated with her Conservative predecessor certainly sharpened divisions among Conservative MPs in her first term of office.
Those MPs of a so-called ‘dry’ tendency have regarded the control of inflation via a tight rein on the money supply as the primary objective of a government's economic policy, favoured free-market policies and a reduction of state ownership and spending, and taken an authoritarian line on law and order and many social issues.
The so-called ‘wets’ favoured an interventionist role for government in the economy and were prepared to increase state spending to boost employment, even if this risked some increase in inflation.
But over time the Conservative party divisions on economic policy became less marked, partly because of electoral success and partly because unemployment has fallen steadily from June 1986.
It could fairly be said that Mrs Thatcher won the economic argument.
The simple division between ‘dry’ and ‘wet’does not, however, do justice to the currents of opinion in the contemporary Conservative party.
One of the effects of the Thatcher decade has been to redefine the benchmark of divisions.
The new Tory right consists both of libertarians and traditionalist (or Burkeian) Tories.
These two groups agree on rejecting many economic policy prescriptions of the ‘wets’ but disagree on the role of the state.
Libertarians want a drastic reduction in the interventions of the state, not only in the economy but also as a social regulator, so that opportunities for both personal choice and the free-market economy are maximized.
Traditionalists, however, do not regard society as merely a gigantic market place and favour an authoritarian stand on many social issues, for example, on drugs, abortion, Sunday trading, and censorship.
Norman Tebbit's Disraeli  lecture in 1985 spelt out his distaste for the ‘valueless values of the permissive society’, of the 1960s and 1970s — represented by legalized abortion and homosexuality, fewer constraints on what is portrayed in the media and theatre, and growing disrespect for authority.
By 1989 the largest Conservative back-bench group was the right-wing 92 Group.
A reading of Rhodes Boyson's Centre Forward (1978) gives some idea of how the Conservative party's policies have shifted in the past decade.
Boyson, an outspoken Conservative MP for Brent North, is on the right wing of the party and propounds populist authoritarian policies — on law and order, education, trade unions, and patriotism.
In 1978 his views were shared by a small minority in the party.
Boyson looked forward in his book to a seven-day programme for the reconstruction of Britain.
The programme included:
(1)
sharply reduced rates of income tax and a top rate of 60 per cent;
(2)
government spending to be cut by 5 per cent annually in real terms for five years;
(3)
a substantial increase in police numbers and pay;
(4)
state welfare to be replaced by a scheme of payments and vouchers;
(5)
an end to exchange controls and allowing the pound to find its own level;
(6)
an end to the statutory monopoly of nationalized industries and all to be opened up to competition.
In 1978 these policies appeared far-fetched.
Yet by 1988 substantial progress had been made on all but items (2) and (4) of the agenda.
Some of Mrs Thatcher's critics claim that she is not a Conservative at all, at least not in the paternalist tradition of Disraeli and One Nation Conservatism.
The qualification is important.
Conservatism in Britain has been multifaceted but that tradition has been dominant.
Her supporters, however, claim that she has returned the party to the essential verities of sound money, lower rates of income tax, strong government, and rolling back government from areas where it has no useful role to play.
From this perspective it was Macmillan, Butler, and their heirs who betrayed Conservatism, by compromising with social democracy.
The case against Mrs Thatcher as a Conservative includes her impatience with the status quo and her suspicion, indeed rejection, of so many traditions and institutions.
Much of the alleged wisdom that inheres in institutions and practice is part of what she has regarded as the flabby consensus that dragged the country down.
She has not approached the senior civil service, local authorities, universities, trade unions, BBC, Church of England, the legal and medical professions, and public corporations with the reverence — or at least respect — with which Burke recommended that we regard the work of our ancestors.
Sir Ian Gilmour, a member of Mrs Thatcher's Cabinet until his dismissal in 1981, has been the most articulate critic of the new Conservatism.
His views have been expressed in numerous speeches and newspaper articles and in two learned and witty books,Inside Right and Britain Can Work .
He claims that Conservatism is ‘not an idea, still less is it a system of ideas’ and that the Conservative tradition is marked by ‘scepticism, a sense of the limitations of human reason, a rejection of abstraction or abstract doctrines, a distrust of systems and a belief in the importance of experience and circumstances’.
He invokes Burke in his opposition to a priori politics and to the application of systematic and abstract schemes and policies.
Conservatives should not be rationalists.
The kind of ideological politics which he castigates as non-Conservative covers monetarism as well as Marxism.
Francis Pym, who was abruptly dismissed as Foreign Secretary in 1983, is another good exemplar of the old consensual Tory style.
He favours an approach which is ‘balanced’, aware of different points of view, and he is critical of Mrs Thatcher's ‘‘absolutist'’ style — absolutely in favour of one thing, absolutely against another'.
Lord Whitelaw, for long her Deputy Prime Minster, also embodied this kind of Conservatism — cautious, moderate, a classic One Nation Tory.
As the product of a privileged background, he surely represented the type of rich Conservative who was inhibited by what Mrs Thatcher once called ‘bourgeois guilt’(see p. 246), and a directionless consensus.
In his memoirs he answers the charge: ‘Some Tories, like me, are criticised for this supposed failing (of  being patrician) which is said to lead to moral softness, in contrast with the toughness of those who have had to fight their way in life.
I am not ashamed to be regarded as sympathetic to the anxieties of those whom life appears to be treating harshly.
Nor do I accept that such feelings are a sign of weakness, provided that they are accompanied by an inner toughness where necessary and justified.’
He told Brian Walden, in The Sunday Times (16 April 1989), 'I don't pretend that I liked her because I didn't…
But I decided to force myself to try to get on with her.
I found her infuriating…she goes on and on and is determined to get her own way.’
All three are the voices of the Tory grandees mourning the demise of their values under the shopkeeper's daughter.
In one significant sense, however, Mrs Thatcher has operated in the tradition of Conservative statesmanship.
Jim Bulpitt argues that an abiding interest of Conservative leaders has been the protection of the autonomy of the central government in matters which ministers regard as ‘high politics’, such as defence, foreign affairs, and national economic policy.
Other issues — of ‘low politics’— could be left to voluntary groups, the market, or local government.
By the 1970s, critics claimed that government had become ‘overloaded’ with responsibilities and popular expectations — such as maintaining full employment or delivering rising living standards.
In economic policy, of course, this autonomy of government had been further compromised by Mr Heath's search for agreement with the trade unions on incomes policy between 1972 and 1974 and by succeeding Labour governments.
The task therefore was to recover greater autonomy at the centre and limit the state's obligations to those that were essential and/or that it could carry out.
As already noted, the attraction of monetarism for the new Conservative leadership by 1979 was that it promised a method of controlling inflation by means, as it were, of an automatic pilot; there would be no need for government to compromise its authority with producer groups.
Strict control of the money supply and a curb on government borrowing would squeeze inflation out of the economy.
The government would not print the money to pay for inflationary wage deals.
Instead it would land trade unions and employers with the consequences of their decisions on  prices and pay.
Abandoning the commitment to full employment would restore autonomy to the centre.
According to Bulpitt, ‘in so far as monetarism was associated…with ‘arms' length’, anti-corporatist government, then…the statecraft (of monetarism) must be viewed as less a radical break with the past and more as an attempt to reconstruct it'.
This view can be related to a number of outstanding features ofthe British political system.
Regardless of whether it is called a ‘top down’ model or an elective dictatorship, the formal concentration of political authority in Britain is remarkable.
A unitary system, the sovereignty of Parliament usually wielded by a one-party majority, Treasury control of national finance, the absence of a written constitution or a Bill of Rights which courts can use to challenge the government, and the idea that extra-parliamentary party organs are merely ‘handmaidens’ of the parliamentary party all bear witness to this centralization.
It has proved convenient for Conservatives and Labour parties and will probably continue to be so as long as one of them holds office.
The central issue in British politics has not been how to curb the elective dictatorship but how to capture it.
For all the Conservative talk of ‘rolling back the state’ there has been a remarkable centralization of decision-making since 1979.
To understand this, it is necessary to distinguish between the areas of defence, law and order, and social policy — where the motive of government policy appears to be the concentration of authority to build a ‘strong state’— and full employment, incomes policy, industrial policy, and public ownership from which the government has withdrawn to create ‘a free economy’.
What is significant is the extension since 1979 of the range of issues in the first category which the Conservative leadership regards as ‘high politics’, that is, which it regards as being within its own sphere of decision-making.
In education, local government, and health the government has intervened and regulated on a large scale.
The Interests Disturbed
Traditionally, Conservatives have been respectful of the claims of voluntary groups, interests, and self-governing professions; these were Edmund Burke's celebrated ‘little platoons’.
By  imposing new policies and challenging traditional methods of decision-making, however, the government has disturbed a number of interests.
In higher education, for example, the idea of the autonomy of the University Grants Committee (replaced in 1988 by the University Funding Council) as a buffer between the universities and the Department of Education and Science has been shattered and the Department has regularly intervened with advice to universities and polytechnics about subject areas which should have greater or less resources.
In secondary and primary education the government has imposed central pay bargaining on the school teacher unions, a contract of service and appraisals of performance on teachers, and a core curriculum.
The measures represent a major coup by central government against local government and the unions.
It massively increased the budget of the Manpower Services Commission, enabling it to play a dominant role in vocational education.
In the National Health Service the local element in policymaking has been weakened as the government has pushed for greater accountability of regional bodies to central government.
The Secretary of State for Health reviews proposals to promote efficiency with each Regional Health Authority chairman and the latter then meets the chairmen of the District Health Authorities to implement the policies, covering specific spending and manpower targets.
In 1989 the government's proposals for the reorganization of the NHS included the creation of an NHS ‘internal market’ in which GPs could shop around for health care, the establishment of a new management board, with most members drawn from industry, permission for hospitals to become self-governing and new contracts for GPs.
The 1983 Water Act reduced local authority representation on Regional Water Authorities and the new boards have fewer members, all of whom are now appointed by the Environment Minister.
As with education these interventions and the reduction in the role of producers and local government spokesmen have usually been made in the name of promoting value for money and increasing choice for consumers.
The search for efficiency and cost-cutting has resulted in greater centralization.
The most remarkable extension of central control has been in  the field of local government.
For long British Conservatives praised local government and voluntary groups as a check on an over-mighty (obviously Socialist) central government; such pluralism could also promote experimentation and diversity in policies.
The party, for example, has always opposed mandatory comprehensive secondary education, insisting that the choice be left to each local authority.
Labour, which wanted mandatory comprehensive schooling, was painted as the party of central control and uniformity.
Conservative defence of local government prevailed until the mid-1970s.
Thereafter, the growing concern over inflation, steep rises in household rates, growth of public spending, and the activities of left-wing Labour authorities led the Conservatives to search for economy.
This culminated in the imposition of far-reaching controls.
The containment of public spending has won out over local choice; reducing the state in this area has meant central government rolling back the local state.
The erosion of consensus politics overtook local government as it did many other areas of public life.
In Manchester, Liverpool, the Greater London Council, and some London boroughs left-wing Labour authorities sought to implement local socialism and use the town hall to challenge Thatcherite Whitehall.
Local defiance of central government policies and rejection of its ultimate authority overturned traditional conventions of central-local relations.
Increases in spending, grants, and support for anti-racist, pro-Sinn Fein, and pro-gay-lesbian policies enraged right-wing Conservatives and the tabloid press.
The label loony left councils stuck and was used to discredit much of local government in general.
There also developed a right-wing Conservative critique of local government.
So often, it was claimed, local government was not the voice of the local community — election turnouts were derisory, elections were fought on national rather than local issues, and many voters were council employees (with, therefore, a vested interest in greater spending), council house tenants (with an interest in subsidized rents), or were not ratepayers at all.
Many of the services provided were quasi-monopolistic and poor.
The high spending, high rating left-wing councils drove away business, exacerbated the economic decline of inner cities, and frustrated the enterprise policies of the government.
Increasingly the Thatcher governments became the protector of the ratepayer rather than the defender of local democracy.
According to one commentator Thatcherite decentralization embraced a new ‘ratepayer democracy’:
Local government itself was seen as being as much in need or a rolling back of its frontiers as was central government, in order that economic individualism might have greater room for action.
Ratepayer democracy…implied less local government, with fewer services to provide since some of them could be handed over to the private sector, to the supposed benefit of consumers and ratepayers alike.
The attempt to ‘discipline’ certain offending local authorities involved the government in many political and legal battles, the passage of several Acts of Parliament, and, ultimately, the creation of a radically reshaped system of local government.
In the 1980 Local Government Planning and Land Act the government took powers to decide the spending totals of each local authority.
When this failed to contain local spending sufficiently, volume targets were introduced together with penalties in the form of loss of central government grant if local authorities exceeded their targets.
In response defiant authorities, invariably Labour controlled, raised the extra money from household and business rates.
Having tried and failed to control spending the government then decided to control local revenue.
The 1982 Local Government Finance Act abolished the right of authorities to set a supplementary rate and the 1984 Rates Act empowered the government to limit the spending and rates of centrally defined overspending authorities.
Finally, in some frustration, in 1988 the rating system was abolished for England and Wales and a community charge introduced, to take effect in 1990 — 1 (introduced a year earlier in Scotland).
Whereas only about a third of local residents paid full rates, most adults will pay the charge.
By restoring the link between voting and taxation, the government hopes that voters will punish ‘wasteful’ or ‘high-spending’councils.
In 1985 legislation was also passed to abolish the GLC and the metropolitan counties (all of which were Labour controlled).
By 1987 Britain was the only European state without a directly elected capital city authority.
Some commentators on the left take a more explicitly political  view of the central-local government trends since 1979 and suggest that they are part of a deliberate larger attempted restructuring of relations between state and society.
The abolition of rates fulfils an ambition of Mrs Thatcher's dating back to 1974.
But the interventions, each one usually more radical than the last, were more a sign of growing frustration at the centre.
Critics on the left claim that the police and education services have become part of the strategy of state control and regulation.
This has been combined with such measures as the privatization of local housing and other services, central control over local spending and revenue, and forcing local authority direct labour organizations into the market place.
Urban development corporations (UDCS), were established, dominated by private business, to promote the regeneration of inner cities and bypass local authorities.
In education and housing the government has limited the role of local government.
The centralization from above, and decentralization to markets and consumers below, has weakened local government.
The effects of large-scale unemployment and changes in the laws affecting trade unions have sapped militancy on the shop floor.
The National Graphical Association incurred four contempt fines totalling £675,000 and eventual sequestration of its funds before it called off its illegal picketing (under the 1980 Act) against Mr Eddie Shah's publishing company in 1983.
The National Union of Mineworkers also had to pay heavy fines and suffer sequestration.
In 1986 Sogat 82 was fined and had its entire assets sequestrated because of its illegal disruption of the distribution of Rupert Murdoch's News International newspapers.
Mrs Thatcher's governments were determined to cut the unions down in size and, for all the incremental nature of the legislation, prepared the ground in advance.
Class analysis alone is inadequate for an understanding of the policies of Thatcherism, for it has also disturbed a number of middle-class interests.
The ending of the monopoly of solicitors over house sales conveyancing and of opticians over the sale of spectacles has already been noted.
A Conservative attack on such solid middle-class professions is unprecedented.
The pace has increased in the government's third term of office.
Tenure for university staff has been abolished.
In 1989 it was  planned that doctors would have to work to new contracts, under which their pay would be more clearly related to the number of patients.
There are also government proposals for the reorganization of the legal profession.
Barristers will no longer have the exclusive right of audience before higher courts; any lawyer possessing an ‘advocacy certificate’ will be able to appear.
In 1989 the proposals were being bitterly resisted by doctors and lawyers.
Equally notable has been the worsening relationship with leaders of the Church of England — for so long known as the Tory party at prayer.
Some bishops, notably Jenkins of Durham, Sheppard of Liverpool, and Hapgood of York, have spoken out about deprivation in the inner cities, the miners' strike, and the need for government to show a greater compassion for, and understanding of, the poor.
According to the Bishop of Durham, ‘This Government also seems to be indifferent to poverty and powerlessness.
The financial measures consistently improved the lot of the already better off while worsening that of the badly off…such a Government cannot promote community.’
According to the Archbishop of Canterbury, ‘There seems to be a movement from consensus to confrontation and also a growing scale of confrontation.’
The archbishop also called, in a newspaper interview in November 1984, for ‘leadership in our national life which will unite and not divide the nation’.
He added: ‘That's not an attack on the government.’
Later, in December 1985, the Archbishop of Canterbury's committee on the inner cities presented its report,Life in the City .
This contained many proposals for the regeneration of these areas, including greater central government expenditure, which ran counter to the government's ideas.
The report was immediately dismissed as ‘Marxist’ by a government spokesman and criticized with varying degrees of vigour by many Conservatives.
These attacks in turn have been met by forceful rebuttals from Conservative back-benchers and from the Prime Minister herself.
The Tory critics object that the Church is peddling left-wing politics as a religious message, while failing to assert moral values.
Mrs Thatcher in 1988 addressed the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland and quoted St Paul: ‘If a man shall not work — he shall not eat.’
Relations between the government and senior civil service also have been uneasy.
Some might regard the frequent leaks of sensitive government documents as a consequence of this tension.
Mrs Thatcher also appears to have intervened more directly than previous Prime Ministers in the promotion of Permanent Secretaries, preferring less senior and ‘obvious’ candidates on the grounds that they were impatient with the status quo and not ‘defeatist’.
Some have accused Mrs Thatcher of applying tests of political loyalty in making appointments.
In fact she has favoured ‘doers’.
Mrs Thatcher has been fortunate in that retirements of several senior personnel in the early 1980s gave her the opportunity to influence promotions; there were thirteen appointments as Permanent Secretary in 1982 alone and she has had a hand in appointing the great majority of Permanent and Assistant Permanent Secretaries since 1979.
The traditional ‘trade-off’ for the secure tenure of senior British civil servants has been that they are anonymous and politically impartial.
To some degree the impartiality has depended on there being a large measure of policy agreement and continuity between the parties in government.
The doubts of some pre-war Labour leaders that the civil service would actually co-operate with a radical Labour government were largely laid to rest by the experience of the Attlee government.
But radicals in both parties who favoured radical changes, either to the left or to the right, have frequently condemned the civil service as the embodiment of an above-party consensus favouring continuity of policy.
Sir John Hoskyns, a former head of Mrs Thatcher's Policy Unit, has called for a radical reform of the government system if the effort to transform the economy is to succeed.
He urged the appointment of more outsiders to top positions in the civil service and of officials and ministers who were committed to radical change.
A rejection of this approach was voiced by Lord Bancroft, head of the civil service until 1981.
In a lecture in 1983 he argued that a civil servant who could answer ‘yes’ to the question ‘Is he one of us?’should retire and become a party politician.
Whether it was the abandonment in 1981 of established procedures for settling the pay and conditions of civil servants, abolition of the Civil Service Department in the  same year, deterioration of levels of pay relative to the private sector, efficiency scrutinies in departments in search of savings, attempts to limit index-linked pensions, or the reduction in numbers of staff, there was no doubting Mrs Thatcher's hostility to much of the ethos of the civil service.
In 1989 the government was preparing to implement The Next Steps under which many departments carrying out executive functions would be converted into independent agencies.
Her government, by its clear breach with many previous policies and early derision of the higher civil service, has placed a double strain on the traditional relationship.
She has been willing to look outside the civil service for advice on policy — to various ‘think tanks’ and individuals who have often reinforced her scepticism about traditional departmental policy views.
The new emphasis is on management skills and giving value for money.
The decision in January 1985 of the Oxford University Congregation to vote by a margin of more than 2 to 1 against awarding its most famous daughter an honorary degree is another mark of the emotions she raises among other established élites.
Opponents resented the cuts in university funding and complained that the government was hostile to higher education, particularly to studies of the humanities, which fostered a critical spirit of enquiry.
The ‘utilitarian’ policy of shifting the balance in higher education to vocational, business, and technological subjects concerned many university leaders; it was memorably dismissed by Enoch Powell as ‘barbarism’.
Mrs Thatcher, and the attitudes that she presents, were a challenge to many established ways in the universities.
Hugo Young (‘Why the Dons Showed They've Learnt the New Politics’,Guardian , 4 February 1985) appreciated this side of Mrs Thatcher and its relevance to the question of the honorary degree.
He commented:
Far from being a blot on her tenth anniversary as Conservative leader, the withholding of the doctorate perfectly crystallised the cultural change that she has wrought…
She has been as ready as the Labour party to apply political criteria when making appointments to bodies like the health authorities and nationalised industries.
She praises the risk takers, wealth creators, people who are frequently from modest backgrounds and who may not even have been at a university.
Witness the speech at Newcastle on 23 March 1985, when she attacked her clerical and academic critics:
And nowhere is this attitude [opposition to wealth creation]more marked than in the cloister and common room.
What these critics apparently can't stomach is that wealth creators have a tendency to acquire wealth in the process of creating it for others.
She continued:
They didn't speak with Oxford accents.
They hadn't got what people call the ‘right connections’, they had just one thing in common.
They were men of action.
Her desire to break with traditional policies has also involved a rupture with many traditional Tory interests and leaders.
Before their deaths both Lord Butler and Lord Stockton, formerly Harold Macmillan, frequently made clear their distaste for the government's policies.
These eminent figures from the age of consensus felt that Mrs Thatcher was betraying their ‘One Nation’ legacy.
Although leader of the Conservative party she is pre-eminently an anti-establishment figure.
It is interesting that her famous question ‘Is he one of us?’ has usually been asked about fellow-Conservatives.
One mark of a radical government is its politicization of hitherto relatively non-political areas.
The list is long: the government's decision in August 1985 to lean on the BBC Board of Governors not to show a Real Lives programme featuring interviews with terrorists in Northern Ireland; its prohibition of broadcasts with terrorist groups in Northern Ireland; its prosecution of newspapers which revealed the contents of the Spycatcher book of memoirs by a retired MI5 agent, Peter Wright; its robust dismissal of the dissenting views of senior figures in the Church of England, senior civil servants, and university spokesmen; its appointments to various quangos and nationalized industries; and its controls on local government.
All may have emulated some actions of previous British governments.
But the broad package of interventions and centralization over such a long period of time surely outstrips  that carried out by any previous government.
In many ways it is a classic case of adversary politics.
In so far as the actions since 1979 have politicized areas hitherto relatively immune to such considerations they provide pretexts for a future Labour government to intervene in these spheres.
Another casualty of Thatcherism has been what Whitehall calls The Great and the Good', those who often staffed the Royal Commissions and committees of inquiry.
The G and G were an embodiment of the old consensus.
They were largely drawn from academe, retired mandarins, and BBC governors; they were often political centrists and cross-benchers who had a belief in disinterested enquiry and collecting and weighing evidence.
They were schooled in ‘squaring interests’ and coming up with acceptable compromises.
Harold Wilson appointed so many commissions that he brought the system into discredit.
There is some merit in Mrs Thatcher's claim that too often Royal Commissions were appointed largely to avoid decisions or to postpone necessary tough action: she has not appointed one Royal Commission in her ten years in office.
After all, she knows what is to be done.
Her preferred method has been to make policies with small working parties, drawn from sympathetic ministers and members of her Policy Unit and ‘think tanks’, as with the introduction of the poll tax, the health service review, and some of the education reforms.
Peter Hennessy has called the old G and G ‘the lost tribe of British public life’.
How does one reconcile this record with the Burkeian respect for structures and institutions which mediate relations between the citizen and the state?
In the 1980s Conservatives have been more likely to evaluate the mediating institutions according to whether or not they are in the public sector.
If they are — including public-sector trade unions, local government, local authority schools and housing, and various quangoes — then they attract little sympathy and people have to be liberated from them.
Hence the encouragement for voluntary schools, City Technology Colleges, and for schools and hospitals to ‘opt out’; inducements for universities to be less dependent on state finance; promotion of council house sales and housing action trusts.
It is also interesting to note how relations have worsened with a number of élite institutions which have been identified  with paternalist and consensual values — universities, the Church of England, the senior civil service, the BBC and One Nation Conservatism.
These were committed to a balanced or cross-bench political outlook and have been uneasy with the Prime Minister's zeal, certainty, and forcefulness.
It is now commonplace to say that the Thatcher governments have had to be highly interventionist in order to extend the market, increase the rights of consumers, and reduce producer power.
It has reduced the claims that groups are able to make on the state.
Reliance on monetarism rather than incomes policy meant that the government no longer had to compromise its authority in making social contracts and wages policies with producer groups, particularly the unions.
The public sector of the economy has been rolled back and strikes in the public sector have been resisted.
Another tactic has been to give greater scope to consumers vis-à-vis public sector groups.
Schools and housing associations can opt out of local authority control.
A greater voice has been given to parents, governors, and head teachers in state schools and to GPs and patients in the health service.
Trade union members have been given more say via pre-strike ballots, regular elections of their officials, and votes on the unions' political levy.
Many nationalized industries, which long posed problems for governments, not least in pay negotiations, were floated to the private sector.
The losers have been local authorities, trade unions, health authorities, and nationalized industries.
The net effect of these measures has been to give greater autonomy to the central government.
Public Opinion
What effect has the government had on the public mood?
One has to recall that a major objective of Mrs Thatcher's government has been to change public opinion, not least about the role of government itself.
Mrs Thatcher has said that if economics is the means, then changing hearts and minds is the goal.
One might think that such an ambition — no less than the forging of a cultural revolution — is most unconservative.
Yet this is a natural task for Margaret Thatcher; she relishes proclaiming Thatcherite values and telling people which policies are morally right and which are morally wrong.
Indeed the long-term  success of free-market policies depends on a change in public mood.
In Zurich in 1977, Mrs Thatcher said:
In our philosophy the purpose of the life of the individual is not to be the servant of the state and its objectives but to make the best of his talents and qualities.
The sense of being self reliant, of playing a role within the family, or owning one's own property, of paying one's way, are all part or the spiritual ballast which maintains responsible citizenship…
The speeches of ministers have reiterated the themes that it is not the job of government to solve as many problems as previously, that ministers should be more attentive to the interests of taxpayers when spending public money, that ‘real’ jobs will be created and sustained not by government subsidy but by workers making goods which people will buy, that the criterion of ‘value for money’be applied to public-sector activities, and that the private sector should be encouraged because it creates the wealth which the public sector requires.
Conservative spokesmen have said that people should reduce their expectations of what government can do and that economic improvements would depend largely on the action of people themselves.
In a word, the dependency culture should be replaced by an enterprise one.
In shifting responsibility from government to the people: ‘The Thatcher government has adopted a novel approach.
It has tried to change the question’.
By the end of the year, in an interview with the Financial Times , Mrs Thatcher suggested that a third successive Tory election win would fulfil her aim of ‘Killing off Socialism’.
Surveys suggest that the government has had some success.
A MORI poll (April 1989) for a BBC programme,Thatcher's Children , found that among young voters (15 — 28) aspirations were distinctly bourgeois.
Their ambitions were to own their own homes and have private pensions.
A remarkable 40 per cent wanted to run their own business and a quarter expected to do so.
In 1979 and in 1983 there was clear electoral support for several Conservative policies, even among many Labour voters.
On such issues as public ownership, legal curbs on the trade unions, defence, council house sales, and restricting the range of welfare benefits, a majority of Labour voters disagreed with their party's policies.
By 1989 Labour had shifted its  policies on many of these issues.
In this sense we may talk of there being a shift to the right, even where this is not reflected in voting for the Conservative party.
There has also been a change in mood about nationalization.
The 1964 British Election Survey found that just over half (51 per cent) were satisfied with the status quo , and supporters of further nationalization outnumbered denationalizers by 28 to 21 per cent .
By 1979, however, the survey found that there had been a major shift in support for privatization and public opinion remained in favour of further privatization in 1983, and probably reflected a positive response to the Thatcher policies.
By 1987, however, most voters, supported the (changed) status quo and were opposed to plans to privatize electricity and water.
Surveys have reported heavy support for the trade union reforms introduced by the Conservative government since 1979 and show that profit-making is still socially acceptable and that people endorse the principle that wage increases must be earned by firms selling their goods at a profit.
In terms of ideology also, the Conservatives are well placed.
In 1983, for example, Gallup found that of voters who placed themselves on the political left and right, 22 per cent placed themselves at various ranges of the left end of the scale (from ‘far’ to ‘slightly’left), 51 per cent placed themselves on the right, and 13 per cent regarded themselves as middle of the road.
In 1987, the respective figures had changed to 28 per cent, 45 per cent , and 9 per cent .
Although there had been a 6 per cent swing from ‘right’ to ‘left’between the two elections the former were still in a clear majority.
Many Tory party cheer-leaders boast that there has been a cultural revolution.
Conservative electoral landslides, extension of home ownership, reductions in trade union membership and power, and the rise of white-collar employment, entrepreneurship, and self-employment all seem to be powerful indicators of this change.
On the other side sceptics point out that the Conservative share of the vote in the 1983 and 1987 elections is below that in the 1960s and they point to the several opinion surveys which show that popular support for collective values remains high.
In spite of undoubted social and economic changes there has been no revolution in values.
As a careful analysis of the data   states, ‘Quite simply there has been no Thatcherite transformation of attitudes or behaviour among the British public.
If anything the British have edged further away from Thatcher's position as the decade has progressed’.
Notwithstanding the re-election of Mrs Thatcher in 1983 and 1987, a clear majority of voters have favoured increased taxes to pay for greater expenditure on services such as health, education, and welfare, over tax cutting and programme cutting (Table 10.1).
Since 1979 the balance has moved steadily against tax cutting in favour of more spending on education and the NHS.
In May 1979 spenders and tax-cutters were equal (34 per cent); by May 1987 the spenders outnumbered the cutters by more than 5 to 1 (61 to 12 per cent ).
The results have not been dissimilar when Gallup has asked whether voters preferred a cut in local rates if this meant a reduction in local services  or an extension of the services even if this involved an increase in rates.
In 1977, before Mrs Thatcher came to power, Gallup found that 33 per cent of voters thought that if people were poor this was probably due to their own lack of effort.
By March 1985 the figure had fallen to 21 per cent.
The proportion blaming poverty on ‘circumstances’ rather than fecklessness rose from 30 to 49 per cent between the two dates.
The same survey found that three-quarters of the electorate felt that money and welfare should be more evenly distributed in Britain.
Over time the proportion preferring ‘caring’ to ‘tough’policies has increased by one-third and the ‘carers’are now in a substantial majority.
The 1983 British Election Survey also found a change over recent years in favour of‘liberal’ social policies.
Although support for some of the liberal values is confined to a minority, it is a growing one.
For example, between 1966 and 1983 support for abolition of the death penalty increased from 18 to 37 per cent (support for its retention or restoration fell from 82 to 63 per cent ).
A similar shift occurred on attitudes to policies which promote equal opportunities for women and ethnic minorities and the provision of abortion on the National Health Service.
In all three cases there has been a marked increase in the proportion who favour the more liberal status quo.
Public opinion has shifted to the right over the past decade on one component of collectivism — nationalization — and in a more liberal direction on another, state provision of welfare and social policies (for similar trends elsewhere, see below).
If anything, the surveys suggest that the public mood was at its most Thatcherite and right-wing in the second half of the 1970s.
This divorce between the two elements is particularly marked among the salariat — the well-educated members ofthe professions and management — which has grown most in the past twenty years.
The shift to a more ‘liberal’ view on social issues and disarmament is probably due to the growth of this group and the expansion of higher education.
A decade has not made the concept of Thatcherism attractive to the British people.
According to Gallup (April 1989) the term Thatcherism has negative connotations for most people.
MORI (April 1989) found widespread support for the idea of a    society which placed collective over individual values (Table 10.2).
Surveys of attitudes to so-called Thatcherite ideas (for example, a government sticking to its principles, however unpopular; not consulting with the major economic interests; and the government's inability to do much about unemployment) found that, on average, Thatcherite supporters (40 per cent ) were outnumbered by opponents (47 per cent ).
Table 10.3 shows a further swing away from Thatcherite ideas towards caring and consensus government between 1983 and 1987.
It is as if the public recognizes that society has changed over the decade but does not much like what sees.
The burden of the survey findings seems clear and is rather disheartening for the Thatcher project.
But some qualifications are in order.
What are many of these questions measuring and how significant is the data, say as a guide to behaviour or as an influence on voting?
Huge majorities apparently prefer reducing unemployment to fighting inflation.
Yet what do we then make of a Gallup finding (21 — 6 May 1987) that, when asked to choose between inflation and unemployment as the greater threat to them and their families, 49 per cent chose inflation and only 43 per cent unemployment?
Similarly, for all the huge majorities claiming to prefer more government spending, even if this involves paying more taxes, what does one make of the finding that voters, when asked which mattered more to themselves and their families, ‘more public spending or tax cuts?’, a majority preferred the tax cuts (Marplan, March 1987).
Gallup has found widespread dissatisfaction with the quality of society.
People are seen as being more selfish, aggressive, and less tolerant and happy than was the case a decade ago.
But, surprisingly, when individuals were asked whether they felt this about themselves only tiny minorities admitted to such a feeling.
Survey questions pitched at a general level may elicit what respondents regard as socially approved values.
Similarly worded questions over time have to take account of changes in the topics under question.
Surveys since 1979 show that trade unions have become less feared and that there is less support for further privatization.
On both topics, however, the status quo has changed radically compared to 1979.
Unions have lost powers and the numbers of disputes has declined; similarly the public sector has been reduced in size.
The data might be read as a backhanded success for the Thatcher government.
As the concerns of 1979 — high taxation, trade union power, nationalization, and inflation — have become less salient, so there is less support for radical policies to deal with them.
As economic satisfactions have increased, so the scope for dissatisfaction on social issues may also have increased.
A New Middle Ground
There have been many claims that Mrs Thatcher has shifted the agenda of British politics.
On the political left a journal like  Marxism Today claims that there has been an underlying and probably permanent shift to anti-socialist values.
Again, Andrew Gamble is worth quoting:
Whatever the fate of the Thatcher government, the New Right will survive it.
In its impact on British politics and economic policy it has already been remarkably successful.
The traditional post-war argument between different kinds of interventionism has been replaced by a much broader debate.
The 1983 and 1987 Gallup election surveys showed that voters across all parties agreed on many goals of government.
This is significant, given that many commentators in 1983 thought that the policies of the Conservative and Labour parties were further apart than at any time over the previous thirty years.
Richard Rose's review of the Gallup survey on twenty political issues found that majorities of voters for all three parties agree with each other on more than two-thirds of all issues, that most Alliance voters agree with the national majority on nineteen of twenty issues, and that most Conservative and Labour voters with the majority on seventeen of twenty issues.
Moreover this level of inter-party agreement has persisted since 1970.
Even in 1987 voters did not expect the return of a Labour or Conservative government to make a significant difference.
According to Gallup, voters expected that, on twelve issues, a change of government would produce different outcomes only on those affecting trade union powers and nationalization.
There is also wide support for the mixed economy — a private enterprise economy, subject to government controls — as well as for state provision of welfare services.
The roles of government and state are viewed neither in the negative terms of Mrs Thatcher nor in the positive terms of Labour's left wing.
For all the talk about a new consensus and a new realism, however, a number of issues remain open.
How is the free-market economy to be reconciled with continued large-scale tax concessions for house mortgages and private pensions?
How durable, for example, will be the changes in industry, elimination of many restrictive work practices, productivity pains, decline of labour militancy, and reassertion of managerial authority?
In 1989 the British economy was again at the wrong  end of league tables for having relatively high levels of inflation, interest rates, and a trade gap.
Some critics suggested that many of the old problems of the British economy had returned.
Yet if talk of permanent or irreversible changes may be too bold, the Thatcher government has created a new agenda, one which a successor government will find difficult to reverse.
It is difficult to imagine that there will be a return to the status quo ante regarding the closed shop, trade union immunities and pre-strike ballots, the right of council house tenants to buy their own homes (over a million former council tenants have made such purchases), and the position of former nationalized industries.
Millions of voters have acquired a stake in the wider ownership of shares and homes and a voice in union affairs.
Similarly, sustained government rhetoric about getting value for money from programmes and protecting the interest of taxpayers will probably leave a mark.
Since 1979 there has been a loss of over 1.5 million manufacturing jobs; by 1987 manufacturing accounted for only 22 per cent of the British workforce, ‘a figure more typical of countries with large fishing or agricultural sectors’.
That decline, when coupled with the abolition of Labour party strongholds in local government in London and the metropolitan counties, reduced employment in the nationalized industries and public sector (down from 29.4 per cent of the workforce in 1979 to 26.9 per cent in 1985) and a lower number of trade unionists and council tenants, means that a future Labour government will start from a much weaker position in terms of promoting its traditional objectives of public ownership, trade union bargaining rights, and collectivism.
There is also some evidence that Mrs Thatcher has attracted a particular electoral constituency.
That section of the middle class which includes shopkeepers, foremen, and the small and self-employed businessmen —the petit bourgeois — has turned strongly to the party since she became leader.
By 1974 many of these people had become disillusioned with the Heath government.
Yet a survey study of the 1983 election found that this section of the electorate was the most right-wing of all on issue questions about privatization, incentives versus equality, trade union rights, and comprehensive schools, and that over 70 per cent of them voted Conservative in the election.
The  Conservative electorate in the 1980s contains two significant groups.
With 36 per cent of the manual workers' vote in 1987 the party's share of the working-class vote was the highest for any post-war election.
It was higher still in what Crewe calls the ‘new working class’— workers living in the south, owning their own homes, employed in the private sector and not in trade unions.
The second group is concentrated among a particular section of the middle class — those in the private rather than the public sector, and among those who are not graduates.
Some of the new thinking may already be common ground.
The fine print of the speeches of Labour leaders and party policy documents has changed during the 1980s.
The party now accepts Britain's membership of the European Community and in the 1989 Euro-elections claimed to be the party of ‘good Europeans’.
It has turned away from old style nationalization and is more willing to admit the need for enterprise and a role for markets.
The party leadership has also accepted the case for state aid for regular elections of trade union officials by members, pre-strike ballots, and the sale of council houses to tenants.
The 1989 policy review has made it clear that complete renationalization of privatized industries will not be a high priority for a future Labour government, that direct taxation will not be increased for those on average and slightly above average incomes, and that it is ‘concerned’ about law and order.
It has also abandoned unilateralism and refuses to promise that a Labour government will rid Britain of nuclear weapons in the lifetime of the government.
Compared to 1983, let alone 1979, Labour appears to be more aware of a changed electorate, one which is not largely poor, unemployed, in trade unions, working in heavy manufacturing, or living in council houses.
A test of a shift in the central ground of politics is the extent to which the opposite party accepts, however reluctantly and implicitly, the new ideas.
On this test, Thatcherism has achieved a partial success.
A by-product of Labour leaders' responsiveness to the new thinking may be that the party relieves itself of some commitments which have been electoral liabilities in the past.
So far the leadership's reaction to the 1983 and 1987 defeats has differed from that to such earlier decisive election defeats in 1931, 1951, 1970, and 1979.
Those defeats unleashed bitter internal conflicts  and, except for 1951, a shift to the left on policy.
The parliamentary leadership was usually assailed by the left for having failed to carry out socialist policies and having compromised with capitalism when in government.
Since 1983 the leadership, having read the election defeats as a repudiation of left-wing policies, has been more concerned to reassure the electorate and attract the millions of ‘missing’ Labour voters.
Militant Tendency in Liverpool and elsewhere, Mr Scargill of the NUM and Tony Benn have been lashed by the leadership as the unacceptable face of Labour and all have been marginalized in the party.
Among more radical monetarists and free marketeers there remains disappointment that the government had not done more to shift the middle ground.
Such critics want bolder measures to cut taxation and state spending.
In education radicals welcome the introduction of the assisted places scheme, CTCs, proposals for opting out, and increase in places on school governing boards for parents, but seek further reforms to erode the dominance of the state and extend parental choice.
A scheme of school vouchers was considered and abandoned although a scheme for loans in higher education is to be introduced.
No action has been taken to trim tax relief for pension contributions or house mortgages (although the Treasury has ended the entitlement to tax relief for two mortgages on one property and has maintained a limit of £30,000 on mortgages entitled to tax relief).
In December 1985 the long-awaited Fowler review of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) produced only a reduction in the pension benefits rather than an abolition of the scheme (it is worth noting, however, that the encouragement to leave SERPS for private schemes has had some success; by mid-1989 over one million people had left).
On the NHS, for all the managerial changes and efficiency campaigns, Mrs Thatcher has made clear that it will remain a largely state-financed service.
Finally, the much-heralded Medium Term Financial Strategy (see p. 228) and monetarism were cast aside.
In October 1984 Nigel Lawson's Mansion House speech formally abandoned a specific range for the M3 measure of the money supply.
The Chancellor made clear that henceforth he would rely more on the narrower definition of money, Mo, and  maintain a high exchange rate (and high interest rates) to dampen inflation.
In fact money supply grew rapidly and by 1989 inflation was over 8 per cent.
Some right-wing critics of the Conservative government have argued that the partial success in changing attitudes was reflected in the failure of government to be more radical in cutting the levels of taxation and public spending and the size of the public sector.
Here is a critique of the Thatcher record from a different perspective than that of the left or of the centre.
An editorial in The Times , a firm supporter of Thatcherite policies, could ask on 3 May 1985: ‘If these obstructions to a society, based on enterprise and shorn of its collectivist illusions, cannot be dismantled in six years, what evidence is there that twelve years will be any better?’
The paper claimed that the government had failed to make more progress in changing attitudes because so many beneficiaries of the tax state were opinionformers and hostile to the government's goals and to free enterprise.
The beneficiaries included teachers in higher education, bureaucrats, trade union leaders, welfare organizers, and leaders of public corporations.
Critics pointed to the government's fear of losing votes among middle-class interests and to the power of particular lobbies.
According to a disappointed editorial in The Economist (15 June 1985) history would judge the Thatcher government as only an averagely wet Tory administration'.
The Times again complained about the government's loss of radical purpose.
In an editorial on 2 November 1985, headlined ‘Unfinished Business’, it asked ‘whether the structures and institutions of British life have been so shaken by six years of Mrs Thatcher that they can no longer fall back into their old ways — or whether more shaking is needed?’
It answered: ‘More shaking is still needed’.
This view was shared by most of the lobbies and opinion-forming groups discussed in Chapters 3 and 4.
Their view was that the government lacked a clear strategy in its second term.
By May 1989, however, many of these critics had come round to praise the continued radicalism of the Thatcher government, in education, tax cuts, and further measures of privatization.
An International Shift
Many of the trends in British politics in the 1980s have had counterparts in other western states.
From the mid-1970s the slow-down in economic growth and rising inflation sapped the confidence of policy-makers in demand management.
Strict control of the money supply seemed to be linked to low rates of inflation in Switzerland and West Germany.
As many western states simultaneously suffered sharp increases in levels of unemployment and prices, concern grew over the growing costs of government welfare programmes, many of which were linked by statute to changes in price levels.
The overall cost of welfare programmes in Western Europe was rising by an average of 7 per cent per annum in the 1970s, while the economy was growing by an average of 3.5 per cent.
Double-digit inflation and the growth in the costs of public policy at a rate faster than that of the economy posed obvious problems.
The success in California of Proposition 13 in 1978 was paralleled by similar tax backlash movements in Denmark and the swing to the political right in Britain, Sweden, and Norway.
Not surprisingly the above trends have raised greater electoral and ideological difficulties for the political parties of the left.
Parties associated with policies of increasing taxation and growing public expenditure appeared to be less popular at the ballot box.
Many of the political values and supporters (particularly public-sector workers and welfare lobbies) of left-wing parties have favoured public spending and looked to governments as problem-solvers.
However policy-makers' overriding concern with inflation and the calculations about likely reactions of financial markets to inflation-risking economic policies (notably in Britain in 1976, France in 1982 — 3, and Australia in 1984) have forced advocates of state spending on to the defensive.
Policies of economic redistribution to the less well off met with resistance from skilled workers at a time of low economic growth.
A problem for many parties of the left in the era of slow growth was to reconcile high public spending and greater social and economic equality with the reluctance of many workers to pay heavier taxes.
In Britain, West Germany, and Scandinavia in the 1970s there was a steady reduction in working-class support for parties of the left.
Politically there has been a shift to, or confirmation of, right-dominated governments for much of the 1980s in West Germany, Britain, USA, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Canada, and Japan.
In the United States the long dominant Democratic New Deal electoral coalition, which Franklin Roosevelt created out of the white south and the industrial working-class, has been in retreat.
The Democratic party has won the presidency only once out of the last six elections since 1964.
The nomination of weak candidates has been a factor.
But the party has also lost out because of the salience of race (which encouraged the white south to defect to the Republicans), embourgeoisement of the working class, and the Social Issue (concern about the rise of the anti-Vietnam war protest movement in the 1970s and the assertiveness and challenges to traditional values by various minority groups).
President Reagan, like Margaret Thatcher, was a product of the concern in the 1970s over the economy, big spending programmes, social indiscipline, and, for the USA, military decline.
It was Reagan, but it could have been Thatcher, who said in 1981, ‘Government is not the solution to our problems.
Government is the problem.’
The litany of tax reductions, spending cuts, high defence spending, and, until the advent of Mr Gorbachev, anti-Soviet rhetoric, dominated Reagan's (and Thatcher's) administration.
In Denmark the normal pattern of Social Democratic government was disturbed by the emergence in 1982 of a four-party centre-right coalition, headed by a Conservative Prime Minister — the first since 1905.
In Norway the multi-party system was further fragmented by the 1972 referendum on Norway's membership of the European Community.
Since 1973 there has been a steady increase in electoral support for the Conservative party which dominated centre-right coalition governments in the early 1980s.
In Sweden the Social Democrats were ousted from power in 1976 after forty-five years in office by an alliance of ‘bourgeois’ parties, although they returned to office in 1982.
Yet the ideas of deregulation, limits to taxation, and budget-cutting have been accepted even by governments of the left in France, Spain, Australia, and New Zealand.
Perhaps the most dramatic reactions against central state planning and a willingness to experiment with market forces have been seen  in China, the USSR, Poland, and Hungary.
By the end of the 1980s central economic planning was in retreat, even in its heartland.
It is possible to discern some international trends in economic policy.
One has been a pursuit of ‘prudent’ finance and curbing inflation.
The new package includes cutting income taxes, particularly the high marginal rates, containing public spending, ‘privatizing’ state assets (although Britain has gone further than any other state in this) and reducing loss-making activities among state enterprises.
In Austria there have been sales by the holding company for state companies, Obesterreichissche Industrien, and in Sweden also.
The socialist government in Spain has partly privatized state industries, including Iberia Airlines.
In France there has been partial privatization of banking, industrial, and insurance groups.
Another plank has been the encouragement of the private sector by deregulation (particularly in Britain and the United States), especially in transport, tax deductions for investment, and packages of incentives for small business.
As in Britain this qualified support for the free market has been accompanied by measures for a stronger stance in defence and law and order (which have increased their shares in public spending in most Western European states).
A final trend has been the attempt to contain the growth in welfare and social security spending.
Social security accounts for about a third of total public spending in most western states.
It has been an obvious target for economy-minded governments.
For example, Norway imposed a freeze on social security benefits and West Germany made all student grants repayable to the government, increased contributions to pension and sickness benefit, and delayed rises in pensions.
Denmark has made cuts in employment and sickness benefits and France required hospital patients to contribute towards non-medical services and uprated welfare benefits in line with current inflation rather than the higher level of the previous year.
Governments everywhere have tried to educate voters about the dilemma of the tax burden and state spending.
In spite of such cuts total social security spending continued to increase as a proportion of GDP — by an average of 5 per cent in real terms — in OECD states between 1975 and 1985.
For all  the talk of a tax backlash and attempts to cut state spending on welfare the irony is that both are now higher as shares of GDP in all OECD states compared with 1975 or 1980.
Some of the rise has been prompted by the increased unemployment and rising pension and health demands of the growing army of the over-65s.
Perhaps the main achievement of the political right has been to slow down the rate of growth in public spending and to identify some of it as ‘wasteful’.
Tax cutting may also have passed its peak.
In Norway and Denmark electoral support for anti-tax parties has declined, while opinion surveys in the United States and Britain show that tax-cutting has become a minority cause, compared to support for spending on social programmes.
Since 1978 most tax-cutting referendums in the United States have been defeated.
There has been a general shift to less visible forms of taxation such as payroll (or national insurance) and indirect taxes.
As in the case of Britain one has to tread carefully in arguing that public opinion has moved to the right in other states in the past decade.
In spite of the overwhelming popularity of Ronald Reagan, surveys show that the American public consistently refused to support many of his programmes.
On social and moral issues, such as school prayers, the Equal Rights Amendment (for women), and abortion, the ‘hard’ positions of Reagan and the Moral Majority were in a minority.
The majority of voters also favoured cuts in the defence budget and level or increased Spending on domestic education and health programmes.
Americans liked Reagan's personality and his handling of the economy and foreign policy, but they did not endorse Reaganism.
In Scandinavia the shift to the right has been more complex.
In Norway and Denmark there continue to be high levels of popular support for state-provided welfare but there has been a marked and sustained shift against state control and intervention in the economy.
In Sweden, however, approval for the welfare and economic interventionist aspects of collectivism has remained high.
The broad picture is not dissimilar from the British reaction to Thatcherism.
In spite of the shift to the political right there remains widespread support for state-funded programmes in education and health and for those which are targeted at the poor and the old.
In other words, there is extensive support in Britain and many other  western states for government welfare and economic programmes which help the ‘deserving’ poor, and are also thought to be credible and realistic.
Opinion surveys show attitudes that run across the old left — right divide.
There is approval ofthe free market for wealth creation and many of the economic policies this entails.
But there is also widespread support for state or collective provision of welfare even over tax cuts.
The right-wing reaction has been half successful, repudiating Keynes but not Beveridge.
It is difficult to assess whether these trends will produce a lasting shift in the middle ground.
Will they develop incrementally along existing lines or will there be a change cyclically to something resembling the old consensus?
At Present it appears that advocates of big spending programmes, expanding the public sector, inflation-risking policies, and increasing state control over the economy are in a minority.
The vocabulary of many young leaders of left-wing parties in Western Europe — Kinnock, Gonzales, Rocard, Rau — refers to a ‘servant’ or ‘opportunity’state, dismisses throwing money at problems as a solution, and promises to provide incentives for free enterprise.
In debates over the Labour party's policy review in 1989, Mr Kinnock countered complaints from his left wing that he was propping up capitalism with the claim that Labour's task was to make the market work more efficiently and justly.
So much for Clause IV.
The ‘new realism’ of the left is more willing to acknowledge the limits of public spending and the need to encourage entrepreneurship.
a Changing Party System
The 1983 and 1987 general elections were interesting for psephological as well as for political reasons.
Despite presiding over large-scale unemployment the Conservatives were returned to office by huge majorities.
Although it is already fashionable to explain away the scale of the election successes — by such factors as the Falklands, Foot, Benn, and an inept Labour campaign in 1983, and prosperity and the disproportional electoral system in 1987 — the results marked a further stage in the decline of the Labour party.
By the next general election (say 1 991) the Conservatives will have been in  office for sixteen of the twenty-one years since 1970.
After the 1987 election there was speculation that Britain had moved into an era of one-party politics or a predominantly one-party system.
The Conservatives have been a long way ahead of Labour not just in seats (an arbitrary effect of the electoral system) but also in votes.
Between 1950 and 1979 neither Labour nor Conservative ever had as much as 55 per cent ofthe combined two-party vote.
But in the 1983 and 1987 elections the Conservatives averaged nearly 60 per cent and led Labour by 14.8 per cent and 11.5 per cent of the votes respectively in the two elections.
Opposition in Parliament in the 1980s came more effectively from Conservative dissidents and the House of Lords than the Labour party.
Not since the 1930s has the party system been so one-sided in Parliament.
One must always be wary of extrapolating from present trends to the future in electoral matters, as in others.
The 1959 election defeat and the growing embourgeoisement of the working class were thought to spell future electoral ruin for Labour.
The conditional projections made in 1969 by David Butler and Donald Stokes about the differential fertility — death rates between the social classes, combined with the transmission of political loyalties from parents to children — appeared to make Labour a natural majority party.
The first projection was immediately disconfirmed by Labour winning the 1964 and 1966 elections and the second was undone by the 1970 election and has been destroyed by the last three general elections.
A telling statistic in a recent election study by Rose and McAllister is that, whereas in 196480 per cent of those who came from homes in which both parents were Labour voters themselves voted for the party, by 1983 the proportion from such backgrounds which still voted Labour had dropped to 45 Per cent.
The loss of working-class support for Labour is the outstanding feature of post-war electoral sociology in Britain.
The ‘new’ affluent working class was clearly Conservative in 1983, and was so again in 1987.
Ivor Crewe has drawn attention to the political significance of the more important social trends: twice as many manual workers are now in the private sector as in the public sector; there are far more home-owners than council tenants among them, and nearly as many live in the south as in the north and Scotland combined.
Moreover, these trends are likely to increase (aided by the Conservative government) as a result of privatization, council house sales, and the growth of home-ownership and the southward drift of population.
The ‘traditional working class’ is Britain's newest minority and it is far too small by itself to elect a Labour government.
Few general elections or administrations map out a new agenda.
Yet such a change can happen.
A different set of policies, perhaps sustained over two or three elections, may force the defeated party to reconsider its strategy if it wants to remain electorally competitive.
The adaptation of the Conservative party to the post-war Labour party initiatives is one example.
The acceptance of the New Deal by many Republicans in the United States and the adoption of the social market approach and formal abandonment of Marxism by West Germany's Social Democrats are others.
In the last two cases, decisive and successive election defeats convinced the party leaders that the centre of electoral opinion had moved away for them.
Parties adopt or disavow policies not only to win forthcoming elections but also as a response to past electoral outcomes.
An election may also be a realigning one in that it produces a long-term shift in the balance of support between the parties, perhaps installing one as the new majority.
The 1983 election, although a significant Conservative success, was not a realigning one, nor one necessarily presaging a long spell of Conservative rule.
Prosperity was an important factor for many Conservative voters in 1983 and 1987; such votes are instrumental and conditional.
Public opinion, though skewed to the right on many issues, has not moved further right between 1979 and 1989, and may actually have moved in a contrary direction.
The proportion of voters identifying with the Conservative  party is about the same as in 1964 (although Labour's fall has been steep) and the party's share of the vote in 1983 and 1987 was actually slightly less than in 1979.
It profited handsomely from the division of the non-Conservative vote between Labour and Alliance, and from the exaggerating effects of the British electoral system; compared to 1979, a decline of 1.5 per cent in share of the vote had produced a trebling of the government's overall majority in seats from 44 to 144 in 1983 and to 100 in 1987.
The 1980s has been a decade of three-party politics.
The emergence of the Alliance posed the most formidable third-party challenge to the Labour/Conservative duopoly since the multi-partyism of the 1920s.
Indeed the distribution of votes across the three parties in 1983 bears a striking resemblance to the elections of 1923 and of 1929 (Table 10.4).
Talk of a realignment on the centre-left of the spectrum has a long history.
It seemed more credible in the 1980s with the emergence of the Alliance and Labour's electoral collapse.
The widespread agreement across the electorate on many issues increases the possibilities for voters to shop around the political parties, as well as for the political parties to attract voters who are not traditional supporters.
The electoral system has been a barrier to realignment.
Labour in the north of Britain and the Conservatives in the south have so many safe seats that they can suffer a loss of popular votes without this being translated into an equivalent loss of seats.
The proportions differed only slightly in the 1987 general election.
In 1983 the Conservatives gained 85 per cent of the seats in Southern England for 50 per cent of the votes, Labour 55 per cent of the seats in Northern England for 37 per cent of the vote.
The Alliance had no such electoral stronghold.
Surveys showed that its support, like that for the Liberals, was diffuse but shallow and lacked distinctive issue bases or social constituencies, apart from a following in the well-educated professional groups.
Mr Kinnock, however, has moved Labour back to the centre and since 1987 the two former Alliance parties have been in disarray.
For all the turbulence and excitement that erupted with the Gang of Four's break with Labour in 1981, Britain looked as much a two-party system at the end of the decade as it did in 1980.
The Alliance route to a realignment of the party  system is dead.
The great opportunity for Labour is that it will again be the main repository of anti-Conservative votes.
The significant electoral battleground in the future is likely to be the middle class or non-manual working class, simply because of its size.
Even if at the next general election Labour does better than ever before in attracting working-class support, say 80 per cent of the working class, it still would not have a majority of the vote.
Labour's problem is that its core constituency in the manual working class has steadily declined over the years.
The growth of private home-ownership and car-ownership, reduction in the number of voters dependent on council housing, expansion of self-employment (up from 1.9 million to 3 million between 1979 and 1989) and of employment in the private sector, and a fall in the public-sector employment, may also work against the party.
The Conservative government has not of course been passive in the process of restructuring the social bases of electoral choice.
Between 1979 and 1989 the reduction in public-sector employment, extension of private home-ownership (up from 55 per cent to 65 per cent) and share-ownership (up from 7 per cent to 22 per cent ), increasing scope for private provision of services, and run-down of trade union membership (down from 54 per cent to 46 per cent of the workforce) have all been government objectives.
None of these trends in social and economic structure and party identification mean that Labour can never win again, nor that the Conservatives are sure to win.
Research suggests that many manual workers who have bought shares in the privatized firms and industries or purchased council houses were already Conservative voters.
But in so far as such voters may have their partisanship reinforced the trends do present a major hurdle to the election of a Labour government.
Comparison with the fortunes of the left in Western Europe are encouraging for Labour, but also chastening.
In the recessionary 1970s, most governments were turned out at elections or saw their share of electoral support fall.
The misery index (the combined percentages of unemployment and inflation) reached new heights.
Although there has been some shift in the 1980s to the political right in the United States and West Germany, the socialist share of the vote has hardly changed over the two decades in Austria, Scandinavia, West Germany, and Italy.
It has increased substantially in France and Spain, and Labour governments have been re-elected in New Zealand and Australia.
Only in Britain has the fall in popular support for the left been substantial.
Indeed the scale of decline for such a major party is virtually unparalleled in any other state in post-war Western Europe.
The good news for Labour from a comparative survey is that such features as wider home ownership, affluence, and the embourgeoisement of the working class are not necessarily electorally adverse.
Political behaviour is not shaped exclusively by social forces.
Democratic socialist parties can still thrive in prosperous societies as the examples of Sweden and France prove.
It is worth adding that, compared to some other socialist parties, Labour has not been handicapped by the opposition or suspicion of a powerful Catholic Church (as in some Western European states), or divided by a powerful Communist movement in party politics and in trade unions (as in France and Italy).
Moreover, because of the first-past-the-post electoral system and the predominantly two-party system, it has been one of the few parties of the left able to form a government on its own.
Elsewhere socialist parties have had to compete in multiparty and proportional electoral systems and usually share power in government.
The question that such analysis then suggests is: why has Labour done so badly?
Perhaps other parties, simply because they have lacked the British Labour party's advantages, have necessarily had to be more adaptable and willing to make alliances.
Left governments in Australia, New Zealand, France, and Spain have pursued a series of economic and social policies that are not dissimilar from those that Mrs Thatcher's government has pursued since 1979.
Conclusion
The rhetoric of party politics, particularly at election time, is often adversarial and absolutist in tone.
The introduction of new men and new women promises a new beginning.
Edward Heath, in his first speech to a Conservative party conference as Prime Minister in 1970, claimed: ‘We were returned to office to change the course and the history of this nation — nothing less.’
In each election manifesto between 1970 and 1983, Labour  promised a ‘fundamental and irreversible shift in the balance of power and wealth to working people’.
In a foreword to the 1979 Conservative election manifesto, Mrs Thatcher suggested that the election might be the last chance voters had to reverse the extension of state power at the expense of the individual.
In 1983 she spoke of the general election providing a ‘choice’ between two ways of life; before the 1987 election she spoke of the election as the opportunity to ‘kill off’left-wing socialism.
The controversy surrounding the overall record of the Thatcher administration suggests that it has had a major impact.
On the political left, the government is regularly reviled for running down the welfare state, smashing the trade unions, and waging class war.
‘The most reactionary government this century’ is merely a mild form of left-wing rhetoric.
Some of Mrs Thatcher's ‘cheerleaders’ in the party and popular press see her as having achieved a virtual revolution in British politics, restoring the authority of government, putting the trade unions in their place, taming a greedy and parasitic public sector, and regaining a greater freedom of choice for people in many areas.
The case of the 1979 — 83 administration seems to support Richard Rose s claims about the weakness of party government.
The gloomy trends of macro-economic indicators of economic growth, inflation, unemployment, and public spending over the period were in line with those for earlier governments.
Such factors, however, are only partly under the control of government.
The significant discontinuities elsewhere support the thesis of adversary politics.
These include the reduction in the legal immunities and rights of trade unions, rejection of formal incomes policy, and the tripartite style of decisionmaking, according priority to the abatement of inflation, even with unemployment at over three million, privatization of state industries and services, changes in the framework in which many public services are carried out, interventions in local government structure and imposition of far-reaching controls over its finance, changes in the welfare state, and open hostility to the civil service and large parts of the public sector.
The government has challenged many of the assumptions of several participants and commentators on British politics.
The more one looks back on the record the more one is impressed by the role of Mrs Thatcher as a dominant figure and as an illustration of the power of the Prime Minister.
Chapter 3 explored the various critiques of social democratic values and policies and the suggested policy alternatives.
The critiques and the alternative policies found an audience because of a number of worrying developments in the mid-1970s (Chapter 5), independently of the campaigns of Sir Keith Joseph and Mrs Thatcher.
We are not claiming that personal leadership is all important but rather that Mrs Thatcher's personality and policies enabled her to take advantage of the constellation of events and ideas.
This is the more remarkable in view of the lukewarm support some of the policies have had in the Cabinet and party.
Over time she has retained her ideological commitment, and the shortcomings as well as the successes of her government record are invoked by her as reasons to press on with the original strategy.
She has clearly set a lead in a number of areas, pushing radical ideas and reforms (see Chapter 9).
Although the discontinuity in economic policy from the Heath Cabinet (1972 — 4) is remarkable, there has been only one dissenting resignation from her Cabinet, partly on grounds of her style as well as policy (that of Mr Heseltine over Westland in January 1986).
Previous great reforming administrations — notably the Liberals (1906) and Labour (1945)— did not retain their parliamentary majorities for long.
Both had been returned by huge majorities, having long been out of office.
Both rapidly alienated many groups and the Liberal majority was extinguished by 1910 and Labour's by 1951.
Most British governments have been worn down by failures (particularly economic), scandals, lack of purpose, and electoral boredom.
Mrs Thatcher's governments have not only won elections but retained their drive.
Mrs Thatcher still tells interviewers and staff that ‘There is much more to do’.
If there is a time to sew and a time to reap, the latter has not yet arrived.
But radical governments depend in large measure on opportunities — for example, an inept political opposition or a crisis — and have to catch a mood.
In due course, they will suffer from the mood of ‘time for a change’, either to consolidate or reverse policies, or from the rise of new issues.
The impact of the  Thatcher years can only be fully assessed in the future.
What is clear, however, is that she dominated the content and style of British politics in the 1980s and shaped the politics of the post-Thatcher era.