

SHARK NUDGES 200lb
A 198 lb porbeagle shark gave David Proudfoot a terrific 45 minute battle during a boat session off Dunnet Head in Scotland.
David first tried a cod bait on a size 10/0 hook and wire trace after a shark attacked a cod being brought aboard Clair Calder's Scrabster-based charter boat Karen.
The Janetstown, Thurso, environmental health officer was broken twice after two short fights and stepped up to a 70 lb wire trace with 10 feet of 200 lb nylon as a rubbing leader and baited up with a 1 lb coalfish deadbait on a size 8/0 hook.
Five minutes after letting the freelined bait drift off in the tide the big shark struck.
Within ten minutes the shark was visible but it then set off on a strong deep dive taking 100 yards of line despite a heavy drag setting.
‘For 25 minutes it was difficult to see who was going to be exhausted first,’ said David, 36, Caithness SAA secretary.
•John Watson had a hectic morning's had a hectic morning's pike fishing topped by this 26 lb 8 oz specimen from a south Norfolk lake.
The Norwich civil servant thought the trip would be a complete waste of time after arriving to find the lake completely frozen over but the pike fed furiously for three hours.
‘I managed to get two rods out but had to sink the line below the water to avoid the ice which was being blown towards me,’ said John.
‘The first time the buzzer went I thought it was the ice but it was a 16 lb pike.
‘The rod with the smelt on soon went again and I did not realise how big the fish was and steered it around the swim for a minute to break the ice.
‘Only when it was in the net did I realise what size it was and it weighed 26 ob 8 oz,’ added John who went on to bank five other pike, two of 8 lb 8 oz, and others of 10 lb, 11lb and 14 lb.
The biggest specimen was landed on two size 8 trebles to 12 lb line.
MAIL BOX
•MORE than £1,000 in prizes is up for grabs in the British All-comers Championships at Tynemouth this Sunday, February 17.
Details from Dave Higgins on 091 252 4695.
PASS EXAM OR YOU DON'T GET A LICENCE!
Fish experts' move to introduce test shocks angling.
Radical proposals to restrict rod licences to those who have passed an angling test have been handed to the Sports Council review panel by the Institute of Fisheries Management.
The IFM looked at similar systems in Germany and Czechoslovakia before making the suggestions which would also see the launch of a mjor training scheme for new anglers.
The IFM says an angling test should at first be voluntary but perhaps become compulsory in the future with anglers losing their licence for breaking a code of practice.
Sources close to the panel say the recommndations are unlikely to be introduced.
But elements of the IFM case have attracted the support of some angling bodies.
National Anglers' Council chief Peter Tombleson welcomed the emphasis on training but is sceptical about any compulsory test.
‘We run a proficiency award scheme and would like that to continue because there ought to be an award for young anglers in particular to show they are not just good anglers but caring conservationists as well,’ said Peter.
‘We support the Institute in their proposals but not when it comes to making something compulsory which we find simply turns people against it.’
Adult anglers in Germany must take evening classes and pass a multiple choice test before they can get their rod licence.
To fish without a licence is illegal and anglers may pay up to £30 for training which covers everything from fish diseases to different kinds of aquatic weed.
National Federation of Anglers president Dave Bird has given the idea the thumbs-down.
‘Whilst the German idea looks very attractive the NFA have examined it and believe in this country it would be impractical,’ he said.
The recommendations have received a mixed welcome from the Angling Foundation.
AF boss Dr Bruno Broughton said: ‘There is nothing wrong with the bulk of the IFM proposals but forcing people to qualify before being allowed to go fishing is over the top.’
‘That sort of route would be impractical but it might help solve the exessses that a small minority of anglers get up to.’
Also included in the IFM recommendations are a national angling centre with teaching facilities and offices and continuing the use of Anglers Consultative Associations but with a wider range of representaion of angling interests.
‘The idea is that anglers should be far more aware of the resource they are using and it should be the job of the IFM to teach them more about the fish,’ said IFM official Robin Templeton.
‘As a starting point we would like to see some sort of voluntary test similar to the German system which would then give anglers a discount on the cost of a licence if they passed,’ added Robin.
COVER PICTURE
The 24 lb 7 oz pike on the cover gave Doncaster council worker Andy Tate a terrific battle at a Lincolnshire stillwater after being fooled by a paternostered roach bait.
The specimen bored straight into a weed bed and Pike Anglers' Club member Andy fought the fish for 15 minutes before beating it with size 8 trebles to 11 lb line.
•Les Aves smashed the South Essex Specimen Group record with this terrific 3 lb 4 oz roach from the Hampshire Avon at Fordingbridge.
Builder Les, from Aldershot, Hampshire, went in search of a big roach after banking a 27 lb 1 oz pike earlier in the season but his efforts had produced only chub until this capture.
‘When I arrived at the river I wasn't at all sure I was doing the right thing because the water temperature was 4.1 degrees Centigrade and the air temperature was 1.8 degrees,’ said Les.
‘It wasn't long before I had my first bite which was a 3 lb 7 oz chub.
I had two more chub in quick succession to 2 lb 14 oz and then the last bite of the day produced this roach — what a fish!’
Les, 46, made the great capture using maggots on a size 18 hook fished with a feeder on 3 lb line with 1.5 lb bottom.
The fish earns our £40 Predator Baits big fish picture of the week award.
•Self-employed sales rep Dean /verbar; Lomas put in a night at a lake near his Sheffield home to bank this 22 lb mirror carp.
The specimen mopped up a boilie on a size 6 hook to 8 lb line.
The session also yielded a 19 lb 3 oz leather carp.
MAGIC FOR MICK
Two 5 lb chub from same swim.
Mike Dinnigan didn't allow the frosty weather to stop his fishing and landed two 5 lb plus chub from the same swim.
The National Association of Specialisht Anglers member put in a couple of days on the River Swale at Topcliffe in North Yorkshire to take six chub over 4 lb, including specimens of 5 lb 13 oz and 5 lb 12 oz.
‘The river had been ten feet up the previous week and I thing the chub had been pushed into the swim,’ said Mick, 33.
‘But it also meant a lot of brances had been washed down and the river has a lot of snags anyway.
‘The line just went solid with the 5 ob 13 oz fish see-sawing around a snag and I was sure the line would go.
A similar thing happened with the 5 lb 12 oz fish but I had luck on my side.’
Both chub smashed the Bramley, South Yorkshire angler's previous personal best and the biggest specimen measured an impressive 23 inches.
All the chub fell for quivertipped bread flake link legered on a size 8 hook to 4 lb line.
Chadwell Heath, Essex engineer David Williams visited a London AA stretch of the River Thames near Goring in Oxfordshire to bank a hat trick of big chub.
David, 29, included specimens of 5 lb 10 oz, 5 lb 3 oz and 4 lb 10 oz in one session with the biggest fish setting a new personal best.
‘I had just one fish from the swim the week before but this time had five botes and took four fish,’ said David.
The chub fell for double bronze maggot on a swimfeeder rig, 3 lb main line, 2 lb bottom and 14 hook.
CLUBS TO TACKLE THE MINK MENACE
An emergency meeting has been called for clubs leasing stretches of the Macclesfield Canal in a bid to find a solution to an increasing mink problem.
Clubs with water between Congleton and Kidscrobe are to thrash out the best way of removing the mink which have spiralled in numbers.
British Waterways and the Ministry of Agriculture have been approached by fishing clubs in the region to help rid them of the menace which is depleting fish stocks in the canal.
With more than 30 different sightings of mink in a recent five hour match at Kidsgrove and Scholar Green, anglers have agreed the time is right to remove the killers
BW's chief fisheries officer Tom Leatherland said: ‘Until this week I had no idea that the mink problem was so great on the Macclesfield Canal, the most northerly point we have had the animals reported to us.
‘Mink are unnecessary killers and have a habit of decimating fish stocks if left to breed at the side of fisheries, so I will help the local clubs to get rid of them as soon as I can,’ he added.
The battle to rid the canal of mink is being organised by Mow Cop AC secretary Phil Carr who put out an appear for other clubs with a mink problem to contact him.
So far 11 clubs have agreed to meet at the Nelson Pub in Brownlees on February 20.
BW, MAFF and the National Rivers Authority have also been invited.
MAIL BOX
•Neville Fickling is guest speaker at the next Pike Anglers' Club Lea Valley meeting on Tuesday, February 26 at Chestnut FC in Theobalds Lane, starting at 8pm.
Dead Fish frozen into oil-hit Grand Union
Anglers discovered dead fish frozen into the Grand Union Canal when they arrived for a major match.
But the stench of diesel oil gave away the fact that the fish had not been killed by the bad weather.
Now British Waterways fishing experts are to investigate the deaths at West Drayton on the outskirts of West London.
Browns team member Stuart Redman, from East London, one of the first to discover the dead Fish, said: ‘It was an awful sight, the canal was frozen over and a carp of 10 lb, bream to 2 lb, roach and a tench were lying dead on top.
‘Anglers broke the ice to fish and diesel bubbled up to the surface.
It absolutely stank.
‘The match went ahead though and the catches were obviously low from the polluted stretch.
‘When I got home I called the NRA freephone pollution number and I was told it was too dark and cold for anyone to go down and somebody would be there first thing in the morning.
‘They haven't been in touch with me since so I'm wondering what they're going to do about it,’ said Stuart.
Trev's Browning skipper Tony Marti said: ‘We fished a Super League practise session last September and we saw an oil slick coming down the canal then.
‘I called the NRA and they sent someone down to soak up the oil from the surface with sheets of foam.
They told me they'd found the source and they were going to prosecute the offender.
‘During the latest match anglers found the fish dotted along the stretch frozen in the green-oil-based ice.
I have a feeling it's coming from the same source.
It's been going on for long enough and I think something should be done about it,’ he added.
British Waterways fisheries officer John Ellis said: ‘The pollution is news to me.
I shall have to investigate the matter with the NRA.
‘I'm surprised they haven't told me.
But I can assure you appropriate action will be taken when we have found the guilty party…’
NRA Thames Region spokeswoman Sharon Bolton said: ‘We had a call late on Sunday night and it was too dark to do anything so we went down on Monday morning and although there was evidence of oil there was not a sufficient amount for concern.
‘Regarding the September issue, we are positive the matter is not connected and we are still gathering evidence to prosecute the culprit,’ she added.
Postie delivers giant roach
Postman Anthony Creed is determined to smash the 3 lb roach barrier and he's already well on his way after landing a 2 lb 12 oz beauty from a private stretch of the Hampshire Avon.
A change pf tactics and a cast towards the middle of the river provided the specimen during freezing cold conditions.
Anthony said: ‘It was my first fish over 2 lb.
My previous best was 1 lb lighter.
I fish most weekends and I don't mind what I catch, I'll fish for anything, so this fish was a real bonus.
‘It had been a quiet day and I had only caught a few small dace and then my rod thumped round.
I thought it was a big chub and was surprised to see the red fins when it surfaced.
Legered double maggot on a size 14 hook to 1.5 lb line worked for Anthony, 50, from Bournemouth, Dorset.
MAIL BOX
London's Raven AC have rescheduled their 250 peg Keith Record Memorial on the Regents Canal for this Sunday, February 17.
Details from Mac McEndoo on 081 743 3381 or 081 904 4988 (evenings).
FISH OF THE WEEK CONTEST
How to enter
If you hook a specimen fish in 1991 then make sure you tell the Mail.
Our Fish of the Week contest offers superb prizes from the best selling DAM range and it's easy to enter.
Complete the form (below left) and post it to our Newsdesk immediately.
A copy of the rules is available (send SAE) but the Editors decision is final on all matters.
No correspondence will be entered into concerning adjudications.
The star prizes
COARSE
TWO WINNERS — Quick CD 142 Match reel plus 100 metres of Tectan 3.1 lb line.
the reel features carbon body, push button spool with line clip, stern drag.
Auto manual internal trip bale.
Silent anti-reverse, folding handle, hook retainer.
Weight 335gm.
Gear ratio 4.8:1.
Damyl Tectan 3.1 ‘lb line has a 0.12mm diameter and excellent knot-strength.
SEA
TWO WINNERS — Quick Fighter 60 fixed spool.
One of the best selling reels of its type.
A no-nonsense, metal bodied model capable of swallowing 225 metres of 20 lb line.
Gear ratio 4.4:1.
Front drag and skirted spool.
PLUS bulk spool containing 760 yards of 15 lb Damyl Surfer mono.
•Kenny Gates and Mark Fitzwalters had a frantic battle with these mirror carp after getting takes within 30 seconds of each other from the same swim at Old Hall Lake in their home county of Essex.
The Harold Hill pair used almost identical methods to lure the mirrors with Kenny (right) taking a 21 lb 6 oz specimen and Mark a 21 lb 4 oz fish.
Both used home-made boilies with 8 lb line and Silkworm hook length.
Kenny used a size 8 hook and Mark a size 8 bent pattern.
WASTE PLAN SPARKS WORRY FOR THE EDEN
An angling club has condemned plans for a hazardous waste storage site on the banks of the River Eden.
The treatment station, for Alco Waste Management, is to be built alongside the river on Carlisle's Willowholme Industrial Estate.
It will deal with a range of industrial chemicals and toxic substances from around the county and anglers fear the river could be hit by a major pollution.
The Eden was contaminated with ammonia in 1987 by Express Dairies who were recently forced to pay £113,000 in compensation following action by the Anglers' Cooperative Association.
Tommy Graham, Carlisle AA secretary, said: ‘We do not object to the company, it is the location that is going to cause problems.
‘If the river is contaminated with toxic waste then there is every possibility all river life would be killed off for generations.’
The association's concerns have been backed by the National Rivers Authority who said in a letter: ‘The site and building is on the flood plane of the River Eden and the flooding of the area and the building cannot be discounted.’
But Carlisle city planners say the site presents no danger to the river because strict conditions will ensure waste products are handled correctly and they have given the go-ahead to the scheme.
•Lake Windermere in Cumbria is becoming a health hazard because of raw sewage and litter, experts have warned.
It is the victim of too many boats discharging effluent straight into the water according to lake ranger Tony Hill in his annual report.
He claims the lake, which holds good pike, perch, trout and char, smells of sewage in warm weather and its shores are strewn with condoms and sanitary towels.
Lake District Planning Board chairman Robert Addison, agreed with the report and described the current state of the lake as ‘appalling’.
•A Welsh angling club has issued posters warning possible polluters that the River Taff and its tributaries are not a rubbish site.
Merthyr Tyfil AA are concerned thousands of fish could die because of continual pollution, particularly from factories.
The posters will be sent to companies calling on them to be more careful.
ELECTRO FISHING FINE
A fisheries consultant has been fined £500 by Ely magistrates for electro fishing a lake without National Rivers Authority permission.
David Quelch of Buntingford, Herefordshire, admitted using the device to remove fish at a pit in Haddenham, Cambridgeshire without consent but claimed he was carrying out a health check on behalf of the owners.
Quelch claimed he had verbal consent from the NRA.
But checks by officers showed permission had not been granted.
Mr Quelch was ordered to pay £150 costs on top of £400 for using the device and £100 for removing fish.
NRA Anglian Region spokeswoman Nina Miller said: ‘We hope this case will act as a deterrent to anyone thinking of doing something similar.
‘Electro-fishing can be dangerous to both the user and the fish if they are not experienced.’
ACTION REPLAY
DOUBLE FEEDING GETS A QUICKER RESPONSE
The River Nene around Peterborough has really come on form for roach in the last few months, despite the weather, with double-figure hauls of quality fish commonplace.
Nene regular and local matchman Alan Dean, an Oundle team member for five years, has notched up a succession of competition placings on the river, including runner-up this season in the Nene Team Championships.
We joined Alan on a £1.50 day ticket stretch to check out his winning methods.
9.10am
The weather has not been kind to the river in recent weeks and today is no exception.
I have decided to fish permanent peg 458 at the Orton upstream stetch of the Nene, near Peterborough, a consistently productive area, even when the fishing's hard.
The water is a muddy brown colour, fining down after heavy rains, and three continuous nights of hard frost have frozen the margins.
Flow on this stretch is usually sluggish but today, with the extra water, the flow is much quicker but I should still be able to use a waggler.
9.30am
I have set up a Mormark Microlite 13 foot float rod, a Shimano 2500S reel loaded with 2 lb Maxima coupled with a 1.5 lb Double Strength hook length.
To save time I make up my float rigs beforehand and put them on pole winders.
This rig includes a home-made peacock waggler, with a sarcandas reed insert.
It will be fished with 2AAA and 1BB bulk locking shot with three No.6s grouped at half depth with a No.6 and a No.8 spread equally between the bulk and the hook.
The rig is about ten feet long and is attached by a blood know to the main reel line.
9.45am
I always take a lot of care plumbing the depth, and even though I know this peg well, I will plumb it again.
The depth is about six foot along the middle, which is the line I will fish, hoping to catch roach to 12 oz.
My single bronze maggot bait on a size 20 Kamasan B510 barbless hook is set to trip through the swim one inch off the bottom to stop it dragging in any rubbish.
My first fish after 15 minutes is a 2 oz roach.
10.05am
The state of the river and a temperature barely above freezing means it is going to be hard today but I will still feed about a dozen maggots when I cast in, and them the same again when the float is halfway down the swim.
This double feeding is used to get the fish to respond quicker.
A little skimmer bream is my fourth fish of the day and the first I have had to net.
Now I know there are some fish willing to feed I will cut down my feed rate to a dozen maggots only when I cast in.
10.20am
I have been missing a lot of bites and assuming they are false takes — probably on the shoe — I will replace the No.8 with a No.12 Styl, hoping to eliminate the problem.
I will also introduce a few grains of hemp into the swim along with the maggots to try and bring the bigger dish onto the feed.
The main reason for fishing the middle line of the river today is that with a head wind it is the safest distance for me to be able to loosefeed easily.
11.05am
This is my best fish so far, a 10 oz roach.
Unfortunately, after a shower of icy rain the temperature has dropped even lower and I am finding it very difficult to move my fingers, they are so numb.
11.50am
Although it is winter time I am not afraid to move my bait higher in the water to keep in touch with the fish.
Some anglers add depth to their rigs to take more fish but I have found on the Nene shallowing up can bring better results.
I have altered the depth consistently during the day and have tempted some fish almost two feet off the bottom.
12.40pm
Although the fish are feeding, it has been spasmodic which could mean there is a pike in the swim.
It is a common problem along this stretch containing such a fine head of roach but the lulls in the catch rate rarely last longer than ten minutes.
2.15pm
After I introduced the hemp earlier the fish seemed to go off the feed so I only introduced it for four or five casts.
To see if the fish are interested now, because they are still interested in bronze maggot, I will put a grain on the hook.
The float shoots under with the hemp, and a 6 oz. roach comes to the net.
2.30pm.
I have taken a couple more roach to hemp and reckon i have about 14 lb in the net.
Time to go home to a warm fire.
This is excellent sport in these conditions.
I can only wonder at the fish that would have been caught when the river had fully fined down.
ANDY LITTLE'S CARP WORLD
Advice spot special
ALTERNATIVES TO THE HAIR
My club control a water I have been carp fishing for the last three seasons and have just imposed a hair rig ban.
I cannot understand this as I cannot see any detrimental effect on the carp.
What do you think?
Can you suggest alternatives to the hair to use in conjunction with quite hard boilies?
J. H. Wootton.
Hampshire.
It is difficult to understand the politics within some controlling bodies without knowing all the details and it is difficult for me to comment.
One can only assume that your club committee have the welfare of both the fishery and your fish at heart which we should not knock.
However, I have certainly not experienced damage caused by hair rig fishing to any carp in the last decade.
It may be it is not the hair itself but possible the style of fishing associated that could be the problem.
The hair rig has been a great leveller of angling ability and because on most waters it is self-hooking this can often lead to complacency on the angler's part.
No longer does he have to hover over the rod trying to strike at the slightest movement.
Lack of takes may induce him to wander and do a complete tour of the lake whilst his rods are still ‘fishing’.
I am sure this would only be a minority but it is always the minority that spoil it for the majority.
Looking at it from the club's point of view I can see how this ban arose in a situation like this.
As for rigs other than the hair for boilie fishing there are of course plenty of alternatives.
I would suggest some sort of exposed hook set up and here are three of my favourites.
1.
A side-hooked boilie.
With this set-up the hook to bait ratio needs to be the equivalent of about a size 10 fished with a 14 mm boilie.
Always try to expose as much of the hook as possible but without risking the boilie parting from the hook during the cast.
It is just a matter of lightly pushing the point of the hook into the skin of the boilie by about one eighth of an inch.
The boilie is then rotated round the bend so it comes to rest half way along the shank.
A chemically sharpened hook with this set-up will give you a greater percentage of pricked fish as the carp draws the bait in and then ejects.
Variation
I like to use a Drennan Super Specialist pattern in these circumstances, the size 10s are quite a tough hook and with the thick wire gauge relative to the size of the hook they retain the boilie very well.
2.
A variation on the same theme, the top mounted boilie utilises the same pattern of hook and bait to hook size ratio.
I find this set-up more useful in weedy swims as the boilie protects the point of the hook.
It is also very good with a buoyant or pop-up boilie set-up and for long range work casts slightly better than the side-hooked option.
3.
The eye-mounted bolt rig.
This was my most productive rig prior to the hair and I have used it since on waters where the hair has been banned.
It works best with a large fine wire hook.
Originally I used the Match Blues, unfortunately these are very difficult to get hold of these days.
I now opt for a Gamakatsu 6318.
This does not have such a wide gape as the March Blues but is still relatively long in the shank.
This means you can still get the whole of the bend and point of the hook completely clear of the boilie.
The size of hook to bait ratio changes dramatically.
With the same 14 mm bait I will now be using a size 4 and possibly a size 2.
The idea is to present as much of the hook out of the bait as possible to ensure maximum contact with the carp's mouth.
This set-up needs to be fished with quite a heavy lead of 2 oz plus and a short hook link of between five and seven inches.
Although these rigs will probably be slightly less successful than the hair they will still be consistent catchers but a little bit more attention needs to be paid to ensure that the bait is correctly mounted.
Sorting out the biggies
I am having problems selecting the larger fish in my water where the average run of the mill fish are between 2 lb an 4 lb.
There are some good double but I haven't caught them.
W.D.
Gloucester
On this type of water it can become the luck of the draw with so many small fish out numbering the larger carp and it is difficult to be selective.
The bigger fish will turn up haphazardly to almost anyone.
There always appears to be great competition for food on these waters and very often it is just a case of the more successful angler reducing the odds against catching the larger fish.
I know W.D.
has experienced the same thing as we all have.
He is merrily accumulating a large bag of smaller fish when Fred Smith comes along with inadequate tackle, throws a lump of luncheon meat in the margins and lands the largest fish in the lake.
I am afraid this will always happen.
On some waters you can gain a degree of selectability by using harder and larger diameter baits.
For instance it could be a good idea to introduce your free boilies at 12 mm or 15 mm and use hook baits of 18 mm, 20 mm or maybe even 22 mm.
This will not stop you catching the smaller fish but it may swing the odds in your favour of selecting one or two of the larger fish.
When the greed factor of competition feeding is present the smaller fish will more readily take the easier to handle smaller baits giving the larger baits a little more time to intercept one of the better fish.
Sweetcorn, chickpeas or maples may well be the going bait and it could then be an advantage to fish a couple of very large jumbo tiger nuts of half a brazil nut over the top of the baited area.
The one thing that does not seem to work in these situations is to use a large pop-up fished over the bed of baits.
I think this is because the pop-up is much more noticeable and less selective.
I remember only too well trying to beat the smaller fish in a French lake by using three 18 mm diameter pop-ups on the air.
This failed and actually caught more than a single 18 mm bottom bait.
I was staggered they managed to get such a large mouthful in a relatively small mouth!
ABOVE: Ben Weaver hooked this 19 lb 2 oz specimen in the nick of time — a few moments later gale force winds made fishing impossible.
Ben, 13, from Sheffield, and his father Alan made an early start to bait up a north Nottinghamshire lake with fish flavoured boilies and Ben landed the common on a size 8 hook hair rig.
BELOW: England international sea angler Mick Toomer ended his hunt for a 30 lb plus pike with this terrific 30 lb 6 oz specimen from a home counties lake.
Mick, who has taken a number of 20 lb pike from Essex waters this winter, travelled further afield from his Basildon home and fished a Predator Baits' frozen mackerel on 11 lb line and two size 8 barbless trebles.
BONNER'S THE MAN TO WATCH
by Colin Mitchell
The Kamasan Matchman of the Year race is heading for its tightest-ever show-down with at least half a dozen anglers in the hunt for the most sought-after title.
Long time leader Dave Berrow hasn't scored since November and his 43 point haul is now just three in front of former title winner Dave Harrell and four ahead of inform Denis Bonner.
And it's Daiwa Trentman Denis who is the angler all of the front runners fear in the run up to the end of the season.
The Geordie who moved from Newcastle to Nottingham so he could regularly fish the Trent is rated by Frank Barlow as one of the country's best float anglers — and accolades don't come much higher than that!
But Dave Harrell, the Walsall angler who won the Matchman of the Year title two years ago, also admitted: ‘Denis is red hot at the moment and I think he is definitely the one to beat.
‘I've had a touch of the Dave Berrow's recently and just can't score points.
Mind you, I've been keeping up the ice dance so all the canals are frozen and he can't get a match to fish,’ joked Dave, who runs Midlands Angling Products.
Harrell now plans to search out his matches carefully in a determined bid to re-capture the title.
If he does, he will join former England man John Dean as the only person to ever win the award twice.
Dave Berrow, who has had committments to his Browing Starlets side which has cost him the chance to fish some possible points earning events, admits that the draw bag hasn't been kind to him for quite a while.
‘Having been so close to winning the title in the past few years I thought this was going to be my chance but the draws have just dried up and I can't seem to get near fish,’ said Dave from Hednesford, Staffordshire.
Current Matchman of the Year John Allerton has made a late surge up the tale to eighth position and although he is always a danger the Tri-Cast Barnsley's star's run may be just too late to make the very top.
Tyne to Trent move paid off
Denis Bonner's rise to the top has been meteoric.
It has taken him just five and a half years to make his mark in the big time.
When he moved from Newcastle-upon-Tyne to Nottingham he made the journey down the A1 for better fishing and the chance to learn from big name anglers.
‘But it's all gone past my wildest dream,’ said Denis, 39, who has the full support of wife Lynn and three youngsters.
‘You can't help but learn from people like Wayne Swinscoe and Frank Barlow and other great anglers who live in this area.
Everything has gone right since we came here,’ said Denis who now has Wayne Swinscoe as a neighbour and occasional drinking partner.
The Avon, Severn and Trent are all likely to feature in Denis' matches for the rest of the season, although he is likely to stay away from events close to home where the meat has become the number one bait.
LEFT: Painter and decorator Kevin Barton latched into this early 2 lb 14 oz plaice during a session at Lepestone Point in Hampshire.
Kevin, from Lymington, also beached flounder to 1 lb 12 oz using ragworm on a size 2 hook to 15 lb line.
The specimen was taken from the eastern side of the sandbar just as the tide began to ebb and came the day after Kevin had taken a 2 lb 8 oz flounder from the same spot.
RIGHT: This 22 lb 8 oz pike set a new personal best for police officer Paul May during a session at a West London pit.
Paul, 27, from Hanworth, Middlesex, spent a blank five hours at the water and had just changed swims when the pike took a float fished trout on 12 lb line with size 8 barbless trebles.
Fishing partner Mark Chambers landed a personal best 18 lb 4 oz pike.
Bob Gledhill's Sea Gossip
Now Who's Primitive?
Aren't freshwater anglers a funny lot?
I heard over the weekend of a terrible fuss because one club member was proposing to use an echo sounder to help locate fish on a lake.
It seems the member is also a keen saltwater angler and normally carries the sounder on his boat for hunting cod.
Because he wanted to use it to locate carp and pike he was getting some fiery abuse.
It was not the boat aspect of his idea, rowing boats are permitted on the lake, but some of the club members are saying echo sounders are unsporting.
There was even a muttering that the echo pulses could frighten or harm fish.
The latest outcome is there is move to ban the use of electronics on the lake.
And they tell us sea fishing is primitive in its thinking.
THE DANGERS OF FISHING FOR TIDDLERS
A match planned at Seabrook in Kent next month will use the controversial system of counting undersisized fish towards the final result.
The idea is that while undersized fish will still be returned, their capture will earn a consolation point for the captor.
Setting aside this particular match and looking at the idea on a broader basis, I see a rough ride ahead if the idea spreads.
Its roots come from the Continent, where many shore matches reward the capture of undersized fish.
They have to, because years of pillaging have made sizeable fish from the shore hard to find in places like France, Belgium and Holland.
I know from bitter experience there is nothing more frustrating that to keep catching fish that just miss the line when the fellow next to you only gets one, but its nose nudges over the line.
That is down to little else but bad luck.
The situation hasn't been helped by the downward spiral of the quality of our native shore fishing coupled with an upward tweaking of many minimum size limits.
Dabs, flounder and whiting are three species that are often caught in great numbers from the shore yet often fail to make the measure.
In team fishing it can be demoralising when the score sheet says you have contributed nothing, while the truth is you have fished your heart out, caught several fish but they missed the mark.
The danger is tne new system could encourage the deliberate fishing for small fish.
It may well become obvious that more can be gained from tiny hooks and tiny fish than using more orthodox tackle and regarding undersize fish as as nuisance.
That would make match fishing from the beach into a farce and would be guaranteed to drive away competitors even more than the current poor fishing.
The amount of small fish that swim behing the breaker is enormous.
Whenever I pull a shrimp net there are scores of little fish caught.
But the greatest dilemma would be the matter of how small a fish is eligible for weighing in?
Using a pole, fixed line, size 24 hook and wisp of fish or half a harbour rag it would be possible to catch fish an inch long one after another.
Should there be a lower limit for undersize fish?
Then, how long before somebody proposes giving points for undersized fish that did not make the undersize fish measure?
Navigator price is bearing up.
There must be hundreds, maybe thousands, of sea anglers who have fitted a Decca-receiving navigator to their own boat.
With sets like the Navstar 2000D and the Decca Mark IV costing £560 they are within the reach of many serious boat anglers.
Yet anyone who has been using one in the last few months will know, the accuracy of the sets in winter can be very poor.
I regularly get total signal failure and if I followed some of the compass courses displayed I would never be heard of again.
This is not the case with the new satellite system called GPS.
This give almost unfailing accuracy no matter what the weather conditions.
The problem with GPS is that like all new gadgets, the companies are wanting to recover development costs as quickly as possible and they are very expensive.
The first sets a few months ago were well over £2000 which would put them out of the range of all private and a lot of charter boats.
Competition and mass production is now changing that.
The Earls Court Boat Show last month saw the launching of a GPS set called the Pronav for £1,495, including VAT, and other sets have begun to tumble in price.
My local electronics dealer tells me he is confident that there will be GPS under £1,000 within six months and then the real price war will begin as the manufacturer battle it out for the lucrative yacht market.
Wyre Boat Club
A lead story in Bob Gledhill's column headlined ‘Beware of Non-Fishing Bureaucrats’(November 24 issue) criticised one of local boat clubs for failing to invest in electric winches and described the committee as ‘armchair rulers.’
It was claimed that the chairman never went fishing and did not own his boat.
No club was named in the piece but Wyre Boat Angling Club have complained to Angler's Mail that they recognized themselves as the targets of Bob's attack — and say his comments are inaccurate, totally unjustified and reflect solely a minority view.
The club fear that other anglers in their area have also recognised the Wyre Boat Angling Club from the article.
Wyre anglers, including members of the committee, voted at their annual meeting last March to purchase an electric winch at a cost of £285.
The club states that all major financial decisions, other than those connected with the day to day running of the club, are put to the membership for approval.
The chairman of Wyre has his own boat and goes fishing on a regular basis.
Other members of the committee, together with the general membership, also fish as often as possible when weather and tide allow.
Angler's Mail and Bob recognise that the criticisms were not fair and withdraw them with apologies to the Wyre Boat Angling Club.
ZANDER EAT INTO CLUB'S MATCHES by Sue Will
A zander explosion in the Coventry Canal is forcing anglers to cancel matches and seek alternative venues.
Nuneaton AC scrapped plans to keep a match booking on the canal when the predators threatened to ruin their 80 peg Open.
Official Alan Grimshaw said: ‘The present zander problem prompted us to cancel the match.
‘There's a lot of zander throughout the canal and I think we'll be leaving it until next season before we reschedule the match,’ he said.
Roger Pimlott, secretary of controlling club Coventry DAC, said: ‘The zander in the Hartshill stretch are a new problem.
Although it has been electrofished I believe it's not an efficient method of removing the smaller fish in the 4–5 oz bracket.
‘British Waterways assure me something will be done about it.
Obviously we lose money if clubs start cancelling matches but we are fortunate to have alternative waters,’ said Roger.
BW's fisheries officer Keith Fisher said: ‘I don't understand why Nuneaton cancelled their match.
We electro-fished the 3.5 mile stretch from Hartshill to Nuneaton and only found four zander.
We discovered plenty of small fish.
‘We promised Coventry we'll have a look at the stretch again before the zander spawn in April.
The only thing I can suggest is there's a small pocket of fish causing the problem.
‘We are planning to electrofish the North Oxford junction later this month but it really depends on the weather.
‘We have visited Hawkesbury Junction twice now, once in November when we caught 256 zander and in December we removed just 14.
We are hopeful these figures show the numbers are reducing but it's hard to say for sure.
‘We only electrofished four miles of the open ended canal and it's possible the fish could have survived and moved in the 20 mile stretch before the locks.
If we are controlling them we shall restock the venue with small fish,’ he added.
Thieves Take League Details
Sundridge Super League North East Division Two organiser John Davis has issued an urgent appeal for team captains to contact him after thieves stole his car containing all of his tackle and league details.
The car, a VW Golf, was parked outside a friend's house in Otley, West Yorkshire, and later recovered in nearby Shipley with all the contents missing.
The teams who should contact him are Big Waters, Middlesbrough, Kingfishers, Firpac, Horbury MG, Tackle Box Cleethorpes, Drax, Driffield, Beverley, Saltaire, Scunthorpe, Ryburn and Barnsley.
His numbers are: 0943 467203 (day) and 0943 463283 (evening).
Thanks my son
Warehouseman Lee Seary is secretly glad his six-year old son became tired while playing a pike — because he took over and landed a personal best 27 lb specimen.
Lee, 32, from Waltham Abbey, Essex, was getting ready to pack up after a biteless morning when his self-cocking float carrying a half mackerel slid away.
‘I hit the fish and stright away though it was a good one, but my son Tony has never caught a pike so I handed him the rod,’ said Lee.
‘He played it into the side but it powered off again and he complained that his arms were hurting, so I took the rod back from him and landed the fish,’ he added.
Banking
The pike was beaten on 10 lb line at a gravel pit near Chestnut, Hertfordshire.
Portsmouth AC member Pete Tann went on a roach fishing trip to the Hampshire Avon at Fordingbridge and ended up banking a 23 ob pike.
Pete got fed up with the slow roach sport and decided to switch to a spinner.
Hastings, Sussex angler Martin Hemsley float legered a sprat in 20 feet of water at his local Buckshole Reservoir to catch the largest pike from the water for several years.
The 22 lb 4 oz specimen was landed on a single size 8 treble to 9 lb line.
Chris Clark on shorefishing.
Safety must come first
The modern trend of using crimps for holding hooks lengths in position has produced a number of worrying implications.
The real danger of these rigs was hammered home recently during a small Open match which saw me ducking for shelter.
I had just left the shelter of my brolly as a pout started to rattle my rod tip when a 5 oz sinker ripped a hole through my brolly.
The trace from a chap 20 yards up the beach had snapped in half as full power was applied to a pendulum cast.
For a few seconds I was left shell shocked but I was quickly brought to my senses after seeing the broken rig.
All the right components had been used for a power casting rig, 60 lb main trace line, heavy duty swivels along with good links.
But all this had been wasted by some heavy handed crimping.
The crimps had been used to hold in position the three small swivels that connect to the hook lengths.
The main problem when using crimps is you can't actually see whether any damage has been done to the main line when the pressure is applied to the crimp.
If this process is done with a proper crimping tool there is very little chance of serious damage, although in this case it seemed by the damage done to the line that a normal pair of pliers had been used.
With such a tool it only needs a little extra pressure to severely weaken the main trace line.
To make matters worse the angler was using a rig he had bought from his local tackle shop.
Over the last few years there has been a dramatic increase in the number of rigs available from shops.
Many meet the strictest safety standards but there are a few exceptions.
Economics play a major role in dictating a rig's safety.
Constructing terminal tackle of this nature is a time consuming occupation although there are a few that try to cut corners to maximise profits.
You cna't blame tackle shops and manufacturers for trying to streamline their production, but when other angler's safety is put at risk questions must be asked.
It's far better to spend a few extra minutes making a trace 100 per cent safe, even if it means putting a few extra pence into the finished product.
The Point of Bulk Buying
There's a considerable saving in buying hooks in bulk but only a small percentage of anglers make use of this facility.
For the angler who only makes a few sorties a year it makes sense to buy hooks in smaller units like packets of ten.
Packaging and handling charges do not come cheap, so what's the point of paying for ten plastic packets along with the extra labour when you could buy one box containing 100 hooks and save up to 33 per cent?
Most of the popular brands are available in larger units.
Storage is one stumbling block, hooks quickly deteriorate once they have been exposed to saltwater spray.
A simple solution is to use an old film canister and carry just a few hooks leaving the open box at home out of harm's way.
Top Beach Marks Hill Head, Hampshire.
Location
At the mouth of Southampton Water between Lee-on-Solent and Stubbington, Hill Head is popular with match anglers.
There is easy access along the whole venue.
Potential
Flounder are the principle species taken from this shallow venue although bass, eels, pout, rockling, plaice and the odd cod do show.
A large sandbar is uncovered on low water Springs just north west of the nature reserve which is a prime area for larger species over low water.
Flounder show during January and February with day sessions best.
As darkness falls just the odd rockling and pouting are left.
March is slow although flounder start to return as April approoaches, but many are in poor condition.
The odd plaice show throughout May along with bass and a few early silver eel.
The flounder population is also on the increase.
Bait robbing crabs appear during June, July and August when night tides produce quality eels with pout and the odd bass.
Flounder become the number one during September and October.
Eels, pout, bass and the odd sole figure on night tides.
Throughout November and December a few big cod can be taken over low water from the end of the sandbar on night tides.
Bass will figure from the point with a few double-figure fish.
Baits
The tide retreats several hundred yards during Springs uncovering large shellfish and bait beds along the entire venue.
Rag, lugworm, whites, peeler crabs, whelks, shrimps, cockles and even odd razor-fish can be collected.
There's also a good head of clams which are collected commercially over bigger tides.
Ragworm is the principal flounder bait with the exception of May and June when peeler crab will produce.
Peeler also works for pout, eels and the big cod.
A small live freelined pout is ideal for specimen bass.
Tides
The last three hours of the flood and the first two hours of the ebb are the prime feeding periods for flatties.
On the end of the sandbars the first two hours of the flood are best.
The bigger the tide the better the action.
There is a fair amount of tidal movement but 5 oz plain leads are the order of the day.
Breakaway-type sinkers are only used during rough conditions.
Weather
Calm conditions produce the best founder action.
A good chop is needed for other species.
The better cod are taken from the sandbar when the water is coloured.
Tackle and Tactics
Distance casting is rarely needed and a 50 yard job is more than adequate for flounder.
The bass and eels often feed at extremely close range.
A good thump is beneficial when cod fishing.
Standard two up and one down rigs armed with size two Aberdeens set the trend for flatties, eels, pout and rockling.
Codding calls for two hook rigs armed with Cox and Rawle 3/0 crab hooks.
Bass fishing with live baits calls for a fairly light spinning rod along with a fixed spool reel loaded with 15 lb line straight through.
The best action is at night.
These fish often feed within 20 yards of the beach and the slightest light reflection will spook them.
New man at the top
John Freestone is tne new Irish international manager following Bill Lawler's resignation due to ill health.
Bill had held the position for two years and saw the team achieve two of their best-ever results, sevenths in the last two World Championships.
Self-employed John, 48, from Dublin said: ‘I've been in the international scene for the past few years.
I worked beside Bill and when he had to resign it seemed appropriate for me to step forward.
‘I hope fo carry on Bill's good work and keep things ticking over.
We have a good crew and don't expect any radical changes.
We're looking hopefully towards a win in the future,’ he said.
Team member Jack Tinsdale said: ‘John was Bill's right-hand man and has put a lot of time into the team.
He was appointed provisionally for one year by the National Coarse Fish of Ireland Committee.’
CANAL SWIMS LOST AFTER GUN THREAT
Anglers have lost two sections of the Royal Military Canal in Kent after threats from angry house-holders — including one armed with a shotgun.
As reported exclusively in Angler's Mail, Kent-based Ashford AS gave up 12 miles of the canal after 88 years tenancy because of a long-running row with the National Rivers Authority's Southern region.
Now the club has revealed that major access problems culminated in one house-holder standing in his garden with a shotgun to put anglers off fishing near his house.
‘For several years householders have been very anti to anglers at both the Ham street and Ruckinge ends of the water,’ said Robin Wadham.
‘An NRA bailiff was bitten by a Newfoundland dog and during the Division Three National on the canal this year one man tried to stop anglers and spectators passing through his garden.
‘He came out of his house with a shotgun and a dog and we had to call the police.
‘These were very serious situations which we wanted cleared up by the NRA but they refused to do anything about it.’
The problems arise from a legal peculiarity where the towpath is owned by householders but the fishing rights by the NRA.
In effect, Ashford were given rights to fish from the gardens but had difficulties even attempting to pass through to other swims they leased.
‘The NRA would just not respond to the access problems while we had the lease,’ said Robin.
Now two small sections including one swim in each will not be included in any new lease.
NRA Southern region official Dr Binny Buckley said: ‘There are two freehold properties which own the land but the fishing rights actually belong to us.
‘In future there will be no access through these gardens but it is only two swims and the rest of the canal can be accessed via other routes.
Book to Benefit ACA
Top specimen anglers have clubbed toogether to produce a book to boost the pollution fighting Anglers Co-operative Association's funds.
Printed by the Oxford Illustrated Press the Book of the Perch is a series of instructural chapters.
Among the contributors are Barrie Rickards, Vic Bellars, Tony Miles, Ken Whitehead, Archie Braddock, John Bailey and Dick Walker, with the widow's permission.
It is edited by Perch Fishers Club founder members Steve Burke and Pete Rogers.
Steve Burke said: ‘One hundred per cent of funds raised will go to the ACA.
We expect to raise many thousands of pounds and are hoping it will run into a second edition and provide the ACA with money well into the future.’
ACA director Allen Edwards said: ‘It is extremely good news.
‘On behalf of the association I would like to say how much we appreciate all their hard work and this very positive support.
The book will cost £20 and is due to be released in the near future.
Further details from Steve Burke on 0233 732272.
Flounder go mad in Dorset
Dorset's Poole harbour has produced the most consistent run of specimen flounder for years with local rods bagging fish to 3 lb 10 oz during night sessions.
Local Gary Austin landed a 3 lb 2 oz 8 drm flattie during a Flounder League match and then topped it with a 3 lb 10 oz specimen while pleasure fishing.
Both flounder came from the Evening Hill shore mark to ragworm fished in just six feet of water on a size 2 hook to 15 lb line.
The Flounder League also produced a 3 lb 6 oz 12 drm fish for Southborne's Nich Edwards and a 2 ob 14 oz flattie for Reg Clough from Bowerchalk.
Ragworm was again the successful bait fished over the extensive lugworm beds at Evening Hill.
The same approach also brought a 3 lb 7 oz 8 drm flounder for Andy Stevens from Bournemouth.
•Bradford specimen hunter Eddie Harrison banked this 2 lb 2 oz roach during a session on the Rive Aire in the Keighley area on a day when everyone else was blanking.
Eddie baited the swim with mashed bread and legered bread flake on a size 14 hook with 2 lb hook length and 3 lb main line to make the capture and added a small chub later in the session.
•Surrey Elite Specimen Group member Derek Hack, 36, banked an impressive brace of double-figure pike from a Sussex river topped by this 26 lb 8 oz specimen.
A small float fished rudd bait on a size 8 hook to 15 lb line tempted the predator which was followed by another of 16 lb 8 oz an hour later for Derek, a tailor from Send, Woking, Surrey.
FRANK BARLOW'S WEEKLY REPORT
ALL CHANGE BUT I'M STILL IN THE MONEY
Saturday
What a nice change.
Last week there I was moaning about just two fish in three matches and this week I had more than 200 in two outings.
With the canal bank out of sorts, Tony Hanson ran a match on his club's water at Redhill Lock on the Soar.
This used to be one of my lucky venues and I have some real nice memories of bagging sessions and wads of notes.
But what a surprise when I got there.
It was so different even the weir had been removed which means the river at this point is some three feet shallower than when I last fished it.
I drew a peg in the bend which I had drawn some years before and knew there were a few fish there and decided on one rig only — the pole.
It was ten foot deep and I fished at 11 metres with a shortish line to get good control.
After a slow first hour I started to get a few better fish, roach and skimmers.
Then a nice roach of about 1 lb showed up.
I was doing quite well but knew I was well behind Tony the organiser who was bagging on the stick float.
I needed something special to pull this one out of the fire.
Well, it must have been my day as with half an hour to go I had just got to the end of my swim when the float buried and the elastic shot out.
This was a real proper 'un.
For ten minutes I never saw my float as the fish cruised up and down.
Eventually, it tired and came to the pan.
A lovely big fat rubber dub which went 3 lb 8 oz.
As the whistle went I thought it could now be a bit close.
I packed up and went to follow the scales and 7 lb was the top until it came to Tony who weighed 10 lb dead.
Then his son, Sam, weighed 2 lb.
We all reckon that being as the prize for lowest weight was a year on the Cambridge Diet he fished without any bait at all on the hook.
My old mate, Malc Bassford, had 3 lb next to me — he is definitely getting better as that is his best weight since he bagged up on the River Cam 20 years ago.
Then it was my turn — 10 lb 7 oz.
I had just beaten Tony thanks to that lucky chub.
There were several weights over 5 lb and it was nice to see plenty of fish caught for a change.
There's another one there next week so I'll probably be there again.
Good sport down the ice holes
SUNDAY
We had Liverpool superstar Frank Holden for company as we travelled down to the Twenty Foot river near March.
What a keen lad is Frank, leaving the ‘Pool at 5 am to come to our house and then all the way down there.
That's how I used to be until I had my brain overhaused last year.
What a shock when we arrived.
All that way and it was frozen solid.
An even bigger shock was in store when the organisers set to and began breaking out a peg for everyone.
That's what I call looking after your punters.
There was only one peg that was ice-free and I predicted that if anything was caught at all that peg would be the last to produce.
That always seems to happen when you break the ice.
The hole I drew was about nine metres out and I fished it with that length of pole and a short line.
Starting on the bread I had six small roach straight away, not a bad start under these Arctic conditions.
But at the next peg different things were happening.
There sat Tydd Gote superstar Paul Smith.
Now he is known best for writing and talking a good match.
Well, trust him to save his lifetime best performance until he draws next to me.
Every fish he got seemed to be a good 'un.
I was getting more fish than him but couldn't get the quality despite trying every bait in the book.
He was too far away from me to see what he was catching on.
When I shouted to enquire about his successful bait all he said was: Anything I put on.
Up yours, I thought and got my head down to extract everything I could.
I caught all through and finished with 7 lb 4oz but that was no match for Paul who took 9 lb 12 oz to the scales.
A marvellous weight under severe conditions, a real nice set of fish with roach of 1 lb 8 oz.
I was happy with second while Frank the Scouse was fifth with 5 lb 6 oz.
Our Dean drew the ice-free peg and never caught for the first hour, as I predicted.
He finished with 5 lb.
Paul told afterwards he had caught some of the quality fish on hemp seed.
That's the only bait I didn't have but, who would have thought that with ice about?
Probably only the Tydd Goter.
A final word of praise for organiser Bob Fitzjohn, for getting the match off the ground.
That was a feat in itself and his third-placed 6 lb 15 oz was just reward for his effort.
London AA Shield Preview
Match of Mystery
Two of London's top match teams head off on a magic mystery tour this Sunday with the historic London AA Shield as their goal.
Neither Brunswick Brothers AS from Docklands or Tile Kiln AS from Hackney will have a clue where the venue for the match is until they actually arrive.
The referee for this year is Defiant Mobile's Billy Waldron who can choose the venue from any river, canal, lake or reservoir.
And just to make things really tough the matches are rovers with each angler sent off one at a time to pick his swim, putting the emphasis on reading the water.
The two six man teams board a coach in the early hours of Sunday and can be driven around for hours before arriving at the venue of the referee's choice.
The match is often held on the Lea, Thames or Grand Union Canal and the bad weather will obviously play some part in that decision this season.
The organisers claim the format teaches lessons that stay with the anglers forever and top names like Dave and Mick Vincent, Andy Love, Keith Arthur, Jimmy Randell and Ray Mumford all graduated through Shield matches.
The forerunners of current Division One National champions Trev's Browning, Trev's Terrapins, have been winners of the Shield in the past.
Brunswick Brothers are the favourites to take the three foot high solver shield and join an elite band of four clubs who have won the competition three or more times since the first final in 1903.
Team captain Peter Blyth will be going for a hat trick of wins as captain — all with different teams.
Peter led both Tottenham Angling Centre and Jubilee AS to victory and has experienced men like former Essex County boss Dennis Salmon and Division Four National runner-up Dave Dunstone to call on.
Tile Kiln are in the final for the first time in 35 years of trying and include Brian Gladden, twice previous winner of the Shield with Defiant Mobile and Duke of Wellington, and former Defiant captain Billy Jones.
Mail Slough British Legion AS raised £1,042 towards a hydrotherapy pool for the Wrexham Park Hospital, Buckinghamshire with their annual Chas Collins Trophy charity match on the Thames at Staines.
FRESH AIRE
The Aire and Calder Navigation has been stocked with 30,000 small fish released below Fish Ponds Lock south of Leeds — and it's set to receive more.
The General Purposes Committee of Leeds DASA linked arms with the Fisheries Management Committee to complete a netting operation on a private stillwater.
Leeds were given the fish by a benefactor, their task was to remove the many small roach and skimmer bream.
British Waterways have also topped up stocks in the same watercourse below Thwaites Mill.
They recently introduced 2,500 roach and a further 5,000 fish are in the pipeline.
GIANT COD FROM THE DEEP
A superb 44 lb cod has been caught by Penarth charter skipper Charlie Debaene just half an hour off the coast.
The brilliant specimen is one of the biggest ever boated off South Wales and came from the same mark which yielded Charlie a 33 lb 8 oz cod three years ago.
Charlie, 50, battled for 35 minutes to beat the specimen which was hooked in 70 feet of water half a mile off Stout Point near Aberthaw, Mid-Glamorgan.
The skipper of the Lady Hamilton also had to cope with a bird's nest on his reel halfway through the fight and had to strip off yards of line before he could resume the battle.
‘The was just a small knock on the rod and I went for it,’ said Charlie, from Newport.
‘At first I thought I'd hooked a tree because it felt so solid.
The fish made several deep dives and I began to wonder who would give up first, me or the cod.
The great specimen took a big bunch of ragworm tipped off with squid on a size 6/0 hook and was eventually brought aboard on 18 lb line.
Another big cod fell to Cardiff quantity surveyor Steve Williams on his first-ever fishing trip.
The 32-year old boated a 30 lb 8 oz specimen on lug and squid cocktail aboard Danny Williams' Swansea craft Lady Gail.
Carlisle sales rep Ian Cass made the short journey to top shore mark Balcary Point in south west Scotland to catch a 22 lb 8 oz cod.
Ian, 39, fished a bunch of lugworm on a size 4/0 hook to tempt the cod which was beached on 15 lb line.
Just Reward
Charity fundraiser Robbie Robertson has been awarded a trophy to mark his record-breaking marathon wheelchair journey from John O'Groats to Land's End.
Robbie, the National Federation of Anglers' disabled co-ordinator, raised around £22,000 for charity from last June's trip.
He was awarded the Griffin Trophy in a ceremony at Torquay, Devon, to mark his achievement which provided a bus for a Sussex school for the physically disabled and around £8,000 for the NFA's Ron Shirley Memorial Fund.
Trout get a jacuzzi
Trout in the River Wye at Loudwater, Buckinghamshire, are to get a touch of the high life with the building of a new jacuzzi-style weir.
The weir will be the second of its kind on the river and was designed by the National Rivers Authority to keep gravel spawning beds clear of silt.
The weir is formed of stones which shoot fine sprays of water up through the gravel on the river bed in a similar fashion to a jacuzzi.
Area fisheries officer Vaughan Lewis said: ‘The Wye has a healthy trout population but silting up of the river bed can be a problem.
‘The new weir should provide a clean area which will encourage spawning.’
The weir is the latest in a series of improvements on the Wye which have included the creation of reed beds, tree planting and habitat improvements to protect the native crawfish.
DOUBLE BLOW FOR ANGLERS
Midlands anglers are fuming over two rulings made by local councils which have struck a double blow to fishing in the Warwickshire region.
BLOW ONE: One of the best winter hotspots on the Warwickshire Avon has been lost to anglers following a decision by Stratford-On-Avon District Council amenities committee to ban fishing opposite the Hilton Hotel in the town.
BLOW TWO: Nuneaton and Bedworth Borough Council threw out plans to allow fishing on park lakes in the area.
‘These are typical stupid decisions by anti-angling politicians,’ stormed Rugby tackle dealer and former National Champion Dave Burr.
‘In the space of a couple of days local politicians have succeeded in dashing the hopes of thousands of anglers, and I feel it is just the thin end of the wedge.
‘In this area angling seems to have been lumped together with bloodsports and some members of these councils vote automatically against anything that could benefit local fishing.
‘In Stratford in particular, there is a hard core that hate anglers and they seem to be able to sway the rest of the council at voting time.
‘I wonder if these councillors realise that anglers are among the people who vote them in in the first place, and who they are supposed to serve?,’ he asked.
Dave added the Nuneaton area was starved of good fisheries, and that the only choice for locals who don't wish to travel is a couple of stetches of canal.
The Nuneaton and Bedworth Council claimed it had received letters of protest from residents opposed to a trial scheme to allow fishing on three lakes in the borough.
Councillors were told anglers spoiled the enjoyment of members of the public who liked to stroll around the lakes, and labour councillor Owen Granfield expressed concern over the environmental impact of stocking fish into park lakes.
Meanwhile, at Stratford, the district council banned fishing on the popular 300-yard stretch of the Avon just above the swan sanctuary following complaints from nearby residents.
One, Yvonne Morgan, said anglers on the riverbank were an invasion of her privacy and claimed she had been subjected to abuse and foul language.
MAIL BOX
The West Sussex region of the Carp Anglers' Association have two meeting in Bognor Regis on Friday, March 29 and Saturday April 13.
Details from Simon Lee on 0243 824608.
Three meetings of the Carp Society's East London and Essex region have been arranged for March 28, April 25 and May 30 at the PTA club, Parr Road, East Ham.
Details from Danny Regan on 081 552 3795.
•This 33 lb 12 oz pike was the result of a two year campaign at a Nottinghamshire gravel pit by Mansfield miner David Dare.
David, 38, with his brother Andy and fishing partners Kev Berry and Robin Clark have spent dozens of hours trying to take a big predator from the water.
It all came right for David when he legered a sardine on size 8 barbless trebles to a 20 lb wire trace and 12 lb line.
‘I had my only run of the day at approximately 11 am and after setting the hooks I had a slow, dogged fight for about five minutes before netting the fish at the second attempt,’ said Dave.
The personal best pike measured a massive 45 inches with a girth of 24 inches and was returned alive.
Four share 172 lb pike haul
A small East Anglian stillwater yielded 172 lb of pike for four anglers from Heacham, Norfolk.
Bricklayers Trevor and Paul Framlingham, Cedric Hipkin and plumber Chris Palmer had 30 fish and lost another 12, using fish baits on 10 lb line in a 100 yard stretch of water.
Southern Ireland Match Guide
FESTIVAL PAYOUTS TOP £15,000
The stakes are big in Southern Ireland's Close Season match fixtures.
The chance to fish against some of the biggest names in match angling and beat them can be too hard to resist, and the rewards are high.
Prize monies for this year's festivals look set to top £15,000.
Festivals aren't only about fishing, most feature an after match disco and for the less energetic there's pool, darts competitions and singalongs in the local bar.
Venues for the 1991 events cover a whole range of waters from canal to rivers to lakes and results year after year confirm the Irish fish hhave no respect for big reputations.
Bream often have the biggest price on their heads but roach, rudd and hefty tench can provide a healthy bonus.
Feeder and float tactics are equally productive, and catches are likely to top 100 lb with 200 lb possible from waters like the Shannon.
THE MAJOR DATES
MARCH 29–31: Castleblaney Easter Festival.
Feeder and maggot expected to provide the winner in this two day event on Lough Muckno, County Monaghan.
Three man team and individual, plenty of prizes each day and overall.
Lots of roach and hybrids, 50–60 lb a good weight.
Limited to 51 anglers.
Leisure Angling sole selling agents, package deals from £99.
Telephone Leisure Angling on 051 734 5200.
APRIL 22–26: Bailieborough Spring Festival, County Cavan, organised by Leisure Angling.
Likely to be a feeder match, with big weights.
Roach and bream the target, 60 lb plus needed to win depending on bream.
Plenty of prizes, team and individual contests.
APRIL 28: Edenderry Open, County Offaly.
On the Grand Canal, bream expected but good back up weights of roach, rudd and hybrids possible.
Pole and maggot should win.
25 lb to 30 lb a good weight.
Also Opens here on July 28 and August 18.
MAY 4–11: Farney Festival, County Monaghan.
Expected to attract top names.
Carrickmacross has a reputation for double-figure bream, but there is good mixed sport.
Feeder and maggot and pole should score.
60 lb plus a good weight.
MAY 5–9: Prosperous Festival, County Kildare.
Attractive match for disabled anglers with easy access.
On the Grand Canal with bream and rudd mainly to pole and maggot.
Should yield 35 lb plus nets.
MAY 13–17: Galway Angling Festival.
New event sponsored by Flanagan's Travel boasts £1,000 in prize money plus pools and trophies.
Fished over three days on the prolific rivers and lakes around Galway, bumper catches expected.
Large shoals of roach, bream and hybrids likely with 100 lb plus nets possible.
Pleasure bags have topped 300 lb.
Details from Glanagans on 0203 597000.
MAY 18–25: Ballinasloe Festival, County Galway.
Excellent social event and good fishing.
River Suck bream around 5 lb, with 50 lb plus needed to win, probably on the feeder.
MAY 19–24: Ballybay Festival.
Will be won with bream, possibly 100 lb plus.
Limited to 60 pegs and very popular.
Features lake fishing for mixed species, 4 lb to 5 lb bream the target.
MAY 27–31: Fermoy Festival.
A hit with stick float anglers but could be won on the pole or waggler.
River Blackwater's roach and dace the target.
Top weight around 60 lb.
Team and individual event.
JUNE 29 — JULY 6: Athlone International Festival.
Fished on the Meadows and Burgess Park stretches of the prolific River Shannon.
100 lb plus bream haul expected each day.
Limited to 80 anglers.
Team and individual events.
JULY 28 — AUGUST 3: Belturbet Festival.
Three figure weights possible.
Fished mainly on the Erne, bream and roach on the pole and feeder.
JULY 31 — AUGUST 7: Arva Festival, Cavan Feeder orientated festival fished on lakes should produce good catches of bream, roach and hybrids.
SEPTEMBER 1–7: Drunconrath Festival, County Meath.
All methods productive.
Fished on lakes in the Drunconrath area.
Pole, waggler and feeder could score.
Bream and roach expected but big tench and hybrids can boost catches.
Target 60 lb.
SEPTEMBER 10–15: King of Clubs Championship, County Cavan.
Premier event with over £10,000 in prize money plus pools and trophies worth an extra £6,000.
Limited to 180 anglers.
SEPTEMBER 14–21: Monaghan Paris Championships, County Monaghan.
Organised by Leisure Angling.
Fished on Lough Muckno for bream, roach and hybrids in expected nets to 70 lb.
Two and a half tons of fish taken in last year's event.
About £6,000 of offer.
Further details from Leisure Angling.
SEPTEMBER 15–21: Carrick-on-Shannon Festival, Leitrim.
A good entry expected with pegging on a new stretch of the River Shannon and Lough Bran.
Bream expected to feeder, 100 lb plus bags possible.
SEPTEMBER 21–28: Cootehill Festival, Cavan.
Top class lake fishing, bream likely to feature in winning weight which could be in three figures.
Individual and team event.
OCTOBER 23–27: King of the Shannon, Athlone, Westmeath.
Big catches possible, 200 lb bream nets recorded.
Worm a favourite with feeder for shoaled up bream.
Shannon should be in top form for this event.
Limited to 80 anglers.
Anglers World are planning a Southern Ireland Festival for October, venue and date to be confirmed in the next few weeks.
Details from Martin Founds on 0246 221717.
Shannon Holidays of Chesham, Buckinghamshire are organising coach trips to Southern Ireland incorporating sea and coarse matches from April 27.
The trips will be to the Clare Lakelands and Shannon.
Accommodation will overlook Lough Derg.
Contests will be staged on the Shannon for rudd and bream.
Pleasure fishing will be available.
Prizes include free holildays and trophies.
Details from 0494 772728.
Northamptonshire's Cliff Smart's Angling Holidays are offering up to £500 in prize money for winners of certian angling festivals if you book through them.
The festivals include Cootehill, Carrick, Arva, Belturbet, Athlone, Fermoy, Ballinasloe, Prosperous and Farney.
Details from 0536 724226 or 725453.
RIVER REPORTS
ANGLIAN
Ancholme.
Patchy and unpredictable.
Cadney one of the few bright spots.
Main sport for small roach plus perch and ruffe.
Maggot on pole or waggler.
Lower Great Ouse.
Roach the main target, fish to 1 lb 4 oz in match returns nearing 20 lb at Ten Mile Bank.
Limited bream activity below Lark Outfall, fish to 3 lb through to Littleport Bridge.
Catches of 10 lb possible.
Opposite the old beet factory at Ely, roach to 8 oz in catches from 6–10 lb.
Cut-Off Channel patchy, although roach nearing 2 lb in pleasure nets to 14 lb at Hilgay Bridge.
Odd bream to 4 lb.
Relief Channel patchy.
Middle Level Drains.
Frost and hearby snow reduced fishing.
Twenty Foot at Hobbs Lot Bridge gave pleasure catches to 10 lb with roach to 8 oz, and match returns to 8 lb.
Old Nene in March around Wigston Bridge offers roach to 1 lb in nets to 10 lb.
Roach at Priory Sluice.
Odd tench to 2 lb from clear stretches.
Nene.
Much harder.
Some reasonable nets of roach possible along the upper river from Thrapston to Wansford with waggler best.
Chub in Peterborough section, fish to 4 lb 8 oz at Alwalton and Milton.
Small maggot feeder fished against far bank best.
There should be some reasonable roach catches possible from just above Milton Bridge and downstream to Orton Weir, but below the weir poor.
Peterborough Embankment roach to 8 oz fair sport around the new road bridge.
Norfolk Broads and Rivers.
Most venues iced-up and sport generally poor.
Try upper, fast flowing reaches and millpools.
Upper Wensum above Norwich for chub to 4 lb, odd roach and dace, mostly between Hellesdon and Norwich ring road.
Waveney in the Bungay area for chub to 5 lb.
Tiday Wensum through Norwich in form for small roach, dace and bream in weights to 12 lb.
Middle of the day best period, maggot or caster top baits.
Tiday Yare at Thorpe, Thitlingham and Brundall offers fair sport.
Head for tidal boatyard dykes and basins when thaw sets in, as excellent sport expected.
Waveney at Beccles, the upper Thirne between Martham and Potter Heigham, the Bure at Weoxham and Horning and the Wensum and Yare in the Norwich to Buckenham area all recommended for roach and bream.
Few pike showing, but an improvement expected.
Welland.
Dace and chub around Stamford and Deeping St James, with catches of small roach and skimmers possible in Spalding town.
Wide river around Crowland poor.
One or two big bream, including fish over 8 lb.
Witham.
Before snow, the area below Bardney Bridge was fishing well for roach to 14 oz in midweek hauls to 13 lb.
Waggler or pole with bronze maggot best.
Southrey good, lots of roach nets around 6–7 lb with 15 lb possible.
Waggler and bronze maggot best.
Pound length inconsistent, but can produce weights to 9 lb.
Tattershall Bridge area good for mainly snall roach to pole or waggler.
The 320s near Skirth Outfall best for 5–6 lb nets.
Jimmy's Hill in excellent form, with 420–440 the best pegs for 15 lb bags.
All drains, including the Hobhold and Bargate, frozen.
Expect a few small roach and skimmers on pole and squatts when after the thaw.
NORTHUMBRIAN
Tees.
River in sparkling form before cold weather.
Nellies Beck on the tidal could produce decent dace and roach, but tide critical.
Chub the mainstay upriver, with bread top bait.
Over Dinsdale for nets to almost 40 lb and Croft for swimfeeder nets to 16 lb.
Grayling in upper reaches, some pike around Darlington.
Tyne.
Dace nets to 6 lb from the Wylam area.
Feeder aend maggot most productive.
Slacker swims best.
Once snow thaws, expect poor sport.
Wear.
Pegs from Lumley Bridge to the day at Chester-le-Street most productive for dace.
Fish tend to be small.
Stick float and maggot best.
Durham Ice Rink fair for dace and roach plus the odd grayling.
NORTHWEST
Bridgewater Canal.
Odd skimmer and some roach fron Warrington water to ice breakers before the deep freeze.
Bloodworm took 2–3 lb catches at Trafford park.
Leeds-Liverpool Canal.
Good bags of roach to punched bread from Parbold and Dover Lock on Leigh Arm before worst conditions.
Roach and perch in 6–7 lb bags on caster along Leigh branch and Common Lane.
Skimmers, roach and small perch from most Liverpool sections but pike active.
Plugs took fish to 16 lb plus numerous jacks at Brewery Land bridge.
Ribble.
Grim, with only a handful of swims producing modest bags of 2 to 2 lb 8 oz chub on feeder.
Best avoided until normal conditions.
Macclesfield Canal.
Slow, even before ice, with small roach and perch.
Should revive quicker than most waters once thaw sets in.
Shropshire Union Canal.
Most sections frozen but prospects good.
Most anglers are concentrating on the Tiverton and Beeston sections where roach and skimmers are taking punched bread and gozzer.
Chriselton similar, but the usually prolific Church Eaton a major disappointment.
Trent and Mersey Canal.
Match bags to 2 lb on pinkie or punched bread before total ice cover.
Weaver.
Carp to 12 lb on boilies off boatyear before sub-zero temperatures.
Some small roach but patchy.
All species showing from Northwich town centre, but no quality fish.
Moving stretches yielded big roach in nets to 15 lb to stick float and maggot.
SEVERN TRENT
Severn.
Snow, water and severe frosts hit sport although still some action with grayling in upper reaches.
Roach to stick float and maggot at Shrewsbury, with the chance of bonus chub.
Odd chub to swimfeeder, maggot or bread at Ironbridge.
Chub at Bridgnorth on milder days.
Action at Bewdley mainly from deeper, slow swims for chub and roach.
Roach to 2 lb 8 oz at Stourport plus some dace, with float and single maggot best.
Top swims below Mucky Meadow.
Holdt Fleet for some roach, bream possible from deep swims.
Roach target at Bevere, mixed catches from Grimley and Hallow.
Worcester chub tightly shoaled on Cleve Lode, where 35 lb possible.
Few anglers bothering at Tewkesbury.
TEME.
Cold and little activity.
Few fish moving apart from small grayling to floatfished maggot.
Some chub at Ashford Carbonel, in mild spells and from deeper swims.
TRENT.
Fishing reasonable despite sub zero temperatures.
Very clear and fish tightly shoaled.
Long Higgin fished well for chub in the Manvers Field on long range feeder and maggot.
Pegs nine to 12 best.
Chub to 4 lb.
Parkside for lots of roach from the bend to stick and maggot but bream and chub dominate matches.
Burton Joyce gave a few big roach catches.
Chub and meat baits have taken over for all the major weights.
Waggler and meat best for weights to 30 lbs.
Gunthorpe with the exception of the first ten pegs which are giving 10 to 15 lb of roach the rest appear devoid of fish, Shelford for fish around Stoke Ferry land end and pleasure anglers getting 30 lb plus nets on stick and maggot.
Meat also scoring but weights not reaching 25 lb.
Caythorpe hard, odd catches on meat and 10 lb on maggot feeder.
Neward Dyke hard with few fish apart from the A46 bridge and Red Bridge section.
Winthorpe nets to 10 lb on stick and pole and similar catches on maggot feeder.
15 lb a brilliant weight.
Holme Marsh patchy, a draw below 30 prefered or blank a possibility.
Warwickshire Avon.
Dace and chub mainstay with roach hard to tempt.
Small chub at Warwick, fish to 2 lb at Hampton Lucy.
Some good chub on Lido sections at Stratford.
Waggler best.
Double-figure chub catches possible from above weir at Marlcliffe.
Quiet at Bidford, but short spells of action with chub and roach around midday at Welford.
Chub at Twyford, best action on top pegs and island swims.
Evesham best swims around bridge for chub to waggler and maggot.
Hampton Ferry lower swims best, bream could show on pegs in the low 30s.
Warmer weather needed to bring bream back on in Swans Neck area.
SOUTHERN
Arun.
Roach at Swan Meadow to waggler and maggot.
Railway Bridge area most productive with chub from Rother mouth on pole and maggot.
Stopham produced roach and skimmers on waggler and maggot.
Fish shoaled tightly above bridge.
Medway.
East Peckham, Farleigh, Marming, and Stilstead for chub on waggler and maggot.
Maidstone and Tovil for roach and dace on pole and maggot.
Rother.
Bodiam for roach on bread punch and pole.
Skimmers and roach at Newenden on pole and maggot.
Iden Bridge and Star Lock produced roach on waggler and maggot.
Royal Military Canal.
Iden stretch for small fish on pole and maggot in the deeper water by lock.
Kenardington and Warehorne for roach and odd bream on pole and caster.
Hythe for roach on bread punch and waggler.
Stour.
Grove Ferry only consistent area.
Bream and roach showing off the Ferry Boards and Boatyard stretches to stick float or feeder.
SOUTH WEST/WESSEX
Bristol Avon.
Heavy snow falls will affect sport, but river has been fishing well with good catches of dace and roach from Conham, especially around the footbridge and Boardmill.
Chequers fishing well off the boats and around the lone tree.
Jackie Whites for chub from the blockhouse, with one or two good roach bags around the outfall.
Crane for plenty of small fish from the bottom end, and some good nets of roach from the Ashtip Field.
New fence area for one or two good nets of chub.
Bittern Brook fishing well for chub and roach.
Swineford second field producing chub and a few good roach.
Kelston for good nets of roach, chub, perch and odd bream from pegs below the weir.
The sink peg and the point above for decent nets of roach.
Saltford slow in the trees, just the odd chub and roach.
Newbridge straight fishing well for roach and chub.
Rotork for good nets of chub from the toytown area.
Bath free water very good, plenty of small fish.
Bathford slow, pegs around the railway bridge best.
Warley poor, just odd chub.
Claverton manor field best, chub showing on the bend.
Limpley Stoke sewer outfall producing bream., with some chub throughout.
Avoncliffe very poor except for feature pegs.
Barton Farm and Chippenham slow.
Kellaways worth a try for chub.
Lacock good on the deep, fast glides with plenty of roach, chub and dace.
Melksham's Black Bridge producing some good nets of chub.
Christian Malford and Sutton Benger on form for roach plus occasional chub.
Brue.
Best of south west waters at the moment.
Good bags of roach and chub around Pompales Bridge and Blackhatches Weir.
Chub to 4 lb to bread or cheese on lead, maggot on float.
Dorset Stour.
Good bags of roach, bream and chub throughout.
Throop fishery giving up to 15 chub a sitting, including fish to 5 lb.
Bolder Weir for 11 chub a sitting, inlcluding fish to 5 lb.
Bolder Weir for 11 chub to 5 lb 2 oz.
Horsebeach for chub to 4 lb 8 oz.
School bridge area for chub to 5 lb.
Bottom boundary for mixed nets to 40 lb of bream and roach.
Barbel Corner gave chub, bream and smaller species.
Hampshire Avon.
Lifelands above weir for bags to 30 lb of roach and dace.
Red and white maggot top bait.
Pike to 17 lb 2 oz showing.
Kings Stream for good bags of dace and roach on trotted maggot.
Pike to 15 lb 2 oz.
Fordingbridge Park for good roach nets plus odd chub and dace.
Roach to 2 lb 2 oz reported.
Local Dave Swallow took a 5 lb 4 oz chub on trotted bread flake.
Bickley Millstream on form for bags of dace, small chub and odd better fish behind the industrial estate.
Huntspill, Exeter Canal, King's Sedgemoor Drain, Tiverton and Kennet and Avon Canals.
Frozen with little prospect of any sport.
Parrett.
Best catches from deeper water below Langport town bridge.
Fishing well for roach.
Above the bridge a few chub taken on waggler.
Fish to 1 lb 8 oz.
Taunton-Bridgwater Canal.
Around the locks, such as Mansell, a few small fish taken in clearer water to bread punch or pinkie.
Tone.
Only small fish showing in Newbridge area.
Fishing very hard.
Bronze maggot with waggler or stick best bet.
THAMES
Grand Union Canal.
Ice-breaking brought reasonable results at Berkhamsted, with roach, small skimmers and gudgeon.
Areas close to locks best.
Sewage outfall at Bourne End producing odd skimmers along with quality roach.
Sticklebacks and minnows a problem here and at Lady Capels.
Chub possible from the wides, booms and pegs near the Motorway bridge.
Most pounds frozen from Watford to London.
Odd sheltered parts of Regents arm ice free and have produced small roach catches to 3 lb.
Uxbridge flowing sections produced a few good roach to maggot.
Lea.
St. Margarets for fair roach and perch sport.
Bloodworm on the long pole top method.
Crown quiet, best chances of fish from the bridge up to the start of the conkers.
Meadow terrible.
Most of navigation from Wormley to Tottenham frozen.
Cooks Ferry and Stonebridge for a few small fish to bloodworm through the ice.
Odd quality roach and dace below Tottenham to float and maggot.
Mole.
Reasonable bet for some sport, chub main quarry in low temperatures with several double-figure bags recorded in one match on North Bank, Dorking.
Roach and dace not showing.
Steep banks dangerous with snow.
Thames.
Kelmscot and Radcot slow and patchy.
Pleasure anglers getting odd chub to big legered baits or maggot feeder.
Few small fish.
Oxford pleasure anglers getting good chub to legered bread flake.
Roach patchy.
Reading slow.
Windsor hard, pleasure anglers catching just odd chub.
Staines chub showing downstream towards Penton Hook, one angler has 12 to 3 lb 8 oz.
Chertsey and Laleham for odd chub to swim feedered maggot at Laleham.
Molesey and Kingston slow, only odd small fish.
Tiday usually safe for small fish but dace shoals not showing in cold weather.
Open match won with less than 2 lb.
Wey.
Godalming slow.
Pleasure anglers getting odd chub to big baits on leger.
Guildford midweek anglers had odd chub, match won with 6 lb, three chub.
Long pole holding back maggots good.
Bowers poor, less than 4 lb to win matches.
Woking improved and main river match won with 16 lb 8 oz.
During same match one angler had five bream for 12 ob 8 oz on legered bread flake.
Wet Navigation.
Mostly frozen over.
Expected to be unfishable for some time.
WALES
Dee.
Desperate from the Crook O'Dea to the Earls Eye with many dry nets.
Better returns from Farndon with dace.
Quality roach boosting returns in Chester, legered bronze maggot best.
Lugg.
At normal level but cold and clear.
Chub the main feeders and legered meat took a few fish to 4 lb at Mardon, Lugg Mill, Longworth Mill and Mordiford.
A few swims on the Frome at Lugwardine are turning up dace and odd chub.
Monmouthshire Canal.
Frozen throughout and fishing is impossible.
Monnow.
Sport poor in the cold, clear river.
Some chub below Vauxhall bridge in Monmouth.
Roach being taken from swims just above the by pass bridge.
Taff.
Despite the cold, river is fishing well.
Roach nets to double-figures at Halley Park and chub to 3 lb just above and below Western Avenue bridge.
A few dace at Black Weir.
Roach to 1 lb from the tidal around Canton Bridge.
Wye.
Low, clear and cold and sport patchy.
Heavy falls of snow will result in more cold water.
Prospects aren't good.
Graying the most reliable feeders on the upper river, fish to 1 lb 8 oz around Builth Wells, Llyswen and Erwood.
Chub to legered cheese paste and some pike to deadbaits.
Dace hard to find, even the Llynfi tributary at Glasbury is giving little.
The deep and steady Belmont stretch at Hereford gave good sport with dace from the pumphouse down to the town bridge.
Downstream, the Bartensham section is turning up some good roach.
Chub to 4 lb at Ross and matches won with over 20 lb of dace at Symonds Yat.
The bottom of this water is fishing well for roach.
Newport anglers Tony Croome and Ken Middle shared a 100 lb haul of fish to 1 lb 8 oz from an 11 foot deep swim in front of the Saracens Head.
YORKSHIRE
Aire.
Chub upstream of Keighley.
Bread best bait in Skipton area and good chub expected from Carleton reaches along with specimen roach.
Chub shoaled downstream of Kildwick Bridge, maggot took fair nets near the bridge.
Chub around Sutton Beck end and at top end of Steeton.
Bread and wasp grubs for good chub nets just above Steeton Bridge and around Silsden beck end.
Chub also at top end of Utley near the Ellpots, maggot favoured.
Small chub released at Utley failed to show.
Pike at Stocksbridge, try spinners.
Roach and small chub on the Roberts Park stretch at Saltaire.
Roach south of Leeds, good nets to caster upstream of Thwaits weir at Stourton.
Bream below South Accommodation bridge in Hunslet.
Good roach nets from First Avenue stretch at Rothwell.
Aire and Calder Navigation.
Newly-opened to anglers, and early reports encouraging.
Roach to 1 lb-plus and some decent hauls of skimmers from Goole railway bridge.
Rawcliffe bridge and behind Southfields Reservoirs.
Maggot taking the fish on pole.
Calder.
Brighouse for roach around Cooper Bridge to coloured maggots.
Legered worm for chub near the bridge.
Chub also near the island on the Wakefield Road section.
Odd bream on the Anchor Pit stetch.
Roach slow, best nets from Lillands Farm.
Derwent.
Graying around Yedingham.
Dace and pike at Crambe.
Swimfeeder tactics with maggot and wasp grubs took small chub above Stamford Weir.
Dace near the Viaduct downstream of Stamford Bridge, also pike.
Wasp grubs for chub and casters for roach at Scoreby and Kexby.
Jack pike downstream of Elvington dam.
Big pike around Thorganby.
Hull.
Roach plentiful at Beverly shipyard, with several over 1 lb 4 oz.
Leger and trotting tactics best.
Bream from pegs upstream of the shipyard, including odd specimens to 7 lb 8 oz.
Market Weighton Canal.
Level and colour good.
Ice expected to last some time, but look for a few skimmers and perch at Newport on pole and maggot.
Pike also active.
Nidd.
Grayling in the Pateley Bridge area.
Big shoals of grayling at Ripley and below Sawmills weir at Scotton, also chub.
Dace above Sawmills weir to maggot.
Wasp grub and maggot for chub on Chapmans and at Goldsborough.
Chub and bream at Cowthorpe.
Roach at Hunsinngore, bread flake for the specimens.
Dace and pike at Tockwith.
Dace near Hammerton railway bridge.
Ouse System.
Roach at Dunsforth between the Jungle and the Crow Tres.
Specimen chub expected in the Ferry Field and off the sandbed upstream of the stump to caster and bread.
Chub in the Little Fields and Sandersons.
Big shoal of roach at top end of Aldward.
Try meat for chub near Aldward Bridge.
Roach around the Willow Garth at Hunders Lodge.
Bungalows at Hunters for chub, and odd bream.
Roach and bog chub at Linton and Widdington.
Roach at Fulford, Palace and Middlethorpe Ings.
Skimmers and roach to maggot feeder at Acaster.
Selby Canal.
Little activity as canal is iced over.
Moderate catches of roach, chub to 2 lb and skimmers possible from Selby town lengths.
Maggot on wagglers or pole best.
Stainforth and Keadby Canal.
Keadby Basin in reasonable form for skimmers and chub, but generally hard and fairly unrewarding.
Mauds Bridge and Thorne lengths reasonable.
Swale.
Grayling around Catterick to maggot.
Bread and lobworms for chub at Swainby and Maunby.
Bread and cheese for chub at Pick Holl and Holme.
Wasp grubs for chub at Baldersby.
Chub to maggot around Skipton Bridge, try big baits.
Dace and roach on the Salmon Hall stretch but chub main target to big baits.
Roach and dace on Listers upstream of Topcliffe weir.
Chub below Asenby road bridge to maggot.
Dace and small chub at Fawdington also pike which could show at Thornton Bridge and near Brafferton Bridge, Helperby.
Ure.
Chub around ripon.
Caster best below Military Bridge.
Chub below North Bridge to maggot and caster, try bread around Hewick bridge for chub.
Roach at Bishop Monkton, pike around the canal mouth.
Maggot wad wasp grubs for bumper chub nets at Brampton.
Double-figure roach nets from Roecliffe around the A1 roadbridge upstream of Boroughbridge.
Quality chub on Roecliffe bottom.
Last season bream could show around Whitchips drain at Langthorpe.
Wharfe.
Dace and roach upstream of Wetherby weir on day ticket water.
Roach and big bream on the Grange stretch below A1 road bridge at Wetherby, also grayling.
Caster for roach below Boston Spa road bridge.
Dace in match nets at Smaws Ings along with chub, odd bream and pike.
Roach late showing at Smaws.
SEASCENE
WALES
Beach fishing from Swansea to Ogmore very poor and codling still hard to find.
Flounder caught at Gower and from the Loughor estuary where fish to over 2 lb taken.
At Mumbles only pouting and rockling.
Codling and small conger from Port Talbot breakwater and Sker Beach.
Odd cod from Porthcawl Pier and at Newton Point.
Boat sport quiet but big cod starting to show.
Best so far a 30 lb 8 oz fish from the boat Lady Gail.
Ogmore to Barry beach sport hit rock bottom.
Two club contests at Boveton Beach produced nothing and just a few codling from the whole stretch of beach.
Better chance of fish at Barry Docks where flounder and pouting taken on light tackle.
Boat fishing patchy, but odd big cod reported, best 44 lb aboard the Lady Hamilton off Aberthow.
Flounder to 1 lb the main species at Redwick, St Brides and Rumney.
Cardiff foreshore turned up a few conger and codling.
Penarth Pier worth a try for pouting, flounder and occasional just-sizeable codling.
Cardiff and Penarth charter boats took a few cod to 14 lb.
Local boats Michele and Leah James also took thornback ray to 12 lb and spotted ray to 5 lb.
Eastern winds have brought what had been fair sport back to a normal level for the time of year.
Only the off flounder left on the north bank at Portmadoc with no reports from the estuary.
Some nice dabs to 1 lb from the golf course beach at Harlech.
Rockling, dabs, odd flounder and school bass at night over the sandbanks at Llandanwg.
Flounder from the river mouth at Dalar to 1 lb 13 oz on razorfish.
Open beach marks at Dyffryn and Talybont have seen little angling activity with just the odd dab and rockling.
Barmouth north beach for dogs and dabs over high water.
No reports of flounder from the Nawddach estuary which has probably seen its worst for the species for more than ten years.
Towyn north beach good for dogfish but flounder and dabs reported from the southern section at Penllyn and the rifle range.
Rockling and odd dabs at Borth.
Some good whiting to 1 lb at Aberarth but few in number.
Unconfirmed reports of rays to 3 lb 8 oz from Aberporth rocks.
Day tides at Mwnt for dogfish.
School bass at night from the surf at Tresaith.
Just the odd flounder in the outer channels of the Teifi estuary.
A boat trip from Pensarn gave only small thornback and dogfish.
Whiting thin on the ground which is most unusual at this time.
Merseyside quiet with small codling, whiting and a few dabs the mainstay.
One or two sizeable codling at Seaforth and the One O'Clock Gun.
Dee estuary at Mostyn and Talacre disappointing, probably due to snow water.
Colwyn Bay and Llandudno for undersized codling, a few whiting and odd dab.
Boat sport off Rhos and Conway patchy, some days offering whiting to 2 lb and large dabs.
A lot of small codling in the Menai Straits, plus a few dabs to 1 lb at Port Dinorwic and Beaumaris.
Caim and Whitebeach for whiting, dabs and a few dogs.
Llan Carw whiting to 1 lb 8 oz with dogs, small pollack and a codling to 3 lb 8 oz.
Holyhead Breakwater, Chair Rock and Treaddur Bay yielding occasional cod to 7 lb.
Whiting to 1 lb and flats from the rocks at Ty Croes.
Dinas Dinlle for small codling and a few whiting.
SOUTH EAST
A combination of east winds and sub zero temperatures made shore and boat fishing difficult throughout the region although there is still the chance of odd big cod.
Main shore sport along the North Kent coast with flounder, harbour rag and king ragworm the tip baits.
Best areas include Shorne Fort at Gravesend and Rushenden Bay at Sheerness.
Occasional codling from the Broadstairs chalk ledges of stone and Dumpton Gap to peeler crab at night.
Ramsgate undercliff promenades and piers offer founder and rockling.
Boats fishing the Goodwins Sands can expect codling, thornback ray, whiting and dabs.
At Sandwich Bay plenty of small pout and dabs.
Odd codling to 3 lb at Sandown over low water.
Deal Pier for odd codling at night, best 3 lb 14 oz to Richard Tunnicliff.
Deal and Dover boats found a few codling at Fan Bay and other inshore marks.
Best taken aboard the boats Growler and Mariner 11 at 7 lb.
Pout, whiting, dabs and odd dogfish made up bags.
Dover Breakwater offered flounder, dabs and small pout with the inside wall best.
Dover's town beach for flounder.
At Folkestone some decent dabs from the pier over high water.
Folkestone boats struggled with only occasional codling inshore although the odd 20 lb fish still taken.
Seabrook and Hythe beaches for flounder, dabs and pout with razorfish best for the flounder.
Hythe Range to Redoubt Wall for dabs, pout and rockling.
Dungeness beach yielded dabs to black lugworm.
High water in the evenings best.
Dengemarsh for pout, whiting dabs and flounder.
Dungeness boats produced cod to 15 lb with dogs, pout and whiting.
SOUTHWEST
Intense commercial netting of wrecks has made life difficult for offshore charter skippers and anglers.
Few fish of note taken.
The reefs in deep water off Devon and Cornwall are fairly clear and have given steady sport.
Top fish a tremendous 37 lb ling from the Hands Deeps.
The specimen is believed to be a rough ground record for the south west.
Loads of ling between 10–20 lb with medium-weight pollack and good whiting.
Shore anglers enjoying one of the best flounder seasons ever.
Every tidal waterway in the region continues to give number of fish to 4 lb.
The Plym has never fished so well and enthusiasts report catches of up to eight fish per session with a high percentage of 2 lb plus specimens.
Best area for the small boat angler is the Exe near the Dawlish Warren spit.
Large numbers of flounder expected to stay in the rivers and estuaries until later this month.
Cornwall's Atlantic coast good for whiting and excellent bags of fish to 1 lb 12 oz after dark.
Cod to 9 lb with the best catches from Baggy Point along the coast to Ilfracombe and on to Coombe Martin.
Severe cold conditions could lead to a big increase in cod numbers.
Good coalfish available at many places.
WEST SCOTLAND
Lochryan shore sport poor with only a few dogfish from Old House Point and Lefnol.
Worm baits picked up a few small coalfish, codling and whiting.
Portpatrick rock marks gave occasional codling but mostly small coalfish and pollack.
Mull of Galloway rock marks for dogfish, small codling and coalfish.
Best results around East and West Tarbet.
Isle of Whithorn rocks produced catches of dogfish to 20 lb.
Worm baits tempted small codling, coalfish and whiting.
Best results from the eastern side of the Isle around Cairn Head up to Garlieston.
Worm baits tempted undersize codling and whiting from Borgue rock marks.
Ross and Borness for occasional sizeable whiting and small coalies.
Kirkcudbright Bay for codling during rough conditions with the Senwick shoreline for up to four codling to 3 lb a session.
Worm baits also tempted a few whiting and coalfish.
Marks around Torrs Point and Gypsy Point for decent catches of codling to 4 lb.
Whiting, coalfish and a few dabs to worm.
Abbey Burnfoot fished well over low water on night tides for a few decent codling.
Rascarell marks for odd cod to 10 lb along with whiting and dabs.
Worm best bait.
Balcary flat rock and point produced a few cod to 28 lb.
Big lugworm or lug and squid codktails took most fish.
Colvend and Rockcliffe coast gave cod to 16 lb.
NORTH WEST
Rough seas hit boat fishing off Walney Island and Barrow anglers unable to get out anywhere except in the Roa Channel where they found a few small codling and dabs.
Shore fishing in the north of the county moderate.
Some codling from the north promenade end of Maryport at night, best over high water.
Grasslot Beach also gave some fish during calmer conditions.
During south westerlies nice codling taken in the shelter of Maryport Pier.
Not much from Siddick or Flimby either high or low water.
Harrington rocks best at low water for odd big fish.
Poor in the estuaries in the northern half of Morecambe Bay and not much prospect of improvement.
Fleetwood charter boats able to fish the edges of the bay during unsettled weather but only found dabs and whiting.
Odd codling from the dumper buoy area.
Shore fishing at Fleetwood patchy, a few good fish over low water from Rossall area at night.
Conditions good for cod at Cleveleys and Norbreck at low water.
Beach capable of bigger cod in the next few weeks.
Cod of 14 lb and 11 lb at Anchorsholme over low water.
EAST
Kings Lynn to Southwold gave few flatfish and catches are very poor.
Odd codling at Trimingham and Mundesley, plus Yarmouth South Beach.
Harbour rag and lug top flattie baits.
Little prospects of boats getting out.
Southwold to Brightlingsea poor with flounder and dabs plus occasional sole and plaice from estuaries.
Boats taking occasional thornback ray, but cod scarce.
Orford and Aldeburgh deep water marks best.
Small pout, rockling, dabs and whiting from Felixstowe Pier.
Tilbury to Foulness boat sport poor, only dabs and flounder for most anglers in the Thames estuary.
Numbers of flounder and some large dabs from Thorpe Bay and Westcliff.
Dabs and flounder from the stem of Southend Pier, with undersized whiting a nuisance from the extension.
Sprat shoals concentrated in the Thames estuary.
Cornwall's Hands Deep Reef, a haven for the specimen hunter, yielded its biggest ling ever to Graham Andrews skipper of the Plymouth-based boat Franjo, when he boated this 37 lb giant.
The short session on the mid-tide paid dividends for the fish is believed to be a rough ground record for the south west.
NORTH EAST
Little boat activity in heavy seas and cold winds and shore anglers had better results.
Beadness Sker produced cod into double-figures on lug and frozen crab.
Bigger tides yielding best fish from marks halfway along.
Hauxley and Hadston beaches for cod to 8 lb, best results at high tide.
Bog Hole at Newbiggin gave John Bohill victory in the Shiremoor Open with three cod for 15 lb.
Newbiggin Promenade at high water produced good results, mainly cod to lug and mussel.
Lyneburn cod to 10 lb, mainly to lug and rag with razorfish a good alternative.
Sandy Bay for good bags of codling, mainly to lug and mussel.
some anglers had seven fish.
Cambois North Hole for cod to 6 lb and a few coalfish on frozen crab.
Whitley Bay beach for cod to 5 lb in heavy tides.
River Wear poor and upriver marks around the A19 road bridge best for flounder on a variety of baits.
Sunderland's Roker Pier produced odd codling, and a few coalfish.
Seaham area for a few codling in the harbour and from the Green Wall.
Colliery beaches produced some sizeable codling, although they are out numbered by undersized fish.
Horden and Easington best by night and Blackhall worth a try at the turn of the tide.
Crimdon produced a few good codling, but only at low water.
Hartlepool's Heugh Pier the only worthwhile mark in the area, although catches are small.
Redcar for some reasonable codling from East Scars.
South Gare offers a variety of small fish.
Some better fish at Skinningrove, with the turn of the tide best.
Whitby south rocks for sizeable codling, with the pier worth a try in rough conditions.
Commercial netting blamed for lack of cod on the Holderness coast.
Ulrome, Skipsea, Dimlington and Easington produced cod to 5 lb on lug or rag.
ENGLISH CHANNEL
Boat anglers out from Lyme Regis had varied action with an 18 lb turbot the most noticable specimen.
Weymouth boats took a number of rays from the Adamant Bank while marks just off Portland produced dogfish, pout, conger and occasional cod.
Chesil Beach gave dabs, pout and small whiting during daylight with odd dogfish at night.
Very little from Portland rock marks with the exception of Church Ope cove where odd cod and coalfish landed.
A few pout and small flounder from Swanage Beach at night, a 6 lb 2 oz bass also reported.
Quality flounder from the lower reaches of Poole harbour.
A league contest produced fish of 3 lb 6 oz, 3 lb 2 oz and 2 lb 14 oz.
Poole boat anglers found the going tough with just odd pout, dogfish, whiting and occasional cod.
Bournemouth beaches produced odd flounder at night with pout, rockling and flatfish at Friars Cliff.
Night sessions most productive.
Sandbars at Hurst Castle provided limited action during night sessions with small dabs, flounder and pout.
A few late cod from deep water at Lepe while flounder and odd plaice taken from the Stone Point section.
Lymington DSFC member Kevin Barton took a 2 lb 14 oz plaice along with half a dozen flounder in one session.
Calshot Beach produced flounder while sport slowing at Southampton Water.
Boats heading out past the Needles found just odd cod along with a few whiting, rays, pout and dogfish.
Marks in the Western Solent yielded odd double-figure cod from the Sowley section, Bramble Bank area also produced a few specimens.
Flounder from the River Medina, Bembridge and Yarmoutn harbours also produced odd flatties.
Beaches along the Western Wight produced limited action with Chale having the edge for pout and odd dogfish.
Stretch of beach between Fishbourne and Ryde Pier offered good flounder at night with odd dabs at Seaview.
Small pout and rockling at Sandown during night sessions.
Ventor boat anglers found odd cod, whiting and doogfish.
Langley Point and White Horses producing a few whiting and dabs to black lug.
Day sessions best.
Boats restricted to inshore but little feeding.
Cold snap hit Portsmouth sport.
Eastney and Hayling beaches quidt, although flounder and place have started to move inshore.
Ragworm and limpet top baits.
Langstone and Portsmouth harbours best bet for a few flounder, with Eastern Roadd, Porchester and the Oyster Beds top areas.
Hillhead for a few founder by day.
Gilkicker and Browndown yielding a few pout and dabs after dark.
Boat anglers at Dean Tail, The Nab and marks around the Isle of Wight had some whiting, pout, dogs and the occasional cod.
First run of plaice and some sizable dabs from Hayling Bay out to Dean Tail and along to the blocks at Southsea Pier.
Ragworm and spoon or beads best.
BRISTOL CHANNEL
Shore sport in the Avon area still poor but plenty of small codling and occasional dab from Portishead and Clevedon.
Most other marks only produced tiny codling.
Boats took one or two cod from deeper water but generally poor.
Odd cod to 10 lb from Hinckley Point to Kilve over low water but mainly small codling and whiting.
Burnham boat anglers enjoyed good sport with cod and a few dogfish and rays.
Watchet, Minehead and Porlock boats poor and several trips were fishless.
EAST SCOTLAND
Boat fishing poor and Berwick and Eyemouth craft report as few as four fish per trip.
Highly coloured water blamed for poor results.
Shore anglers fared better.
Peterhead area on song.
Pier produced cod to 4 lb on mussel and lug.
Arbroath cliffs produced cod to 5 lb on lug and rag when conditions allowed.
During heavy conditions, Arbroath Breakwater fished well.
Buckhaven and Dysart producing good catches of codling to 4 lb to lug and rag.
Weedy areas best.
Back of the swimming pool at North Berwick produced cod to 6 lb 8 oz., although a lot of fish lost in heavy weed.
This flounder brace earned Teignmouth, south Devon, angler Roy Repton first prize in last week's Anglers Mail Fish of the Week contest.
Roy beached the specimens of 4 lb 4 oz and 3 lb 6 oz during a session on the River Exe at Starcross to smash Teignmouth SAS's outer area shore-caught best.
Both fell to peeler crab on a 1/0 hook to 15 lb line to give Roy a unique double — before Christmas he took a 4 lb 7 oz flounder from the Exe to set a new best for his club's inner area record.
Junior Mail by Sue Will
WHAT A START!
Young Richard Kirk wasn't content with a fine 7 lb 2 oz bream when he ventured out with his dad on his first ever fishing trip — he went on to bank ten others to 6 lb!
The Liverpool youngster, who's only six years old, offered a caster, maggot and worm cocktail over a bed of hemp and groundbait and also caught other bream between 5 and 6 lb from the private Cheshire lake.
Richard, from Mossley Hill, cast 25 yards out into six feet of water and used a 2 lb hook length and 5 lb main line.
Windy conditions didn't stop the fish feeding at Long Load drainage channel at Martock in Somerset, as Matthew Lee discovered when he tempted a 5 lb 4 oz bream from the venue.
Matthew, 15, from nearby Montacute, touch legered double maggot on a size 16 hook to 5 lb line for the personal best fish plus two roach to 1 lb.
‘The rod was really rocking on the rest and it was very difficult to see the bites.
‘When I struck the bream tore off downstream and dragged me into some weeds but I eventually got it to the bankside,’ said Matthew.
Greedy pike was personal best
Oxfordshire youngster Ddavid Harrison had a battle on his hands when he hooked a 24 lb 5 oz pike on his first cast of the day at a local lake.
The big predator snapped up David's trout bait within seconds of it hitting the water under an over hanging willow tree.
‘The pike slowly took line off the spool, I struck and then a 15 minute fight began,’ said David, 15, from Fyfield, near Abingdon.
‘It took me three attempts to land the fish but eventually I managed to bring it in to the bank and my mate Paul scooped the net under it.
I was amazed, it's the biggest pike I've ever caught,’ said David who legered his trout bait on a size 8 hook to a 20 lb trace and 10 lb line.
James Rainbow fished his first ever pike session last week and caught the fish of a lifetime — a beauty of 24 lb 8 oz.
James, 15, from Stanford-le-Hope, Essex, trailed a plug in the ice cold water at Swanscombe Farm Trout and Coarse Fishery, Kent, and landed the fish on size 8 trebles to 6 lb line.
A 20 lb 10 oz pike from the Hampshire Avon near his home at Fordingbridge smashed Joshua Searl's previous best by 7 lb 8 oz.
Joshua, seven, landed the pike following a five minute fight after it had taken a dead dace to 15 lb line.
Middie Masters
There's 20 great prizes on offer each month in the Middy Masters contest, including top tackle items, a trophy, plus the chance to win £300.
Entry forms should be available from your local tackle shop but if there's a problem telephone me on 071 261 6025 or write with details of your course catch.
We need to know your name, age, address and telephone number, the species caught, weight, tackle used and any further details of capture together with the venue.
Photographs would be appreciated.
You must be under 16.
Post your entries to Middy Masters, Angler's Mail, IPC Magazines, King's Reach Tower, Stamford Street, London SE1 9LS.
•Wolverhampton teen-ager Lee Collings has got plenty to smile about —the carp he's holding is a personal best 19 lb mirror taken from a Shropshire syndicate lake.
Bait presentation wasn't easy for Lee, 15, as he cast a home-made boilie on a size 6 hook to an 8 lb hook length and 10 lb line into the wind.
‘I managed to punch my boilie out to the edge of a gravel bar about 60 yeards out, but I had to play the fish towards the top as I brought it in because there are a lot of boulders on the bottom,’ explained Lee.
Chris Ogborne's Trout Beat
Saved by the rain!
If I had been asked at Christmas whether my home waters of Chew and Blagdon would be full by opening day, the answer would have been an emphatic no.
The lakes were at their lowest levels for 20 years, and Chew was lower than I can ever remember.
Yet in six weeks things have changed.
The Bristol area had over two inches of rainfall in two days during the first week of January, and that was followed by one of the wettest and stormiest periods for some time.
The region went from a drought order to having almost too much rain, and all in the period of two weeks.
It underlines just how anglers depend on the weather.
Over the last 30 years I have kept a fairly meticulous diary, and this includes not just fishing detail but an accurate record of the conditions.
The reason for this is that so much of the guesswork can be removed, certain weather conditions demand certain tactics.
In turn, these tactics demand certain fly patterns, and by relating it all together, I can predict, with surprising accuracy, the flies I'm likely to need on any particular combination of wind and weather.
Once you get into the diary habit, it really is no chore.
I now keep it going through the winter.
This is useful, because by comparing previous drought years like 1976, you can draw a lot of conclusions.
This year, it's almost uncanny how the conditions are a mirror-match for last year.
The January gales are the same, as are the floods and heavy rain.
Water levels are coming up at exactly the same speed, and Chew and Blagdon are even being visited by the same migrant wildfowl.
All this detail is directly relevant to the fishing.
For instance, the frost levels are critical.
Apart from the brief cold spell in late November, we have had very few hard frosts.
This is good news, because now water levels all over the country are rising so fast, it means the banks will be spared from the scouring effects of a hard winter.
This is also good for fly life in the coming season, all those eggs are now safely under a protecting layer of water.
Prolonged cold spells on reasonably full lakes are not a bad thing.
Few lakes or reservoirs start to warm up until late March, and the deeper ones are normally cold well into May.
The shallow bays may be a degree or two warmer, and are always the first place to look in the early days, but the deeps will stay cold until real strength returns to the sun.
Fish normally seek out the warmer shallows, and if there are a few days of sunshine before opening day then you will know where to choose on the bank.
At the moment, most reservoirs are filling fast.
In November and December last year the water tables across the land were depleted, but the majority have now been replenished.
Any rainfall now will just run straight into the lakes, and it really does look as though all the main waters will be at top level for Spring.
The rivers, too, will have a good flush through, removing a lot of the silt that built up during the drought.
I predict with some confidence that Chew and Blagdon will be at top levels for the start of the 1991 angling year.
The newly-flooded margins will be attractive to the fish in the first few days, until the sudden influx of size ten waders make them wary.
The great thing about having the lakes at top level is there is so much bank to choose from, and we are almost spoilt for choice.
This is not the case when the level is even just a few feet down.
For my money it can rain as much as it likes in the coming weeks.
I visited one of my favourite Wessex waters recently, Sutton Bingham near Yeovil.
This is a scaled-down version of Blaggdon, and has always been one of my early-season pilgrimages.
No matter how bad the weather, you can always find some sheltered stretches, and there is normally the bonus of seeing some of the first swallows and martins of the year as well.
It's a rather special feeling to stretch out on the bank, with a cup of coffee warming chilled fingers, and to know six months of the season is before you.
Apart from winter fishing, this is the first real outing of the year, and always a super ritual for my father and myself.
As February turns to March, I watch the evening weather forecists with increasing interest.
The pattern of weather systems is fascinating, and I try to predict the sport on opening day on the strength of them.
The one thing we all dread is high winds.
In such conditions, all the sheltered spots get overcrowded, and there is usually too much colour in the water.
Early season winds are cold and take away much of the pleasure.
Maybe we shall have one of those text book days of gentle ripple, high cloud and blue sky.
Even if we don't, I rather suspect we shall all be there!
HELPLINE
If you've a course fishing problem write to Dave Coster at Helpline, Angler's Mail, Kings Reach Tower, Stamford St., London, SE1 9LS.
Slippery Solution
I have a Matchman Hooktier which tends to put kinks in the hook length, especially when I use very fine lines.
Can this be prevented?
This problem is common with fine lines when you tie any type of knot which entails pulling the line above the hook to tighten up the knot.
Unfortunately this is the case with hooktiers.
My solution, as I do not use a machine for tying my hooks, is to tie reverse knots which do not put undue pressure on the section of line which ends up immediately above the hook.
The knot is tightened by pulling the end of hook length which is eventually trimmed off.
There are ways to get round your hooktier problem.
First, look at the make of line you are using.
Some brands tie better than others, having a more slippery surface.
One good example I recently reviewed in Angler's Mail was the Toray hook length monofilament from Normark.
Another possibility is to lubricate the line before you attempt the knot.
This helps to avoid the kinking up problem.
You can wet the line or spray it with a silicone floatant.
When tightening hook knots, pull the line very slowly — this helps to prevent heat from friction, which can so easily damage fine diameter monofilament.
Drift-Beating Shot Pattern
I am having difficulty holding a large waggler still on a 11 foot deep lake when it's windy.
Short of switching to a leger what can I do?
M.B. Suffolk.
This angler has tried going quite heavy down the line with three No. 6 shot, setting the tackle three feet over depth.
The problem is I don't know where he has been placing these shot.
The first adjustment I would make would be to try positioning the three to six No. 6 shot at one inch gaps, starting ten inches from the hook as in diagram A.
This loses a slight degree of sensitivity by not having a dropper shot but usually does the trick of holding the float stationary.
Several shot lying on the bottom act better as a brake if set slightly apart from each other.
This strung shotting technique often requires you to fish two or three feet overdepth.
It's a case of pushing the float up until it holds and doesn't drag under.
Another good way of beating drift in this depth of water is to fish a bottom end slider.
(Diagram B).
With a slider it is possible to fish a much larger grouping of bulk shot well below the drifting layers of water.
This is often enough to stabilise a big float rig.
If this tactic fails then I'm afraid you'll have to resort to the leger.
Cold Weather Blues
I fish a lake stock with commons, mirrors, crucians and roach.
During the warmer months I averaged at least 15 common carp in a five hour session but this winter two sessions were biteless.
I tried all the baits which worked earlier in the season and varied my approach.
Is the colder weather affecting sport?
A.B.
Berkshire
Stillwaters are often more difficult during the winter, particularly if the water goes clear.
In many cases you have to lower your expectations accordingly.
Some venues will respond in a limited way, others may not.
It is mainly a case of less feed and smaller hook baits to tempt bites.
Baits need to be anchored well on the bottom and left for long periods and leger tactics are more likely to succeed than the float.
Stillwater fish are often found in deepish water when the weather is cold and this may entail a longer cast.
Rather than risking poor accuracy with your loose feed or grondbait, an open end feeder can prove more effective at long range.
Another important winter consideration is the time of day you fish.
In your letter you said two four hour sessions failed to pull a response.
Perhaps you missed the short period in which the fish were feeding?
This can vary water by water, but often the last two or three hours of daylight are crucial and can bring a short burst of action after all else has failed.
Benefits of dyed reed floats
A few years ago you wrote about the merits of sarkandas reed as a waggler material.
Instead of painting the reed you dyed it, to reduce weight.
Can you tell me how to do this and if you need to varnish it?
R.H. London
I make up a bath of dye to treat the sarkandas before cutting the reed to the required lengths.
The dye is green chysoidine powder mixed with methylated spirits, two tablespoons of dye to one litre of spirits.
Pour about two inches of this mixture into a shallow tray and submerge 50 or so lengths of reed at a time.
After 30 minutes the dyes will have completely penetrated the reed which is then dried out on sheets of newspaper for several days.
The end result is a lovely camouflaged effect, but more importantly the dye has roughened up the normally smooth surface of the reed, which will now take a good varnish that will not chip off.
I use Aiken Hi Coat which gives a waterproof satin finish.
I do not advocate using a glossy varnish, because it tends to give false readings as you try to shot the float down.
My reason for dyeing, rather than painting these floats is because they will take more shotting.
The finish is also more permanent and does not upset the float's balance.
One final word of caution, be careful when handling chrysoidine.
Protect your hands with rubber gloves because it can be a dangerous substance in such a concentrated form.
Once the reed has dried, it is advisable to put the gloves back on again, so any excess powder on the surfact can be wiped away, before you start forming your floats.
MATCHMAIL
All starred contests are qualifiers in the Kamasan matchmen of the year series
TRENT CHUBB SPREE
Only 17 anglers turned up for Sunday's Notts AA Open on the Trent at Shelford so a match was organised downstream at East Bridgeford where there was a stunning result.
The top nine anglers had a total of 205 lb 5 oz of chub and the top three returned more than 35 lb.
Leading the way was Pete Palmer (Daiwa Trentmen) with 46–8–0 of chub taken on steak fished on a 14 hook beneath a waggler at the end peg.
Team mate Steve Clark was runner-up with 37–15–0 of chub from peg seven, also on steak, and the same bait gave Roy Toulson (Notts Fed) 35–6–0.
Others: Steve Draper (Daiwa Trentmen) 26–11–0; Brian Richmond (Notts AA) 19–8–0; D. Richmond (Notts AA) 13–6–0.
Roy Toulson was among the fish on Saturday was well when he landed 43 chub for 40–8–0 in the Notts Fed Open at Burton Joyce.
The match organiser had a 2 lb chub first cast and continued with steak under his 5AAA waggler four rod lengths out at the top of the road stretch.
Runner-up Keith Noble (R and R Sports) also float fished steak on a 14 hook along the road side and had 20–11–0 to beat in-form Sean Stenton (Daiwa Goldthorpe) who had 15–5–0 in the 36 pegger.
Others: Jess King (Smithies Browning); F. Ashworth (Stainforth) 10–15–0; Pete Hamilton (Olympic I. Walton) 10–2–0.
Sirhowy.
Ice covered much of the River Frome at Lugwardine and only two anglers caught fish in the 30 plus entry Sirhowy Open.
Glen Robson (Tredegar) was in a deep bend opposite the Longworth Mill barn and fished over depth with a stick float and single maggot on a 20 hook for a dozen dace weighing 2–0–0.
The only other weigher was Tredegar teenager Ward Draper with 0–1–0.
Cardiff Nomads
The Dock Feeder Canal at Cardiff was gin clear and cold and the only angler to catch more than 1 lb was Pontypridd tackle dealer Neil Scott.
Pegged near where the canal enters the East Dock the Cariff Nomad quivertipped pinkie on a size 22 hook to catch 20 small roach totalling 1–1–0.
Cardiff painter and decorator Ken Hornsey was drawn alongside the Tyndall Street road bridge and flicked a small bomb under the bridge for six roach on a pinkie-baited size 22 hook to finish second with 0–5–0.
Cardiff's former World Champion Clive Branson was third with half a dozen small roach weighing 0–4–0 on quivertipped pinkie.
Keighley
Floating ice and bankside snowdrifts couldn't stop 24 hard anglers taking part in the Keighley Open on the Aire where Ian Dawson (Leeds Anglers World) had 14–15–0.
He finished the armchair upstream of Steeton Bridge with float and maggot for six chub.
Steve Fairbourn (Keighley) was runner-up from close by with five chub on legered bread for 15–10–0.
Others: Harry Kenny (Keighley) 8–15–0; A. Lavelle (Keighley) 8–5–0; Calum Evans (Idle and Thackley) 2–15–0.
Leeds Shimano
It was a struggle for bites in the Leeds Shimano Open on the Aire at Leeds where anglers had to dodge floating ice.
Bob Hirst (Daiwa Goldthorpe) fished caster and pole four above Twaites weir for five roach worth 2–11–0.
Others: Tony Webster (Mirfield Angling) 1–1–0; Stan Jeffreys (Leeds Shimano) 0–9–8.
Abbey Hulton
Even a three inch covering on the Caldon Canal at Stoke failed to stop a hastily arranged match won by Paul Hart (Abbey Hulton) with 24 gudgeon for 0–5–8.
He fished a three metre pole rig with bloodworm at the rear of Hanley Park.
Others: John Wild (Stone Rowleys) 0–4–0; Steve Lowndes (Ash Bank) 0–2–12.
Bitter taste for Salt
Brian Salt (Rists) could have won the Kidsgrove Open on the Trent and Mersey Canal if he hadn't missed his keepnet with an 8 oz roach.
Instead, Richard Crane (PMG Central) won with 1–7–8 from the warm water stretch.
He pole fished pinkies at eight metres for a dozen small roach to 5 oz.
Brian had to settle for second with three roach taken on caster for 1–1–0.
Others: Mick Clewes (Norsec) 0–11–8; Nigel Boulton (PMG Central) 0–11–0.
Bream was a good start
Blizzards didn't stop 100 anglers taking part in the Leeds Daiwa League on the Ouse where the best weights came from Hunters Lodge.
Steve Raper (Punyettas) had a 4 lb bream in the first ten minutes opposite the bungalows and continued on the feeder with caster for roach that lifted him to 11–10–0.
John Atkinson (Psycho) fished maggot under a slider near the winner for 10–13–0.
Others: Ron Wilkinson (Yarm) 9–12–0; Bernard Guy (Ouse Five) 8–2–0.
Brian Ware (Psycho) 6–9–0.
Teams on day: Psycho 20–10–0; Yarm 14–4–0; Punyettas 13–11–8.
Float fishing was virtually impossible at Hunters Lodge for the Leeds Saturday series won by Stan Haigh (Leeds Anglers World) with 20 small roach for 4–1–8.
He fished single maggot on the bomb opposite the Ouse-Ure signpost.
Others: Pete Wheatley (Stanley Vickers) 3–0–0; Nick Chaffer (Leeds Anglers World) 2–15–0; Dave Armitage (Brighouse) and Martin Thorpe (Glen) both 2–11–8.
Knee deep snow meant poor catches in the Snape Open on the Swale at Salmon Hall Farm.
Mike Simpson (Stanley Vickers) stick floated maggot near the willow in the bottom field for small roach, dace and gudgeon for a winning 1–11–0.
Others: Mark Calvert (Stanley Vickers) 1–6–8; Martin Henstock (Ripon) 1–2–8; J. Roberts and S. Suggitt (both Snape) both 0–14–0.
Wotsits
Freezing rod rings made it hard work in the Wotsits Open on the Trent at Long Higgin where Simon Roff (Tri-Cast Barnsley) fished the feeder at long range for three chub to 4 lb 4 oz in a winning 9–3–8.
Others: Chris Skinner (Home and Dry) 7–10–0; Ian Bowman (Niddmen) 5–14–0; Jim Leach (Tri-Cast Barnsley) and Dennis Dring (Anglers World) both 3–14–0
£70 roach
The Lea below Pymmes Brook outfall at Leabridge Road was ice-free and 21 anglers braved conditions to fish a hastily-arranged Tottenham Angling sweepstake.
All the money was paid out in sections which resulted in winner Danny Fung (Hertford Tackle) taking home £70 for his single 1 oz roach on pole and bloodworm.
Pete Vasey (Trev's Browning) was second with 0–0–4, the same weight as equal third men Paul Burrough (Tottenham Angling) and Peter Jordan (Hertford Tackle) but with two sticklebacks to their one each.
Paul Burrough was the happiest, as his was the only fish caught in his section, resulting in him scooping the same cash as the winner.
Coventry
One ice-breaker went over the top on the Oxford Canal at Nell's Bridge on Saturday and plunged neck deep into freezing water
But he scrambled out and fished through the 30-entry Coventry Open.
Surprisingly, nobody had a dry net.
Dick Ashby (Banbury Castaways) won with 150 gudgeon and small perch to short pole and blood worm for 2–10–8, just ahead of team mate Derek Cullip who caught 2–8–8 of small fish on the same method.
Others: Mark Lichtenberg (Trev's Browning) 1–15–0; S. Maddocks (Milton Keynes) 1–11–8.
Conham
The Briston Avaon at Conham was in perfect condition despite the cosd and match organiser Dave Haines (Briston Sensas) topped the 30-strong field with 6–8–0.
Pegged just below the footbridge, Dave caught small dace steadily on waggler and maggot to head off Pete Sivell (Avon Angling).
Staked just above the footbridge, Pete also plumped for wagger and maggot and caught chub.
Others: Gary Bowden (Bristol Sensas) 4–6–0; Dick Hodges (Golden Carp 4–2–0; Graham Beavor (Avon Angling) 3–9–0.
Trowbridge
Only 13 anglers braved the Bristol Avon at Staverton, and it was unlucky for ren who dry netted.
Ian Stanier (Trowbridge) won with three chub for 6–14–0 on float fished maggot, clear of clubmate Adrain Parrish on 3–14–0 and Dave Baker (Bradford) 0–15–0.
Massey
Sunday's Massey Ferguson Open on the Grand Union Canal at Rowington attracted 35 competitors who used axes, bricks and anything else heavy to break the three inch thick ice.
The match was restricted to three hours, and Jeff Sparks (Massey Ferguson) won using bloodworm on the near ledge.
He fished a three-metre whip to take gudgeon steadily, and adding a few small perch for 2–11–8.
It was all gudgeon for Geoff Stanley (Coventry Casters) who used bloodworm to tempt 2–2–0.
Norman Baker (Massey Ferguson) slipped into the shallow canal while ice breaking, but ended third with 2–1–8 of gudgeon to the short pole.
Others: Alan Powell (Massey Ferguson) 1–15–0.
Middleton
The Middleton Open was transferred from the iced solid Erewash Canal at Ilkeston to the warm water-boosted Beeston Canal, where all 13 competitors had fish.
Host club member Dave Amber won with 4–8–0 of small chub.
taken on long pole alternating between maggot and caster.
Frank Barlow (Wotsits) filled second with 2–10–0 of small roach on caster, ahead of Clilff Adcock (Nottingham Deaf) on 2–3–0.
Izaak Walton
Alan Round finished way ahead of the field in a hastily-arranged Olympic IWAA Sweepstake on the Staffs Worcester Canal at Farmdown Road.
The experienced towpath angler put together his winning 7–14–0 of gudgeon and perch on bloodworm from a peg near the road bridge.
Sean Ashby (Browning Starlets) was pegged in the same area and his 3–13–4 catch was made up of gudgeon, roach and perch.
Olympic I. Walton skipper Alan Chatfield's 3–13–0 catch was made up of gudgeon from a peg near the salt works to beat Robin Tooth (Team Uniprint) with 3–5–4 of gudgeon.
Thames frozen bank to bank
The Thames at Abingdon was barely fishable for the Mick's Tackle Open with the bottom areas of the March length frozen over for the full 50 yard width.
Pete Brownlow (Dells) won with 5–7–0 of roach to 12 oz and small skimmers on case feeder and liquidise bread, fishing opposite the Anchor pub.
Paul Glenfield's remarkable run on the river continued when he was runner-up with a 4 lb 8 oz chub and a few bits taken on bread.
Others: Rob Spurett (Mick's) 1–15–0; Gary Dallimore (Sundridge) 1–13–0.
Hottest Action Was On the Phone!
Organiser Pete Simmonds had more than 150 phone calls on Friday from anglers either cancelling or making bookings for Saturday's Sabrina Open on the Severn.
Other anglers were desperately seeking tickets in a Kamasan points qualifier.
The event finally went ahead and Pete removed all surplus pegs from the quarry and county ground at Shrewsbury leaving many of competitors with double pegs.
More than 40 competitors blanked and iced rod rigs were a major problem.
Paul Davis (Shrewsbury Bait Centre) took 14 roach to waggler and maggot from three pegs below Posthill Bridge to win the four-hour event with 6–0–0.
A single 3–2–0 chub to legered maggot from the next occupied below the winner took Jeff Perrin (Shakespeare) into second and helped him to forth in the Kamasan Matchman of the Year table.
Simon Christian (Jacksons Tipton Match) was opposite the tennis court at the bottom of the quarry and used a mini-feeder to locate enough maggot-tempted roach to clinch third on 3–1–0.
Others: Pete Simmonds (Sabrina) 1–2–0; Chris Dennis (Stoke) 1–1–0; Tony Lloyd (Shrewsbury Bait Centre) 0–14–0.
Boats got match underway
Patshull Park Lake was ice free on Saturday but completely frozen on Sunday so two motor boats were used to break up the half inch thick ice for two hours.
One boat was holed three times and despite baling had taken in a foot of water when beached.
The other boat remained out during the match to keep the fishing areas clear.
Len Miller (West End) drawn near the Burnt Oak, picked up roach at intervals presenting a single maggot under a six metre pole to win with 4–14–0.
Two pegs away, Phil Rhodes (West End) used a six metre pole to tackle the deepest swim in the match length, and took 4–12–12 of roach for second.
Brian Gamston (West End) on the Lodge Bay platform took his all-roach 4–12–8 to maggot under the pole.
Others: Joe Brennan (Nige Williams Tackle) 4–7–0; Mick Edwards (Springfield) 4–3–10.
Winter Leagues
Hemsworth.
Newark Dyke just above Crankley POint provided some lively action with chub making up bumper weights.
Barry Newton (South Kirkby) led a string of couble-figure weights with 18–8–8 of small chub to maggot feeder.
Club colleague Phil Iveson had a similar catch for 15–11–0.
Others: Baill Wade (Wakefield A) 13–15–8; R. Goy (Ferrybridge) 12–8–0; P. Reynolds (Wakefield B) 12–2–8.
Teams: South Kirby 79; Featherstone 73; Crown Silstar 68.
League: Featherstone 4; South Kirby 7; Youngers 16.
Swindon Angling Centre.
Geoff Wilson (Tameside Normans) won through in a tight finish on an icebound Bridgewater Canal around Broadheath.
Two skimmers to pole and bloodworm tactics made up the bulk of his 4–1–3 winning weight, pipping England international Alan McAtee (Elton Tackle) on 3–13–8.
Others: Chris Frazer (Swindon Angling Centre) 3–10–12; Graham Broughton (Elton Tackle) 3–5–3.
Teams: Highfield Blue 92; Highfield Green 91; Izaak Walton 85; tameside Normans 84.
League: Highfield Green 274; Tameside Normans Red 267; Izaak Walton A 264; Highfield Blue 256; Elton Tackle Red 239.
York.
Roach dominated catches from the snow covered banks of the River Ouse below York.
Roger Flude (Bishopthorpe B) fished maggot on a slider rig at the bottom of Middlethorpe Ings to take 5–2–8 of roach for victory.
Phil Blood (Monroe UK) legered bread flake from a feeder also at Middlethorpe for 4–-7–0 of roach.
Others: Andy Harvey (Legionaires) 4–0–8; Tim Harrison (Leeds Anglers World) 3–1–8.
Teams: Leeds Anglers World 10–7–0; Legionaires 10–6–0; South Bank 9–14–0.
League: Mitre Pets 55; Legionaires 53; South Bank 52.
LONDON AA.
The final round on the Grand Union Canal at Broadmead Bridge was fished by 26 competiors who had to smash through ice up to six inches thick.
Peter Vasey (Trev's Browning) had three roach on pole and bread punch for victory with 0–4–0.
Others: Steve Davis (A1 Shimano) 0–3–0; Derek Seymour (Trev's Browning) 0–2–12.
A1 Shimano's Bill Bullock won the league with 0–2–8, enough for fourth on the day to bring his earnings from the series to almost £500.
ROD AND GUN.
The River Severn at Shrewsbury was frozen solid in places and some anglers found fish hard to come by.
Richard Duke (Bridgnorth) put together a match-winning catch of rudd weighing 4–8–8 from the ‘slab’ peg on the county ground using stick float and maggot.
Team mate Steve Wilkinson was runner-up with a 2–10–4 of roach on the straight leger from a peg below the suspension bridge in the quarry.
Others: Been Beecham (Dawley B) 2–1–0; Clive Wheldon (Corbetts Aces) 1–2–12.
Teams: Bridnorth 55; Dawley B 44; Corbetts Aces 43; Rod and Gun 36.
League: Rod and Gun 5; Bridnorth 6; Corbetts Aces 7; Dawley B 7; Harris's Raiders 8; The Best 8.
RUGELEY.
With one leg to fish three teams are level at the top.
The latest round on the Church Bridge length of the Trent and Mersey Canal at Rugeley saw Steve Collins (Team Uniprint) gain his best win to date with 4–5–10 of ruffe to beat his team mate, Tony Keeling, on 3–3–4.
Others: Terry Ballinger (Rugeley MG All Stars) 3–0–15; Perry Follows (Team Uniprint) 2–9–4.
Teams: Rugeley MG All Stars and Team Uniprint tied for first with Rugeley MG Blue third.
League: Rugeley MG All Stars, Team Uniprint and Rugeley MG Blue all 8 points; Rugeley and Brereton.
13 LUCKY FOR JOHN
Clevedon Veals skipper Ray Bazeley had only planned for a small squad outing after their first choice match on the Nene at Peterborough was cancelled.
But word got around and by 9am some 30 anglers had gathered in the Little Chef at Bath, prompting a sweepstake on the local Bristol Avon.
The deep stretch at Bath fished well, and John Amato (Bristol Sensas) landed 13 chub on waggler-fished maggots for 12–6–0 and victory.
John ran his float down to the inside stantion of the old railway bridge.
Dave Lewis (Avon Angling) netted 10–6–8 of chub and roach on pole fished maggot.
Pete Sivell (Avon Angling) made it three frame places in successive matches with 8–13–0 for third.
Others: Chris Cotterell (Clevedon Veals) 8–4–0; Steve Robinson (Avon Angling) 6–8–0.
Rugeley
The Rugeley Open on the Trent and Mersey Canal at Mossley went ahead after ice-breaking operation, although the attendance was kept down by poor road conditions.
But Dave Hargreaves (Chase Social) was the only angler to put together any amount of bites.
His finished with 2–7–0 of grudgeon.
Others: Mark Capewell (Carthys) 0–7–2; Graham Ward (Chase Social) 0–3–11.
Middle Hours Were Crucial
The Humberside winter league was cancelled as not all the teams turned up but the anglers left arranged an Open on the Trent at Caythorpe.
The river was clear and sport patchy with big bream and chub dominating results.
Malcolm Bailey (Shimano Goole) won at peg 126, taking seven bream in the second and third hours for 20–4–8 on maggot feeder.
Team mate Paul Cannon drew peg 81 and took four decent chub for 12–8–0 and second, two falling to maggot feeder and two on lobworm and straight lead.
Bradford Mustad Viking Jack Ferguson was next with four bream for 10–13–0 on maggot feeder, again fished well out.
Others: Andy Kirk (Anglers World) 8–12–0; Adrian Broomhead (Shimano Goole) 5–14–0; John Illingworth (Bradford Mustadd Vikings) 5–2–0.
MIDWEEK
Watford Tackle Lady Chapels on the Grand Union Canal came out of its recent dolddrums and gave almost half the field in the Watford Tackle midweek Open at least one chub.
Despite flurries of snow, Steve Spooner (Olympus Outdoor World) got four chubb on quivertipped maggot and caster at peg 75 for 8–5–8.
Dave Boyd (VOrtex) used similar tactics two pegs away for three decent skimmers and a chub totalling 5–14–8.
KC-Dorking The third and final match in the KC-Dorking midweek mini-series was won by Chris Nicholl (Studio) who had ten chub on pole and bronze maggot from the Tank Traps for 13–13–0.
Runner-up Wally Eisenger (Guilford) had 10–0–0 of dace on waggler and maggot from a peg on the Stepping Stones, close to third man Kevvin Gaywood (KC Angling) who also caught dace for 9–2–0.
Julian Morley (Leatherhead Apollo) managed a couple of decent chub plus roach for 8–7–0 and fourth.
Tony Llelliot (Polegate) scooped £250 for overall victory in the series.
Shrewsbury Bait The high numbers on the quarry length were the pegs to draw in Wednesday's Shrewsbury Bait Centre Open on the River Severn.
John Harris (Team Northendon) made his long journey from Lancashire pay with 6–13–0 of roach to 12 oz from peg 99.
Fishing waggler and maggot with a 22 hook to 1 lb bottom, John took most of his fish in the opening two hours to finish clear of in-form Howard Williams (Buckley) who had 5–6–0 at the next peg down.
Others: Chris Perry (Mohmar) 4–7–0; £Barry Cooper (Shrewsbury Bait Centre) 2–2–0; Dave Harrell (Midland Angling Products) 1–15–0.
Fosters Tackle The 42 hardy anglers who braved the worst of Thursday's blizzards found bites scarce on the Severn at Stourport.
Brian Rigby (AFS) was the only man to crack double-figures, taking 18 chub on waggler and double maggot from peg 29 on the Lyttleeton water for 12–0–0 worth £160.
Bob Ginster (GM Trophies) alternated waggler and stickfloat for 6–12–0 of roach to clinch second from peg 33 on Severnside.
Others: Pete Rice (Shakespeare Aquarians) 4–12–0; Brian Bennett (Evesham) 4–2–0; Dave Edwards (Birmingham AA) 3–4–0; Dave Harell (Midland Angling Products) 3–1–10.
Twyford Farm Pete Sivell (Avon Angling) won the Twyford Country Centre midweek Open with 13 chub for 15–3–0.
Drawn peg 110, Pete tripped bottom with waggler and maggot to head off Southam hotelier Dave McKay who had a similar net totalling 10–5–0 two pegs away.
Others: Stuart Kearsey (Newlands) 5–12–8; Ken Gibbons (Welford) 3–6–0; Stuart Gottfried (Twyford) 3–4–0.
Grayling Saved the Day
Fifty-three hardy anglers turned out in Arctic-like conditions for the Matlock Open on the River Derwent at Matlock and Neil Atkins (Belper) won the £100 first prize with 11–13–0 of grayling.
He was pegged just below the pumphouse in Matlock Park and worked with pole and rod and line with maggot in a very shallow peg.
Anglers Mail columnist Frank Barlow (Wotsits Tackle) drew right opposite a pub but some bites on stick float and maggots kept him rooted to his box and he finished runner-up with 11–7–0 of grayling.
Others: P. Reeves (Mansfield) 8–11–0; Graham Gibbons (Wotsits Tackle) 7–11–0; D. Spencer (Matlock) 6–13–8; S. Wildsmith (Derby Anglers Corner) 6–12–0.
Matlock have another Open this Sunday on the same venue.
Details from John Spencer on 0629 583619.
Well Organised
Bad road conditions drastically cut the attendance for the Derby AA Open on the popular Trent and Mersey Canal at Shardlow where match organiser John Humphries (Wednesbury Tackle) topped the scores with 3–5–4 of gudgeon and perch.
He fished bloodworm and a three metre whip from a peg near the greenhousees and after a blank first hour and a half eventually caught around 100 fish.
Sean Ashby (Browning Starlets) was runner-up at the next peg with an almost identical net of fish weighing 3–3–8.
Others: Adam Barlow (Barlow's Tackle) 1–1–12; S. Daniels (Fenton Artwork) 0–6–0.
WEATHER TAKES ITS TOLL — Where snow and ice hit the weekend match programme
Yorkshire Access problems caused the cancellation of many matches in Yorkshire and the north east.
They included the Ripon event on the Ure, Heacy Woollen winter league on the Brighouse Canal, Three Counties league on Newark Dyke, Idle and Thackley Open on the Swale and the Bradford No. 1 on the Nidd.
The Allerton Bywater and Halkon Hunt matches were called off because of the ice as was the Doncaster event on the Idle where the river was frozen bank to bank.
The Selby Canal was iced and the Winter Warmers match was switched to the River Aire swhere conditions were so bad only organiser Billy Harrison turned out!
The Ritz winter league and other events on the ice-bound River Ancholme were cancelled.
North West North West match angling almost came to a total halt at the weekend with virtually all major matches called off.
Arguments started on some fisheries when match organisers and pleasure anglers tried to fish venues usually left for freelance angling.
The Dee at Chester was fishable but the only action was from 40 cormorants who have taken up residence above the weir.
Hardly a fish has been caught here for three weeks but the birds had had roach and dace up to 8 oz.
The Dane gave some chub to float fished maggot but the margins of the river were frozen.
Water discharged from Daresbury Power Station into the Bridgewater Canal kept the Goosberry Hollow to Norton Station stretch fishable and there were catches of up to 30 small roach and the odd skimmer bream.
St Helens AA had enough room for 20 anglers at Carr Mill Dam between the ice but not a fish was caught in the Sunday sweep.
South West/Wales Both divisions of the South Wales winter league were cancelled when heavy snow made travelling almost impossible.
Organiser Alan Solomon hopes to slot in the postponed round on the River Wye around Hereford on Sunday, March 10.
Parts of the Bristol Avon were iced over, resulting in the cancellation of the Bradford-On-Avon Open.
The Bridgwater match on the Taunton-Bridgwater Canal was another casualty.
South No major match survived the south's big freeze including events on the Thames.
Cookham cancelled their match on the river because of poor weather and although the waterway at Maidenhead was fishable the match had to be cancelled because of frozen banks.
The Shiplake Open on the Thames was a victim because the lock cuts were frozen and the main river was a mass of ice floes.
The Basingstoke Canal at Claycart had around three inches of ice which led to the cancellation of the HBCAA Open and there was two and a half inches of ice on the Oxford Canal which led to the scrapping of the Banbury Open.
At Woking, snow heaped on the banks of the Wey made the river unfishable for the Open.
Matches at Goldsworth Park Lake and Badshot Lea Lakes were also called off becuase of ice.
West Midlands The West Midlands week-end match programme collapsed under a carpet of snow and ice.
Alcester, Twyford, Whitmore Reans and Dutton Opens went first on the the Avon, canals and Earlswood lakes soon followed by the Kidderminster and Warwich matches.
The Rugby winter league and Daiwa Gordon League matches were also cancelled.
At Hampton Ferry the Saturday match was cancelled but with a milder day the Sunday event was still going ahead Saturday night.
But the organisers found the Avon water frozen early Sunday morning so this event also joined the list of casualties.
Most matches went ahead in the central Midlands although road and bank conditions were bad which lead to low turnouts.
Two of the bigger matches were cancelled, the Bass National squad Open on the Trent at Burton a victim because of the road conditions.
The CT Peper Sales Open, which was also a sell-out, had to be cancelled, ironically because of car parking problems.
The Staffs-Worcs Canal was frozen but heavy snow in the car parks made access impossible.
East Midlands There was a complete cancellation of the match programme in the eastern counties.
The following Opens were cancelled as the venues were completely frozen: Ely Beet, Ouse, Ely; Stamford Welland, Welland, Stamford; Biggleswade, Hitchin, Ivel, Tempsford; Kettering Thrapston, Nene, Thrapston; Vauxhall, Ouse, Radwell; Littleport, Ouse, Littleport; Waterbeach, Cam, Hatleys Wash; Whittlesey, Cock Bank Drain, Coates; Peterborough DAA, Nene; Long Buckby, Grand Union Canal, Buckby Wharf.
The Daiwa League and Walton Opens on the Trent at Muskham were called off because of dangerous bankside conditions, as was the van den Eynde event at Long Eaton.
The Cotmanhay Open on the Erewash Canal had to be called off because of ice.
The Witham was frozen from bank to bank from Lincoln to Boston.
The only free places were where the swans have been.
The Tackle Box league and Boston Open were both scrapped.
Barclay's Brokers match on the Upper Hobhole at Lade Bank was cancelled.
The River Bain, a popular running water venue was frozen solid as were the Bargate and West Fen Drains.
An RAF match on Wednesday on the Witham was won by Neil Parkinson with around 40 roach, ruff and gudgeon for 1 lb 8 oz.
Change left Chris near 60 lb
A change of tactics provided Chris Worthington (JCB) with 34 chub for a winning 59–14–0 in the Burton Mutual Open on the in-form River Dove at Tutbury.
Ledgered bread failed to catch for the first hour but a switch to three bronze maggot on a size 14 hook presented over the far side found chub to 2 lb 8 oz from peg one.
Terry Newton (Derby) used waggler and maggot on peg 40 for second with an all-chub 48–10–0.
Others: Dave Heely (Derby) 14–12–0; Ken Smith (Derby) 10–12–0.
Square
Kevin Garvey (Warley Encon) drew on one of the two warm water outfalls and won the 27 peg Square Open on the Lifford Canal with 6–4–12.
He fished caster on a nine metre pole for mainly roach.
Steve Pierpoint (Shakespeare) took small carp and roach on pole and pinkie from the other outfall for second.
Billy Neath (Crown) had a single 2–2–0 carp for third.
His son Jason (Browning Starlets) and organiser Terry Morris (Clive Smith MG) both had 1–2–0.
No place like home
Horse and Jockey AC match secretary Mick Dryers had an unusual Sunday morning — he spent it at home for the first time in two years.
Mick called off his club's Open on the Coventry Canal due to four inches of ice.
The sell-out South Leicestershire Canal Championships on the Grand Union between Daddington and Foxton was another casualty.
Organisers hope to fish the match before the season ends.
Knaresborough
Martin Dodsworth (Knaresborough) stick floated maggot during a heavy snow storm to win his club's match on the Nidd.
He drew below the sawmills at Scotton to take 6–6–0 of grayling.
Others: Eddie McEvoyh 2–8–8; Ray Fletcher 0–8–12.
Match News
Irish Festival is Back
The Athlone Angling Festival is back after a two year absence caused by the problem of Irish fishing licences and the death of orgaaniser Sean Egan.
Now, with support from local industry and Liverpool-based holiday specialists Leisure Angling, the festival has been resurrected carrying a IR£5,000 purse.
The match will take place from July 1–5, believed to be the ideal time for sport on the River Shannon, which has produced ton-up bream hauls in past festivals.
The King of the Shannon is officially on too, following on from the Cootehill Championship on September 29 to October 1.
Further information on these events and the Castleblaney Easter Festival, the Monaghan Pairs and Bailieboro events are listed on Keisure Angling's match information sheet on 051 734 2344.
Carry on fishing!
Exeter DAA have announced dates for their popular matches on the Exeter Canal between March and June — the time of year when most matchmen hang up their poles.
Taking advantage of the no close season ruling on south west stillwaters, the first 160 peg event takes place on Sunday March 17.
Subsequent matches are on $March 31, April 14 and April 28 before the highlight of their calendar, the Ashford Slating and Tiling Classic, on Sunday May 26.
Tickets for the Opens are £10, with entry £30 for the big-money Classic, which promises £1,500 to the winner down to £100 for seventh, and 16 £50 section prizes.
Tickets from Mike Hosgood on 0392 211360.
A teams of four match will be held on May 12, tickets £50 from Terry Barrell on 0392 77445,
Draw for all the matches is 8–9am at the Countess Wear Lodge Hotel, Exeter.
Sundridge London and South East Division One competitors Stows Match Group are on the hunt for new anglers to boost their squad.
The Staines, Middlesex, based side fish Division Four of the NFA Nationals this year and the Thames Valley Winter League.
Anyone interested should telephone captain Ken Wheeler on 0784 469448 or vice captain Tony Yianni on 081 570 8970.
The Sundridge Super League North West Division One are holding a meeting on February 27 to fix venues for next season's campaign.
Captains should contact Barry Smith on 0282 864513 to confirm their attendance.
Frozen Stiff
But Ian and John rescue struggling specimens Two carp anglers braved the coldest temperatures for four years to rescue fish from a leaking West Midlands canal.
Ian Elmore and John Whitwich, from Walsall, were horrified to see dozens of specimen tench and big carp struggling in just ten inches of water when they visited engineering works on the Park Hall stetch of the Rushall Canal near Walsall.
The hardy pair transferred 30 lb of tench to 6 lb, 12 pike to 8 lb and three double-figure carp last Wednesday night in temperatures to minus eight degrees Centigrade.
They took the fish to an unaffected stretch of canal 150 yards away and realising bigger fish were still distressed returned on Thurday to finish the job.
Their second rescue included roach, pike, tench and a 17 lb 2 oz mirror carp.
‘We only went there to see what British Waterways were doing,’ said Ian.
‘The fish were really distressed and could not avoid bashing into each other with the water level so low.
‘If we had lost the four big carp, sport on the canal would have been ruined.
‘It was absolutely freezing and by the time we got the fish to the deeper water the carp sacks were frozen,’ added Ian who also broke two landing nets during the rescue.
British Waterways lowered the water in the section by ten inches while laying a sewage pipe underneath the canal and say a further drop in levels was caused by a leaking paddle on a lock gate.
‘The water level fell by two feet or so during the night,’ said fisheries officer Keith Fisher.
‘As far as we are aware there were no fish in distress when we returned to work on the Thursday morning and the canal was refilled with two feet of water.’
‘We have also put planks in front of the paddle to ensure it does not happen again.’
Perchfishers member Richard Frissen, 31, banked his fourth perch over 3 lb with this 3 lb 2 oz specimen from a Surrey club water.
Farnborough, Hampshire driver Richard paternostered a rudd bait on 6 trebles to 6lb line.
LEAGUE CHAMPIONS' FINAL
Oxford Canal, Keyford to Northbrook preview by Tom Legge
Feeding's the key to £1,000 cheque
Fifteen successful match outfits will be keeping their fingers crossed that a quick thaw is on its way before the weekend.
That's because the Sundridge Super League Champions match is due to take place on the Oxford Canal between Heyford Station and Northbrook Lock on Sunday.
All the teams have won their division of the Sundrige this season, and six will be doing battle in the top flight of their respective regions next year.
Any one of them would love to take away the £1,000 winner's cheque, won last year by Bristol Amalgamation, but first they'll have to beat the other hopefuls on what could be a bumper match.
The Super League's Southern semi-final canal match was fished at Northbrook last month and produced two double-figure hauls of quality roach, dace and perch plus a gudgeon catch topping 7 lb.
Since then, an incredible 27 lb 9 oz of roach was brought to the scales in an Oxford Open from a peg in Northbrook spinney.
But Oxford match secretary Steve Pipkin, who is pegging the length, reckons the team who can best sort out a method for the small fish will win on the day.
‘The key is knowing the area to fish in your peg and feeding it correctly.
Gudgeon are the chief target as they certainly weigh better than the little perch and tiny silver fish,’ said Steve.
‘If the canal thaws and colours up, then the bigger fish should show more.
In the clear conditions, anglers have been spotting many of the venue's double-figure carp but they'ree not feeding,’ he added.
Coventry Albatros, winners of the West Midlands Division Two, are tipped to do well, along with the powerful Team Robbos, victors in the London and South-East Division One.
Lancastrians Star, Clive Smith MG of Birmingham and Nott AA are also teams to watch.
All competing teams should report to the Dashwood Arms, Kirtlington at 8am., bringing with them an accurate set of scales.
The team who draws peg one will be responsible for weighing in their section, with peg two assisting as section stewards.
The match will be fished in all but the severest of conditions — the Oxford has a reputation for producing fish even when ice-breaking is necessary.
But road conditions for travelling teams must also be taken into account, and for this reason a decision on whether the match will go ahead will be taken on Thursday February 14) at 12 noon.
Captains only can telephone Tom Legge on 071 261 5998 after that deadline to confirm the match will be fished.
This 11 lb plus net taken by Trev's Browning's Derek Young was second in the Sundrige semi final on the Oxford Canal
Dave Berrow with the 7 lb gudgeon net taken from Northampton last month