

Commercialism and Violence
IT is becoming commonplace to think of sport as a ‘leisure industry’.
In recent years there have certainly been dramatic moves to open sport up to the forces of the market.
The maximum wage and the retain-and-transfer system in football, and the distinction between gentlemen and players in cricket has been scrapped.
Tennis also abandoned the amateur and professional labels and simply called all competitors ‘players’ from 1967.
Most recently a change of heart on the part of the athletics authorities now enables Top competitors To earn very large sums which are held in ‘trust funds’.
This technicality permits athletes to remain ‘amateurs’.
Only Rugby Union holds out against the commercial tide despite widespread speculation about covert payments to players.
Cricket, The game of the British amateur par excellence , is now sponsored by tobacco firms and insurance companies whilst footballers advertise everything from double-glazing to Guinness on their shirts.
The football League was recently sponsored by a Japanese camera manufacturer whose name had to be repeated when publishing or broadcasting results.
A newspaper and now a bank have since taken over.
In return for media coverage and the ‘clean’ image of sport, sponsors are prepared to provide big injections of cash.
This new rush to make profits from sport provides a contemporary context against which to measure the earlier degree of commercialization.
To what extent were large profits made from spectator sports and what kind of earnings and working conditions could a professional sportsman expect?
What role have newspapers, the radio, and television played in sport?
This leads us to the composition and behaviour of sports crowds, especially at football matches and the current debate about the reasons for hooliganism.
How far are money and the media responsible for the misbehaviour of football supporters?
Or is aggression leading to violence endemic in sport and sports spectators? competent, phlegmatic Englishman reading the Oxford Book of Greek Verse while organizing supplies and technical support with a minimum of fuss.
There was still hope for Britain if the old qualities of stoicism and the knack of handling ‘native’ races could be combined with the scientific and management skills needed in the modern world.
Another sporting triumph followed hard upon the conquest of Everest and gave added reassurance to the nation, especially those steeped in the amateur spirit for whom the demolition of English professional football by Puskas and the Hungarians was not a matter for much regret.
On 6 May 1954 at the small Iffley Road stadium in Oxford, Roger Bannister, a medical student at the University, broke The four-minute mile with the help of a couple of friends, Chris Brasher and Christopher Chataway.
Despite the apparent informality of the occasion, this was no glorious undergraduate fluke.
The sub-four-minute mile was a superbly planned and executed achievement.
The record was broken by scientific training and pacing in which two first-class athletes sacrificed themselves to permit Bannister to break the record.
A blend of the old virtues and the new, which the public seemed to understand and appreciate, united these two very different achievements.
Bannister and Hunt gave the English hope for the future within the British Isles and more importantly in the wider post-imperial world.
Not since a bony young Yorkshireman, Len Hutton, batted into a third day in August 1938 against Bradman's Australia to pass the Don's record score for a test match had the British known such transcendent moments of self-belief through sport.
Hutton, later to become the first professional captain of England and knighted in 1956, joined the ranks of those who had to embody the hopes and expectations of an England creaking under the weight of its industrial and imperial past, but whose sense of destiny was still quite strong.
SHAREHOLDERs AND PROFESSIONALS
Professionalism was the limited form through which amateurs permitted market forces to enter the world of sport.
There was a long-standing tradition of professionalism, which centred around jockeys and pugilists for the most part.
Sporting gentlemen of the pre-Victorian period saw no harm in making money through playing games so long as this was a matter of gambling; nor did they mind mixing with others of a lower class, who derived the bulk of their income in this way, provided distinctions of birth were recognized and preserved.
Peers played cricket with the Hampshire farmers of Hambledon without needing to designate their status officially as ‘gentlemen’ or ‘players’.
Yet in Victorian Britain the alliance of wealth and birth formed in the public schools infused sport with a new idealism whilst simultaneously segregating the élite from members of the lower classes taking the same form of exercise.
What were the implications of this for the process of commercialization?
More striking than the provision of popular entertainment for profit was the remarkable degree to which the landed interest, the liberal professions, and even sections of the business community itself excluded commercial forces from sport.
The rule of sport by amateurs kept capitalism at bay in British sport.
All sports came to make sharp distinctions between those who received payment and those who did not.
Some amateur associations went as far as legal prosecution to prevent any payment or pro fit being derived from the activities they controlled.
Of those sports where payment was permitted, there was little concession to the creation of a free market.
footballers were hedged around by restrictions on personal mobility and income whilst the residence qualifications for county cricketers prevented a cricketing equivalent of the football transfer system.
Even the breakaway ‘Northern Union’ required rugby players to have a source of income outside of the game and paid them in principle for ‘broken time’.
The historical hostility to commercialism among the ruling bodies of sport is indisputable.
Yet there were areas of commercial penetration.
Sport certainly responded to the demand of the urban worker for entertainment.
Professional football is the obvious case.
With hundreds of thousands of paying spectators each week, with rising transfer fees, and the registration of clubs as limited liability companies surely it is reasonable to conclude that professional football was ‘a business’?
Plausible as this may sound, the proposition is flawed; the organization of football, for example, was quite unlike that of the music-hall or the cinema.
Spectator sport may have been partially commercialized but it never became a capitalist leisure enterprise.
Careful research by Tony Mason, Wray Vamplew, and others has uncovered the financial structure of football from company records.
Professional clubs formed themselves into limited liability companies not to speculate in the entertainment business but to make legally secure the cost of providing facilities.
It was not just a matter of handling gate-money and paying the players.
More important was the status of loans raised to buy or rent land and erect a stadium.
Even this was hardly big business.
The initial sums were often quite modest as football clubs tend to grow gradually, first drawing crowds on a casual basis and then fencing in a field and charging admission; from this point a wooden stand might be built and earth piled up into which steps could be cut.
Fulham even invited the public to dump their refuse in the ground in order to erect rudimentary terracing and so, I am told, did Stirling Albion.
Purpose-built stadia generally followed from club success rather than being built speculatively in the hope of profit.
There was no ‘futures market’ in football.
Between 1889 and 1910 fifty-eight clubs moved into new grounds, though there was often continuity of land use in the sense that, at least 35 out of the current league grounds were recreational or sporting grounds in some form before the clubs moved in’.
Club directors were cautious and strictly functional in their building plans.
Archibald Leitch, a mechanical engineer from Glasgow, provided the standard design for stadia with three open sides and a two-tier grandstand running the length of one of the longer sides of the rectangle.
Much as their fans loved them for all their quirks, the aesthetics and comfort of a ground did not cross the mind of many football directors.
They did not seek to attract new customers by the excellence of their pitches or facilities as music-hall proprietors did through the plushness and extravagance of their theatres.
Building and running a stadium that would hold tens of thousands of spectators was an expensive business and not usually a profitable one.
Only six out of sixty-two leading clubs paid their shareholders any dividend in the season 1908–9 and they were restricted by the FA from paying a dividend of more than 5 per cent.
‘No one who is out for a business return would look at football shares,’ commented a leading sporting paper.
‘Hundreds [of shareholders]have for years maintained guarantees at banks’, continued the article, ‘and thousands have helped to create clubs by taking shares without hope of seeing their money back or any return on it.’
The same was broadly true of Scotland.
Only Rangers and Celtic made much money — hence the original meaning of The term ‘The Old firm’— and Celtic was pledged To donate to Catholic charities.
The small annual profits of the Edinburgh and Dundee clubs were interspersed with losses and no dividends were distributed to shareholders.
There were odd cases of profiteering such as the rental and catering concession held by Mears at Chelsea, but these were the exceptions that proved the rule.
When ‘King John’ Houlding, a self-made brewer and prominent local Tory, tried to use his position on the Everton board to jack up the rent paid to him by The club, There was a shareholders' revolt and Houlding eventually left the club to form Liverpool FC.
Profiteering was morally unacceptable to most Everton shareholders; this was even true of business men like Hartley, the jam-maker, and Hudson, The soap-manufacturer.
When there were contractors to be handed out directors may have tried to help one another, but that can hardly have been a sufficient reason for buying up large blocks of shares.
Although there was no direct financial incentive for The purchase of shares, the bulk of those who took them up were involved in business.
Of 740 directors of football clubs from 1888–1915 that have been traced there were only forty-two skilled manual workers and a mere four unskilled.
Similarly there were only thirty-two ‘gentlemen’.
Manufacturers and managers, wholesale and retail, financial and commercial businesses, the building trade and the food and drink trade made up approximately two-thirds of the group.
Naturally directors tended to be drawn from the larger shareholders.
The thirty-four English clubs examined by Tony Mason were mostly run by smallish groups of substantial shareholders, though shareholding was sometimes quite widely distributed as in the case of Woolwich Arsenal with 900 manual workers holding shares in 1893.
In Sheffield a small, interconnected group of industrialists dominated football, passing down their directorships from father to son like family property.
Many directors continued in office long after they could hope to participate effectively.
Alderman Wardley of Sheffield Wednesday remained a director until he was over ninety.
Attendance at AGMs was small and directors were returned unopposed.
At West Ham the club was run by two families involved locally in business on a modest scale.
As they controlled an absolute majority of shares, the club was effectively closed.
No new members of the board were elected, though the odd family friend was co-opted from time to time.
Vamplew suggests shareholding was rather more democratically distributed in Scotland with skilled manual workers making up 19.1 per cent of shareholders in twenty-three clubs up to 1916.
Publicans were still the most important occupational group, holding between them almost a third (31.2 per cent) of all shares.
Perhaps a stake in a popular club would give profitable returns indirectly through the sale of drink.
The degree to which publicans ‘invested’ for this reason in football is unknown but the pecuniary advantage at first sight seems doubtful.
There was all the difference in the world between meeting a retired sporting hero behind the bar and meeting a shareholder or even a director.
Probably publicans were just carrying on an old tradition of involvement in popular sports.
Being a major shareholder or a director was rather like holding some honorific office within the community; it brought its own private and social satisfactions which could not be measured financially.
Publicans were frequently men of working-class origin, who sought prosperity without leaving their community.
They had a certain prestige within the neighbourhood and influence within the world of football was part of this process of ‘making good’.
Similar feelings influenced middle-class shareholders and directors too.
Investment in soccer offered a sense of self-importance and pride at running an organization around which so much local interest was centred; the club made you ‘someone’ in the town, a big fish in a small pool.
Arnold Bennett caught this splendidly in the story of Denry Machin, an ambitious and well-off young councillor, who brought back a local footballing hero to the town at his own expense.
‘Two days later a letter appeared in the Signal (signed ‘Fiat Justitia’) suggesting that Denry, as some reward for his public spirit, ought to be the next mayor of Bursley.’
When he was duly elected, Machin merely remarked to his wife ‘You'll be mayoress to the youngest mayor…
And it's cost me, including hotel and travelling expenses, eight hundred and eleven pounds six and sevenpence’(the cost of the transfer fee from York).
Such was the ‘psychic capital’ to be earned from investing in football.
If football was a business, it was a very peculiar one.
Clubs did not compete with one another to attract larger crowds by reducing their prices.
Nor did they make any serious efforts to derive income from a huge fixed asset, which was used for only a few hours a week.
Even the payment of players was regulated in such a way as to prevent clubs competing in a free market for talent.
As the game became more popular in the 1880s lack of regulation enabled the best footballers to play clubs off against one another and bid up their own wages.
It was to stop this that amateurs within the FA, who disliked professionalism in principle, were willing to accept it in practice.
Professionalism was legalised partly in order to place a limit on the bargaining power of players.
‘Clubs who employ paid men will be only too glad to possess a strong authority over them’ was how the Athletic News put it.
Hence the acceptance of professionalism did not set up a free market in football but bound players legally to one club and determined the maximum wage that could be paid to them.
The Football League was a kind of non-pro fit-making cartel in which the power of the largest clubs was limited by the smallest.
This was just as the amateurs of the FA thought it should be.
Nor were there frustrated breakaway movements from a handful of top clubs.
For they could still buy the best players through club transfers and were in a position to provide small additional incentives to players without increasing their wage-bill.
Cricket was even less open to the winds of free competition.
County cricket made little concession to spectators.
Amateurs wanted to get off to the country for the weekend rather than performing for the benefit of playing spectators.
‘The amateurs in the two teams went out grouse-shooting during the morning’, disclosed one account of Surrey against Derbyshire at Glossop in 1902.
The professionals sat around waiting for the gentlemen to return before the match was called off.
The interests of the crowd were simply not considered.
The English ‘national’ game was largely played at times when the English nation was otherwise engaged.
‘Cricket’, remarked Pelham Warner sternly, ‘is not a circus, and it would be far better that it should be driven back to the village green…than yield a jot to the petulant demands of the spectator.’
County matches frequently produced dull play and drawn games.
But there was no question of any of the first-class counties being relegated for poor results.
County clubs were financed partly through gate-money and partly from the subscriptions of members.
The idea of being part of the ‘county’ was socially appealing.
County membership was not quite the same as holding a season-ticket for a Football League club.
Kent and Yorkshire even refused to recruit from outside of their territorial frontiers.
Wearing the county tie was a mark of modest social distinction and with that went the responsibility of meeting debts and subsidizing the side.
In 1937 county cricket was estimated to have lost £30,000.
The losses of individual counties were relatively small and every four years the visit of the Australians helped to replenish the kitty.
Titled county presidents were also of great value.
Patronage did not die out with industrialization; it lived on through the honorific offices of county clubs and national bodies.
ln Derbyshire Will Taylor, the county secretary, would do his sums at the end of the season before phoning the Duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth.
‘Now then, Taylor, what's the damage this time?’ the Duke would ask and on being told he would briskly reply ‘Cheque in post tomorrow.
Good day to ye.’
Crowds had begun to fall from a first-day county average of almost 15,000 in the 1890s to under 10,000 between 1906 and 1914.
The relative failure of cricket as a popular spectacle lay ‘in the deliberate refusal of its administrators to modernize.
Cricket, in essence, stifled itself by remaining too true to its pre-industrial origins.’
Lack of an alternative summer team sport protected cricket between the wars and it benefited from a brief post-1945 resurgence in numbers, but then numbers fell so dramatically that by 1965 they stood at about a third of the post-1945 years.
It was the imminent collapse of the county game which finally pushed the men of Lord's towards a more businesslike and consumer-conscious outlook.
Until recently both football and cricket administrators simply took the loyalty of the crowds for granted.
Average attendances in the First Division doubled between the Edwardian period and the 1930s.
Approximately 30,000 was the average crowd in the season 1937–8 and cup games often attracted double this number.
ln Glasgow a Rangers-Celtic cup-tie in 1937 attracted a crowd of almost 150,000.
The tragedy at Bolton in 1946, in which thirty-three were killed and 400 injured, was the result of admitting 85,000 fans with more clambering over walls or vaulting the turnstiles.
The demand from the public for football was so great, the FA and the League had no need to ‘sell’ the game.
Instead of profiting from the enormous interest in gambling on football results through the ‘pools’ system, the FA's puritanism led to a futile and absurd confrontation in 1936, which involved the withholding of fixture lists to frustrate the pools companies.
The hostility of the FA arose not just from a lack of commercial sense but from a more profound belief that gambling was wrong.
Elements of a morally uplifting ‘rational recreation’ tradition survived in football despite the payment of players.
The gambling issue underlined the central fact that professionalism and commercialism were not synonymous.
Of course, there were some economic changes during the century spanning the formation of the FA and the ending of the maximum wage.
In the inter-war years, for example, transfer fees rose dramatically, the job of manager was defined, and revenue from advertising came to be more important.
Herbert Chapman, the manager of Arsenal, proved to be the prototype.
These changes, which were limited to the big club sides, will be examined later in relation to media interest in sport.
For the moment let us take a look at the fortunes of the professionals, mostly unsung and unremembered, who played cricket or football for pay.
‘Obedient servants’ they have been called, and that for the most part is just what they were.
Until very recently professional sportsmen have been regarded by directors as skilled workmen; footballers' incomes were not calculated in the same way as transfer fees according to market value but in relation to what other working-class men could expect to earn.
By such standards both footballers and cricketers, provided they were among the minority who avoided injury and played in the first team, were quite well off for a few years.
They were paid about double what a skilled man could expect for a fifty-hour week in return for working part-time at something that they enjoyed.
Spectators were not surprisingly unsympathetic to the rare protests of professionals about the maximum wage and the retain-and-transfer system.
Their employers were quick to stoke up popular envy through the press if players even temporarily forgot their good fortune.
Yet both professional footballers and cricketers were subjected to unreasonable restrictions and working practices.
In most cases they gained very little financially from their employment.
ln cricket there were very few opportunities with only fifteen first-class counties and the Lancashire League sides, who had only one full professional per team.
Professional batsmen were frequently in competition with ‘gentlemen’ who did not charge for their services in the conventional manner.
County cricketers were paid for the summer and only the best were given a reduced wage to see them through the winter.
Of twenty-four professionals retained by Lancashire in 1899, seventeen were paid £3 a week as a basic wage during the season with the remainder getting less.
All received reduced winter wages with eleven given nothing at all.
Match fees and bonuses for winning pushed up the wages of the best players, but travel and hotel expenses had to be met out of the £5 or £6 payment for away games.
Most significant for a county player was the opportunity to have a benefit match.
This was not done for players with less than ten years' service and a longer period was usually required.
Benefits were notoriously unreliable.
If a player was granted a good fixture, if the weather held fair, and if the player was popular with the supporters, a good sum might be raised.
Mandle's calculation of an average benefit of £816 in the 1890s indicates a threefold increase since the 1860s, and would have been enough perhaps to start a man off in a small business.
The ‘benefit’ was in fact a deferred payment, which both tied a player to a single club and was of no value to those who through loss of form or injury were not able to serve the county for a long enough period.
Bobby Abel, the son of a cockney lamplighter from Rotherhithe, played for Surrey from 1881 to 1904.
At the time only ‘W.G.’ had made more first-class runs than the ‘Little Guv'nor’with his 32,669.
‘He gathers runs like blackberries everywhere he goes’, said C. B. Fry.
With his cap pulled down over one eye and the crowds shouting ‘Go to it little ‘un’, he was a stalwart of Surrey and England.
Had he not been followed as a Surrey opener by Jack Hobbs, then perhaps he would be better known to posterity.
He was a dedicated professional, who claimed ‘I sacrifice everything for cricket, never stop out late and always take the greatest care of myself.’
Whenever he was out he set himself the task ‘to study how and why until I discovered how I should have played the ball that beat me’.
Abel was granted a benefit in 1895 after fourteen years with the club and took the Surrey-Yorkshire game.
The Bank Holiday fixture was habitually requested and refused for benefit matches and the stand receipts were also withheld.
Abel managed to make £730, which helped to develop a sports shop beside the Oval, though this later failed and he was rescued from penury by a public appeal launched by the Daily Mail after the First World War.
Players like Abel of international calibre were increasingly resentful of the special payments made to famous amateurs.
Grace openly demanded payment of £20 a match from Gloucester and more for Test matches;Wisden could only comment that ‘nice customs curtsey to great kings’.
At Surrey the ‘amateur’ W. W. Read was employed as ‘assistant secretary’to the club for £250 a year — a post he relinquished when he ceased to play.
Entry fees to the Stock Exchange were put up by members of the Surrey committee in the late nineteenth century to help impecunious gentleman-cricketers.
Harry Wood, a professional for twenty years with Surrey and along with Abel one of three who went ‘on strike’ in 1896 demanding a £20 match fee to play the Australians, left the game a bitter man.
He believed that if ‘1 had played cricket as a ‘gentleman’ I should have made sufficient out of my ‘expenses’to retire by now.’
This was probably an exaggeration, though the resentment was understandable.
Amateurs always claimed that (W.G. apart) only legitimate hotel and travelling expenses were met, though ‘testimonials, were sometimes arranged to give the gentleman a decent send-off.
Grace notoriously pocketed £9,000 from his second testimonial while more modestly W. W. Read managed a respectable £1,000 from a Surrey vs.
England fixture specially resurrected for him.
Then there were the sheer indignities of a professional cricketer's life — the separate entrances, changing facilities, menial jobs to do around the club, even the placing of the man's initials after his surname to signify servile status.
When Kent played Surrey in 1890 a fine spread was laid on for the gentlemen but the professionals ‘were left to shift for themselves, and thought themselves lucky to get a bit of bread and cheese’.
Even the otherwise haughty Surrey committee was moved to complain about this lack of common courtesy, though naturally they did not go so far as to suggest meals should be taken in common.
The Middlesex secretary of the Edwardian years, who was also secretary of the MCC, Sir Francis Lacey, mixed a curt politeness with public condescension in his treatment of the professional staff.
At the start of each season he would stand with his chief clerk at the gate of Lord's with ‘a pile of contracts on heavy blue legal paper, everyone tied with a piece of pink ribbon.
As each cricketer stepped forward he would refer to the man by his surname and say, ‘Here's your contract and here's your first day's wages, and I hope you've wintered well.’
Not even the most distinguished professionals were treated any differently, including ‘Patsy’ Hendren, who after Jack Hobbs made more first-class centuries than any other player.
Patsy's brother Dennis also played for the club and did not appreciate the secretary's habitual greeting: ‘with me bleedin’ ribs pokin’out of me skin, breakin’me neck to get at that six and eight’(the initial sum dispensed by the Secretary), Dennis Hendren had not wintered well’and did not believe Middlesex looked after its players out of season.
Wally Hammond took over from Hobbs as the Great Man of English cricket.
He played his first match at the age of 17 for Gloucester in 1920 and continued until after the Second World War.
He was the supreme all-rounder — the best since Grace — but with a self-confessed ‘allergy’ to publicity which perhaps led his reputation to suffer after his retirement.
Hammond changed his status from professional to amateur partly through taking a directorship of a tyre company in 1938 — he liked to drive fast cars — and was then selected to captain England.
He was the first ex-professional to be so honoured.
His career neatly illustrates the expanding commercial possibilities for famous sportsmen outside the field of play.
Taking money for playing still disqualified a man for the highest honours in amateur eyes, but profiting from sporting fame indirectly through directorships did not.
The subordinate status of professionals lasted a very long time indeed.
When the distinction was abandoned in 1963 some old ‘players’ steeped in traditions of the game even mourned its passing.
Most professionals were a deferential, biddable lot.
The ending of what amounted to class segregation was less a matter of the democratic spirit of professionals finally asserting itself than of the decline of the amateur.
A combination of higher taxation and more rigorous academic standards led to a dearth of first-class amateurs.
Gentlemen had to take their fortunes and their education more seriously.
Even Oxbridge men had less time and money to spare.
Things had changed since the 1920s when Lionel Hedges, a Tonbridge and Kent cricketer and Oxford blue, had dismissed ‘a seedy looking middle-aged gentleman [who]called on him on the morning of a match.
Imagining him to be a reporter, Lionel said to him brusquely, ‘I have nothing to say to you.’
The man tried to expostulate but Lionel repeated, ‘I have nothing to say to you.’
It only afterwards transpired that the seedy man was not a reporter but his tutor, with whom he was not otherwise acquainted.’
After the Second World War the comfortable, leisured life cushioned with a decent income from stocks and shares was hit both by inflation and the liquidation of Britain's foreign assets.
When Keynes had talked of the ‘euthanasia of the rentier’ he had not been thinking of cricket, but the MCC had to face the reality of the decline of the leisured classes.
From 175 out of 450 county cricketers in 1949 the number of amateurs fell to 72 out of 370 in 1961.
It was becoming difficult to put together a Gentlemen's eleven worthy of the name.
So Lord's decided that all men should henceforth be ‘cricketers’ and the Gentlemen and Players fixture was duly abandoned.
By this time professional cricketers' earnings had fallen behind average manual wages.
Cricketers were no longer even financially privileged workers and there was no representative body to fight for them until the Cricketers' Association was formed in 1968.
Since then their incomes, though still relatively low, have improved somewhat.
The benefit has remained crucial to the county cricketer, and with assiduous planning and work the sums raised from them have gone up dramatically.
Cyril Washbrook's £14,000 in 1948 remained a record until the early 1970s.
Nowadays the holding of dances, raffles, and pub talks along with the fixture has pushed up the sums enormously, although if inflation and house prices are taken into account even £50,000 or over is hardly a fortune for a man who has to find a job and keep a family.
Professional footballers fared little better than cricketers and were less likely to be able to pursue their occupation for as long.
On the other hand, there were many more openings for footballers than cricketers.
There were 448 players registered with the Football League in 1891 but this figure rose to around 5,000 by the Edwardian period.
During the 1890s the FA left wages to the discretion of individual clubs, but there were complaints that top players were able to use this freedom to extract large sums from the directors despite their contractual bondage to a particular club.
Moreover, poorer clubs were anxious not to find themselves in a wages-auction with richer ones and the FA finally set a £4 a week maximum in 1900, which was raised in 1909 to £5 for senior professionals with a club.
Although well above the best wages of a skilled man, it was neither market-determined nor received by all registered professionals.
Wage regulation applied only at the upper limit.
There was no ‘minimum wage’ and clubs tended to take on large numbers of hopefuls at low rates.
Vamplew has worked out that almost half of the players registered with First Division clubs in 1910 never played a League match.
Many players retained part-time jobs or worked odd shifts at the pit.
Of twenty-eight new signings for Aston Villa in 1893–4 half never played and only one continued with the club for more than three seasons.
The same seems to have been true of other clubs.
Most working men claimed to know someone who had once been given a trial or had been ‘on the books’ of a club for a spell.
Wages rose with inflation after the war to £8 a week but only a minority of players on a club's books received this.
Of full-time professionals playing for a major club like Sheffield United in 1934–5 only four out of twenty-one were on the maximum wage.
Benefits for long-serving players were discretionary and unlike cricket were subject to tax.
This, of course, is only the official, public side of the story.
The extent to which the maximum wage was regularly breached is difficult to determine.
Naturally, players and directors did not want to broadcast systematic evasion of FA rules.
For most players in the lower divisions the issue simply did not arise.
They would have been only too happy to accept the maximum.
But in the commanding heights of the First Division with huge crowds and ambitious directors, there is no doubt that incentives were given to players.
One way of evading restrictions was to find sinecure posts for good players; one man was given the job of checking the advertising posters for the club, though the most common trick was for club directors, who were often substantial employers, to find part-time or simply bogus jobs for which payment was made.
Another ruse was to offer houses at low rent or for sale, or to offer signing-on fees far in excess of the £10 theoretically permitted by the FA.
Old cars were sold to clubs at inflated prices and on one occasion a player sold his dog to a director.
From time to time the authorities got wind of these breaches of regulations and punished clubs, but they did not regularly inspect the books and revelations of extra payments tended to emerge as a result of other inquiries.
Such was the case at Manchester City in 1905–6.
Billy Meredith, the ‘Prince of Dribblers’ and the club captain, was suspended for a season for attempting to offer a bribe to an Aston Villa player.
Meredith at first proclaimed his innocence but friction between the player and the club led to further disclosures.
Meredith claimed he had offered the bribe on behalf of the manager and that the players were to be offered a team bonus of £100 if they won the League.
An FA investigation revealed that the club had regularly breached the maximum wage restrictions in the season 1904–5.
As a result seventeen players were suspended for six months, fined a total of £900, and forbidden to play for the club again.
Two directors were suspended for a year and the chairman and manager banned from football for good.
The FA was determined to set an example, but here the difference between the largely amateur FA and the Football League was important.
The League was controlled by the club chairmen, some of whom were undoubtedly also involved in making extra payments.
The supreme irony of the Manchester City affair was that several rival clubs, notably Manchester United, signed the suspended players, offering substantial signing-on fees (contrary to FA rules) as well as a transfer fee to the club.
Billy Meredith and Herbert Burgess, the ‘Mighty Atom’ as the fans called him went to Manchester United along with Jimmy Bannister, Meredith's partner in City's attack.
Presumably they were offered inducements to sign and paid over the odds when they helped to win the League championship for City's rivals two years later.
There seems little doubt that the richest clubs went on evading the maximum wage regulation.
As the FA handed over control of this aspect of the game to the League, it was not likely that club chairmen would encourage investigations that might damage themselves.
The memoirs of great inter-war players like Dixie Dean, Tommy Lawton, and Stanley Matthews politely skate over the issue, but a Manchester United player in the 1920s recalled a telling incident involving the club captain, Frank Barson.
Barson's powers of tackling and leadership were so highly regarded that United had paid £5,000 — a huge fee at the time, especially for a defender — for his transfer from Aston Villa in 1922.
When the former blacksmith from Barnsley ‘walked into the United dressing-room, he would put a hand on to a shelf in search of a package before he took his coat off.
In the package was the few bob he got extra, because he was half the team.
One day, there was no package and he said to the trainer, ‘Where's the doin's?
I'm not taking my bloody coat off till I get it.’
That illegal payments to players in the top clubs was widespread and continued throughout the period of the maximum wage emerged from evidence of overpayment by Sunderland in the 1950s submitted anonymously to discredit the chairman, Bill Ditchburn, a wealthy local business man, who used to go out to buy fish and chips in his pink-and-mauve Rolls-Royce.
Ditchburn covered up the extra payments through a hugely inflated figure for the purchase of straw to protect the turf from frost.
He was barred for life from the game and angrily hired his own team of detectives to collect evidence to prove that all the other major clubs were also evading the regulations.
This ‘evidence’ was never published but he persisted in his belief that his only crime was that he was found out.
Trevor Ford, the aggressive Welsh centre-forward, who had been signed for Sunderland as part of Ditchburn's lavish spending programme (earning Sunderland the name of ‘The Bank of England club’), confirmed that abuse of the system was widespread in the First Division.
Most professionals, however, did not have the market value nor did their clubs have the resources to behave like this.
Just how hard a school professional football was emerges from Ward and Alister's imaginative oral history of Barnsley between 1953 and 1959.
The club had thirty in its youth squad in 1951 and there was competition even to get a game for the fourth team.
Despite relegation to the Third Division the club kept a playing staff of thirty-eight, twenty-five of whom came from the Barnsley area and were almost all miners or the sons of miners.
Even first-team players had odd jobs and reserves often worked shifts at the pit or elsewhere.
Johnny Kelly, an established player, ingeniously devised his own brand of detergent, which he mixed up in his bath at home and delivered in an old van with the registration number AGE 100.
Clubs such as this were rather like workshops with the old pros as time-served tradesmen who expected the young apprentices to clean their boots and learn their trade.
These lads were often touchingly naïve.
Away games gave working-class youths their first taste of comfortable living.
Many had never stayed at a hotel or even had a cheap meal away from home.
When one youngster was asked by a waitress what he wanted for ‘a sweet’, he replied ‘a Nuttall's Minto’.
What became of most professionals after their brief sojourn in the game?
Their lack of other skills or a decent education often pushed them into routine manual labour, though jobs within football did increase between the wars.
The most successful players certainly did well; Stanley Matthews had a hotel in Blackpool and Jackie Milburn, the folk-hero of Tyneside, ran a coach firm.
But they were exceptional.
Of the eleven who won the Cup for Manchester United in 1948, most of whom were internationals and all in the first rank of senior professionals, five went into football coaching and management, three ran newsagents' shops (customers presumably enjoyed discussing the sports headlines with men who had once made them), two worked in factories, and one became a night-telephonist.
Only one of the five who stayed in football was able to keep his position within the game until retirement.
Even Johnny Carey, the club captain and reckoned to be the most versatile player of all time (he had played in ten positions for United including goalkeeper), finished his working life modestly in the treasurer's office of Trafford Borough Council after having gone the way of all managers in the grip of impatient and often ignorant directors.
Such were the small gains to be made from a playing career at the very top.
Ordinary club professionals had far fewer opportunities.
A few like Hughie Gallacher, the marvellous centre-forward for Newcastle and Scotland in the 1920s, could never adjust to the sudden loss of fame and took their own life.
But there were probably a great many more who simply took advantage of too many of the free pints they were offered too often and slipped into alcoholism.
It was hard to be a hero one day and a ‘has-been’ the next.
Arthur Hopcraft's The football Man evokes perfectly the life of the footballer at the fag-end of England's industrial heyday as men like Nat Lofthouse, the son of a coal-man from Bolton and a ‘Bevin Boy’ in the war, led the England attack in the tradition of big, fearless centre-forwards.
In the 1940s and early 1950s football remained the ruling passion of working men without cars and televisions, whose world still revolved around the communal life of the works, the pub, and the match.
Derek Dooley, the young Sheffield Wednesday centre-forward who scored forty-six goals in his team's Second Division championship victory in 1951–2, was the kind of hero every northern boy dreamed of becoming.
His father was a steel-worker.
He had often been out of work during the boy ‘s early years in the west of Sheffield ‘where the city meanders in a smokey, greasy straggle of workshops into Rotherham’.
The son learned his football in a shared backyard or on ‘patches of grit and oily grass, hemmed in by the crouched streets, with the rusty swings and roundabouts, which creaked under a cafuffle of ragged children.
Jackets made goal-posts, and: ‘If you went down you got up with a lump of a cinder in your knee.’
School football matches were desperately hard-fought, especially when the secondary modern had a chance to beat the grammar school.
This was no place for the frail ball player.
Hardness was cultivated and admired.
Hopeful youngsters clashed with old timers playing out their last few seasons in the reserve leagues, which were as competitive as the first-team games and often a lot tougher.
And so Derek Dooley went to Sheffield Wednesday at seventeen and a half, his local team, until a clash with an advancing goalkeeper forced the immediate amputation of his leg in February 1953.
He had not even had a full season in the First Division.
Dooley's personal tragedy was so awful — he was so young and talented and he took the blow with such heroic, idiotic stoicism (‘It's my one regret that the ball didn't finish in the net’)— that a substantial sum was raised for him and he later went to work for the club.
Happily it was rare to be as unfortunate as Dooley on the field, but few were able to make a good career in the game.
Many were called but few were chosen.
The history of the Players' Union has only intermittently been a struggle against wage and transfer controls.
More central to the ordinary professional was the question of compensation for injury.
This was the issue which brought the Professional Footballers' Association, founded in 1907 after several earlier false starts, into immediate conflict with the FA and the League.
The PFA appealed on behalf of injured players to the courts under the terms of the Workmen's Compensation Act of 1906.
When the FA protested, they received a splendid rebuff to the effect that the PFA could not be expected ‘to regard seriously the opinion that a football player forfeits a common legal right on entering into a professional engagement with a football club’.
The PFA urged players not to sign new contracts until this principle was accepted and several of the leading sides such as Manchester United and Newcastle United, where Colin Veitch's energetic organization and articulate socialism briefly seems to have radicalized the players, went on strike.
Possibly the widening class-consciousness of militant trade unionism within the Edwardian working class, especially considering the number of players from mining origins, may also have helped encourage this flurry of ‘industrial’ action.
Threats from the FA, however, forced 800 of the 1,200 members of the PFA to resign.
A truce was eventually agreed by which players would first present any injury claims to the FA itself and a small increase in the maximum wage and a bonus system were introduced.
The PFA challenged the retain-and-transfer system in the courts and lost in 1912, to which was added the indignity of needing financial help from the League to pay the costs of the case.
The real weakness of any players' union lay in the difficulty of maintaining solidarity amongst its members.
Competition was so intense for team-places that managers could isolate activists.
The constant supply of optimistic youngsters meant that those who became bitter or critical as they got older could be quietly dropped.
Hence the PFA concentrated on making small gains.
It did not challenge the essentials of the system between the wars but concentrated on edging up the maximum wage and stressing the benefits of belonging to a mutual aid society for sickness or injury.
There were about 2,000 members by 1939 and after 1945 the ‘friendly society’ dimension was further strengthened by the taking out of an expensive private insurance scheme for players, which absorbed half of the income of the Association.
Anger over their failure to benefit from increased television revenue combined with the falling value of the maximum wage of £20 in relation to average industrial earnings led to a new surge of militancy in the 1950s.
Professionals' self-esteem had been founded upon being at the top of the manual wages pyramid.
Then there was the emergence of Jimmy Hill, a Fulham player with a grammar school education and a father in the Stock Exchange, as an articulate and shrewd spokesman for the players.
Strike action to remove the maximum wage in 1960 was promised.
The threat was enough this time.
Public opinion, carefully managed by Hill, favoured the players and some of the top clubs, who had never liked the system, were worried about the growing tendency of the very best professionals to leave the country to play in Italy and elsewhere.
So the maximum wage was scrapped but freedom of contract and mobility was harder to get.
George Eastham backed by the PFA took Newcastle United to court for ‘unjustifiable restraint on trade’ and won the case, although significantly the logical implications of the judgement in respect of full freedom of contract for players was resisted by the Football League for nearly another twenty years.
Those who think the modern footballer's life is a round of ‘boutiques, blow-waves and BMWs’(as the Sun might put it) should read Eamon Dunphy's Only a Game ?
In a genre noted for its shoddiness and sensationalism, this playing memoir of a season with Millwall in the mid-1970s stands out as a truthful and often painful account of the player's lot.
Dunphy, an Irish international, was better off than most, but the awful uncertainty of the job, the fear of failure or injury, were always present.
There was the public humiliation of being dropped from the side; the autocratic style of managers, who were themselves as afraid and insecure as their players; the refusal to let good players use their natural talent to play, forcing them through repetitive training ‘systems’ and naïve ‘game plans’; the petty jealousies of the players, their hierarchies, and childish pranks; the fear of the new signing, who has to be included at the expense of an old friend; the view of a match from ‘the inside’when you know a team-mate does not want the ball but wants it to look as if you will not give it to him.
As the team faces relegation to the Third Division, Charlton offers Dunphy a job but his house is tied to Millwall.
The Charlton house is
terrible.
A real slum…
And then it hit me, and I really got frightened…
I felt really vulnerable.
I've got nothing.
No money, no security, no trade, no home…
All I had to bargain with was my own little bit of skill, which really, when you compare it with a carpenter's skill, or a plumber's skill, is intangible.
They can make chairs, mend the loo.
But a footballer?
A Second or Third Division footballer is expendable.
You can be easily done without.
He felt he had to go.
He would probably have been forced out anyway, as several of his friends had been.
It was better to go first from choice.
‘I persuaded him [the Millwall manager]that he had had eight years out of me, and I had nothing to show for it.
That they weren't having to give me a testimonial, which I would be entitled to soon, and were making a profit on my sale.’
He finally agreed to sell Dunphy to Charlton.
Other entertainers on the wane can often fall back on a ‘club circuit’, musicians and dancers can sometimes coach others, but there are few openings for the ex-footballer.
They cannot teach sport in schools.
They may pay a high price for their few years of glory with injury problems in later life and will probably never enjoy the relative prosperity of their first working years again.
There were, of course, other professional sportsmen besides cricketers and footballers.
What of them?
The greatest track athlete of the late nineteenth century was Walter George.
He turned professional in 1885 having won everything from the half-mile to the ten-mile AAA's events.
Thirty thousand spectators turned up at Lillie Bridge in London to see him run the mile against William Cummings of Paisley and in the return match George's time of 4 min. 12.75 sec. was not beaten in Britain for forty-nine years.
That his name is scarcely known today is a testament to the power of the amateur establishment to make a professional an ‘unperson’.
This pedestrian tradition of foot-racing for cups and prize-money survived, especially in Scotland.
When Dixie Dean was on holiday in Ayr, he noticed that a professional sprint was to be held and entered it as an outsider and won; he thereby not only demonstrated the outstanding athletic abilities of top footballers (Matthews was also a fine athlete), but underlined the survival of the old pedestrian traditions at the new resorts catering for working-class holiday-makers.
The Powderhall stadium in Edinburgh was the top venue for professional athletics, though competitors could not make a living by running alone.
Pedestrianism remained a source of extra money for good runners, who were willing to sacrifice the more socially prestigious amateur laurels.
Men did not get rich through running as they did through boxing.
Next to football, boxing was probably the most important working-class spectator sport.
With the establishment of the British Boxing Board of Control in 1929 boxing was freed from the private control of the gentlemen of the National Sporting Club, and despite the dominance of the United States, especially in the heavier weights, boxing remained an extremely popular professional sport.
There were around a thousand registered fighters in the 1940s, but the number fell steadily in the 1950s and 1960s as working-class affluence softened inner-city boys brought up to fight out of hunger and the sheer hardness of street life.
In Jimmy Wilde, the world flyweight champion from 1916, Britain produced one of the very greatest boxers of all time.
He was defeated only four times in a long career, ‘retiring with a fortune of £70,000, almost all of which was promptly lost for him’.
Wilde was a Welshman as were two other of the great Edwardian boxers, Freddie Welsh, the lightweight champion of Britain in 1909, and Jim Driscoll, the world bantamweight champion who ended his days ‘Wandering around the pubs of London, penniless, and dying at 44’.
Boxers fought an enormous number of contests by modern standards to satisfy a working-class public who wanted to see regular bouts.
Wilde fought 864.
Len Harvey, the leading middleweight in the inter-war years, fought 412 contests.
Jack Matthews, the ‘Fighting Barber’ and father of Stanley, fought 350 bouts losing only nine times without winning a championship title.
Jack ‘Kid’ Berg, who grew up in the East End ghetto, fought his way up from the streets to a world welterweight title in the tradition of oppressed racial minorities.
Jewish boxers were an important part of the London sporting scene.
Irish Catholics in Glasgow grew up in a similarly hostile environment.
Benny Lynch, the world flyweight champion from 1935 to 1938, was their folk-hero.
Born in the Gorbals, he learned boxing in a Catholic youth club and by fighting on the street-corners.
He toured round the boxing-booths of the summer fairgrounds like other ‘has-beens’ or ‘hopefuls’.
The ‘small halls’ put on weekly programmes of fights for small purses.
Paddy Reilly, a friend of Lynch's, once claimed to have had five ten-round fights in a week.
Alex Farries, another Glaswegian contemporary, lost count of the number.
On one occasion he went to Dundee where the promoter knocked down his purse from £4 to £2. 10s. because he had come on his motor bike rather than on the train.
For this he fought a hard ten-round contest.
He collapsed with a dangerous fever and inflammation when he got back to Glasgow.
When Farries fought Benny Lynch for £5 at the Eldorado at Leith, the two Glaswegians cheerfully came home together on the train.
In the West of Scotland, South Wales, and Fast London — all areas of significantly high immigration — professional boxing was followed with a fierce passion and local fighters were folk-heroes.
In Belfast from 1931 to 1938 a total of 800 twice-weekly boxing-programmes were put on by ‘Ma Copley’, who first organized fights in the open air and then set up a boxing hall at Chapel Fields.
Threepence bought a night's boxing at ‘the Nursery’ as this training-ground for fighters was known.
They were a tough crowd who drew fighters from quite far afield.
Scotsmen, Englishmen, and Welshmen joined with local fighters like Spider Kelly, Jackie Quinn, and Rinty Monaghan to slug it out for a few pounds.
American dominance of the top weights has unduly obscured the vitality of our own fighting tradition at the lower divisions.
Despite the growing protests of the medical establishment, boxing still thrives at the championship level.
Black immigration, recession, and the enormous purses which television can provide have meant there remain a ready supply of men willing to risk brain damage in the ring.
Public reaction to boxing is now ambivalent.
As a display of complete athleticism a great boxing match is a supreme sporting event, the purest expression of skill, strength, and courage.
But it is undoubtedly dangerous and often cruel, stirring not so much the boxers but the crowds who watch them to a pitch of savagery quite incompatible with the notion that boxing is ‘the noble art of self-defence’.
The moral opposition to boxing in the late twentieth century, which is essentially a continuation of an old Nonconformist hostility bolstered by science, is weakened by the popularity of men like Henry Cooper: 'Enry, the Londoner, the decent, gentle bruiser, who almost knocked out one of the greatest heavyweights of all time, but now prospers as a TV celebrity playing golf for charity or advertising deodorants.
Boxing is certainly a business; great fortunes are made and more are kept than before.
Boxers fight less and earn more.
This may be accounted a kind of progress and helps to assuage the liberal moral conscience.
Wrestlers were a breed apart.
They were more akin to circus performers than to more conventional professional sportsmen.
Mass Observation made a quite careful study of this new spectator fad in Bolton in the late 1930s.
A wrestling stadium was opened in 1933 by a former amateur wrestler and publican to show ‘free style’ wrestling from the USA with its commercial flamboyance and parodies of ‘good’and ‘bad’sportsmanship.
Out of a sample of 300 men a third had attended wrestling.
‘Thrill’ was the most frequent motive for attending but ‘humour’was also frequently cited — if the wrestlers went in for too much close holding choruses of ‘Kiss me sergeant ‘and ‘What blue eyes you've got’would strike up.
‘Rough stuff, of the half-simulated sort that has diverted modern television audiences, was popular from the start.
Third round P — again beats gong, rushes at B — puts B's head over the rope and then lifts middle rope over part of his neck.
B — cannot get loose and seems to be choking and the crowd are on their feet yelling and waving their hands — the referee helped by both seconds manages to extricate B — but P — grabs him, a quick aeroplane spin, gets him with his left hand round the shoulder, right hand through his left, swings him three times round in the air and pins him with his shoulders on the floor for the count of three.
Boos and Boos and one or three cheering in the 6d .
stands.
M.C. announces first fall to P — in 2 minutes 50 secs. of the third round.
B — can scarcely rise, the referee is in a fit of temper, attacks P — with stool, P — chases him round ring — gong goes for the 4th round — P — still has stool so B — picks up the water bowl and with a terrific bang lands it on P's head.
P — drops almost unconscious.
B — jumps at him, Jack the referee drops on stomach to count but is fast between wrestlers and can't be seen and he manages to free himself, and counts 1 2 3 very quickly.
Second fall to B —.
Observer asks his neighbour how he enjoyed it.
‘I can ‘t tell you proper — I can ‘t believe my own bloody eyes.’
Such were the pleasures of a night of ‘dirty’ wrestling.
Footballers, cricketers, and boxers were the most numerous of professional sportsmen, but the best-known, especially in the late nineteenth century ‘were jockeys.
Their own earnings were fabulous and they could make money for their followers as well.
Tom Cannon was paid £15,000 simply as a retainer in the 1880s and Vamplew has calculated that the best riders in the period 1870–1914 might earn £75,000 in their careers.
Most famous of all was Fred Archer.
‘Crowds would block a street simply to see Archer leave a hotel and take a cab; when he married in January 1883, special trains were laid on to bring the cheering crowds to Newmarket and Cambridge.
‘His marriage ended tragically in the early death of his wife and a year later he shot himself.
‘Hardly anything could cause a more widespread and painful sensation’, wrote The Times , ‘the news of his death has come with a sense of shock and almost personal loss to millions.’
The top dozen or so jockeys would expect to ride over half the winners in a season.
The profession was extremely hard to break into and to maintain a very low weight required constant vigilance and self-discipline.
Archer was said to have become especially depressive when starving himself to make the required weight.
Most stable-lads would have counted themselves lucky even to get a ride let alone to win a race.
Much of this remains true today.
Racing is a major source of continuity in British sport.
The aristocracy has kept a tight grip on ‘the sport of kings’ and the British royal family have kept a close eye on the Turf — the present Queen is a fine judge of a horse.
Gordon Richards, champion jockey twenty-six times between 1925 and 1952, surpassed Fred Archer's annual record of 246 winners set in 1885 with 259 in 1933 and then 269 in 1947.
He got a knighthood as well as a fortune for his pains — the first professional sportsman to do so.
Lester Piggott, his brilliant successor from the 1960s to the 1980s, was driven by such a desperate, obsessive need for wealth and security that he was sent to prison for persistently defrauding the Inland Revenue of its share of his millions.
Tennis and golf were similarly skewed towards a handful of great competitors.
From the inter-war years a small number of tennis professionals played tournaments in the United States.
Most of the outstanding men who first made their name in the amateur game, turned professional — Tilden, Perry, Budge, Gonzales ‘Sedgman, Trabert, and then Rosewall, Hoad, and finally Rod Laver.
Yet the bulk of competitive play continued to be amateur until the late 1960s.
Golf employed a far larger number of professionals but these men were rarely tournament competitors.
Until the 1950s there were few tournaments with substantial amounts of prize-money.
Golf professionals sold equipment, gave lessons, and sometimes helped to look after the course.
The ‘pro’ remained a servant of the club in a little ‘shop’on the fringes of the premises.
Those who earned their living from the game in tournament play were few and far between.
Around the turn of the century there had been the great triumvirate of Braid, Vardon, and Taylor but American dominance was established between the wars in the shape of Walter Hagen, who won the Open four times, and Gene Sarazen.
Only one amateur could break the stranglehold of the professionals but Bobby Jones, who in 1930 took the British and American amateur and open titles in a unique Grand Slam, was an American.
Henry Cotton, who won the Open in 1934 and 1937 and then again in 1948 kept up British hopes.
Thereafter Bobby Locke of South Africa and Peter Thomson of Australia dominated the British professional game alongside American entrants for the Open for twenty years after the Second World War.
From their Edwardian dominance of golf and tennis, the British slipped back to the second rank.
Our amateurs were simply not dedicated enough to win at a world level.
It was not just a question of climate as the British sometimes liked to think.
Certainly Americans and Australians could play sport for more of the year but they did so in a more positive, meritocratic context where success was admired and recognized for its own sake.
Until recently social barriers both kept the working-class out of suburban sports and decreed that being a professional was a kind of elevated manual labour and not a proper or respectable career for a middle-class man.
Hence our shortage of great players.
PRESS, TELEVISION, AND PROFIT
Although professionalism was restricted and most governing sports bodies held themselves aloof from the pursuit of profit, the impression remains that sport soon became part of a ‘leisure, industry catering for the needs of a new kind of urban consumer.
Spectator sport in this respect seems to be a part of a wider system of entertainment’ which embraced the music-hall and the cinema, the record industry ‘and the dance-hall.
The growth of the popular press, which could bring news of the latest entertainment to the breakfast tables of the nation, clearly has played a crucial role in defining sport as part of a commercialized mass culture.
But when and how did this happen?
The enormous success of televised sport within the last twenty years has certainly been decisive in turning matches into ‘media events’ and in attracting commercial investment at unprecedented levels.
But this is all quite new and it does not follow that previous generations of advertisers were as enthusiastic about sport.
The progress of sport as a ‘commodity’ either to be sold to the media in its own right or to be used in order to sell other products was slower and more halting than might be imagined.
The press have played a major part in popularizing spectator sport and sustaining interest in it, but it is misleading to think of professional football, for example, as having been created or manufactured by the media.
The press reflected the living culture of the people; it could influence opinion and reinforce existing attitudes but it did not create new forms of entertainment and rarely attempted to alter the habits or loyalties of its readership.
The links between sport, the media ‘and big business ‘which are now so important, have taken a long time to forge.
Sport had always been a prominent source of news in its own right.
The early sporting papers such as Bell's Life in London existed to give news of forthcoming events and descriptions of recent ones ‘mostly races and prize-fights.
The Sporting Magazine was more interested in hunting and published the literary work of ‘Nimrod’ and Surtees along with more conventional reporting of sports events.
These papers were not so much creating a new market as servicing an established public interest.
This responsiveness of the specialist press to popular tastes remained extremely important throughout the nineteenth century as modern organized sports came into being.
The Sporting Life , which was essentially a racing-paper, had a circulation of 300,000 by the 1880s and the Athletic News , a weekly journal begun from Manchester in 1875, which concentrated on providing a wide range of football match reports ‘was soon claiming 100 ‘000.
In Scotland the Scottish Athletic Journal was started in 1882 coming out on Fridays for 2d. and was soon selling 20 ‘000 copies.
It merged six years later with the Scottish Umpire to form Scottish Sport , which appeared twice weekly at 1d. and claimed a circulation of 43,000.
But competition was fierce and the Scottish Referee , costing only a halfpenny and appearing on Monday afternoons with the reports of the weekend's activities, soon put in a challenge.
‘The Specials’, the Saturday night sporting press which reported in detail the performances of local teams, spread rapidly.
There were only four such papers in the 1880s, but eighteen in the 1890s and after 1900 they were ubiquitous —‘as much a part of the cultural scene as the gas-lamp and the fish-and-chip shop’.
In Scotland the ‘white’ edition of the Evening News competed with the ‘green-of the Evening Citizen and the ‘pink ‘of the Evening Times .
On late Saturday afternoons, at the corner the kerb is covered with men who stand with their backs to the light, intently reading in a pink newspaper full of poetical reporting and results ‘noted an observer of Glasgow in 1901.
The habit of reading the ‘football special’ died hard.
Even after radio reporting of results began between the wars, the ‘pink'uns’ and ‘green'uns’kept their readers.
There were dialect pieces and local banter along with information on how a particular local player had performed a couple of hundred miles away.
In Barnsley in the early 1950s men were even seen reading the ‘green'un’ over their partner's shoulder as they mechanically steered the wife around the ballroom on a Saturday night.
At first football was not so much the creature of the mass press as the source of new specialist newspapers.
But the technology that permitted the almost immediate availability of match results and reports meant that sport came to occupy a larger place in the daily national press.
Coverage, however’ was patchy and varied.
The Times gave prominence to cricket but thought the FA Cup Final in 1914 ‘of comparatively little interest except to the Lancashire working classes’(the game was between Liverpool and Burnley).
Of greater interest to The Times was the attendance of the King at the match for the first time and the fact that a cuckoo had been heard in the vicinity of the Crystal Palace.
More popular papers, however, like Reynold's News were starting to give football ample coverage from the mid-1880s.
From ten match reports in 1882 there were twenty-five in 1886 for Association football.
The Sunday Chronicle contained sports reports from its inception in 1885.
The popular daily press in the Edwardian years began to give quite a prominent place to sport.
The ‘sports page’ at the back of the paper established itself, though the emphasis remained on results and reports rather than background gossip and speculation about future selections.
Observers of inner-city youth noted that along with smoking and clothes, talking about sport was the main amusement of lads on the street-corner.
Football was their chief interest but they also followed cricket.
The new literacy arising from compulsory elementary education meant that boys could read about a sport which was organized in a way that made it difficult to watch regularly.
A London observer remarked that ‘the fortunes of the Surrey team are followed with that breathless and extravagant interest which demands a copy of every edition of the Star ’.
In Birmingham ‘the evening papers are eagerly read each night, and scores of boys who never play themselves are able to name at any time the runs made by prominent cricketers…and in seasons like the present ‘discuss readily and ably the claims of the individual members of the Australian team to be considered really worthy exponents of the game’.
From the 1920s sports reporting and photography was accepted as a crucial and specialized component of popular journalism.
Significantly, the Athletic News , which had provided splendid weekly coverage, fell from its 170,000 circulation and disappeared as an independent title in 1931.
The daily national press took up the cause of sport with a vengeance.
Taking their lead from the ‘gee-whizzers’ of American journalism, a more colourful, gossipy style of writing took over from the rather self-consciously poetic late Victorian style with its ‘hapless custodians’and ‘leather spheroids’.
There was more team speculation and more dressing-room chat, especially in the popular Sunday papers, whose circulation rose enormously between the wars.
The People , which boasted ‘four pages of sport’, sold 600,000 copies in 1924 and 4,600 ‘000 in 1946.
By 1950 it was devoting over a third of its space to sport with particular emphasis on football.
The People even financed a year-long secret investigation of football in the early 1960s which brought to light a gambling-ring betting on the results of two or three games, which they ‘fixed’ by bribing players.
The search for soccer stories occupied a new breed of journalist — men like Alan Hoby, the self-styled ‘Man Who Knows’, or the ‘Man Who Knows F — All’ as he was known to some of his readers.
The News of the World with its phenomenal eight million circulation, the Daily Mail , and the Daily Express all gave increasing space to sport.
Sports writing, especially match reporting, was an ‘art’ in itself.
Inflated language sometimes enlivened a dull game but most match reports were glib and full of clichés.
Inside forwards would ‘turn on a sixpence’; a centre-forward would ‘rise like a salmon’ and so on.
The habit of reading the paper backwards even spread to the quality press.
Neville Cardus gained a devoted following for his lyrical cricket writing as well as his musical reviews for the Manchester Guardian between the wars.
The Times could also be counted upon for lengthy discussion of cricket and Rugby Union, both from specialist reporters and from their readers through the institution of the Letters Page which became an important forum for influential discussion of these games.
The sensationalist side of sports reporting has gone from strength to strength in the popular press since the advent of television.
What happens off the pitch is the stuff of the sports pages — team rows, family rows, drink, and sex.
A recent critic complained about the ‘clichés, the daft, ghosted ‘star names’ columns, the silly photos (remember Ian Botham as ‘Rambo’?), the creation of heroes and villains, the concentration on the star or the result of the moment, the search for conflict, the trivialization of sporting women, the insularity (beyond Dover, forget it), the emphasis on spectating rather than participating, the dearth of analysis, the marginal treatment of those who don't quite ‘make it’.
The ‘quality’ press aside, this seems a fair verdict on the tabloids.
The recent Sunday Sport contains little but topless models and sports gossip.
Yet the power of the press within sport has until recently been severely circumscribed.
Journalists could whip up public indignation but cricket and football authorities were singularly unresponsive to press influence apart from The Times .
The educated amateur, whose organizational influence remained so strong, rarely listened to journalists.
Moreover, club directors were tolerably insulated from outside pressure.
They could not avoid criticism but they could usually ignore it.
And a few, like J. J. Bentley, a former chairman of Manchester United, had a financial stake in the press themselves.
Until the 1950s, at least, the press tended to react to events in the sporting world rather than ‘create’ them.
The FA were brusque with Fleet Street, often hardly bothering to organize press conferences or explain themselves.
When they took their stand against gambling on the football pools by refusing to release the fixture-lists in advance, they incurred the wrath of the press as well as the pools promoters.
Here Herbert Chapman stands apart.
He was ahead of his time and set the pattern for the post-war development of soccer as a ‘media event’.
Chapman, a Yorkshireman, had not had much success as a player, but he shone as a manager, first with Huddersfield and then with Arsenal, where he had a salary of £2,000 a year and wrote a column for the Sunday Express into the bargain.
Chapman made real efforts to shape the image of his team in the press and encouraged his players to promote themselves in public.
He was usually available for comment and did not talk down to journalists.
He used his generous transfer funds to the maximum advantage both to secure great players and to create a ‘star’ image for the club.
Despite his flair and populism, he was a cautious man who took great comfort from the fact that his son had not become a footballer but was securely settled in the middle class as a solicitor.
Significantly, his successor was not a football player at all but a journalist who got to know the Arsenal chairman while working as a society correspondent for the New York Herald .
The major professional influence in his career, he later claimed, was meeting the publicity agents for Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show and seeing how the Americans managed the media.
He became one of the first football commentators on radio, copying the urgent, excitable American style of the ‘gee-whizzers’, earning himself the nickname of ‘By Jove’ Allison on the way.
If Allison's style was a little out of place in the sober, earnest world of Reith's BBC in the 1920s, sport itself proved an immediate success at the Corporation.
In fact, broadcasting, first through radio and then even more dramatically on television ‘has been the single most important influence on the development of sport in this century.
The number of radio licences rose from two to eight million between 1926 and 1939 with 71 per cent of all households having a wireless by the Second World War.
The first sports broadcast, ironically at the suggestion of the Daily Mail , was of a fight between Kid Lewis and Georges Carpentier in 1922.
Sport came to have an important place in the BBC canon of ‘good’ entertainment, though boxing did not meet with full official approval.
The aim of the new Director-General was to promote sport as well as Christianity.
Reith was the true successor of the Victorian headmaster, rapidly establishing a range of sporting events which the BBC in its capacity as the sole arbiter of airways deemed to be of national significance.
A few big events joined the list of approved patriotic ‘moments’ like Remembrance Day — the Wembley crowd even sang ‘Abide With Me’— and in Reith's words permitted the British people to be ‘present equally at functions and ceremonials upon which national sentiment is consecrated’.
Test cricket, Rugby internationals, the Derby, and the Cup Final were established favourites.
The annual rowing contest between the two ancient universities was a great London event with many ordinary families taking sides and wearing favours but it was hardly a matter of ‘national’ concern until the BBC included the Boat Race in the select band of truly British events.
‘Look how that's come to the fore,’ remarked a Bristol listener, ‘we never used to know anything about it and now there's many wouldn't miss it.’
Seventy per cent of the audience panel of a BBC survey in 1939 listened to the Boat Race followed by 51 per cent for boxing, 50 per cent for soccer, and 50 per cent for cricket; soccer and boxing were predictably the favourites of the working-class respondents but the 34 per cent overall interest in Wimbledon was a clear indication that hitherto bourgeois sports were broadening their appeal.
The BBC under Reith placed great emphasis on control from the centre and from above; the BBC was an openly élitist institution which ‘knew best’ what the public needed and suppressed regional variations and creativity.
Local sporting traditions were ignored in favour of a handful of sports which were singled out as worthy of national broadcasting.
Gerald Cock, head of Outside Broadcasting, led a team of technicians who increasingly brought live sport into the home.
Sports commentators had what many came to consider the most enviable job in the world; they had the best seats for the best events in return for talking about what they loved anyway.
This, at least, is how many people saw the job, though few understood the difficulties involved.
‘It is easier to make a commentator into a temporary expert than a true expert into a commentator’, wrote the Daily Dispatch .
It was from the ranks of Oxbridge enthusiasts that these commentators were mostly drawn.
George Allison has already been mentioned, but even better known were Howard Marshall, the Test match commentator, Freddie Grisewood, later to chair ‘Any Questions’, and Colonel Wakeham on rugby.
Best known of all was John Snagge.
Though he did other broadcasts, Snagge was particularly fond of the Boat Race, which he made his own for forty years.
In 1951 ‘he was so excited that all he could say was ‘It's a desperately close race — I can't quite see from here who is ahead — it's either Oxford or Cambridge’.
Sports reporting certainly had its difficulties for the live commentator, who might be held up to ridicule for a lapse of sense or grammar in the heat of the moment.
David Coleman has unwittingly given his name to this tradition of sporting gaffe published mercilessly in Private Eye , of which Murray Walker's ‘this car is absolutely unique, except for the one behind, which is identical’ must stand for the many.
Maybe the commentator's lot is not such a happy one after all.
Interviewing the likes of Lester Piggott or notoriously inarticulate footballers whose only comment on scoring a hat-trick is ‘I'm over the moon’ or ‘I just hit it into the back of the net, Brian’cannot be the simplest of tasks.
Commentators are a maligned lot and deserve some credit for disseminating enthusiasm for sport on a hitherto unimagined scale.
This was a two-way process.
Coverage of sport certainly helped popularize the otherwise earnest BBC.
Manufacturers could play on the excitement of a commentary to sell their sets.
‘Tense with excitement…thrilled.
Almost seeing the game, ss clearly does he hear it.
Can you wonder that he shouts?’
(The illustration shows a man getting out of his armchair yelling ‘Shoot, Man, Shoot!’)
This excitement, the copy-writer continues, is brought into the home courtesy of ‘the new Pye Portable…glorious in tone, generous in volume, comprehensive in range of reception’.
Sport spread from the stands and into the home with the Cup Final as the sporting highlight of the year reaching a female audience for the first time.
Writing in the Radio Times in 1930, the novelist Winifred Holtby, feminist and friend of Vera Brittain, recalled listening to her first football commentary:
I was excited.
I had not, I have not to this day, the remotest notion of what they were all doing.
But I know that I was excited.
No one could listen with cold blood and sluggish pulses to the quickening crescendo of the roar preceding the final shout of ‘Goal!’
I wanted more goals.
I didn't care who shot them.
I didn't know who shot them.
I didn't know who was playing or what they were playing, or where, or why.
But I wanted to feel my spine tickle and my pulses beat, and my hair stir gently at the roots with suspense as that voice cried out from somewhere near our drawing room curtains.
‘Now he's got it.
It's coming close on the right wing.
I can't see for a moment because of the crowd.
Ah, there it is now, he's got it.
Jarvis has it.
Jarvis has it.
Goal!’
Judging by this description that breathless voice probably belonged to none other than ‘By Jove’ Allison.
The national dimension to sports reporting and the search for heroes could be a source of anxiety and even distress to the more reticent sportsman.
When Jack Hobbs was approaching W. G. Grace's record for the number of first-class centuries the massive attention of the press actually caused him a brief loss of form.
But there was another profitable side to the coin.
Despite his shyness and natural modesty, Hobbs was willing to capitalize on his fame.
He endorsed — not without payment for some, though not all — fountain-pens, cricket-bats and equipment, cocoa, total abstinence, chocolate, and soft drinks.
He was filmed, interviewed, and provided with ‘ghosts’ who helped him to ‘write’nine books, one of them a thriller called The Test Match Surprise which was something of a best seller in the sixpenny ‘Readers' Library’ss popular in Woolworth's in the 1920s.
Hobbs did better than his soccer counterpart, Dixie Dean, whose goal-scoring achievements were so famous for a decade from 1927.
He was used to advertise Players' cigarettes but was not even paid a proper fee.
‘Dixie’— a nickname said to derive from his swarthy complexion and curly black hair — preferred to augment his income by making bets with bookmakers on the basis of the number of goals he could score in a game (one goal was evens, two goals 5–2, and three 10- 1), Sportsmen, especially footballers, had since the 1880s been used on cigarette cards as free advertising for a brand.
Clubs were better placed than inexperienced individuals to profit from advertising, which began to expand the commercial potential of sport in the 1930s.
The Cup finalists of 1934 promoted brands of trousers, shoe-polish, and Shredded Wheat.
Manchester City gave their endorsement to a new model of radio.
Yet by the standards of current advertising and sponsorship the sums involved and the use made of sport by advertisers was paltry.
It was not enough to be the best in the world at your chosen sport, as Joe Davis found to his cost.
Golf and tennis had an exclusive image (good for selling cars) but snooker, the most popular indoor sport, had a seedy side which discouraged advertisers.
The new world snooker champion was aware of the commercial potential of his title, but was unable to persuade companies to comply with his desire to endorse their products.
‘I tried eye-lotions and hair-lotions, shirtmakers and shoe-makers without eliciting the slightest flicker of interest.
The only contract for endorsing a product I obtained in those days was for Churchman's cigarettes.’
Television more than anything else has transformed the image of the professional sportsman or woman from the skilled artisan (‘master of their craft’) to the dubious cinematic status of ‘star’, or currently ‘superstar’ or ‘megastar’as show-business hyperbole infects sport.
Newsreel coverage of sport paved the way for this.
Snappy, short news sequences certainly helped promote some of the big names but this was on a small scale in comparison with the United States where a few outstanding sportsmen became Hollywood stars.
However, it was the advent of television which really transformed sportsmen.
The ‘TV revolution’ started modestly enough with small screens and black-and-white pictures, which were not able to follow a match with the fluency, play-backs, close-ups, and other techniques that have made sport increasingly a ‘televisual’phenomenon of late.
Football was used as a way of encouraging working people to buy or hire televisions in the 1950s with the slogan ‘When they are talking about the big match on TV will you have to remain silent?’
Television offered either live coverage or by editing down the best moments presented a particularly dramatic version of events.
A series of specialist sports programmes culminated in the setting up of ‘Sportsview’ in 1954, a half-hour mid-week programme which interviewed personalities — Mike Hawthorn, Stirling Moss, and Danny Blanchflower featured in October 1954 — as well as giving previews of top events.
Peter Dimmock was the genial presenter and a powerful expansionist force in BBC sport, heading a list of commentators which included such familiar names as Harry Carpenter, Kenneth Wolstenholme, Henry Longhurst, John Arlott, Brian Johnston, Peter West, and David Coleman among others.
A few, like Cliff Michelmore, went on to bigger things.
But most have stayed and worn well, reassuring and fixed points in an otherwise changing landscape.
The ‘Beeb’ has been kind to its commentators — thirty years is a long time in television — and they in turn have served it well, adjusting cleverly to the growing informality of broadcasting without ever quite forgetting the august institution in which ‘they serve’.
The BBC believe that no one does sport as well as they do — and they may be right.
The popular press could not compete and has been pushed more and more into the ‘human interest’ dimension, interviewing friends and relations of players, stoking up dressing-room feuds and seizing upon the sex lives of the young, virile, and wayward.
This pressure from within the media was reinforced by other social changes.
Rising real incomes, especially for the young, minimal unemployment, and greater personal freedom from into which sportsmen, especially footballers, were to find an important place.
George Best, a thin teenager from Belfast, whose dribbling skills made him into a star with Manchester United and the darling of the sports and gossip columns epitomized the new era.
Alex James in the 1930s had not been averse to appearing at the odd night-club, but Best's moves were tracked by a posse of desperate journalists as he went from bed to boutique, from discothèque to dressing-room.
Next to the Beatles and Mick Jagger he was probably the best-known teenage ‘pin up’.
The footballer as sex symbol was not exactly new — Dixie Dean had been the subject of female interest and cited in at least one paternity suit — but the avidity of the press for salacious gossip and the relentless pursuit of young footballers, who were suddenly rich and emotionally immature, was new.
Players certainly gained in terms of rising wages, advertising, and other sources of income, but at the highest level they often found there were new stresses to cope with as they were ‘declassed’ and lost touch with their old communities.
Television has had as profound an effect on contemporary sport as the railway or the popular press had on Victorian sport.
For television is not a ‘neutral’ provider of images or a mere facilitator, it has increasingly determined the manner in which high performance sport is played and presented to the public.
In the early 1950s no more than 10 per cent of households had a television.
By the late 1960s only 10 per cent did not.
Not having a television was odd — the product either of extreme deprivation or self-conscious intellectualism.
From the beginning sport was extremely popular with those who ran television.
The reason is not hard to find.
Sport was both cheap and successful.
It was ‘good television’ and there were virtually no production costs in a sports broadcast in comparison with making a play or a documentary feature.
A fee was paid to the ruling body and in the early years these were very low indeed.
Huge audiences could be entertained at relatively little cost.
Currently sport occupies a quarter of the BBC's own production and 17 per cent of its total output, though the fees for broadcasting have risen by as much or more than a thousandfold for certain sports like tennis and golf.
Swimming is still cheap but athletics is getting more expensive.
The physicality of sport, its speed and grace, along with the emotional intensity of victory and defeat are supremely visual.
But this is not all.
Sport has a crucial further attraction.
It is ‘live’ entertainment at a time when more and more television is pre-recorded and packaged, and even recorded events can sustain uncertainty of outcome if the result is unknown to the viewer.
An episode of the highly successful TV comedy The Likely Lads was based entirely on the two working-class Geordie protagonists not being told the result of a recorded game.
Video technology has made this a frequent topic of male sporting conversation.
Sport offers spontaneity which, combined with ever more sophisticated technology, allows a viewer to watch a game from many different angles, moving in for a close-up on the agonized or exultant face of the athlete, or panning back for a shot of the pitch, track, or the seashore during an Open golf championship.
In football, rugby, or cricket the ability to stop the frame at the crucial moment or play-back a sequence, which has come recently with the development of video, has actually placed the viewer and the commentator in a better position to make a decision than the unfortunate referee or umpire.
Television is the means through which the bulk of the public ‘takes part’ in sport.
Only 14 per cent of a recent sample of the population, who declared themselves to be ‘very interested in soccer’, actually played the game or were members of clubs, though 98 per cent watched it on television.
Football has been transformed for most of those who follow it from a Saturday afternoon activity in all weathers to a Saturday night home entertainment.
Full-length games are edited down to show the highlights in a way which sometimes irritates the purist.
The subtleties of the contest — running off the ball, watching an individual contest between two players rather than following the ball around through the camera lens — may be sacrificed but these failings have not deterred the audience.
The football authorities have debated endlessly about the impact of these changes on their game.
Clearly television is not the only reason for falling gates — affluence and a consequently greater variety of choice in entertainment, a desire to participate in physical exercise rather than watch, hooliganism, suburban family-centredness, and feminism are other factors all pulling more or less in the direction of declining live attendance.
Banning TV coverage might lose important revenues without bringing back the crowds.
Most probably the solution in the longer term will be a switch to the American pattern, which stresses quality over quantity.
This might mean co-opting the top Scottish clubs into a ‘British’ premier league — still a horrifying prospect to most Scots.
However things turn out the geography of football based on the Industrial Revolution seems likely to change in favour of a small ‘super league’ which will take high earnings from a ‘live’national TV audience.
In effect this is already starting to happen through television concentration on a few top clubs with only a brief nod in the direction of the rest.
The football authorities have not been the only ones to agonize over the impact of television on sport.
There have been the predictable complaints that people increasingly prefer to watch than to play, that we are producing a generation of armchair athletes.
Recent social research has dismissed such speculation.
Television may have made inroads on the number of live spectators but, if anything, it has encouraged a greater degree of participation in a far wider range of activities.
There has been a huge expansion of golf, for example, the attractions of which were brought home to the general public through the televising of tournaments.
Even Association football has grown at the grass roots with a further 2,000 clubs affiliating to the FA in the second half of the 1970s to make up a total of almost 40,000.
So participation in sport is increasing although women, the old, the unskilled, and those without private transport are still under-represented.
Watching on TV and taking part are not so much mutually exclusive as part of a balanced human cycle of passive and active involvement.
Recently television has contributed dramatically to the rejuvenation of particular sports, most notably darts and snooker.
The medium is particularly well suited to close-up shots and the viewer can make his assessment of the situation from behind the player's arm.
When Joe Davis finally retired in 1964 he said ‘snooker has no future’.
Yet only twenty years later the Crucible Theatre in Sheffield was the focus of the attention of around twenty million viewers as Steve Davis was defeated on the final ball of the final frame by Dennis Taylor, who became the world champion in what The Times (won over to ‘popular culture’ under its antipodean ownership) declared to be a ‘heart-stopping’match.
Snooker has been reborn through colour television.
What began as an attempt to diversify and cater for minority interests on BBC 2 turned into an extraordinary national obsession.
Snooker players clash not just as players but as personalities with their own quirks, style, and personal feuds — Alex Higgins ‘The Hurricane’ or Jimmy White ‘The Tooting Tearaway’set against the inscrutable, trance-like calmness of Steve Davis or Cliff Thorburn, or the bantering and benign Dennis Taylor and Willie Thorne; all the ‘lads’are part of an immensely lucrative media ‘hype’carefully planned by a professional promoter-cum-accountant.
‘Whispering’ Ted Lowe was suddenly a celebrity with murmured thoughts about the difficulty of ‘a long pink against the nap into the top pocket’.
A similar process is also taking place in darts led by an exuberant Geordie commentator with a Cambridge History degree.
Rugby, in particular, has its ‘characters’— Eddie Waring, a favourite with a generation of impressionists, brought the banter of the Yorkshire terraces into the commentary-box; Bill Maclaren is the embodiment of Borders rugby — firm, crackling along, supremely direct, enthusiastic and decent, a yeoman of Scotland.
Appropriately enough, he is a schoolmaster and not a full-time professional commentator.
Picking the select few to make the transition from a successful playing career in football to television reporting has become a minor entertainment in itself.
Football now has Bob Wilson of Arsenal and Emlyn Hughes of Liverpool and on independent television there is Ian StJohn and Jimmy Greaves (‘The Saint and Greavsie’), who have taken the art of televised sport a step further by reproducing in the studio all the mixture of jokes and outlandish memories, bets, hunches, tactical shrewdness, and affectionate ‘piss-taking’ that make up a friendly hour in the pub.
Television, it should be remembered, can conserve and celebrate just as it can abbreviate and denature.
Despite the view that television has created a ‘global village’ in which similar electronic images flicker before countless millions creating a common mass culture, the presentation of sport on British television differs sharply from that of the United States or of France.
Each country develops its own ways of using television to promote its own tastes and values.
Styles of commentary, methods of editing, programming schedules, and the interspersing of sport with other subjects all contribute to establishing national styles within the framework of a common technology.
ln Britain, the pattern of televised sport has in many respects followed the natural preferences of the ‘amateur’ establishment.
With the exception of the Cup Final, the independent channels have concentrated on racing and on wrestling for Saturday afternoon entertainment and do not show golf or cricket.
Currently the ITV sports budget is around £14 million.
‘In newspaper terms, the BBC is much more Telegraph and we are the Mirror or even the Sun ’, remarked ITV's head of sport recently.
As an established ‘national’ institution the BBC head of sport claims ‘we don't approach life from a purely business point of view’.
Historically the BBC has been in a privileged position to negotiate coverage with the ‘gentlemen amateurs’ of the MCC, the Committee of the All-England Club, and the four rugby unions.
‘I have never attempted to conceal my belief that ‘Wimbledon’ treated us generously,’wrote the Head of Outside Broadcasts in 1952.
‘I assumed it was the deliberate policy of an amateur sport towards a ‘public service’.’
From early on the government underpinned this advantage by laying down that certain ‘national’ events could not be contractually monopolized by either side.
This had the effect of giving the BBC an effective monopoly as advertising revenue could best be maximized by providing an alternative to sport on independent television.
A cricket audience was too restricted to share profitably.
Despite a few celebrated deserters including former England captain Tony Greig, cricket has resisted being incorporated into a private television circus run from Australia by Kerry Packer.
Mike Brearley, the subsequent England captain and a Cambridge graduate with a distinctly academic turn of mind, was revealing in his reasons for turning down the offer, which would have overturned the historical structure of international cricket: ‘Money apart, Kerry Packer is not my style.
England is my home.
I prefer the chugging British coaster with a cargo of pig-iron to a monstrous supertanker hurriedly constructed.
We put up with the buckets to catch the drips in the dressing-room at Taunton in order to enjoy the wisteria round the door of the George at Bewley.’
Cricket, in fact, has negotiated a successful compromise with the world of broadcasting, enjoying extensive coverage, which is now used to gain lucrative ‘low-key’ sponsorship and advertising.
Through their sponsorship of cricket, Cornhill, until recently a little-known City insurance company, turned themselves into a household name at the cost of a million pounds over five years.
In 1981 Cornhill's banners appeared 7,459 times on a television service resolutely opposed to advertising.
The benefit for Cornhill was its ‘awareness level’(the number of people who mentioned it when asked to name an insurance company), which shot up from 2 per cent in 1977 to 17 per cent in 1981.
In addition, the firm recruited cricketers for its publicity functions and was given free tickets and entertainment facilities for the Test matches.
Naturally, television exposure was the overwhelming consideration for Cornhill and this was presumably also true for other sponsors, which included Schweppes, United Friendly Assurance, Commercial Union Assurance, the Prudential, Gordon's gin, Haig's whisky, Whitbread's beer, Younger's beer, Wrigley's spearmint among others.
Despite the ‘wisteria’, cricket has come to be quietly alive to capitalism.
The same has turned out to be true of show-jumping, a little-known landed pursuit before it was taken up by the BBC as a sport which might appeal to women, especially when Pat Smythe rode Flanagan to four European Championship victories between 1957 and 1963.
As the standards of competition became even higher, costs shot up and sponsors came forward to support an activity with high social status and a good media profile.
The BBC again found itself the unwilling accomplice of the advertisers.
The unfortunate Dorian Williams, whose cultured, distinctly upper-class accent was synonymous with commentary on the sport, was required to tell the viewers that the next contestant was Harvey Smith riding ‘Hitachi Music Centre’.
‘Trade’ had infected even gentry pursuits, though the presence of royalty in the person of Princess Anne and her husband, both competitors of international standard, kept up the social tone.
The role of sponsorship and television together has brought vast amounts of new money into sport, providing high earnings for tournament winners or top team-players.
In return sportsmen and women have to make themselves available to the press and the sponsors for promotional purposes.
A sea-change is taking place.
Nineteenth-century amateurism has been stood on its head.
Consider the following articles, which by chance appeared side by side in the Guardian in 1982.
One concerned the transfer of Kevin Keegan from Southampton to Newcastle United.
The deal involved a transfer fee plus a complicated sponsorship package, which required Keegan to advertise and do promotional work for Scottish and Newcastle Breweries.
Keegan duly appeared at the press conference to extol his new club and his sponsors, despite the fact he was known not to drink the product himself.
‘You don't have to sell Newcastle United to anyone.
This is a great club, the only one that can beat Liverpool for the enthusiasm of its supporters’, he enthused.
His instant sincerity was much appreciated by all concerned.
Keegan ‘did the business’ on the field and off.
On the same page appeared a sharp rebuke to Ken Brown, an idiosyncratic professional golfer, who had committed the unforgivable sin of refusing to give interviews to the press or television and making good his escape from a crowd of journalists by vaulting over a barrier.
‘We view Brown's behaviour very seriously,’ said the presiding official, ‘he is doing a disservice to the PGA [Professional Golfers' Association]and to everyone concerned with the game.’
The promoter of the tournament went further: ‘It's time the PGA brought in a disciplinary element for this sort of behaviour.
There is a lot of money to be won this week and people should earn it not only on the course but off it as well.’
Brown was a ‘bad sport’ who was not ‘playing the game’, but Keegan was a ‘model pro’.
Such judgements were based upon a willingness to comply to the full with the turning of sports into a ‘media event’.
The praise of Keegan and the criticism of Brown might have surprised and distressed earlier generations of gentlemen-amateurs but it was logical in its own terms; if players wished to become rich, they had to sell themselves as well as their skill.
The older code, which put the integrity of players and the game itself above money, had been abandoned.
Brown was supposed to be a kind of entertainer, albeit a reluctant and irritable one, and he had to sing for his supper.
Top sportsmen frequently mixed with celebrities from the 1920s onwards.
Footballers sometimes appeared on a music-hall bill in the late Victorian and Edwardian years but it was not until the inter-war years that top players became ‘stars’.
Steve Bloomer of Derby or Billy Meredith at Manchester were famous locally rather than nationally.
Dixie Dean, however, had a wider following.
He was friendly not only with well-known boxers and bookies but with George Robey and with other public Merseyside figures like Bessie Braddock.
Alex James of Arsenal was worshipped in London and in Scotland.
In snooker Joe Davis even put on a show at the Palladium during the Second World War with Tommy Trinder, Sid Field, Arthur Askey, and Tessie O'Shea.
Trinder, who became a director of Fulham, pointed the way towards a larger-scale penetration of the boardroom by entertainers.
Eric Morecambe's directorship at Luton was another example.
The logical culmination of the process came when the pop singer and song-writer Elton John took over the chairmanship of Watford.
Pop singer Rod Stewart took inordinate pride in his brief time as a professional with Brentford and would make well-publicized appearances to support Scotland.
George Best, as we saw, was closely linked to ‘pop culture’ and international teams began to make special records as part of a ‘media package’for the World Cup.
Top sportsmen liked to think of themselves as ‘personalities’.
Mick Channon observed that ‘most famous people are ‘characters’(presumably including himself in this select group).
When very successful footballers, cricketers, boxers, golfers, even amateur rugby players like Bill Beaumont and Gareth Edwards, retired from their sport they might hope to cash in somehow.
They could perhaps join the growing band of pundits.
There were talk shows, after-dinner speeches, and quiz programmes as well.
Some of these sporting ‘characters’ play golf and appear with comedians such as Jimmy Tarbuck and Bruce Forsyth or actor Sean Connery for a few holes and a bit of friendly banter.
Peter Allis has turned golf into a kind of harmless interview where public figures hit a few shots and chat about themselves.
Substantial sums of money are raised for charity by show-biz football teams.
The athletic disc jockey is a distinctively contemporary phenomenon.
Ian Botham's alleged flirtation with cannabis and the occasional female admirer has occupied the popular press far more than his performances as the great all-rounder of English cricket.
He inadvisedly tried to launch himself very briefly in Hollywood.
He also walked from John O'Groats to Land's End for charity with celebrities doing well-publicized stints by his side.
He has been endlessly harassed by the press who desperately need a story.
The ‘good guys’ are all very well but they don't make headlines.
Wimbledon has been dull without McEnroe from the gossip point of view.
Cricket can be boring when Botham behaves, and snooker needs Alex Higgins even if it does not like to say so.
The crazy circus rolls on and on.
More coverage of more sports is supplemented by endless interviews and chat-show appearances.
There seems to be no saturation point.
Amidst such massive coverage there has been little television interest in what ordinary people get out of sport.
Sports programmes do not see this as part of what they are supposed to be doing.
Sport is high-performance stuff varied with a bit of club golf played by famous people or a marathon which involves both top athletes and the general public.
The availability of less well-known sports very cheaply has attracted some interesting coverage, which brings the viewer closer to the ordinary competitor.
For example the sport of crown green bowling, which was very little known outside of the north of England, has been shown to a wider public; the greens are often oddly bereft of spectators, and the northern accents of the players are plainly audible as they urge on their woods or confer solemnly as a pair over the last bowl of an important ‘end’.
Even these modest broadcasts show only the best of the bunch.
Why are there no programmes about ordinary clubs and ordinary people?
A rare exception to this unrelieved diet of excellence came recently in the shape of a programme made by unemployed men on Teesside about the place in their life of the municipal golf-course.
‘For a couple of hours I feel like a man again,’ said one.
Another, making a joke out of his poverty, hit a good drive and sighed, ‘That's gone further than I went on my holidays.’
There was much of this, a few small side-bets, and plenty of mixing between the generations.
The club had its blazer and badge, a captain and lady captain and an honours board.
It was imitative of the suburban golf club but independent and unashamed.
Television had brought golf to the working class and for just a moment television gave us an idea of what it meant to them.
HOOLIGANS
Hooliganism has been the exception to the rule that the media are only interested in victories, records, and the private life of the stars.
In recent years the collective aggression displayed by groups of younger fans has caused a kind of ‘moral panic’ in the press.
Football hooliganism has been defined as a major social problem.
It has attracted not only widespread condemnation but a fair amount of sociological analysis as well with the result that there is a lively debate taking place about its origins and nature.
Of particular interest to the historian is the question of continuity or discontinuity in this kind of behaviour.
Did the 1960s see a sharp break in the form and content of the collective behaviour of young working-class spectators?
Or is the current wave of hooliganism in British football merely a continuation of old traditions, which we now are less willing to tolerate and more anxious to report?
Serious discussion of the phenomenon began with a debate over the role of the press in reporting violent incidents at football matches.
It was argued that the sensationalizing of relatively minor forms of rowdyism invented hooliganism as a ‘social problem’.
Young fans found a new ‘hooligan’ identity created for them by journalists with a vested interest in whipping up public indignation.
Headlines like ‘SAVAGES!
ANIMALS!’ or ‘BIRCH’EM’and ‘SMASH THESE THUGS’encouraged the public to treat young football fans as criminals, and the fans themselves then acted out the role that had been supplied for them.
Garry Whannel traced four main themes in the analysis of football hooliganism in the popular press in the 1970s: fans were ‘mindless/senseless’; they were ‘maniacs/lunatics’; ‘foul/subhuman’(which led some fans to chant back at the police and the respectable public ‘We hate humans’); finally that they were ‘so-called supporters’ and in a small minority, i.e. they made up only a very small percentage of the crowd and they had little interest in the game itself.
Much of this analysis of the media treatment of hooliganism drew upon the work of Stanley Cohen.
The new ‘sociology of deviance’ suggested hooligans were not abnormal young people and that the whole phenomenon — like the Mods and Rockers panic before — had been ‘amplified’by the popular press in order to boost their circulation and pander to the prejudices of their readers.
One of the most enduring and widespread of these prejudices, which achieved the status of a popular myth, was that ‘things weren't like that in my day’.
Geoffrey Pearson's recent Hooligan: a History of Respectable Fears gives a persuasive account of law-and-order myths, which shows that people continually locate ‘the good old days’ of decent behaviour at some time about twenty or thirty years in the past.
Those concerned about football hooliganism today idealize the stable post-war years when it was safe to be on the terraces and one could walk the streets at night.
Yet back in the 1950s there was the ‘Teddy Boy’ to alarm the public and to set against the allegedly poor but honest inter-war years when people could leave their doors unlocked.
Between the wars the kind of juvenile gang-violence portrayed, for example, in Graham Greene's Brighton Rock again led to unfavourable comparisons being made with the past.
In the 1920s and 1930s London had its ‘Drury Lane Boys’, ‘Fulham Boys’, ‘Waterloo Road Gang’, ‘Chelsea Boys’, and many more.
Glasgow was notoriously violent.
Billy Fullerton's Protestant gang from Bridgeton wreaked havoc on Catholics, especially if they incautiously made themselves easy targets by wearing a Celtic scarf.
However, a closer look at the supposedly more stable Edwardian era found men like Baden-Powell and Charles Masterman deeply concerned over the problem of ‘boy life’;, adolescence was invented as a unique psychological stage and youth cults like the ‘Ikey boys’ were defined as a ‘problem’requiring ‘solutions’such as special ‘youth clubs’and movements.
And so the process went on; back into the Dickensian world of the Artful Dodger and then the violence of the eighteenth-century ‘mob’.
Each generation created its own myth of stability and fastened upon disorderly juvenile elements in its own culture to prove the thesis.
Pearson sums up his argument as follows:
Across the centuries, we have seen the sane rituals of territorial dominance, trials of strength, gang fights, mockery against elders and authorities, and antagonism towards ‘outsiders’ as typical focuses for youthful energy and aggressive mischief.
Even under vastly different social conditions there are striking continuities between the violent interruptions to pre-industrial fairs and festivals, and the customary eruptions during modern Bank Holidays or the weekly carnival of misrule at contemporary football games — where the football rowdy, with his territorial edginess, mascots, emblems and choral arrangements in the ‘rough music’ tradition, must seem like the incarnation of the unruly apprentice, or the late Victorian ‘Hooligan’.
The opening sections of this book have already provided evidence of juvenile ‘misrule’ in pre-industrial and in modern sports.
Violence of different kinds has certainly been endemic in sport and fighting between groups of players or spectators is nothing new.
Territoriality was the key to urban working-class sporting loyalties and this was sometimes expressed in acts of violence.
So to what extent is juvenile violence a ‘constant’ varying only in style and in detail over time?
The notion that the media have ‘amplified’ football violence may have been tenable ten or twenty years ago, but the current scale of hooliganism does not appear to be much exaggerated by the media.
Recently the press have, if anything, tended to understate the extent of the problem to deny hooligans ‘the oxygen of publicity’.
The view that hooligans actually learn how to behave from the papers and reflect back to the public the image that has been created for them is not really borne out in personal interviews.
Moreover, the nature of crowd behaviour may be different from the past not just in style but in substance.
The ‘continuity’ thesis is obviously attractive to the social historian but important reservations and unanswered questions remain.
In essence the issues are these: first, given the old traditions of ‘misrule’ and ‘gang life’, how far do contemporary forms of violence in sport resemble earlier ones; second, why did football matches — the stadia, the surroundings, the routes and transport to and from the game — become the chosen site of hooligan behaviour?
If continuity is the key to football hooliganism, then there should be some solid evidence of similar forms of violence at football matches since the formation of the Football League.
If discontinuity is the case, there is the alleged distinctiveness of recent crowd behaviour and explanations of it as part of a general transformation of the urban working class since 1945 to consider.
First we need a proper idea of what it is we are seeking to explain.
Who are the hooligans?
This is reasonably easy to answer.
Judging by surveys and by convictions they are largely white, urban, unskilled school-leavers ln their teens.
Married hooligans are relatively rare.
What is ‘hooligan’ behaviour?
Social psychologists have attempted to pin it down using video recordings, ‘participant/observer’ reports, and interviews with hooligans.
What emerges is that much of the actual group aggression — the chanting, threats, charges — is symbolic and ritualized.
Hooligans go through the motions of violence but relatively little damage is done either to property or to the person.
The danger of injury or death arises less from fights between rival groups of fans as from the panic that actual or threatened attacks provoke amongst the general public.
The tragedy at the Heysel stadium in Brussels, for example, came from the crush of spectators fleeing from the drunken charges of Liverpool fans.
None of the 38 who died was murdered personally by English hooligans.
The point here is not to exonerate the violent behaviour of certain Liverpool supporters but rather the reverse, i.e. to emphasize the potentially fatal risks which are being run each week in stadia where large and rowdy confrontations of young spectators take place.
The Ibrox casualties of 1902, the Bolton disaster of 1946, and others were a result of overcrowding and poor facilities, but the Heysel deaths were caused by hooligans.
The violence of the fans itself may be largely symbolic (though beatings and occasionally stabbings do take place), but its potential consequences in enclosed spaces present a genuine danger to public safety.
It is not reasonable to suggest that hooliganism is merely inflated by the press and best treated by ‘radical non-intervention’.
The concentration of several thousand younger fans systematically chanting abuse and taunting one another, forcibly separated by the police and each threatening to attack the other is neither an imaginary problem nor simply a product of imitative behaviour picked up from incautious media coverage.
Fans dress carefully in order to identify themselves within their group.
The styles change with bewildering rapidity but the way of tying a scarf or the kind of boots and socks worn carry a message about the ‘hardness’ of the wearer.
‘Hardness’ is what much of hooligan behaviour is about.
When hooligans themselves are asked to define the term they usually say ‘a right little hardnut’; someone willing to get ‘stuck in’ when a fight breaks out.
Most ‘hooligans’ use the word in a flattering sense to describe the ‘hardest’members of their own group.
Chanting is ‘macho’ in the sense that opposing players, supporters, and officials are often abused in sexual terms (‘wankers’and ‘cunts’), and some of the scornful chanting has a deliberately ‘caveman’style as in ‘Oxford Boys we are here/ shag your women, drink your beer/ — a widely favoured kind of verse freely adapted by other fans.
They do not use the ‘animal’ terms their critics use except in the case of black players where ape-like grunting and the throwing of bananas are common.
The most important feature of contemporary hooliganism is the taking and holding of ‘ends’.
Away supporters, especially those from clubs with ‘hooligan’ reputations, try to drive home supporters from their traditional end.
‘That's what it is,’ said a young Cardiff fan, ‘that's what it's all about.
You've to get in their end and take it — the away supporters have.’
A young Arsenal fan made the same point after having listened rather contemptuously to a discussion by academics about working-class ‘resistance’ to increasing middle-class infiltration of football.
‘They don't give a sod for the students and all the other wankers and pooftas that turn up’, he declared.
‘All the North Bank [the Highbury hooligan end]care about is their team and the other end and that's all there is to it.’
Hooligans do not normally attack older or better-off supporters.
They save their wrath for other working-class youths like themselves, who happen to have been born or grown up somewhere else.
What evidence is there of this kind of behaviour at football matches before the First World War or in the inter-war period?
There are plenty of references to violent incidents of various kinds.
Football was never an entirely respectable sport and from the outset crowds swore and shouted, occasionally threw things or charged on to the pitch.
There are also records of fights between individual spectators and more rarely between groups of spectators.
One of the most infamous of all football riots took place in Glasgow in 1909 when a crowd of around 6,000 invaded the pitch at full time.
However, in this case, the crowd was angry that extra time was not going to be played and vented their fury on the pitch and the police rather than on one another.
Of course, gang fights between supporters of Celtic and Rangers were quite common, especially between the wars, as Bill Murray's study of The Old Finn makes clear.
Something akin to the contemporary pattern of hooliganism has long existed in Glasgow as a result of Irish Catholic immigration and militant working-class Scottish Protestantism.
In Glasgow fighting between fans was not just a matter for juveniles.
Although youths were predominant, there was no shortage of older men willing to fight for sectarian reasons.
Both Rangers' and Celtic supporters were organized into ‘brake clubs’ in order to travel to away matches.
There were frequent rowdy incidents as these gangs of travelling supporters descended on a town for an away match, especially after the First World War when the struggle for Irish independence was at its height.
The Celtic brake clubs would sing ‘The Soldier's Song’, ‘Keep the Green Flag Flying’, and ‘God Save Ireland’ whilst chalking slogans like ‘Rebels 2, Black and Tans 0’on the sides of their carriages and vans.
Rangers' supporters replied in kind, and so the blood feud went on and on — and continues to this day.
Glasgow, however, was not Britain.
Despite heavy Irish immigration into south Lancashire, the Midlands, and London, Orangeism was less ferocious south of the Border.
Certain teams did become very loosely identified with Catholic or Protestant support in Liverpool and Manchester, but this was never a prominent feature of English football or a significant source of violence.
Tony Mason, who has weighed up both the composition and the behaviour of Victorian and Edwardian football crowds as carefully as the sketchy evidence permits, suggests that skilled workers were disproportionately dominant within the crowd.
It seems probable that it was not until the doubling in the size of crowds between the wars that the ‘rough’ as opposed to the ‘respectable’working class was fully represented as a proportion of the total population.
Dunning and Murphy have tried to argue that violent street-gangs, whose antics led to several alarmed inquiries around the turn of the century, were likely to have been present at football matches from the outset.
This is speculative but they are on firmer ground when they point out that violent incidents were underreported both by referees in their correspondence with the FA and by the press.
A detailed examination of the Leicester Mercury from 1895 to 1914 has revealed 137 reports of violent incidents nationally as against 116 in the FA minute-books.
Moreover, fifty-five of the 137 reports in the Leicester Mercury related to Leicester itself, which suggests that there was a good deal more trouble at local level than reached the national press or the FA.
In fact, only fifteen of the Leicester Mercury's 137 incidents appeared in the FA's total of 116.
Conversely the Leicester Mercury only reported a fraction of the officially minuted FA incidents.
‘Underrecording in both directions’ was an important factor, as Dunning and Murphy stress.
But do these totals prove that hooligan behaviour of a kind broadly comparable with the present day was widespread before the First World War?
Looking more closely at the kinds of misbehaviour reported in the Leicester Mercury , the descriptions of crowd offences committed within Leicestershire from 1894 to 1914 do not permit any clear reconstruction of crowd behaviour.
Verbal abuse and disorder was the most common category of offence followed by pitch invasions or encroachments.
There were sixteen instances of physical violence or assault reported between 1895 and 1914, but these included throwing missiles at players as well as fights between spectators.
Going on to the inter-war years the authors note that there was no great reduction in the number of incidents reported in the press, despite the reputation of the large crowds of those years fur generally good behaviour.
The bulk of reported incidents again concerned bad language and unsportsmanlike conduct.
The authors conclude that the improving image of the game drew a wider and more respectable public, including more women.
This runs counter to Mason's suggestion that more unskilled workers attended between the wars.
There is no obvious way of resolving the question of crowd composition.
Proper data was never collected at the time.
One thing, however, is pretty clear.
Nowhere in the vast press coverage and literature of match reports is there any reference to the growth of a violent, organized youth subculture within football.
Casual, individual violence was almost certainly more common than today but ‘hooliganism’ in the collective and contemporary sense did not take place at football matches.
It is unacceptable to deduce from the lack of prosecutions that hooligan behaviour was formerly tolerated to such a degree that the culprits were neither censured nor prosecuted.
The ‘argument from silence’ will not do, especially in the late Victorian era.
During the second half of the nineteenth century the police were increasingly active against all sorts of minor public offences such as drunken or disorderly behaviour or the playing of street games.
A moralistic middle-class press or the civic or football authorities themselves would never have ignored systematic gang-violence either in football grounds or around them.
The problem of ‘street arabs’ and juvenile gangs was very much in the mind of those who formed the Boys' Brigade, Church Lads, and the Scouts.
A recent oral history of schoolchildren shows how close an eye the police kept on ‘larking about’.
Home Office reports on football-ground safety in 1924 did not even raise hooliganism as an item on the agenda.
The picture which emerges is one where there was a good deal of casual crudity and the occasional fight between individuals or small groups but little orchestrated rowdyism or violence.
Examining the reports of the Chief Constable of Birmingham between 1900 and 1940, Tony Mason notes that football does not merit inclusion as a policing problem.
Perhaps most eloquent of ali is the simple fact that the grounds themselves were not segregated.
Large numbers of ‘away’ fans were uncommon except for local derbies.
Even then opposing fans mixed on the same terraces without the ‘taking of ends’.
Accounts of watching football composed by ordinary spectators emphasize how familiar many people were to one another, the wide age-range, and the lively banter.
A lifelong Manchester City fan recalled that in the 1940s ‘it was a very mixed crowd.
There were a lot of old blokes, and women, even some elderly women.
You ali stood there together.
You knew everybody.
You never saw'em between games.
But we always stood roughly in the same place and we knew the forty or fifty people around us 'cos they were always there.
The worst hazard of standing in that crowd was someone pissing down the back of your leg.’
There were occasional fights when groups of visiting supporters descended on a local pub but very little trouble at the ground itself.
Moreover when there were fights, observed the chairman of the Birmingham City Supporters' Club, ‘it was punch-ups among men in those days…when I was a lad, if I stepped out of line I got a bloody good hiding from my Dad’.
Denis Brailsford, an inter-war spectator and a distinguished sports historian, recalled that he first went to football in the 1930s as part of his father's extended family of miners and their wives, who made up the core of a group that regularly went to Mansfield Town's home games.
There were few visiting spectators and there was no singing or chanting.
However, ‘there would be swearing, there would be people coming in drunk…staggering from the local pubs into the ground, but they were a tiny, tiny minority and you would get the odd fight breaking out’.
Brailsford quite categoricaliy rejects the idea that group aggression was part of the spectacle in the way it has come to be since the 1960s.
‘I never remember a fight with more than two people involved with the rest of us encouraging them usually, holding their coats until the police stepped in to break it up, and these scuffles normally had nothing to do with loyalty to rival teams.’
The structure of the crowd differed sharply from the present.
This is the nub of the matter.
Crowds were composed of groups of family, friends, or work-mates tending to go to the same part of the ground and recognizing those around them.
There were no ‘ends’ where the young congregated unsupervised.
Heavy drinking, spitting, and swearing rather than collective violence marked off the ‘rough’ from the rest — the self-controlled ‘respectable’elements.
How then did occasional individual violence give way to the regular and organized group aggression of the ‘ends’ witnessed since the 1960s?
At one level the answer to this question is deceptively straightforward.
Until the 1950s away support at games (except ‘derbies’) was limited by shortage of money, especially amongst young workers.
But between 1951 and 1962 juvenile weekly wages rose by 83 per cent.
Motor cycles and scooters, clothes, records, and football expenses accounted fur most of the new disposable income.
This in itself would hardly have been significant had it not been for a wider transformation of the adult male working class.
The halving in aggregate attendance at football matches, which has taken place between the early 1950s and the early 1980s (from almost 40 million to under 20 million), is a result of the disinclination of married men to spend most Saturday afternoons watching live football.
The car might need a running repair; the wife would want a ‘drive’ in the country or, at least, a lift to the shops.
Spectator sport could be followed from home on a winter's afternoon and older men increasingly chose to do this.
Thus the family, neighbourhood, or work-place groups of older and younger men and a sprinkling of women, which seem to have formed the basic unit of attendance between the wars and before, broke up.
Juvenile hooliganism was mainly the consequence of the coil apse of the controls which older family and time-served men had exerted.
The composition of the crowd altered and with it went the surveillance and supervision of the young.
As the age-structure changed older spectators tended to leave the terraces to take up the increasing amount of seated accommodation; the ‘ends’ were left to ‘the lads’.
As gangs of home supporters confronted rival travelling groups, the internal segregation of the ground by age was intensified.
The older men, who still wanted to attend live games, learned to avoid either of the ‘ends’, and with falling attendances there was no difficulty in finding a relatively safe place elsewhere in the ground.
So the process gained momentum.
Hooliganism and segregation were mutually reinforcing.
So much for the ‘how’ of hooliganism but what of the ‘why’?
Even taking an ethologist's view that young men are fighting animals who need to work off aggression harmlessly in play — a sweeping and contentious assumption — we st ill have to account for the specific form of football hooliganism since the 1960s.
Why was group identity expressed in this rather than in some other way?
What social meanings, if any, can be detected in the synchronized clapping and threats aggression?
Hooligan behaviour is more elaborate than one might think.
Oxford United fans, for example, were found to have a repertoire of over 250 carefully orchestrated chants ranging from ‘We’ re gonna win the league, tra la la la’to ‘You're gonna get your fuckin’heads kicked in’— the favoured greeting for visiting fans.
Interpretations which see hooliganism as a conscious protest against poor urban conditions and employment prospects, though often finding favour with politicians, are facile.
The contemporary hooligan phenomenon arose in the 1960s at a time of unprecedented prosperity and low unemployment and has continued through recession both in the depressed north and the relatively prosperous south.
Southern hooligans in employment sing ‘You'll never get a job’ to northerners, especially Liverpudlians.
Nor do fans see themselves as engaging in a kind of working-class resistance to the commercialization of football in any straightforward sense.
Central to the phenomenon is the idea of territory and community.
Hooligans often take care to evade police escorts and to slip into rival territories unobserved.
Young Arsenal supporters sometimes disembark from trains south of the river and enter Chelsea territory across Wandsworth Bridge.
In one sense this kind of thing has been taking place for centuries.
The continuity thesis is not without some merit if carefully defined.
Traditional football had been an expression of male prowess and village pride sanctioned by custom and loosely supervised by adults.
Under industrialization these games and the ‘bands of youth’ were either suppressed or marginalized.
What Edwardian sociologists liked to call ‘boy-life’ existed at the informal level of the street-gang or more respectably in the ‘youth club’movement.
Central to the working class was the establishment of a stable urban culture segregated by sex where boys ‘learned’ how to be men.
This kind of socialization involved, for example, finding out how to drink without getting hopelessly or degradingly drunk; how to indulge in banter and when to risk a fight.
Men passed on these things to their sons and their apprentices.
Although there was plenty of loutish and rough behaviour in public by groups of juveniles, there was always a counterbalancing influence within male culture.
The gang rivalries of the street were kept within bounds and out of the world of adult entertainment.
Since the 1950s the old solidarities of working-class culture have disappeared.
So too have many of the communities themselves.
Networks of neighbours have been broken up by rehousing.
Sons are far less likely to follow their fathers or other male relatives into the same occupations or places of work.
Football since the 1950s has come to provide a kind of surrogate community for the young; the club defines their identity and the ‘end’ is their territory, even if they have moved out to high-rise blocks miles away.
Membership of a working-class community was something their fathers took for granted.
Working men of earlier generations had less need to assert who or what they were.
They inherited a firm class culture and lived within it.
They were not urged by their teachers to achieve educational success or by advertisers to join a consumer society where class differences were blurred by the possession of material goods.
Hooliganism is partly an assertion of ‘hardness’ and an attachment to local territory, which the boys see as the traditional characteristics of their class.
This is what seems to have been behind the ‘skinhead’ or ‘boot-boy’phenomenon that has been a part of football hooliganism.
Shaving their heads unlike long-haired middle-class students or pop singers of the period and wearing heavy workmen's boots and braces, they seemed like a caricature of the world that their parents had left.
They perpetuated the old traditions in new ways.
Football became the single most important focus for this.
Extensive community work and interviews with young Arsenal supporters in a run-down housing estate by Robbins and Cohen confirmed this impression.
The boys talked nostalgically about the way fighting had been a part of their fathers' world; ‘about the time old man MacIlroy, half-pissed, had taken on ali the men folk of his very extended family, at his sister's wedding, and stili had time to call for more beer.
Young Neil told how old man Allen one day for a bet had drawn a line across a bar-room floor at the Black Horse and challenged all comers to cross it.’
Would their children talk with similar nostalgia about the time their dads led ‘the North Bank on a charge against the Chelsea ‘Shed’? ss Sport presents a problem for such youths.
On the one hand it offers a way of displaying hardness, on the other it is respectable, adopted as part of the official culture of ‘school’ or ‘youth club’.
In the Roundhouse, a Catholic housing estate in Liverpool, a slightly older man remarked to members of a teenage gang ‘you lot are just like we was.
We'd always be fighting coz we knew the older fellas had.
Like yourselves, you see us lot playing for Heriots and see fellers going in hard, and say I can be just as hard.’
‘The Boys’, as they were known, formed their own team rather than play in established youth sides but were dismissed from the local league for fighting and violent play.
In another participant/observer study of a delinquent group within a secondary school, Paul Willis noted how one boy had initially started out very well, with school reports praising his co-operative attitude and his achievements in cricket, football, and cross-country until ‘his whole manner and attitude changed’.
When asked to explain this the boy remarked ‘my father called me an ear'ole [a ‘crawler’ or conformist]once, in the second year, for playing football and coming to school’.
Playing sport as opposed to watching professional football was identified with acceptance of school authority.
When some boys at the school put excrement under the headmaster's chair, he contrasted the culprits unfavourably with true school sportsmen: ‘Last Friday I was feeling pretty low when I found out about this lot…but then I went to football on Saturday, there were several lads and teachers there, playing their hearts out or giving up their time just for the school, and then I thought, ‘Perhaps, it's not so bad after all.’
Naturally this idea of sport is anathema to the hooligan.
Middle-class ideals of ‘playing the game’ have always been alien to rough working-class culture.
Deracinated urban youths have built upon this uncompromisingly physical attitude to games and turned it into a different, more aggressive, and organized subculture.
Some of West Ham's most violent supporters have come from the satellite estates of north London or new towns like Harlow or Thamesmead.
A young messenger-boy for the Post Office described what he thought brought youths to Highbury.
‘Success isn't the most important thing, it's got most to do with where you live, which team you support, or where you used to live before you got moved out…you go back there, support your old team.’
When a group have lost their old territory in which their traditions were established, football provides a symbolic substitute for the young in the heart of the old community.
Supporting West Ham was a way of staying an East-Ender, going to the Boleyn pub beside Upton Park and ‘steaming in’ against rival supporters or immigrants.
‘Everyone from our side of the bar used to steam round an' kick fuck out of the Pakis’, remarked one hooligan approvingly.
‘You get them all standin’ in a mob, all talkin’that chapati language an’all that, an’you never know whether they're talkin’about you.
.. It was like the black hole of Calcutta down my factory.’
Crude racial abuse is widespread on the terraces.
Black players have to endure endless taunts except when one scores a goal for the hooligan's team.
Pakistanis have the added stigma in the eyes of the white hooligan of tending to be better off, linguistically separate, less physical, and less interested in football.
Racism seems to have become one of the most dangerous and distinctive aspects of contemporary football violence in comparison to earlier forms of juvenile disorder and has begun to spread to cricket too.
The National Front and other crypto-fascist fringe-groups have consciously attempted to use football as a means of spreading their ideology amongst young white workers and have specifically targeted certain clubs such as West Ham and Millwall.
Some of the most vicious and persistent football offenders have connections with fascist organizations, although the bulk of young supporters do not.
Here it is important to make a distinction between different types of hooligan.
At the apex, as it were, of the hooligan hierarchy are those in their late teens or early twenties who have a record for violence.
They are a minority who are drawn to football as a means of fighting; they go seeking ‘aggro’ and are half-admired, half-feared by the bulk of young fans.
In recent years this older element seems to have become more prominent; they are often smartly dressed and travel to games by car or on scheduled train services away from police surveillance, organized in gangs with names like the Inter-City Firm, the Main Line Service Crew, or the Anti-Personnel Firm.
They plan their assaults meticulously and even have kept records to produce a league table of violence.
They are a small group increasingly watched by the police and sociologically marginal to the hooligan phenomenon.
It is the symbolic violence of the teenager on the terraces, which spills over into the odd affray with visiting gangs that is more typical than the premeditated violence of disturbed or habitually aggressive individuals, who see football as a kind of arena for serious assault with little risk of arrest.
More extensive use of video film and exemplary sentencing may discourage the ultra-violent minority, but the assembling of large mobs of chanting and charging youngsters at the ‘ends’ seems to have become an established part of youth culture.
Only age restrictions, which would be costly to clubs already financially hard-pressed as well as being difficult to enforce, could stop this.
Stoke and Coventry have attempted to bring back families into the game with a ‘Lads and Dads’ programme.
Watford, among other clubs, have tried a similar initiative, though re-creating ‘organic’ communities of spectators is beyond the scope of well-intentioned clubs.
Serious as it is, the problem of hooliganism has to be kept in proportion.
Only a minority of urban youth engages in such behaviour.
In several African and South American states there have been far more serious incidents in which large numbers of people have been killed.
In one case war was declared over a disputed game.
Even in a society without any apparent ‘hooligan’ problem such as France there was a powerful tradition of misrule before, during, and after games, especially amongst the Rugby players of the south-west.
Holland has had its violent confrontations between Amsterdam and Rotterdam teams and their fans; Borussia Dortmund's supporters' club had neo-Nazi links and the fascist Right in Italy have tried to infiltrate the ‘ragazzi di stadio’, such as the self-styled ‘Fighters’ of Juventus.
American football is notoriously violent.
Players in the virtually invincible Yale side around the turn of the century would dip their shirts in blood from an abattoir before a match.
American football itself has been described as an exercise in ‘controlled violence’.
Both baseball and American football abound in ‘hooligan’ incidents.
In 1976 at Foxboro ‘one fan stole another's wheelchair, thirty were hospitalized, another stabbed.
Two died of coronaries…and while a policeman was giving a coronary victim resuscitation, a fan relieved himself on both.’
‘Mother, may I slug the umpire, may I slug him right away’ was a parody of crowd behaviour at baseball games published by the Washington Critic in 1886.
Hooliganism is more habitual and more fully developed in Britain than elsewhere, but it is not confined to Britain.
Nor is violence confined to football.
Rugby, whose spectators are a fairly respectable lot, turns a blind eye to fighting on the field.
Slinging the odd punch is part of the game and the recent imprisonment of a prominent Welsh player for a blatant and dangerous assault was criticized by most players and supporters.
In a recent ‘friendly’ fixture between Penygraig and Brencethin youth teams the referee himself was assaulted.
His nose was broken in two places by a player he had sent off for violent play.
Football hooliganism, therefore, can neither be explained in terms of simple continuities nor as an abrupt discontinuity; the location and the specific forms of juvenile riotousness were new but the phenomenon itself was as old as the hills.
This is why it is so perplexing.
One face of the hooligan is thoroughly traditional.
When young supporters chant ‘We'll be running round Pompey with our willies hanging out, singing I've got a bigger one than you’, or some other scatological rhyme, slightly changed to fit the time and place, they are doing nothing new.
This kind of rudeness goes back to Rabelais and far beyond.
The same went for the man who complained in the following terms to a local government committee for ‘Better Football’: ‘I visited the New Stand lavatories.
After two minutes I was showered with hot tea and a selection of cakes from the next door cubicle.
Then a couple of Jumping Jack fireworks came over the top, one of which fell into my underpants.
No sooner had I thrown it into the toilet than it exploded and I was spattered with the pan's contents.
At this point I heard a gale of raucous laughter.’
This suspiciously hilarious incident sounds as if it had been polished in the telling, as many hooligan incidents are.
There are archetypal anecdotes which crop up again and again in one form or another.
There is the one where a madcap home supporter gingerly urinates from above on opposition fans who are innocently drinking tea in what they take to be a gentle drizzle.
A variant of this is the celebrated Celtic and Rangers story about a lone fan caught by the opposition and made to fetch the hot Bovril at half-time.
His captors keep one of his shoes to make sure he comes back, and return it to him filled with excrement.
On recounting the tale to a journalist, the victim is asked if he thinks there will ever be an end to this cycle of violence, to which he answers, ‘No, as long as they keep shitting in our shoes, we'll keep pissing in their Bovril.’
Antics of this kind had been the stuff of carnival throughout western Europe for centuries.
In nineteenth-century Paris young revellers would melt down chocolate and smear horrified passers-by with what they took to be excrement.
Examples of loose continuities could be multiplied ad infinitum .
Fighting and joking, after all, were the main amusements of bachelors in pre-industrial Europe.
An anthropologist who by chance was travelling recently on a ferry during a battle between Manchester United and West Ham fans observed a distinct similarity with the ritual warfare of tribal societies.
‘They seemed to be enjoying themselves immensely, making a lot of noise, rushing dramatically up and down the stairs, spraying the fire-hoses everywhere, and throwing the occasional bottle or glass at the other side.’
As they did so ‘they experienced a transcendent moment of community with their mates’.
So where does this leave us?
Pre-industrial survival or contemporary malaise?
The special circumstances of territorial displacement and the withdrawal of adult supervision, which appear to have been more pronounced in Britain than in other parts of western Europe where the family is stronger as a recreational unit, have made the problem worse here than elsewhere; this has led to the formation of the ‘ends’ which in turn has tended to attract a small fascist and psychotic fringe.
Hooliganism is not one but several overlapping phenomena — traditional misrule, new forms of territorial aggression, youth styles both invented or reflected in the media.
All this is combined with the resentment of ethnic minorities by those who see football as a way of reasserting their national pride.
Chauvinism, local and national, lies at the heart of hooliganism and England fans seem to find in foreigners a convenient target fur a vague resentment at Britain's diminished place in the world.
Football has become a substitute for patriotism amongst the disaffected, half-educated white working-class youth of a nation which only a generation ago was respected and feared throughout the world.
Street-fighting and village brawls at football matches were so much a part of ‘traditional’ society that we tend to forget how relatively civilized modern social life has become.
There are manifest continuities between the rites of violence in contemporary Britain and earlier periods.
But the specific forms of hooliganism are new; football crowds were not segregated by age before the 1960s; youth did not congregate around parts of football clubs as their territory — they had a larger territory and community which they shared with their older male relatives.
When there were fights at football matches there was no dramatic media coverage.
All of these features have combined to create the contemporary problem; hooliganism exemplifies to perfection the difficulty of disentangling what is new from what is old in social history.
Conclusion
IN 1965 a Sports Council was set up to advise the government on future policy on sport and physical education.
This was a novel step and came from the advice of the Wolfenden Committee which reported in 1960 on ‘Sport and the Community’.
Wolfenden was commissioned not by the state but by the Central Council of Physical Recreation (CCPR), which had been set up in 1935 as a co-ordinating body for the many voluntary associations involved in the running of sport.
Alongside the CCPR there was the National Playing Fields Association formed in 1925 to increase urban playing space; there was also some limited provision of physical training facilities for the unemployed in the 1930s by the National Council for Social Service.
But ali of these organizational initiatives stopped well short of full-blooded state intervention.
Even the Physical Training and Recreation Act of 1937, which made funds available to promote fitness amidst rumours of war and the realities of domestic rearmament, was exceedingly modest in scope with a meagre two-million-pound budget in comparison with the vast sums spent on ‘Kraft durch Freude’ by the Third Reich and Mussolini's ‘Dopolavoro’programme.
The small-state tradition of the Victorians was strong and resilient.
There was a very restricted physical education ‘establishment’ in the form of specialist colleges for teacher-training.
These institutions were concerned mainly with gymnastics and confined largely to women until after the Second World War.
Games were not even made compulsory in state schools until 1944 despite the importance of athleticism in private education.
The ideology of amateurism discouraged the notion that sport was an appropriate sphere of state activity.
The government even declined an invitation to take part in an UNESCO conference on ‘The Place of Sport in Education’ in 1954.
It was not that sport was unimportant.
On the contrary, sport was a characteristic, almost a birthright of Britons everywhere.
But its virtues would be sapped if it was ‘nationalized’.
Sport was the true province of private persons in private clubs and tampering with this smacked of an authoritarianism foreign to all that Britons — Labour, Liberal, and Tory — held most dear.
The fill story of how this attitude has gradually changed cannot be told here.
My purpose has been to account for the rise and consolidation of amateurism rather than to catalogue its contemporary decline.
Pressure to increase state involvement came from various directions.
There was the huge extension of state activity in other areas of social life that came about as a result of the ‘warfare means welfare’ principle of the 1940s.
If sport was ‘a good thing’, then the state should provide for it within the framework of the welfare state along with health and education.
The limits of what had formerly been considered the proper role of the state had changed.
Additionally the growing importance of the media, especially radio and television, highlighted the relatively poor performance of British sportsmen and women at an international level.
Britain only won one gold medal in the 1952 Olympics and that was in an equestrian event.
The Soviet Union had entered international sport with a vengeance, throwing the weight of a massive state machine against West European and American dominance of athletics.
Cold War influences filtered through gradually and merged with a growing concern about the effects of increased leisure and affluence on the young, especially the problem of delinquency.
‘It is easy to ridicule the ‘that's not cricket old boy’ attitude,’remarked Wolfenden, ‘but in its deeper (and usually inarticulate) significance it stili provides something like the foundations of an ethical standard which may not be highly intellectual but does have a considerable influence on the day-to-day behaviour of millions of people.’
It took a Labour Government less inhibited than the Tories with their informal links to the amateur élite to bring sport within the ambit of the welfare state by setting up the Sports Council.
The consequences of state intervention since 1964 have been use fully summarized in a recent report of the Sports Council on ‘The Impact of the Sport For All Policy, 1966–84’.
The efforts of the state have mainly gone into providing better facilities for sport, especially in inner cities.
This rather belated official intervention has not met with much success.
‘Sport For All’ has done little to overcome the inequalities present at the start of the campaign’, conclude the report's authors.
Sports centres with excellent pitches and pools have been built but they have either been under used or more often patronized by groups who already had a high participation ratio, especially adult male car-owners.
The unskilled, women, the older members of community, and rough youths on the delinquent fringe have been conspicuous by their absence.
This is not the place to enter into a debate about contemporary sports policy.
The point is rather to stress the limits of state action.
The mere provision of facilities is not enough.
As this book has insisted over and over again, sport is to do with attitudes and values not just with exercise.
Peter McIntosh, the co-author of this report and a pioneer in the historical study of sport in modern Britain, concludes that the state via the Sports Council should ‘base both research and promotion on enjoyment rather than social function’.
Commitment to sport has to be freely given; it has to be fun; it cannot be foisted on to the poor or the wayward from above because it is good for them.
This brings us back to a central theme of Sport and the British : the extraordinary degree to which it has been promoted privately without politicians, employers, or trade unionists taking a significant part except as enthusiastic individual sportsmen.
People have created their own kinds of pleasure through sport and there has been no powerful institutional ‘push’ of the kind that came, for example, from the French Church after 1905 or the German Social Democratic Party of the Wilhelmine era.
Britain even lagged behind the United States in the provision of industrial recreation facilities.
Muscular Christians and middle-class moralists in a private capacity certainly boosted the cause or games.
But their ideas had only limited influence on the way games were played and understood by the mass of manual workers.
This leads naturally to another key point: whatever social or political meanings are attached to sport by different groups, participation remains intensely sociable and largely organized around the institution of the individual ‘club’— a neglected social creation of the Victorians.
Conviviality has been at the heart of sport.
The fierce rivalries of teams and top competitors has masked the warmth of participating together in a team or standing on the terraces cheering on your side.
Sport is more about making friends, building communities, and sharing experiences than keeping fit.
There may be hostility to rivals but there is also the deep sense of solidarity and identity that comes from fierce loyalties to a place or a people.
This sociability has been largely male.
Female participation in sport has been negligible until recently.
Men have kept women out of sport except as helpers for those aspects of club life like dances and teas which were not segregated.
When Frankenberg went to carry out anthropological research in a village on the Welsh borders in the early 1950s he found that the village football team provided ‘a symbol of village unity and cohesion against the outside world’ and had ‘a central place in village social activity’.
The team had a supporters' club in which local women were represented.
Conflict arose when their wishes over the use of club funds towards a Coronation carnival were ignored by the men.
The women demanded their ‘gifts’ of time and interest to the club be reciprocated by the donation of time and money by the players for the collective life of the community.
Female social participation may have been more widespread than has been realized.
Women have certainly been socially active in middle-class sports like tennis and golf, which also have a significant element of active female participation.
But in sport as a whole they have been mostly conspicuous by their absence.
In swimming — the single most popular physical recreation after walking — the importance of teaching children to swim has drawn in some women and competitive swimming is a very important sport for girls.
As the social secretary of a swimming-club remarked, ‘you start off by just coming down to watch…and gradually you start to get involved’.
She had to admit that she found swimming ‘a bit boring really’ but there was the possibility of shared recreation.
‘We were always very interested in the dances’— the links between sport, dances, and courtship is a world of its own which would repay further her study.
Female involvement may have been at the fringes, though what took place in this ‘marginal, area may turn out to have been more important than long-forgotten events on the field of play.
However, the social integration element, though unduly neglected, should not be pressed too hard, especially amongst urban workers.
Observers of a mining community in the 1950s noted that ‘husband and wife live separate and in a sense secret lives…it is a point of honour among men to keep some time for drinking and attending sporting events with their mates’.
After a year or two of marriage ‘men return once more to the company of their mates’.
In modern Britain sport has been one of the ways that men have kept themselves apart, defined their own territory, and indulged their enthusiasms.
What the Edwardians called ‘boy-life’ had its own kind of ‘clubbable’logic whether amongst the ‘Old Boys’of the Long Room or on the terraces of Old Trafford.
The pattern of male involvement, however, has depended primarily on social class with important regional and national variations.
The way changing class structures and urban experience have moulded sport has been the central concern of the book.
Chapter 1 examined the nature and decline of traditional forms of sport.
Old-established festive customs, in which sports mixed with eating, dancing, and drinking according to the traditions of the Church and agricultural practice, were gradually eroded.
Different activities declined at different times and in different ways.
Animal sports were put down by crusading urban and evangelical pressure.
The creation of a private association to prosecute offenders and chivvy local and central government into action was a pioneering effort in Victorian middle-class moral interference in the lives of the poor.
Yet the prohibition of cock-fighting and animal-baiting was only politically possible because of the tacit consent of the landed élite, who had already largely desert ed these activities for more exclusive and civilized ones.
Disgust at cruel sports came to be a distinguishing feature of British life.
Even a vocal minority of skilled manual workers supported the ban.
The same applied to traditional football except that in this case legislation merely banned the game from the public highway.
Football, however, had lost much of its rumbustiousness before it was outlawed from the streets.
Still, the continuities were as important as the changes.
Cricket and horse-racing prospered, drawing good crowds and plenty of money.
Prize-fighting remained popular, though technically illegal, until the 1880s.
Increasingly publicans took over the task of providing facilities for sports which had once been enjoyed on the streets or on common land.
Sporting grounds were opened alongside pubs, and by the mid-nineteenth century, there were plenty of independent commercial grounds where ‘pedestrian’ events were held.
Although the Highways Act of 1835 steadily drove pedestrianism off the roads, it did not drive it out of existence.
Athletics was a popular sport before the age of the Oxbridge blue and village cricket was thriving when county cricket was still unknown.
There was no leisure vacuum in early Victorian Britain.
Rather there had been a subtle unravelling of what had once been a more integrated pattern of recreation.
First, the withdrawal of the gentry and later their large tenants from rural life coincided with growing criticism and interference from an increasingly powerful middle class.
Second, the combined forces of civilized distaste gradually had an effect on the working-class élite whilst the actual times and spaces for the old sports both in town and country were ever more restricted.
by no means all of the old sport s were abandoned, but they were more or less confined either to the margins of community life or to the remoter parts of the nation.
This was particularly evident as far as the young were concerned.
The special place that they had enjoyed in traditional sports was much reduced.
Either they joined in with their adult workmates or they played children's games in the streets.
Ancient games did survive amongst the young and continued to be enjoyed into the middle of this century, but their songs and rhymes, and the old chasing, throwing, and racing games were increasingly regarded as puerile.
Adults would have been thought foolish to take part in what were now only infantile amusements.
The enthusiasm of the common people for the old sports was weakened to such an extent that there was a genuine receptiveness on the part of the mass of the population to the revised forms of play that were being nurtured amongst the privileged in the mid-Victorian public schools.
There were two sides of middle-class sport.
The first was the code of amateurism as embodied in public school games; the second was the emergence of suburban recreation.
Amateurism provided a bridge between the old world of aristocratic values and the new one of bourgeois exertion and competitiveness.
Fair play embodied a new philosophy that was probably more pervasive and influential than the more widely known ‘work-ethic’ and ‘call to seriousness’amongst the Victorians.
The dynamism and distinctiveness of the new private educational system with its unprecedented cult of games is perhaps the best-known aspect of the social history of sport.
‘Athleticism’, as it was sometimes called, was a kind of moral code or system of ideas.
Public school sport and the ‘old-boy’ network helped foster a sense of solidarity rather than social division between landed wealth, the new industrial élites, and the liberal professions.
Yet sport did not bind the whole of the bourgeoisie and the aristocracy together.
The middle classes were split between the northern industrial element, which tolerated professionalism and took directorships of Football League and Rugby League clubs, and the bankers, brokers, doctors, lawyers, civil servants, and schoolmasters who formed the bulk of the amateur establishment in southern England.
That amateurism was both a code of ethics and a system of status was borne out by the fact that ‘amateur’ was often used in conjunction with‘gentleman’.
The two went hand in hand until the later nineteenth century.
One way of defining the middle classes is to try to understand how they kept themselves morally distinct from the lower orders.
An alternative perspective comes from looking at what they did rather than what they said.
In practice, the force of amateur values was slowly eroded.
Nationalism, the media, and market forces were partly responsible.
But changing middle-class manners and values were also important.
There was a shift towards a more casual, private, and hedonistic style of life.
The late Victorian and Edwardian period offered low taxes, cheap servant labour, and reasonable returns of capital whilst the retail price index fell by around 10 per cent between the wars.
By 1939 there were two million private cars and taxation was no more than 10 per cent for a man on £500 a year.
‘You need money in this England,’ as Priestley said, ‘but you do not need much money.’
Suburban commuters, who increasingly formed the bulk of the middle-aged middle classes, were often rather hazy about ‘the games ethic’ and confined the ideal of amateurism to rugby, cricket, or athletics.
Amateurism waned as a set of values for living.
Golf had rules of ‘etiquette’ rather than an ethic of fair play and public service.
Being middle class was becoming more a matter of consumption than of belief.
Any family could join in provided they had the money and were not Jewish — racism thrived tolerably well in meritocratic suburbia where Jews sometimes had to form their own clubs.
What better forum for conspicuous consumption than the locker-room or the golf club car-park?
Whilst paying lip service to the sporting values of the public schools, suburban man was busy with less physically and morally taxing forms of exercise.
The mould of cheerful materialism was starting to take shape.
The amateur ideal prospered in its purest form in the Empire.
‘Athleticism’ provided a crucial, distinctive element in the British ‘imperial idea’.
A flair for games and a talent for government went hand in hand.
The British were a superior race, blessed with exceptional energy, toughness, and qualities of leadership, which they refined in their play and used throughout the world to promote the rule of law, the Christian religion, and the ‘rational’ use of economic resources.
This ‘civilizing mission’ was both a ‘burden’and a ‘duty’as well as being a source of pleasurable employment and riches.
Such was the self-image of Empire, which spread out from the public schools and into the public mind with the growth of the popular press and the introduction of compulsory primary education.
Banner headlines and patriotic textbooks told the British they were ‘an imperial race’— a message pictorially reinforced on biscuit-tins, sauce-bottles, and cigarette-cards.
Youth movements were fiercely loyal to Crown and colonies, especially the ‘Boy Scouts’, which their founder, Baden-Powell, at first had wished to name the ‘Imperial Scouts’.
Then there was the elaborate and explicitly imperial ceremonial that surrounded the monarch in life and in death.
This helped pave the way for the full-blooded domestication of the idea of Empire at the popular imperial exhibitions held first at Wembley and later in Glasgow between the wars.
AU this helped provide a favourable climate for imperial sport — Test matches, rugby tours, and ultimately the institution of the Empire Games itself.
Whilst sport offered an acceptable outlet for Dominion nationalism it also proved a useful tool for incorporating indigenous rulers into the running of the Empire, especially in India.
Even with decolonization and the cutting of formal colonial ties, a sport like cricket in the West Indies has consolidated good relations.
Coexisting — sometimes uneasily — with imperialism there was domestic nationalism.
Sport has helped to give the English a coherent national culture no less than it has the Irish, the Welsh, or the Scots.
It also spread English values through the Empire which became hopelessly con fused with ‘Britishness’.
For it was the English élite, formed in those new institutions of national culture, the public schools, who ran the show.
Despite strong parochial and provincial loyalties, the pull of sport as part of a national culture in England grew stronger between the wars.
And this in turn fed the flames of a wider imperial culture of British sports.
Since the 1960s the problem of South Africa, which goes beyond the scope of the present survey, has placed far greater strains on Commonwealth sporting links than ever before.
Yet they continue, still surprisingly vigorous, though how long the Commonwealth Games can survive boycotts of the kind mounted at Edinburgh in 1986 is much less certain.
Historically sport has broadly been a cohesive force in imperial relations.
Only the nationalist Irish explicitly exempted themselves from the interplay of national identity and shared sentiments through games.
The Irish enforced a ‘Ban’ on British sports in the sense that those who wished to play Gaelic football or hurling under the aegis of the Gaelic Athletic Association could not also play football or cricket.
The Welsh and Scots adopted a different tactic which was more in keeping with their less explicitly political expression of nationality.
Rugby in South Wales and football in central Scotland reflected a new sense of working-class cultural nationalism which was distinct from the bardic celebrations in Wales and the romanticism of readers of Sir Walter Scott and nostalgic expatriates.
Nationalism was only one element in the working-class sporting tradition.
The range and richness of sport as a component of popular culture has been overlooked by those who take a ‘diffusionist’ view, concentrating on how middle-class games and values were passed on to industrial workers via muscular Christians and social reformers.
Two major points emerged in our analysis of popular participation.
First, there was no effective imposition of middle-class games on urban workers in the name of ‘social control’ or ‘rational recreation’; second, a distinct and introverted tradition of sport grew up combining old-established popular traditions within a more systematic national framework.
While there was no shortage of articulate individuals with the intention of improving the lower orders through their play, the impact of churches, youth movements, and employers was largely restricted to the provision of facilities and routine organization.
Ideologically they did not get very far.
Such ventures never formed more than a significant minority of the total number of clubs, most of which were based on street or neighbourhood groups set up and run by ordinary working people.
These clubs did not necessarily take their sport in the spirit of fair play.
Fierce local loyalties and rivalries were the life-blood of the amateur football leagues just as they had been in parish recreations a century before, and this carried over into commercial spectator sport, which offered a new kind of community life and identity.
As industrial communities became established on a grander scale with second, third, and fourth generation residents, there was a need to express territoriality in new ways.
This tension between change and continuity is the key to understanding the inner meaning as opposed to the outward form of working-class sport.
Hence the attachment to gambling.
Here the traditions of the gentry and the common people met in joint rejection of the middle-class sporting morality that outlawed betting in the name of decency and ‘character’.
Horse-racing, a sport that had largely remained in the hands of the aristocracy and which was the object of criticism from bourgeois ideologues and socialists alike, grew rapidly in popularity.
Rationality, so dear to the reforming heart, ironically found its fullest expression in the picking of winners after careful perusal of ‘the sporting intelligence’.
Calculating the draws on the coupon, the odds on a dog, the speed of a bird might draw upon reserves of numeracy and judgement, but this did not betoken the triumph of a ‘scientific world-view’.
Record-breaking and the alleged mania for quantification cannot properly explain the appeal of sport.
A new precision was certainly present and this was important for the dedicated few.
But statistics were not at the heart of the thing except for the occasional schoolboy or zealot.
Nor, on the other hand, was violence.
— Edwardian working-class sport as a whole was less violent than it had been a half-century before.
Even ratting contests and prize-fights seemed to lose their appeal in the last quarter of the century.
The tradition of gambling that had been associated with brutal sports came to be centred on horse-racing and later football.
Boxing, or football for that matter, was stili pretty rough and the crowds could be crude and rowdy, but the overall impression was of a more orderly world.
Popular recreation was more ‘rational’ in a bureaucratic sense and it was more respectable than before, but its pleasures remained deeply traditional: drinking and betting, chaffing your mates and cheering on the standard-bearers of your real or adopted territory.
This, at least, was the way things were until the third quarter of this century.
Since the Second World War Britain's industrial and imperial heyday has passed and with it a peculiarly British way of playing.
Most dramatic has been the demise of the amateur.
The MCC abolished the distinction between gentlemen and players in the early 1960s.
Henceforth there would only be ‘cricketers’.
Wimbledon followed suit a little later by opening up competition to professional tennis players.
Amateurism was scrapped at the same moment that the imperial structure it had helped to sustain was itself wound up.
Simultaneously the status of the professional improved as players began to assert themselves not as ‘club servants’ or ‘skilled workmen’but as entertainers who should be paid in accordance with their market value.
Footballers success fully abolished the imposition of the maximum wage, though the retain-and-transfer system took longer to scrap.
British sport began for the first time to embrace commercialism, although the process was cautious and gradual.
The Football League, for example, has only accepted shirt advertising and fu 11 commercial sponsorship in the last few years.
The Amateur Athletic Association have clung to their name despite condoning the principle that athletes be paid — often very large sums — provided it is done through the setting up of ‘trust funds’.
Behind these profound changes lies the impact of television combined with a shift in the values of the organizing élite.
Media coverage now offers the possibility of enormously increased revenue from advertising either directly or indirectly through named sponsors.
The idea of ‘the game for the game's sake’ that underpinned athleticism as a moral code has come to seem strangely antiquated.
Gentlemanly distaste for ‘trade’ is as out of place in sport as it is in the Conservative Party of Mrs Thatcher.
Alongside the late entry of capitalism into sport, which is bringing Britain closer to the commercialism of the Tour de France or the Superbowl — both of which significantly have begun to attract British audiences in sizeable numbers in the later 1980s — there lie two pressing issues: the decline of live audiences for sport and the rise of a hooligan subculture.
The old crowd controls at football matches have gone as working men increasingly stay at home to watch sport, leaving the stadium — or the unseated ‘ends’ at least— as an arena for the young.
Football has become the focus for a new kind of identity for working-class male youth and it is quite possible that other forms of sport — cricket for instance— will be similarly used.
Fierce loyalties to a professional club — often located outside an adolescent's immediate territory as is the case with many Manchester United or Liverpool supporters attracted by playing success, glamour, and television coverage — create new juvenile communities, who briefly suspend hostilities at internationals in the cause of English chauvinism.
No wonder George Orwell had no respect for sport.
By chance the writing of this book began in 1984 amidst a flood of neo-Orweliian speculation about nuclear war, the ecology of the planet, information technology, the North-South dialogue, and the dangers of television.
Then, as abruptly as it had pitched camp, the caravan moved on.
Gratefully or guiltily, we plunged back into the present with its reassuring calendar of events from Wembley to Wimbledon, from Lord's to Twickenham, from Ascot to ‘The Open’.
The apocalyptic stock-taking was put aside for some future anniversary or crisis.
Sport resumed its place at the centre of male culture providing familiar landmarks for private lives, giving a kind of chronology or structure to the year.
There is no escaping sport.
Each year the time devoted to it and the importance attached to it, especially on television, seems to increase.
The cult of sport sometimes seems to take on the quality of an Orwellian nightmare.
Will the next millennium see man obsessed by athletic entertainment to the exclusion of other kinds of culture?
Will the state promote sport as a safe, numbing kind of nationalistic cocoon for healthy, obedient citizens?
If the past is anything to go by — and what better measure do we have?— this will not happen.
Sport may be taken too seriously; high-performance spectator sport is arguably too central to our lives already.
But the friendliness and common sense of ordinary players, the humour, excitement, and the fin it affords offer reasonable grounds for hope.
These values will mediate the impact of mass culture.
The relationship between the two will determine the shape of British sport in the future.