

ERIKA RAN, mile after effortless mile around the park until dusk brought the bone-chilling mist; then, in a loping run, under the great beech tree, home.
Supper was ready — soup and Bulgarian tinned fruit — eaten, dishes washed, Erika and Paul ready to go out, Herr and Frau Nordern too.
‘The Beyers rang,’ Frau Nordern said, mentioning some friendly acquaintances who lived a couple of streets away.
‘We're going to have a drink and play cards.
It will be a nice change.’
‘Yes,’ Erika agreed that it would be a nice change for her mother but she looked at Omi, sitting quietly in her chair.
‘I don't think that I'll go to the Youth Club after all,’ she said.
‘I'll stay in, rest — and do some homework.’
But that ploy didn't work.
Omi smiled her patient, wise smile.
‘Go, child,’ she said, ‘go.’
Erika and Paul went, Paul politely, solicitously, opening the door for Erika and waving her through first, although it was a tight squeeze in the tiny vestibule, and at the bus-stop, in a bizarre parody of good manners, insisting that Erika stand in front of him.
Erika looked at him shrewdly.
‘Are you being funny, Paul?
Because if you are….’
‘Funny!’
Paul looked hurt.
‘I'm being polite.’
‘Yes, that's what's funny,’ Erika said.
‘And what have you been looking so pleased about this week?
Just because I got you off seeing Herr Lettner doesn't mean it won't happen again.
And next time don't expect me to help you.’
‘I know that,’ Paul was odiously grateful.
‘And thanks a lot for that, Erika.
But you've seen me doing my homework, haven't you?
I've been doing that.’
‘Yes, for a week.’
‘Well, a week's good.
You've got to get used to these things.
But listen, Erika,’ Paul stamped his feet against the cold.
‘Listen, when you go to the sports school you'll leave home, won't you?’
‘If I go I might.’
‘Well, I'll tell you what.’
Paul looked down the road to where distant lights told of the approach of the bus.
‘I've been thinking.
When you go, Omi won't need that big room all to herself, will she?
So I was thinking, when you go she could move into my room and I could have yours.’
‘Paul!’
Erika's cheeks flamed, with temper.
‘You really are the end.
Don't you ever think of anyone but yourself?’
She swung on to the bus.
‘No, go away,’ she said, as Paul sat next to her.
‘Listen,’ Paul said.
‘I am thinking of someone else.
I'm thinking of Omi!’ he urged, in one of the most improbable remarks he had ever made.
‘Your room is on the street.
Mine would be quieter —’
But the rest of his appeal was lost as Erika pushed past him and stood at the end of the bus, well aware that Paul would rather postpone his appeal than stand the two slow lurching miles to the club.
The Youth Club of the Paris Commune as it was officially known, or the ‘Paree’ as its more irreverent members called it, was a gimcrack affair, cracked concrete and cheap plastic panels, tucked beside the inevitable block of flats, and a health centre, but it was well equipped: table tennis, television, a library, a concert room, a rather more substantial annexe for weight lifting, a hall which doubled up for meetings of the Free German Youth and dancing, and a comfortable lounge where one could buy coffee and soft drinks.
A girl was playing Chopin in the concert room as Erika went into the lounge.
Rosa was there drinking fruit juice with Fritz Kott and a few other pupils from the Egon Schultz School who greeted her with the same, unanimous question: ‘What happened?’
Struggling not to blush, although failing, Erika told them, stressing emphatically the provisional nature of the interview.
But that qualification was brushed aside.
‘No ifs or buts,’ Fritz said.
‘You're in.
In .’
‘Maybe,’ Erika said.
‘But it's a big maybe.
I've got to keep jumping well.’
‘And why shouldn't you?’
Fritz said.
‘If you can do a thing once you can do it again.
Right, Rosa?’
‘Absolutely,’ Rosa said.
‘And do it better.
And the way you're jumping now Erika…wow!’ she pointed to the ceiling.
‘Oh, you never know,’ Erika protested.
‘You can reach your peak and that's it.’
She laughed despite herself.
‘That has to be true, doesn't it?
Otherwise people would be jumping over the Television Tower.’
‘Some truth in that,’ Rosa agreed.
‘I know I've reached my limit.
No, really.
I know it.
And to be tops you can lose a lot….’
‘And gain a lot, too,’ Fritz said, with a warmth glowing beyond loyalty.
‘Well, we'll see,’ Erika said, ‘and talking of seeing, look who's here.’
The who was a Herr Hocher who, with a dedicated voluntary worker, Fräulein Renn, ran the Youth Club.
He was a tall, rather gloomy man in his forties, dressed, as he always and incongruously was, in the blue and white of the F.G.Y. and accompanied by Herman Guttenbruk, he of the trip to, and interminable lecture on, the Soviet Union.
Herr Hocher's long face split into a welcoming smile — or what might, charitably, have passed for one.
‘Ha! ha! ha! familiar faces…yes…but not too familiar, I'm sorry to say.
Ha! ha!
Klaus, isn't it? and Klara — Oh, of course—’ corrected —‘Erika, Fritz, Rosa…we really ought to see you more often, ought we not?
Don't you have a duty to support….’
But the group had its answer to that: pressures of training, all working hard at normal school subjects,and attending F.G.Y. meetings at school.
‘But, ha! ha! able to make time for a dance,’ Herr Hocher said.
‘Ah,’ Rosa said, with an air of sweet reasonableness.
‘We have to have some relaxation.
The school doctor says that we should work hard, but not overwork,’ adding a muffled ‘ha! ha!’as, baffled, Herr Hocher retreated to the T.V. room where there was a noisy scuffle.
‘The Louts,’ Fritz said.
‘I hope that they aren't staying for the dance.’
There was a general sigh of agreement.
The Louts were a bunch of youths from another district who came to the club now and again and mildly disturbed the dances.
There was never any real trouble, as the consequences for hooliganism in the G.D.R.
could be extremely severe, but some horseplay, and the occasional illicit disc was put on the record-player, much to Herr Hocher's annoyance.
Just once there had been a fight but as the then leader of the Louts had, unwittingly, taken on a junior boxing champion, he had ceased appearing.
But still, the Louts were tedious, at least in the eyes of Erika and her friends, the more so to Erika who had an uneasy, and not unjustified feeling that Paul was always likely to be drawn into their orbit.
More people were drifting into the club, all of whom asked Erika how her interview had gone.
‘I don't understand how they know,’ Erika said.
‘I didn't tell anyone.’
Fritz grinned.
‘Don't you know?
In this country everything is a secret — and nothing is secret.’
The group laughed as the first strains of a Hungarian pop group wailed from the hall.
‘Shall we go in?’
Fritz asked.
Erika resolutely shook her head.
‘Not until there are more people in there.’
‘Now, now,’ Fritz said.
‘You mustn't be shy.
Just think what it will be like doing the high jump with 50,000 people watching you!’
‘Don't!’
Erika felt goose-pimples on her arms and the thought crossed her mind that, despite all that had been said to her about courage, perhaps she wasn't really cut out for stardom, after all.
But she firmly stamped on that thought.
‘All right,’ she said.
‘Let's go in.
But I'm not dancing, remember.’
They strolled into the hall where a few couples were vaguely swaying under the glare of yellow neon, and the basilisk stare of Fräulein Renn.
Rosa nudged Erika.
‘Look,’ she said out of the side of her mouth.
Erika looked.
A girl was sauntering into the hall.
She was something of a celebrity at the Egon Schultz School.
Her father was a high official and had taken her with him on a trip to London and she had returned with her hair in orange stripes.
She had actually appeared at school like that — once.
When she came back the next day the stripes had been dyed her natural brunette, but badly, so that her hair still seemed striped, hence her nickname, Bunte.
She was also something of a femme fatale , with the looks of a young Marlene Dietrich, and a blasé manner to match.
Bunte casually wiggled over to Erika and her friends.
‘Helloo’ she drawled.
‘How is Rosa?
How is Erika?
How is Fritz?
All well, yes.
Athletic, yes.
Democratic, yes.
Socialist, yes.
Healthy minds in healthy bodies, yes.
Who will dance with me?
In the discos in the West they darken the lights, in the East they brighten them.
But come, Fritz.’
To Erika's intense annoyance, Fritz promptly accepted the invitation — obeyed the command, rather — and as Rosa moved on to the floor with another boy, she was left feeling abandoned — and foolish.
She felt a rare prickle of envious hostility and in that mood, defiantly and with a lunatic rashness, accepted an invitation to dance with one of the Louts, whose approach was loutish enough: a jerk of the head and a mumbled, ‘Wanna dance, chick?’
Erika moved on to the floor, keeping the Lout at a safe distance, but he was not as loutish as his manner suggested.
‘You're a good dancer,’ he said.
‘A really good mover.’
‘Better than her?’
Erika indicated Bunte.
‘Sure.
Although she's not bad,’ the Lout said.
‘But what's the matter with her hair?
It's all stripy.’
Erika told him the reason, expecting a sneering laugh, but the Lout was impressed.
‘That's something,’ he said.
‘That takes some nerve you know, to do that to your hair and go to school.’
‘It seems silly, to me,’ Erika said.
‘They do that in the West,’ the Lout said.
‘Stripe their hair.
Cut it, too, in patterns.’
‘I know,’ Erika said loftily.
‘It's barbaric.’
Hoping to squash the Lout with that word.
But the Lout was unsquashed.
‘It's individualism.
Shows your personality.
Makes you someone.
Someone different.
Yourself.’
Erika was mildly scandalised by this heresy.
‘True individualism lies in the proper relationship of each person to society,’ she said, primly.
‘Eh?
Oh, that junk,’ the Lout said.
‘Hey, listen, do you want to come to Wannsee?’
‘What?’
Erika stopped dancing.
‘Now?
With you?’
‘Sure, why not?
There's going to be a big party in the woods, real rock and roll.
I've got a scooter.’
He added that information with an air of modest pride.
Erika laughed incredulously.
‘Go to Wannsee on the back of a scooter in this weather?
You must be crazy.’
‘O.K. Suit yourself.’
The Lout shrugged as the music ended.
‘See you around,’ he said, making a bee-line for Bunte.
Rosa came across the dance-floor, her face serious.
‘Erika,’ she said, ‘what on earth are you doing?’
‘Dancing,’ Erika said.
Rosa was impatient.
‘You know what I mean.
If you hurt your foot….’
‘I'm being careful,’ Erika said, in a voice which meant that Rosa could mind her own business.
‘But —’ Rosa began.
‘I don't want to hear any ‘buts’,’ Erika snapped, her eyes on Fritz who, despite competition from the Louts, was talking to Bunte.
Another disc started, Herr Hocher placing it on the record-player with his own hands, the result being a foxtrot played by a Russian orchestra, and he himself took the floor with Fräulein Renn, the pair of them going through what seemed to the young people weirdly funny gyrations together.
Finally, elbowed out of Bunte's presence by the Louts, Fritz ambled over to the girls.
‘That's put the stopper on it,’ he said.
‘Has it?
On what, might I ask?’
Erika was freezingly polite.
‘This music,’ Fritz said.
‘I think that it's very nice music,’ Erika said.
‘Honestly?’
Fritz was surprised.
‘Yes.’
Erika smiled across the floor at the odious Herman Guttenbruk.
‘And I think that someone would like to dance it with me ,’ she said, as Herman, lured by the smile, came across and with a ludicrous bow, asked Erika if she would do him the honour of the dance, Erika graciously accepting, to her delight leaving Fritz looking disconsolate and unhappy.
‘I much prefer this music,’ Herman said, doing an awkward shuffle.
‘Pop music is degenerate.
Don't you agree?’
‘Hmm?’
Erika was too occupied in looking over Herman's shoulder at Fritz to pay him any attention.
‘I said pop and rock are degenerate,’ Herman repeated.
‘In fact I was surprised to see you dancing to pop music, and with one of them .’
Erika had no intention of being lectured to by Herman.
‘What's wrong with dancing with one of them?’ she demanded.
‘Well,’ Herman bumped into Herr Hocher and apologised profusely.
‘They aren't good types.’
‘They don't breathe all over you though.’
‘Sorry.
Very sorry.’
Herman, whom Erika had already been keeping at a safe distance from her feet, backed away.
‘But you know what I mean, Erika.’
‘Do I?’
Erika was aloof but seeing Fritz watching her pulled Herman closer.
‘How can we dance if you're miles away?’
Herman, startled but pleased, moved in, only to be disconcerted as Erika pushed him away.
‘Not that close,’ she said, although pleased by the expression on Fritz's face.
The record ended and Erika walked off the floor with Herman in attendance.
Herr Hocher put on another record, an amateurish jazz band.
‘Shall we?’
Herman said.
‘I thought that you said this was decadent music,’ Erika replied.
‘Oh, not this.
This is quite acceptable.
They play it in the Soviet Union.
I heard it while I was there.
I went to a Young Pioneer dance in Moscow….’
But his reminiscences, twice, thrice told, were lost on the dance-hall air as Erika walked away round the hall, affecting not to see Fritz who was standing moodily by the door, and giving a start of surprise when he asked her to dance.
‘I'm going for a juice,’ she said.
‘Anyway, I thought that you had a partner.’
‘What?
Oh, Bunte.
I danced with her.’
‘Really?
I thought you were teaching her calculus.’
Erika!
Fritz followed her into the lounge.
You did say you weren't going to dance, and she did ask me.
I just didn't want to seem rude.
And then you went and danced with that Lout —and with Herman.
Didn't you see me looking at you?’
‘I might have done,’ Erika said.
‘I wanted you to stop dancing — no!—’ as Erika turned on him —‘because of what you said, about hurting your foot.
That's all.’
‘So you didn't mind me dancing with other people?’
‘Well,’ Fritz went red, which, Erika thought, made rather a nice change from her own blushing, and looked at his shoes.
Erika thawed, melted, forgave Fritz, for which he was pathetically grateful, and sent him for fruit juice while she looked for Paul who was happily playing table tennis.
She went back into the lounge and sat with Fritz, finding out how remarkably much they had in common, until they were joined by Rosa and other friends and spent two magical hours until, at 10.00, she stood up.
‘Home time,’ she said.
‘No,’ cutting off Fritz's protests.
‘I'm in training and I should be in bed now.
Where's Paul?’
Fritz scurried off and returned with a reluctant Paul and they went to the door.
The Louts had also had enough, enough of Herr Hocher, that is, and were on their scooters, revving them with an ear-splitting racket.
‘So,’ Erika said.
‘Good-night, Fritz.’
‘Good-night, Erika.’
Fritz stared at her.
‘I…
I….’
‘What?’
Fritz gulped, ‘I wonder…how about tomorrow?’
Erika shook her head.
‘I can't.
Really.
Training.’
‘Yes.
Of course.’
Fritz took a step nearer Erika.
‘Perhaps —, then his face changed.
‘Look at Paul,’ he said.
Cursing Paul under her breath Erika turned.
Paul was deep in conversation with a very loutish Lout indeed.
‘Paul!’
Erika cried over the din of the scooters.
‘Paul!’
Paul did not, or affected not to, hear her and Erika walked across the yard and took him by the elbow.
‘Time for you to come home,’ she said, quite as firmly as her mother.
The Lout eased the throttle on his scooter and leered through the exhaust smoke.
‘What's this about going home?
Come with us, have a good time.’
Erika ignored him.
‘Come on,’ she said to Paul.
Paul actually hesitated and the Lout stuck his oar in again.
‘Are you coming or not, kid?
Never mind what she says.’
‘Keep out of this,’ Erika flared up.
‘Clear off.’
‘Now just a minute.’
The Lout began to swing off his scooter.
‘Who are you to give orders?
If the kid wants to come he can, see?’
‘No he can't.’
Fritz's voice came over Erika's shoulder, and it sounded astonishingly determined.
‘Another Nosey Parker!’
The Lout simulated astonishment.
‘The massed ranks of the F.G.Y.!
Well keep your nose out of this,Comrade , unless you want trouble.’
‘I don't want it,’ Fritz said.
‘But if you insist.’
The Lout hesitated for a moment but then, as the other scooters roared out of the yard, he shrugged and revved his own scooter up.
‘I'll see you again,’ he shouted.
‘Any time,’ Fritz bellowed back as the Lout drove off, tooting his horn derisively.
‘Thanks Fritz,’ Erika said.
‘But there was no need to bother.’
‘It's all right,’ Fritz said.
‘I know that character.
His father is a big shot and he thinks he is, too.
He needed taking down a peg.’
‘I wasn't frightened of him,’ Erika said.
‘I'm sure you weren't.’
‘So.’
Erika shivered a little.
‘So.’
Fritz was solicitous.
‘Better not stand about.’
‘No.’
‘You'll miss your bus.’
‘Yes.’
Slowly, hesitantly, Fritz's hand moved forward and slowly, hesitantly Erika's hand stole forward too and touched it.
‘See you Monday then.’
‘Yes.’
The touch of the hands became the slightest of caresses and then the hands recoiled.
‘Good-night,’ Erika said, and left with a sullen Paul at her heels.
The bus came and they boarded it, but to Erika it seemed less like the familiar old lumbering, lurching, yellow Berlin bus, and more a vehicle of romance, gliding through a night made mysterious by more than fog.
But even these strange raptures were forgotten when they got off and, outside the flats, Erika turned on Paul.
I won't tell about tonight,’ she said.
‘Nothing to tell,’ Paul muttered.
‘Nothing!’
Erika shook her head.
‘What do you think Father and Mother would say if they knew you were even thinking of going off with those kids — and at this time of night!
You're crazy Paul.
Really crazy.’
And so am I, she thought, as she ran up the stairs.
Only Omi was in, and she was ready for bed.
Erika helped her prepare and, when she was safely in bed, sat by her.
‘Will you do something for me tomorrow,Liebchen ?’
Omi asked.
Anything, Omi.
Anything at all.
‘You are sure?’
‘Absolutely.’
Omi sighed.
‘I would like to go to church.
Will you take me?’
‘Certainly.’
Erika tucked in a corner of Omi's duvet.
‘Would you like to go to the Cathedral?
We could do some window shopping, too.’
‘No.
I would like to go into the country.
I know a church in Tappersdorf.
We can go on the S-Bahn .’
‘That would be very nice,’ Erika said.
‘We'll go.
Sleep now.
Good-night.’
Herr and Frau Nordern came home contented after a pleasant evening.
A last drink of coffee was had, and the flat settled down to slumber.
As the owl hooted and the night train called, Erika was already slipping into the state where the real world fades and the dreamworld begins, thinking of Fritz and that last, subtle touch of two hands.
chapter 13
THE NEXT morning Erika helped Omi dress in black, the only colour she considered suitable for Divine Service.
Erika dressed soberly, too, although, in an uncharacteristic act of defiance, she pinned her F.G.Y. badge on to her lapel.
Although not approving of church-going, Herr Nordern offered to drive Omi and Erika to the church but, the day being bright and sunny, the offer was declined.
‘Thank you,’ Omi said, ‘but, really, the fresh air will do me good.’
She smiled.
‘And a trip on the S-Bahn , it is a long time since I had one.’
Across the table Erika looked up thoughtfully from her smoked ham.
With a twinge of conscience it occurred to her that it was not often Omi got out; a rare trip to the theatre or a concert, Wannsee in summer, or Potsdam, but in the winter she was trapped in the flat, passing long, lonely hours looking on to a street where little happened.
‘I'll take her out more,’ Erika thought, and then realised that she might not be around to do so.
Herr Nordern insisted that he should drive Erika and Omi at least to the S-Bahn station and stood with them until the train came, then, shaking his head, he handed Omi into a carriage.
Tappersdorf was a few stops along the line — countrified and still keeping a rural quietness: poplars masked a factory, behind pre-war houses with steeply pitched roofs fields of sprouts stretched away, the sprouts looking oddly sentient as they stood in their patient, frosty queues, waiting to be picked.
Under the inevitable power lines the church looked rural, too: a simple wooden structure with a sharp, narrow steeple prodding at the sky as if to remind God that it was there, its bell clanking as an additional reminder and as a summons to the faithful.
There were a good number of these, the men and women solemn in their Sunday best, although the young people, and there were plenty of those, too, were surprisingly casual, wearing jeans and bright sweaters under their black leather jackets; casual and cheerful, too, in their attitude as they entered the church, calling greetings, and making good-natured jokes, much to Omi's disapproval.
The interior of the church was quite different: bare, bleak and uncompromising, painted white with a black cross standing on a simple table.
If a soul was to meet God there it was without the mediation of stained glass, pictures, images or incense.
It was a building for the speaking, and the hearing, of the word of God — and no distractions allowed.
But bleak though the building might be, the welcome was warm, Elders shaking hands with the congregation, delighted to see two new faces, ushering Omi and Erika to their seats.
Omi not being of the school which sits as far at the back of a church as possible, Erika found herself under the nose of the Minister, who beamed upon her, and surrounded by family groups: parents, grandparents and children who made an agreeable din until a small group of musicians struck up the opening bars of the first hymn.
Erika had been to church before: with Omi, once on her own out of curiosity, and once with the F.G.Y. as a prelude to a discussion on Modern Superstitions.
So the service was not unfamiliar; the readings from the Bible in the magnificent prose of Martin Luther, the prayers, the general confession, the great hymns, sung with unaffected fervour and in which Erika joined (although she was critical of the flautist) both because she liked singing and because it would have hurt Omi had she remained silent.
But in the prayers, although she knelt and bowed her head, her attention was on the people in the church.
How strange, she thought, that such normal, pleasant people could bring themselves to believe in the existence of God.
How extraordinary that people her own age should believe such grotesque, non-scientific ideas as that a man could be resurrected from the dead after, and a horrible thought it was, after being crucified; and how fantastic that they should believe that all the dead would rise from their graves — all of them, those countless millions, millions upon millions, rising from the clay into which they had, long since, dissolved….
She peered sideways at Omi.
Omi's old head was bowed and her gnarled fingers were pressed together in prayer.
Was she praying for resurrection, asking the mysterious, invisible Maker of All Things to hasten the day when she and her dearly loved man would be united again as they had been in those golden days long past?
But if Omi was, then surely she was wrong.
Erika remembered the Watchword Omi had been reading on the day when Karl had come.
The Watchword had read, ‘Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.’
Erika was still not completely sure what the text meant but one thing about it was clear, people had better things to do than to dwell on the past and surely — it came upon Erika in a flash of intuition — surely the State was doing just that: not, of course, leaving the dead unmourned, and certainly not forgetting the evils of Fascism, but moving forward — preaching a socialist gospel — and not merely preaching it, doing it: making a fairer, better, juster Germany.
Yes!
With a mixture of admiration at her own acumen, pride in her country, and affectionate pity for Omi, Erika politely sat upright as the Minister began his sermon.
It was not short.
When the congregation of the Lutheran Church gathered to hear the Word of God expounded, they expected to hear it expounded fully, and the Pastor of Tappersdorf was ready to oblige, not merely comparing the German text for the day — a reference to the doings of an obscure Old Testament prophet — with the original Hebrew, and giving a learned half-hour to an explanation of the circumstances in which the prophet lived, suffered, and prophesied, a time in which it seemed a small group of people struggled for the truth and searched for God under the shadow of huge decadent empires to the East — and the West, but he, the Pastor, was perfectly willing to apply the prophet's message to the present day — and to present-day socialist Germany, at that.
With a little of the guilty excitement of enjoying a forbidden pleasure, Erika began to listen attentively.
‘Of course,’ the Pastor said, ‘of course , the State may properly demand our obedience in many matters: obeying its laws — if the laws are just; making us pay taxes — if the taxes are properly spent; supporting its policies — if the policies are wise.
So far the Church is at one with the State.
But where do we differ, as Micah differed from the priesthood and rulers of his day?
‘It is in this.
In the end a totalitarian state says that everything which exists belongs to it.
The Church says that in the end everything which exists belongs to God.
‘But what is the difference there?
What is the difference between an almighty state and almighty God?
It lies in one simple point.
God has given us complete autonomy, that is self-government, the government of ourselves.
We call that freedom, the freedom to do good — or evil — and we, the Church, say that the choice between good and evil is an individual one.
Of course, if an individual chooses evil then it follows that he must be punished, but he must be punished because he, or she, has deliberately chosen to do evil.
‘That is a terrible gift but it is a precious one.
It belongs to us as individuals regardless of the power of the State or the claims of the State.
And if the State denies us that right of individual choice then, although it might shower us with gifts, it is robbing us of our deepest, profoundest freedom, that upon which all other freedoms depend, and so the State, any State, which denies God's ultimate gift must be opposed.’
The Pastor paused for a moment and looked thoughtfully at his flock and, Erika was convinced, piercingly at her.
‘There is one more point I should like to make.
We are in the season of Advent which, as we know, means the Coming —— the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ — and He, as we know also, was crucified by rulers who set the claims of the State above Him.
But what is the image Advent calls to our minds?
Surely it is of the family of Christ, Father, Mother, and Child.’
The Pastor smiled a little wryly, ‘It is called a unitary family, now, and unitary families are under attack in certain quarters, but the family is at the heart of our religion and our civilisation.
Why?
Because there we find trust and confidence and love.
Every totalitarian state has attacked the family because in that small, loving group they see a threat to the power of the State.
And so, if the State sets its claims against those of the family it must be resisted.’
The Pastor gazed at the bare, raftered ceiling.
‘Of course,’ he said, ‘of course , we are happy to live in a state where no such claims are made.
Amen.’
The final prayers were said, a final hymn sung, and the blessing given.
The congregation stood up and amiably shuffled out, shaking hands as they did so.
At the door the Minister was waiting.
Surrounded by his flock he nonetheless had an eye on Omi and Erika and, although he made no apparent attempt to meet them, Erika and Omi found themselves facing him.
‘Gnädige Frau,’—‘Gracious lady.’
Omi held out a gloved hand in a stately, aristocratic manner.
‘Von Ritter,’ she announced herself.
‘My granddaughter, Erika Nordern.’
‘Ah, a pleasure.’
The Minister shook hands firmly with Erika, his eye resting for a moment on the F.G.Y. badge in her lapel.
We haven't seen you before, Frau von Ritter, Erika.
‘We live in Biesdorf,’ Omi said.
‘I see.
That will be St Mark's.
Pastor Dietrich.’
‘Yes.
But I confess I don't go as often as I might,’ Omi said.
‘My age, and winter.’
‘Ah, winter,’ the Minister's voice had the rueful edge common to Germans when speaking of that season.
‘And Erika?’
He turned to her.
‘Do you go to St Mark's?’
The question was put lightly but, in view of Erika s F.G.Y. badge, there was a certain teasing quality to it.
Somewhat self — consciously, Erika denied going to St Mark's, or any other church.
‘I'm an atheist,’ she said defiantly, although feeling rather foolish for saying so; foolish and a little ashamed with Omi standing next to her.
But the Pastor was undisturbed.
‘An atheist.
Quite.
But you came to our church.’
‘I brought my grandmother,’ Erika said.
‘Yes.’
The Minister smiled.
‘Well, that is a Christian act.
Did you enjoy the service?’
Actually, Erika had enjoyed it; the resonance of the language, the communal singing and the friendly presence of the congregation had a warmth which, she had to admit, the meetings of the F.G.Y. lacked.
as if reading her thoughts the Minister leaned forward a little.
‘We have a youth group.
Why not come along?
You could give a talk — perhaps — on atheism.’
The treacherous red invaded Erika's cheeks.
‘I don't think so.
I'm very busy.
But excuse me, my grandmother, I mustn't keep her in the cold.’
‘No, of course not.’
The Minister was solicitous.
‘One of us will drive you to the station.’
But that offer was declined too, courteous goodbyes were exchanged, and Omi took Erika's arm as they walked back to the S-Bahn .
On the way there was a café, a reasonable sort of place with discreet lace curtains.
Omi squeezed Erika's elbow.
‘Shall we have coffee?
We've done our duty so we can have a little treat.’
Erika was ready for a treat and a moment later, surrounded by a forest of plants which gave the café an Amazonian aspect, they were seated and ordering coffee and cakes.
Omi sighed contentedly as she looked around the room which had a fair smattering of elderly ladies, like herself having a Sunday morning treat.
‘Ah,’ she said, ‘I feel better, so much better.
It is too long since I went to church —’ she broke off as the coffee and cream cakes arrived.
‘Dear me, when I was a child we went to church twice every Sunday.
We girls wore starched white aprons and very uncomfortable they were too.
Not that I approve of the way some of the young people were dressed today.
The Creator deserves our respect.’
She nodded firmly at Erika.
‘But you were dressed properly.
A true von Ritter.’
Erika demurred mildly.
‘I'm a Nordern, Omi.’
‘Yes, a Nordern too.
I don't deny it.’
Omi looked searchingly at Erika.
‘But you take after our line.
You have fine bones and eyes.
The face of an aristocrat.’
‘Omi!’
Erika dissented quite vehemently from this heresy while, despite herself, her eyes were searching for a mirror.
‘You shouldn't say such things.
Besides, those old Junker —’ she was about to say all those Junker but in deference to Omi did not —‘they didn't all look nice.
Some of them were awful.
Take Hindenburg,’ she said, mentioning the last President of the Reich before Hitler took power.
‘Hindenburg.’
Omi waved a dismissive hand.
‘He was middle-class.
All Germany may have worshipped him — but not the von Brombergs.
Do you know, in the first World War, when he was Commander-in-Chief, they put up wooden statues of him in all the towns and you could pay and hammer a nail in it!
It was for war charities but can you imagine anything more barbarous?’
She shook her head then reached across the cakes and patted Erika's hand.
‘But you should not forget your ancestry.
I know that this is Socialist Germany and all are equal, but blood counts —’ she held up her hand as Erika opened her mouth in a scandalised protest.
‘Yes, blood and breeding.’
‘But Omi!’
Erika was truly shocked.
‘That is just what the Nazis said!’
‘Ach!
That scum.’
True contempt showed in Omi's eyes.
‘They talked about the glory of the family and then taught children to inform on their parents.
Wickedness.
Wickedness!
No wonder the Almighty brought his lightning on our heads.
But it is true,Liebchen , ancestry counts, a family line going back 600 years…and I see it in you.’
‘Do you see it in Paul?’
Erika asked, with a toughness which surprised herself.
‘Paul….’
Omi sliced her cake.
‘He takes after his father, doesn't he?
He has inherited…what do they call them?’
‘Genes,’ Erika said.
‘Yes.
He has inherited the Nordern genes.
There is something…crude about him.
It's true, isn't it?’
Omi took a tremulous sip of her coffee.
Erika watched her across the table feeling baffled.
There was genetic inheritance, of course, and Paul was…well…crude, like all boys, but it didn't work the way Omi was suggesting, nothing like it.
The trouble was that she wasn't quite sure how it did work.
She made a mental note to listen more attentively to her lessons in biology and in Marxism, and then, to divert Omi from the views she was expressing, Erika said: ‘Uncle Karl will be back soon, Omi.
Then we can have the party.’
‘Ah, Karl!’
Omi's face lighted up in a vivid smile.
‘My Karl.
It is something to find a brother,Liebchen .’
She stared into her coffee as though it were a pool reflecting the past.
‘He wasn't cruel, really,’ she said, as if defying an invisible accuser.
‘Cruel?’
Erika was astonished.
‘What?’
Omi blinked.
‘Did I say cruel?
Oh.
Well boys are.
I don't know why.
Pulling wings off flies, killing nestlings…
Karl was misunderstood.’
‘I see,’ Erika said, although she didn't see at all.
She felt disturbed; thinking of the gleaming Karl with his polished manners and mannered poise, and of how once he had been a boy.
‘Wild’, Omi had called him the night he arrived, a wild boy, and now another dimension had been added to that figure from long ago: cruelty — a cruel boy….
‘But that was long ago,’ Omi said.
‘Long, long ago.
And soon we shall all meet again for the last time.
All of us who are left….’
‘Omi!’
Erika smiled.
‘You will all meet again, many times.’
‘No.’
Omi was certain.
‘It will be the last time.
We are all growing old and we shall die and be buried.’
‘It's not true,’ Erika said.
‘It is true.’
Omi pushed away her coffee cup.
‘In any case, Karl will go, and then you will go away, too.’
‘No, Omi.’
Erika leaned forward.
‘I shan't be going far — even if I go at all.’
‘But you won't be at home, will you?’
Omi said.
‘You won't be coming home in the evening.
But there, I'm just a selfish old woman, and a foolish one.
You must forgive me, my Dear.
And it is true what your father says…when I think of what it was like after the War, and when I look around now —’ suiting her actions to her words she looked around the café, at the ladies, old and frail, like herself, respectable in black and grey —‘these went through it too,’she said, ‘and look at them, at us, coffee and cake on a Sunday morning.
Perhaps it is a miracle….’
‘You should write it down,’ Erika said.
‘Write your memoirs, all your experiences.’
Omi looked steadily at Erika for a long moment, and looking back into Omi's fine, hooded eyes, Erika sensed for the first time ever, not merely that Omi was an old woman who walked rather slowly, was glad of help in undressing, and who, on days when her arthritis was very bad, needed her meat cutting for her.
She was a woman from an age quite different from Erika's own; separated by a gulf, a measureless chasm of experience distancing them each from the other as surely as though they were beings from two different planets.
Omi crooked a finger for the waitress who offered the bill with subtle deference, and Omi paid it with subtle superiority.
And then Omi tapped the table, once.
‘Write my memoirs?’ she said, and smiled, but such a smile as Erika had never seen on her grandmother's face before: wry, mocking, and, shockingly, cynical.
Then the smile went and the eyes were veiled and Omi rose and said, ‘I don't think anyone would want to hear my memoirs.
Let us go home.’
THE NEXT day or two were ones of mild confusion.
the phone rang constantly as various relatives called from across the G.D.R.
demanding to know the date of the party — which was unanswerable, since no one knew when Karl would be back from Dresden — and either confirming that, anyway, if it was to be on a week-end they would be resent — or not Frau Nordern was annoyed b the refusals but Herr Nordern had a drier view ‘Most of them have hardly heard of Karl,’ he said ‘and anyway it isn't everyone who wants to be seen meeting….
The rest of the remark he left unsaid, but it did not need spelling out.
There were those in the G.D.R.
not unhappy at staying away from a western business man, even though he might be a temporary guest of the State; after all, they were permanent guests and who knew but….
Although indignant at this slur on her relatives, Frau Nordern forgot it as she, Omi, and Erika became absorbed in planning a menu for the party.
Herr Nordern joined in, and even Paul was co-opted although his contribution was less than successful as his views on suitable food seemed to consist only of frankfurter sausages, Cola, and, drawn from a mysterious memory of the dinner in the Palast, champagne.
In addition there was the tension of waiting for news from the Ministry of Sport and despite all Herr Nordern's warnings, based on his own profound experience of bureaucracy, he, as well as the rest of the family, found himself waiting with more than usual interest for the postman's knock.
And Herr Nordern had tensions of his own to cope with.
Despite the assurances of the Director of his Department that he was favourably looked upon, and despite the fact that there was no doubt that at his office he was being treated with a subtle air of respect, nothing formal or official about his promotion had been announced; and as he knew very well, a change of Directorship, a shift in Government economic policy, even a chill wind in international relations, could mean the end of his hopes.
And always, at the back of his mind, there was the business with the Police; a mere shadow, as he repeatedly reminded himself, without substance, but there just the same and often, as he went through Ostkreuz on the S-Bahn , he was tempted to get off and see Lieutenant Werner, merely to get the matter sorted out once and for all but, mindful of Bodo's advice, he never did.
Erika had her own preoccupations, too.
There was, of course, first and absolutely foremost, the need to keep on jumping, and to do so at the very highest level; a need which Fräulein Silber emphasised repeatedly.
‘Remember, Erika,’ she said, ‘you are on the ladder, but only just.
You have to keep showing improvement, and not just in height but in technique.
Your leg is still trailing when you go over the bar.
You must concentrate, wipe out everything from your mind but the leap;everything .
And I hear that a girl in Pankow is breaking 1.80 every time she jumps.’
Erika was not too sure about the girl in Pankow, half suspecting that Fräulein Silber was using her as a means of putting pressure on herself.
That she was lacking a little in concentration was true, but then she had plenty to disturb her concentration: Uncle Karl, Omi s strange remarks about breeding, the coming party, and, of course, and most disturbing of all, Fritz Kott.
And yet what was Fritz to her?
Until a few weeks ago she had been scarcely aware of him except as a friendly and familiar face in class; but now, now she was very much aware of him — and he was very definitely aware of her; much to Erika's embarrassment sitting with her and Rosa at lunch, at the next desk in class, asking her out to the cinema and even, to Erika's amazement and, she suspected, his own, offering to help Paul with his homework — in the Nordern home, that is — an offer declined both by Erika and Paul, although Paul did corner Fritz in school and suggest to him that if he actually did the homework then he, Paul, would further his, Fritz's, courtship of Erika; Paul being shrewd enough to guess the motive behind Fritz's philanthropic gesture even though the square on the hypotenuse might remain a mystery to him.
Rosa gently teased Erika about the vestigial romance but was serious about the advice she gave, that Erika was not, repeat not , to get involved with a boy-friend, especially with the Indoor Championships drawing nearer, and with the Ministry of Sport keeping an eye on her.
It was advice Erika took seriously, distancing herself from Fritz as much as possible and adroitly using Rosa as a shield so that Fritz was forever baulked in his obscure desires.
But still, on the bus going to and from school, on her steady, daily runs in the park, swimming, weight-lifting, doing her exercises, and on those other rare occasions when she was alone and free from the demands of school, State, and family, Erika found herself thinking of Fritz, although what she thought she scarcely knew herself, except that she knew that she blushed when she did so….
However, on the Wednesday, Erika's mind was freed from Fritz because her mother took her out.
‘Meet me at the Centre after school,’ she said, imperiously.
‘I shan't be free until 7.00,’ Erika said.
‘I'll be in the gym.’
‘That's all right,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘But what about supper — for Omi and Paul and Father?’
‘They can look after themselves for once,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Just meet me at 7.00.’
During the day, Erika wondered what her mother wanted her for, but after two hours in the gym she had given up wondering, and, indeed, had forgotten about it.
In fact she was walking to the wrong bus-stop before she did recall it.
Getting to the Health Centre was a tedious business involving a bus and a clanking ride for a few stops on the underground and Erika was glad to find her way to it, jammed among the usual blocks of flats, although at that time of night they had rather a festive air with every window lighted.
Frau Nordern was free when Erika finally penetrated to her room, sitting at her desk behind a mound of reports.
She shook her head at Erika.
‘Some of these women,’ she said.
‘Forty years of socialism, education, propaganda rewards and punishments, and still…
It makes you despair at times.
Let's go.’
Without explaining to where they were going she walked regally from the room swinging her brief-case which, unlike a great many brief-cases on the streets of Berlin, was filled with notes and papers and not stolen goods.
‘One bus,’ she said, as they stood on Lenin Allee.
‘It should be here in a moment.’
as if obeying her the bus did appear and ten minutes later she and Erika were at Frankfurter Allee, a roaring road choked with an army convoy: dozens of lorries, their contents masked by huge tarPaulins.
Frau Nordern did not give the lorries a second glance but dived down a side-street into a rather agreeable square.
‘Here we are,’ she said.
‘Here’ was the Buda, the restaurant where the great party was to be held, a long, low building, part of it pre-war, and with its outside liberally plastered with posters of a vastly hairy Karl Marx.
‘I want to make sure that everything is in order,’ Frau Nordern said, grimly, as they crossed the square.
‘I remember Omi s birthday party.
Erika remembered that, too.
The restaurant had been double booked and when the two parties had met there had been a scene akin to the opening of World War Three until Frau Nordern, at her most imperious, and with the additional, strategic advantage that her husband was a state official and the opposition merely clerks from the Centrum store, cowed the manager and routed the clerks.
It seemed that the manager remembered it plainly, too, because as they entered the restaurant, he came from behind his desk like a bolted rabbit and, before Frau Nordern had time to speak, assured her that everything would be in order if only, his hands out wide, beseechingly, if only the gnädige Frau would give him a date .
The manager was a small Hungarian with the cosmopolitan air restaurateurs have the world over and full of a nervous, twitching charm.
‘Just a little notice, gnädige Frau,’ he begged.
‘I shall have to get extra waiters, order the food, prepare the wine, get musicians —’
‘We have our own musicians,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Oh!’
The manager's face fell as he saw that part of his commission disappear.
‘But still, for the rest….’
‘You'll have plenty of notice,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Now I want to see the room.’
‘Ah, the room.’
A subtle expression crossed the manager's face, almost a mocking smile.
‘But you have seen the room.’
‘Four years ago,’ Frau Nordern said dryly, ‘and it needed cleaning and painting then.
The room!’
‘The room.’
The manager shrugged, as if defeated.
He led them down a small corridor, paused by a door, took out a huge bunch of keys, slowly, and deliberately, unlocked the door, and then, with a dramatic, indeed melodramatic, flourish, flung it open.
‘Voilà !’ he said.
There was a moment's stunned silence then, ‘My word,’ said Frau Nordern.
‘My word!
‘Voilà !’ indeed.’
And ‘voilà ’ was the word, Erika thought.
Her memory of the room had been of a dingy, barrack-like hall with fine plaster swags, marred by the fact that chunks of them had been missing, and they, and the room, not improved by having been painted in a weird mixture of colour: purple, pink, green, ochre, rather like the bike belonging to the old man on the S-Bahn .
The manager leaned against the wall, arms folded, ankles crossed, in a typical hotelier's pose, and enjoyed his sensation.
The plaster work had been restored and gilded so that it glittered against a dazzling white ceiling and against walls hung with crimson wallpaper.
Echoing the ceiling, the woodwork was an immaculate white, picked out with crimson, and the floor had been sanded, showing a beautiful, if chipped, parquet.
‘You like it?’ the manager asked, as if the room had been especially redone for Frau Nordern's sake.
‘I certainly do,’ Frau Nordern answered, as if the room had been done for her.
‘Come.’
The manager crooked a finger and beckoned Frau Nordern and Erika across the room.
He jiggled with a formidable lock on a cupboard and opened it.
‘See!’
The cupboard was stocked with linen, and of the finest quality.
‘For the tables,’ the manager said, somewhat unnecessarily, and, dropping his voice reverentially he murmured, ‘Irish, the finest in the world.’
Frau Nordern fingered the linen with covetous hands.
‘But how…?’
‘Ah,’ the manager smiled wholeheartedly.
‘The combine did well last year — and it was my turn.’
‘So that was it,’ Erika thought.
Like many businesses in the G.D.R.
the Buda was part of a combine, leased from the State by the manager and also part of a co-operative.
And, as was the rest of the country, reflecting a growing prosperity.
‘But the linen,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Ah!’
The manager raised a finger and said, with pride in his voice, ‘The Deputy Mayor gave a party here six months ago.
A private party,’ he gave a swift and completely Eastern European look around the room and, almost imperceptibly, lowered his voice; ‘with some Friends.’
‘Aha!’
Erika thought.
That was it.
A prominent man, Friends — Russians in other words — and so skilled men, wallpaper, paint, gold leaf — and fine linen instantly available; she smiled as she wondered whether Bodo had had a hand in it.
Quite likely he had.
‘So,’ the manager locked, and double locked the cupboard, led the way from the room, locked and double locked that door too, and took the Norderns into the restaurant bar.
He pulled out two chairs from a table, brushed a table-cloth of distinctly inferior quality, insisted that Frau Nordern and Erika sit down, and, overriding their feeble protests, treated them to drinks, a large Bulgarian wine for Frau Nordern and a Club Cola for Erika.
‘Sit,’ the manager said, ‘enjoy your drinks, think about your menu, but remember, gnädige Frau,notice , please.’
Rather more docile than when she had entered, Frau Nordern agreed that she would give notice, ample notice, more than enough notice to make sure that they had the room and raised her glass in salute as the manager beamed on Erika and then withdrew to welcome the first of his evening guests, stout, prosperous looking men in heavy dark suits: officials, with their wives.
‘Well, well,’ Frau Nordern sipped her wine.
‘What a surprise.
Nice, isn't it?’
It was, Erika agreed, much nicer than the Palast, as a matter of fact.
She liked the Hungarian manager with his charm and evident desire to please, his pride in his dining-room and linen and his unabashed pleasure at their pleasure; so unlike the haughty anonymity of the Palast.
‘So, the Deputy Mayor had a party in that very room!’
Frau Nordern glanced at a menu, ‘And the prices have hardly gone up at all.’
She fished in her brief-case and, to Erika's amazement took out a packet of cigarettes.
‘Oh yes,’ she said, ‘I do sometimes, especially after a day like I've had.
No need to mention it to Father, though.’
Erika shook her head, hypnotised by the sight of her mother smoking.
‘We really must find out when Karl is coming back,’ Frau Nordern went on.
‘I don't want to miss getting that room.
We'll put flowers in it, bouquets…
Omi will be so proud and happy.’
She half-smiled.
‘She still hankers after the Adlon.’
She tapped the ash off her cigarette and looked around the restaurant.
More people had come in, well-dressed men and women, shedding vast overcoats, ordering wine, food, lighting cigars…a violinist, young, blonde, blue eyed, dressed improbably as a gipsy woman was playing a tzigane, accompanied by a pianist dressed even more improbably as a gipsy man.
‘Ah,’ Frau Nordern sighed, ‘it will be nice when Hans gets his promotion.
We'll be able to get out more, come to places like this.
And get another flat, bigger, although you'll be away — no, Erika,’ brushing aside any protest, ‘Hans is sure you'll go, but another room will be so good.
A room of my own, to have some privacy….’
Privacy; Erika longed for it herself, often, but it occurred to her, for the first time, that her mother might long for it, too, might want it and, indeed,need it, and it dawned on her, also for the first time, that her mother had never had any privacy since the end of the War; that all her life since then she had lived in small apartments, actually in one small room for long periods, and sharing even that room with others….
Her mother was leaning back, her head tilted, a faint flush from the wine tinting her cheeks, the tilt of her head drawing the flesh from her chin and jaw, making her look young, younger than her years, and handsome, and, Erika suddenly realised, her eyes were of an exquisite forget-me-not blue.
Erika looked away, puzzled.
Across the room a young man, eating on his own, was looking at her mother, and not innocently, either.
‘Mother!’
Erika whispered.
‘That man, that man over there.
He's staring at you.’
‘Hmm?’
It took a moment for Erika's words to sink in.
Frau Nordern blew out a voluptuous stream of smoke and looked at the man who suddenly became extremely interested in his herring Bismarck.
‘He's quite good-looking,’ Frau Nordern said.
The blue eyes turned on Erika like searchlights.
‘Just an observation.
An objective judgement.’
She took a drink of her wine, and then, disconcertingly, asked, ‘What's all this about a boyfriend?’
The blood rushed to Erika's face.
‘What?’
And then, with a flash of temper, ‘Has Paul been telling stupid tales?’
Frau Nordern raised a shoulder.
‘He didn't need to.
You've been mooning about for a few weeks,’ she chuckled, ruefully.
‘I'm not blind, you know.’
‘It's nothing,’ Erika said.
‘Anyway, I haven't got a boyfriend.’
‘All right,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Just don't go getting involved with some spotty adolescent.
Not now at any rate, you've got too much at stake.’
She gazed into her glass.
‘I'm going to have another drink.
It's so nice in here, not worrying about other people, or getting supper, or anything.
And sitting with you.
It's a long time since we did that.’
It had been more than a long time, Erika reflected.
In fact she had never sat in a restaurant alone with her mother.
They had taken an occasional coffee together after shopping, but this was a new experience.
Totally new.
And it was new seeing her mother leaning back with a drink and a cigarette, looking years younger than her age; and she herself felt different, older, suddenly, if older was the word she wanted.
But how strange it was, the changes which the past two or three weeks had brought: not merely the changes of circumstances; her father and his hoped for promotion, herself going to the Stadium, Omi talking about herself, Fritz…but the whole relationship inside the family had altered, and she herself had changed, and it had begun with the arrival of Uncle Karl, as if he were a sorcerer, a wave of whose manicured hands could transform life, as alchemists thought they could transform base metal into gold or, with a certain sinister frisson , perhaps the other way around.
But that was not a pleasant thought and Erika firmly pushed it away, thinking of movement from a lower to a higher stage of development, as Marx taught, and such as was taking place now, she and her mother sitting together, no longer like mother and daughter, teacher and child, but more like sisters.
Frau Nordern's drink came.
She lighted another cigarette.
‘Have a glass of wine,’ she said.
She waved away Erika's protest that she was in strict training.
‘A glass of light wine won't kill you,’ she said.
‘Anyway, you'll have enough strict training where you're going.’
Sisterlike or not, Frau Nordern's word was enough and Erika found herself with a glass of light Hungarian wine and enjoying it, too.
Frau Nordern tapped ash from another cigarette into her ashtray.
‘You're sure you want to go?’
‘Go?’
Erika blinked.
‘We've just —’ she gestured at the drinks.
‘Go to the special sports school,’ her mother said, a little testily.
‘We are all excited about it, but you don't have to go if you don't want to.
Remember that.
I don't want you going just because you think that it will please us — Hans and me.
It will mean giving up a lot, you know.’
‘I thought that you wanted me to go,’ Erika said.
‘I do,’ Frau Nordern toyed with her glass.
‘But sometimes I wonder why.
You know, most parents want their children to do things, do this, do that, make money, become famous, have a better house…car…although, actually, there are plenty who want the opposite — yes, that's true, some are jealous, full of hate — I see it at work — but you…
I want you to go because you want to go.
It will mean giving up a lot and —’ she gave the ghost of a smile —‘I know what that means.
I missed a lot when I was your age.’
Yes, Erika knew that.
Her mother had missed a lot; a refugee on that terrible trek with Omi, the bleak years in a ruined city in a ruined country, the children coming late, work again….
‘I'm sorry, Mother,’ she said.
Frau Nordern waved smoke from her eyes, waved away the past.
‘I'm not complaining,’ she said.
‘I was lucky.
Your father was always good to me, and his uncle.
Better than we deserved.
What were we to them?’
She veiled her eyes in a startling evocation of Omi.
‘It wasn't what you might think.
Women outnumbered men in those days, you know.
The men were buried between here and…’ she drew an invisible line with her fingers, as if sketching the road from Berlin to Stalingrad, Bonn to El Alamein, Stuttgart to Normandy.
‘Yes, always good, to me and Omi, even in the rubble times.
That's why I stayed — here I mean.’
Emboldened by her glass of wine, and by this new found intimacy, Erika asked, ‘Mother, are you glad you stayed?’
‘Glad?’
Frau Nordern pushed her glass a little.
‘What does that mean?
If we had gone to the West, then what?
I might have had a different man, a bigger apartment, a bigger car, travel that way instead of this.
But things would have been much the same.
They are really.
People live their lives…somehow….’
She looked up, the blue searchlights glowing.
‘I would have had different children.
You and Paul might never have existed.
that's a strange thought, isn't it?
But here you are, and here I am, and I wouldn't have that different,Liebchen .
But Omi…
I don't know.
I think that she might have gone.
Does she ever speak about it to you?’
Erika shook her head.
‘Never a word.’
‘She wouldn't.
She has honour.
Give the old Junker that.’
Erika was shocked.
‘Mother,’ she said, ‘the Junker put Hitler in power.’
‘Yes, they did,’ Frau Nordern agreed.
‘Some of them.
Some of them tried to blow him up, too.
And they paid for it.’
That was true, Erika admitted: the July Plot in 1944 when a group of officers, aristocrats to a man, had tried to assassinate Hitler and been caught and hanged with piano wire — and filmed being hanged — and the film shown at Hitler's headquarters as after dinner entertainment….
‘One of them was a relative of yours,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘You didn't know that, did you?
A second cousin.
And there were Junker and Junker .
The Brombergs and the Ritters, they were always Christians, very devout, God-fearing….’
‘Were you one, a Christian?’
In the warm intimacy of the café Erika felt emboldened to ask such a question.
‘I was brought up as one,’ Frau Nordern said, ‘but after 1945…a God who would allow that to happen…that's what I mean about Omi's honour.
She gave her word to God when she was confirmed and she kept it.
Just as she gave her word to Hans.’
‘Gave her word?’
Erika was intensely interested.
‘Oh, not formally.’
Frau Nordern toyed with her wine.
‘No oath-taking on a Bible or anything like that, but there was an understanding.’
‘An understanding?’
‘Yes.
You know your father.
Working class, a socialist through thick and thin, and us.
Two worlds, really.
It could have been difficult.
So the past was forgotten.
Wiped out.
Our past I mean.
Even Father.’
For a moment Erika was at a loss as to whom her mother was talking about, then it dawned on her.
‘You mean your father.’
‘Who else?
Of course I hardly knew him.
I've forgotten him, actually.’
Yes, but Omi hadn't, Erika thought, she had not forgotten that handsome officer who had courted her all those inconceivable years ago.
‘I'm a bit worried about Omi,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Worried?’
‘Yes, she seems, I don't know, a little withdrawn just now.
Have you noticed?’
Erika put her chin on her hand.
‘Yes,’ she admitted.
Omi had been rather silent, in the flat at any rate, although….
‘She talked when we went to church,’ Erika said.
‘Oh, what about?’
Erika shrugged.
‘Family, breeding.’
Frau Nordern glanced at her watch but seemed in no hurry to move.
‘I suppose that's because of Karl coming back.
It must have stirred up some memories for her, days of wine and roses, eh?
No matter how deep it's buried, the past, back it comes, like ghosts, really.
This is a city of ghosts.’
Erika looked up, startled.
What a strange remark that was, coming from her mother who always seemed so practical and matter-of-fact.
Frau Nordern did not miss Erika's surprise.
She took another sip of wine and smiled crookedly.
‘It is.
Everyone here is haunted one way or another.
The things that were done, the dead…strange isn't it, all those Germans killed by the Russians, Germans killed by Germans.
Ach, it's best forgotten.
It only leads to rows — like the other night.’
‘But we can't forget everything, Mother.’
Erika dutifully echoed the lessons of school.
‘We have to learn from the past.’
‘I suppose so.’
Frau Nordern rose.
‘Anyway,’ she returned abruptly to the affairs of the practical world.
‘We must find out when Karl is coming back so we can book the room.
I don't want to miss that.
Have you enjoyed it?
Being out?’
Yes, Erika had enjoyed it, very much so; the proud little manager, looking at the other guests, the intimacy of the talk with her mother, and, knowing her mother's pride in her children, she had been touched by her concern about the special sports school.
That thought in particular kept her warm as they left the restaurant for the bitter streets of the city.
Herr Nordern was a little grumpy when they got home.
Steinmark was still absent and he, Nordern, was doing two men's work which annoyed him, particularly as he wanted to give the best possible impression of himself during the next few weeks.
He welcomed his wife and Erika briefly, said that as he had prepared the meal he was not going to wash up, and retreated into his bedroom.
Frau Nordern and Erika ate, fussed over by Omi.
Paul was dragged from his retreat to wash up, a little work was done, and then, as the family prepared for bed, the phone rang.
Frau Nordern threw her hands in the air.
‘Always the same.
You either sit down for a meal or get ready for bed and the phone goes.’
‘I'll get it.’
Erika picked up the phone and through a barrage of crackles heard a smooth voice.
‘Uncle Karl,’ she said, handing the receiver to her mother.
Frau Nordern snatched at it.
‘Karl?
Speak up, I can't hear you.
The usual G.D.R.
telephone conversation took place, as if two deaf people were talking to each other on a rowdy main road, but fragments of conversation filtered through as Frau Nordern repeated what Karl, presumably, was saying.
‘Ah!…
Good…yes, well…coming back!…
What?…
When?
Yes…
YES….’
Frau Nordern beckoned Omi.
‘He'll want to talk to you.’
Omi picked up the phone, said ‘Karl’ a couple of times, then frowned at Frau Nordern.
‘I can't hear anything.’
Frau Nordern took the phone again, bellowed ‘Karl!’ several decibels louder than Omi, shook the phone as if it were a recalcitrant child, listened again, then put it down.
‘Cut off,’ she said.
‘Never mind.
It's all right.
He's finished in Dresden and he's coming back tomorrow.’
Omi's eyes glowed but Frau Nordern raised a warning finger.
‘He may not be able to get round immediately, but he'll let us know as soon as he can.
So, now we can really get on with the party.
Actually, I'll be glad to get it over with.
It's so unsettling.’
The Norderns went to their beds.
As ever, Erika peered through her window for a moment or two.
The sky was clear and glittering with icy stars.
A police car went past, the Dresden train, punctual to the minute, its klaxon, muted by distance, sounding a friendly, human signal.
The owl hooted in the beech tree and, to Erika's deep delight, it was answered by another owl.
Erika smiled, glad to know that her owl had company.
She gently turned Omi's pillow to stop her mild snoring and then drifted off into her own dreamless sleep.
THE NEXT morning was bustle with herr Nordern still a little grumpy.
‘Didn't sleep well,’ he said, mildly apologetic, snatching a bite of bread and cheese, gulping a cup of coffee standing before nodding curtly and dashing out into a freezing morning.
Herr Nordern's temper wasn't improved when, having caught the S-Bahn , he realised that he had left his book of tickets in his other Jacket.
He was strongly tempted to stay on the train and take his chance but remembering the man he had seen the Railway Police arrest he got off at Lichtenberg and bought a ticket at the machine.
He was cutting his journey fine and it was only by actually jogging from Friedrichstrasse, and feeling a fool for doing so, apart from almost breaking his neck by slipping on the icy pavement, that he arrived at his office before the ominous red line was drawn.
Consequently he was in a ferocious temper when he got into his room and saw a mound of mail on his desk, half of which was addressed to Steinmark.
‘Steinmark!’ he exploded.
‘Herr Nordern to attend to this — and this — and this —!’
He scattered the letters across his desk.
‘What the devil is he up to in Dresden?
A few archives to look into.
He's been there for weeks and I could have done the whole thing in a couple of days.
I know what he's doing —’ answering himself —‘skiving off!
And what's the matter with you?’
He looked sternly at Herr Müller who had an odd expression.
‘You've not heard then?’
Müller asked.
‘About him?’
‘About who?’
Herr Nordern was testy.
‘Steinmark,’ Müller said.
‘He's dead.’
‘Dead?’
Herr Nordern was astounded.
‘Dead?
That's impossible.
He's as healthy as you or me.’
‘Was,’ Müller said.
‘But he's dead all the same.’
Herr Nordern sat down heavily.
‘It's…
I mean…that's incredible.
What happened?’
Müller shook his head.
‘They say it was an accident.
Someone said he was hit by a train.’
‘A train!’
Nordern stared at the mail, dumbfounded.
‘How in God's name could that happen?’
Müller shrugged.
‘I don't know.
That's all I've heard.’
‘But it's….’
Herr Nordern groped for words as he stared at the envelopes with Steinmark written across them.
‘It's fantastic.
I mean, how?’
‘Your guess is as good as mine,’ Müller said.
‘Well,’ Nordern fished out a cigar.
‘I'll be honest, I never liked the man but —’ he lit his cigar.
‘I suppose that we'll get the details in time.’
‘I hope we get a replacement,’ Müller said heartlessly as they settled down to work.
At 10.30 Herr Nordern's phone rang.
Herr Nagel, the Section Head, wished to see him.
‘Come in, come in,’ Nagel said as Nordern rapped on his door.
‘Take a seat.
You have heard of this business about Steinmark?’
‘Yes,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘Terrible.
Müller says he was hit by a train!’
Nagel was exasperated.
‘I don't know how these things get around, but that's quite correct.’
He flicked a finger against the palm of his hand.
‘He was badly…well…mangled.’
‘But how on earth can you get hit by a train?’
Herr Nordern said.
‘A child, yes, but a grown man!
If it was a car…but a train!’
Nagel flicked his palm more vigorously then placed his hands on his desk.
‘It seems….’
He hesitated for a moment and lowered his voice….
‘It seems that there are some, well, some low drinking dens on the other side of the tracks.
It also seems that our Herr Steinmark had some…some degraded habits.
He had been going there, to that area and…
I don't need to spell it out for you but the assumption is that he was going back drunk and got hit.
That information is for you only.
Understood?’
‘Of course,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘Yes.’
Nagel nodded.
‘I must say it makes you wonder what the Security Police are up to not knowing that — and Steinmark working with secret archives.’
He stared bleakly over Herr Nordern's head.
‘I dare say that there will be some questions asked.’
‘I'll bet there will be,’ Herr Nordern thought.
There would be some uneasy heads lying on their pillows that night.
‘Did you know anything about him?’
Nagel asked.
‘No.’
Herr Nordern was emphatic.
‘I never saw him outside work — apart from Union meetings.’
‘I know,’ Nagel agreed.
‘These middle-aged bachelors…anyway, don't be surprised if Security want a word with you.
But still, we have to think about our own work.
I was hoping that Steinmark would be back on Monday but I'm afraid that you will have to carry on the best you can.
I'll find a replacement as soon as possible.
If there is anyone you would like to recommend let me know.
And keep an eye on young Müller.’
‘Müller is all right,’ Nordern said, a little surprised at his own warmth.
‘I'm sure he is, but these young men….
Anyway, carry on and let me know if there are any real difficulties.
Sorry you are going to be burdened, but there it is.
Now, about these figures for the meeting next week….’
The talk drifted off into technicalities for a while, and then, those disposed of, Nagel told Herr Nordern that he could go.
‘But keep this business about Steinmark under your hat,’ he said.
‘Oh, and perhaps as senior man you might like to arrange something for his funeral, a wreath, represent the Section, that sort of thing.
If you would?’
Herr Nordern would, yes, although he would no more have refused than he would have tried to jump over the Wall.
He went back to his office, made some sharp remarks to a surprised, and hurt, Müller about sloppy work, worked himself, then went to the canteen for his lunch.
The canteen, a gloomy area in the basement, was buzzing with talk about Steinmark.
Herr Nordern was quizzed by the entire staff but stoically maintained that he knew no more than anyone else.
But as he attacked his potato salad Herr Nordern felt exultation.
Not, of course, at Steinmark's death, but at how Nagel had confided in him and how, quite explicitly, responsibility for the sub-section had been handed to himself.
Both were signs that he was, indeed, marked for promotion.
It was hard luck on Steinmark, that went without saying, but if the man had been lurking in disreputable quarters and lurching home drunk, it was his own fault.
All that now remained was to get the next couple of weeks over — have the party, get Karl away, see Erika settled, get the business of the accident cleared up and then, although he did not normally think in melodramatic terms — then the future!
He finished his lunch, went back to his office, gave a bemused Müller a stern warning about the standards expected from state officials, buckled into a solid afternoon's work and, when the working day was over, carried a bulging briefcase home.
He opened the familiar door, giving the aluminium plate a rub with his sleeve, but in the tiny vestibule he paused.
A smell, rich, savoury, and unfamiliar was drifting from the flat.
He raised his eyebrows and pushed into the sitting-room.
There, with the rest of the family, drinking whisky, smooth, dapper, silver hair gleaming, face glowing, teeth shining, was Uncle Karl.
‘My dear fellow!’
As glossy as a fashion-plate, Karl jumped up, grasped Herr Nordern's hand, and beamed into his face.
‘What a pleasure to see you again.
I know that it has only been a couple of weeks but my word, it does seem longer, and so much has happened to you, hasn't it?
I know because I called around early and took my sister out for tea.
You don't mind, do you?’
‘Of course not.’
Herr Nordern was a trifle brusque, not only because he did mind Karl being in his flat at dinner-time, but also because he found his florid manners irritating.
‘And,’ Karl flourished a whisky bottle.
‘May I tempt you?’
‘Of course you may,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Have a drink Hans — and can you smell that?
Karl brought a saddle of venison.’
‘Thank you.’
Herr Nordern nodded to Karl, took the whisky, and then felt bound to be agreeable.
‘How was Dresden?
A successful trip?’
Karl smiled.
‘Oh yes.
Yes.
I think that I can say it was.’
‘I'm glad to hear it.’
Herr Nordern slumped on a chair.
‘Oddly enough, I had some news from Dresden today.’
He looked across at Frau Nordern.
‘Steinmark is dead.’
He told the details to an incredulous audience, although tactfully leaving out the part about Steinmark's base habits, merely suggesting that he had probably been taking a short cut across the line.
‘Well,’ Frau Nordern shook her head.
‘People will do that.
You see the children at the S-Bahn here.
They just will not go over the bridge.’
She frowned at Paul who affected an air of exaggerated innocence.
‘But Steinmark!
You never know, do you?’
‘Still, it helps my promotion along,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘Are you all right?’
He turned to Karl who had spluttered into his drink.
‘Yes.
Yes.
Quite all right.’
Karl dabbed his mouth with one of his beautiful handkerchiefs.
‘Drink went down the wrong way.’
He poured himself more whisky, pressing Herr Nordern to have another, too, and saying that he was leading the Norderns into bad ways but that they must forgive him as it wasn't very often they saw him, ha! ha! and Herr Nordern, while not prepared to accept that he was led by anyone except the leaders of his country, took the whisky, thinking, what the devil, he had worked like a dog all day, and it was true, Karl would not be with them much longer and they would probably never see him again and, he had to confess, he wouldn't mind if he never saw him again as long as either of them lived.
And it was excellent whisky.
‘We've been working out the date for the party,’ Frau Nordern said, producing an enormous desk diary.
‘It will have to be a week on Saturday.’
‘Why so late?’
Herr Nordern asked.
‘I would have thought Karl wants to get away before then.’
‘Erika.’
Frau Nordern said firmly.
‘She can't be going off to a big party before the Championship.
She has to go into very strict training for the week before, and a week on Saturday means we can have the party on the evening after the Championship.’
‘That suit you Karl?’
Herr Nordern said.
‘Well,’ Karl smiled, ‘I would have preferred to go sooner but yes I can stay.
A little more business, and maybe some sightseeing.
It occurred to me that perhaps I could invite Erika and Paul out for lunch.’
‘That is nice,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘And Erika might show you some sights.’
‘Ah, sights.’
Karl nodded.
‘I have seen a few, you know, ha! ha! but yes, that would be excellent.
A little sightseeing with a pretty girl — but you are sure it would not be inconvenient, Erika?
It wouldn't interrupt your training?’
No, lunch and a little sightseeing would not interrupt Erika's training or, Paul eagerly assured everyone, his homework.
‘It will be a great event, the party,’ Karl said.
‘A rare meeting, and you, dear sister,’ he turned to Omi, ‘will be at the head of the table with me!’
‘Speaking of which,’ Herr Nordern, while quite happy to lounge back with a good cigar and a glass of whisky, was also ready for his meal.
Reading his thought Frau Nordern stood up.
‘All right, Hans.
It should be ready now.’
The table was laid, the saddle of venison made its appearance, from his cornucopia Karl produced excellent wine, the venison was carved, toasts exchanged, and then there was a vigorous knock on the door.
‘Now who can that be,’ Frau Nordern said, exasperated.
‘Go and see, Paul, and tell them that we're busy.’
Paul went, but the caller was not to be turned away.
On the contrary he strode in, rubbing his hands and making it clear that he, too, would like a piece of venison, and he being Bodo it was not really possible to refuse him.
‘Let me introduce you,’ Herr Nordern said, resigned to his fate.
‘My brother Bodo — Uncle Karl.’
Erika watched the meeting of the men with interest.
Bodo, big in his brown overalls, holding out a large, square, calloused hand with broken finger-nails and taking Karl's white hand firmly but, Erika noticed, not squeezing hard.
A surprisingly delicate gesture for such an apparently rough man.
‘Well, I'm glad to meet you,’ Bodo said.
‘Of course, I've heard all about you.’
‘And I have heard about you.’
Karl flashed his charming smile.
‘My dear sister was talking about you only today at tea.
A builder!
A splendid profession; to make homes for people, build new cities, really, a modern hero!’
He chattered on in his easy way to a somewhat sceptical family who were not accustomed to thinking of Bodo in this new and totally unexpected light.
Bodo himself said little, tucking into the venison but, Erika noticed, he kept a sharp and shrewd eye on Karl.
Inevitably, over supper, the conversation turned on Karl.
Bodo asked about the building trade in West Germany, Herr Nordern about economic planning, Frau Nordern was curious about the social welfare services, and Paul asked about rock and roll, about which Karl modestly denied all knowledge.
‘The Merry Widow is more my taste, and my sister's, too.
Is that not so?’
Turning to Omi, skilfully bringing her into the conversation, and complimenting her on the way the venison had been cooked.
‘But of course we know something about it, don't we?’
He addressed himself to Bodo.
‘Forgive me for saying so but in East Prussia — Poland, I should say!— we had our pick of game.
Deer, wild boar, so we can claim to be connoisseurs.
Although I must say it is difficult to find a butcher now who understands how to hang meat, dear me, yes….’
The talk drifted away to food, shortages of in the G.D.R.
stoutly denied by Herr Nordern, strange gluts of — equally stoutly defended by him, memorable meals of the past, the coming party, and, although Omi barely spoke a word, sitting silently, merely picking at her meal, Karl kept up a lively alert manner which belied his years.
Supper over, Paul, with astonishing docility, took the plates away and Karl produced brandy, the very best French cognac, and a little was sipped over coffee.
‘I do hope that you don't mind, Bodo,’ Karl said.
‘This is not in any way meant to be a slight on the excellent brandy one gets here.’
‘It's about ten times better,’ Bodo said bluntly and cheerfully, swigging his glassful and accepting another.
‘Aha!
I see that you are not afraid to speak your mind,’ Karl said.
‘I do like that in a man — openness and frankness.
I've always found it paid, in the Army and in business.
Tell the truth and shame the Devil, as they say, ha! ha!’
And that, Erika thought, was a curious remark for Karl to make, bearing in mind that he had lived a lie for many years but, glancing at her parents, and they not batting an eyelash, she kept quiet.
‘Yes.’
Bodo answered Karl, rolling a cigar in his blunt fingers and sounding profoundly sincere.
‘That's what they say, right enough.
By the way, Hans, did you hear any more from Ostkreuz?’
‘Ostkreuz?’
Herr Nordern blinked.
‘Yes, the cops.’
‘The Police?’
Karl interrupted, his eyes bright and penetrating.
‘Oh,’ Herr Nordern was dismissive.
‘Nothing, nothing at all.
A case of mistaken identity.’
He explained briefly what had happened and added, untruthfully, that the Police had been friendly, helpful, and understanding.
‘It is odd though,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Two accidents in just a few days.’
‘I suppose so.’
Herr Nordern told Bodo about Steinmark.
‘And I was in Dresden only last night,’ Karl said.
‘A most unpleasant coincidence.
I'm only — I won't say glad , no, that would be quite the wrong word, but, shall I say relieved , that it happened last night.’
‘Why is that?’
Bodo asked, casually.
‘My dear chap!’
Karl leaned forward and tapped Bodo on his knee.
‘I might have been on the train that hit him!
What a ghastly thought!
Thank goodness that I came back this morning.’
‘Right.’
Bodo said.
‘But I hope that there weren't any well-dressed men wandering around the railway line in Dresden last night.’
A little of Karl's immaculate poise slipped.
He stared into his brandy and then, rather sourly for such a charming man, said, ‘I'm afraid that I don't quite follow you, Bodo.’
‘I was thinking of Hans and the car accident,’ Bodo said, quite unruffled.
‘Some idiot might have seen a well-dressed elderly gent near the railway line and then you could have been questioned.’
‘Oh, now I see!’
The cloud lifted from Karl's face.
‘Of course, I understand.
Foul play suspected, mistaken identity, a wrongful arrest!
My word, Bodo, I really think that you are in the wrong profession.
You ought to be writing detective stories!’
He laughed in his merry way.
‘But I was tucked up in bed early — not difficult in Dresden you know, they don't have West German television down there — oh!
Perhaps I should not have said that.’
‘Why not,’ Bodo said.
‘Idiots' alley, we call it.
Just because of that.’
‘Do you indeed?’
Karl was slightly disapproving.
‘Forgive me, but as a guest of your Government I…well, I'm sure that you understand.’
He glanced at his watch.
‘But really, I ought to be tucked up in bed now.
At my age…and I have ordered a taxi….’
Karl was muffled up in his luxurious overcoat.
He kissed Frau Nordern, Erika, and Omi, holding her firmly but gently, and staring into her old eyes, and saying, Do remember our little chat this afternoon, dear sister,’ and she, her eyes moist, like a well refilling after a drought, promised that she would.
A peek through the window showed that the taxi had arrived, brief farewells were made to the men, and Karl left, promising to ring them the next day and making mock threats to Erika and Paul should they forget to meet him the following Sunday.
‘as if you would,’ Frau Nordern said to Paul as the door closed on Karl.
‘But you would forget your homework.
Do it now.’
‘Homework,’ Herr Nordern said with more sympathy than he would normally have allowed himself.
‘I've plenty to do myself.’
‘Understood.’
Bodo was sympathetic.
‘I'll be off in a minute.’
He helped himself to another brandy and waved the bottle before Herr Nordern's eyes.
‘Oh, very well,’ Herr Nordern had a nip and, as Erika volunteered to wash up, Frau Nordern, not to be outdone, had one also, and, coaxed by the family, Omi had a thimbleful too.
‘So,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘What do you think of Karl, Bodo.
Isn't he a gentleman?’
‘I suppose so,’ Bodo said.
‘I don't know the type so I can't tell.
Don't mix with nobs much.
Well-dressed though, and I wouldn't mind having his watch.’
Omi tutted censoriously but Frau Nordern was more open in her disapproval.
‘Really Bodo, don't you think of anything but…but things and money.’
‘No.’
Bodo, gap-toothed, grinned.
‘But I was thinking about Steinmark.
Just shows, doesn't it?’
‘Shows what?’
Frau Nordern demanded.
‘Oh, just that you can never tell.
Put the right clothes on someone and everyone judges them by their appearance.
Dark-blue suit, black hat, respectable official — like Hans — or Steinmark.
Smart grey suit, business man; brown overalls — a thick head.
All right!
I'm joking.
And I'm off.’
He stood up, shrugging his broad shoulders into a thick sheepskin jacket.
‘So, good-night all.
See you at the party if not before.
Omi, you know how to cook venison.
He edged around the sofa and banged on Paul's door.
‘Keep up the homework,’ he shouted.
‘Get good marks and I'll give you a terrific record.
Erika —’ calling through the plastic ivy.
‘Don't forget, I'm taking you to the Stadt Berlin.
See me out Hans.’
Herr Nordern followed Bodo into the vestibule and on to the landing.
‘Close the door,’ Bodo muttered.
‘What?’
‘The door.’
Bodo put out a large hand and pulled the door to.
‘Come down to the bar with me,’ he said.
‘The bar?’
Herr Nordern could not believe his ears.
‘At this time of night?’
‘There's one by the S-Bahn ,’ Bodo said.
‘Come on.
I mean it.’
‘Bodo!’
Herr Nordern sighed hugely.
‘I want to talk to you,’ Bodo said.
‘What about?’
Herr Nordern was incredulous.
‘I can't tell you here,’ Bodo muttered, with more than a touch of impatience.
‘It's important.
But if you don't want to hear it…’ he made as if to go but Herr Nordern took him by the elbow.
‘Is it really important?’
‘It's why I came round,’ Bodo said.
‘But…
’ Herr Nordern stared for a moment into Bodo's steady brown eyes.
‘All right,’ he said.
‘Just a minute.’
He went back into the flat, grabbed his coat, told an astonished Frau Nordern that he was going out for a moment and, without waiting for any protests, dashed out and joined Bodo at the foot of the stairs.
The bar was crowded with men coming off shift from the electronics factory all arguing heatedly about a disputed penalty in a soccer match being shown on a T.V. set above the counter, the fact that the match had taken place two months before in no way diminishing the fervour of the argument.
Bodo and Herr Nordern found a table in a back room.
Ignoring his brother's plea that he didn't want any, Bodo ordered beer.
‘Well?’
Herr Nordern demanded.
Bodo held up a warning finger.
‘Wait for the beer,’ he said, and while they waited exchanged jovial insults with the men at the counter.
‘You know the men in here, too, do you?’
Herr Nordern asked.
‘Some of them.’
Bodo pointed to a seedy-looking character.
‘He got you those spark plugs.’
He chortled as Herr Nordern shuddered, and laughed again as the waitress, a stout fifty year old, brought the beer and refused his offer to take her for a sensuous holiday in Siberia.
‘I thought that you said this was an important matter,’ Herr Nordern snapped.
‘I didn't come here for a boozy evening.’
Bodo took a long mouthful of beer.
‘It is,’ he said.
‘It is important.
Believe me.’
‘Well?’
Bodo lowered his glass.
‘Have you heard any more from the cops, about that accident?’
Herr Nordern felt a flicker of alarm.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Not at all.
Why, have you heard anything?’
‘Well….’
Bodo waved his hand and ordered more beer.
‘Speak normally,’ he said.
‘Don't shout, but don't whisper, either.’
Herr Nordern was aghast.
‘You mean someone might be listening!’
‘You never know.’
Bodo asked the waitress if she would take the romantic lead in a film he claimed to be making and when she had gone, said, ‘I don't think so, but you never know, do you?
It's one of the advantages of a bar, they can't bug them all.
Still….’ he paused and lit a cigarette.
He waved out the match, gazed at it thoughtfully for a moment, dropped it into the ashtray and then looked at Herr Nordern.
It was a hard, uncompromising look, like a prize-fighter weighing up an opponent.
‘Listen, Hans,’ he said.
‘You've not done anything wrong, have you?’
‘Wrong?
Me?’
Herr Nordern's voice quivered with indignation.
‘What wrong could I have done?’
‘Dunno,’ Bodo said.
He suddenly stood up.
‘Back in a minute.’
He strode to the counter and began talking earnestly with a burly man dressed in white house-painter's overalls.
Herr Nordern gulped his beer and drummed his fingers on the table.
He was sweating, and not just because of the stuffiness of the room.
He fished out a cigar and lighted it with fingers which were trembling.
Despite everything he had drunk already that night he badly wanted a brandy — and a large one at that.
And as Bodo made his way back to him he ordered two from the stout waitress who didn't stop and joke with him .
‘Sorry,’ Bodo said, lowering his bulk next to his brother.
‘I had to see that man.
What's this?’ he asked as the waitress brought the brandies.
‘You don't want to hit that stuff too hard,’ knocking his back without a qualm.
‘Never mind that,’ Herr Nordern gulped his brandy.
‘What's this about something being wrong?’
‘Well,’ Bodo looked cheerful and unconcerned, but his voice was serious.
‘I've been asking around, about Werner —— you know, the cop at Ostkreuz.’
‘I know,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘Get to the point can't you.’
‘I'm getting there,’ Bodo said.
‘But listen, Hans, come on now, we are brothers.’
‘Of course we're brothers.’
Herr Nordern clenched his fist.
‘For Christ's sake, I brought you up!’
All right, all right , Bodo said.
I know that.
But Hans, tell me, have you been mixed up in any rackets?’
Herr Nordern almost dropped his glass.
‘Me!
In a racket?’
‘Keep your voice down ,’ Bodo said.
Herr Nordern made a huge effort and controlled himself.
‘Of course I haven't been in any rackets.
You're the one for that,’ he added bitterly.
Bodo did not deny the charge.
‘But I'm serious.
You've not got mixed up in any fiddles?’
‘What fiddles could I be in?’
Herr Nordern said.
‘I don't know.’
Bodo shrugged.
‘Some racket in your Department.
Currency, maybe.
Something to do with Karl.’
‘Karl!’
Herr Nordern was astounded.
‘You mean Uncle Karl?’
‘Sure.
Why not?
He's a crook,’ Bodo said flatly.
Herr Nordern could not believe his ears.
‘How can you say such a thing?
How can you?
You only met him tonight.’
‘He's a con man,’ Bodo said.
‘I can spot them a mile off.’
‘I think that is a wicked thing to say,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘Truly wicked.’
Bodo was genuinely surprised.
‘What's wicked about it?
I don't mind.
Good luck to him if he can get away with it.’
‘I don't mean that,’ Herr Nordern said, ‘and you know it.
I mean it's wicked even to say it.
Karl is a guest of the Government!’
Serious or not, whatever the business Bodo had to talk about with his brother, to Herr Nordern's dismay he burst out laughing.
He patted Herr Nordern on the shoulder and shook his head.
‘All right, Hans,’ he said.
‘All right.’
He was still laughing as two policemen came into the bar, but, despite himself, and despite his certain knowledge of his complete innocence, Herr Nordern's heart sank as they made their way towards his table.
‘Oh the devil,’ he whispered, but Bodo was quite unperturbed.
‘Hello Heini, Joachim.’
He jabbed a thumb at Hans.
‘My brother.’
Hands were shaken, drinks offered, regretfully refused by the policemen.
Heini leaned forward and murmured into Bodo's ear.
‘No problem,’ Bodo said.
‘A hen-house.
You've got the timber?’
The policeman whispered something and Bodo grinned.
‘Should be good stuff then.
O.K. Some time next week?
Fine.’
Heini nodded thanks and left the room, followed by his colleague, both giving piercing, policemen's glances around the bar as they left.
‘Sorry,’ Bodo said.
‘Got to keep in with them, though.’
He looked sideways at Herr Nordern.
‘What was that you were saying about guests of the Government?’ he added dryly.
Herr Nordern shook his head.
‘Do you know everyone in Berlin?
But I can't stay here much longer —’ he groaned as the waitress came with two beers and two gins.
‘From the cops,’ the waitress said.
‘Got to keep drinking,’ Bodo said.
‘Look normal.’
He filched one of Herr Nordern's cigars.
‘But all right.
Business.’
‘At last.’
‘Right.’
Bodo took a deep breath.
‘I've been asking around about Werner, who interviewed you about the accident.
Well listen, Hans, there isn't a Werner at Ostkreuz cop-shop.’
Against his better judgement Herr Nordern gulped some beer and then mopped his face with his handkerchief.
‘What are you saying?’
Bodo shrugged.
‘I don't know, but there was a Werner at Schwerin in '81.’
‘So?’
Herr Nordern's voice rose.
‘He was in the Border Police then,’ Bodo said.
‘The Border Police?
But what's he doing dealing with a traffic accident?’
The room seemed to spin a little and Herr Nordern grabbed the table.
‘It doesn't mean a thing,’ he said.
‘Werner — it's not an uncommon name — no?’ he asked, as Bodo shook his head.
‘I think it's the same man,’ Bodo said.
‘I don't understand.’
‘I don't either,’ Bodo said.
Both men were silent for a moment then, clutching at a straw, Herr Nordern said, ‘It must be something to do with you.
You're the one up to your neck in rackets.
My God, do you realise what could happen if there was any scandal?
I'm up for promotion, and there's Erika….’
‘I've thought about that,’ Bodo was serious.
‘But I don't think so.
In fact I'm sure of it.
They wouldn't bring in the heavy mob for me, I'm not important enough.
Besides, I've done too much for the big pots.
They wouldn't want any scandal, either.
But this business of the car crash, it sounds phony to me.’
‘But why in hell should the police make up a story about an accident?’
Herr Nordern demanded.
‘Why?
Where's the sense in it?’
‘Search me.
But if you've done nothing wrong then you've got nothing to worry about —’ although Bodo rather spoiled this optimistic remark by adding, ‘I hope.’
‘So what should I do?’
Bodo shook his head.
‘I still wouldn't do anything.’
‘But —’
‘No buts,’ Bodo said.
‘If you don't do anything then you've got no worries, see?
Start doing something and it looks as if you have got worries.’
‘But I am worried,’ Herr Nordern said.
I know, I know.
But appear not to be.
Just carry on as normal, right?
I'll do the poking around.
So.
Let's go.’
They left the bar, Bodo exchanging farewells as if he had not a care in the world.
Herr Nordern staggered as the night air hit him and Bodo held his elbow as they lurched back to the flats.
‘O.K.,’ Bodo climbed into his pick-up.
‘I'll be in touch.
Just —’ he hesitated for a moment and Herr Nordern leaned forward eagerly.
‘Just what?’
‘Just keep a low profile,’ Bodo said, as he started the engine and roared away.
Herr Nordern went up the stairs, into a dark flat and a discontented bedroom.
‘Where have you been?’
Frau Nordern hissed.
‘Only with Bodo,’ Herr Nordern swore as he pulled his shirt off and it became entangled with his vest.
‘Only with Bodo!’
Disapproval seeped from Frau Nordern.
‘What were the two of you up to?’
‘Having a drink.’
Herr Nordern sat down heavily, making the bed lurch.
‘Go to sleep.’
‘I was asleep,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Where are you going now?’
‘Bathroom.’
Herr Nordern wove unsteadily across the living-room into the bathroom and plunged his face into cold water.
‘Stupid,’ he thought, looking at his flushed, dripping face in the mirror.
‘Utterly stupid.
Drunk and stupid.’
He began to clean his teeth, jabbing at his mouth, then dropped the toothbrush on to the floor.
He picked it up, banging his head on the bowl.
He drank some water and felt worse, then groped his way back to the bedroom.
He climbed into bed and lay on his side, not moving and scarcely breathing.
There was silence for a moment or two and then, like the voice of doom, Frau Nordern spoke again.
What did Bodo want?
Nordern groaned.
‘I'll tell you tomorrow,’ he said.
‘Tomorrow.’
Another silence.
Herr Nordern breathed a little easier, then: ‘Now.’
Herr Nordern pressed his hot face against his pillow.
‘You know Bodo.’
He had a flash of inspiration.
‘He wanted to borrow some money.
To build a hen-house.
It sounded utterly preposterous but it led to a longer silence.
Frau Nordern's breathing became deeper and more regular.
Herr Nordern relaxed a trifle.
‘Did you?
Lend him the money?’
‘No!
No.
No.
Now go to sleep.
I've got work to do tomorrow.’
‘You won't do it drinking with Bodo till all hours,’ Frau Nordern said, but it was a Parthian shot as she did, then, go to sleep.
Herr Nordern lay awake, listening to his wife blowing little bubbling breaths.
He did not feel well.
In fact he was not far from being sick.
What was the matter with him? he thought.
He was drinking like a fish, and had been for weeks.
And now he was lurching about his flat with innocent children asleep in their beds, and he had lied to Helga.
He had never done that before in all their life together.
Just the thought of it made him feel unclean.
For a moment he was tempted to wake her up and confess but thought better of it.
‘But I will tell her tomorrow,’ he promised.
‘Some of it, anyway.’
Then he, too, slipped off into an uneasy sleep, and strange, vivid dreams, in which Lieutenant Werner chased him down endless, war-torn and shattered streets, for ever.
HERR NORDERN did not feel better the next morning, in fact he felt considerably worse.
As he shaved his reflection seemed to be the face of a low criminal — or like one of Bodo's associates — and when he went into the sitting-room his wife bore more than a passing resemblance to an exceptionally severe judge about to condemn that criminal to hard labour for life.
Herr Nordern gave her a ghastly, feeble grin, as if asking for remission, but Frau Nordern turned a cold face away, showing only an upright back and stiff neck which in their rigidity seemed to symbolise the rectitude of all the generations of the Houses of von Bromberg and von Ritter.
Gulping coffee, Herr Nordern stared at that unyielding back and felt his heart sink.
As he went into the bedroom for his brief-case he shook his head.
‘I can't do it,’ he thought.
‘I really can't go through the day feeling like this.’
He looked through the window.
It had snowed during the night but not heavily.
He took a deep breath and opened the door.
‘Er…
Helga….’ he said.
Frau Nordern did not hear him or at least seemed not to.
Herr Nordern cleared his throat.
‘Helga?’
This time Frau Nordern deigned him a glance, but only that.
‘Your brief-case is on the dressing-table,’ she said before turning back to her coffee.
‘Ahem, ahem.’
Needlessly Herr Nordern cleared his throat again, frowning at Paul who was goggling at him while stuffing himself with cheese and cold ham.
‘It's not that.
Could you spare me a moment?’
He shook his head and beckoned at the same time, feeling an unutterable fool for doing so.
Frau Nordern gazed at him for an icy moment then stalked into the bedroom.
‘Well?’ she demanded.
Herr Nordern closed the door.
As he did so his wife raised her eyebrows as if at some freakish aberration.
‘What on earth are you doing that for?’ she asked.
Herr Nordern held out his hand.
‘Helga,’ he said, ‘listen, I want to talk to you.’
‘Talk to me?’
Frau Nordern was, or sounded as if she was, utterly amazed.
‘Now?’
‘Well, not now.
Not just this minute.’
Despite himself Herr Nordern was irascible.
‘Look, I'll get the car out and drive you to work and tell you as we go.’
‘Get the car out?
Tell me as we go?
Tell me what?’
Beneath his new submissiveness Herr Nordern felt another flicker of exasperation, the more so because he was being submissive.
‘I'll tell you in the car,’ he said.
‘If you want to come.’
He looked at his watch.
‘But we'll have to go now.’
Frau Nordern gave him a calculating look then nodded.
‘All right,’ she said.
‘If the car works.’
For an anguished three minutes Herr Nordern thought that the Lada would not work but, in company with a neighbour s antiquated Volkswagen, after a bout of racking, early morning, heavy smoker's coughing, it came to a sort of half-life as, quite unnecessarily, because the Lada's engine could be heard half-way across Berlin, Herr Nordern tooted its feeble horn.
In the flat Frau Nordern drained the last of her coffee, snatched her brief-case, kissed Omi, and swept to the door.
Still munching cheese, Paul made a dive for his coat only to be halted by his mother's withering glare.
‘Aren't we coming?’
Paul demanded indignantly.
‘Coming where?’
‘In the car.’
‘The car?’
Frau Nordern gave Paul a cold, blue stare.
‘Just you make sure that you don't miss your bus — and bring your homework back.’
The door slammed behind her as Paul looked dolefully at Erika.
‘What's the matter with them?’ he demanded.
‘Nothing.’
Erika was firm.
‘And —’ to an approving nod from Omi she added, ‘don't say them about Mother and Father.
It isn't polite.’
‘It's them who aren't being polite,’ Paul muttered,sotto voce .
And in fact Frau Nordern was not being polite as Herr Nordern drove the Lada in a wobbly course down Klara-Lettkin-Strasse.
‘I hope that you have something worth saying,’ she said.
‘Well,’ Herr Nordern struggled with the gears as a gigantic lorry with a huge sign saying ‘Workers of All Countries Unite’painted on it cut across him, its horn blaring.
‘Helga —’ he cursed as another lorry swung across his bonnet.
Clutching her brief-case, Frau Nordern jerked her chin.
‘If all you can do is swear —, ‘For Christ's sake!’
A motor-cyclist slithered towards the car.
‘Just a minute.’
Herr Nordern heaved on the steering-wheel and swung the Lada into the relative safety of a narrow street shadowed by the bulk of a church where he pulled up, although wisely keeping the engine running.
Frau Nordern raised her head as if appealing to the Deity presiding over the church.
‘What are we doing here ?’ she asked, as if , by some miracle, they had arrived in Lapland.
‘Just a moment.
One moment.’
Herr Nordern pulled out a cigar.
‘Can't talk in that traffic.
I'm sorry.’
He lighted his cigar, puffed furiously, sank back in his seat, as far as it would allow him to, and stared fixedly through the windscreen, already lightly furred with snow.
‘Look, Helga, it's about last night.
When I got back.’
Frau Nordern turned a marmoreal face, and when she spoke her voice was as cold as her face.
‘You were drunk.’
‘Er….’
Herr Nordern fidgeted with his cigar.
‘Not actually drunk, Helga.’
‘You were!’
Frau Nordern was contemptuous.
‘Lurching about the flat.
I heard you.’
‘Well, all right.
I was — a bit.
But that's not it.’
‘Not what?’
Frau Nordern turned her face away.
‘Don't do that, Helga,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘Look at me, please.
Thank you.
I was worried — let me finish —— Bodo —’
‘Bodo!’
Frau Nordern was withering.
‘I thought that he'd have something to do with it.’
‘No, it's not what you think —’
‘You don't know what I think.’
Frau Nordern struggled with her window.
Smoke billowed out and a few snowflakes fluttered into the car.
‘You did lend him the money, didn't you?’
‘Lend him money?’
Herr Nordern said blankly.
‘Forgotten already.’
Frau Nordern jerked her chin.
‘I said that you were drunk.’
‘All right!’
Herr Nordern threw his cigar out of the window.
‘I was.
I was drunk.
Drunk!
Don't keep going on about it.
I'm trying to talk to you.’
There was an ominous minute's silence and then, even more ominously, Frau Nordern spoke.
‘He's in trouble, isn't he?
Serious trouble.’
Herr Nordern tapped the steering-wheel.
‘No.
No, he isn't in trouble.
But he told me something.
It…it was about Werner.’
‘Werner?’
‘Yes.
The policeman.
The one who interviewed me about the accident.’
‘What about him?’
Herr Nordern tugged at his collar.
‘Bodo said —’ he repeated what Bodo had told him.
Frau Nordern listened intently.
When Herr Nordern had finished some of her iciness had melted.
‘What does it mean?’ she asked.
‘I don't know.’
Herr Nordern shook his head.
‘But that's why I was worried and drank too much.’
‘So it wasn't about lending money to Bodo at all?’
‘No.’
Herr Nordern stared at his hands.
‘I'm sorry, Helga, lying to you.’
‘That's all right.’
Frau Nordern forced her window up.
‘I didn't believe you anyway.’
‘You didn't?’
Herr Nordern was rather offended.
‘No.’
Frau Nordern half-smiled.
‘You're not a good liar, Hans.
Not enough practice.’
She paused.
‘And Bodo said don't do anything?’
‘Yes.’
‘I see.’
Frau Nordern looked at her watch.
‘We'd better get going, I'm late already.’
Twenty minutes later, after a silent, worried drive, Herr Nordern dropped off his wife at the Welfare Centre.
‘I'll pick you up tonight if you like,’ he said.
Frau Nordern hesitated then shook her head.
‘I may have to go to a meeting.
I'll see you back home.’
She nodded curtly at a respectful errant mother then stooped to the car window.
‘Don't worry your head about Werner.
It can't be anything.’
She raised her hand as a dubious Herr Nordern forced the car into almost the right gear and drove off with a curious jerking motion, then turned and went into the Centre with a look on her face which boded ill for anyone who crossed her path that day.
The brief Berlin day faded away.
Errant mothers wished that they weren't or, given that they were, had a different case officer from Frau Nordern.
In his office an anxious Herr Nordern gouged out a few marks from unenthusiastic colleagues for a wreath for Steinmark's funeral.
It stopped snowing but grew colder as the East breathed an icy wind across the city, and in the Egon Schultz school the music of Johann Sebastian Bach echoed through the corridors.
The music came from members of the school orchestra who, with Erika on the flute, were rehearsing the ‘Musical Offering’ by Bach, an unusual piece as it was Bach's only work written for five instruments.
Erika was surprised to find that she was beginning to like Bach.
As short a time as a few weeks previously she had been, when not bored, repelled by his music.
It had seemed, the great choral works excepted, mere mathematics, endless, tedious variations on simple themes, clever, of course, but no more than that.
But now she was being drawn, as it were unwillingly, into his world which although intellectual — abstract, even — was, she was discovering, informed by deep, profound passion.
It was an excellent rehearsal and the music teacher, Frau Fegel, was delighted.
‘Very good,’ she said.
‘Really good.
The balance was correct, and the technical quality.
But we must concentrate on drawing out the feeling .’
She looked at the clock.
‘We could run through it once more.’
‘I'm sorry, Frau Fegel,’ Erika said.
‘I have to go to the gym.
‘Ah, athletics.’
Frau Fegel was less than enthusiastic.
‘If you must.’
Must was the word and Erika left the music room, Frau Fegel taking her place; the sound of the music followed Erika as she went down the corridor to the gym.
And there, after her warming-up exercises, she leaped like a gazelle, undisturbed by the fact that she was being filmed on video by two pupils and barely noticing that during the session a small group of people tiptoed on to the gallery, and she did her last jump to applause.
Showered and changed, she went back into the gym and found Fräulein Silber standing modestly in the background while, very much in the foreground were Herr Wolf, from the National Stadium, and Fräulein Carow.
Herr Wolf shook Erika's hand.
‘Excellent jumping,’ he said.
‘You remember Fräulein Carow, of course.
You see we haven't forgotten you, Erika.
Not that we came just to see you.
Even promising young athletes don't bring us out on a winter's day; we do have little tours of inspection, occasionally.’
He smiled his pleasant, open smile.
‘We have been to other schools.
I must say that the standard of high jumping is very good this year.
So, congratulations, Erika.
I notice that you have got your left leg sorted out.
Well done Fräulein Silber.
We'll see you at the next coaches' meeting.’
To cordial goodbyes they left, leaving Erika and Fräulein Silber alone in the huge gym.
‘Good,’ Fräulein Silber said.
‘Really good, Erika.’
‘It's thanks to you, Fräulein,’ Erika said.
Fräulein Silber waved the thanks aside but Erika persisted.
‘I mean it.
If it hadn't been for you, after my fall….’
‘You did that yourself, recovering,’ Fräulein Silber said.
‘All the coaches in the world wouldn't have been of any use if you hadn't had courage.
And now —’ she made a typical high-jumpers' gesture, that which marks them out from all other athletes, raising her arms and stretching her torso, as if taking off to challenge that dappled crossbar.
‘You noticed what Herr Wolf said?’ she continued.
‘They'd been to other schools and the standard is high?
Yes, and there is one girl in particular, in Pankow, Karen Bloxen.
She's only just moved to Berlin so I don't know much about her — these provincials…
’ Fräulein Silber gave a wintry smile, ‘and her coach is keeping her heights dark, but I know that she is keeping the bar up.
However, we'll see about that — it's one thing jumping well in your own gym, but it's another one altogether doing it in a stadium — in a championship — with thousands of people looking at you.
That's when people crack.
That's when courage counts — and nerve.’
‘You won a championship,’ Erika said.
‘Yes.’
Fräulein Silber smiled a little crookedly.
‘The Pomeranian Zonal Championship.’
She subsided gracefully on to a mat and motioned Erika to join her.
‘Area Junior Champion, but that was my limit.
I went to a special sports school — not Leipzig,’ she added hastily, to a nod from Erika who knew very well what Leipzig meant in the athletic world of the G.D.R., the absolute, superlative top —‘but I was a second rater there.
Oh yes,’ she raised a finger as Erika tried to protest.
‘I was.
But I had a fine training, the best in the world.
Better even than the Americans.
And now I have a good job, one I like.
And I was with them, with the Greats.
Do you know that I once beat Ulrike Meyfarth!’
She laughed.
‘Yes — two years later she won the Gold Medal in the Olympics.
But I saw them, I saw them face to face.
And one day I will say that I saw Erika Nordern, say that I coached her.
That will be something.’
‘Fräulein!’
Her face crimson, Erika protested.
‘It's true.’
Fräulein Silber turned her green eyes on Erika.
‘I mean it, you have the real stuff.
So.’
She stood up.
‘One week to go.
A week of real concentration, and then….’
Erika stood up, too, and gave a rueful shrug.
‘Concentration.’
Fräulein Silber was suddenly sharp.
‘What about it?’
‘Oh,’ Erika sighed.
‘It's just that we are having a party — after the competition,’ she added hastily.
‘It's for my great-uncle.
People are coming from all over the place, and the flat….’ she held out her arms.
Fräulein Silber clicked her teeth in exasperation.
‘That won't do.
It won't do at all.’
‘But —’ Erika began, only to be cut off.
‘No buts about it.’
Fräulein Silber's voice had the snap of authority.
Erika shook her head, for once letting authority go unheeded.
‘We can't put the party off, Fräulein.
All the arrangements have been made.’
‘Of course,’ Fräulein Silber said.
‘I'm not suggesting that.
But I've been thinking about next week.
You are crowded at home?’
Erika hardly bothered to say ‘yes’.
For a family in the position of hers it would have been like saying one needed air to breathe.
But Fräulein Silber was in a different position.
‘My flat is small,’ she said, ‘but there's room for two, and it's quiet.
It would be a good idea if you came and stayed with me.
Not if you don't want to, of course.
Would you mind?’
Erika blinked.
‘No, I don't think so.’
‘And your parents?’
Erika thought for a moment — a brief moment.
‘I'm sure that they wouldn't,’ she said, although wondering what her mother would say.
‘Ask them anyway.
But the main thing is yourself.’
The green eyes peered at Erika.
‘It's an important week and if you would be happier at home….’
Erika did not need that last qualification.
To have a week away, and with Fräulein Silber…even the thought of Omi faded as she thought of it; after all, it would only be for one week, pushing away the traitorous thought that one week for herself was quite different from a week in Omi's life, and, treachery giving way to treason, she did have her own life to lead; and so she said, firmly, ‘It will be all right, Fräulein.
And thank you.
Good-night.’
She walked away across the polished floor, then halted and turned.
Fräulein Silber was standing by the high jump, one hand resting on the bar.
‘Thank you so much, Fräulein,’ Erika called.
‘For everything.’
And then, overcome by her own emotion, she ran from the gym, and the school.
Outside the door she paused, breathing the chill and chilling air.
From the school came more music, the school choir rehearsing for Christmas.
She could see the choir through the windows of the Hall: a hundred pupils, rapt, or, at any rate looking rapt, under the vast banner of the G.D.R.
They were singing a folk-song, simple but moving, and Erika came close to tears.
Perhaps she was destined for glory.
Perhaps, one day, the pupils singing would say — boast!—— that they had known Erika Nordern.
She remembered what her father had said that day in the Stadium; the German Democratic Republic was a good country, a great country, a miracle.
The choir sang:
‘Ah!
Wald und Berg….
Ah, forest and mountain,
River and lake
My love for you will never fade….’
And then a tentative voice called from the darkness.
‘Erika?’
Erika broke away from her reverie and peered into the gloom.
‘Who's there?’ she said.
‘Who's that?’
‘It's me.’
Preceded by a cloud of vaporised breath, a figure shuffled into the light spilling from the Hall.
‘Fritz!’
Erika raised her hand.
‘What are you doing here?’
Fritz Kott gave a hangdog grin.
‘I was just passing.’
‘Just passing?’
Erika was amazed.
‘You live miles away.’
She had a sudden insight, at once alarming and ludicrous.
‘You haven't been waiting here since school ended, have you?
I mean waiting for me?’
Fritz gave an even more ghastly grin.
‘Er…no.
No.
I was just passing.’
‘You have been waiting!’
Erika stamped her foot in vexation.
‘Tell the truth.
Are you crazy?
Standing around in this weather for ages.’
‘It's not cold.’
Fritz shuddered as he spoke.
‘Of course it's cold.
It's freezing!’
A devastating thought struck Erika.
‘I hope that no one has seen you hanging about round here.’
‘No, no one.
Honest.’
Fritz spoke with fawning eagerness.
Erika flushed.
‘So you have been waiting.
What are you thinking of?
You'll have the whole school talking.’
‘No, really.’
Fritz took a step nearer.
‘Honestly, Erika, no one has seen me.
I just wanted to see you, that's all.’
‘But you see me every day,’ Erika snapped.
‘You saw me today.’
‘Yes.’
Fritz stared at his shoes.
‘But it's…you know…it's not the same.’
‘Not the same as what?’
Erika demanded.
‘Not the same as…as…you know….’
Fritz's voice tailed dismally away.
He rolled his eyes and tugged at his collar and blew on his finger-nails; and then Erika felt a sensation she had never known before; one that in all her life of order, regimentation, structures, and of love and caring, too, it had never occurred to her that she might have.
She felt a sense of power: power utter and complete over another human being, and in the black and bitter night, she used it.
‘Know what?’ she asked, knowing that Fritz was there to be toyed with.
Fritz gave her an earnest look which was, if anything, even more ghastly and idiotic than his grin.
‘The…the disco,’ he said, huskily, as if lowering his voice would give that humble word a significance beyond all words.
‘The disco?’
Erika frowned and tilted her head as if trying to remember and then, cruelly, said, ‘Oh yes, where I danced with that interesting lad, and with Herman Guttenbruk.’
‘Erika!’
Fritz was outraged.
‘You know what I mean.’
‘I haven't the faintest idea what you mean.’
Erika had her mother's iciness.
‘And please don't tell me what I know or don't know.’
‘No!
No, of course not.
Sorry.’
Fritz made a strange gargling noise.
‘I just meant, I mean, er…would you like to come for a coffee.
The Kiev isn't far.’
‘The Kiev!’
Erika, who rather liked the Kiev, was disdainful.
‘I certainly wouldn't go there.’
‘All right.’
Fritz took another step forward and almost fell over his feet.
‘Listen, we could go to the Baltic —’ naming a horribly expensive café and one far beyond his means —‘it's only a few stops on the bus —’
But the little game was over for Erika.
Her fingers and toes were chilling and slowly and almost imperceptibly the mist settling on her fur collar was turning a frosty white.
‘I think that you're crazy,’ she said.
‘You really are.
Anyway, I should be home by now.
Don't hang around school waiting for me ever again.
Good-night.’
But the good-night was not as definite as it sounded and Fritz, cowed though he was, knew it and walked with Erika to her bus-stop and waited with her in the cold until the bus did trundle along, and even then he made an attempt to get on it with her, a ploy which, with a deft use of her elbow, Erika foiled, leaving him standing at the bus-stop; a lonely rejected youth, bowed as with the sorrows of all the world — and yet irresistibly comic.
‘He's in love with me!’
Erika thought, and burst out laughing.
But comical though he was, and although Erika laughed, yet her heart was touched, and as the bus juddered through the deserted streets, all the way home she looked into the window, seeing not the flats, factories, and dark parks, but, wonderingly, her own reflection.
As ever, Omi was in, sitting patiently at the table, writing one of the many letters with which she kept the tattered network of Brombergs and Ritters precariously bound together.
She smiled as Erika entered the room although her smile had that new wistfulness about it.
Erika kissed Omi's old cheek, and then made hot chocolate.
‘Have you had a good day, Omi?’ she asked, sitting with her grandmother.
‘Ach!
Such a day.’
Omi shook her head.
‘The telephone.
On, on, on!
I've written down the messages.’
She made to rise but Erika forestalled her and got the telephone pad.
‘I couldn't hear what they were saying most of the time,’ Omi said, as Erika ran her eye down the list of calls written in Omi's shaky, old-fashioned script.
‘The line was so bad, clickings and buzzings, and I'm not quick….’
‘It's all right.’
Erika was cheerful.
‘They'll call again, anyway.
Bet your boots on it.
Omi chuckled.
‘Ah,Liebchen , you do my heart good.
She peered over her spectacles.
‘And how pretty you look.
Such a complexion.
Like the English girls.
I had a cousin, Heinrich von Ströbel.
He fell in love with an English girl just because of her cheeks….’
Erika felt the blood flow into her cheeks.
She lowered her cup.
‘Omi,’ she was about to tiptoe into that mysterious realm summed up by the word love when, maddeningly, the phone rang.
‘Another!’
Omi said as Erika, mildly — internally — cursing, reached and took the receiver.
‘Erika?’
Through a barrage of clicks and crackles, Frau Nordern's voice reached Klara-Lettkin-Strasse sounding oddly ghostly.
Erika?
It s your mother.
Your mother !
‘Yes, I can hear you,’ Erika said.
‘What?’
‘I know,’ Erika shouted across the bedlam on the line.
‘Know what?
Is that you Erika?’
The interference mysteriously stopped and through a clear line Frau Nordern's voice boomed with all its usual authority, as if the ghost had miraculously become embodied with all the solidity of human flesh.
Erika held the phone away from her ear for a moment then spoke into it quietly.
‘Yes, it's me, and I can hear you.’
‘Good.
Who is there?’
‘Omi and I.’
‘Where's Paul?’
‘At the F.G.Y.’
‘Hm.’
There was a brief pause, then, ‘Are you sure?’
Erika sighed.
‘Yes, it's Friday right.’
There was a suspicious assent.
‘And Father isn't there?’
‘No.’
‘Well listen, Erika — are you listening?’
‘Of course I am.’
‘Good.
I may be a little late so don't wait supper for me.
Do you understand that?’
For a moment Erika was strongly tempted to say that she didn't but instead she meekly said, ‘Yes, Mother.’
‘All right.’
Suddenly the cacophony broke out again on the line.
Erika heard something vague and peremptory from her mother and then, as the line went dead, the front door rattled, Herr Nordern came in, and Erika shrugged and dropped the phone back on to its holder.
At the other end of the line Frau Nordern did much the same, then stood up and stuffed her brief-case with various documents.
She locked her desk and her office, and moved majestically out of the Centre.
She caught her usual bus, but instead of getting off at Frankfurter Allee and catching the S-Bahn to Biesdorf, she stayed on it, all the way to Ostkreuz where, like Herr Nordern once before her, she made her way to Ostkreuz Police Station.
HERR NORDERN would have recognised the scene inside the Station as if it were a replay of a film, or a remake, rather: the shady characters and the drunks, and the badinage reflecting a curious bonhomie between the Duty Officer and the offenders, although the cast was different and, it being later, the Station was busier; the offenders looking more offensive and the policemen more policeman-like, bigger, harder, and, in all senses of the word, more arresting — although, big and hard though they were, two of them, bundling out an unfortunate to a police van, gave way respectfully to Frau Nordern as she stalked towards the desk.
The Duty Officer, elderly and paunchy, raised a lumpy face from a crime sheet, or a sports paper, both of which were on his desk, looked again, and stood up.
‘Frau?’
‘Lieutenant Werner,’ Frau Nordern said.
The Duty Officer leaned forward.
‘Who?’
‘Werner,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Lieutenant Werner.
And I haven't got all night.’
The lumpy face creased into a puzzled frown.
‘Werner?’
Frau Nordern heaved up her brief-case and let it fall on to the desk with a satisfying, rather official thud.
‘That's four times we've said the name.’
‘Werner.’
The Duty Officer made it a fifth time, glanced, not without anxiety at the brief-case, momentarily at Frau Nordern, then with relief, over her shoulder, and jerked his lumps and bumps.
‘Frau.’
A striped sleeve rested on the desk.
‘Can I help you?’
Frau Nordern turned.
A sergeant with a face which looked as if its owner was more used to giving lumps than receiving them was standing next to her.
With an air of hugely controlled patience she said, ‘I want to see Lieutenant Werner.’
‘Why is that, Frau?’
Frau Nordern gave an ominous drum-roll on the desk with her fingers.
‘That is for me to tell the Lieutenant.’
The Sergeant waited for the drum-roll to die away, and for a drunk, shouting incoherently, to be dragged through a grim looking door.
‘We're busy tonight,’ he said reasonably, ‘Frau…?’
‘Nordern!’
Frau Nordern snapped.
‘And I'm busy all the time.
Now get me the Lieutenant.’
‘I'm afraid that he's not here, Frau,’ the Sergeant said in a blank, bureaucratic voice.
‘Then get me whoever is in charge,’ Frau Nordern said, in an equally bureaucratic voice.
The Sergeant hesitated for a moment.
‘And I'm to say?’
‘Say I'm from the Ministry of Justice.’
The boozy gabble of the offenders was suddenly silenced, although whether it was the tone of Frau Nordern's voice or the word ‘ministry’ which stilled it, it would be hard to say.
In the uncanny silence the Sergeant looked again at Frau Nordern, and at the brief-case.
‘Very well,’ he said.
‘Er, would the Frau like a seat?’
He gestured at the row of chairs where the offenders lolled.
Frau Nordern gave them a contemptuous glance and the Sergeant coughed.
‘No, perhaps not.
If the Frau would wait just one moment then.’
‘One moment,’ Frau Nordern said, placing a well aimed dart between the Sergeant's broad, grey-clad shoulders as he went into an inner office.
The moment stretched into one, two, three, a minute, another.
The hands on the big wall clock jerked around with the enthusiasm of a convict doing forced labour, the offenders stared at their battered and scuffed shoes in awed silence with the exception of a drunk who had missed the dreaded word MINISTRY and who openly admired Frau Nordern's figure but who, with the solidarity of the criminal underworld, was instantly hushed into silence by the other offenders.
His sports paper having mysteriously disappeared, the Duty Officer scratched furiously at a vast form, a flush, as ominous as a gathering storm began to show on Frau Nordern's neck, and then the door of the office opened, the Sergeant came out, and behind him a stocky man in plain clothes, smoking a cigar, and blinking through bloodshot eyes, waved Frau Nordern forward.
As Frau Nordern went into the office a babble of voices rose behind her, still audible, although muted, as the door was closed by the man with the cigar.
He waved Frau Nordern to a seat and took one himself.
‘Marx,’ he said.
‘Otto Marx.
No relation.
And you are Frau Nordern?’
‘Yes,’ Frau Nordern sat bolt upright and gave Marx her commanding glare which, however, did not have quite the same effect on him as it had done on the Duty Officer.
‘So you want to see Lieutenant Werner?’
Marx said.
‘Yes.’
Frau Nordern waved at the cigar smoke but, unperturbed, Marx puffed vigorously away.
‘He's not here,’ he said.
‘Well, when will he be here?’
Frau Nordern demanded.
Marx blinked his bloodshot eyes.
‘Couldn't say.’
Frau Nordern frowned as Marx stubbed out his cigar and promptly took out another one.
‘What rank are you?’ she asked.
‘Sergeant.’
Marx struck a match.
‘Detective Sergeant.’
‘And are you in charge of this station?’
‘No.’
Marx lighted his cigar.
‘Then who is in charge?’
‘Inspector Grün, but he's not here either, so in a manner of speaking I suppose I am in charge just now.’
From behind the frosted-glass door there were bangs and scuffles and a wild drunken bellow.
Marx blinked at what could be seen of the office ceiling through the hanging cloud of his cigar smoke.
‘Business improving,’ he observed.
‘Friday night.
Is this a Ministry affair, Frau?’
Frau Nordern hesitated.
‘No, not exactly.’
Marx peered at Frau Nordern.
‘You said you were from the Ministry.’
‘I work there,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Not quite the same thing,’ Marx said, mildly and without rancour, as if half-truths and no-truths were part of his life, which they were.
‘Still, if there's anything you want to talk about you'll have to talk to me or no one.’
Frau Nordern bit her lip in vexation.
‘When can I see Lieutenant Werner?’
‘Couldn't say.’
Marx shrugged.
‘Inspector Grün then?’
Marx shook his head.
‘Difficult.
Very difficult.’
He picked a shred of tobacco off his lip.
‘Especially if you won't say what you want to see him about.’
Frau Nordern gave an exasperated ‘tut’.
‘Does Lieutenant Werner work here?’ she demanded.
Marx's manner altered abruptly.
He gave Frau Nordern a hard stare.
‘You ought to know better than to ask that.
Who works here is a State Secret.’
‘Yes — of course.
Sorry.’
Frau Nordern, uncharacteristically meek, was forced on to the defensive.
Even asking about State Secrets was a serious crime, and both she and Marx knew it.
‘You're quite right.’
Marx nodded grimly.
‘All right, Frau, we'll forget it.
Now what do you want?’
He leaned forward confidingly.
‘One policeman is the same as another.’
Very well.
Frau Nordern coughed in what for her was a diffident manner.
‘It's about my husband.
He was called in here a few days ago, about an accident.’
‘Yes?’
‘What do you mean, yes?’
Frau Nordern allowed herself a note of exasperation.
Marx blinked his bloodshot eyes.
‘I mean yes.
What accident was it?’
‘Oh.’
Frau Nordern nodded.
‘It was a motor-cyclist, he was knocked down and the driver didn't stop.’
‘So?’
Cigar ash spilled down Marx's jacket.
‘So we want to know what's happening.’
Marx pawed at his jacket, rubbing the ash in rather than dusting it off.
‘Why?’
Frau Nordern had a flash of temper.
‘Why do you think?
My husband's worried about it.’
‘Oh?’
Marx sounded mildly surprised.
‘Just a minute.’
He stood up and went to a battered grey filing cabinet, rummaged through it, and grunted.
When he turned around he was leafing through a file.
‘Yes, Nordern…accident…number…statement taken….’
He leaned against the cabinet forcing Frau Nordern to turn awkwardly in order to see him.
‘What's he worried about, your husband?
He says he had nothing to do with it.’
‘He certainly hadn't,’ Frau Nordern snapped.
‘So?’
Frau Nordern flushed.
‘So I want to know how the investigation is getting on.
We have a right to know.
Do you realise what it's like having something like this hanging over your head?’
Marx re-lit his cigar.
‘No, I don't,’ he said blandly.
‘Well you ought to,’ Frau Nordern flashed, then, realising the oddity of the remark, retracted.
‘Of course I don't mean that you should….’
She paused, at a loss for words, but Marx wasn't.
‘I hope that you don't,’ he said in a tough, menacing voice.
‘Yes.’
Frau Nordern was taken aback by the toughness and the menace.
‘But I just want to know what's happening, that's all.’
Marx yawned, showing blackened teeth.
‘Enquiries proceeding.’
Frau Nordern made another foray.
‘Who is the case officer?’
Marx dropped the file back in the cabinet and slammed the drawer shut.
State Secret, too.
He went to the door and opened it.
There was a babble of voices, astonishingly cheerful under the circumstances.
Marx rolled his cigar from one side of his mouth to the other.
‘They're not worrying,’ he said.
—‘And they are guilty.
Goodnight, Frau.’
Frau Nordern snapped a good-night back and stormed out of the Station, and such was the mood showing on her face there on the S-Bahn a railway policeman checking tickets did not ask for hers but wisely changed carriages at Lichtenberg station and looked for other prey.
The family had finished their supper when she got home, but her temper was soothed by her reception: Herr Nordern coming from the bedroom to greet her, Omi fussing, Erika getting her meal, even Paul helping her off with her coat, although he rather spoiled his effect by then chucking it over the back of a chair instead of hanging it up.
She finished her supper of pork and sauerkraut then, as she had a coffee, Herr Nordern joined her and the family and had coffee himself.
Feeling rather guilty, Frau Nordern listened as he described the arrangements for Steinmark's funeral.
‘It seems to be taking a long time,’ Omi observed.
‘It's the inquest,’ Herr Nordern said, ‘and they're having the devil of a job finding a relative to make any arrangements.’
‘Has he no family?’
Omi asked.
Herr Nordern shook his head.
‘Seems not.
All wiped out in the War and he was brought up in an orphanage.
He was a lonely, miserable wretch.
The Police opened his flat, hardly any furniture, just a pile of dirty magazines.’
There was a moment's silence and, as Omi murmured a prayer for Steinmark, Frau Nordern looked around at her family and felt her throat tighten.
‘My God,’ she thought.
A lonely, miserable wretch, living a furtive life in a shabby room somewhere, uncared for, unmourned, and it could have happened to her husband, to herself, Omi…the War could have done that, its implacable hand wiping out all human ties.
As she looked again at the faces of her family she was ready to burst into tears and almost did so but Erika, moving lightly into the kitchen, said: ‘Fräulein Silber thinks that I should stay with her next week.’
Lobbed through the plastic ivy it was a minor bombshell.
Steinmark was forgotten, and even Werner and the accident slipped from Frau Nordern's mind as the family clucked over this news.
‘A week away from home?
Before the Championships?’
Frau Nordern shook her head.
‘You should be here, sleeping in your own bed and eating good food.’
Omi, too, shook her head, in sadness rather than disagreement, but, as usual, Herr Nordern was bluntly commonsensical.
‘What's the fuss?
Erika has been away plenty of times, and if Fräulein Silber thinks that it is the right thing to do then it is the right thing.
She's the expert, but it's up to you,Liebchen .’
As Erika had already made up her mind, that effectively ended the debate.
The television was switched on, Omi started a new piece of crochet-work, Herr Nordern abandoned his statistics, Frau Nordern her reports, and Paul, boldly and half-truthfully announcing that he had finished his homework, joined Erika on the sofa to watch a good thriller on West German television.
It began to snow again and the dark streets of Berlin had a new, immaculate blanket, hiding the grime and grease of the day.
The film ended most satisfactorily, vice punished and virtue rewarded, the villain caught and the heroine finding true love with the detective.
As Herr Nordern said, it might easily have been made in the G.D.R., yawning as he spoke, that being a signal the whole family understood.
A few minutes later, Erika sat by Omi.
‘It was a good film, wasn't it?’ she said, smoothing Omi's pillows.
‘Yes.’
Omi took her Watchword.
‘So you will leave.’
She raised her hand, stilling Erika's voice.
‘Of course that is right.
You must have peace and quiet before such an event.
Here —’ she smiled —‘it will be like a railway station, people coming and going — staying, too.
No, you must go, rest, relax, and then win your vaulting.’
‘Jumping,’ Erika said.
The familiar gurgle came from the bathroom.
‘My turn.’
Erika took her dressing-gown and slipped out, deftly avoiding her mother who was going to her room.
‘Good-night, Mother,’ Erika said.
‘Good-night.’
Frau Nordern paused for a moment then waved her hand.
‘Ah, go to Fräulein Silber.
It's the sensible thing to do.’
Erika disappeared into the bathroom, Frau Nordern into the bedroom where Herr Nordern was sitting at his desk, looking absently at the wall.
‘You're not thinking of starting work, are you?’
Frau Nordern asked in a tone of voice which strongly suggested that if he was then he could go and do it somewhere else.
‘Eh?’
Herr Nordern blinked.
‘No, no.
I was just thinking.’
‘Yes?’
‘Oh, about Steinmark, and us.
How lucky we are, a family together, and how lucky I am.’
‘How lucky I am.’
Frau Nordern said.
‘And my mother.’
‘No.’
Herr Nordern shook his head.
‘You would have been all right in the end.
But men…they go downhill so quickly.’
‘Oh, Hans.’
It was rare for Frau Nordern to kiss her husband affectionately but she did so now, kissing him on the cheek and ruffling his hair.
Herr Nordern smiled.
‘Thank you, my Dear.’
He gazed at Frau Nordern as she squeezed past the desk and sat on the bed.
‘I'm so glad I told you the truth this morning.
I would have felt bad all day otherwise.’
He stood up, stretched his arms, took two paces to the window, and peered, with some difficulty, through a hedge of cacti.
‘Still snowing,’ he said.
‘Ah, honesty is the best policy.
It really is.’
Frau Nordern looked at her husband's broad back.
‘Honest Hans,’ she thought.
‘Solid, thorough, plodding, even,’(that had been said of him by a Bromberg once to Frau Nordern —— but once only)‘but kind in his shy way and decent to the very core.’
She thought again of Steinmark and his lonely miserable life, and of the single women, and there were many in Berlin, living their lonely lives in bare rooms across the city….
She bit her lip, took a deep breath, and spoke.
‘Hans, I went there today.’
‘Hmm?’
Herr Nordern half-turned.
‘Where?’
For a moment Frau Nordern was tempted to lie, to say that she had been to a meeting, or a mother.
‘After all,’ she thought, ‘why say something which might upset Hans?’
Some things were best left unsaid, after all, some bones best left unrattled, some secrets left buried.
But it wasn't the time for secrets, or the place.
‘I went to Ostkreuz,’ she said.
‘To the Police Station.’
It took a moment for the truth to sink in, but when it did Herr Nordern jumped.
‘What!’
He turned, caught his hand on a cactus spike, swore, and gaped.
‘Ostkreuz?’
Frau Nordern moved uneasily on the bed.
‘Yes.’
‘But….’
Herr Nordern shook his head.
‘But why?
I mean…did they send for you?’
‘No,’ frau Nordern shook her head.
‘I just went.’
Herr Nordern sat down heavily at his desk.
‘Just went?
I don't understand.’
‘I wanted to see this Werner man.’
Frau Nordern raised her chin pugnaciously.
‘I wanted to know what is going on.
‘But Bodo —’
‘Don't Bodo me,’ Frau Nordern snapped, but immediately raised her hand in apology.
‘Sorry Hans.
I didn't mean to speak sharply.
I know what Bodo said about letting the matter lie, but I don't agree with him.
We have a right to know what is going on, so I went to find out.’
Herr Nordern sucked his thumb for a moment, biting at the cactus spike.
‘And what did you find out?’
‘Well,’ Frau Nordern tugged at the collar of her dressing-gown.
‘Not much.’
Herr Nordern bit impatiently at his thumb.
‘Did you see Werner?’
‘No, I saw a sergeant called Marx.’
‘Marx?’
‘Yes.’
Despite herself Frau Nordern laughed.
‘A stubby man, chain-smoking cigars.’
Herr Nordern grunted.
‘I think he was there when I saw Werner.
Bloodshot eyes?’
‘Yes.’
‘And what did he say?’
‘He said enquiries were proceeding.’
‘That's all?’
‘Yes.’
‘So it's still hanging over us.’
Herr Nordern frowned.
‘Did you find out anything about Werner?’
‘No.’
Frau Nordern shook her head.
‘They said any information like that is a State Secret.’
‘Of course it is.’
Herr Nordern was sharp.
‘You ought to know that.’
He rapped the desk.
‘I wish you hadn't gone.
I really do.
Bodo was quite right.’
Frau Nordern agreed that he probably had been.
‘And what did you find out?
Nothing, nothing at all.’
‘I know.’
Frau Nordern was meek.
‘All you've done is make us look suspicious.’
Frau Nordern demurred.
‘I don't see that.
There's nothing wrong in asking about an accident.’
‘No,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘But there is in asking about Werner.’
There was a glum silence for a moment or two then Frau Nordern climbed into bed.
‘Put the light out will you?’
Herr Nordern switched off the light but went back to his desk.
There was the sputter of a match as he lighted a cigar.
‘Aren't you coming to bed?’
Frau Nordern asked.
‘In a minute.’
Frau Nordern joggled her side of the bolster.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘It's all right,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘You meant well.
Go to sleep.
I'll be in bed soon.’
But ten minutes later, as Frau Nordern was drifting off into an uneasy slumber, Herr Nordern was still at his desk, staring into the darkness, the end of his cigar glowing like a red warning signal as the snow drifted down on to Berlin, and his family, and the city, slept.
FRAU NORDERN woke to a clear cold light and, to her amazement, Herr Nordern looming over her with a coffee.
I didn't sleep very well, he said, almost apologetically.
‘I thought that you would like a coffee in bed for a change.
You're not going to work are you?’
Frau Nordern took the coffee and blinked sleepily.
‘No.
Saturday isn't it?’
‘All day.’
Herr Nordern turned to the door.
‘Sorry if I was sharp last night, about you going to the Police.
It just took me aback.’
‘It's all right.’
Frau Nordern sipped her coffee.
‘It was stupid of me.’
‘No.
Why shouldn't we ask.
Anyway, I'm going to the office.
The office ,’ he repeated.
‘No more secrets, eh?’
He smiled shyly.
‘Be back by 1.00 — I hope.
'Bye.’
Leaving behind an amused wife he went into the livingi-room where Erika, dressed in a track suit, was having her breakfast.
‘Liebchen ,’ Herr Nordern heaved on his overcoat.
‘Going running?’
Erika wagged a finger.
‘Been,’ she said.
‘Five kilometres.’
Herr Nordern waved a goodbye and walked along the familiar road to the S-Bahn station.
‘My God.’
He shook his head.
‘Five kilometres and it's barely light.
‘I couldn't run five metres.’
As the train rattled into the station he felt a glow of pride.
‘What a girl — and my daughter.
I just hope that there is nothing to this Werner business.
My God, I hope not.’
Behind him, in the flat on Klara-Lettkin-Strasse, there was a cheerful atmosphere.
Touched by her husband's bringing her coffee Frau Nordern was in a good humour, dismissing her own worries about the accident as mere alarmism stoked by Bodo, and tempering her authoritarian ways by letting Paul stay in bed for an extra fifteen minutes instead of, as usual , rousing him in the manner of a sergeant in charge of a penal battalion.
The arrival of the mail helped, too: a mound of letters from the relatives who were, or, if they were to be given free accommodation, thought that they were, coming to Uncle Karl's party.
‘I think that Fräulein Silber was right,’ she said, reading a letter from an obscure, elderly maiden cousin who lived in an even more obscure district of the country.
‘Hetta's coming.
My God, Mecken, what a place to live!’
Erika laughed and Omi smiled, breaking her wan mood.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘That awful bog-land.
When we were children we were told that we would be sent there if we were naughty.
Poor Hetta.
Still, it will be good to see her.’
Erika, who had never set eyes on Hetta in her life, stoutly agreed, and even Paul, making a dishevelled appearance, said with his new courtliness that he would like to meet her, causing Frau Nordern to raise a sceptical eyebrow and warn him not to be sarcastic at that time of the morning.
‘So.’
Erika stood up.
‘I'm going to the gym.
I can tell Fräulein Silber that I'll be staying with her next week then?’
‘Yes,’ Frau Nordern looked at her mail and added, ruefully, ‘I wouldn't mind staying with her myself.’
The sun had broken through as Erika went to the bus-stop and by the time she had reached school it was quite warm, this pleasing Erika who feared that really severe weather would cause Uncle Karl to cancel the tour of Berlin the next day.
In the gym, though, in front of the school video team, Fräulein Silber was at her most severe, even criticising Erika's warm-up exercises and clapping her hands with exasperation at Erika's run-up, that curved and crucial approach to the bar.
But after an hour of steady jumping, Fräulein Silber's mood changed abruptly.
With an approving clap of her hands she ended the session, smiled, and said, ‘Excellent.
Very good.’
She dismissed the video crew with the threat of terrible penalties if the video tape was not perfect, waved Erika down on the mat, and joined her.
She leaned forward, her face serious.
‘Erika, you jumped really well there at the end.
First-class technique — you'll see for yourself on the video tape.
But —’
Erika's face fell, ‘But.’
Life seemed full of them.
Her father would take her sailing on the Wannsee next summer —but !
They might move into a bigger flat —but !
She was jumping A.I —but !
‘Cheer up.’
Fräulein Silber's somewhat chilly face splintered into a smile.
‘What I'm saying is this.
Until a few weeks ago you were jumping with passion.
Yes, with real feeling.
With —’ she searched for the right word.
‘With dynamism .
That's it.
You were dynamic.
Watching you jump was…well, it was like seeing a firework going off, a sky-rocket.
You just shot up, whizzing all over the place, erratic but really zooming, and that partly compensated for any lack of technique.
Now your technique is good, not perfect by any means, but good.
But the fire has gone.
Wait.’
She raised her hand, stilling Erika's instinctive protest.
‘Don't worry.
It always happens.
People start spontaneously in sport.
It's a natural activity; running, jumping, kicking footballs.
Having fun, really.
But then to be good at a sport, really good I mean, you have to learn how to do what you are doing naturally in the best way possible.
And that means technique.
But, and it does happen, learning the technique dampens the fire — and then we have to stoke it up again.’
Fräulein Silber paused and looked steadily at Erika.
‘In fact you have to forget the technique.
It's there now.
It's built into you.
What was unnatural has become natural, you don't have to think about it, your body will do the right thing in the right way, like breathing.
Strange, isn't it?
You spend years learning something only to forget what you've learned.
Like riding a bicycle.’
‘Or playing Bach,’ Erika said.
‘Bach?’
‘Oh,’ Erika stretched her legs.
‘Frau Fegel was saying the other day when we were playing Bach that our technique was good but that we had to learn to put feeling into our playing.’
‘Just so!’
Fräulein Silber smacked her muscular thigh.
‘Exactly, and remember, art and sport have this in common, they are both means of self-expression.
But they are more than just that.
A child screaming is expressing itself, or like those artists who daub things in the West — they say they are expressing themselves.’
It was clear from Fräulein Silber's face that she did not think highly of modern art.
‘But with discipline, art and sport are ways of developing one's personality.
And it can be done at any level.
Even a paraplegic can be a sportsman.
That is why we encourage mass sport in the G.D.R.
And —’ adding a little hastily —‘mass participation in all forms of human activity, art, crafts, and —’somewhat improbably —‘philosophy, Marxism-Leninism.
But —’
She rose with the fluent movement of the athlete.
‘Enough of that.
So, you will be staying with me next week?’
Yes, Erika would.
‘Good.
I'll call for you in my car tomorrow.
Next week we put the fire back into you.
Goodbye — and don't forget your exercises this afternoon.’
They parted and Erika caught her bus, wondering about the relationship between technique and feeling.
It was an interesting thought, to learn something in order to forget it; as Fräulein Silber had said, like learning how to ride a bike, but like many other things, too, learning to play a musical instrument for instance.
And this business of self-expression — she thought of Bunte with her striped hair.
‘I really must think about the whole question,’ she thought, as she went up the stairs to the flat.
Her mother and Omi and Paul were in, going through the arrangements for the party and wondering where the various guests could be put up — for free.
Erika joined them, scanning the mail, and Bodo bustled in, ruddy from the cold, rubbing his calloused hands together, taking a glass of plum brandy, and filling the flat with an air of cheerful, rough, vigorous outdoor life.
‘Just called to see you about the musicians for the party,’ he said.
‘How many?
Six?
Eight?
Ten?’
‘Three,’ Frau Nordern said promptly.
‘Piano, drums, and a what-do-you-call-them?
An accordian.’
Bodo shook his head.
‘They'll only play with four.
That includes a violinist.’
‘How much?’
Frau Nordern asked — and blenched when she heard the figure.
‘I'm certainly not paying that,’ she said indignantly.
‘Half would be too much.’
‘Come on Helga.’
Bodo swigged his brandy.
‘It's a good price and —’ he winked slyly at Erika —‘and for another twenty marks they'll wear gipsy dress.’
‘Gipsy —’ Frau Nordern began, but stopped as Erika burst out laughing.
‘Oh, a joke.
Very funny.
But I'm not paying that much if they dress up as…as….’
She searched for words, and was still searching for them as the front door opened and Herr Nordern came in.
At once Frau Nordern went on to the attack.
‘Hans, the money Bodo wants for his musicians!’
‘Not my musicians,’ Bodo said.
‘I won't make anything out of them.’
Frau Nordern gave him a disbelieving stare.
‘Anyway,’ she said.
‘You tell him Hans — and we only want three.’
Herr Nordern hesitated, then nodded.
‘Yes.
Er, come into the bedroom, Bodo.’
Bodo blinked.
‘A secret session.’
He guffawed.
‘It's about a musician not a disarmament conference.’
‘Yes, yes.
But come anyway.’
Herr Nordern brusquely waved Bodo into the bedroom and closed the door behind them.
‘What the —’ Bodo began, then saw the expression on his brother's face.
‘Oh.
Serious.’
‘Maybe, perhaps, I don't know.’
Herr Nordern rummaged in his desk, brought out a half-bottle of schnapps, two glasses, and poured drinks.
‘Sit down,’ he said.
‘It's this Werner business, Bodo.
Helga went to Ostkreuz last night.’
Bodo whistled.
‘Not wise, Hans.
Not wise.’
‘I know that.’
Herr Nordern gulped his drink.
‘But she didn't tell me she was going.’
Bodo downed his drink and held his glass out for more.
‘So what happened?’
Herr Nordern told him, barking savagely at an innocent Paul who poked his head around the door to ask what time they wanted lunch.
‘Asking about Werner….’
Bodo shook his head.
‘Yes.
But what's the harm in it — I mean what?’
Herr Nordern said, then held out his hand.
‘I know.
I know.
Anyway, she saw this man Marx.
What do you know about him?’
But Bodo did not get round to answering that question because, to another curse from Herr Nordern, the door opened again — only this time the frame was blocked by Frau Nordern, her pale face paler than usual, her hand at her throat, and her eyes wide and staring.
‘It's for you,’ she said to her husband.
‘It's that man from Ostkreuz.
It's Sergeant Marx.’
There was a stunned silence, broken finally by Herr Nordern.
‘What?’ he said.
‘Marx?
Here?’
‘At the door,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘He's waiting.’
‘I can't believe….’
Some of the blood drained from Herr Nordern's face.
‘What does he want?’
‘He wants you,’ Frau Nordern said.
The rest of the blood seeped away from Herr Nordern's face, leaving it as white as his wife's.
He licked his lips and looked at Bodo who, grim-faced, shrugged.
‘Have to see him,’ Bodo said.
‘He isn't going to go away.’
‘No.’
Herr Nordern stood up rather stiffly and squared his shoulders.
‘He won't.’
Automatically he smoothed his hair and adjusted his tie.
‘Well, it can't be anything —’ and again, passionately, ‘it can't be!
You'll come, Bodo?’
‘Sure.’
Bodo stood up, as solid as a brick wall.
‘All the way.’
‘Right, then.’
Herr Nordern went through the sitting-room to the front door.
Marx was there, leaning on the door-frame, a hat rammed on the back of his head, a cigar jammed in the corner of his mouth, blinking his bloodshot eyes.
‘You want to see me?’
Herr Nordern said.
Marx nodded and gave a chesty cough.
‘What about?’
Herr Nordern tried to sound firm and innocent although, as he was desperately aware, sounding feeble — and guilty.
Marx coughed again.
‘Perhaps we ought to go inside.’
‘Inside?
Oh, of course.
Yes.’
as if they were doing a bizarre dance, followed by Marx, Herr Nordern backed through the tiny vestibule, into the sitting-room, and a silent, apprehensive circle of Norderns.
‘You've met my wife, I think,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘This is my mother-in-law, my children, and my brother.’
Omi and the children got perfunctory nods from Marx but he peered intently at Bodo who, massive arms folded, was leaning against the wall.
‘I know you,’ he said.
‘And I know you,’ Bodo answered in a tough, unyielding voice.
‘And you've got your hat on.’
Herr Nordern's heart jumped, but Marx merely raised his eyebrows.
‘So I have,’ he said, and removed it.
‘'Scuse me.’
He addressed Frau Nordern.
‘Where I spend my time people don't bother.’
Herr Nordern gave a placatory smile and was about to say, completely untruthfully, that he — they — understood, when, to his horror, Bodo butted in again.
‘Well we do here,’ he said in his toughest voice.
Herr Nordern held his breath but Marx nodded.
‘I suppose you do.’
There was a long moment's silence.
The Norderns looked at Marx who stood before them as if he was quite happy to stand there in silence all day.
Finally Herr Nordern spoke.
He tried to sound jocular but realised that he sounded almost pleading.
‘And what can I do for you, Sergeant?
It is Sergeant, isn't it?’
‘Yes.
Detective Sergeant.’
Marx looked around for an ashtray, found one, and deliberately ground out his cigar-end.
‘It's about the accident.
You remember that, I suppose?’
Again Herr Nordern was going to speak, knowing as he did so that he would sound feeble, when again Bodo stepped in and said, in a distinctly non-feeble voice, which sounded like a cement-mixer, ‘Of course he remembers.
Get on with it.’
Herr Nordern's pounding heart stopped momentarily.
‘Oh my God,’ he thought.
‘Oh Bodo, please keep your mouth shut.
Don't provoke the Police.
Don't make matters worse.’
But Marx, in an equally tough voice, merely said, ‘O.K. Let's do just that,’ put his hand in his breast pocket, slowly pulled out a horribly official-looking envelope, and slowly and carefully took from that an even more horribly official-looking form, folded once, in what to Herr Nordern seemed an indescribably sinister manner from top to bottom instead of side to side.
Marx unfolded the form and spoke to Herr Nordern.
‘Perhaps you'd like to sit down.’
‘Yes.
Yes, if you say so.
Thank you.’
Herr Nordern sank on to the sofa and, astonishingly, found himself holding his wife's hand, and feeling hers firmly gripping his.
Frau Nordern turned her head.
‘Erika, Paul, go to your room.
Omi?’
But as Erika and Paul obediently, docilely, left the room — not without a backward glance from Paul — Omi shook her head.
‘I will stay here if I may,’ she said, looking at Marx as if he were an unpleasant insect.
Not that the look bothered Marx.
He blinked at Herr Nordern, then peered at the document and began to read aloud, in a hoarse voice: ‘By Order of the Minister of Justice, I, the Chief of Police of the City of Berlin…’
In Omi's room, the door opened a crack: herself frightened, Erika peeked into the sitting-room and hushed an even more frightened Paul into silence as he whispered, ‘What is it?
What's going on?’
‘Nothing,’ Erika whispered back.
‘It's all right,’ although, as she looked through the crack it did not seem all right at all ; in fact it seemed all wrong.
Her father and mother were sitting tensely on the sofa, Omi at the table, upright, disdain on her fine features, Bodo, huge against the wall, and all of them staring at the stubby, shabby, ash-stained figure of Marx, blinking through his red eyes at the document and reading aloud in an artificially solemn voice, practised in legal jargon and with which he, no doubt, had read out a hundred, a thousand, such documents.
‘…of the City of Berlin…you, Herr Nordern, official, of 13 Klara-Lettkin-Strasse, Biesdorf, in the jurisdiction of the City of Berlin, are hereby given official notification that —’
‘Oh,’ Erika placed her hand over her mouth.
‘Please,’ she thought, ‘please please.’
And then summoning up all her courage, listened to Marx continue.
‘That the accident at the corner of…resolved…culprit apprehended…said Herr Nordern cleared of all suspicion…and etc., and etc., and etc., And that's that,’ Marx said unemotionally as he folded the form and slid it back into the envelope.
Herr Nordern felt his hand tremble.
With an effort of will he tried to stop it but it carried on trembling.
‘Cleared?’ he said.
‘Cleared?
You mean…you mean I'm cleared?’
‘That's right.’
Marx stuck the envelope into his pocket.
‘Actually, I shouldn't be telling you yet, but as your wife came to the station saying how worried you were I thought I'd call in and tell you.
You don't mind, I hope?’
‘Mind!’
Herr Nordern jumped from the sofa, exultant.
‘My God, thank you.
Thank you, Sergeant.
Cleared!
Do you hear that, Helga?
Bodo?
Ah!
A drink.
We must have a drink on it.
Erika, Paul, come in, come in.
Get some glasses, Erika.
Ha! ha!
Sergeant, you'll have a drink with us?
Of course you will.’
He opened a bottle of brandy, his hands trembling and his face no longer white but red.
‘Here Sergeant.’
He handed a brimming glass to the imperturbable Marx.
‘And thank you.
Thank you very much.
Very much .’
Marx downed his glass in one gulp and absent-mindedly held it out for more.
‘That's all right,’ he said as Herr Nordern eagerly refilled it.
‘You would have heard officially on Monday but I thought why not tell you now and save you a week-end's worry.
I was passing anyway.’
‘Passing!’
Herr Nordern laughed.
‘I'm glad that you were, Sergeant.
Hey, Helga?
Bodo?’
He filled glasses and took one himself.
‘But the other man, the culprit?’
‘Oh,’ Marx was dismissive.
‘We got him.
It's like I said, the witness got the licence number garbled.’
Herr Nordern gave a huge sigh of relief.
‘You did say that, Sergeant.
Yes, you said that when I saw you at the station, ha! ha!’
‘And the victim?’
Omi whispered from her seat behind the table.
‘Oh, him.
He seems to be pulling round,’ Marx said.
‘Thank God,’ Omi said, a sentiment shared cordially by all the family.
‘And thank you again, Sergeant,’ Herr Nordern said, as Marx stood up, spilling cigar ash over himself and the carpet.
Herr Nordern shook hands with him, escorted him to the door, and saw him down the stairs as an excited buzz broke out among the family.
‘I can't say how glad I am,’ Frau Nordern said.
‘Over!
That nightmare.’
‘That's the word.’
Herr Nordern came back, rubbing his hands.
‘Nightmare.
I can't believe that it is over.
You were right, Bodo, saying to leave the matter alone — although you gave me a turn when you were so…so abrupt with the Sergeant.’
Bodo sat down, making the chair creak.
‘You don't want to let the cops walk all over you,’ he growled.
‘Anyway, I knew it was nothing when he came in.’
‘You did?’
Herr Nordern said.
‘Sure.
They come in twos when they're out for trouble.
Anyway, you were innocent all along.’
‘Ach!’
Frau Nordern waved her arms.
‘What does it matter.
It's over, that's the thing.’
‘And it's past lunch-time,’ Herr Nordern said, adding hastily, ‘not that I'm bothered, but the children, and Omi….’
Lunch was ready, Bodo, pressed to stay, was persuaded, two bottles of wine were opened, a good, warming goulash brought in, and then, as Herr Nordern rather ceremoniously raised his glass to offer a toast, the telephone rang.
The whole family groaned, then burst out laughing.
‘Leave it,’ Herr Nordern said as Erika moved to take the call, but, as usual, the phone was hard to resist and, pulling a face, Herr Nordern took the call himself.
The line was surprisingly good, free from the usual squawks and clicks, and coming through, smooth, bland, was the voice of Uncle Karl.
‘Hans?
My dear fellow.
Karl here.
How are you, and the family?’
‘Well.
We're all well,’ Herr Nordern bellowed from force of habit.
‘In fact we're very well indeed.’
‘Really?’
Karl sounded intrigued.
‘Hans, you sound…exhilarated.
Have you heard some good news?’
‘Yes, yes!’
Herr Nordern was triumphant as he told Karl of Marx's visit.
‘Ahh,’ Karl purred with satisfaction.
‘Splendid.
Simply splendid.
Of course I never doubted that your excellent police force would catch the real culprit, but it must have cleared your mind.
Most unpleasant having something like that hanging over your head.
No —’ in answer to Herr Nordern's promptings —‘I'm truly sorry but I can't join you today.
Actually I was calling to confirm my little trip with Erika tomorrow.’
The phone was handed over to Erika, who confirmed the trip and then gave the phone to her mother, who exchanged a few banalities and then handed it to Omi, who cooed and clucked and finally returned it to Herr Nordern who said, briefly, that they all looked forward very much to seeing Karl again and firmly replaced the receiver before anyone else could claim it.
‘Eat,’ he said, in a voice which meant, undeniably,now .
Eat it was, the goulash excellent, good black bread, and the wine very passable.
Herr Nordern looked around the table, exuberant, dizzy with happiness, and then, remembering the toast he had been about to make, raised his glass.
‘To us,’ he said proudly.
‘To all of us, but especially to you, Erika.
The week of your life ahead of you!’
Frau Nordern and Omi beamed on Erika, Bodo banged the table with his fist, making the plates bounce alarmingly, Erika blushed, and, for reasons known only to himself, Paul went a fiery red, too.
‘And what did Karl want with you?’
Frau Nordern asked when the hubbub had died down.
‘Oh,’ Erika said.
‘It was about tomorrow.
Tomorrow ,’ she repeated after getting a blank stare from her mother.
‘I'm meeting him, to go on a trip round the city.
That's if the weather is good.’
‘Of course, I'd quite forgotten,’ Frau Nordern said.
She spooned goulash down her handsome throat.
‘Where will you take him?’
‘The zoo,’ Paul butted in, only to be butted out by his mother.
‘The zoo!’
She was blistering.
‘You might as well say take him on the swings in the park.
What would you say, Omi?’
Omi half-smiled.
‘It isn't the weather for sightseeing, but he might care to look at the old Adlon hotel.’
Herr Nordern, pouring out more wine, shook his head.
‘Do you think so, Omi, really?
Not much to see there and it's a bit near the Bun —’ he chopped his sentence short.
‘Sorry.’
He coughed.
‘Shouldn't have mentioned it, but you know what I mean.’
They did — even Paul.
Herr Nordern had been about to say ‘the bunker,’ the stretch of waste land behind Friedrichstrasse where, in his concrete tomb, as the Russians had battered their way into the city in 1945, Hitler had lived his final appalling fantasy; commanding armies which did not exist, so condemning thousands, hundreds of thousands of civilians to death in those final lunatic days.
Under docks and willowherb, the Bunker was still there, sealed but poisoned and poisonous, in a haunted city the spectres of an evil past still emanating from it, not least the ghosts of the six children of the Goebbels, killed by their own parents as a final insane act of homage to Der Führer.
For a moment the ghosts hovered around Klara-Lettkin-Strasse until Bodo exorcised them.
‘Take him on a tourist bus,’ he said.
‘They're still running.
Whizz round the sights and then if you've got any sense get back inside the Palast.’
Although the idea of the Palast appealed to Frau Nordern she was not too sure of the propriety of Karl's being whizzed around anywhere, especially on a tourist bus.
Bodo grinned.
‘Well…what about you Paul?
Any more ideas?’
Paul had plenty but as, owing to a fixed and completely unbreakable appointment with the F.G.Y., he was not going on the tour, his ideas were of no consequence.
‘But you're coming to lunch,’ Erika said, consoling him.
Paul perked up at that and, in any case, Herr Nordern shifted the topic.
‘Wait until tomorrow before you decide,’ he said to Erika.
‘The weather might be too bad, anyway.’
That prospect looked increasingly likely as the day wore out its brief existence.
The clouds were lifting and breaking and at dusk, as Erika padded home from her run in the park, the temperature was falling.
It grew colder still as the night fell, a crackling frost under a sickle moon, but the coldness did not reach into the Norderns' flat and it would not have done so even had the central heating broken down, the joy and relief of the family generating enough warmth to melt the polar ice-cap if necessary.
‘I can't say how I feel,’ Herr Nordern said for the twentieth time.
‘I really can't.
It's all over.
Done with.
Finished.
Now all we have to do is our duty to the State and it's full steam ahead for the Norderns.’
Frau Nordern agreed, although not without adding a rider of her own: ‘I always did think that Bodo was being alarmist.’
But she said that almost as if it were expected of her rather than with conviction — and the family knew it.
Paul, in fact, moved to Bodo's defence.
‘Uncle Bodo is all right,’ he said, only to be crushed by his mother.
‘And who said he wasn't?’ she demanded, and, pulverising as well as crushing, added, ‘Go and tidy your room or you won't watch television tonight.’
Paul, whose remark had been the opening move in a carefully planned campaign to enhance Bodo's image so that his plan to leave school and work with him would not meet resistance, meekly accepted the rebuke and the order, especially as the television he wanted to watch was a rock concert.
Frau Nordern sternly watched Paul's retreating back then, dotingly, smiled at Erika.
‘You ought to get ready,’ she said.
Erika, rubbing her hair after’ her shower said, ‘Get ready for what?’
‘For tomorrow,’ her mother said.
‘You're going to Fräulein Silber's.’
Erika laughed.
‘There's ages of time.’
‘No.’
Frau Nordern was sharp.
‘You'll be busy tomorrow and besides, I like things done with plenty of time to spare.’
Erika following her, she bustled into Omi's room and began rummaging in the dressing-table pulling out garments to a running commentary of, ‘Are these clean?
Is this?
This one isn't.
I'll lend you my suitcase, yours isn't fit to be seen….’
Erika sat on her bed smiling and when, after a few vigorous minutes, her mother announced that all was ready, she burst out laughing.
‘And just what is so funny?’ her mother demanded.
‘Nothing really,’ Erika said.
‘It's just that I might as well have stayed in the sitting-room, that's all.’
She laughed again and, after a suspicious moment, Frau Nordern laughed too, a rich, throaty chuckle.
‘I suppose so,’ she said.
She shook her head.
‘I can't get used to the idea that you're growing up and can look after yourself.
And I shouldn't go through your things.
I know I hated it when Omi did it to me when I was your age.’
‘It's all right, Mother.’
Erika smiled, an enchanting open smile which illuminated her entire being and the entire room.
‘Look away.
All open for inspection.
No secrets.’
Frau Nordern looked at Erika for a long, long moment.
‘No secrets,’ she said.
‘Bless you, child.’
In the next room, Herr Nordern, reading the evening paper, heard the laughter, and the warm voices, and felt again profound happiness and contentment in his heart.
He lowered his paper, lighted a cigar, and looked across at Omi.
‘We live in a good country,’ he said.
‘Mmm?’
Omi raised her head from her crochet-work.
‘If you say so.’
‘I do say so.’
Herr Nordern was vigorously affirmative, combative even, but he was taken aback by Omi's response.
‘You didn't think that the other day,’ she said.
‘I beg your pardon?’
Herr Nordern was indignant.
Omi hooked a thread around her crochet-hook.
‘When you were complaining about the Police,’ she said.
Herr Nordern raised his hand in protest but let it fall again.
‘Ah,’ he thought, ‘why argue?
She's just an old woman living in the past, and if I never have another one this evening is going to be a good one.’
And good it was: good wine, good food, and a good film on the television, even Paul's request for the rock concert being allowed — for ten minutes.
Omi sat quietly crocheting, Erika conscientiously worked on her sightseeing list for the next morning, writing out appropriate comments from the official guide to the city, Herr Nordern, guilt-free, smoked and drank brandy and Frau Nordern sat by him, having a drink, too, wondering whether she might have a cigarette — but deciding not to, preferring to keep that secret to herself.
And then, good-night, and goodnight, and the Nordern family went to bed.
As ever, Erika sat with Omi for a while, holding her hand.
‘You are packed already?’
Omi said.
‘Yes.’
Erika looked at the splendid silver plastic suitcase on her bed.
‘Mother did it.’
She laughed again, but Omi did not join in.
Erika looked at her thoughtfully.
‘Omi,’ she said, ‘you're not sad, are you?
I'm only going to be away for a few days.’
‘I know.’
Omi patted Erika's hand.
‘Only a week, and you must have a good week.
And you must have a good morning tomorrow with Karl.’
Erika had a sudden thought.
‘Why not come with me?’ she asked.
A half-smile played on Omi's lips.
‘I think not,’ she said.
‘Not in this weather, but thank you for the thought, my dear one.
Thank you.’
The flat fell quiet.
Erika slipped into the bathroom and met her father coming out.
‘Good-night,Liebchen ,’ he said.
‘Oh, just one thing.
‘Tomorrow….’
‘Yes?’
Erika said.
‘Show Karl Bebel-Platz,’ Herr Nordern said.
‘Make sure he doesn't miss it.’
And on that enigmatic note he kissed her cheek and went to bed.
When Erika tiptoed back into the bedroom Omi was asleep.
Erika took the Watchwords from her hands, flicked out the bedside lamp, and stood by the window: a silent street.
No one moving, not a man nor a woman, not a car or a motor bike, not even a dog barking under the sickle moon which shone in an opalescent sky surrounded by a diadem of stars.
In the beech tree, over the boulder, the owl called, for all the bitter frost warm in his golden feathers, and soon Erika was in her fleece of down, sleeping the sleep of the young and the innocent and the pure of heart.
NO SNOW fell during the night and at 10.00, after Erika had run her five kilometres under a dazzling blue sky, Karl ran and said that he thought he rather did that a brief tour of Berlin would be possible and that he would be waiting in the lounge of the Palast at 11.00; adding that Paul should meet them at the television Tower at 1.00
Waiting he was in the gold and brown of the Palast, himself immaculate, pink, flashing his smile as he complimented Erika on her appearance and, in her leather coat and with her fur hat at a rakish angle, and her face glowing with health, Erika deserved the compliment.
‘The streets aren't icy?’ he asked, and, reassured that they were not — not in the city centre, anyway — he suggested that they might take a short stroll, just a short one, if that suited Erika.
‘Of course,’ Erika said.
She took out her list.
‘I thought that we would go up the Television Tower and see the view, then go to the museums, especially the Pergamon, then the Palace of the Republic, then….’
Her voice died away as Karl benignly shook his head.
‘A most interesting programme, my Dear, but perhaps a little too much.
I have seen a great many sights, you know.
My hosts have taken me around, and I thought that we would have lunch in the Television Tower — in fact I have reserved a table.
No, I thought that perhaps a stroll down Unter den Linden — such memories for me there — and then I have another idea.
A surprise, ha! ha!’
A little crestfallen, Erika put her list away and dutifully said that of course she would be happy to do whatever Uncle Karl wished to do.
‘So.’
Karl waved a hand, a brown-uniformed attendant gave them a respectful salute, and they sauntered out.
Karl tucked Erika's arm under his as they crossed the bridge over the green, splintered ice of the Spree which formed a chill moat around the great museums, by the great dome of the Protestant Cathedral, and on to the broad stretch of Unter den Linden.
‘Ah,’ Karl shook his head as he looked down the avenue.
‘It has changed, the bombing, the battle, but…some has survived, shops, libraries, the Embassies….’
Erika took out her notes.
‘A great deal of damage was done during the anti-fascist struggle but the German Democratic Republic is restoring these monuments to art and culture.’
‘Admirable.’
Karl took a pace or two forwards.
‘My hosts have driven me down the avenue and given me the figures.
Most admirable.
And to see that —’
With surprising agility Karl darted across the road to where, on a bronze plinth, brazen himself, a mighty figure rode a horse.
Erika followed Karl with a few lithe strides.
‘Frederick the Great,’ she said, unreeling her lesson learned by rote.
‘King of Prussia.’
She pointed to the frieze under the formidable warrior-king: ‘General Yorck, General Blücher, General Scharnhorst, principal generals of the War of Liberation in which the German people freed themselves from French occupation in 1813.
Although representatives of the Prussian ruling class they played a necessary role in the development of the national aspirations of the people which was to lead to our new Germany….’
But Karl was not listening.
He placed his hand on the plinth as one might lay a hand upon a sacred object so that its virtue might flow from it to oneself.
But when he turned, his face was as bland as ever.
‘Yes indeed,’ he said.
‘Frederick and the generals, Prussian generals, ha! ha!’ he laughed meaninglessly.
‘Shall we saunter on?’
With less alacrity he allowed himself to be guided across the other lane of the avenue, on to the safety of the pavement, and to an oddly impressive square, framed by the Catholic Cathedral, the Opera House, and the old Royal Library.
‘The State restored the Cathedral,’ Erika said.
‘It was badly damaged by shelling in 1945.’
‘Most meritorious,’ Karl murmured.
‘I do know the square — rather well.’
‘It is called August-Bebel-Platz now,’ Erika said.
‘And Father thought that you ought to see this.
It is new since your time.’
She walked across the cobbles and pointed to a plaque set in the wall of the Library.
‘Another interesting sight.’
Karl gave a vulpine smile as, in her clear voice, Erika read aloud:
‘On this spot, on the tenth of May, 1933, under the evil spirit of Fascism, the gangsters of the Nazi party burned the noblest works of German and World Literature.
‘Let the burning of these books remind us to be everlastingly on our guard against Imperialism and War.’
The plaque, and the Platz , always moved Erika.
And the scene of the burning of the books, seen on film by her many times, was as vivid as an actual memory: Hitler's jack-booted thugs in their brown shirts, swastikas on their arms, heaving the books from the Library and heaping the heritage of the world on to a pyre, dancing and gloating as the flames consumed book after book, volume after volume: Heine, Schiller, Brecht, Thomas Mann, Einstein, Freud, Marx: history, poetry, novels, science, the works of philosophers, psychologists — men and women who had dedicated their lives for the betterment of the brutes who burned their books; brutes living in utter ignorance, leading lives as dull and limited as the beasts of the fields, inspired only by resentment, vile prejudice, and blind hatred of what they could not understand, and, it was true, victims themselves of poverty and ignorance seeking victims in their turn — and finding them.
And not only in their books.
Erika knew the words of a Protestant pastor, himself tortured and executed by the Gestapo: ‘First they came for the Jews — and we said nothing.
Then they came for the Communists — and we said nothing.
Then they came for the Socialists — and we said nothing.
Then they came for the Trades Unionists — and we said nothing.
And then they came for us, and there was no one left to defend us.’
‘Yes.’
Standing in the Platz in her elegant coat and furs Erika was on the verge of tears: first the books were thrown on to the flames and then, in a terrible and inevitable sequence, human beings were put into the incinerators.
And it was an inevitable sequence.
The books were the products of minds, and the minds were the products of brains and bodies, so what more natural than to burn the bodies which produced the minds which produced the books?
And all the rest of humanity which offended you, too: Jews, gipsies, the mentally handicapped, Poles, Russians — the Untermensch —— the subhuman, subhuman because they did not have blue eyes and blond hair, white skin or, that vaguest, and because most vague, most potent of myths, the right blood .
as if humanity distinguished between the blood of a Jew, or a Pole, or an African, or an Indian — or a German.
Erika, born after the smoke of the death camps had stopped drifting across Europe, wanted deeply to try and say this to dapper Uncle Karl, born before the smoke fouled the skies.
She turned to speak to him, but he was not there.
‘Uncle?’
She ran past the Library to the corner of Unter den Linden and saw Karl, notable in his elegant overcoat, sauntering down the street.
‘Oh dear,’ Erika snapped her fingers and caught up with Karl.
‘Uncle, I thought that you would like to see the very spot where they burned the books,’ she said.
‘Yes, yes.’
Karl nodded.
‘Terrible.
Awful.
But I was getting a trifle chilled — just a trifle, you know, and on this beautiful day —’ he waved a gloved hand at the brilliant sky and the buildings, dazzling in a chiaroscuro of stone and snow, the snow making the grey stone look black, the stone making the snow blindingly pure.
‘Yes, such a day, and to stroll along as I did so many times in the old days.
How gay it was in spring, under the linden trees: people sauntering, the cafés full, everyone enjoying themselves, and to walk it now with —’ he smiled again, an elderly uncle's smile, recalling long lost days, when the linden trees bloomed along the avenue —‘with a pretty girl.
Ah…what memories among these buildings….
‘Yes.’
Erika's assent was less than whole-hearted, for, although she was proud of the care the State was lavishing on the old buildings, and although, in fact, she preferred this part of the city, she felt it a duty to defend the crude and blatant concrete of the post-war Berlin.
‘Nowadays most people go to Alexanderplatz,’ she said.
‘To the new city.’
‘Of course, of course .’
Karl clutched Erika as they negotiated a rather icy patch of pavement.
‘But this is new.’
‘Oh,’ Erika paused with Karl.
‘The Embassy.’
‘The Embassy .’
Karl, as it were, added the italics as he cast a speculative eye over a huge grey building which loomed over the avenue like a battleship over a flotilla of cargo boats and from which, in the still, clear air, hung a vast flag, red, with a golden hammer and sickle emblazoned on it.
Karl looked across the street to where, among the cargo boats, the French and British Embassies hung out their flags, then looked again at the battleship.
‘It is large, isn't it.’
Erika had to agree.
There was no denying that the Soviet Embassy was large, enormous, one might say, making lilliputian a convoy of Russian lorries parked outside from which, mysteriously, soldiers in olive green and red were taking canteens of food.
‘Yes,’ Erika said, feeling oddly defensive.
‘But of course, the Soviet Union is our best friend.’
‘So I understand.’
Holding Erika, Karl sauntered past a G.D.R.
policeman and looked sideways at the Russian troops.
‘Do you know,’ he said, ‘in all my stay here I have hardly ever seen a Russian soldier.’
‘No,’ Erika said.
‘The Friends are usually in the countryside.
They go to dances and, of course, they join in exercises with our People's Army.’
‘How comradely,’ Karl said.
‘How pleasant, too, dancing with the country girls.
So…unaffected .
No wonder you call them Friends.
The official title is it not?
Yes, I rather like that.
And this.’
He halted at the corner of Unter den Linden and Grotewohlstrasse.
Across the street, beyond a wide stretch of frost-laced gravel, there was a huge triumphal arch on which were four horses driven by a goddess of peace, over whom, in turn, hung two flags, both enormous as if vying with each other and both striped red, orange and black, the far one with those stripes alone, but the near one bearing the wreath, hammer and dividers of the German Democratic Republic, and under it all, cutting the avenue in half, halting it with the abruptness of Finis at the end of a book, and behind a fragile metal fence, snow on its top giving it an odd, festive look, there was a drab grey wall made of concrete blocks.
Karl gazed across the street, looking at the arch, and the horses and goddess, and the flags of the two Germanys.
‘The Brandenburger Tor,’ he said.
‘We call it the Gate of Peace now,’ Erika said.
‘The Gate of Peace.
Karl pressed his hand to his mouth and coughed.
‘What a charming name.
But the…the concrete?’
‘The Anti-Fascist barrier,’ Erika said dutifully.
‘It was built to prevent Fascist agents from the West entering the G.D.R.
and committing acts of terrorism.’
‘A most wise precaution,’ Karl said.
‘The Anti-Fascist Barrier.
And to think that in the West they merely call it the Wall.
But I see that we can go a little nearer.’
Looking carefully both ways, he led Erika across the road, on to the gravel plaza, and peered through the metal fence.
‘The Anti-Fascist Barrier.
How insignificant it looks, but what a bold conception.
Really, quite a stroke of genius.
But, Erika,’ he lowered his voice a little.
‘These people —’ he gestured to a group of men and women, posing in three lines, the front row kneeling, the tallest at the back, all beaming as a photographer stepped back in order to get their picture with The Wall in a clear focus.
‘Who are they?’
Not for the first time that morning Erika felt slightly uncomfortable.
‘They are tourists,’ she said.
‘Tourists?’
Karl raised his eyebrows.
‘Friends,’ Erika said.
‘Russians.’
‘And so they are!
So they are!’
Unnervingly Karl burst into a high-pitched hyena-like laugh.
His shoulders shook underneath his beautiful overcoat.
‘Ha! ha! ha! hee! hee! hee!
Oh dear!
Oh dear me!’
He dabbed his eyes with his immaculate handkerchief.
‘Forgive me.’
He exploded with laughter again.
‘Hee! hee! hee!
How Adolf would have relished this.’
‘Adolf?’
Erika turned and stared at Karl's face, crimson with laughter, horror dawning in her violet eyes.
Karl stopped laughing as suddenly as he had begun, his face grave and concerned and kindly.
‘Excuse me, my Dear, laughing so.
Most undignified in an old man.’
He poked his head forward, like a tortoise coming out from its shell.
‘You look quite shocked, Erika.’
Instinctively Erika recoiled.
‘Adolf,’ she whispered.
‘Ah!’
Understanding dawned on Karl's face.
‘I think I understand.
But I was thinking, looking at them —’ he gestured towards the tourists —‘seeing them in a group, it reminded me of a time in cadet school.
We had a group photograph with a long time-exposure and a friend of mine, a dear friend, ran from one end of the back line to the other and had his picture twice on the same photograph.
He was called Adolf.
Adolf von Seydlitz.’
Relief flooded through Erika, and showed in her face.
‘But of course!’
Karl slapped his side.
‘Of course, of course !
Adolf means only one person to you.
But remember, before that terrible man Adolf was an honoured name in Germany.’
‘Yes, Uncle Karl.’
Erika was contrite.
‘There, there.’
Karl patted her arm, making Erika feel that she was deeply in the wrong but was being forgiven.
‘A little mistake on your part, but we will forget it.
These misunderstandings do take place, the generation gap, as they say over there.’
He gestured to where the flag of the other Germany hung over the old Tiergarten .
Erika smiled, pleased that the little cloud had passed over.
‘I'm sorry.’
And, receiving another encouraging nod from Karl pulled out her list.
‘So, where would you like to go now?
Omi thought that you might like to see the old Adlon.
It isn't far —’
Karl shook his head.
‘Just between ourselves, I have been there!’
His eyes twinkled.
‘Just for old times' sake I went, not that there is much to see!
But I rather thought, you know, if you wouldn't mind, we might go to Treptower Park.’
‘Treptow?’
Erika was startled.
‘You mean the Pleasure Park?’
‘No.’
Karl shook his head, amused.
‘I'm a little too old for pleasure parks.
I thought we might go to the War Memorial.’
‘The Soviet War Memorial?’
‘Yes,’ Karl said.
‘I've heard about it but it is one of the sights my hosts haven't shown me.
Shall we go?’
‘If you want.’
Erika agreed but was somewhat dubious.
‘It's rather a long way, though.
We would have to go to Alexanderplatz and get the S-Bahn ….’
‘That won't be necessary,’ Karl said.
‘I have a car!’
He glanced at the watch Bodo admired so much.
‘And if the man is punctual he should be here — now!
And so he is.’
He pointed across the street to where a long, black, polished car had pulled up.
‘Good German efficiency,’ Karl said, as they crossed the street and climbed into the back of the car.
Karl leaned forward and spoke to the driver.
‘You have the map?’
‘Yes,’ The driver flourished a street plan, with a route marked in red.
‘Good.’
Karl settled back.
‘Go.’
With what to Erika, used to the erratic behaviour of the old Lada, was miraculous smoothness, the driver let in the gears and drove down Grotewohlstrasse but instead of turning left at Leipziger Strasse, carried on into a warren of tiny streets.
Determined to be her Uncle's guide Erika said, ‘I think that we are going the wrong way, Uncle.
There are only factories down here.’
‘I know, my Dear,’ lolling back in the car Karl nodded lazily.
‘But you must remember that I am an industrialist and, really, factories are as interesting to me as museums, ha! ha!’
The car zigzagged through the streets.
Karl, his head turned steadily to his right, peered intently at the run-down flats and battered buildings and factories lining small side-streets, each and every one of which ended in that apparently insignificant, almost unobtrusive wall of grey concrete blocks.
As they crossed the broad reach of the Spree at Elsenstrasse, where tugs were crunching through the ice, Erika pointed out what sights there were to see but Karl merely gave a perfunctory nod and returned to his absorbed stare through his window.
They drove past the big Siemens factory, plastered with huge portraits of Marx and Lenin, on to the broad, tree-lined avenue of Am Treptower Park, swung into a car-park, and stopped.
‘Treptow,’ the driver grunted.
Erika and Karl got out of the warmth of the car into a crystalline coldness, walked up an avenue lined with bare trees and came to an enclosed garden.
In its middle was a statue of a weeping woman holding her slain son.
The Motherland mourning her dead, Erika murmured.
‘The Motherland?’
Karl queried.
For a moment Erika was puzzled by the query, then she understood.
Karl would still think of Germany as the Fatherland.
‘It means the Soviet Motherland.
Of course there is a memorial to the German victims of Fascism and militarism.
It is on Unter den Linden and —’
‘I've seen it.’
Karl almost jerked the words out.
He turned his head and walked towards a flight of shallow steps above which jutted two triangles of red granite.
‘Red flags dipped in mourning,’ Erika said.
Karl nodded and began to walk slowly up the steps, Erika by his side, moving at a funereal pace.
Step by step they climbed, and as they ascended, black against the dazzling blue sky and glazed under a shroud of ice, a vast figure began to loom: a helmeted head, a flowing cape, a sword in one hand and a child in the other, and beneath its booted feet, visible as Erika and Karl reached the top of the stairs, a broken swastika, and bearing the whole gigantic figure, a grassy mound.
Between Erika and Karl, standing at the top of the steps, and the statue there was a sunken garden, its sides punctuated by slabs of concrete.
It was quiet, hushed almost.
No one else was in the garden and dense rows of leafless poplars damped the grinding roar of the lorries on Am Treptower Park.
‘And this is it?’
Karl said.
‘Yes.’
Erika pointed to the looming statue.
‘That is a Soviet infantryman of the Red Army.’
Karl peered bleakly forward.
The corners of his mouth were dragged down and his plump cheeks looked shrunken, like withered apples.
He looked very old.
‘I know the shape,’ he said.
‘Of course,’ Erika thought.
Having spent years fighting them, Karl would recognise a Russian soldier.
‘How tactless of me,’ she said to herself, and to cover up the awkwardness she felt she pointed at the statue.
‘The soldier is carrying a German child rescued from Fascism,’ she said, ‘and the swastika….’
But that hardly needed explaining.
‘Would you like to go down and look at the inscriptions on the slabs?’
For a long, long moment Karl hesitated then, with a curious shrug of his shoulders, he said, ‘Yes.
By all means let us see the inscriptions.’
They went down the steps and walked slowly around the garden.
The inscriptions in German and Russian were cut into the concrete blocks, each of which carried a bold, crude, but appropriate carving.
‘These represent the glorious struggle of the Soviet Union in the fight against Fascism,’ Erika said.
‘So I observe.’
Karl paused at the first block and then started back, looking truly astonished.
‘These words are by Stalin!
Josef Stalin!’
He cackled mirthlessly.
‘My God in His Heaven!
Josef Stalin!’
He shook his head in wonderment.
‘This must be the last place on earth where his words are public — except Albania.’
For a reason not quite clear to her, Erika felt embarrassed, as if there were an irony in Karl's words, especially the reference to Albania, which she felt she was not clever enough to understand.
‘I can't really say about that,’ she said, ‘but —’launching into a text learned by heart —‘although guilty of many deviations from Marxism-Leninism and Socialist legality, Stalin did lead the heroic resistance of the Soviet peoples in the anti-Fascist war.’
They sauntered on, Erika conscientiously describing each slab as they reached it: ‘Tribute to the glorious soldiers of the Red Army….
Tribute to the glorious airmen of the Red Air Force….
Tribute to the glorious peasants of the Soviet Union….’ her voice clear in the silent garden as the enormous statue loomed over them.
At the foot of the mound they halted and peered up at the statue, eerie under its glaze of ice, which stared sightlessly far above their heads.
A flight of steps led up the mound to the base of the figure.
‘We could go up,’ Erika said.
‘There is a room inside.’
‘And what is inside the room?’
Karl asked.
‘Well…nothing really,’ Erika confessed.
‘It is a dome.
With mosaics.’
‘Mosaics.
How very Eastern,’ Karl said.
‘This mound is a mausoleum,’ Erika said.
‘5,000 soldiers of the Red Army are buried under it.
Killed in the Battle for Berlin.’
‘5,000?’
Karl pursed his lips.
‘They lost more than that, 100,000, more like.
Berlin did not fall so easily.’
There was an edge to his voice, of defiance, almost.
‘I suppose so,’ Erika said, a little lamely.
‘There are other cemeteries.’
‘Yes.’
Karl turned and walked back along the other side of the garden, although this time Erika did not draw his attention to the words of Josef Stalin paying tribute to glorious workers, doctors, nurses, and so on.
They re-climbed the steps to the granite flags and there Karl turned and looked again at the statue, his face still sunken and sour.
Rather timidly, and feeling that somehow she had let her uncle down, Erika touched Karl's arm.
‘Don't you like it?’ she asked.
‘Like it?’
Something which might — or might not — have been a smile, touched Karl's lips.
‘Let me put it this way, child.
It is…inspiring.’
‘Really?’
Erika glowed with pleasure.
‘Yes, really.
That is exactly the right word.
This —’ he waved his hand —‘this has given me true inspiration.
Now, come.’
They took a pace or two and then, suddenly, Karl turned back and spat a couple of words.
‘I beg your pardon?’
Erika, a pace ahead, turned, too.
‘Nothing.
Nothing at all.’
Karl said sharply and then, with something of a return to his jolly, Uncle Karl manner, he said, thoughtfully, ‘Have you noticed, there are no birds here.
None at all.’