

REDEMPTION BY PARRICIDE 1925–1929
In 1793, the Fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford, erected a large building of simple classical design on the edge of their deer park.
To distinguish it from the medieval part of the college which hugs the splendid fifteenth-century cloisters, they called it New Buildings.
By 1925, New Buildings had begun to look old and stately.
Built from soft Headington stone, and blackened by the soot from college chimneys, it had something of the crumbly, grand appearance of a country house in Ireland.
In front of the building was a neatly made formal garden.
Behind and all around it was a richly planted park, in which deer grazed.
Beyond it, to the east, was a meadow, thick with fritillaries in spring and surrounded by a wooded path, known (after the essayist and moralist who was a fellow of the College in the early eighteenth century) as Addison's Walk.
There can be few more beautiful places in Europe.
C. S. Lewis was given rooms in New Buildings and moved in shortly after the end of the summer term, 1925.
He had expected to be given the rooms furnished by the College.
He had no money in his bank account, and when he gazed about at the huge drawing-room, smaller inner drawing-room and large bedroom, he had no idea how he was to find the money to buy the barest essentials — a few chairs, a table, a bed.
All that met his eye was the linoleum on the floor which the College bursar, in a spirit of generosity, said that he could keep.
The bed was necessary, because Lewis intended to sleep in the College, at least during the week in term-time.
Why not?
He was a bachelor, and this was certainly expected of him by his colleagues.
The modern habit of Oxford dons' merely coming into their colleges to teach, and perhaps lunch, before cycling or driving home to their wives and children had not caught on.
Most fellows would have dined in college on most nights, whether they were married or not; and the huge majority were still bachelors for whom the celibate life was the norm.
Lewis was now twenty-seven years old.
Mrs Moore was fifty-three.
Maureen Moore was nineteen, and when she had finished her qualifications she would become a music teacher.
There was no question of Lewis abandoning the Moores, but the body does not always believe the evidence of its senses; and from this time onwards Minto (as Lewis had begun to call Janie, after a variety of sweet to which she was devoted) began to develop a series of psychosomatic conditions which strengthened the ties binding him to her side.
A holiday on Exmoor in the course of that summer was dogged by her rheumatism.
If it kept her awake all night, then it was only right that she should wake up Jack for fresh hot-water bottles to be applied to the afflicted areas.
They consulted a doctor who told them that there was very little that could be done for a rheumatic attack.
Yet those are mistaken who imagine (as, for example, Warnie did) that Mrs Moore was nothing but a distraction from the serious business of work.
For one thing, although she was a distraction, she did try not to be.
She honestly believed that she was making life easier for Jack, by providing him with a background of home, where not only were meals provided and clothes mended, but his time was also jealously guarded.
She made a point of ensuring that others did not disturb him when he was at his books, even though it was not always a rule that she was able to keep herself.
I don't think I ever saw J[ack] work more than half an hour without the cry of ‘Barboys!’—‘Coming, dear!’, down would go the pen, and he would be away perhaps five minutes, perhaps half an hour; possibly to do nothing more important than stand by the kitchen range as scullery maid.
Then another spell of work, then the same all over again.
And these were the conditions under which Screwtape and indeed all his books were produced.
How, it may be asked, could any serious work be done in those circumstances?
The answer is that in the years when Minto was in her fall vigour, Lewis's flow of words was limited.
A glance at the shelf containing his long list of books shows us immediately that the bulk of his work was completed when Minto was in her dotage or after she died.
He was a fluent and rapid prose writer.
But his first major prose work —The Allegory of Love —took about eight years to complete.
This was the price he paid far having thrown in his lot with a person who with all her virtues — generosity, warmth of character, genuine and passionate admiration, as well as love, for Lewis himself — did not have the concept of a working day.
She belonged to that great majority of intelligent human beings who think of a book as something with which to beguile the hours of solitude of an evening.
After years of living with Lewis she still knew but did not know that ‘a man’ could regard reading as the main business of the day and everything else as an interruption.
On the other hand, if Lewis had been allowed to live in this way, though we might have had a few more mighty works of literary history from his pen, it is doubtful whether he would have written the works for which he is more popular.
He is the great chronicler of the minor domestic irritation, of the annoying little trait bulking to (literally) hellish proportions.
Domestic life with his father had been the training-school for this distinctively Lewisian vision.
Minto not only provided him with plenty of Screwtape- style domestic situations.
She also had a rich enjoyment of the comedy of human character, which was one of the things she shared with Lewis.
For example, at the next table at the Exmoor Forest Hotel, he had overheard two people talking to each other , a ‘very well bred looking old man with a dry peevish voice whom I took to be mentally deranged and a woman who was either his daughter or his nurse’.
Lewis took the trouble to transcribe what he remembered of their conversation:
HE: Look at this ham.
It's all cut in chunks.
SHE: Oh, do be quiet.
HE: Anyone would think they were cutting it for coal-heavers (pause) or stonebreakers.
It's…it's…wasteful you know, so wasteful.
SHE: Well, you needn't worry about that, need you.
HE(savagely): Look at that.
It's abominable.
SHE: Oh do be quiet.
Get on with your lunch.
I want to go out.
HE: What's it like out?
SHE: It's lovely.
HE: Oh yes, I know it s lovely.
What I want to know is, is it cold or hot?
SHE: It was cold when I first went out, but — HE(interrupting): There you are, cold.
I knew it was cold.
SHE: I was going to say, if you'd let me, that it was very hot before I got back.
HE (after a pause): Look at that.
It's really disgraceful to cut ham like that.
It was a nice ham too.
Well smoked, well cured and good fibre.
And they go and spoil it all by cutting it in chunks.
Chunks.
Just look at that (stabbing a piece and holding it up in mid-air).
SHE: Oh, do get on.
HE:(Something inaudible) SHE: Well they've as much right here as we have.
Why can't you get on and eat your lunch?
HE: I'm not going to be hustled over my lunch.
Hustled.
I won't let you hustle me in this way.
(A pause.)
Why don't you ask Mrs Ellworthy to let you make some of that nice porridge of yours.
SHE: How could I in a hotel?
(They had a long argument over this.)
Then HE (almost pathetically): Why don't you eat some of this salad?
It's beautifully flavoured (here his voice broke and he added almost in a whisper)— with CUCUMBER.
If it wasn't far the ham…
And so they went on.
The impulse which made Lewis transcribe the dialogue at such length was something which could have been directed into comic fiction.
It was the side of Lewis which reflected his father's love of ‘wheezes’.
Albert's love of recording the essential transitoriness of irritation, mere human annoyingness, gives an almost stream-of-consciousness effect in the Lewis Papers .
‘Sunday, August 10, 1913: I wish this awful man would not come into our house’ is a fairly typical entry, transcribed from Albert's pocket diary.
Obviously in the presence of some prize bore, Albert had scribbled this down and shoved the book across the table to Warnie or Jack.
Everyone in the world has had such thoughts.
The distinctive Lewisian thing was to have written them down.
In Albert's ‘wheezes’, human beings are often behaving foolishly, but they are observed with some warmth.
In Jack's transcriptions of such experiences, the vision of humanity is bleaker.
Already, before he has found a theological universe in which to create them, they have the feeling of lost souls, fodder for hell.
I suspect that Mrs Moore's sense of humour contributed much to the genuine streak of misanthropy in Lewis's nature.
In spite of this, his animus against his father was already diminishing.
At the end of the vacation — in the last two weeks of September — he returned to Ulster, and Albert gratefully recorded, jacks returned.
A fortnight and a few days with me.
Very pleasant.
Not a cloud.
Went to the Boat with him.
The first time I did not pay his passage money.
I offered, but he did not want it.’
Jack Lewis was about to embark on his professional career as a college tutor at Magdalen; and since not everyone is familiar with the way Oxford functions, it might be worth explaining exactly what his work was going to entail.
He did not need Albert to pay his fare on the Irish packet for, at last, he was an independent man, earning his own living.
As a Fellow of Magdalen he earned £500 a year, considerably more than his father's allowance of £210.
Lewis was about to embark on a three-stranded career.
He would be a university lecturer, responsible far lecturing perhaps once a week; a Fellow of Magdalen, involved in the administration of the College; and, perhaps most importantly, a college tutor.
He was responsible for all those men at Magdalen who were reading English.
He had to prepare them for the study of Old English (Anglo-Saxon), Middle English (that is, the language and literature of England from about 1200 until 1450, including Chaucer) and all the remaining periods of English literature up to the Victorian period.
He was also responsible for instructing his pupils in the History of the English Language and in philology (the growth, history and structure of words).
Some of this teaching could be done in classes — the routine language work, for example.
But the bulk of it was done by way of the tutorial, a weekly session in which the pupil read aloud an essay of some three thousand words to his tutor and they then discussed it.
This is the distinctive method of instruction at Oxford, and it is extremely prodigal of time.
If, say, on Wordswoth, he would, instead of having one hour in which they all discussed Wordswoth together, have seven hours in which they all discussed Wordswoth separately.
This method of teaching, though daunting at first far the pupil, is a formative experience, the aspect of the course to which most Oxford graduates look back with most gratitude.
It is not an hour in which a pupil sits learning what the tutor has to teach.
It is, or should be, an hour in which the pupil gradually comes to learn to defend himself or herself in argument, to have confidence in his or her own prose style, to grow up intellectually.
But it has a strange effect on the tutor.
For the pupils (to keep to the same example), it is one gloriously stimulating hour in which they have the chance to pour out all that they have felt and discovered about The Prelude .
Very few people, at nineteen or twenty, have the humility or cynicism to realize that their thoughts on any particular book will coincide with eerie exactitude to everyone else's.
For the tutor it is the seventh conversation about The Prelude he or she has had that week.
After only a very few years of teaching it becomes the twenty-first or the forty-ninth.
It is small wonder that many dons (as teachers at Oxford are called; a shortening of Latin dominus)develop a kind of crust, a persona, a ‘character’ to help them through these increasingly one-sided experiences.
‘O brave new world that has such people in it,’ says Miranda; to which donnish Prospero replies, ‘is new to thee.’
The good Oxford tutor never forgets that ‘tis new to thee.’
But in order not to forget it, an element of artifice, of manner, is essential from the start.
The younger the tutor, the more this manner will be felt necessary as a defence.
This is not to say that a don must affect mannerisms or artificial eccentricities as a way of keeping his distance from the pupil — though many have done this.
It is more an inevitable consequence of two people (particularity people of a similar age) finding themselves sitting together week after week in a setting which, socially speaking, is hard to define.
In Lewis's day, some formality was added to the proceedings by the undergraduate's wearing a gown.
Nevertheless, as they both sat in upholstered armchairs or a sofa in front of a fire, mere was something domestic about it.
‘I'm not your schoolmaster, ‘Lewis once crossly remarked to a pupil.
Nor quite, though, is the pupil considered the tutor's equal.
Again, in Lewis's day the relationship would have begun with the pupil calling his tutor ‘Sir’ and the tutor calling his pupil by his surname.
Later, when they came to know each other better, the pupil might graduate to calling him ‘Lewis’, but this would be in the case of intimates.
There is something curiously intimate about the tutorial — about meeting regularly à deux to have conversations of a depth and intellectual intensity which will probably never be repeated in the pupil's life.
Yet where the two do not like one another or the chemistry is wrong, the relationship will remain distant for the entire three years.
From the beginning, Lewis was a conscientious tutor who tried to keep the balance right between amiability or conviviality (not always possible between incompatible types) and his duty to the pupils to give them sufficient preparation for their examinations.
Since he was also responsible for teaching a weekly class of seven young women at Lady Margaret Hall (a women's college in North Oxford) and for teaching philosophy to the undergraduates of Magdalen, his first few years at the College were strenuous.
English, as a subject, had evolved cautiously, and at Oxford, far many years, it was on the defensive.
First, it was on the defensive against the Germans.
It was they, shamingly, who had led the great discovery of old Germanic literature, which included the Old English texts Beowulf The Wanderer, The Seafarer and the great rhythmical prose-sermons of Aelfric and Wulfstan.
English scholars, all classicists or ex-classicists, hurried to catch up and prove themselves the equals of the Germans in philological and textual skill.
Then again, English at Oxford was on the defensive against the other faculties.
Was English a ‘proper subject’ such as Law or Greek?
Since any well-educated person had read The Rape of the Lock or Paradise Lost , how could English justify itself as an academic discipline?
The answer was that it would make the study of literature highly historical and linguistic.
In order to do well at English at Oxford, you would have to show more than a purely aesthetic aptitude.
You would need to have a sound grasp of English history before you began; and you would need, at every point, to relate your study of the literature of any given period to the state and development of the language.
In the earliest stages, this required a fall working knowledge of the processes of Germanic philology and the history of sound-change, a branch of study which is extremely difficult to master.
It calls on the speculative ability of a scientist (for the so-called laws of sound-change such as Grimm's Law and Verner's Law are, like scientific laws, working hypotheses about the development of sound); it also requires a workable memory and a simple ability to reason, to see logical consequences, an ability not always found among students of literature.
Lewis worked extremely hard at preparing this part of the course for his pupils.
Needless to say, it was the part which most of them hated; they were longing to get it finished so that they could write their essays on Hamlet or Keats.
Without a knowledge of what was happening to Germanic diphthongs and vowels in the Dark Ages, however, even a clever pupil at Oxford in those days would have done badly.
Lewis organized ‘Beer and Beowulf’ evenings for his pupils, during which he taught them to chant mnemonics to master the processes of sound-change:
Thus Æ to Ě they soon were fetchin' Cf. such forms as ÞÆC and ÞECCEAN.
There is a kind of innocence about this which makes the modern reader, coming upon it all sixty years after the event, squirm with embarrassment.
The bluffness of Lewis, which before he became a don was only part of his nature ('Heavy Lewis'), was fast hardening into a persona.
The more arty and airy-fairy his pupils, the bluffer and beerier and louder he became.
Magdalen, which had been Oscar Wilde's college, always attracted a fair number of rarefied and aesthetic young men, and it was on to the path of this tradition that one of Lewis's first pupils, John Betjeman, happily placed his bedroom-slippered toe.
Betjeman appeared in a pair of eccentric bedroom slippers and said he hoped I didn't mind them as he had a blister.
He seemed so pleased with himself that I couldn't help saying that I should mind them very much myself but that I had no objection to his wearing them — a view which I believed surprised him.
Betjeman liked teasing Lewis.
He opted to be taught medieval Welsh as a special subject.
He was perfectly entitled to do this by the statutes of the English Faculty; but there being, at that date, no one in Oxford who could teach it, Lewis had to organize a tutor from Aberystwyth to be brought to Oxford once a week by train.
Sometimes Betjeman surprised Lewis by producing ‘a very creditable essay’.
But for the most part he was, in Lewis's eyes, an ‘idle prig’ who wasted his time cultivating well-born families and pretty boys and visiting exotic churches.
On one occasion when he had failed to produce an essay for the third week running, Betjeman wandered sheepishly into Lewis's room and threw himself on his knees by the hearth.
‘What is the matter, Betjeman?’ asked Lewis.
‘I'm hopeless.
I've failed to produce an essay yet again.
I shall be a failure, I shall have to take Holy Orders, but you see, I'm in such an agony of doubt, I can't decide.’
‘What can't you decide, Betjeman?’
‘Whether to be a very High Church clergyman with a short lacy surplice, or a very Low Church clergyman with long grey moustaches.’
Lewis treasured this conversation in after years, but at the time he found it disconcerting and annoying.
He bullied Betjeman.
‘You've got no style, Betjeman,’ he used to taunt the younger man.
‘Why can't you go away and get some style?’
Betjeman asked Lewis to a number of his parties, and Lewis found their High Church pansyism fairly difficult to stomach.
He saw Betjeman's qualities.
It may even have been — for he was quick to spot poetic talent — that he could see where Betjeman's true genius lay.
If so, it would only have increased his feeling of vulnerability and awkwardness for, until he had come to recognize that he was not going to be the greatest poet of the age after Yeats, Lewis was always hostile to poets.
Betjeman introduced Louis MacNeice to him with the words ‘He doesn't say much, but he's a great poet.’
It prompted in Lewis the immediate feeling that MacNeice was ‘absolutely silent and astonishingly ugly’.
He had a rooted antipathy to T. S. Eliot which, even after they had both become famous as defenders of the faith and brothers in Christ, was still hard to shake off.
When Betjeman failed his Divinity exams at the end of his first year, it would have been open to his tutor to plead for him with the College so that he could resit these comparatively unimportant exams and stay on at the University.
Lewis let Betjeman sink.
Betjeman recalled the moment in his autobiographical poem,Summoned by Bells :
I sought my tutor in his arid rooms, Who told me, ‘You'd have only got a third.’
Betjeman always loathed Lewis thereafter, though as they got older they both tried to make a bit of a joke about it.
In the spring of 1926, Lewis's own secret career as a poet took a great stride forward as he completed his long narrative poem Dymer .
He had been working on it ever since the end of the war, and showing it in whole or in part to his friends.
Harwood, when he had read Canto II, had ‘danced for joy’, and Barfield had a very high opinion of the work.
Reading Dymer today, it is hard to see why.
It reads like Masefield on a very bad day; and one uses the word ‘reads’ with caution, since few people in recent times, except Lewis enthusiasts anxious to have read their way through the entire canon, can ever have bothered to press on with Dymer .
He had been meditating on the parricidal theme which runs through Dymer since he was a pupil of Kirkpatrick's.
Versions of it in prose and rhyme had been written up while he was still at Gastons.
After meeting Mrs Moore, the theme of a powerful female entered the story —
Always the same…that frightful woman shape Besets the dream-way and the soul's escape.
The tale concerns a young man — Dymer — who escapes from a city — the Perfect City — which is a cross between Plato's Republic and an English public school, and becomes entangled with a hag-like older woman.
She seems gay at first but she is quickly transformed, after a short lovemaking, into a Spenserian crone.
From the ecstatic moment when
He opened wide His arms — the breathy body of a girl Slid into them he is penitent.
He thinks that if he is only slavish enough in his service of the old hag, the beautiful girl to whom he once made love will come back to him:
I would be content To drudge in earth, easing my heart's disgrace…
If at the year's end I saw her face somewhere.
But he never finds her again, and is imprisoned in his strange mixture of tormented lust and repentance.
The fruit of this mysterious union, into which Dymer has drifted, is a monster.
In the latter part of the story, the monster and Dymer are involved in an Oedipal struggle, and the father is killed.
By then the ‘monster’ has gone through many transformations, unable to decide who he is or which of his many disguises represents the true ‘him’; but he can only find liberty by killing the father who sired him.
‘Of course,’ Lewis insisted, ‘I'm not Dymer.’
Of course not.
What troubles the admirer of Lewis the critic — the man who had such an eye for excellence in the poets of past ages — is that he could be capable of stanza after stanza in which the verse is deadened by flat language, repeated clumsy enjambments and sheer technical incompetence.
Much of it just fails to scan correctly — very odd for someone who was lecturing and giving tutorials on English poetry.
In February 1926, Lewis plucked up courage and showed the poem to his colleague in the English Faculty, Nevill Coghill.
He begged Coghill to keep the matter to himself.
‘I don't want it known here [i.e. at Magdalen]that I am writing ‘pomes’[sic].’
Coghill felt that he had discovered a ‘considerable poem’ by ‘a powerful new poet’(though ‘in the Masefield tradition’), and he wrote back to Lewis in adulatory terms.
Lewis felt ‘as if you had given me a bottle of champagne…
Your remarks on the Masefieldian lines go to the root of the matter — I should say the bad Masefieldian lines for in some points one would not in the least be ashamed to have learned from him…
’ Lewis was especially grateful that Coghill was so appreciative of Dymer's ‘spiritual experiences’; and in particular that he approved of the theme of ‘redemption by parricide’which Lewis feared ‘would seem simply preposterous and shocking’.
Coghill did more than heap praises on Dymer .
He found a publisher for it.
When
Guy Pocock of Dent read the poem, he felt ‘there can be no possible question of its greatness…
I have not read any new poetry to touch it since the publication of The Everlasting Mercy [by John masefield].’
When the book did appear, in beautiful, almost square duodecimo format, it was adorned with a naked figure, the hero, embossed on the end board.
We stretches up beyond the sun.
He is there again in the frontispiece, like a figure in the Tarot cards, breaking his chains and dancing towards the spheres.
Behind him, a winged, helmeted figure leans on a cruciform, phallic-looking sword.
It takes a little while for an author to realize that his book has been a complete failure.
He waits and waits.
Lewis anxiously opened The Times Literary Supplement every Friday for a year, hoping far a good notice for the poem.
A favourable review did appear, but not until a year later.
By then, the poem had sunk from public consciousness.
It did not sell, and it made almost no impact whatsoever.
It is striking that Lewis did not want it known in College that he wrote ‘pomes’, but only natural that he should have looked outside Magdalen for soulmates within his own Faculty.
It is the least satisfactory feature of collegiate universities that for all social and administrative purposes — meals and meetings and life in Common Room — the academics minx not with those who share their intellectual preoccupations but with people of completely different disciplines.
In an ideal world this would mean that a lot of clever people, all anxious to communicate enthusiasm for their subject, would talk helpfully about it to their colleagues.
In a rosy paragraph of Surprised by Joy Lewis paid tribute to
Five great Magdalen men who enlarged my very idea of what a learned life should be — P. V. M. Benecke, C. C. J. Webb, J. A. Smith, F. E. Brightman and C. T. Onions…
In my earliest years at Magdalen I inhabited a world where hardly anything I wanted to know needed to be found out by my own unaided efforts.
One or other of these could always give you a clue.
('You'll find something about it in Alanus.’
‘Macrobius would be the man to try ‘etc) This is certainly how dons talk in the novels of Dorothy L. Sayers.
Whether they did so at Magdalen in the years 1925–1929 there are few alive old enough to remember.
The key phrase in Lewis's paragraph here is ‘my earliest years’.
He writes from the perspective of later years when the dons of Magdalen were anything but congenial society to him.
Even in those early years, when honest old men were tossing out such useful snippets of information as ‘Macrobius would be the man’, the college did not provide soulmates of the kind Lewis always craved.
Coghill, who had been a friend since they read English together as undergraduates in 1923, was now the English tutor at Exeter College.
He probably remained Lewis's best friend in the English Faculty during the early years at Magdalen.
The Faculty in those days was comparatively small, and still dominated by old men who were primarily literary historians.
Criticism of the kind which became popular with the pupils of I. A. Richards at Cambridge later in the century was absolutely unknown at Oxford.
Reading English was really a literary way of reading History.
The sort of scholarship which predominated was textual scholarship, as exemplified by Percy Simpson's monumental edition of Ben Jonson.
But there was a new broom coming into the English Faculty at this period and, although younger than Simpson, Wilson, Garrod and the rest, he appeared to be more radically reactionary.
This was the Rawlinson and Bosworth Professor of Anglo-Saxon, who had been appointed to his chair at the age of thirty-two, in the same year that Lewis got his fellowship at Magdalen.
His name was J. R. R. Tolkien.
It was another medievalist, under Tolkien's influence, who gave utterance to the view that ‘Literature stops in 1100; after that there's only books,’ but they were sentiments which in a crude way echoed Tolkien's own position.
A graduate of Exeter College, Oxford, Tolkien had read Classical Mods and then done a version of the English course which was rigidly philological, and did not concern itself with post-medieval literature.
Much more important than this was Tolkien's vast imaginative life, one day to make him famous as author of The Lord of the Rings , but at this date completely hidden from all but his family and close friends.
True, Tolkien's favourite books were the old books — in English, the Anglo-Saxon poets; in Icelandic, those of the Elder Edda; in Celtic, the old Welsh Triads and the Irish was by far the most distinguished scholar in his field of Old and Middle English, his interest in it all was very far from being ‘purely academic’.
It was as though an extraordinary story — a great mythology, with half-forgotten legends, languages and lore — had been unfolding in his head from the time he began to think; and his appreciation of the Old Literature was at the deepest level imaginative and creative.
An example of this can be seen in his youthful discovery of the biblical poems of the Anglo-Saxon poet Cynewulf.
In the poem Crist , Tolkien came upon the lines:
Eala Earendel engla berhtast ofer middangeard monnum sended.
(Hail Earendel, brightest of the angels, sent to men upon Middle Earth.)
The dry-as-dust scholar, the Percy Simpson sort of scholar, would merely note here that Earendel meant ‘shining ray’.
Tolkien himself thought that this bright ray was the Old English word far Venus, here applied to John the Baptist, herald of the Christ.
But it was not the mere surface meaning of the words which arrested him.
‘I felt a curious thrill, as if something had stirred within me, half awakening from sleep.
There was something very remote and strange and beautiful behind those words, if I could grasp it, far beyond ancient English.’
Tolkien brought a response on this level of emotional intensity to those texts which, for the majority of the English Faculty, were the ‘boring part of the course’.
Indeed, when Tolkien arrived, he found that the Old English being dished up to the likes of Betjeman was in a grossly truncated form, and the poetry was mainly seen as a quarry for ‘gobbets’— that is, short passages of a very few lines, used for the purposes of testing the candidates' knowledge of sound-changes.
Tolkien's suggestion was that the Faculty should reform its syllabus, giving space far a proper study of the Old English poets.
Since this would necessarily involve cutting out some other part of the course, he suggested stopping the syllabus at 1830, and removing the study of Victorian literature.
Lewis was strongly opposed to this move.
But on his first proper encounter with Tolkien — at a meeting with English Faculty colleagues at Merton College in May 1926 — he could not help being charmed by this ‘smooth, pale, fluent little chap’.
At that date, as Lewis himself tells us, he had two very marked prejudices.
‘At my first coming into the world I had been (implicitly) warned never to trust a Papist, and at my first coming into the English Faculty (explicitly) never to trust a philologist.
Tolkien was both.’
One of the first things Tolkien did after his return to Oxford in 1925 was to set up an Icelandic reading group such as he had enjoyed during his last job, as Professor of English at Leeds.
The idea was that the few men in the University who could read the original language of the Edda and the Sagas should group together with those who wished to learn, and read their way through the principal texts.
They called the group the Kolbitar (coal-biters), an Icelandic kenning which means those who sit around a fire.
The group was quite large.
It included Nevill Coghill from the beginning, and also John Bryson and George Gordon, who had supported Lewis as a candidate for the fellowship at Magdalen and became President of the college in 1928.
C. T. Onions, the philologist, another fellow of Magdalen, was a founder member of the Kolbitar, and not long after it was founded two other fellows of Magdalen were asked to join: Jack Lewis and Bruce McFarlane, the historian.
It was very much Kirkpatrick's method of learning a language.
Never having read a word of Norse (Old Icelandic) before, Lewis plunged in and attempted a few lines of Laxdaela Saga.
For someone with a good reading knowledge of German and Anglo-Saxon, the coguate tongue of Norse offered few difficulties.
Lewis, who had known the sagas in translation since Gastons days, was very happy with this further enrichment of the pleasures of reading.
But he was soon to find that Tolkien had more to offer him than the chance to learn Old Norse.
Lewis himself represents the summer of 1929 as the turning point of his whole life.
The fluency with which he himself wrote about this period was born out of a particular requirement.
A publisher had asked him to explain, some quarter of a century after the event, how he passed from scepticism to religious belief.
Minds more subtle than
Lewis's would probably have shrunk from the attempt.
And those who have made similar attempts at spiritual self-chronicling have hedged their story about with provisos.
‘It was not logic that carried might one say that the quicksilver in the barometer changes the weather.
It is the concrete being that reasons; pass a number of years and I find my mind in a new place: how? the whole man moves; paper logic is but the record of it.’
There can be no doubt that the ‘whole man’ Lewis moved from a position of atheism in his undergraduate years to an acceptance in the early 1930s of ‘mere Christianity’.
In his autobiography, he tries to see how this happened to ‘the whole man’— to the man who had been haunted since youth by a sense of joy’, to the man whose love of Autumn, of Northernness, even of his own mother, was always, as he came to feel, a longing for one without whom our hearts will find no rest.
But for a handful of obvious reasons, Lewis does not draw a picture of ‘the whole man’ in Surprised by Joy It is partly that a natural reticence made him draw a veil over the two greatest facts of his emotional history: his relationships with his father and Mrs Moore.
Probably, by the time he came to write Surprised by Joy his way of looking at himself had become so idiosyncratic that he was not able to see the significance of these two relationships in his religious, as well as in his whole emotional, development.
His old friend Barfield ruefully suggested that ‘at a certain stage in his life he deliberately ceased to take any interest in himself except as a kind of spiritual animus taking stock of his moral faults…
Self knowledge for him had come to mean recognition of his own weaknesses and shortcomings and nothing more.’
This, no doubt, was what enabled Lewis, in telling the story of his life, to separate the departments of his life, telling us only the ‘spiritual’ story and leaving that part of himself which Newman would have called ‘the concrete man’hidden in shadows.
So of his falling in love with Mrs Moore we are merely informed that ‘even if I were free to tell the story, I doubt if it has much to do with the subject of this book,’ and of his father's death in the late summer of 1929 that this ‘does not really come into the story I am telling’.
If either of these sentences were true, the story would not have been worth telling, since the conversion would have been a purely fanciful affair which bore no relevance to Lewis at the deepest levels of his being.
His reluctance to tell the fall story is all of a piece with his extreme slowness, after his religious conversion, to accept Christianity, a religion which tries the heart, which searches us out and knows us.
His embarrassment about self-disclosure gives the impression, belied by his other books, that he knew nothing of the mystery that grace works by means of human weakness, not by side-stepping it.
Since Lewis buried the secrets, first from himself and then from others, there is not much hope that those coming after will be able to follow the story of his conversion.
He gives us a few outlines of ‘paper logic’ followed by a paragraph or two describing some of the religious experiences themselves.
The logical crisis went back to the time when he first started to read philosophy as an undergraduate and related to his reading of the English Idealist philosophers, as well as to his return (for the purposes of passing his exams, and later as a tutor) to the English empiricists of the eighteenth century.
He had slowly, and unwillingly, come to feel the necessity of believing in an Absolute.
He was driven into something ‘like Berkleyanism’; and he took to feeling that there was no harm in positing the existence of some form of Absolute Spirit, so long as this was firmly distinguished from the God ‘of popular religion’.
Something which focused his intellectual uncertainties at this time was reading Alexander's Space, Time and Deity , which introduces ‘enjoyment’ and ‘contemplation’as technical terms.
‘We do not think a thought’ in the same sense in which we ‘think Herodotus is unreliable’.
When we think a thought, ‘thought’ is a cognate accusative (like ‘blow’in ‘strike a blow’).
We enjoy the thought that Herodotus is unreliable and in so doing, contemplate the unreliability of Herodotus.
I accepted this distinction at once and have ever since regarded it as an indispensable tool of thought.’
It was a linchpin of Lewis's theism that thought itself was a metaphysical act; his exploration of this theme in his book Miracles and the subsequent heated debate between himself and a fellow-Christian philosopher, Elizabeth Anscombe, provided one of the great academic sideshows in the Oxford of the late 1940s.
But of course, had Alexander's argument and Lewis's interpretation of it been irrefutable, had it been the kind of thing which compelled religious certainty, then all the philosophers in Oxford would have fallen to their knees when they had finished reading it.
They did not do so.
The fact that Lewis did is not a sign that he was illogical, merely that he was caught up in a spiritual drama which involved more than ‘paper logic’.
There were, primarily, the tugs of sympathy.
His closest friend from childhood, Arthur Greeves, was religious.
His closest undergraduate friend, Owen Barfield, was also a believer.
When he visited Lewis at Magdalen (Barfield was now working as a solicitor in London), the two friends often reverted to their ‘Great War’ and there was no doubt, any longer, who was going to be the victor.
Someone who occasionally joined in these discussions was a pupil of Lewis's, Alan Griffiths, who had also become a friend.
He, like Lewis, had not yet reached a position of religious faith, but he was dissatisfied with purely materialistic explanations for life's mysteries, and he found the conversation of Barfield intoxicating.
Once, when the three of them were sitting in Lewis's rooms, Lewis happened to refer to philosophy as ‘a subject’.
‘It wasn't a subject to Plato,’ said Barfield, ‘it was a way.
‘The quiet but fervent agreement of Griffiths and the quick glance of understanding between those two revealed to me my own frivolity.
Enough had been thought, and said and felt and imagined.
It was about time that something should be done.’
Among the circle of people he found most sympathetic, Lewis was in fact beginning to feel an odd man out.
Coghill and Tolkien were both Christians.
Chesterton, always a favourite author, was a Christian; it was at this period that Lewis read The Everlasting Man , and it made a profound impression on him.
But there was something, or, as Lewis came to feel, someone, else.
No doubt there were many contributory external or psychological factors in what was happening to the way he perceived his own personality.
It could be said that some sort of crisis was going to force itself up in the life of a strongly emotional young man who was so strictly engaged in compartmentalizing his life: a father who was never meant to know about Janie Moore; Minto herself cut off from college; almost all his friends kept in darkness about his emotional history, and most of them at this period unaware of his religious interests; pupils who were discussing with him the things he cared about most — books — but in a fashion which prevented his strength of feeling breaking through.
Griffiths far instance, only came across Lewis's power of imaginative invention and insight of which I had no conception before.
It must be remembered that Lewis always affected (I think it was deliberate) to be a plain, honest man with no nonsense about him, usually wearing, when out on a walk, an old tweed hat and coat and accompanied with a pipe and a dog.’
Beneath this exterior something was going to have to ‘give’ if Lewis was to survive.
Shortly before he admitted what was happening to him, he re-read the Hippolytus of Euripides.
He did so for no particular reason; it was just an impulse.
The theme of the play (as Lewis somehow expects all readers of his memoirs to remember) is the rejection and suppression of erotic love.
Phaedra, the all-powerful matriarch, conceives a wild passion for her stepson Hippolytus, who rejects her love with speeches hostile not just to her but to the whole erotic faculty.
In her grief, she kills herself.
When the father of Hippolytus, Theseus, returns from his travels, he is unable to believe that no sexual congress has taken place between his wife and his son.
He banishes Hippolytus and prays for his death, which is granted when Poseidon sends a sea monster to upturn the young man's chariot.
Too late, Theseus learns that his son loved and was loyal to him after all.
This is a play in which the priggish young hide their emotions while their elders give themselves up to extremes of passion.
It is also a play in which mortals are seen as figures of infinite pathos in a universe controlled by the whims of a cruel fate and a capricious deity.
Reading the play almost shattered Lewis.
His decision, since the madness of Doc Askins, to live without the emotions, was one that he realized was impossible.
‘There was a transitional moment of delicious uneasiness and then — instantaneously — the long inhibition was over, the dry desert lay behind, I was off once more into the land of longing, my heart at once broken and exalted as it had never been since the old days at Bookham.’
He began to feel himself approached by God, and in the summer of 1929 went through a mystical experience.
As befitted a man who had sung the pleasures of the ordinary, it occurred on a bus going up Headington Hill, on his way back to Mrs Moore's house.
There were no words in the experience, but he became aware of the fact that he was keeping something at bay; or another way of looking at it would be that he was wearing some rigid outer clothing, like corsets or a suit of armour.
In his moment of illumination on the bus, Lewis felt that he could either remain encased in this shell, or he could take it off.
After this strange sensation he felt as if he were a snowman ‘at last beginning to melt’.
Some time in that summer of 1929, in his college rooms at Magdalen, he ‘gave in, and admitted that God was God, and knelt and prayed; perhaps, that night, the most dejected and reluctant convert in all England’.
The ‘conversion’ was a recognition that God was God.
It was not a conversion to Christianity.
He writes about it in unforgettably dramatic terms and with the sublime egoism (to use the word purely, with no pejorative sense) of a man alone with God.
He really was, at that moment, one for whom there were ‘two and two only supreme and luminously self-evident beings, myself and my Creator’, as Newman described his own experience.
Since Lewis was to go on to become a faithful and devoted Christian, he writes rather as if the ‘conversion’ were a fait accompli , after which nothing could be the same.
But men have had such experiences and done nothing further about them, either because they have decided that there was less to the experience than they at first supposed, or because they could not endure the ethical and spiritual demands which were implied in the unspoken, ineffable moment of divine knowledge.
That summer, however, events were to place a seal on what happened to Lewis in his Magdalen rooms.
It is probably fanciful to cast Mrs Moore as Phaedra, or the P'daytabird as Theseus, but now Lewis was crossing the sea to see his father for the last time.
A great emotional business was reaching its climax.
Lewis continued, throughout life, to be obsessed not only by his father, but also by the possibility that his life could be interpreted in a purely Freudian way.
‘In those days, the new psychology was just beginning to make itself felt in the circles I most frequented in Oxford,’ he told readers of the 1950 reprint of Dymer .
Much earlier, at the time of ‘the Doc's insanity’ in 1923, Lewis had written to Greeves, ‘Arthur, whatever you do never allow yourself to get a neurosis.’
This piece of advice might suggest that his grasp of the ‘new psychology’ was still at the rudimentary stage, since he speaks of a neurosis as if it were something avoidable.
The letter is interesting, though, for the light it casts on his rooted dread of mental imbalance, and on his horrified feeling that the unsatisfactory relations which had existed between himself and his father since eariy adolescence might somehow mar him for the rest of his life: You and I are both qualified for it [neurosis]because we were both afraid of our fathers as children.
The Doctor who came to see the poor Doc (a psychoanalyst and neurological specialist) said that every neurotic case went back to the childish fear of the father.
But it can be avoided.
Keep clear of introspection, of brooding, of spiritualism, of everything eccentric.
Keep to work and sanity and open air — to the cheerful and the matter of fact side of things.
This was advice which he had been unable to fallow himself.
With the reading of Hippolytus and the cracking of the outer shell of his cheerful, hard-working, no-nonsense self, introspection was running riot and ‘spiritualism’— by which he clearly meant dabbling in affairs of the spirit rather than solely a preoccupation with the dead — had, by the summer of 1929, taken a firm grip on him.
No wonder, then, that when he came to write up the experience in Surprised by Joy he should have been so insistent that his father's last illness and death ‘does not really come into the story I am telling’.
He was frightened that hostile readers of his theological work would be able to say that his religion could be ‘explained’ in terms of the Oedipus complex (or perhaps the Hippolytus complex); and that he was only able to find peace for his heart by coming to terms with a Heavenly Father of his own projection when he had seen the last of his earthly father in Belfast.
So much did he dread that his own was a case of ‘redemption by parricide’ that he emphasized the unwillingness with which he accepted the divine call with language which is exaggerated and almost coarse.
He was a ‘prodigal who is brought kicking, struggling, resentful and darting his eyes in every direction for a chance of escape’.
He crossed the Irish channel on 12 August and reached Little Lea on the morning of the thirteenth.
His father had been ‘under the weather, since July, and Lewis was half-aware that he might be coming home for the last time.
Once he set eyes on Albert, he knew that the old man was very sick indeed.
His father rejoiced to see him, and noted that Jacks was ‘looking remarkably well and in great form’.
Jack fell quickly into the routine of looking out for the absurdities in his father's speech to put into a P'dayta-Pie for Warnie; but he had no heart for it.
He began to write about one such P'daytaism, and then crossed it out.
The truth was, as he wrote to Warnie, that ‘P. is rather seriously ill.’
It was cancer of the bowel, though the doctors were slow or unwilling to diagnose it at first.
Not long after Jack came home, Albert began to run high fevers.
His heart was not strong either, and by the end of the month he was confined to his bed.
Jack stayed up to nurse him.
Delighted to have his boy at home, Albert was in particularly cheerful form, in spite of his pain.
When the doctors broke it to him that he would need an operation, his son noted that ‘he is taking it like a hero.’
All of a sudden, Jack saw that his father was a sort of hero — a maddening, eccentric hero but a man whose decency, courage and good humour were as unshakable as his sincere piety.
The two men were enjoying a condition of harmony which had been unknown in all the previous years.
The house was fall of memories; but even to call them memories was to imply that Jack had put them behind him; and he had not.
‘Every room is soaked with the bogeys of childhood…
The awful rows, the awful returnings to school.’
He sat in the dining-room, able to enjoy a few biscuits and fruit rather than the ‘gargantuan midday meal which was hitherto compulsory’.
Every day he saw Arthur Greeves, who was still living next door, having studied art at the Slade School in London and returned to Belfast with no prospects.
Arthur, who had followed so much of Jack's inner journey, was the perfect companion during those strange days.
Much of the time, however, Jack was alone.
When his father was tucked up for the night, the son would wander out into the garden and enjoy the cool air as a contrast to the fug of the sick-room.
‘My father and I are physical counterparts: and during these days more than ever I notice his resemblance to me…’ he mused.
At the beginning of September, the doctors recommended an operation, and Albert was moved into a nursing home.
The operation revealed the extent of the cancer, but nevertheless Jack was told mat his father might live for ‘a few more years’.
Since he had teaching to prepare at Oxford for the following term, he said an unwilling farewell to his father and took the boat home.
Four days later, on 25 September, Albert Lewis died.
In the Lewis Papers , Warren remarked, ‘With his passing we lose him who may perhaps be described as the hero of our saga…
His age was 66 years and 33 days.’
MYTHOPOEIA 1929–1931
‘I treated my own father abominably and no sin in my whole life now seems to be so serious,’ Lewis blurted out to a correspondent twenty-five years after A. J. Lewis's demise.
His remorse was perpetual and far-reaching, and it coloured the whole of his memory.
Sadness far the way he had felt about the old man blended with a sense that his childhood was irrecoverably lost, and the knowledge that the very past when it was in flight Lived, like the present, in continual death.
Moreover the death of Albert only served to emphasize the emotional burden which he was now craving: the increasing loneliness of the ageing Janie Moore, and the total isolation of his brother.
Stationed as a soldier in Shanghai, and unable to get home until the following April, Warnie was in an agony of sorrow for the old days.
‘The P'daytabird is dead,’ his diary solemnly records.
All day I have been seeing pictures of him at his best; jumbled up in no chronological sequence — Saturday evening tram rides and visits to the Hippodrome with late supper afterwards in Malvern days, earlier days of ‘where do you want to go to’ in the study…the ‘Well, boys this is grand’at the beginning of the holiday…his little drop of whiskey: his fund of wheezes.
How far Warnie emulated at this stage of life his father's fondness for a little drop of whiskey, and at what point he began his calamintous descent into alcoholism is not easy to determine.
He was not actually dismissed from the service, though it was because of alcohol that he was asked to volunteer his own early resignation.
One thing was certain.
The death of his father made him homeless.
‘Worst of all, being pulled up by the roots — worse for me than for j[ack]; for Leeborough has always been my base whereas his real home has been Hillsboro [Mrs Moore's rented house in Headington, Oxford]far some years now.
The thought that there will never be any going home is hard to bear.’
That the other person in Jack's life, Mrs Moore, was also profoundly lonely is made clear by a generous, and at me same time comically self-revealing, letter which she wrote to Warnie on 29 October.
She urged Warnie to treat Hillsboro as a home, and confessed:
I should have been very glad of your society this last year, Maureen has been at the Royal College of Music, and I have been much alone, only for the animal's company I don't know what I should have done and poor Mr. Papworth [a dog]has been so ill we had to telephone a vet up at 2 a.m. one morning it was a funny night, Jack and I in our dressing gowns in the kitchen trying to comfort Mr. Papworth.
Jack and the vet (who turned out to be an Irishman too) drinking whiskey which they thought was brandy because I'd put it into a brandy bottle…
All this was kindly meant, and the suggestion that Warnie was welcome with Jack and Minto was some comfort.
But the exiled soldier wanted more than a place to stay: he wanted, to a Peter Pan-ish degree, everything as it had been in his childhood home.
In one of his lengthy letters to Jack from Shanghai, he suggested that they ‘yield to sentiment and construct the Little End Room in your sitting room at Magdalen’.
In another letter he suggested constructing the ‘Little End Room’ in a spare bedroom at Headington, ‘a place where we can always meet on the common ground of the past and ipso facto a museum of the Leeborough which we want to preserve’.
Furthermore, this 36-year-old officer was in desperation about the fate of their boyhood toys, locked up in a trunk in the attic at Leeborough.
He found it ‘intolerable’ to think of the toys falling into the hands of other children —‘The idea of a crowd of embryo right wee fellas’' getting hold of them and Bolshevising and applying to their own base purposes that well-ordered world in which we spent so many happy hours’.
Jack felt the need to treat these outbursts by Warnie with firmness as well as with gentleness, not least because his brother was giving voice to feelings which he shared quite passionately himself.
He rejected the idea of a Little End Room museum, not least because ‘a museum is preciously like a mausoleum’.
He said it would be a mistake, ‘a mistake in sentiment; for it could only mean that we were embalming the corpse of something that isn't really dead and needn't die at all— an aesthetic mistake — because we don't really want to have the taste of our schooldays established as a boundary for our whole lives’.
To anyone who knew Lewis in the second half of his life, and remarked his preference for boys' books such as R. M. Ballantyne or Captain Marryat over the so-called ‘moderns’, there can be no doubt that he was here addressing a warning not just to his brother but to himself.
Within a very few weeks of his father's death, Lewis found himself obliged once more to take up the routines of an Oxford term: weekly tutorials, college meetings and lectures.
Any thought of what was to happen to his family home in Belfast had to be shelved until a joint decision could be reached with his brother when he next came home on leave.
The most marked feature of Lewis's own emotional and intellectual life as the autumn days grew shorter and the year 1929 drew to its close was the development of his friendship with J. R. R. Tolkien.
It is only now, decades after they were first written down, that the reading public can begin to have any sense of the extent and range of Tolkien's mythological writings.
From his early years, he had been engaged in the creation of a whole world, comparable in scale with the world of Greek mythology, with a pantheon of gods, a hierarchy of elvish immortals, and a vast cycle of stories, some of them ‘forgotten’, or not yet formulated, in his imagination; some surviving in fragmentary form; some planned as long prose narratives; some conceived as great poems, longer than Beowulf The sheer volume of all this, much of it composed before his fortieth birthday, bears testimony to a rare artistic self-confidence.
One receives the strong impression that Tolkien would have continued to write his gnominsh grammars, his elvish etymologies, his histories of mythological lost ages, his wanted to read them or not.
And indeed, the very extent to which they would lie readable was called in question by their range and bulk.
For how could a reader who knew nothing of the original matter — the origin of the Silmarils, the rise and fall of Numenor, the triumphs and ultimate ruin of Gondolin, etc. — find a way in ?
There exists no easy guide to me Tolkien mythology, and the existing materials, when published, have required the extensive annotation of Tolkien's son.
Nevertheless, no writer, however self-sufficient, writes without a thought of an audience, and Tolkien was happy to discover anyone who could appreciate what he was up to.
It was evident, from conversations with him at the Kolbitar, that Lewis was such a man, and in version of his Lay of Leithian , the story of how the mortal Beren, returning from the wars, through the forests of Neldoreth, encounters the elfish maiden Luthien and falls in love with her.
Thingol, Luthien's father, is so enraged that a mortal should dare to woo his daughter that he says he will only give her hand to Beren if he will wrest one of the Silmarils, or enchanted jewels, from the iron crown of the dark lord Margoth.
This impossible quest, which indirectly leads to the undoing of Thingol's own elvish kingdom, is only possible because Luthien accompanies Beren on his journey.
He manages to penetrate the fastness of the dark lord disguised in a wolfskin, while she is hidden in the garment of a bat; but it is her own enchantments, her beauty and her songs, which ultimately defeat the evil one.
Tolkien never finished the Kay of Leithian , though he worked at it on and off far seven years, composing at least two versions of the poem in more than four thousand lines of octosyllabic couplets.
Though at times the verse is technically imperfect, it is full of passages of quite stunning beauty; and the overall conception must make it, though unfinished, one of the most remarkable poems written in English in the twentieth century.
It is worth describing it at such length so that readers who have not read Tolkien's ‘minor’ works might develop some idea of Lewis's importance as Tolkien's ‘onlie begetter’or ‘miglior fabbro’, for there can be very little doubt that it was Lewis's friendship and encouragement which led Tolkien to write the works which made his name with the public; just as it was Tolkien's friendship which released in Lewis wells of creativity which had remained (though he was so naturally fluent) mysteriously dry.
It was therefore an important moment when Tolkien gave Lewis the Lay of Leithian to read in manuscript.
It has been said that Lewis's expressed distaste for the poetry of his contemporaries, such as MacNeice and Eliot, was based on jealousy.
Tolkien, when he read this suggestion after Lewis's death — and after his own relationship with Lewis had become less than happy — rejected it as entirely unworthy.
He knew that Lewis was a greater man than that.
From personal experience, he knew that Lewis could be a generous, though by no means an uncritical, reader of contemporary poetry.
Lewis wrote to Tolkien:
I sat up late last night and read the Geste as far as to where Beren and his gnomish allies defeat the patrol of orcs above the sources of the Narog and disguise themselves in the reaf [Old English: ‘garments, weapons taken from the slain’].
I can quite honestly say that it is ages since I have had an evening of such delight; and the personal interest of reading a friend's work had very little to do with it.
I should have enjoyed it just as well if I'd picked it up in a bookshop, by an unknown author.
The two things that come out clearly are the sense of reality in the background and the mythical value.
Lewis had seen, almost more clearly, one suspects, than the author himself saw, what was the essence of Tolkien.
In order to draw this out of him, he wrote a vastly elaborate commentary on the Lay , softening the blow of his harsher criticisms by inventing the personae of a whole group of scholarly editors who are debating the text in the way that scholars have disputed over Homer or Beowulf It would seem that Tolkien took a great deal of notice of Lewis's invented editors, for he rewrote his Kay and incorporated a high proportion of their emendations.
The device was a clever one on Lewis's part, for since he was seven years younger than Tolkien and a relatively junior member of a faculty in which ‘Tollers’ was a professor, there was the need to tread carefully.
It was not simply a question of age and hierarchy.
Tolkien was by temperament a very different man from Lewis.
He could be touchy and irritable; Lewis could be brash and tactless.
There was a touch of elfish melancholy, as well as of delicacy, in Tolkien which would never respond to the broader outlines of Lewis's essentially sunny disposition.
Lewis would not have guessed that Tolkien's Kay would remain unfinished.
It must have seemed clear to him at once that Tolkien was a man of literary genius, and this fact only brought home to him his own sense of failure as a writer.
‘From the age of sixteen onwards, I had one single ambition, from which I never wavered, in the prosecution of which I spent every ounce I could, on which I really and deliberately staked my whole contentment; and I recognise myself as having unmistakeably failed in it.’
He knew that as yet the appropriate style eluded him.
He knew neither what to write nor how to write it.
In Tolkien, by huge contrast, he met a man whose style had been with him from the beginning.
Lewis responded so warmly to Tolkien's imagined world because, as he wrote to Arthur Greeves, ‘he is, in one part of him, what we were.’
That is to say, Tolkien's stories could be said to be an embodiment of that Northernness with which Lewis and Greeves had been in love since early adolescence.
Lewis was subtle enough to see that this was at best a half-truth, and perhaps he was beginning to sense that what Tolkien's friendship had to offer him was something rather more important than a regress to me nursery.
For Tolkien, whose literary pilgrimage was to be so lonely, and whose return to Oxford had not been marked by great domestic happiness, there was something very cheering in the company of this clever, widely read, humorous and spontaneously affectionate Irishman.
When he reflected with sadness on the unhappiness of his marriage towards the end of 1929, he noted, ‘Friendship with Lewis compensates for much.’
The death of Albert Lewis inevitably involved his two sons in practical decisions.
What was to be the future of their house in Belfast?
Where would Warnie live?
How much money would be available to them when the probate of the estate had been completed?
The decision to sell Little Lea more or less made itself.
Jack could not possibly run the house from Oxford, and Warnie was still a serving officer in the Army.
When he came home on leave in April 1930, they both returned to their childhood home and made all the necessary arrangements for its sale.
It was ‘perfectly beastly’ as Warnie said in his diary, to see ‘P's grave with its fresh turned earth and a handful of withered daffodils at its head alongside Mamy's.
It was also a shock to discover that their father's investments only yielded an income of some £190 per annum net, considerably less than Warnie (desperate to leave the Army and live on his pension) had been hoping.
The house, thought to be worth about £3,000 by the lawyers, in fact went for less.
Not the least of their tasks was the disposal of the toys.
They decided in the end to bury the trunk of ‘characters’ from Animal-land unopened.
A huge hole was dug in the vegetable patch for the purpose.
After several days of dividing their possessions into things they wished to keep and things which could be given away or sold, they were ready to leave the house for the last time.
It was a tremendous wrench, one from which Warnie never truly recovered.
One of his last acts was to heave the contents of the wine cellar (some bottles of whiskey) into the back of a relative's car.
Clearly the whereabouts of those bottles, and the number of them, had been one of the P'daytabird's little secrets, for Warnie writes, ‘Nothing brought home to me the finality of the old life as did the carrying out of those bottles and putting them into [the]car — to see the mysteries of that jealously guarded secret room emerge as plain matter of fact bottles, and the cellar stand revealed as an ordinary empty cupboard was an unpleasant feeling.’
Jack wrote a poem to Warnie, urging him not to look back out of the car window as it hurtled away, leaving their childhood behind them.
Yet look not out.
Think rather, ‘When from France And those old German wars we came back here Already it was the mind's swift haunting glance Towards the further past, that made time dear.’
Then to that further past, still up the stream Ascend and think of some divine first day In holidays from school.
Even there the gleam Of earlier memory like enchantment lay.
Already, the germ is present which was to flower most fully in The Last Battle : the idea of school holidays being a mere Platonic shadow of our permanent refreshment in Paradise, of our earthly homes being but a reflection of heaven.
which preoccupied them.
Jack had very decided misgivings about Minto's impulsive suggestion that Warnie should live with them.
To Warnie, he had written a letter fall of the gravest admonitions, designed to make him think carefully about what he was committing himself to.
Can you stand as a permanency our cuisine — Maureen's practising — Maureen's sulks — Minto's burnettodesmondism — Minto's mare's nests — the perpetual interruptions of family life — the partial loss of liberty?
This sounds as if I were either sick of it myself or else trying to make you sick of it; but neither is the case.
I have definitely chosen and I don't regret me choice.
What I hope — very much hope — is that you, after consideration, may make the same choice.
But me thought of sharing his Minto-life with Warnie was not without its complications for Jack himself.
In a letter to Arthur Greeves, he said that Warnie and Mrs Moore liked each other, ‘and, I hope, as W. gets broken into domestic life, they may come to do so still more: but in the interval mere is a ticklish time ahead and in any case it is a big sacrifice of our…
’ At this point the manuscript breaks off.
Greeves, in pencil, has written ‘very private’ and ‘to be burnt’at the top of the letter and the following pages of it are missing.
The letter concludes, ‘You are my only real Father Confessor.’
Warnie, no sophisticate in emotional matters, found Jack's relationship with Janie Moore incomprehensible.
Jack ‘commonly referred to Mrs Moore as ‘my mother’.
On the only occasion when Warnie tried to probe Jack on the origin or true nature of his relationship with Minto he was shut up with great vehemence.
There is enough recorded in Warnie's diaries over the next twenty years of friction and domestic misery to make us see why Jack had misgivings about the advisability of their all attempting to live together.
The factor which clinched their decision was the discovery of a house which they could only afford to buy if all three pooled their resources.
After long years of living in unsatisfactory rented accommodation, it now looked as if Jack and Minto could afford a place of their own.
They first set eyes on the house which was to be ‘home’ for the rest of Jack's life on 7 July 1930.
Minto was ‘more excited’ than Warnie had ever seen her when he returned from Aldershot far week-end leave, happy to leave behind him his fellow-officers, whom he nicknamed the Aldershits.
When Jack took him to see the house, Warnie was just as enthusiastic.
‘I instantly caught the infection.’
The house itself was unimpressive, little more than a low-lying cottage of modern design which would not easily accommodate four grown-up people.
In order to make it suitable, Minto believed that it would be necessary to build on at least two extra rooms.
What made it so enchanting was the setting.
The gardens and grounds covered eight acres, nestling at the northern foot of Shotover Hill.
The house took its name — The Kilns — from the two old brick kilns which stood by its side.
Further in, towards the base of the hill, was a wood, within which were one large pool and several smaller ones, formed by the hollowing-out of the old stone quarries in a previous century.
It was said that the poet Shelley had been here to sail paper boats.
‘Many a £10,000 house is worse situated and has a much poorer garden, ‘Warnie observed.
The asking price was £3,500.
This was a considerable sum of money.
The sort of modest suburban house which Mrs Moore was renting at the time could be purchased in those days for £850 or £1,000.
The Lewises’ substantial house in Belfast was finally sold for £2,300, seven months after their purchase of The Kilns.
Minto airily spoke of being worth £1,000 and able to raise a further £2,000 as a mortgage, but this was not the case.
Upon investigation, it was discovered that her Askins inheritance, held in trust, enabled her to have a mortgage of just £1,500.
Dons, in those days, did not reckon on buying houses, still less on having mortgages.
The huge majority of them lived in rented houses in North Oxford.
The Kilns venture was highly unusual, and the Lewis brothers knew that they could only afford it by taking the great risk of throwing in their lot together; in the event the purchase price was lowered to £3,300.
Warnie paid the cash deposit of £300, and raised a mortgage of £500, Minto's trustees put up a mortgage of £1,500 and Jack raised a mortgage of £1,000.
On this precarious basis, life at The Kilns began — and the distinctive Lewisian habitat had been established.
Surprised by Joy limited by the necessarily artificial conventions of autobiography, gives an impression that the development of Lewis's religious opinions was much more cut and dried than was really the case.
He gives us a picture of a firm conversion to theism in the summer of 1929, followed by a period in which he believed in God, but not in the doctrines of Christianity.
Then, in the late summer of 1931, he writes that he passed definitely from this position of ‘rational meism, into a fall acceptance of the Christian dispensation.
While not exactly false, this simple version of his spiritual growth gives no picture of the tremendous vacillations in his faith which he confided to Arthur Greeves during this period.
For example, in his attempt to lead a new life, he attributes any success he may have had in conquering lust, anger or pride to God's grace , a very specifically Christian idea; and this is a full fifteen months before his conversion to Christianity.
Anything which smacks of an incarnational theology, he eschews.
That is to say he is not in the least drawn to the idea that Christ came in the flesh, and he finds the simplicity and literalism of what might be termed ‘mere Christianity’ frankly unacceptable.
To Greeves, the orthodox believer, he wrote in January 1930, ‘In spite of all my recent changes of view I am still inclined to think that you can only get what you call Christ out of the Gospels by picking and choosing and slurring over a good deal.’
The authors he found most helpful in this ‘interim’ period were all mystics, or figures who emphasized spirit over matter — MacDonald, William Ralph Inge, Jacob Boehme, whose quasi-theosophical, semi-astrological De Signatura Rerum (The Signatures of Things)gave him ‘about the biggest shaking up I've got from a book, since I first read Phantastes ’.
But such moments of uplift as were provided by the mystics could not prevent Lewis's common-sense humility from seeing ‘how much of one's philosophy and religion are mere talk’.
When in college, he had begun to attend chapel (i.e. the prayer-book office of morning prayer) each day.
It could not prevent him from having doubts.
‘I have no rational ground for going back on the arguments that convinced me of God's existence: but the irrational deadweight of my old sceptical habits, and the spirit of the age, and the cares of the day, steal away all my lively feeling of the truth, and often when I pray I wonder if I am not posting letters to a non-existent address.’
For those who are familiar with Lewis's literary persona, as for the much smaller number of people who knew him in life, his acceptance of an orthodox Christian position seems in an almost literal sense fitting.
There are certain clothes we feel comfortable in and which we would wear in preference to all others.
On this level of mere temperamental affinity (not considering its truth or falsehood) we feel Lewis to be a man who would be most happy in Christian garb.
There is no doubt that until he discovered this clothing (be it artificial carapace or ‘the whole armour of God’), Lewis was only half-formed as a writer, as a literary imagination, perhaps as a person.
Many readers of his apologetics must have been disconcerted by me fact that his chapter about conversion in Beyond Personality is entitled ‘Let's Pretend’.
He suggests that the moment you ‘make a shot at saying your prayers’ and say ‘Our Father’you are ‘dressing up as Christ…
That is why children's games are so important.
They are always pretending to be grown-ups playing soldiers, playing shop.
But all the time they are hardening their muscles and sharpening their wits, so that the pretence of being grown-up helps them to grow up in earnest.’
This process of ‘let's pretend’ took an irreversible step forward one September night in 1931, when Lewis was entertaining J. R. R. Tolkien to dinner at Magdalen.
He had also asked Henry Victor Dyson, a lecturer at Reading University who had been an exact contemporary of Tolkien's as an undergraduate at Exeter College.
Like Tolkien, Dyson (known to all his friends as Hugo) was a Christian — though he was a High Anglican while Tolkien was Roman Catholic.
Lewis had got to know him because he was a frequent visitor to Oxford, anxious to get a job in the Oxford English Faculty, and a friend not only of Tolkien but also of Nevill Coghill.
Dyson was a beguilingly witty man, handsome and bright-eyed, whose talk was a flow of fantasy, keen literary appreciation and occasional learning.
Like many Oxford men, he belonged to the strong Socratic tradition in which dialogue was esteemed as highly as the written word.
As the years went by, and some of his friends became prolific writers, Dyson came to be jealous of their reputations and to scorn what they wrote.
He himself published almost nothing.
In 1931, however, they were all still comparatively innocent as far as publication was concerned.
Lewis had his two slender volumes of verse, and Tolkien his learned edition of Sir Gawain and the Green knight and his article on Ancrene Wisse and Hali Meith-had (which combines deep linguistic learning with a justly famous account of the world of this West Midland prose writer which we can recognize as a foretaste of the Hobbit's native Shire).
These were hardly a threat to Dyson's rhetorical skills.
Dyson, besides, though unpublished and ‘a don at Reading’(as he always half-ironically described himself) rather than at Oxford, was more a man of the world than either Tolkien or Lewis.
He had been a friend of Lawrence of Arabia; he knew Ottoline Morrell, at whose house Garsington Manor he had met Virginia Woolf, Bertrand Russell and D. H. Lawrence, among others.
The combination of Tolkien and Dyson was therefore a formidable one.
After dinner the talk fell to the great question which was uppermost in Lewis's mind: that question being, in the words of his pupil Betjeman, ‘and is it true, and is it true, this most amazing tale of all?’
Owen Barfield, both in conversation and in writing, had already gone a long way in revealing to Lewis the fallacy of making sharp distinctions between ‘myth’ and ‘fact’.
In his book Poetic Diction he had pointed out that in earlier times, those who first used language did not necessarily distinguish between ‘metaphorical’ and ‘literal’uses of words.
The Latin spiritus , for example, means breath .
Modern rationalists might wish to distinguish between the ‘meaning’ of ‘spirit in some elevated sense’and that of ‘merely breath’.
But early users of the language would not have made such a distinction.
When the wind blew it was not ‘like’ someone breathing.
It was the breath of a divinity.
This powerfully confirmed the way in which Tolkien had been accustoming himself to think about the world ever since he grew to manhood.
One of the great distinctions in his mythology is made between the Elves, who are ‘animist’ and ‘pagan’, and the Men, who are destined to move beyond this.
The Elves, who will never leave the material universe and do not know what happens to Men when they die, are embodiments of language-users for whom the breath-wind-spirit distinction would be meaningless.
By contrast, God willed that ‘the hearts of Men should seek beyond the world and should find no rest therein’.
In his dialogue with Lewis that September night, Tolkien was really arguing for a less human and more ‘even’ approach to the Gospel story.
Lewis complained that he could not see any personal relevance for himself in the story of Christ.
‘What I couldn't see was how the life and death of Someone Else (whoever he was) 2000 years ago could help us here and now — except in so far as his example helped us.’
Tolkien pointed out that this was, as much as anything, an imaginative failure on Lewis's part.
When Lewis came across myths of dying and reviving gods, he was moved.
When he read stories about Balder, Adonis and Bacchus, he was prepared to ‘feel the myth as profound and suggestive of meanings beyond my grasp even tho’ I could not say in cold prose ‘what it meant’.
He stopped short of understanding Christianity because when he thought about that, he laid aside the receptive imagination with which he allowed himself to appreciate myth and became rigidly narrow and empiricist.
He should understand that ‘the story of Christ is simply a true myth: a myth working on us in the same way as the others, but with this tremendous difference that it really happened : and one must be content to accept it in the same way.’
To this extent, Tolkien argued, ‘doctrines’ which are extracted from the ‘myth’are less true than the ‘myth’itself.
The ideas are too large and too all-embracing for the finite mind to absorb them.
That is why the divine providence revealed himself in story.
Lewis claimed that this was tantamount to ‘breathing a lie through silver’, a riposte which Tolkien felt sufficiently challenging to require a written reply.
The result was the verse known as ‘Mythopoeia’, some of which he quoted in his essay.
Its ‘argument’ repeated the discussion which he and Lewis shared with Dyson on that memorable September night.
Myth was the exact opposite of a ‘lie breathed through silver’.
Man's capacity to mythologize was a remnant of his pre-lapsarian capacity to see into the life of things:
Disgraced he may be, yet is not dethroned, And keeps the rags of Lordship once he owned.
It was a completely still, warm evening, and the three friends walked round and round the mile-long circuit of Addison's Walk beneath the avenues of beeches.
Quite suddenly, at a crucial point in the conversation, there was a rush of wind, causing the first fall of leaves in the season.
They stood in the dark and listened.
At first the pattering leaves sounded like rain.
It was at this point that Tolkien reiterated the argument already made familiar to Lewis by Barfield.
We speak of ‘stars’ and ‘trees’as though they were entities which we had mastered in our post-Newtonian, materialist fashion.
But for those who formed the words star and tree they were very different.
For them, stars were a living silver, bursting into flame in answer to an eternal music in the mind of God.
All creation was ‘myth-woven and elf-patterned’.
It was late; the clock in Magdalen Tower had struck three in the morning before Lewis let Tolkien out by the little postern on Magdalen Bridge.
Dyson lingered, and he and Lewis found still more to say to one another, strolling up and down the cloister of New Buildings.
They did not part until four a.m.
Nine days later, on 28 September, there was an outing from The Kilns to Whipsnade Zoo.
Minto and Maureen, accompanied by an Irish friend called Vera Henry and the dog Mr Papwoth, who had recovered his strength before going hence and being no more seen, were to travel by car.
Jack and Warnie were to go by motorcycle — Daudel as Warnie called it — with Warnie in the saddle and Jack in a low-slung sidecar.
It was a thick, misty day, but when the two brothers got beyond the small market town of Thame, the fog gave way to bright sunshine.
They stopped far beer and then waited anxiously at an agreed spot for Minto and the others.
They had still not turned up by two o'clock, and since their sandwich lunch was in the car, Jack and Warnie were feeling ‘uncommonly peckish’.
At two-twenty Minto's party appeared, saying that the reason for their delay was that Liddiat, the handyman employed by Minto at The Kilns, had pumped up the tyres of the car so hard that it was impossible to drive at more than fifteen miles per hour.
In spite of the frayed tempers caused by this, it was an enjoyable expedition.
Everyone, but especially the two Lewises, loved the zoo, and Jack made friends with a bear whom he nicknamed Bultitude.
He said how much he would like to adopt the bear — which, in a sense, he was to do, for Bultitude appears as one of the characters in the final volume of his space trilogy That Hideous Strength .
To all appearances, it had been a completely normal day.
Only, as Lewis tells us in Surprised by Joy , ‘when we set out I did not believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and when we reached the zoo I did.’
When confiding the news to Greeves, he said, ‘My long night talk with Dyson and Tolkien had a good deal to do with it.’
We are told that Janie Moore bitterly resented the final stages of
Holy Communion for attending ‘blood feasts’.
There is something puzzling here, since Mrs Moore, though an unbeliever, had been happy to have her own daughter confirmed, and there is a steady succession of references in Jack's letters and diaries, during the years 1919–1931, of attendance at church with Minto.
We must assume either that Warnie's memory exaggerated the virulence of her hostility to Jack's conversion, or that there was some particular thing about it which affected her more than anyone else.
We cannot know — and she was by this time fifty-eight years old to Jack's thirty-three — whether she felt personally slighted by the change.
We do know what Jack's views were of the Christian and sexual morality: ‘There is no getting away from it: the Christian rule is ‘Either marriage, with complete faithfulness to your partner, or else total abstinence.’
In later years, offered the objection that celibacy is not always possible, Lewis the radio evangelist was to be quite unambiguous: ‘faced with an optional question in an examination paper, one considers whether one can do it or not; faced with a compulsory question, one must do the best one can…
It is wonderful what you can do when you have to.’
The letters to Greeves suggest that he did not find this part of a Christian's duty very easy ('Daily Castration Prevents Master Bation').
But he was not a man to say one thing and do another.
He meant his Christian commitment to be total.
This commitment grew out of profound emotional changes over which he had no control, and of which he himself perhaps had only an imperfect knowledge.
The first change, the move to theism, happened in 1929 and coincided more or less directly with the death of his father.
It would be far too glib to suggest that he consciously made the second change, to adopt Christianity, merely to give himself an excuse to abandon sexual relations with Mrs Moore, whatever the nature of those relations had been.
There are some men who pay prostitutes not for overtly sexual favours, but far humiliation of the most humdrum kind.
Such people, caught in a strange web of masochism, find their emotional fulfilment not in acts of love but in being made to scrub kitchen floors or scour out pans.
‘He was as good as an extra maid,’ said Minto.
Certainly, as his mind prepared itself for the acceptance of the
Christian orthodoxies, he was making dogged attempts to come to terms with his sado-masochistic tendencies.
In February of 1931, he and Warnie had attended a production of James Elroy Flecker's Hassan at the Oxford Playhouse.
It was not very well done, but well enough for me: indeed to see it really well acted would be too much for me.
In reading it the cruelty is just about balanced by the extreme beauty of the lyrics and much of the dialogue, so that the total effect, tho’ sinister, like a too bright dream which is sure to turn into nightmare before the end, yet is bearable.
On the stage, where one has less time to dwell on the cadence or suggestion of the individual words, me cruelty is unendurable.
Warnie went out half way through.
I felt quite sick but thought it almost a duty far one afflicted in my way to remain, saying to myself, ‘Oh, you like cruelty, do you?
Well now stew in it’— the same principle on which one trains a puppy to be clean —‘rub their noses in it’.
It has haunted me ever since.
The disturbing thing about this letter to Arthur Greeves is the extent to which he does not see that the remedy proposed sounds all too like the disorder he wishes to eliminate.
For the shaming pleasure of voyeuristic torture, he has substituted the pleasure of having his nose rubbed in it.
Like many sexually naïve people, Lewis supposed that if he eliminated the consciously erotic elements of his sexuality from the surface of life, he would be able to dispel the habits and characteristics of which these particular tastes were a mere symptom.
Perhaps if he had worried less about them, and taken a less self-reproachful line, the outlines of his personality would have softened with the years.
Perhaps, too, if they had known about his ‘tastes’, his friends would have been less puzzled by two of his most mysterious personality traits: his delight in verbal bullying, of students or intellectual opponents, and his apparently cheerful domestic enslavement to Mrs Moore.
The college grind of meetings and tutorials went on.
Lewis had by now settled into the role of tutor, but he did not relax in it.
His pupils neatly all felt (particularly the first pupil of the morning, at ten a.m., who watched him lay down his steel-nibbed pen with an air of resignation) that tutorials were an interruption to what he considered his real work.
And he had a notorious asperity for which he was afterwards sometimes penitent.
Treating his pupils to the compliment of rational disagreement sometimes spilled over into a verbal contest so fierce that the young person concerned was abashed or even frightened.
The feelings may be imagined of the pupil who rashly let fall a slighting reference to Sohrab and Rustum , to be answered by Lewis's brandishing an old regimental sword of his brother's which stood in the corner of his room and shouting, ‘The sword must settle this!’
The experience of the others was probably less dramatic, but they all knew the sharp edge of Lewis's tongue.
‘As to yesterday morning, I was a bit‘short’.
If you take into account the fact that I have been up till after midnight every night since Monday, that I have a cold, and that that morning I had been talking on a sore throat from 9.30 to 1 o'clock, perhaps you will understand.’
Quite as remarkable as the original display of ill temper was the graciousness which prompted him to apologize for it.
‘The truth is,’ he admitted to Alan Griffiths, ‘I have a constant temptation to over asperity…even when there is no subjective anger to prompt me: it comes, I think, from the pleasure of using the English language forcibly — i.e. it is not a species of Ira but of Superbia.
‘Some pupils came in time to like it; not simply because the outbursts were part of Lewis ‘act’, but because he was conscientious teacher, who was concerned, as the Great Knock had been, to wage war on sloppy language and sloppy thinking.
John Lawlor, a pupil from 1936 onwards, said of himself that he ‘passed from dislike and hostility to stubborn affection, and then to gratitude for the weekly bout in which no quarter was asked or given’.
In this he almost certainly spoke for the majority of Lewis's pupils.
As a pupil of slightly later vintage, Derek Brewer, remarked, ‘Many of his pupils became teachers of one sort or another and all, or most of them, became his friends.’
That is pretty high praise; and though there are some obvious exceptions, they were fewer as the years went by.
A tutor who could command the unhesitating affection and intellectual respect of so miscellaneous a collection of men as Derek Brewer (later Master of Emmanuel College, Cambridge), the drama critic Kenneth Tynan, the publisher Charles Monteith and the poet John Wain was clearly doing his job.
One aspect of the Lewis regime about which the majority of his pupils had some misgivings, however, was the termly dinner he gave for them.
He called it the ‘English binge’.
It was a dinner held at his own expense in a private room at Magdalen, and it was a symptom of his great generosity.
But it was also a throwback to a form of behaviour which, however natural it might have seemed to officer cadets in the First World War, was excruciatingly embarrassing to succeeding generations of Magdalen men.
The idea of the evening was primarily to get drunk, and this was a matter about which Lewis was exuberantly insistent.
The conversation had to be what he called ‘bawdry.
‘Nothing above the belly or below the knee tonight!’ he exclaimed on one of these evenings, savouring the rowdy songs and bawdy rhymes which resulted.
One of his pupils, Roger Lancelyn Green, has commented on a letter which Lewis wrote to Warnie describing the ‘English binge’ at Christmas 1931.
‘Bawdy ought to be outrageous and extravagant,’ Lewis had written; and Green tells us, ‘he proceeds to give a very mild example.’
It is a remnant which ‘dates’ Green and reveals our later generation as less innocent and more acquiescent.
Green does not quote the example, which is a song about an angry father who suspects that his daughter has been ravished by the protagonist of the ballad.
What Lewis calls ‘the good part’ goes as follows:
Hark!
I hear a step on the stair!
Sounds to me like an angry father, With a pistol in either hand, Looking for the man that screwed his daughter (Rum ti-iddle-ey etc).
I have seized him by the hair of his head And shoved it into a bucket of water And I screwed his pistols up his arse A dam sight harder than I screwed his daughter (Rum ti-iddle-ey etc).
Lewis spent Christmas Day 1931 transcribing this ditty for Warnie, who had returned for his last spell of service in Shanghai.
With the role of the heavy father properly cast — stumping up the stairs with a desperate expression and his two pistols, he wrote, ‘this anticlimax, this adding of injury to insult, seems to me irresistible’.
He regretted that bawdry of this kind was the ‘only living folk-art left to us.
If our English binge had been held in a medieval university we should have had, mixed with the bawdy songs, tragical and even devotional pieces, equally authorless and handed on from mouth to mouth in the same way, with the same individual variations.’
One somehow thinks that only Lewis could have stepped, with a few vigorous steps, from a defence of drunken all-male ‘stag’ evenings to a vivid illustration of the life and literature of the Middle Ages.
REGRESS 1931–1936
Lewis was by now thirty-three years old.
By the age of thirty-three Keats and Shelley were dead; Byron had finished two-thirds of his major work.
Even a figure more comparable with Lewis, G. K. Chesterton, had at this age published five of his most distinguished books, and discovered his own voice.
With Lewis this was not so, and it is probably vain to look for reasons.
We can account for what he was doing with his time, but this is not the same thing as explaining how or why the tone of voice — that vigour, that distinctively Lewisian freshness and vitality — was so long in coming.
What we do know is that his full conversion to Christianity released in him a literary flow which only ceased with death.
From then on, works of scholarship, fantasy, literary appreciation, and apologetics poured from his ever-fertile brain.
The poetry got much better too.
The angel's song at the end of The Pilgrim's Regress is in a different league from the unhappier patches of Spirits in Bondage or Dymer .
Terse, poignant, and well made, it says what could only be said in poetry.
The thought, perhaps, is borrowed from Tolkien, whose immortals cannot see why men dread death.
('We who bear the ever-mounting burden of the years do not clearly understand this.
‘) But the perspective is very distinctly that of Lewis, who was to spend nearly all his literary energies imagining what the world would look like if seen from heaven.
Lewis began to write The Pilgrim's Regress , appropriately enough, on a return visit to Northern Ireland to stay with Arthur Greeves in the spring of 1932.
‘We have come to Puritania,’ he said, ‘and that was my father's house.
I see that my father and mother are gone already beyond the brook.
I had much I would have said to them.
But it is no matter.’
The book owes its title and framework to Bunyan, but it is much more satirical in tone and purpose than The Pilgrim's Progress .
Read today, its contemporary references seem crude and dead as mutton.
Anyone can work out who the ‘subspecies’ Marxomanni, Mussolimini and Swastici are meant to represent, but they do not really play an important part in the story, since we can feel that John, the Pilgrim, is not really tempted or overwhelmed by them, any more than Lewis ever felt the slightest inclination to become a Maminst or a Fascist.
Similarly, the pre-First World War diction now creates moments of unintentional comedy, as when the figure of Christ says to John, ‘You must play fair,’ or when John's plunge into the pool of faith is described as ‘he took a header’.
(Lewis, incidentally, had been — taught to dive only very lately, by Owen Barfield, an event which he considered full of religious significance.)
Any fair-minded critic of The Pilgrim's Regress must also admit that some of its conceits are unfortunate.
The identification of lust with ‘brown girls’ probably had no racial connotations in that innocently discriminatory age; but the scenes towards the end where the Witch tries to capture John with her wiles do leave the disconcerting impression that Lewis thought of Christianity as little more than a good ‘cure’for lust.
All that must be conceded, and yet the book's virtues greatly outweigh its faults.
Some of the contemporary satire -John Betjeman as ‘Victoriana’, Edith Sitwell as ‘Glugly’— is still quite funny.
('She was very tall and lean as a post…
She waddled to and fro with her toes pointing in…
Finally she made some grunts and said: ‘Globol obol ookle ogle globol gloogle gloo.’)
The assaults on the neo-Thominst revival of the period are also well made.
There are sentences in ‘Neo-Angular's’ speeches which are echoed almost word for word in the essays of T. S. Eliot and the letters of Evelyn Waugh.
So you have met Mother Kirk?
No wonder that you are confused.
You had no business to talk to her except through a qualified Steward…
Reason is divine.
But how should you understand her?
You are a beginner.
For you, the only safe commerce with reason is to learn from your superiors the dogmata in which her deliverances have been codified for general use.
The book has the unmistakable stamp of Lewis upon it.
There is the tremendous narrative verve; there are the flights of true sublimity side by side with the knockabout of comedy and debate; there is, above all, the sense which informs nearly all his religious writing, that a human being's relationship with God is the great Romance of life.
The subtitle is An Allegorical Apology for Christianity, Reason and Romanticism , and it is important to remember that for Lewis the three things went together.
Tolkien had taught him that the inability to believe in Christianity was primarily a failure of the imagination .
This insight had enabled Lewis to recover all the things in art and in life which he had been enjoying since imaginative awareness dawned.
In Puritania, religion had been the stuff of cant, of laws, of promised punishments for behaviour which the Pilgrim's inner conscience could not condemn.
But there had also been this other vision — of the ‘green wood full of primroses’— which he had glimpsed through a hole in the wall, and which promised all the things which Lewis and Greeves had come to label ‘It’ or ‘Joy’.
These were the pleasures he got from the beauties of nature, from the music of Wagner, from the watercolours of Beatrix Potter, from the books of William Morris, George MacDonald and Wordsworth.
What he discovered in his ‘regress’ was that all these things were echoes of the heavenly places.
In the allegory, it is not easy to work out the extent to which the regress is a return to Puritanian values.
The double values of the stewards, and the ethics based on fear of punishment are rejected.
But Mother Kirk — a sort of Anglican version of Langland's Mother Church — is certainly John's guide in the final stages of his journey.
J. R. R. Tolkien, to whom Lewis read aloud The Pilgrim's Regress , liked the book.
Thirty years later, however, Tolkien saw that there was more in the word ‘regress’ than had immediately met his ear.
He saw that Lewis would not re-enter Christianity by a new door but by the old one: at least in the sense that in taking it up again he would also take up again or reawaken the prejudices so sedulously planted in childhood and boyhood.
He would become again a Northern Ireland Protestant — though with a difference, certainly: he was no longer a resident; he was learned; he had the wonderful gifts both of imagination and a clear and analytical mind; and above all his faith came of Grace to which he responded heroically, in patience and self-sacrifice — when he was aware of himself.
Tolkien's contention was that something he called ‘the ulsterior motive’— the bogey of Lewis's Ulster background — lurked beneath the surface of his imagination, and rose when he was off his guard to make him brutal in manners, crude or illogical in thought.
Anyone who has studied Lewis's work must know what Tolkien meant, though the ‘ulsterior motive’ is much more apparent in Lewis's reported speech (particularly in speech lubricated by the wine of High Table or the beer of Oxfordshire pubs) than on the printed page.
But Tolkien's censure, written from the standpoint of one who had himself hardened in a sentimental devotion to the religion of his boyhood, must not be accepted without qualifications.
With his conscious self, Lewis had a very distinct loathing of Ulster Protestantism.
When he attended St Mark's, Dundela, for the first time after his conversion, he was repelled by the sense that ‘these good Produsdands’ went there to express party solidarity rather than religious feeling; and he found his Irish relations almost universally repulsive.
He and Warnie, for example, had decided that they would erect a memorial window to their parents in St Mark's, but it was a decision they quickly came to regret when the Lewis, Hamilton and Ewart cousins all weighed in with suggestions of what should go into the window.
The incumbent of St Mark's, the Rev. Claude Lionel Chavasse, suggested that the window might contain a view of St Mark's itself in the background.
Lewis immediately guessed that this suggestion came not from Chavasse but from his Aunt Lily, and in the irrational way that such family meddling irritates, this prompted an extraordinary flow of anger.
He described the case to Warnie:
It just occurs to me as I write that Chavasse in this matter is probably the unwilling mouthpiece of the Select Vestry: I daresay even that monstrous regiment of women, incarnated in Lily Ewart, is really at the bottom of it.
Zounds!— I'd like a few minutes at the bottom of her!
No ‘thought inform’ would there ‘stain my cheek’: a firm hand rather would stain Goth hers.
He disliked the ethos of Irish Protestantism and he did not believe in its doctrines.
If the mark of a reborn evangelical is a devotion to the Epistles of St Paul and in particular to the doctrine of Justification by Faith, then there can have been few Christian converts less evangelical than Lewis.
When he has been a Christian for three years, we find him, in the pages of his brother's diary, reading The Epistle to the Romans, the greatest exposition in Scripture of the themes of Original Sin, Grace and Justification by Faith.
jack’, we discover, ‘has been reading this epistle with a commentary but could get no help from it.’
In later years, when Lewis showed Mere Christianity to four clergymen, of four different denominations, for their criticisms, he received hostile comments from two of the four.
One of these two, inevitably, was his old pupil and sparring partner Alan Griffiths (by then a Roman Catholic monk, Dom Bede Griffiths), who claimed that Lewis undervalued the doctrine of the Atonement.
Perhaps more fundamental than this was the criticism he received from a Methodist minister that the book does not really mention, let alone do justice to, the central Christian doctrine of Justification by Faith.
Lewis came to the faith by means of what one could loosely term Neo-Platonism.
It was the sense of another world which drew him; the sense he got from MacDonald (a convert to Broad Church Anglicanism from Congregationalism) of Heaven being penetrable through dreams and the subconscious and the exercise of the imagination.
It was the conviction of Tolkien (a Roman Catholic) that truth is best discerned through myth which finally tipped the balance.
In all this period he was influenced by Barfield (a disciple of Rudolph Steiner) and by rereading Plato himself, as well as by Neo-Platonist writers such as Dean Inge (Broad Church).
It is therefore a mistake to make too much of ‘the ulsterior motive,.
In actual devotional practice, Lewis was greatly guided by reading the Imitutio Christi of Thomas à Kempis.
The hallmarks of Thomas à Kempis's approach to the religious life are a rigorous inner self-discipline and a conformity, for reasons of humility, to the existing forms of Christianity as met from day to day wherever you happen to be.
As to the outward forms of religion, Lewis decided from the moment that he became a Christian that he should attend his college chapel on weekday mornings and his parish church on Sundays.
As it happened, the ritual of Magdalen chapel was ‘Low Church’ and that of the Headington Quarry church was ‘High’.
With his background in Ulster, where he had seen the blasphemous absurdity of Christians hating one another on the grounds of historical or ritual difference, he was always rigorously ‘non-party’ in his Anglicanism.
His non-ritualism was still, in the early 1930s, perfectly normal and there were many Anglicans who would have shared it, though perhaps not all would have been quite so dogged about it as he.
On Palm Sunday, 1934, for example, Lewis and his brother attended the liturgy at the parish church in Headington Quarry.
The vicar ‘came down to the steps at the top of the nave, accompanied by a server with a basket of palms and we all went up and got one except J[ack].’
This might be thought to be the ulsterior motive surfacing; but if so, it has to be balanced by Lewis's unconquerable distaste for hymns (not a markedly Protestant trait).
At the Quarry church, if he attended a choral service, it was his invariable custom to leave during the singing of the last hymn.
He had, in fact, an almost Tridentine attitude to the liturgy.
In spite of his distaste for ‘frills’, he saw church-going as something one did out of obedience; something which shaped the life of prayer and reminded each individual that he or she was a ‘member incorporate in the blessed company of all faithful people’; but not something which needed to be added to, still less enjoyed as a hobby.
Warnie, incidentally, was less brave than Jack, and dutifully went up to fetch his palm, in an agony of embarrassment.
‘I think that there is a real risk that an imaginative child may get the impression that a bit of palm is in some way a magical charm,’ he considered.
To be on the safe side, he burnt his when he got home, presumably unaware that this was, liturgically, the ‘correct’ and Catholic thing to do, though some forty-six weeks too early.
By now, the household of The Kilns had taken on the shape which it was to maintain until well after the Second World War.
Warnie had retired from me Army at the earliest possible opportunity, in December 1932, and moved in with Jack and Minto as a permanent fixture.
He was thirty-seven years old.
The question of what he was to do with himself for the rest of his life was never properly resolved in his mind or anyone else's, which perhaps accounts for his periodic assaults on the whiskey bottle — what Minto called ‘Warnie's benders’.
Being Irish herself, and the sister of a man who had gone mad with syphilis, she was rather more tolerant of Warnie's foibles than he was of hers.
Among the innumerable items which they brought away from Little Lea — a lumpish wardrobe to which Jack had a sentimental attachment, for instance— there were countless letters, diaries and family papers stretching back to the lifetime of their Lewis and Hamilton grandparents.
Warnie was a natural historian, and he set himself the task of putting all these documents into chronological order.
The real interest of the past, he wrote, ‘lies in the answer to the question, How did the ordinary undistinguished man live?…and it is with a view to providing posterity with an addition to such all too scanty materials that the papers…have been embodied in permanent form.’
Undergraduate pupils of Jack's throughout the middle years of the 1930s got used to passing through the outer drawing-room of his rooms at Magdalen where sat the mysterious figure of Captain Lewis, typing with two fingers on an ancient black portable.
The finished result, eleven bound volumes of single-spaced pages, is a testimony to Warnie's extraordinary patience, as well as to his seemingly inexhaustible appetite for contemplating his own immediate past.
Every note, every school report, every passing wheeze of the P'daytabird is here; and since, by a strange series of chances, the Lewis Papers now reside in an air-conditioned cavern in the suburbs of Chicago, we may suppose that they will survive for ever, perhaps long after Oxford and Ulster have been lost to sight.
Jack never seems to have regarded the proximity of his brother, even while doing his teaching, as a burden; if anything, it was the reverse.
But the possibilities of domestic tension were increased by Warnie's presence a hundredfold.
Both Warnie and Minto were jealous of anyone who claimed Jack's love; this meant that they were bound to be jealous of one another, since for both of them Jack was the most important person in the universe.
Shortly after moving into The Kilns, Minto had engaged a gardener to help her with the eight acres of ground.
His name was Fred Paxford, and he lived in a small wooden bungalow on the other side of the brick kilns.
Paxford was a ‘character’, given to looking on the black side of every passing scene, and to lugubrious murmurings of ‘Abide with Me’ and other hymns while he toiled.
His pessimistic character was fairly faithfully reproduced in Pudlleglum, the Marshwiggle in The Silver Chair .
In spite of Paxford's strong left-wing views, Minto idolized him and allowed him to occupy the same sort of position in her household as John Brown had occupied at the court of Queen Victoria.
He was consulted as an oracle on all occasions, however inappropriate, and this was something which Warnie found insufferably annoying.
His diaries chronicle each phase of irritation with novelistic detail.
I quite suddenly got very bored with M's conversation tonight.
She has lately developed a tiresome habit of becoming a mere compendium of Paxford's views; every conceivable topic is met with a reply beginning ‘Paxford says’.
I am resigned to being addressed by the new name of Pax-Wanxie, but if she is to become a mere conduit of the Paxford philosophy it will be a very great bore.
Further, it makes me angry with myself to find that the perfectly natural and utterly unfair result is that I begin to dislike Paxford, no exercise of the will convincing me that it is not the unfortunate P. who is boring me with his views on everything under the sun.
A magnificent example of the ‘Paxford says’ routine is provided when Maureen and Minto have been into Oxford to get two wireless sets on approval.
The scene is the kitchen at The Kilns and both sets are plugged in.
MAUREEN: Well the A set certainly has the better tone.
MINTO: Oh no, dear, Paxford says the B set has a lovely tone; he says the A set is tinny.
MAUREEN: Well, it blurs the sound: you can't hear the ‘Underneath’ of any music.
MINTO: Paxford and I were saying it was so clear.
MAUREEN: Then it's easier to find stations on the A set.
MINTO: Paxford says the B set is easier; Paxford says he got forty stations on it: he made it work beautifully.
MAUREEN (trying the B set which emits a series of siren-like whoops and then a muffled jazz band): It doesn't seem particularly easy to get ANY station on the B.
MINTO: Ask Paxford, dear: he'll show you how to work it in the morning.
MYSELF (Internally): Bugger Paxford.
(Aloud): Well, goodnight, I'm off to bed.
MINTO: Goodnight Pax-Warnie.
Paxford says —(I close the door and go to bed).
Jack avoided being a witness to these scenes much of the time by residing in college.
For half the year, he would sleep at The Kilns.
But during the three eight-week terms his routine was to sleep in college, at least for the days in the middle of the week.
If Maureen was at home, she would drive into Oxford to fetch him home for lunch.
Sometimes Paxford fulfilled this office.
And if neither of them was at home Lewis would return to The Kilns by bus; so Minto was visited each day.
There was, indeed, never a day, except when he was away on short holidays, during which he did not spend some time in her company, from the time of their first association in 1919 until her death in 1951.
This has been represented as some kind of martyrdom on Lewis's part; and doubtless, like any long-term relationship, it called for reserves of patience and good humour on both sides.
But it is absurd to suppose that Lewis had nothing to gain from Minto's company, or that all thEir time was spent discussing domestic trivia (much as she and Lewis both enjoyed such discussions).
A recent pen has asserted that Mrs Moore was never seen with a book in her hands.
It is true that she was not academic; this was part of her charm for Lewis.
But even the most rudimentary reading of his many surviving letters will reveal passages which speak of the pleasures of reading with or to Mrs Moore.
In 1936, for example, we find them reading Virginia Woolf's Orlando together; and in 1943, Lewis wrote to a friend that Minto was reading Jane Eyre .
She, for her part, accepted the fact that he was gregarious and, like the great majority of men in those days, tended to congregate with members of his own sex.
Our social mores have changed so much that it is easy to single out as personal characteristics those which were actually held in common by neatly everyone.
Lewis, for instance, is frequently spoken of as a man who enjoyed male coteries, as though , in the 1930s, the regiments, the London clubs, the Oxford and
Cambridge colleges and the City companies were all overflowing with ‘mixed’ company.
This simply was not so, and the fact that Lewis spent evenings in the company of male friends was not what distinguished him.
Even to speak of those by-now famous evenings as a coterie is to imply that they were both more formal and more enclosed than was the case.
For example, one day in 1934 or 1935, Lewis had influenza.
In those days, if you were ill in England, the doctor visited you, rather than expecting you to stagger to the surgery.
Minto summoned the man who had recently taken over the Headington practice from the household's former practitioner, Dr Wood.
The doctor who appeared was R. E. Havard, and after five minutes of talk about influenza (Lewis had rather a fondness for discussing symptoms man to man), they fell to some ethical or philosophical talk.
Lewis, it struck Havard, a recent convert to Roman Catholicism and a devotee of Thomas Aquinas, took a remarkably idealistic, Berkeleyan view of things.
On the strength of this exchange, Lewis realized that Havard would be a man who would enjoy meeting some of the people who had taken to dropping into his rooms at Magdalen on Thursday evenings.
Not long afterwards, therefore, Havard was invited to call at Magdalen.
Warnie was there to welcome him and to dispense drinks.
Others present included Lord David Cecil, who had lately come back to Oxford to teach English Literature at New College, and Adam Fox, the college chaplain.
Dyson and Tolkien were also there.
Lewis was the presiding genius; the meeting took place in his rooms and it was he who chose the moment to ask if anyone present had any work in progress which they wanted to read aloud.
It was in this way that Havard first came to hear many of Tolkien's tales, David Cecil's Two Quiet Lives , and reflections on Dante by Colin Hardie (who taught Classics at Magdalen and was also a regular member of the circle), as well as many of Lewis's own works.
This was no ordinary gathering of men.
The level of wit and comment, sometimes abusive, sometimes adulatory, about what was read was consistently high.
How many ‘literary’ men, happily ensconced in a coterie, would ask along their doctors?
Can we imagine a GP being made to feel welcome in the Bloomsbury set?
But one also sees in the adoption of Havard the vivid contrast which existed between the clubbable Lewis liked by his friends and the figure he presented on the domestic scene.
It is easy to get the impression that he was the only one to suffer in this area, constantly put upon by Mrs Moore or bored by her daughter.
Seen from the women's angle, things could sometimes appear differently.
No sooner had Havard become a friend than Lewis casually asked one day why Minto and Maureen did not entertain the doctor's family; have his wife to tea and allow his children to swim in the quarry pond.
Minto was always happy to entertain young people, and the invitation was issued.
The Havards arrived at The Kilns, Maureen played tennis with them, swam with them and provided them with the sandwiches and cakes which she and her mother had been preparing all day.
They liked the Havards, and were pleased to have met them.
Not so Jack, who appeared to have forgotten that it was his idea to invite them in the first place.
‘Really, Maureen,’ he bellowed at her, ‘the friends you insist on inviting round become uglier and uglier.
I never saw such an ugly family as the Havards.’
Meanwhile, the doctor continued to be a friend whom he enjoyed meeting in the evenings.
The roughness and sheer wild irrationality of Lewis's domestic persona were matched by the genuinely warm-hearted impulse which had led him to befriend Havard in the first place.
Havard, who came to be nicknamed ‘Humphrey’(because this was what one member of the group thought was his name) and sometimes the UQ or Useless Quack, came to be a much loved friend of them all.
His presence among them was highly symptomatic.
There was nothing of ‘the ivory tower’, nothing ‘donnish’, about Lewis's intelligence.
In all his talk, and in his writings, he addressed the sympathetic, lively minded ‘general reader’ or ‘average man’.
Even his learned writings have the readability and freshness of appeal of ‘popular’ work; indeed, the distinction between ‘learned’and ‘popular’is one which seems in reading Lewis to be quite false.
And one feels this even when he is at his most learned.
In all available time not devoted to teaching, to domestic life or to friendship, Lewis had been hard at work, ever since the late 1920s, on the book which was to become The Allegory of Love .
Letters to his father in 1928 revealed how he had grown to love the oldest part of the Bodleian — Duke Humfrey's Library.
‘If only one could smoke and if only there were upholstered chairs, this would be one of the most delightful places in the world.’
Others who have appreciated the painted ceilings, mullioned windows and carved bays of that supremely beautiful room must have felt that one of its great charms resided in the absence of modern furniture and tobacco smoke.
Be that as it may, it was here mat Lewis began to build up his encyclopaedic knowledge of late medieval literature.
As far back as 1925, he had dreamed of a complete history of the love allegory from Ovid to Spenser, and by 1928 two chapters of a more modest scheme, starting with the Provençal troubadours, were finished.
But Lewis's conception of the book changed as he himself changed, and nothing much more got written until 193 1.
The substance of his book — the history of allegorical love literature from the early Middle Ages to the late sixteenth century — was worked out in lectures to undergraduates.
Lewis had a distinctive manner of lecturing, which was not greatly altered over the years.
He began speaking as soon as he entered the lecture-room, which he generally did five minutes after me hour.
He finished five minutes before the hour.
He spoke slowly, sometimes at dictation speed, if quoting an author whom he thought his audience should not miss.
The lectures were delivered in a full, deep, slightly Irish version of the Oxford voice ('Lat'n’ for Latin, and rolled Rs), enlivened with amusing analogies and examples from modern life and literature.
He had his father's gift for sensing what sort of an audience he was addressing, and adapting his matter accordingly.
He told jokes well.
His lectures were above all popular because he packed them with information.
Clever undergraduates liked them because of their enormous range.
Lazy undergraduates liked them because Lewis did half their work far them — providing summaries of books they would never get around to reading themselves, and lightening his commentaries with entertaining asides.
But it was not until the early 1930s that The Allegory of Love began to take shape as a book, and it was not finished until 1935.
It is a phenomenal compendium of lightly worn, deeply read learning, and in every page we see why Lewis was such an inspired teacher.
He unselfconsciously expects the reader to be as interested as he is in Jean de Meung or Alanus.
In consequence we are, or wish that we were.
What is more, it is a big-hearted, generous book.
Lewis does not set out to make himself cleverer than the reader, stili less cleverer than the authors whom he is discussing.
Like an enthusiastic guide in a foreign country, he is anxious to share with us the unexpected treasures he has found and which we might, without his help, have missed.
Indeed, if he has a fault as a critic it is in his boyishly enthusiastic generosity towards authors — Thomas Usk, Lydgate — who are not really as interesting as he makes them sound.
It is not that he lies about them, rather that only a patient and omnivorous prospector would have found the particular treasures which he quotes.
The treasures are real enough.
But who would guess, for example, having read some of the Lydgate he quotes —
And as I stoode myself alloone upon the Nuwe Yeare night, I prayed unto the frosty moone, with her pale light — what a dull time we should have if we tried to read our way through The Fall of Princes ?
Supremely, however, this generous desire to show us the best in an author is manifested in his long chapter about Spenser, and there he marks himself out not as a kindly eccentric, but as a pioneer of modern taste.
Thanks very largely to Lewis, Spenser is now once more regarded as one of the greatest English poets, having sunk into almost total obscurity before The Allegory of Love was written.
Moreover, in showing us what he loves about Tbe Faerie Queene , he shows us in embryo what he hardly knows at this point himself: the sort of books which he himself will excel at.
In his descriptions of Spenser's Christian purpose, his blending of allegory with adventure, his use of homely familiar figures, like St George, side by side with figures from a much older mythology and figures from his own imagination, Lewis is actually writing a recipe for how to construct the Narnia chronicles.
There is never a moment's dullness in The Allegory of Love .
Its readability partly consists in the enthusiasm which has already been mentioned, and in the liveliness and unexpectedness of the examples: the comparison of Boiardo's fantasies with Mickey Mouse; the likening of Spenser's Radigund to Simla memsahibs in Kipling.
But the essential and unifying feature of the book is the voice of the author.
One could say very certainly, therefore, that the book could not be complete until Lewis as a ‘character’ was complete.
He is not afraid to come before us in this book as a full-blown figure, someone who is quite recognizable (from earliest school letters and the accounts of Kirkpatrick) as ‘the real Lewis’ but who is also, for the first time, ‘found’as an artistic voice.
Johnson once described the ideal happiness which he would choose, if he were regardless of futurity.
My own choice, with the same reservation, would be to read the Italian epic — to be always convalescent from some small illness and always seated in a window that overlooked the sea, there to read these poems eight hours of each happy day.
Part of the pleasure of reading Lewis, when it is a pleasure, is meeting with this figure.
Few academics would think it proper to bring themselves before the reader in this way, particularly in a work of learning.
But the important point is not that they would hesitate to do it, but that we would not be interested if they did.
Part of Lewis's discovery of himself as a writer was the discovery of a means of presenting himself to the reader.
It is the rhetoric of Romanticism —‘the egotistical sublime’— and not everyone liked or likes it.
Barfield, to whom he dedicated The Allegory of Love , describes a moment when he read Lewis's ‘Open Letter to Dr Tillyard’.
Tillyard, one of the foremost Milton scholars of his day, had suggested that we can only fully understand Paradise Lost when we understand the man who wrote it.
For Lewis, this was ‘the personal heresy’, a vivid example of which would be the present biography, which seeks to shed light on a man's work by researching into the recesses of his mind and the outward events of his life.
It is typical of Lewis's later self that he should have seen no virtue at all in Tillyard's approach, and that furthermore he should have labelled it ‘heresy’.
What struck Barfield, however, was the manner in which this slightly absurd debate was conducted.
‘We have both learnt our dialectic in the academic arena where knocks that would frighten the London literary coteries are given and taken in good part; and even where you think me sometimes too pert you will not suspect me of malice.
If you honour me with a reply it will be in kind; and then, God defend the right!’
Barfield describes how he read this sentence, slapped down the book and shouted: ‘I don't believe it!
It's pastiche!’
While such thoughts were inevitable for those who knew Lewis before the great change came upon his life, it was not quite right to speak of ‘pastiche’.
It was all a bit odder than that.
After he became a Christian, Lewis did completely change his view not only of his own personality but of human personality in general.
‘My own empirical self is becoming more important,’ he wrote to Barfield, ‘and this is exactly the opposite of self-love.’
It is said that when he heard his own voice on the radio, some seven years after writing this letter, Lewis was surprised and in some measure disconcerted.
In a similar way he might have been surprised by the figure he cut in prose or come to that in life.
But he was in no sense putting on an act.
The strange locutions, the shabby clothes, the combination of kindliness and brusqueness, the strong ‘personality’ but increasing impersonality of his conversation and interests, were all part of the same process.
It is comparable with the oddness which might visit all our outward appearances if we stopped looking in mirror.
The only contrived thing about it was the initial impulse, which interpreted the New Testament injunction to deny self as to‘live without an image of the self’.
The ‘image’ of C. S. Lewis, which many were to find rebarbative, was not, as they imagined, stage-managed or rehearsed, but it was none the less odd for that.
The Allegory of Love was sent in manuscript to the offices of the Oxford University Press in London.
As with much else in Lewis's life, it seems as though there was a Providence in its journey, for it landed on the desk of a man celled Charles Williams.
THE INKLINGS 1936–1939
W. H. Auden, the rising star of the English poetic firmament, met Charles Williams about a year after Lewis did.
Auden had been asked by the Oxford University Press to prepare The Oxford Book of Light Verse , and he went along to discuss this with Williams at his office in Amen House.
At this period in his life, Auden was still a subscriber to the bundle of ideologies — leftist in politics, atheist in religion, Freudian in psychology — which went with being a 1930s intellectual.
Yet, in the presence of Williams, he felt ‘for the first time in my life…in the presence of personal sanctity…
I had met many good people before who made me feel ashamed of my own shortcomings, but in the presence of this man — we never discussed anything but literary business — I did not feel ashamed.
I felt transformed into a person who was incapable of doing anything base or unloving.’
T. S. Eliot, who published many of Williams's books, felt the same.
Eliot had first met Williams — of all unlikely settings — at a tea-party given in London by Lady Ottoline Morrell, and felt ‘a kind of benediction’ emanating from this curious bespectacled creature who ‘appeared to combine frail physique with exceptional vitality’.
Williams was a man who was able to hold many apparently contradictory ideas in harmony.
For example, he was able to reconcile membership of the Church of England (rather High) with belonging to such occult groups as the Order of the Golden Dawn.
Thomas Cranmer and Aleister Crowley were held in uneasy balance in his sympathies.
A rather unsatisfactory marriage was glorified in his imagination by high-sounding comparisons between himself and Dante, while his largely innocent office romances — which do not appear to have gone much beyond crushes on secretaries — were seen in terms of Launcelot's devotion to Guinevere and the threatened breaking of the Round Table.
Entirely self-educated and cockney in speech, Williams (rather like Blake in an earlier generation of London mystics) had an almost matter-of-fact awareness of the other world.
Angels — or ‘angelicals’ as he would have preferred to call them in his strange idiolect — were as real to him as omnibuses or mortgage repayments — and far more likely to obtrude into his consciousness.
In his theological writings, it is not always easy to see at what point he steps over the borderline between magic and religion.
In his fiction, there is an analogous blurring of distinctions, shocking or thrilling depending on the reader's taste.
Once Oxford University Press had accepted The Allegory of Love for publication, it was sent to Charles Williams, who worked on their editorial desk in London.
It so happened, entirely by coincidence, that Coghill lent Lewis a copy of Williams's novel The Place of the Lion at precisely this moment.
The merits contained in any Williams novel — and this one has many — are not purely literary.
Indeed, none of his novels is well shaped or well written.
The characters have improbable names and say improbable things.
The excitement of The Place of the Lion is in its power to shake the reader up — to make us feel that the world is not the place we thought it was.
Here, for example, we meet a very ordinary young woman with the very extraordinary name of Damaris Tighe.
She is the sort of girl we might meet in the pages of a Barbara Pym —, a bit of a scholar, leading a spinsterly existence in a middle-class house in an English country village.
But she is in fact in grave theological and spiritual error.
Her ‘subject’ is the relationship between the angels of medieval philosophers and the Ideas and Forms in Plato.
Her paper The Eidoli and the Angeli is not a suitable one to read to the little study group which meets in a neighbour's house: the group, it transpires, is actually in touch with the world of spirits.
These people are not, like Damaris, dry-as-dust, unbelieving intellectuals.
They are magicians and hierophants.
The Eidoli and the Angeli have power to invade even dull suburban English houses.
Damaris discovers that she has been guilty of intellectual sin in failing to believe, to realize imaginatively, the nature of the material she is studying.
This is rather like the moment in Lewis's life when he described philosophy as a subject and Barfield replied that to Plato, philosophy was not a subject but a way.
In The Place of the Lion , the Platonic archetypes of which objects and creatures in the world are but reflections or repetitions actually appear.
A lion which at the beginning of the book seems as though it might just be an escaped animal from a nearby zoo turns out to be the great Lion of Strength.
Perhaps the most extraordinary moment in the story is when the Butterfly appears and ali the butterflies in the world, in a great swarm, are absorbed back into his essence.
Lewis was overwhelmed by reading this book.
In the course of time, we begin to read Williams's influence in Lewis's own work — the Lion of Strength will reappear as Aslan, Judah's Lion, crushing the Serpent's Head in the Chronicles of Narnia, for example.
The immediate impact in February 1936 was inner and self-disciplinary.
‘The reading of it has been a good preparation for Lent as far as I am concerned: for it shows me (through the heroine) the special sin of abuse of intellect to which all my profession are liable, more clearly than I ever saw before.
I have learned more than I ever knew about humility.
In fact, it has been a big experience.’
If Lewis had been learning more than he knew before about humility, Williams had been learning more than he knew before about medieval literature.
At the very moment Lewis was finishing The Place of the Lion , Williams was reading The Allegory of Love with great admiration.
‘I regard your book as practically the only one that I have ever come across, since Dante, that shows the slightest understanding of what this very peculiar identity of love and religion means,’ Williams wrote, signing himself ‘Very gratefully yours’.
The bulk of Lewis's book is pure literary history, though its earlier chapters refer to the strange pseudo-religion of Love which appears to have originated in twelfth-century Provence.
But it is entirely characteristic of Williams, whose head was always buzzing with Dante, and with the dangerous borderlines between sacred and profane love, that he should have read The Allegory in that way.
Not long after this, Lewis and Williams met in London, as they continued to do at irregular intervals for the next three years.
They really were very different types.
Williams was emotionally exuberant, Lewis was profoundly buttoned up.
Lewis was plump, and rather coarse in appearance; Williams, who has been unkindly likened to a monkey, was actually rather ethereal in manner, with his long fingers and piercing eyes.
The ugly voice was not merely ugly; it was, by many accounts, half-hypnotic.
But different as they were in appearance, temperament and background, they discovered in common a strong belief in the absolute reality of the supernatural world.
It had been latent in Lewis ever since his encounter with God in Magdalen in the summer of 1929.
But to meet Williams was to make the belief yet more inescapable.
Many readers of The Place of the Lion would be unable to convict the heroine of ‘sin’ at all.
She is a modern woman, with a modern consciousness.
How can we expect her to adopt the thought patterns of an earlier age?
This problem of historical relativism is one of the most besetting for anyone who wishes to read an old book without either getting it hopelessly wrong or, worse, assuming that the fact that we are modern and the author of the book ‘medieval’ or ‘old’implies the superiority of one or the other.
Quite apart from the problem of the factual reliability of old books (is it so, for example, that there really are such eidoli and angeli as Williams, Abelard, Pseudo-Dionysus and Plato believed?), we meet, much earlier, the simple difficulty of adjusting to old meanings.
Learning an old language — Middle English, Old French, Latin — is more than an exercise in matching modern word for old word.
It often involves the modern mind's entering into old concepts for which there is no modern equivalent.
What writers from past centuries believed about the world, the sky, themselves is often untranslatable, and we will never quite master it without the help of a guide.
This was the task Lewis set himself.
The Oxford lectures which he gave at this time were eventually to be published as The Discarded Image , perhaps the most completely satisfying and impressive book he ever published.
One could wish it eight times as long, a great compendium like Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy .
The subtitle of the book is An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature .
But this is not a work of criticism, nor an attempt to make you like The Faerie Queene or the Confessio Amantis .
It is a wide-ranging analysis of the world picture which almost all the old writers would have taken for granted but which we, our minds fed with different mythologies and sciences, would very easily mistake.
How, for instance, did a medieval man look at the sky?
Having early disposed of the false idea that in the Middle Ages people believed in a flat earth, Lewis tells us to look at the sky itself.
You must go out on a starry night and walk about for half an hour trying to see the sky in terms of the old (Ptolemaic) cosmology.
Remember that you now have an absolute Up and Down.
The Earth is really the centre, really the lowest place; movement to it from whatever direction is downward movement.
As a modern, you located the stars at a great distance.
For distance you must now substitute that very special, and far less abstract, sort of distance which we call height: height which speaks immediately to our muscles and nerves.
The Medieval Model is vertiginous.
And the fact that the height of the stars in medieval astronomy is very small compared with their distance in modern, will turn out not to have the kind of importance you anticipated…
To look out on the night sky with modern eyes is like looking about one in a trackless forest — trees forever and no horizon.
To look up at the towering medieval universe is much more like looking at a great building.
The ‘space’ of modern astronomy may arouse terror, or bewilderment or vague reverie; the spheres of the old writers present us with an object in which the mind can rest, overwhelming in its greatness but satisfying in its harmony.
That is the sense in which our universe is romantic and theirs was classical.
By the time we have finished his chapter called ‘The Heavens’, we have not only been informed about what the shape of the Ptolemaic universe was like, and how the belief in astrology worked, and how much knowledge was in our sense ‘scientific’ and how much ‘poetic’or ‘mythological’.
We have actually had our picture of the universe changed for ever.
By this, I do not mean mat Lewis has represented the medieval picture as ‘better’ than the modern; but he has shown us that both are merely pictures.
And in understanding the old picture so vividly, he has prepared us to appreciate, and to understand, many things which we either could not previously have hoped to understand, or which we had been looking at with half-open eyes.
He enhances our sense not only of the poets' universe — me cosmology of Dante and Milton, for example— but also of the symbolism used by painters and architects.
The past is still a foreign country, but we have been shown round it by the most genial and expert of guides.
Such basic matters as what people believed about their own bodies — made up of humours — or their pasts are juxtaposed with fascinating excursions into such areas of belief as the fairies and mythical beasts.
The range of reading and reference is prodigious.
Almost the most enjoyable thing of all is Lewis's ability to find traces of the ‘old world’— beliefs which go back to Isadore of Seville or Macrobius or even as far as Plato — surviving in the pages of Fielding, Johnson or Wordsworth.
In The Discarded Image his omnivorous reading taste is best synthesized.
If 1936 was a sort of annus mirabilis far Jack, it was one of mixed happiness for Warnie.
The more Jack was in demand, as a lecturer, teacher, and man of letters, the more danger there was that Warnie would be thrown back on his own society or, worse, on that of Mrs Moore.
They really were not compatible, in spite of the affections they held in common.
There were other loves besides the love of Jack which bound them together.
At the end of January, for example, Warnie took Minto and Maureen to the Electra cinema to see the funeral of George V, and it was obvious that they were all much affected by it.
A fortnight later came the emotionally more disturbing death of Minto's dog, Mr Papwoth.
He was fourteen years old, blind and hardly able to walk, but they had grown much attached to him and could hardly endure the thought of his death.
In the last four days of his life, he could take nothing but whisky, administered to him by Warnie.
Jack too felt a painful void —‘one remembers his old happy days, especially his puppyhood, with an ache’, and for Minto it was grief ‘as if for a human being’.
(They were eventually to get another dog — a very lively golden retriever, but before that Warnie had bought himself a boat.)
For J. R. R. Tolkien, the 1930s were a decade of continuous literary activity.
Unlike Lewis, who tended to write out his ‘stories or essays once, and only lightly revise them, Tolkien was a cautious and hesitant ‘maker’.
He was in a continual process of rewriting his material and revising his mythology.
It would seem as though The Hobbit , for instance, the story which was to make him famous when it was published in 1937, had existed in embryonic form as early as about 1930.
Lewis was shown a version in 1932 and admired it enormously.
It was probably in 1937 that he and Tolkien had a conversation about their distaste for much of what was being published at that time.
‘Tollers,’ said Lewis, ‘there is too little of what we really like in stories.
I am afraid we shall have to try and write some ourselves.’
It was agreed that Tolkien should write a story about time-travel, and Lewis one about space-travel.
Tolkien's story,The Lost Road , seems to be the only example of his attempting to depict the twentieth,, in legends and lost tales of the old world, Alboin and Audoin by name.
In only a very few pages, we have left the twentieth century far behind and discovered that these two descend from the Lombardic heroes mentioned in the Old English poem Widsith (Aelfwin and Eadwin); and since Aelfvin means ‘Elf-friend’, we are not surprised to find ourselves drifting further back to the times when elves still walked the earth, before Numenor (the Atlantis of the Tolkien mythology) had sunk beneath the waves.
Sadly,The Lost Road only survives as a fragment, and its story line is at a rudimentary stage of evolution.
There could be no greater indication of the contrast between me two friends' approach to their craft than a comparison between The Lost Road , tentatively built up stage by stage, with an infinite number of backward glances at the whole mythology that has gone before, and Lewis's self-confident brush strokes as he dashed off Out of the Silent Planet .
The latter is a book in which the author is firing on all cylinders.
It brings together Lewis the scholar, Lewis the voracious reader of anything from medieval schoolmen or Italian epic to modern science fiction, Lewis the Christian apologist, Lewis the Irish satirist in the savage tradition of Swift, Lewis the failed Romantic poet.
‘Thus skidding violently from one side to the other, his youth approached the moment at which he would begin to be a person.’
It is the story of a philologist (said to be loosely based on Tolkien, but in fact fairly unlike him: Tolkien recognized some of his own opinions and ideas Lewisified in the character) who, by a series of mishaps on a walking tour, comes to a house where two sinister scientists, Weston and Devine, are planning a visit to outer space.
They have everything ready except a human being to accompany them on their voyage.
They are going to a planet celled Malecandra (which turns out to be Mars) and, having made a previous recce there, they are under the impression that the inhabitants are fierce and eat men.
Hence their need for a human companion to placate the natives on their arrival.
Out of the Silent Planet is a book which is quite un-put-downable.
The freshness of the writing reflects the boyish excitement with which Lewis wrote it and read it aloud, chapter by chapter, to his circle of friends.
Into the excitement is woven a tragic sense of the Fall, both as something Romantically conceived (the ruin of the earth, of Man's relationship with the beasts, of the erotic life) and as straight Christian theology.
The theology does not wage war on the story.
The eldils , the angelic beings who are at first invisible to Ransom, and their hierarchic sense of obedience are introduced gently.
And the sheer incidentals, the imagined languages of the Martian creatures, the poetic hrossi , the intellectual sorns and the practical and commercially minded pfifftriggs have a playful quality which, while being purely enjoyable, is not without satiric edge.
Many of the linguistic elements are borrowed from Tolkien and — which must have been more exasperating for their originator — changed and got ‘wrong’.
Lewis's eldils , for instance, are little more than the angels of Judaeo-Christian tradition; but by confusing them linguistically with Tolkien's eldalie (in The Silmarillion), he implies that the elves of mat mythology are angelic, which they are not — they are simply elves.
Any irritation Tolkien felt at this appropriation of his own imaginative world did not prevent him from doing his best for the book.
Since it had been a great success when read aloud to ‘our local club’, Tolkien had absolute confidence in submitting it to the publisher of The Hobbit , Stanley Unwin.
Tolkien's letter reveals that in the original draft of the story the hero is called not Ransom but Unwin ('The latter detail could I am sure be altered').
Ransom, the name finally arrived at, develops its own significance in the sequels to Out of the Silent Planet .
Stanley Unwin turned the book down.
It had already been shown by Lewis to Dent, publisher of Dymer , who rejected it.
Unwin did, however, pass the typescript to a small publishing company called The Bodley Head.
They accepted it and it was swiftly published, appearing before the end of 1938.
It received high praise, often from surprising quarters.
‘Here is a very good book,’ declared that sentimental realist Hugh Walpole.
‘It is of thrilling interest as a story, but it is more than that; it is a kind of poem, and it has the great virtue of improving as it goes on.
It is a unique thing, fall of stars, cold and heat, flowers of the planets and a sharp sardonic humour.’
Walpole himself, after a spell of agnosticism, had returned to Christian belief in middle age.
The Lewisian thing about the first of his space stories is precisely its blend of literary originality and religious truth; it is not ‘theology’ dressed up as ‘literature’; rather it makes its best literary effects when it is at its most religious because the religious matter is what most engages the author's imagination.
In this, Lewis resembles two of his favourite authors, Edmund Spenser and George MacDonald.
The Muses have been traditionally at war with Christ, ever since the period of late classical antiquity, when Jerome and Augustine both viewed literary excellence with the gravest suspicion.
Lewis is one of those very rare writers whose Muse appears to be an anima naturaliter Christiana .
There have been plenty of good writers who were also Christians.
Plenty of Christians have tried their hand at putting their beliefs into prose or poetry, usually with calamitous aesthetic results.
There have been very few with the gift of Dante or John Milton, who have written at their best when being most Christian.
It was to this great tradition, though as a self-confessedly very junior follower, that Lewis quite easily and naturally belonged.
This did not mean that he was above sacrificing aesthetic principle — if there is such a thing, and if he had it — to the purely partisan pleasures of Morte aux païens .
Dante could turn aside from his most sublime passages of religious contemplation to hone a gratuitous insult for the benefit of Florentine families whom he happened to dislike.
Milton, who sang of God and his angels, was equally happy slinging mud at bishops.
Tolkien and Lewis, in some of the same spirit, decided to make a party issue out of the election to the Oxford Chair of Poetry in 1938.
Unlike other professors at Oxford, the Professor of Poetry is elected by the MAs of the University: that is to say, not only by the dons, but also by all the old members of the University who have paid the appropriate fees and undergone, either in person or in absentia , a short ceremony in the Sheldonian Theatre.
Although there have been some famous poets who occupied this chair (for example Matthew Arnold and W. H. Auden), it has much more commonly been occupied by dons; and the point at issue when choosing candidates for the Chair of Poetry has very seldom been their views about the subject on which they are supposed to lecture, still less their competence to do so.
One day over breakfast, the chaplain of Magdalen, Adam Fox, opened his newspaper and saw that Sir Edmund Chambers was being put up as a candidate for the Chair of Poetry.
He described him as ‘a retired civil servant who has made Shakespeare his hobby’.
In this Fox was simply showing his ignorance.
Though indeed he had been a civil servant, Chambers was one of the foremost literary scholars in England.
His books The Medieval Stage and The Elizabethan Stage remain classics of literary history, and in their range and period there are few better anthologies of verse than his Early English Lyrics and Oxford Book of Sixteenth Century Verse .
He had lately come to live in a village called Eynsham, near Oxford, he was a D.Litt. of his old university, and all this Lewis must have known.
Nevertheless, when Fox made the preposterous statement that ‘This is simply shocking, they might as well make me professor of Poetry,’ Lewis responded, ‘Well, we will.’
It is hard, at this distance of time, to see what his motives were, apart from the mere love of a fight for its own sake, and the desire to promote one of his friends.
If E. K. Chambers could be suspected of being dull and pedantic, what were Fox's qualities?
He had published one ‘long and childlike’(his own words) poem called Old King Cole and he had won the sacred poem prize (in another competition open to all MAs of the University).
He was no orator.
He had nothing much to say about poetry.
He was a grotesquely inappropriate choice.
Nevertheless, Lewis put up Fox to stand against Chambers, and his gang of friends rallied to Fox's support.
This had its (presumably) desired effect of annoying a lot of other dons.
They, guided by the strong impression in ‘literary’ circles that Chambers was an old bore and Fox was a non-starter, put up their own candidate, Lord David Cecil, a friend of Lewis's, as it happened, and the English tutor at New College.
But no quarrel in England is ever about what it seems to be about.
Although David Cecil was and always had been a devout Christian, he became the favourite candidate of those who resented the ‘clerical candidate’, the man who had been put up by Lewis, just because he was a Christian.
So the literary set, many of them agnostic or hostile to religion, ranged behind Lord David, while those who had already committed themselves, together with those who esteemed him as a scholar, voted for E. K. Chambers.
This was a situation which the Ulsterman in Lewis relished.
For the time being, he ceased to be a cloistered academic and became once more the son of the police-court solicitor in Belfast, the city where the most popular political slogan at election times was ‘Vote early, vote often’.
Lewis knew well that most of the dons would vote for David Cecil or E. K. Chambers.
They would thereby split the opposition.
All he needed to do was to collect the votes of the majority of MAs who had left the University.
By putting up a clergyman as a candidate, he could rely on the vote of hundreds of MAs who, sitting in their country rectories, could easily be persuaded by a judiciously worded letter that their old University was falling into the hands of infidels.
A vote for Fox became, absurdly, a vote for the Church, a vote for Orthodoxy, a vote far all the things which Lewis now ‘stood for’.
In staunch Irish fashion, he laid on transport for Fox's supporters to be ‘bused’ into Oxford on.
the appropriate days and rewarded them for their votes with meals and refreshments at Magdalen.
Fox was a nice man, much liked among a wide circle of his fellow-clergy.
He romped home.
The election did much to harm Lewis's reputation in Oxford.
The dons felt that he could not be trusted: that he was populist, bullying, showy, and hostile to them.
By his campaign for Fox, Lewis probably destroyed his own chances of promotion in the University, even though he was very obviously the most distinguished member of the English Faculty.
It is certainly easy for those who did not belong to Lewis's group of friends, and who merely come upon the record of it in after days, to see its faults.
Chief among them, and born of the group's increasing feeling that they stood far something, embattled against a hostile world, was their tendency not only to see merit where none existed (in the poetry of Fox, for example), but actually to think that belonging to the group — which began at around this period to be known as the Inklings — was in itself a sort of merit.
One gets the feeling from Warnie's diary, for example, that it was better to be a good Inkling than a good poet, or even a good man.
The most exaggerated example of this (it was the dangerous tendency which Jack himself labelled the ‘Inner Ring’) was when they attended a production of Hamlet at the New Theatre in Oxford, produced — as were so many great Oxford University Dramatic Society productions in the middle years of this century — by Nevill Coghill.
‘What dramatic merit the play had’, Warnie noted afterwards, ‘seemed to have been supplied by Coghill and not by Shakespeare.’
Shakespeare, one realizes, had the supreme misfortune not to be an Inkling.
One gets the strong feeling that he would not (in the unlikely event of his standing as a candidate) have stood much chance of becoming Professor of Poetry at Oxford if Lewis and Tolkien had had anything to do with it.
Though Fox was never to give a distinguished lecture, his friends were triumphant.
He had defeated, as Tolkien boasted to his publisher, ‘a Knight and a noble Lord.
He was nominated by Lewis and myself, and miraculously elected: our first public victory over established privilege.
For Fox is a member of our literary club of practising poets before whom The Hobbitt , and other works (such as the Silent Planet)have been read.’
That was certainly one way of looking at things.
The original Inklings club had been started by an undergraduate at University College, and broke up in 1933.
This was a literary dining club, to which Tolkien and Lewis had both, on different occasions, been invited as guests.
Little by little, Lewis, with his passion for nicknames, adopted this one to describe his own circle of friends.
It was never a formal club with minutes, or apologies for absence, or any ‘business’ or recognizable membership.
Yet, as Tolkien remarked, ‘it was a pleasantly ingenious pun in its way, suggesting people with vague or half-formed intimations and ideas plus those who dabble in ink.’
In this way, another Oxford legend was born.
It would be a mistake, however, even when the intimacy between Lewis and Tolkien was at its strongest, to believe that this was the only thing in both their lives.
Tolkien always had close family ties in which Lewis had no wish to be involved.
Knowing Tolkien to have his difficulties, maritally speaking, the two Lewis brothers stayed away; and Lewis, who disliked sharing spoken intimacies with friends, never allowed the conversation to develop if Tolkien tried to speak of his troubles.
On one occasion when Tolkien tore a ligament playing squash, and was told that he would be confined to his bed for ten weeks, Lewis went to see him — but, as Warnie recorded, he ‘found Madame [i.e. Tolkien's wife]there, so could not have much conversation with him’.
The Tolkien children were invited to swim and punt on Lewis's lake at The Kilns, but there was nothing in the way of a ‘family friendship’ between the two.
Indeed, Lewis was always impatient with ‘Tollers’ if he pleaded family commitments as a reason for not attending an Inklings evening.
Lewis, for his part, had his own private world which he did not share with the Inklings.
There was the whole, and very important, world of his friendship with animals.
A large part of his pleasure derived from walking holidays, when he could put Oxford, college politics and the routines of work behind him.
There were many such tours in the pre-war years, often taken with Barfield, sometimes with Warnie, sometimes both.
Between 2 January and 6 January 1939, for example, the brothers walked forty-two miles in the Welsh Marches (i.e. borders — from me Old English mearc ), and rounded them off with a stay in Great Malvern.
The trip awakened many boyhood memories, and Warnie remarked that they might do worse than spend their declining years there.
Jack readily agreed.
It was a peculiar exchange to take place between men in full vigour, aged forty and forty-four respectively.
It is as though they could not wait to sink into a dotage spent in permanent contemplation of their childhood.
The in-between bits — what some call life — seemed by such standards to be so much waste of time, which they could not be done with fast enough.
To beguile some of the time in Malvern, they went to the cinema.
The Lewis brothers were not great cinema-goers, and there were few films in the 1930s which they viewed with enjoyment.
Noël Coward's Cavalcade , for example, though Jack could see its merit, struck him as fundamentally cheap, ‘a mere brutal assault on one's emotions, using material which one can't help feeling intensely.
It appeals entirely to that part of you which lives in the throat and chest, leaving the spirit untouched.’
A film which apparently did touch the spirit was King Kong , though we do not know whether Jack found it quite as exciting as Warnie did: ‘There were astounding representations of the various prehistoric monsters,’ Warnie confided breathlessly to his diary.
‘How they were done I cannot imagine…‘
For their third cinematic adventure of the decade (unless one counts the showing of George V's funeral), they booked tickets at the cinema in Great Malvern to see Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarves It turned out to be ‘first rate…
It was well worth going to if only for the scene of the spring cleaning of the dwarfs’ house.
We came out into a lovely night: the effect of the quiet town, in the moonlight, with the snowclad hills behind is one that I shan't soon forget,’ wrote Warnie.
It was an evening of blissful happiness for Jack's brother, a return to boyhood, those beloved ‘Malvern days when it was just the two of us against the P'daytabird’.
This was the last walking holiday the two brothers were ever to take together.
Warnie, though he was by all accounts a most delightful and courteous companion, was a clear case of arrested development.
Emotionally, he was imprisoned in his boyhood, the only difference being that the whiskey bottle was substituted for cream buns and lemon pop as the greatest imaginable treat.
With Jack, however, things were less simple; we come once more to Barfield's worry that there was something affected about the younger brother's attitudes and poses.
Certainly, there is no inherent virtue in having read ali the latest books, nor in following intellectual fads and trends.
But if, as William Empson (no ally) believed, Lewis was ‘the best read man of his generation, one who read everything and remembered everything he read’, there is something a little disappointing in such a man rejoicing in the limitations of his sympathy.
On one level, it is quite a good joke in the decade of Brecht's Der Gute Mensch von Sezuan to be relishing the washing-up scene in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs in the decade of Sartre's La Nausée and (as far as English publication was concerned) Joyce's Ulysses , to be whooping with delight at the reprint of Adventures of Tom Pippin by Roland Zuiz.
Where this is born of genuine enthusiasm, well and good.
But Lewis's friends sensed, from this period onwards, something which had begun half as a tease hardening into an attitude.
David Cecil, an omnivorous and generous-hearted reader, was almost always unable to persuade Lewis to like books written by ‘moderns’.
Although Lewis had read Kafka and Virginia Woolf, the virtues of Proust or D. H. Lawrence or T. S. Eliot were virtues he delighted in being unable to see.
One picks up a suggestion of this position calcifying into something more like the outlook of a crusty old gentleman in a club in a letter he wrote in June 1938 to Barfield.
In one paragraph, he makes some perfectly reasonable objections to his pupils' and colleagues' remoteness from life.
In the next he moves to crustiness:
They keep sheep in Magdalen grove now, and I hear the fleecy care bleating all day long: I am shocked to find that none of my pupils, though they are all acquainted with pastoral poetry, regards them as anything but a nuisance: and one of my colleagues has been heard to ask why sheep have their wool cut off.
This is all splendid and we are on Lewis's side.
But then he goes on:
It frightens me, almost.
And so it did the other night, when I heard two undergrads, giving a list of pleasures which were (a) Nazi,(b) leading to homosexuality.
They were: feeling the wind in your hair, walking with bare feet on the grass, and baring in the rain.
Think it over: it gets worse the longer you look at it.
It is twenty-two years since I read that letter, first published in Warnie's selection of his brother's correspondence, and on and off I have been thinking it over.
At no time have I been able to see anything cither Nazi or necessarily homosexual in the listed pleasures, which are precisely of the kind which might occur in a George MacDonald fantasy.
But the pleasures are, of course, those of youth, and Lewis at the age of forty seems to have forgotten what it was like to be young.
He sees exuberant, and perhaps sensual, pleasure in the natural world, of the kind which he once described so lyrically in letters to Arthur Greeves (there is in fact a letter about bathing in the rain at Parson's Pleasure); now such stuff seems to him ‘Nazi’.
If this misgiving about Lewis is at all fair (the sense of a carapace hardening upon him), then one must also view with ambivalence his excursion into the realm of religious apologetics.
Ashley Sampson was the owner of a small London publishing house, which ran a series called ‘Christian Challenge’.
Knowing of Lewis's philosophical training and Christian sympathy, and admiring his two published prose works, he asked if Lewis would be prepared to undertake a 40,000-word contribution to the series.
The subject proposed was The Problem of Pain .
As Lewis tells us in the preface to the published version of this book, his initial reaction was to wish for anonymity, ‘since if I were to say what I really thought about pain, I should be forced to make statements of such apparent fortitude that they would become ridiculous if anyone knew who made them,.
Sampson, however, insisted that Lewis should put his name to anything which was written, and in the course of 1939 he set to work.
The book was finished and completed the following year.
It is a book which vigorously displays, from its opening paragraphs, all Lewis's strengths and weaknesses as a religious apologist.
Most disconcerting, to those who love The Discarded Image , is the apparent cheerfulness with which he abandons the depth and range of his historical imagination in favour of a style of rhetoric which seems more reminiscent of the Belfast police courts.
What is so troubling is that the Discarded Image Lewis is there beside the bullying rhetorician, and we do not know which of them is going to speak next.
‘Lay down this book and reflect for five minutes on the fact that all the great religions were first preached, and long practised, in a world without Chloroform.’
That is The Discarded Image self, usefully prodding our imaginations into seeing things from a proper perspective.
And this self, in the introductory chapter, is surely right to suggest that moral sense and a sense of the numinous do not come naturally — as some anthropological dismissals of religion might suggest — from some crude pre-scientific attempt to explain the universe.
The universe, viewed in those pre-chloroform days, was dark and painful and horrible, and wherever else the human race derived its image of a loving, moral creator, it was not from a simple contemplation of nature.
But then comes a statement about Christ which seems to emanate not from a rational clever man trying to help us to understand things more clearly, but from a rhetorical trickster who is not thinking at all.
There was a man born among these Jews who claimed to be, or to be the son of, or to be one with the something which is at once the awful haunter of Nature and the giver of the moral law.
The claim is so shocking — a paradox and even a horror, which we may easily be lulled into taking too lightly — that only two views of this man are possible.
Either he was a raving lunatic of an unusually abominable type or else He was, and is, precisely what He said.
There is no middle way.
If the records make the first hypothesis unacceptable, then you must submit to the second.
Since a version of this argument was repeated in his broadcast talks and made a linchpin of Lewis's defence of Christianity, it may be profitable to lay down our books for five minutes as he urged us to do when thinking of a world without chloroform and meditate on what he has laid before us.
Let us keep our meditation simple by discounting various facts fact, for example, that most of Christ's Jewish contemporaries did not believe in His divinity or join the newly founded Christian Church or sect.
Did Lewis therefore suppose that they were all very stupid, or damnably wicked?
Neither alternative is particularly probable or palatable.
Let us concentrate rather on the last sentence of the paragraph quoted and work our way back through the foregoing non sequiturs .
‘If the records make the first hypothesis unacceptable…
‘The Discarded Image is a book which was written by a man with an unusual sensitivity to the differences between past and present.
The men and women of the past saw the same physical universe that we did, but their way of seeing it was quite different; their way of describing it in written form more different still.
This does not mean that the old books can provide us with no concrete evidence from the past, but it does mean that old books must be read with delicacy; with a sense that if we go blundering into them, assuming that they mean what we mean by words like sky, earth, history or nature we shall get everything wrong.
If we read the book in their way — whether we are reading Dante, or Chaucer, or Isadore of Seville — we will get something from it.
The more we soak up their way of looking at things, their method of understanding, the more we shall get.
Read it in our way and we shall merely be, as Lewis says in the preface to The Discarded Image , like ‘travellers who carry their resolute Englishry with them all over the Continent, mix only with other English tourists, enjoy all they see for its ‘quaintness’ and have no wish to realise what those ways of life, those churches, those vineyards mean to the natives’.
As an apologist, he seems totally blind to the fact that the New Testament is just such a collection of old books, which require, if we are to understand them aright, patience and a willingness to listen to scholars who have meditated for a long time on the nature of the (often quite puzzling and contradictory) material which they contain.
Lewis's claim that ‘the records’ give us a stark choice about Christ — either he was a ‘raving lunatic’or else ‘He was, and is, precisely what He said’— is startling, to say the least.
To what ‘records’ is he referring?
Different books of the New Testament have different ways of describing the indescribable, that is, the nature of Christ, and the first three centuries of Christendom are a history of ceaseless dispute among the most learned doctors of the Church as to what this nature was, and how it was made manifest during the period of the Incarnation.
This is not to deny the truth of orthodox Christian belief.
It is to point out that there is nowhere in existence a set of ‘records’ which could prove that Christ was either a lunatic or ‘precisely what He said’He was.
The Epistles of St Paul and the Apocalyptic Book of Revelation contain many high and mystical expressions of belief about Christ but they cannot be described as ‘records’ of the kind which would compel rational belief.
If they were, the world would simply be divided into a majority of believing Christians and a small handful of people who were either too stupid or too wicked to accept something which was obvious and clear-cut.
But the nature and being of Christ are not made obvious and clear-cut even in the pages of the New Testament.
Even if we accept only the four gospels as ‘the records’ for the purposes of Lewis's argument, we have to see that they present a differing picture.
The Fourth Gospel, for example, does not lie when it puts into the mouth of Christ words, and whole patterns of speech, which we do not find on His lips in the first three gospels.
But it does, by this convention, proclaim itself to be a book of a special kind, one designed to proclaim what the faithful believe about Christ, not necessarily a book which is straight narrative history in the modern mode.
The first three gospels contain no reference to Christ's having made any such great discourses as fill chapters 13–16 of St John, and since it seems unlikely that the author of the Gospel took notes during the utterance of this sublime discourse, we have to assume them to be a literary creation.
Not a lie, but a creation of what the author believed to be more true than verbatim records.
It follows that behind every statement we make about the historical Jesus there has to be a tacit qualification: ‘We are told this by such-and-such an evangelist, writing in a particular literary mode, far a particular audience, in a particular place at a particular period of history.’
You cannot, in isolation from church doctrine, and in isolation from the plain facts of literary history, say that Jesus said this ming or that thing.
If you do, you find yourself faced with unedifying alternatives such as those which Lewis proposes.
All we have is what the Gospels say that He said.
Precisely what these differing accounts mean by such phrases as ‘Son of Man’, or even ‘Son of God’, cannot be translated into our own modern thought processes without some Discarded Image- style readjustments of sympathy.
And besides that, we discover in the various Gospels quite differing accounts of the earthly Christ's reticence about Himself.
The famous ‘secrecy’ of the Messiah in St Mark's Gospel, for instance('See thou say nothing to any man'), does not really fit into either of Lewis's categories of raving lunatic or self-proclaimed Divinity.
The curious thing is that Lewis, though so very widely read in other areas, had read almost no works of biblical scholarship.
The revolution in New Testament scholarship which had come about during the hundred years before he wrote The Problem of Pain appears to have passed him by.
Perhaps in one sense it does not matter that he ignored the sometimes vandalistic assaults on the gospel texts by Form-critics and Redaction-critics; just as it could be seen not to matter that the school of philosophy in which he was reared had been rendered more or less obsolete by the man who — in the year that Lewis was writing The Problem of Pain —had become a professor of philosophy at Cambridge: Ludwig Wittgenstein.
What is so odd, though, is that Lewis was tempted to argue the faith, to analyse and defend it in a manner at once so roughshod and so cerebral when it had come to him by quite other means.
The philosophy of Wittgenstein did not destroy the faith — it destroyed certain methods of nineteenth-century Idealist argument.
The new biblical critics did not destroy the faith: they merely forced on intelligent people the distinction between history and church doctrine.
Neither philosophy nor textual criticism, however, had led Lewis to the form.
He had been led to it by his experience of the numinous, and by the exercise of his imagination.
Above all, he had been led to it by the discovery that story, myth, could not only carry truth, but also be truth.
Surely the corollary of his great ‘mythopoeia’ discussion with Dyson and Tolkien was that the story of Christ was much more important than any doctrine which a fallible or fallen human mind could extract from it?
Trying to define, or speaking as if it were possible to define, ‘precisely what He meant’ by saying who He was, was a sort of profanity.
Yet of course it was not meant profanely.
The Problem of Pain was written with the best of intentions.
Lewis felt that he must put all his talents to the service of God.
This led him to suppose that his capacity to argue a case was a talent which, quite as much as his imagination and his literary taste, must be consecrated.
And in the context of the time, there was a sort of heroism in this.
Lewis was fully aware of the fact that there was a purely irrational intellectual snobbery abroad in England at that time, more powerful than any genuine intellectual stumbling-block to faith.
When one sees that it was this snobbery which he set out to attack, it is possible to understand why he set about the delicate problem of pain in so breezy a fashion.
Similarly, when one reads the dedication of The Problem of Pain —'to the Inklings' — one understands some of its short-cuts, as well as some of its more peculiar turns of phrase (e.g. of the Incarnation —‘It has the master touch — the rough, male taste of reality.
‘). This was a book which began life as chapters to be read aloud to like-minded male friends.
It was brief, pithy and, like everything Lewis wrote in prose, hugely readable.
None of that small band of men who sat round smoking and drinking their beer or whisky could have had any idea, as they heard Jack vigorously defending the doctrine of hell in nine pages, that the publication of these religious speculations, pieced together at a busy time between giving lectures and examining, was to change his destiny forever.
They would certainly have been completely astonished to learn, as would the author, that The Problem of Pain would become a great commercial success.
By the time it came out, in any case, all their lives had been irrevocably altered by the progress of world events.
There is one encounter worth mentioning before we bring to an end this account of Lewis in 1939.
Some time during the course of that summer, Dr Harvard introduced Lewis to the Roman Catholic Chaplain to the University, Monsignor Ronald Knox.
One would have assumed that as two classicists,Punch contributors and men of letters of an old-fashioned Christian temper, Lewis and Knox would have known each other for years.
But Knox, who was the most brilliant orator of his generation at Oxford — star of the Union, wit, punster in tongues ancient and modern — had left Oxford before the end of the First World War to become a Roman Catholic, and after his return there as chaplain to the Catholics, it was perhaps understandable that he should have kept a low profile.
Lewis greeted him warmly with the assertion that he was possibly the wittiest man in Europe.
Knox modestly demurred, but the meeting was said to be happy and humorous.
Perhaps they might have developed into friends.
Though Lewis was not friendly to Catholicism, the two men had much more of a playful kind in common.
Both enjoyed ‘bad’ literature — in Knox's case, the poetry of Ella Wheeler Wilcox, in Lewis's the novels of Amanda McKittrick Ros.
Both were brilliant parodists.
Both liked spontaneous rhyming.
Their friendship, however, was not to be.
Within a few weeks of their meeting, England was at war.
Knox had gone into the country to translate the Vulgate into English and Lewis was being prepared by an unseen providence for war work no less surprising.
SCREWTAPE 1939–1942
‘This is a fallen world,’ J. R. R. Tolkien wrote to one of his sons early in the Second World War.
‘The world has been ‘going to the bad’ all down me ages.’
Wars tend to prompt religious reawakening in a populace.
Although, as Lewis remarked in a wartime sermon, all individuals face the ultimate realities all the time, war quickens and sharpens our awareness.
When everyone in the country lives with the prospect of having their house destroyed by a bomb during the night, the Christian talk of Armageddon seems less fanciful than in the ‘weak piping times of peace’.
Those who in peacetime seemed brave or merely quaint for believing in all those old doctrines found themselves in wartime much in demand, some as evangelists, some as prophets, some as teachers.
The immediate consequence of the outbreak of war was that Lewis found his circle of friends broken up and changing.
The Useless Quack joined the Navy and grew a gingery beard, which enabled Lewis (always anxious to invent fresh sobriquets for his friends) to label him the Red Admiral.
Warnie, though forty-one, was recalled to active service, given the rank of major, and sent to France, where he remained until the evacuation from Dunkirk.
Most of the friends were too old or too physically enfeebled to be capable of offering themselves for military glory.
Dyson had a club foot; Lewis still had shrapnel in his lung.
They, Tolkien and Coghill stayed in Oxford and when need arose worked as ARP wardens.
The life of the University both did and did not go on.
Young men still came up to the colleges, but they reminded Lewis of his own position in 1917, when his glimpse of Oxford life was just a prelude to the horrors of battle.
The war had its compensations.
Not the least of these was that the
Oxford University Press moved out of London, and took most of its remaining employees to Oxford.
Among them was Charles Williams, who rather surprisingly left his wife and child behind to brave the Blitz in their Hampstead flat while he and his beloved secretary Celia came to take up their (separate) residences in Oxford.
He claimed that Lewis was the only person in Oxford whom he really saw, but this was the reverse of the truth.
It may have been largely thanks to Lewis that Williams became something of a cult figure, idolized by pious lady dons, aspirant mystics and others.
He had real charm, which made canny figures such as Tolkien distrust him.
Lewis was bowled over by him, and was anxious that as many people as possible should have the benefit of his wisdom.
It was the strange circumstance of wartime which enabled Lewis to put Williams forward as a lecturer in the English Faculty.
They needed teachers, and Williams was an experienced public speaker at WEA lectures and evening classes.
His lectures on Milton were first given in the beautiful fifteenth-century Divinity Schools, underneath the Bodleian Library.
The audience packed this room to capacity.
It was certainly not what undergraduates at Oxford had come to expect from a lecturer.
Many were surprised by Williams's appearance, which was simian and scarlet-faced, slightly boozy.
The cockney voice was declamatory, hierophantic.
It was more like being present at a seance than at a lecture.
He held a copy of Milton's works in his hands, but whenever he quoted from the poet he held the book aloft, like the Gospel at High Mass, sometimes going so far as to wave it to and fro behind his head as he chanted out the words.
The first lecture was on Comus (subsequent talks on Milton had to move to the large lecture-room at the Taylorian Institute, the Divinity Schools being too small).
Comus is a masque in which a young lady's chastity is tried and not vanquished.
Some of those who attended the lecture have implied to me that not everyone took it particularly seriously.
There were even giggles as this (as he seemed to some of them) funny little man with a funny voice urged the audience to abstain from fleshly lusts.
But we see what we want to see, and for Lewis this performance by Williams was a revelation.
There we elders heard what we had despaired of hearing — a lecture on Comus which placed its importance where the poet placed it — and watched ‘the yonge fresshe folkes he or she’ who filled the benches listening first with incredulity, then with toleration, and finally with delight, to something so strange and new in their experience as the praise of chastity.
The lecture, and Williams's conversation, turned Lewis's own thoughts to Milton.
In the second year of the war, he was asked to deliver some lectures at Bangor — the University College, North Wales — and he chose as his theme Milton's Paradise Lost .
The lectures, which were subsequently published as A Preface to ‘Paradise Lost’, represent Lewis at his very best.
If someone had never read Lewis before, and wished to get a taste of him, there would be no better book with which to start.
In its asides — quite apart from what he tells us about Milton — we see what it was about Lewis which struck W. T. Kirkpatrick as so remarkable, and which made him such a valued teacher and friend to so many people in the course of his life.
Here is evidence of a mind abundantly stocked with reading which the author has enjoyed — effortlessly, intelligently, and selflessly enjoyed — and he wishes to communicate this enjoyment to us.
The range is so impressive — everything from Lucretius to Tristram Shandy , from Virgil to Kinglake, from Beowulf to T. S. Eliot has been absorbed, not for the sake of being bookish but always — one feels — in an outward-looking manner.
There is a great moral self-confidence and a common sense in the writing — as when he offers one possible explanation far why so many people, reading Paradise Lost , have supposed Satan to be the ‘hero’.
To make a character worse than oneself it is only necessary to release imaginatively from control some of the bad passions which, in real life, are always straining at the leash; the Satan, the Iago, the Becky Sharp, within each of us, is always there and only too ready, the moment the leash is slipped, to come out and have in our books that holiday we try to deny them in life.
There is, too, a constantly intelligent conversational quality about the writing which makes one see how very good his talk must have been.
One thinks of him saying, of the Odyssey , ‘The poem is an adventure story.
As far as greatness of subject goes, it is much closer to Tom Jones or Ivanhoe than to the Aeneid or the Gierusalemme Liberata .
Or, apropos of the necessity of having a good historical imagination when reading, ‘I had much rather know what I should feel like if I adopted the beliefs of Lucretius than how Lucretius would have felt if he had never entertained them.’
On a purely aesthetic level, one is frequently haunted by his (at first sight paradoxical) defence of Milton's preference far Hebrew over Greek lyrics.
‘But if any man will read aloud on alternate mornings for a single month a page of Pindar and a page of the Psalms in any translation he chooses, I think I can guess which he will first grow tired of.’
So much for the asides — but how good is Lewis on the subject he sets himself — on Milton?
I think I have read most of what was written by or about him in English between the seventeenth century and, say, 1975.
There are not many better books than Lewis's.
The passages on Milton and St Augustine, Milton and angels, Milton's theology, are all first-rate.
He has done more theological ‘homework’ here than he did for some of his own religious books, and it shows, even though learning was never more lightly worn.
Moreover the basic picture of Milton himself, though only sketched in very lightly, is completely authentic:
He is a neat, dainty man, ‘the lady of Christ's’; a fastidious man, pacing in trim gardens.
He is a grammarian, a swordsman, a musician with a predilection for the fugue.
Everything that he greatly cares about demands order, proportion, measure and control In poetry he considers decorum the grand masterpiece.
In politics he is that which of all things least resembles a democrat — an aristocratic republican who thinks ‘nothing more agreeable to the order of nature or more for the interest of mankind than that the less should yield to the greater, not in numbers but in wisdom and virtue’.
An extraordinarily high proportion of Milton scholars have chosen to disregard these truths about their subject, and have decided that because Milton was on the side of the regicides this made him a revolutionary and, because a revolutionary, therefore a man of the Left, perhaps even an agonized Maminst, or at least a sympathizer with the Diggers and Levellers of his own day.
The less biographical or historical evidence there is for this view of Milton, the more the scholars believe it, producing readings of Paradise Lost which ignore Lewis's golden rule, ‘You must, so far as in you lies, become an Achaean chief while reading Homer, a medieval knight while reading Malory, and an Eighteenth Century Londoner while reading Johnson.
Only thus will you be able to judge the work ‘in the same spirit that its author writ’.’
Lewis does present in his Preface to ‘Paradise Lost’a very convincing impression of having read the poem which John Milton set out to write and meant us to read.
If that seems like faint praise, you should read the dozen most recent books on Paradise Lost .
Very little criticism as such survives the generation in which it is written.
The same is true, incidentally, of most philosophy and theology.
Those who practise these branches of study often mistake them for spheres of knowledge when they are more accurately seen as examples of dialectic or rhetoric — ideas which may be better aired in talk.
All critics, however dispassionate, bring to their subject thick encrustations of personal prejudice and, which they are probably even less well equipped to notice, assumptions which are attributable to the spirit of the age.
Lewis's debate in the Preface with other Milton critics — with Saurat, Eliot, I. A. Richards or Leavis — all seems pretty dead to us now, since not many people would read any of the aforementioned critics nowadays as critics unless they were interested in the history of criticism for its own sake.
What makes Lewis's criticism rather different is a combination of two very rare qualities.
One is contained in the sentence which is most often mocked in the Preface to ‘Paradise Lost’: 'A schoolboy who reads a page of Milton by chance, for the first time, and then looks up and says ‘By Gum’, not in the least knowing how the thing has worked, but only that new strength and width and brightness and zest have transformed his world, is nearer to the truth [than the critics].’
Lewis never lost his schoolboyish sense of wonder and enjoyment.
It is what makes him such a refreshing literary historian.
He was not ashamed of the ‘By Gum’ school of reading.
What we also notice in the chapters dealing with the Fall, and in particular with Adam and Eve, is that this is not just a book by a scholar in a library.
It is also a reading of Milton by a creative intelligence.
In stories of great temptation, of interplanetary flights, wrestlings with the powers of good and evil, Lewis found something which had already engaged his own pen, and would continue to do so.
Not least among the new friendships which Lewis formed during the war was his friendship with an Anglican nun called Sister Penelope (Lawson) of the Community of St Mary the Virgin at Wantage.
She was eight years Lewis's senior, and a woman of high intellectual abilities.
Richard Hunt, former Keeper of Western Manuscripts at the Bodleian Library and a considerable Medieval Latinist himself, once told me that he thought Sister Penelope the best translator from Latin in her generation.
It was not, however, of learned matters that she first wrote to Lewis but of science fiction.
She had enjoyed Out of the Silent Planet.
‘At ordinary times we do not read novels at all, as you may imagine, but the right novel at the right moment can have a real spiritual value.’
In return for a book of her own —God Persists — Lewis sent Sister Penelope The Pilgrim's Regress , and she noted his acerbic satire on High Anglicans.
He admitted to her, ‘I'm not…what you call high.
To me the real distinction is not high and low, but between religion with a real supernaturalism and salvationism on the one hand and all watered-down modernist versions on the other.’
This sounds like a true distinction, but in real life things are a little different.
An Anglican may not wish to be seduced into all the absurdities of church politics, still less into the hobby of church ceremonial.
But the distinctions between ‘high’ and ‘low’in so far as they are doctrinal do of necessity affect devotional practice.
An instance had arisen on a walking tour Jack and Warnie took in Derbyshire in 1936.
Coming to the parish church at Taddington, they found a notice to say that the Blessed Sacrament was reserved there and should be treated with ‘special reverence’.
The two brothers later had an argument about it over their lunch.
Warnie said that there was room only for a clear cut division of opinion — if one is a Catholic, the aumbry contains Our Lord and of course even prostration is hardly reverence enough: but if one is Church of England, it contains but a wafer and a little wine, and why in front of that should one show any greater reverence than in any other part of the church?…
Jack was not satisfied and seemed to think that there was a middle view between the two.’
Seven or eight years later, by the time he preached his remarkable sermon ‘The Weight of Glory’ C. S. Lewis clearly had a full belief in the Eucharistic Presence, or there would be no force in the rhetoric of his ‘Next to the Blessed Sacrament itself, your neighbour is the holiest object presented to your senses.’
It might be imagined by those who are not themselves Anglican that the habit of ‘going to confession’ is limited only to markedly ‘High’churches, but this is not necessarily the case.
The practice does take place in the Church of Ireland, though as it happened, it did not seem to have come Lewis's way at St Mark's, Dundela.
In Oxford, after his conversion, things were different.
Among his Anglican friends, Coghill probably went to confession.
Dyson certainly did.
It was very much the custom of most churches in central Oxford, even though it has never been obligatory in the Anglican Communion.
‘All may; some should; none must’ is the Church of England rule.
Lewis undoubtedly felt that he should, but was nervous about taking the plunge.
His friendship with Sister Penelope somehow made it easier.
‘The decision to do so was one of the hardest I have ever made: but now that I am committed (by dint of posting the letter before I had time to change my mind) I began to be afraid of opposite extremes — afraid that I am merely indulging in an orgy of egoism.’
He had written to Father Walter Adams, who had a strong reputation as a confessor and spiritual director.
He was a member of the Society of St John the Evangelist, an Anglican religious order popularly called the Cowley Fathers and based in Oxford.
The drama of the moment was recaptured in Perelandra , the second in the science-fiction trilogy, where Ransom remembers the strength which was given to him in a moment requiring supreme moral courage.
It happened once while he was trying to make up his mind to do a very dangerous job in the last war.
It had happened again while he was screwing his resolution to go and see a certain man in London and make to him an excessively embarrassing confession which justice demanded.
In both cases, the thing had seemed a sheer impossibility; he had not thought but known that, being what he was, he was psychologically incapable of doing it; and then, without any apparent movement of the will, as objective and unemotional as the reading on a dial, there had arisen before him, with perfect certitude, the knowledge ‘about this time tomorrow, you will have done the impossible’.
Having been to confession and passed through ‘the wall of fire’, Lewis wrote to Sister Penelope, ‘the suggestion about an orgy of egoism turns out, like all the Enemy propaganda, to have just a grain of truth in it, but I have no doubt that the proper method of dealing with that is as I intend to do, to continue the practice.
‘* The practice of confession brought before Lewis the drama of redemption as a perpetual game of cat and mouse with the Devil — the Enemy.
The very particularity of the sacrament forces upon the penitent the sense that it is on the here and now — that row we had with the neighbours, the bad temper with which we did the washing-up, this specific uncharitable thought or unchaste deed — that salvation and damnation depend.
It is in the small area of our own conscience and our own personal behaviour that the good angels and the bad angels are wrestling over our souls, an idea which is both stupendous and slightly comic.
Betjeman's poem ‘Original Sin on me Sussex Coast’ makes a point unwillingly learnt from his old tutor when it depicts the sheer wickedness of children bullying one another, unseen by the sentimental eyes of the mother whose mind has been washed by modern advertising techniques and the vacuous optimism of the age:
Does Mum the Persil-user still believe That There's no Devil and that youth is bliss?
As certain as the sun behind the Downs And quite as plain to see, the Devil walks.
* It is categorically not the case that Lewis had ‘always wanted to attack the practice’ of sacramental confession ‘whenever he found it, This strange assertion (among many other inaccuracies) occurs in Clive Staples Lewis: A Dramatic life , by William Griffin.
Griffin quotes Lewis as saying, in a letter written to his father in March 1928, ‘If you try to suppress it, you only make martyrs.’
Griffin's readers are not told that Lewis was not, here, speaking about confession.
The ‘it’ which he speaks of suppressing is the Oxford Group Movement formed by Frank Buchman and later known as Moral Rearmament.
The letter (written four years before Lewis became a Christian) expresses distaste for the Groupers' reported custom of extracting public confessions from their devotees.
war.
It was some time after making his first confession that he bumped into a pupil in Addison's Walk.
The pupil had been at Magdalen for a year, and then left to join the Army.
He was in uniform, very much in the situation in which Lewis had found himself as an undergraduate at Univ.
Having given his news, he asked Lewis what he was writing.
‘I've had this idea’, said Lewis, ‘of letters from a senior devil to a junior devil’The Screwtape Letters brought into literary use qualities which Lewis had had to a highly developed degree ever since adolescence.
His ability to see through human failings, his capacity to analyse other people's annoyingness, his rich sense of comedy and satire, had as yet only found their outlet in letters to Greeves, and to a lesser extent in such collections as P'dayta-Pie.
In The Screwtape Letters his inspired malice is given creative rein.
‘She's the sort of woman who lives for others — you can always tell the others by their hunted expression.’
Or take the old woman who is really a slave to the Gluttony of Delicacy but thinks she is the very model of abstinence: She is a positive terror to hostesses and servants.
She is always turning from what has been offered her to say with a demure little sigh and smile, ‘Oh, please, please…all I want is a cup of tea, weak but not too weak, and the teeniest weeniest bit of really crisp toast.’
You see?
Because what she wants is smaller and less costly than what has been set before her, she never recognises as gluttony her determination to get what she wants, however troublesome it may be to others…
In a crowded restaurant she gives a little scream at the plate which some overworked waitress has set before her and says, ‘Oh, that's far, far too much!
Take it away and bring me about a quarter of it.’
To the comedy of such pen-portraits (and Screwtape , it has to be admitted, is a cruel book), is added moral wisdom and a developing religious vision.
Lewis is extremely good at describing the actual territory in which the moral life, for most of us, is thrashed out, and the extent to which we enable ourselves to be deluded about ourselves and other people:
When two humans have lived together for many years it usually happens that each has tones of voice and expressions of face which are almost unendurably irritating to the other.
Work on that.
Bring fully into the consciousness of your patient that particular lift of his mother's eyebrows which he learnt to dislike in the nursery and let him think how he dislikes it.
Let him assume that she knows how annoying it is and does it to annoy — if you know your job he will not notice the immense improbability of the assumption.
It is the last bit of that sentence which contains the punch.
Though Lewis is said to have found the task of writing these letters morally exhausting — entailing as it did the ceaseless identification of himself with the malign and diabolical point of view — their great strength is that, rather like a dramatic monologue by Browning, they reveal the speaker without succumbing to his terrible outlook.
Although they are the letters of instruction from an older devil to a younger, Screwtape's sense of what the Enemy (i.e. God) is preparing for his servants cannot fail to break through.
One must face the fact that all the talk about His love for man, and His service being perfect freedom is not (as one would gladly believe) mere propaganda, but an appalling truth.
He really does want to fill the universe with a lot of loathsome little replicas of Himself — creatures whose life, on its miniature scale, will be qualitatively like His own, not because He has absorbed them but because their wills freely conform to His.
We want cattle who can finally become food; He wants servants who can finally become sons.
We want to suck in, He wants to give out.
Or again:
He's a hedonist at heart.
All those fasts and vigils and stakes and crosses are only a façade.
Or only like foam on the sea shore.
For at sea, out in His sea, there is pleasure, and more pleasure.
He makes no secret of it; at His right hand are ‘pleasures for evermore’.
Ugh!
Once he started, Lewis appears to have written The Screwtape Letters very quickly.
He offered them to the editor of the one periodical which, by this stage, he was in the habit of reading: a High Church weekly, since defunct, called The Guardian.
The Guardian published the letters in weekly instalments from May to November 1941.
Lewis was paid £2 per article, and the money was paid directly into a fund for ‘Clergy Widows’.
Ashley Sampson, who had commissioned The Problem of Pain , persuaded his parent publisher to make an offer for the publication of Screwtape in book form.
When it was published, in February 1942, the first printing of 2,000 copies was sold immediately.
There were two reprintings in March, and the book has been in print ever since, selling over a million copies.
What had begun as a jeu d'esprit of a mere 30,000 words or so made Lewis a household name.
The other factor which contributed to this effect was his decision to become a broadcaster.
This came about in an equally haphazard fashion.
Feeling sheepish about his ineligibility for active servIce, Lewis had accepted an invitation from the RAF chaplains to tramp around the country and give talks to the men in various RAF stations.
Tolkien, who found the contents of these talks, when published, not especially to his taste, nevertheless admired the simple religious feeling which inspired them.
Teaching was his original object.
He took it up in a Pauline spirit, as a reparation; now the least of Christians (by special grace) but once an infidel, and even if he had not persecuted the faithful, one who scorned the Faith, he would do what he could to convert men or stop them from straying away.
The acceptance of the R.A.F. mission, with its hardship of travel to distant and nasty places and audiences of anything but the kind he was humanly fitted to deal with, lonely, cheerless, embarrassed journeys leaving little behind but doubt whether any seed had fallen on good soil; ali this was in its way an imitation of St. Paul.
The talks which Lewis gave to the RAF were on such basic issues as ‘Why we think there is a Right and Wrong’, and from such simple beginnings he framed, in language which was meant to be arresting to ordinary men in the ranks, an exposition first of the theist position, then of the Christian religion.
In February 1941, he was approached by the Director of Religious Broadcasting at the BBC and asked if he would be prepared to give a series of broadcast talks on ‘The Christian
Faith as I see it — by a Layman’; and although there was first a certain amount of debate about what the nature and title of the broadcasts should be, Lewis began to do this in the late summer of 1941, taking the train from Oxford to London every Wednesday evening, and broadcasting from 7.45 to 8.00 p.m.
Sound-broadcasting is a particular skill, not necessarily related to literary ability though impossible without it.
That is, one needs the literate ability to express oneself clearly; but one also needs the right voice and the ability to be concise.
Lewis's broadcasts during the war were in three series, and they were written up (published more or less as spoken over the air) as Broadcast Talks (1942),Christian Behaviour (1943) and Beyond Personality (1944).
The key to them lies in the title of the second series —Christian Behaviour .
Lewis is better than any modern writer both at explaining what Christian behaviour should be and at analysing its difficulties.
People often think of Christian morality as a kind of bargain in which God says, ‘if you keep a lot of rules I'll reward you, and if you don't I'll do the other thing.’
I do not think mat is the best way of looking at it.
I would much rather say that every time you make a choice you are turning the central part of you, the part of you that chooses, into something a little different from what it was before.
And taking your life as a whole, with all your innumerable choices, all your life you are slowly turning this central thing into either a heavenly creature or into a hellish creature.
It is unfortunate that shorthand here makes Lewis imply that the life of submission to Grace is a course of self-improvement.
Indeed overall, he says surprisingly little about Grace and next to nothing about the sacramental life; for these reasons one might regret the title which he gave to the three books gathered into one —Mere Christianity — for it implies that he has written a sort of mini-Summa or encyclopaedia of theology.
That was not his intention.
His intention in the lively fifteen-minute talks was to answer such questions as ‘Can an intelligent person be a Christian?’
‘What should a Christian's attitude be towards war, sex or money?’
‘Is there a heaven and a hell?’
He answers these questions with a breeziness and a self-confidence which on an academic podium would have been totally unacceptable.
And the language and idiom of the broadcasts has dated: ‘There has been a great deal of soft soap talked about God for the last hundred years.
That is not what I am offering.
You can cut all that out…’ or ‘The Christian replies [to some Aunt Sally which Lewis has conveniently erected]‘Don't talk damned nonsense…’or ‘I personally think that next to Christianity Dualism is the manliest and most sensible creed on the market.’
It is hard to read these sentences without a smile.
Nor are all his attempts at analogy helpful.
Certainly to explain the Incarnation in a quarter of an hour over the air is a tall order, but Lewis could surely have done better than to say, ‘If you want to get the hang of it, think how you would like to become a slug or a crab.’
Apart from being offensive, this is bad theology.
God made human beings in His own image and likeness.
Human beings did not make slugs or crabs.
Man could not ‘redeem’ the slugs even if slugs were in need of redemption.
Such lapses were seized upon eagerly by Lewis's jealous academic colleagues.
There is nothing like worldly success on the part of one academic to make all the others hate him or her.
Lewis's immediate success with the general public, and the huge popularity of his theological books, guaranteed him a rough ride with the Fellows of Magdalen, as well as with those in the Oxford Faculties of Theology and English Literature.
Of course, it was not just the atheists who disliked him.
It was a Christian colleague in the English Faculty who said, ‘The problem of pain is quite bad enough without Lewis making it worse.’
Even those one would expect to have rejoiced at the religious revival which Lewis's popularity heralded and to a certain degree inspired could only bring themselves to sneer.
R. H. Lightfoot, for example, the chaplain of New College, and author of a learned commentary on St John's Gospel, remarked to a young colleague of Lewis's: ‘His defection to the area of theology is a sad loss to the English Faculty.
I wish it could be said to be a gain to the Faculty of Theology.’
Lewis knew that they were all saying things like this, and it stung.
It hurt even more that friends like Tolkien, to whom he had dedicated The Screwtape Letters , could not respond to Lewis's effusions as ‘Everyman's Theologian’.
However little his colleagues liked Lewis's activities as a lay evangelist, there can be no doubt about his tremendous impact on the church of his day.
Father Andrew, the saintly co-founder of the Society of the Divine Compassion, wrote to one of his many correspondents: ‘To me it is one of me most hopeful things of this epoch that it has produced C. S. Lewis.’
As far as the Church of England was concerned, there were giants in those days.
Perhaps they were the last days before the final eclipse.
T. S. Eliot was completing the Four Quartets .
All too briefly, until his untimely death in 1944, there was an Archbishop of Canterbury who was not only a learned philosopher and theologian but was also able, in such writings as his Readings in St John's Gospel to speak to people at a simple devotional level.
Dorothy L. Sayers was writing her series of radio plays about the life of Christ called Man Born to Be King .
Lewis's popularity was part of this, and it was with more than a scent of victory in the air, victory over the agnostics and freethinkers, that he consented to be involved with the foundation of the Socratic Club in Oxford in 1941.
This was an undergraduate debating society, founded with an aggressively Christian purpose by a student at Somerville College called Stella Aldwinkle.
Since all undergraduate societies are meant to have one senior member, she asked Lewis to become the President of the Society, a position he held until his departure for Cambridge in 1954.
‘Those who founded it do not for one moment pretend to be neutral,’ Lewis confessed.
‘It was the Christians who constructed the arena and issued the challenge…
’ Socratic evenings took the form of two speakers facing one another over some such topic as ‘Is theology poetry?’or ‘If we have Christ's ethics does the rest of Christianity matter?’
The ideal Socratic evening came about when one of the speakers was an out-and-out atheist, but sometimes the society could only find speakers of opposing viewpoints within the Christian fold.
When Lewis himself was speaking, it was not always easy to find a tame atheist who was prepared to come along and be mauled in public debate; for on these occasions he reverted to type and became again the P'daytabird prosecuting an unlikely prisoner in the Belfast police courts.
No one who witnessed these debates has ever suggested that Lewis played fair.
He argued with tremendous vigour, and when he demolished his victims it was with evident relish.
There were those who admired Lewis's moral courage in being thus prepared to testify for the Christian faith, but not everyone found the spectacle altogether edifying.
On top of all his other commitments, Lewis was writing the second volume of his space trilogy.
‘I've got Ransom to Venus and through his first conversation with the ‘Eve’ of that world: a difficult chapter…
I may have embarked on the impossible,’ Lewis wrote to Sister Penelope on 9 November 1941.
The effort shows in the writing.
Perelandra is the most ambitious of the outer-space stories, and the one with the most single-minded theological aim: nothing less than an imagined temptation-scene between Satan and Eve in which she does not succumb.
For the purpose of saving her, Ransom (veteran of the journey to Malecandra in Out of the Silent Planet)is actually made a Ransom for her, a sort of Christ figure sent to wrestle with the wicked scientist Weston who tries to bring about the Fall on the newly inhabited planet Venus.
Not even John Milton's imagination had attempted such a theme.
It is no wonder that Perelandra is an artistic failure.
How could it have succeeded?
This is not to say that it does not contain many magnificent passages, some comic, some sublime.
And, almost more than any of his other fiction, it reveals what Lewis as a writer was chiefly concerned to achieve.
He wanted nothing less than a revival of the Romantic movement in literature, only a revival under firm Christian management.
The key passage, from this point of view, is the temptation offered by Weston/Satan (the Un-Man) to which the Woman all but yields: the image of herself as a great soul.
‘Greatness, tragedy, high sentiment — these were obviously what occupied her thoughts.’
The new Eve momentarily wants to be a tragedy queen; for a few flickering instants, she wants to be like almost ali the characters in literature whom we find most beguiling — Cleopatra, Anna Karenin, Madame Bovary, Eve herself in Paradise Lost — a figure who has risked everything for the sake of une grande passion .
To set against this the prosaic virtues of humility and obedience, and to make them seem not merely right but also interesting, is — when the writer is a fallen creature writing for other fallen creatures — an impossible task.
Lewis tried, and inevitably blundered this way and that, sometimes falling into appalling sentimentality, sometimes writing ridiculous masculine-minded nonsense about ‘a woman's place’.
The story does, however, abound in felicities; the physical descriptions of the planet, for example, are superb.
And there are scenes of great moral effectiveness, as when Ransom, plucking up his courage far the struggle with Weston, recalls that ‘at that moment, far away on earth…men were at war, and white-faced subalterns and freckled corporals who had but lately begun to shave, stood in horrible gaps or crawled forward in deadly darkness, awakening like him to the preposterous truth that all really depended on their actions.’
The effectiveness of that is not just to make Ransom's struggle real, but also to demonstrate the metaphysical excitement of all moral choices, on the silent planet as well as beyond the music of the spheres.
Outwardly, the plot of Perelandra is borrowed from Milton's Comus , and its chief ideological failing stems from this.
Milton never makes clear exactly how the Lady's virtue is saved.
In the end, it would seem that she is not strong enough to resist Comus's wiles without the intervention of Sabrina.
Likewise in the case of Lewis's Eve: if she is ransomed by Ransom's struggle with the Un-Man in the underworld, a sort of Harrowing of Hell sequence, how can she be said to have resisted the temptation on her own; and if she has not really resisted through her own strength — if she is to be rewarded with immortality and felicity for something she has not done herself — where is the justice in the punishment, on another planet, of Eve and her descendants, for something which again was not wholly her responsibility?
Are we to suppose that human beings only exercise free will when they sin — or, worse, only sin when they exercise free will?
These questions were to make John Milton abandon any discernable belief in the doctrine of Grace and become a sort of Stoic.
Lewis never seems to have faced the problem, either in his imaginative writings or in his works of theology.
If the woman resisted Weston's voice simply out of obedience to Maleldil, then what was the function of Ransom?
This was the question, in notional form, which he had asked Tolkien and Dyson during the September night of 1931 when they talked Lewis into becoming a Christian.
‘My puzzle was the whole doctrine of Redemption: in what sense the life and death of Christ ‘saved’ or ‘opened salvation’to the world…
What I couldn't see was how the life and death of Someone Else ‘whoever he was’ 2000 years ago could help us here and now.’
Perelandra shows that even on the mythopoeic level this most difficult of doctrines had not been absorbed by Lewis.
Another decade was to pass before it really sank in, and he could write, ‘What an ass I have been both for not knowing and for thinking I knew.
I now feel that one must never say one believes or understands anything…‘
This was an admission made to Sister Penelope in 1951.
In 1941 he was still very content with an unrealized, cerebral exposition of the Christian gospel which was to lead him into many distortions.
Nevertheless, the sisters of the Community of St Mary the Virgin were very happy to receive the dedication to Perelandra: 'To some ladies in Wantage’.