

RECIPES
Eastwell Manor's Mark Clayton
BALBIRNIE HOUSE
Fife hospitality
DEEP FAT FRYERS
Latest developments
CATERER & Hotelkeeper
NEWS
OPINION
GREEN LIGHT FOR BHRCA REVAMP
JUDGE QUASHES FOOD HYGIENE FINES
DIET ADVICE IGNORED
REPORT SLAMS ‘HAZARDOUS’ POOLS
STAKIS STRONGMAN Stakis chairman Sir Lewis Robertson tells of his plans for the group
INTERNATIONAL Salomon Brothers report predicts recovery for European hotels, but not until the end of 1991
LETTERS
JOE HYAM On customer service
VIEWPOINT Michael Raffael appreciates a good bed & breakfast
PEOPLE Whitbread chairman announces intention to retire in 1992
BUSINESS
VENTURE CAPITAL TURNS TO LEISURE
PROPERTY Equity dries up for hotels
FOOD PRICES
CAREERS & TRAINING London's Springboard career centre is a success, but continuing support is needed
TECHNOLOGY Generating and controlling your own power
AWARDS Sutcliffe announces Indian day regional winner
COVER STORY
RECIPES FROM EASTWELL MANOR Mark Clayton produces intricate dishes with a large number of ingredients
FEATURES
MENUS Frances Bissell comments on a menu in honour of Bernard Gaume, and another for Prince Charles' Youth Business Trust
MARKETING MAGIC Balbirnie House, Fife, established more than 50% occupancy during its first 18 months, due to carefully targeted marketing
JAIL BREAK A profile of the catering system at HM Prison Pentonville, North London
LIGHT AT THE END OF THE TUNNEL Third of our four-part report on Tricon Foodservice Consultants' advice to the ailing Valley Hotel, Ironbridge, Shropshire
WHAT'S NEW
LIQUID ASSETS Brian Jordan takes a close look at the increasingly professional wines of England
FRIED AND TESTED Research into frying technology means deep-fat fryers are becoming more cost-effective
COUNCIL PUBLISHES FOOD SAFETY CODES
FOOD
EQUIPMENT
CLASSIFIED
YOUR NEXT MOVE: ALL THE BEST JOBS AND PROPERTY
NEXT WEEK
WEALTH FROM HEALTH The surge of interest in healthy lifestyles means big business for health farms
FISH & SIPS — MATCHING FISH WITH WINE (below)
Balbirnie House in Fife.
See page 38
OPINION
Speaking in harmony
In recent months there has been a lively debate — much of it behind the scenes — into how the hospitality industry can speak more effectively to Government.
A new committee, the Joint Hospitality Industry Congress, is being formed for this purpose by the British Hotels, Restaurants and Caterers Association (BHRCA), see page 8.
However, much misunderstanding surrounds the nature of the so-called ‘one voice’ campaign which Caterer & Hotelkeeper has been instrumental in promoting.
Now, on the eve of the formation of the congress, is a good time to clear up any misapprehensions.
People have been talking about finding ‘one voice’ for the industry for many years.
There was good reason for this: when Government ministers want to test opinion in a particular sector, they normally turn to a single trade body, such as the National Farmers Union, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, or the Retail Consortium.
But while the BHRCA speaks for many companies and individuals, it does not represent everyone, or even every sector, and is sometimes at odds with the views of other bodies.
But even if ministers have the time to canvass views from a multitude of different organisations, there is a risk that the hospitality sector's views will be ignored by Government when too many diverse and conflicting responses are made.
While the industry desperately needs to present a more united front to Government and the public, a single voice does not mean the loudest voice, which can drown contrary views.
It should be a powerful voice, united where possible, but if there are disagreements there should be no attempt to pretend otherwise.
The BHRCA is to be applauded for taking the initiative on this issue, but if the joint congress is to receive the whole-hearted support of other leading organisations, it is important that no single ‘lead organisation’ should take ownership.
Its success will depend on the active participation of many other bodies, large and small.
Only in this way can the industry's ‘one voice’ be in harmony rather than unison.
 CATERER & Hotelkeeper 
NEWS
SCHOOL MEALS
School meals need to be marketed to school children in the same way that brewers market themselves, Theo Goldberg, managing director of marketing firm IMCOT, recently told the Local Authority Caterers Association annual conference.
Mr Goldberg said that after adopting a consumer-style approach to marketing, both Norfolk and Surrey County Councils had seen increased use of the school meal service.
Norfolk had recorded a 6% increase or £100,000 in sales.
Both councils used the services of BBC Food and Drink presenter Michael Barry for publicity campaigns.
He also devised new menus.
DORCHESTER STARS
The Dorchester in London has celebrated its 60th anniversary by regaining its AA, five-red-star rating.
The association has inspected the refurbished hotel three times since its reopening and, according to the AA's Albert Hampson, it is ‘even better than before’.
The Dorchester is one of only seven hotels to have five red stars.
GUIDE'S AWARD
Egon Ronay's Cellnet Guide to Hotels and Restaurants will next year feature a Chef of the Year Award for the first time.
Andrew Eliel, editor of the guide, said the award had been launched because it was felt the best chef did not necessarily work in the best restaurant.
DEMAND DOWN
Demand for accommodation in central London's five-star hotels fell by 5.1% in 1990 compared with 1989, according to a study from consultancy Hospitality Valuation Services.
The report predicts 1991 will see further declines in occupancy and achieved room rates.
BHA
Under a new name, the BHRCA is set to give the industry the single voice it demands.
Richard Gordon reports
In possibly its shortest annual general meeting on record — a mere 26 minutes — the British Hotels, Restaurants & Caterers Association (BHRCA) last week voted to change its name to the British Hospitality Association (BHA).
The name change, which will officially happen in January 1992, had been expected since the association took delivery of a weighty industry assessment from Saatchi & Saatchi last summer.
The agency's report suggested a new name would help to improve the image of the BHRCA, and would take advantage of public goodwill towards the hospitality industry in the UK.
Forte chief executive Rocco Forte, who was elected unopposed as first president of the BHRCA, told the AGM at London's Inn on the Park that the new name ‘is more appropriate for the challenges we will face in the future’.
‘It signals change to the outside world and will help create a new image for the association which better reflects the more aggressive stance which we intend to take,’ Mr Forte said.
The change was welcomed by BHRCA members and, although there was no debate at the AGM before the vote, many spoke afterwards of earlier vigorous debates in the committees which make up the BHRCA.
Alistair Borthwick, vice-chairman of the East Anglia Divisional committee, who is also a farmer and member of the National Farmers Union (NFU), said the name change would help to improve membership.
‘The NFU is well known for representing farmers, and it's necessary for the BHA to be easily understood as representing the hospitality industry in all its forms,’ he said.
The AGM also decided to radically alter the structure of the BHRCA.
Out will go the National Council, Board of Management and Council of Chairmen.
In will be a single body called the National Executive with representatives from the regional divisions and industry sector panels.
For the first time this will give contract caterers direct access to the BHRCA management.
It will also create a link between the finance committee and what was the Board of Management.
SINGLE VOICE
A recent survey of BHRCA members found they had joined principally because they wanted an effective voice to put the industry's case to Government.
Mr Forte said the present trading difficulties had at least one benefit — in drawing the Government's attention to the industry.
‘Even with a Government committed to free enterprise, we have faced problems in the past 12 months.
Business rates up 30%, VAT increases and a statutory minimum wage increase of 10%, when most of us are on a pay freeze.
‘If our contribution [to the economy]is not fully understood, we will face even bigger threats, regardless of which party is in power,’ he warned.
In its new form, the BHRCA is determined to lead the hospitality industry in its attempts to head off these ‘threats’ and further challenges from Brussels.
Mr Forte admitted that while the BHRCA was the largest industry association, there were other groups which had a ‘legitimate claim to speak for certain sectors of the industry’.
He issued a call for other industry bodies to join the BHRCA on a committee, called the Joint Hospitality Industry Congress.
‘The aim is to draw together the various industry bodies so we can discuss issues of common interest.
It is very rare that we disagree as an industry, but it is equally rare that we speak in a co-ordinated way,’ he said.
While Mr Forte had reservations about the lengthy name of the congress, he hoped it would lead to a structure which should enable the industry to speak with a single voice on many issues.
Chefs peak at summit
Long hours and tough working conditions are often par for the course in catering.
But Alan Brazier, head chef of Westminster's QEII Centre catering operation, took even normal levels to new extremes during last week's G7 economic summit.
Over the summit's four days the centre was home to 4,000 journalists and media staff, who were served more than 42,000 meals.
Mr Brazier and his senior staff, including deputy head chef Kevin Glasby (above) and senior sous chef Nick Bryan, worked virtually around the clock, pausing only for three hours sleep before starting again at 5am.
But Mr Brazier gave an unhesitating ‘yes’ when asked if he would go through the experience again.
Media folk munched their way through £100,000-worth of food, including 940lb of smoked salmon, 5,000lb of cheese, 1,300lb of beef rib, 17,280 eggs and 16 gallons of baby squid and octopus.
•At Lancaster House, where the heads of state held their historic talks, the catering was carried out by Essex-based Crown Catering Group.
PPL cracks down on illegal music
Music played in many hotels and restaurants is being played illegally, according to Phonographic Performance Limited (PPL), the company which issues one of the two licences necessary to play pre-recorded music.
The PPL licence is required by anyone using commercial sound recordings on their premises, in addition to the licence issued by the Performing Rights Society (PRS).
A spokesman for PPL said that many hoteliers and restaurateurs believe that they only need a licence from the PRS to be fully covered.
The PRS licence protects the copyright of the songwriter/composer, while the PPL licence protects the copyright of the recording.
Not all music requires both licences.
A recording of Mozart, for example, requires only a PPL licence.
It does not need a PRS licence as copyright exists for only 50 years.
Out of 700 cases that the PPL took to court last year, it is thought that as many as 100 could have been brought against hotels or restaurants.
PPL issues two kinds of licence, one for background music and one where music is a featured attraction, such as a discotheque or dance.
The PPL licence for background music costs £65.80 a year, but will rise in September to £69.92 (including VAT).
FINES
David Newham, head of general licensing at PPL, warned the industry that buying a licence was cheaper in the long term, as fines could be between £800 and £1,000.
In June the British Hotels, Restaurants & Caterers Association (BHRCA) finally reached an agreement over revised tariffs with the PRS (see Caterer & Hotelkeeper , 27 June–3 July).
Mr Newham explained that the BHRCA, Brewers Society and the National Licensed Victuallers Association entered into discussions with PPL over revising their tariffs, but the BHRCA withdrew, requesting separate negotiations.
One of the problems for the BHRCA was that more than one PPL licence may be needed; for example, if the same music is played in the bar and reception, and both are self-contained.
Mr Newham said the PPL would have ‘no qualms’ about seeking redress from those who consistently ignored them, but added: ‘If you were to apply for a licence today we could be lenient about past fees.’
The PPL recently commissioned Gallup to carry out a survey of the benefits of recorded music.
It found that four out of five publicans and restaurateurs in the survey agreed it was good for business, and four out of five managers said recorded music made customers stay longer.
•The Performing Right Society (PRS) has won a High Court action to prevent the owner of the Miramar Hotel, Blackpool, Lancashire, from operating a television in the hotel lounge.
An officer from the PRS had visited the hotel and heard a copyright-protected piece of music being played on the TV for which the hotel had no PRS licence.
The case was brought by the PRS after the hotelier, John Hill, refused requests by the society to take out a £58 public performance licence.
The hotelier was ordered by the court to cease using the TV in the lounge and to pay the cost of the case, expected to run into thousands of pounds.
Kevin Glasby in action at the QEII Centre
LONDON WARNING
Vice-President of the London Tourist Board (LTB), Lord Pitt of Hampstead, has called for a London-wide authority to plan and co-ordinate development in the capital.
At the LTB's annual meeting last week, Lord Pitt said London was being undermined as a tourist attraction by a ‘lack of some kind of co-ordinating body, able to promote the capital and fight for its best interests’.
London's position was threatened by foreign competition and the rising international profile of cities such as Birmingham and Glasgow, warned Lord Pitt.
‘Unless there is a serious change of attitude, being the capital will not be a strong enough magnet to draw people to London.’
RUSSIAN VISIT
A delegation from Europe's largest hotel, the Izmailovo in Moscow, recently visited the Moat House International Hotel, Glasgow, to see for themselves the operating standards of a western hotel.
The Izmailovo, which has 5,000 bedrooms is about to undergo a three-year, £20m refurbishment to enable it to compete in the international business and tourism travel market.
The delegation looked at a range of hotel operations including food preparation, customer care programmes, sales and marketing and budgeting.
The Izmailovo will be visited next year by a team from the Scottish Hotel School.
MOSCOW HOLD
A downturn in trade has forced London restaurateur Amin Ali, owner of Jamdani and the Red Fort, to put on hold his plans to open a restaurant in Moscow.
But he quashed rumours that the Red Fort had been quietly put up for sale due to his financial difficulties.
Multi-tenant scheme for Heal's
Catering & Allied Services has broken the mould of contract catering in the UK with the introduction of a scheme which allows different companies in one building to share full-service staff restaurant facilities.
The company, which has 80 staff restaurant contracts, now operates the Heal's building in London's Tottenham Court Road as its first UK multi-tenanted scheme, which it pioneered in the Netherlands.
It already ran the staff restaurant at Heal's when retail conglomerate Storehouse occupied the entire building, but the opportunity to introduce the multi-tenant system presented itself following the departure of Conran Design.
The system means that all companies within a building have access to a staff restaurant facility without the cost of installing their own kitchen and restaurant.
John Houston, managing director of Catering & Allied, said the benefits of the scheme were particularly relevant in a recession where companies were trying to hold down costs.
Peter Mountfield of TCR Properties, the company which manages the Heal's building, said the availability of staff restaurant facilities had also been a useful marketing tool to potential tenants.
The price of space in the building includes use of the facility.
City caterer High Table — a subsidiary of the French Group Elitair, which has multi-tenant schemes in France — is also looking at this type of operation.
Three hundred years of catering for the City of London were celebrated by Ring & Brymer at the Museum of London last week.
Boar's head and jugged hare were among the contemporary dishes served in front of the company's original 18th-century shop front in Cornhill, which now stands in the museum.
At the time, the company was called Birch & Birch.
It was 1837 that it became Ring & Brymer, an entity retained by Lord Forte when he took over the company in 1962.
The company holds the distinction of having catered for every Coronation Banquet since George III came to the throne in 1760.
JUDGE QUASHES FOOD HYGIENE FINES
by Dom Walsh
A Cambridge café owner has won an appeal against a £13,500 fine imposed last month under Food Hygiene Regulations, after the judge accepted that she did not have the money to pay it.
Julia Pledger, owner/director of Fitzbillies, took her case to Cambridge Crown Court after she was fined £900 on each of 15 counts (Caterer & Hotelkeeper , 30 May–5 June).
The court accepted the seriousness of the offences, but felt that a fine of £5,000 would have been more appropriate.
However, even that figure was waived after the court heard that Ms Pledger had no realistic chance of being able to pay.
She was obliged only to pay court costs of £400.
Since the offences were first reported, Ms Pledger's business has gone into receivership and Fitzbillies is now in the process of being refurbished under new management.
But Cambridge City Council's environmental health department warned that the success of the appeal did not set a precedent, and that the court had been careful to reiterate its concern at the ‘grave breaches of the Food Hygiene Regulations’.
The judge was moved to comment that if any customer had seen the photographs used in evidence against Ms Pledger, they would have immediately stopped patronising Fitzbillies.
Geoff Keerie, assistant city environmental health officer, said the council was disappointed with the result of the appeal, but that it was content that the threat of a serious risk to public health had been removed.
‘We are satisfied that [Ms Pledger]is no longer in the food trade and putting customers at risk, which after all, is our priority reason for doing this work,’ he said.
Original fines had included one of £900 for a cracked wooden spoon.
Other offences included not having a bar of soap on a wash basin and no ‘Now Wash Your Hands’ sign on the wall and having a cracked marble worktop.
•Many caterers are finding the Food Safety Act an administrative nightmare according to Les Routiers, the small hotels and restaurants consortium.
Managing director Duncan Bradbury said that although most caterers were prepared in food hygiene training and temperature control, they found much of the legislation confusing.
BA in-flight catering costs must become more competitive
British Airways (BA) in-flight catering must cut costs or face contracting out, according to Chief Executive Sir Colin Marshall.
In recent talks with trade unions, Sir Colin said that catering costs were not fully competitive with those of outside contractors, and that the gap would have to be closed if the business were to be kept in-house.
Catering is just one of the areas BA is examining for potential cost-cutting.
And at BA's annual meeting last week, chairman Lord King said: ‘Our business is to get people into planes and fly them.
I don't want to make bread rolls; I want to eat them.’
However, Maurice Decarteret, operations manager at BA's Catering Centre South, Heathrow, reacted angrily to suggestions that catering might be contracted out.
He said: ‘We would be looking to make ourselves viable in-house before going down that road, and we are well able to do it.’
Mr Decarteret also pointed out that if catering services were contracted out, ‘very delicate industrial relations issues’ would be high-lighted.
BA in-flight catering serves all long-haul and a small number of short-haul services from the UK, producing about 25,000 meals a day from Catering Centre South, where 1,200 people are employed.
Most of the short-haul catering is already contracted to Forte Airport Services, which caters for BA out of eight UK airports as well as from four overseas airports.
A Forte spokeswoman said: ‘We continue to develop a close partnership with BA.
We welcome opportunities to extend the scope of this partnership as and when they arise.’
Another company that will be watching developments with interest is Sutcliffe Catering, which earlier this year won the staff contract for BA's 45 sites — a total of 40,000 people.
OPEN FOR BUSINESS
The Belvedere, Holland Park, London, has reopened under the ownership of Town & County.
Jeremy Strode, the chef from the 90-seat Belvedere restaurant, has devised a Californian-style menu.
Boddington's first Henry's Table in the South of England has opened in Beddington Park, Surrey.
The 92-seat restaurant, called the Grange, cost about £1m to build.
Cafe Réné has opened in Hughenden Yard, Marlborough, Wiltshire.
The 72-seat restaurant/bar, selling authentic French food, is the third in the South-west for owner Kambiz Shayegan.
A boomerang-shaped bar is one of the features of Antipodean-style restaurant Sydney Street in Sydney Street, London.
Owners James Morgan, Andrew Christodoulou and Theo Demetriou are importing fish, meat and wine from Australia and New Zealand.
Scottish-based restaurant group Littlejohn's is to open a 100-seat restaurant in the Highland resort of Aviemore.
The company also operates Littlejohn's in Stirling, Perth, St Andrews and Durham, serving fast food and traditional British dishes.
Wimpy International has opened a further four restaurants at the Metro Centre, Gateshead; Carbis Bay, Cornwall; Shirley, Hampshire; and Sudbury, Suffolk.
Allied Breweries has opened its 11th Mississippi Exchange Bar Diner, in Guildford, Surrey.
Genuine American bric-a-brac has been specially imported from the Deep South for the £820,000 restaurant.
Survey calls time on fears
Government concerns that the 1988 Licensing Act would encourage greater consumption of alcohol have been proved unfounded.
The reforms extended the licensing laws to allow hotel bars and pubs to stay open on weekday afternoons and until 3pm on Sundays.
Results of a survey conducted by the Department of Health — the first to be published since the change in the law — showed that the average adult weekly alcohol consumption had not changed between 1987 and 1989.
Average consumption remained stable at 8.8 standard units per week, or the equivalent of four pints of beer.
Before the law received Royal Assent there was resistance to its implementation.
Home Office ministers and anti-drink campaigners were concerned that extended hours could encourage people to consume alcohol.
However, the survey of 3,600 people found that afternoon drinking was still the exception with only 6% of recent drinkers (those who have had an alcoholic drink in the previous week) having had a drink in licensed premises between 4pm and 5pm during the previous week.
‘It is clear that the extensions to permitted opening hours have not led to a marked increase in overall consumption,’ the report concluded.
Veal protest
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has called on consumers to ask restaurateurs the country of origin of their veal.
The campaign aims to prevent the import of veal from France and Holland, where calves are reared under conditions which have been banned in Britain.
DIET ADVICE IGNORED
The British are still largely complacent about their eating habits, despite a barrage of advice in recent years about the importance of a healthy diet, according to a report by market researcher Mintel.
More than eight out of 10 consumers, out of a sample of about 1,500, said their consumption of meat and fish was unaffected by health considerations and 60% did not care about calories, while more than half claimed not to worry about calories, while more than half claimed not to worry about salt, sugar or caffeine.
Mintel's Healthy Eating report follows hot on the heels if the latest Government Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy (COMA) report, which advised consumers to cut down on intake of nutrients such as sugar, fats and salt.
Mintel's research found that most adult consumers belonged to one of the following three groups:
•Diet ignorers — representing 42% of the sample.
These were meat eaters who admitted to not caring about their intake of salt, sugar, caffeine or calories.
They were most likely to be men, aged 20 to 24, many of whom lived in Scotland.
•Diet aware — representing 23% of the sample.
These were meat eaters who did pay attention to their intake of salt, sugar and caffeine and were also concerned about calories.
They were most likely to come from the 35–44 or 55–64 age group.
•Diet conscious — a minority of just 8% who avoided meat or were vegetarians and were careful about their intake of salt, sugar, caffeine and calories.
This group was drawn from the 15 to 19-year-olds and the ABC1 socio-economic group.
For those who did choose healthy alternatives, the most popular product was low-fat margarine used by nearly half the sample, followed by skimmed milk used by 40%.
One in five chose decaffeinated tea and coffee while 14% used artificial sweeteners.
The report also highlighted the difference in attitudes between men and women.
Women were more likely to be consumers of healthy alternatives.
Only three in 10 were diet ignorers compared with more than half the men.
Who's for an ostrich leg?
The Cottage in the Wood Hotel, Malvern Wells, Hereford & Worcester, cannot be accused of burying its head in the sand with its decision to introduce South African ostrich to its à la carte lunch and dinner menu.
The meat, which looks like dark veal, is imported by the hotel from France.
The hotel is serving it cooked in butter with mushroom and cream flamed with brandy.
Cost is £13.95.
A Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & Food spokesperson said there was nothing to stop hotels and restaurants serving unusual meats, provided they complied with food hygiene regulations.
Salmonella in decline
Recent outbreaks of salmonella have declined to sharply, according to latest Government statistics, but experts have warned that it is too soon to conclude that salmonella is under control.
Figures from the Public Health Laboratory Service (PHLS) revealed 7,848 confirmed cases of salmonella during the first six months of this year, a 17% decrease over the same period last year.
But the PHLS warned that the first six months of the year were always lower risk times because of the colder weather, and said figures for the third-quarter could be higher.
‘Two quarters do not make a trend,’ said a PHLS spokesperson.
‘It could be years before overall trends are established.’
And the figures do not account for the numbers of unreported cases.
A spokesperson for the Institution of Environmental Health Officers said the institution hoped the decrease was because of Government activity focusing attention on food safety.
NEWS FOCUS
Report slams hazardous pools
Hoteliers are backing calls for tougher legislation to make hotel swimming pools safer following an IEHO report slamming hotel pools' safety standards.
Dom Walsh reports
Hoteliers are supporting calls for stronger safety legislation for swimming pools after a survey revealed hotel pools to be the most hazardous in the private sector.
The report, compiled by the Institution of Environmental Health Officers (IEHO), slammed poor safety procedures and the lack of supervision and rescue equipment, and called for tougher legislation to tackle the problem.
The survey, conducted between September and December last year, looked at 687 of the UK's 2,000 privately run pools of which 363 — just over half the sample — were in hotels, guesthouses and conference centres.
Of those 363 hotel pools, 31% were found to have inadequate or no rescue equipment and 21% lacked or had insufficient pool surround fitments.
Only 44% provided lifeguard supervision.
Of the sample as a whole, which included leisure centres, holiday camps and caravan parks, even those pools providing lifeguards exhibited worrying deficiencies, the survey said.
Over 34% of pools with supervision kept no training records for lifeguards, while 43% did not allow them to concentrate solely on supervision.
Another 23% did not make duty periods overlap to ensure continuous monitoring.
Unclear marking of the pool edge, unprotected access at the deep end, narrow surrounds and safety notices obscured by plants were all identified as common problems likely to increase the risk of accidents.
But one of the main problems highlighted by the report was ignorance of existing health and safety guidelines, produced in 1988 by the Health and Safety Commission (HSC) and the Sports Council in a document called Safety in Swimming Pools .
Pool operators were often unaware of their responsibilities to report accidents and dangerous occurrences to their local authority.
Of the hotels in the survey, four had been served improvement notices by environmental health officers, while three had received prohibition notices.
According to Tim Mayled, founder of the fledgling Hotel Leisure Managers Association and country club manager of the Lygon Arms, Broadway, Hereford & Worcester, firm legislation rather than guidelines were needed.
‘Albeit that they're very good guidelines, at the end of the day it's still up to individual to decide whether they adhere to them or not,’ he said.
‘This is where the problems arise.’
Current legislation is embodied in the Health and Safety at Work Act which places a general duty on an employer to ‘conduct his undertaking in such a way as to ensure, as far as is practicable, that persons not in his employment who may be affected thereby, are not exposed to risks to their health and safety.’
Hotel swimming pools also fall within the framework of the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations (COSHH) which require that exposure to substances hazardous to health, such as water disinfectants, is either prevented or adequately controlled.
The IEHO is calling for the strengthening and extension of existing legislation, a move supported by Mr Mayled, who felt that making the HSC guidelines law was the only way to improve standards across the board.
He suggested that one of the main factors which led to unsafe conditions was cost.
Equipment and supervisory staff were expensive, he said, and leisure facilities were often the fist victims of cost-saving cutbacks.
But Mr Mayled also pointed out the commercial logic of implementing proper procedures.
‘It can be a positive marketing tool,’ he said.
The Health & Safety Executive, however, maintained that the HSC's comprehensive guidelines were adequate and that the laying down of rigid prescriptive standards was impossible given the diversity of sizes and types of pool.
But Philip Brook, general manager of Queens Moat's Telford Hotel, Golf & Country Club in Shropshire, which has the biggest hotel swimming pool in the Midlands, argued that legislation was both necessary and possible.
‘With the food hygiene regulations, local authorities must assess each food outlet on its risk factor.
I see no reason why this could not apply to different sizes of swimming pool.’
This type of system would recognise that there are some cases where constant poolside supervision was not reasonably practical, after weighting of risk against cost, as the IEHO report conceded.
Report author Janine Avery said: ‘Among EHOs hotels would generally be categorized as low-risk areas.
But we want swimming pools to be looked at specifically, rather than as just part of the hotel as a whole.’
In its recommendations, the IEHO said that any pool should be fully supervised by trained staff unless it fills three criteria; the pool is used infrequently; a relevant member of staff is always aware when the pool is in use; and that use be restricted to adults of known swimming ability.
The report recommended that clear and enforceable standards be introduced for the following:•supervision requirements;•maximum duty times and minimum training requirements for lifeguards;•provision of safety equipment;•provision of extra services within swimming pools, such as supplying of food and drink, use of diving boards, slides and flumes.
It also suggested that legislation should be brought in that required planners, designers and architects to consider future health and safety needs at the initial design stage.
STAKIS STRONGMAN
Sir Lewis Robertson has had to make tough decisions to revive Stakis' fortunes.
He tells Dom Walsh of the many he has yet to make
Since the appointment of Sir Lewis Robertson as chairman of Stakis in February, the company has experienced wholesale changes.
More than 100 jobs have been axed, a For Sale sign has gone up over a large slice of its assets and chief executive Andros Stakis has been ousted.
Sir Lewis' avuncular features mask a hard-nosed businessman unafraid of putting financial exigency before personal sentiment.
It's not for nothing that he has earned his reputation as Scotland's most effective ‘company doctor’.
However, Sir Lewis has made great efforts to dispel an admitted ‘deep scepticism’ at his appointment among the group's staff of more than 7,000, and there is growing confidence among them in what he is doing.
He gained a lot of brownie points, for example, when the company announced its record interim losses of £45.1m and then revealed plans to sell off the majority of is leisure division.
Just before the official announcement, Sir Lewis had 140 copies of a video distributed around the group, letting staff know of the position and of future plans.
Probably the harshest decision was the need for a new chief executive (yet to be named) to replace Andros Stakis — a move he made unhesitatingly, but ‘with much regret and much personal vexation’.
Another change has been the centralisation of the various head office functions into new Glasgow offices, which Sir Lewis hopes will boost staff morale.
However, one of the most important decisions he has yet to make will determine the fate of the group's involvement in Aviemore, frequently referred to as ‘Stakisville’ thanks to its ownership of three hotels and the Aviemore Centre itself.
While Sir Lewis declared himself to be reasonably happy with the way the group's three hotels were being used, he admitted that the 100-acre-plus ski resort was suffering from a glaring lack of investment, and poor road communications.
He said a study showed that the 30-year-old Aviemore Centre required ‘more or less total renovation’, and that a road spur needed to be built off the A9 bypass.
Finance, of course, is the main problem, especially as Stakis is winding down its land and estates division and is putting no more money into property development.
Yet it needs to make good the outdated complex, which is not even geared to withstanding bad weather.
‘We can do it either by going joint with somebody, or indeed by selling it, or in a variety of ways involving outside capital,’ Sir Lewis explained.
However, money has been set aside for a refurbishment programme across the group's 30 hotels.
An initial sum of £2m will be put into the more urgent cases, he said, with more to follow.
Meanwhile, Sir Lewis does not intend to rush his decision on the future of the Country Court concept, currently on ice with only six of a planned 20 hotels off the starting blocks.
But he was clear that change was inevitable.
‘When the Country Court programme was started, building hotels was still quite a sensible thing to do.
Today it may not be the right way forward because it's probably much cheaper to buy a hotel,’ he said.
But the immediate priority, he emphasised, was to get back to the basics which Sir Reo Stakis tried to inculcate in his managers: using staff effectively to provide a service on the spot and giving the customer what he or she needs and expects.
The face of Stakis' future
INTERNATIONAL
ISRAEL RECOVERS
Israel's tourist industry is gradually recovering to pre-Gulf War levels, according to latest Israeli Government statistics.
Between January and February 1991, 38,200 tourists visited the country — just 20% of the figure for the same period in 1991.
In May, however, 91,000 visitors were recorded — two thirds of the total for May 1990.
The Israeli Government Tourist Office anticipates that tourist numbers will return to pre-crisis level by August 1991 and will continue to rise rapidly.
However, the recovery is not expected to be strong enough to enable total visitor numbers for 1991 to surpass 1990's record of 1.4 million.
GHANA HOTEL
Lonrho is to open a four-star standard hotel in Ghana, West Africa, in August.
The £7.5m 100-bedroom project, designed by Kent-based architects Ratcliffe Stott Associates, will be one of Ghana's premier hotels located in a prime seafront position in the capital, Accra.
LUXURY BUILD
Omni Hotels Asia-Pacific and Barito Pacific Group are to jointly develop a luxury full-service hotel in Jakarta, Indonesia.
The 340-bedroom hotel, the Omni Jakarta Hotel, will be managed by Omni Hotels Asia-Pacific.
The hotel is expected to open in 1994.
SYDNEY NIKKO
A nineteenth-century fruit and grain warehouse in Darling Harbour, Sydney, is the site of a Nikko hotel opening in September.
The five-star-standard, 649-bedroom hotel will have a pre-war ocean liner theme which will include curved timber panelling, etched glass and polished chrome interior.
UPTURN AHEAD FOR EUROPEAN HOTELS
Europe's hotel industry is on the bumpy road to re-establishing its pre-Gulf War position but full recovery is not expected until at least the end of 1991, according to a report from analyst Salomon Brothers.
The European leisure market's short-term potential has faded in the wake of the Gulf War and slowing economic growth but prospects for 1992 and beyond are brighter, the report states.
Report author Jill Krutick said that in the meantime the race was on among the large hotel chains to achieve a pan-European presence with branded hotel products.
‘As travel becomes more international, chains are moving across country lines to try to win a loyal customer base,’ she said.
The report points out that over the past two years there have been international hotel mergers and acquisitions worth $8.8b (£5.5b).
At least one European company has been involved in £5b-worth of these.
Ms Krutick predicted that as the single European market drew closer the travel industry would see an increase in business.
Despite temporary set-backs Europe remains the axis to world travel.
In 1990 Europe received 64% of worldwide tourists (271 million visitors) and 51% of the receipts for world travel (see chart).
European Community countries were the targets for 40% of the world's travel activity.
The lion's share of travel in Europe is dominated by Europeans.
In 1990, Europe's main city hotels attracted a mix of 37% non-domestic Europeans, 24% domestic and 19% US travellers.
Discounting, too, increased as an acceptable practice as European hoteliers imitated their US counterparts.
Average discounts from published room rates in Europe's main cities increased to 31% in 1990 from 27% in 1989.
Amsterdam, Athens and Dublin discounted the most heavily in 1990 at about 40%, while Munich and top Paris hotels discounted 20%.
In US dollar terms room rates remained the highest in Paris, London, Rome and Geneva and lowest in Budapest, Prague and Athens.
London luxury hotels fared badly because of their dependence on US tourists.
Five-star property occupancy rates fell by 4.2 percentage points to 70.4% in 1990.
Germany escaped relatively unscathed from the Gulf War.
Berlin room rates soared by 26% in 1990 and occupancy rates jumped by 9.5 percentage points over the previous year to 80.95%.
And in Paris, where there were fewer hotel room additions before the Gulf War, occupancy rates fell by 1.4 percentage points to 74.8% in 1990 but roomrates advanced by 9.1% in local currency.
Bidding is on for Interhotel
UK hotel companies are anxiously awaiting the outcome of round one in the bidding for the former East German hotel group Interhotel.
The portfolio of 30 hotels includes the Grand Hotel in Berlin.
Others in the group range from the new Dresdener Hof in Dresden — a purpose-built tourist hotel with 13 bars and restaurants — to resort hotels with 800 single bedrooms designed for factory workers on holiday.
Because of this wide range of hotel types, potential UK buyers are waiting to see whether the German government agency handling the sale — Treuhandstalt — will allow the break-up of the group.
UK bidders could include Forte, Inter-Continental and Queens Moat Houses.
LETTERS
COMPOUNDING THE PROBLEM AT ASHLEY COURT
‘Life Savers’(Caterer & Hotelkeeper , 13–19 June) was, to me, incredible!.
What is more, the remedy advised is likely to compound the problem.
The Povahs' predicament appears to have become a common one, and of course there is sympathy, but one does wonder at the borrowings and the strategy upon which they were based.
I, for one, would like to know the source of such indulgent lending.
The role of the accountant also appears to be a mystery.
However, though I must challenge the advice given, I agree that careful consideration must immediately be given to every detail relevant to the business operation.
Staffing levels and costs are, without question, too high and must be reduced.
The spare land and any other spare assets should be disposed of to raise cash to meet the demands of creditors, but that is the limit.
The food service and bar should not be contracted out, the staff should be considered and only those who are indeed surplus to the requirements and standards of the business should become redundant.
Nor would the letting of the house at £400 a month be advisable, because the accommodation in the hotel that the Povah family would need is worth considerably more in terms of income.
Mr Povah should stay put and control the business, and deal with sales contracts by phone and mail.
Mrs Povah should become actively involved and they should jointly draw the £1,000 a month quoted.
This should be included in a salaries and wages budget of 20% of turnover.
Heat, light and power should be revised and contained at 3%, and administrative costs reduced to 10%.
Assuming that the lenders will agree to defer capital repayments, and the fixed charge of £207,192 quoted in Table III becomes applicable, a projected profit and loss account for 1992 can be prepared.
This would show, on 1991 figures, but at a more realistic 70% than the 78.6%, a low of £15,143 net profit.
Much better than the quoted loss projected of £12,728.
 BRYAN LATTER BTL Consultancy, 92 Maygrove Road, West Hampstead, London NW6 
ADVANTAGE IN COLLABORATION?
Having read with interest the saga of the Ashley Court Hotel, and now the first instalment on the Valley Hotel (Caterer , 11–17 July), it strikes me that the Povahs and the Cassons should combine their marketing, accounting and food systems skills.
There's many a true word spoken in jest, but there must be lessons here to help them all awaken from the financial nightmare that the lending institutions have exacerbated.
 CHRIS BONE Farm Cottage, Birds Drove, Sutton St James, Lincolnshire.
DEMAND IN ‘DISDAINFUL’
I have just received a request (not quite a demand) from Expotel for £350 (+10% commission on bookings) to join its hotel database, otherwise I risk falling off its screens.
In the old days, travel agents looked after their customers by finding them the best-value hotels at the required destination.
By looking after customers' interests, they built up their business.
I wonder how many of Expotel's customers are aware that Expotel's recommendations are based not on hotel quality but on the self-interested payment up-front of this ‘sweetener’, plus exclusive corporate rates?
Such a cavalier approach to customers surely leaves Expotel vulnerable to competitors and to bright, investigative trade journalists.
 JOHN JENKINSON Evesham Hotel, Cooper's Lane, Evesham, Hereford & Worcs.
CATERERS NEED HELP ON HYGIENE
I was interested to read ‘Cambridge café fined £13,500’(Caterer , 30 May–5 June).
Food businesses fail to meet basic food safety standards through ignorance.
This ignorance is compounded by a lack of knowledge of where to turn to for advice, and a fear of direct contact with enforcing authorities.
When enforcement procedures are taken against a business, the cost of obtaining expert opinion and the legal costs of providing a defence can prove prohibitive and even result in commercial disaster.
I applaud and support the efforts by Bill Bates, food safety consultant at Control UK, in his attempts to get an arbitration board set up, but have reservations about the priority likely to be given to this by food minister, David Maclean.
In the meantime, businesses must understand the requirements of the legislation, implement suitable management controls to maintain the required standards, and review their insurance and their use of external support services — which can be cost-effective investments in the event of crisis.
D.W. CODD Director of Safety Services, Managing Director IRPC-Hinton, Stockwell House, Hinkley, Leicestershire.
‘HALF MEASURES’ FOR CROWNS
I am greatly disappointed in the London Tourist Board's initiative for small-to-medium sized hotels which do not operate restaurants, but wish to achieve a three-crown rating.
We now have to form an arrangement with a local restaurant to offer an evening meal on our behalf, and we offer transport to the restaurant ourselves.
For goodness sake, why should small city-centre hotels have to operate restaurants or be forced into stupid little half-measures such as the aforementioned to get a rating?
Small city-centre hotels can very rarely operate restaurants profitably (especially not in London).
 M.S. THEODORE Bryanston Court Hotel, Great Cumberland Place, Marble Arch, London W1.
WALKER TOOK WRONG ROUTE
It was extremely disappointing to read your news story entitled ‘Unfriendly Wales’(Caterer , 4–10 July), and I am led to wonder where Tom Harrison chose to walk in the principality.
I would like to show him a folder overflowing with letters from visitors to Llangoed Hall, praising the warmth and professionalism of the staff.
I should further point out that Llangoed Hall is running a series of walking weekends in conjunction with a national magazine and Wayfarers, an organisation for walkers in Great Britain.
Perhaps Mr Harrison would have second thoughts if he walked in our neck of the woods.
 TOM WARD General Manager, Llangoed Hall, Llyswen, Brecon, Powys.
THANKS FOR THE KIND WORDS
On behalf of all local authority caterers, I thank Joe Hyam for his kind words and support for the local authority caterers.
He says: ‘Small budgets, apologetic councils strapped for cash, and a complex social and sometimes ethnic mix of young customers and their parents don't make for an easy life.’
I would agree with him, but then when did caterers ever ask for an easy life?
The positive side of local authority catering is the reward of seeing children happily and healthily fed, of winning the political battle for a small budget to market healthy eating and providing good steady work for thousands of caterers.
Joe should also remember that many of us get a buzz out of controlling budgets of up to £30m a year, employing 3,000 staff, and providing food in up to 600 units.
Some of us even enjoy the political battles, provided we win a few.
 MAGGIE TILTMAN Local Authority Caterers Association, Jacobs Well, Guildford, Surrey.
LANGUAGES ARE WINNING WORDS
I was delighted that your Opinion column (Caterer , 4–10 July) highlighted the need for better language skills.
Our report Lost for words , published last year, showed considerable complacency in Britain, because so many visitors have an impressive command of English.
Yet English is not the native language for almost half of our overseas visitors.
Meeting their expectations means communicating with them in their own tongue.
That is why the British Tourist Association launched its ‘Winning Words’ initiative, to encourage the tourism industry to improve the service it offers to non-English speaking guests.
Our industry can create new markets and opportunities with a modest investment in language initiatives.
Even the most basic multi-language signs or the occasional ‘Guten tag’ will create goodwill and develop future business.
The winning words in the 1990s will be those spoken in the languages of our customers.
 WILLIAM DAVIS Chairman, British Tourist Authority, Hammersmith, London W6.
FINANCIAL HANDS COULD BE TIED
Regarding Garry Hawkes' letter ‘Hygiene first at contractor’(Caterer , 11–17 July), during my employment with Forte, the properties for which I was responsible were often visited by internal inspectors from John Forte's department.
They were excellent in every aspect and always more than willing to give positive practical advice to allow hotel managers to conduct their business with the backing of a truly professional team.
However, Mr Hawkes should note the need for public relations guidance, as perhaps the local government officials mentioned have their financial hands tied by central Government which in turn accepts contributions to the Conservative Party, from Forte.
 GEOFFREY TALLIS Proprietor, Newton House Hotel, Glencarse, Perth.
ALPHA STUDENTS MEET IN LONDON
Alpha is a group is University of Ulster graduates who feel it would benefit all Northern Ireland graduates in the catering and tourism fields to keep in touch, both socially and on a professional level.
May I draw attention to our recently established London branch, which meets regularly to discuss current issues and share ideas and experiences.
Our next meeting will take place at 7pm on 29 July at the Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management Association headquarters, 191 Trinity Road, London.
All current and new members will be made most welcome.
For details please contact: SEAN MURRAY Assistant Food & Beverage Manager, Ritz Hotel, Piccadilly, London W1.
YOUR VIEWS…
We welcome your views on any subject relevant to the catering industry, but please keep letters short and to the point.
We reserve the right to edit where necessary.
Caterer & Hotelkeeper will not publish letters sent anonymously or under pseudonyms.
However, names and addresses can be withheld at the discretion of the editor, but must be supplied.
Letters offering services will not be printed.
Letters should be addressed to: Letters Editor,Caterer & Hotelkeeper , Room 1504, Quadrant House, The Quadrant, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5AS.
Don't forget to print your full name, address and, if possible, give a telephone number where you can be contacted.
JOE HYAM
HOW NOT TO DO IT
It is sometimes beneficial to compare our industry with other service industries.
When you look at the way our railways are run, we can only be grateful that British Rail no longer owns hotels, particularly when you recall what a wonderful training ground the old British Transport Hotels used to be.
Imagine a hotel where the service changed without warning and the staff had no idea what was happening.
It is 8am.
You are looking for coffee, orange juice, toast.
And what do you get?
An announcement.
We apologise to customers for the cancellation of breakfast owing to: repair work in the kitchen, staff shortages, a fatality in the cold room, the non-arrival of deliveries.
You approach the reception desk: ‘Where can I go for breakfast?’ you ask.
‘'s closed.’
‘What do you mean by 's closed?’
‘I mean there's no breakfast.
Try the place round the corner.’
You go to the place round the corner.
There is a ‘closed’ sign on the door.
There is no sign of a shop or café open anywhere.
You return to the hotel.
‘The place round the corner is closed,’ you say.
‘You can get breakfast in the restaurant now.
The chef's come in.’
‘Why didn't you tell me a minute ago?’
‘I didn't know.
Did I?’
Far fetched?
Not a bit of it.
No hotel service could be quite so crass.
But that's a fair equivalent of what happened at Gatwick Airport railway station recently.
First the indicator board wasn't working.
Then it became apparent that the advertised service to London every 15 minutes had been reduced to a 30-minute service.
We were advised by the ticket collector to catch an ordinary train, but the train didn't turn up.
So back we went to the barrier.
‘It should have done,’ he said, when we told him.
‘You'll be quicker on the express.’
Having been criticised for giving no information, BR now gives it all the time with endless repetition, except when you really want it.
And it calls you ‘customers’.
There is a difference between being called a customer and being regarded as one, which seems entirely to have escaped BR.
A customer makes a choice.
BR customers often don't have the choice.
CUSTOM AND PRACTICE
The truth about customers is that most people who serve them see them, at some time or other, as enemies.
Neville Blech who, with his wife Sonia, runs the Mijanou restaurant in London, tells a story which sums up this hidden facet of service.
Customer: ‘I'd like the stewed apples please, but without the custard.’
Waitress: ‘I'll ask the chef.’
The waitress returns.
‘Chef says the dish is stewed apples and custard.
You can't have one without the other.’
Customer: ‘I don't believe it.
What else did he say?’
Waitress: ‘He said if you start giving them apples without custard, where will it ever end?’
 Joe Hyam Director, Academy of Culinary Arts 
VIEWPOINT
Watch out for the rise of the B&B
I would rather stay at a good bed & breakfast than in several five-star hotels I could name.
My reasons have something to do with the costs and value.
B&Bs come in all shapes and sizes.
It's not hard to find bad ones with cubby-hole rooms, nylon sheets and towels like emery boards, but at the other extreme there are elegant houses with antique furniture.
Rooms and their facilities compare to those on the country house circuit.
The welcome is personal and genuine and the breakfast may be fresher and taste better than in almost any hotel.
The price per night in one of the best can be as much as £35; but it could be less than £25.
By any measuring stick, that's a very good deal.
This creates a curious situation.
Many hoteliers, both independents and chain operators, feel they have to charge £50 or £100 to make a profit.
According to their calculations, they are asking a fair rate.
On the other hand, the public, providing that it shops around, can probably buy the same product elsewhere for a fraction of those prices.
A two-tiered position has arisen almost by accident and certainly without any fuss.
There was a time when five-star hotels were assumed to be better than four-star and so on down the line.
For the past decade, at least, it has been recognised that quality exists above and beyond any guide's objective star rating.
What has escaped notice, however, is the knock-on effect of this principle.
Guest houses, inns, farmhouses and B&Bs have all been improving in the same way as the rest of the industry, so that the best of them compare in their own category with say, AA red star hotels.
They won't attract much attention individually.
They are too small for that; some have only one or two letting rooms; they can't market themselves, though an English Tourist Board grading or a high ‘Q’ rating from the AA can help.
For the moment they may not, singly or collectively, present a serious commercial challenge.
A chain hotel located in a city centre or at the exit roundabout of a motorway guarantees many identical rooms.
The average business traveller, who doesn't pay his own bills or make his own booking, will plump for that option in preference to a detour down a country lane or through suburbs in search of some unknown quantity which might turn out to be a gem.
The existence of a cheap national network of accommodation, however diffuse, unstructured and unregulated, is one reason why Forte and other groups have not opened super-budget hotels like their French counterpart Accor, where rooms sell at approximately £15 a night.
No traditional formula could compete on value-for-money with a well-run guesthouse where, as the public has begun to realise, it can expect cheaper prices coupled with modern levels of comfort.
B&Bs are a unique British invention, like the sandwich.
Just as the snack has changed from being a national joke into a respected billion pound industry almost overnight, so the most humble sector of the hospitality industry is on course to become the high-flier of the 1990s.
 Michael Raffael Cookery writer  
PEOPLE
SAM WHITBREAD TO RETIRE NEXT YEAR
Sam Whitbread, chairman of Whitbread since 1984, is to retire in July 1992 and will be replaced by Sir Michael Angus, chairman of Unilever.
In anticipation of the move, Mr Whitbread has already handed effective control of the company to his chief executive Peter Jarvis and has been made non-executive chairman.
He will continue as a non-executive member of the board.
Sir Michael, who is already on the Whitbread board, is also chairman of the Board Remuneration and Audit Committees and is a non-executive director of Thorn EMI and British Airways.
HOWARD HEADS BATH SPA KITCHEN
Alex Howard has been appointed head chef of Forte's Spa Hotel in Bath, Avon.
He replaces Berndt Meister, who will be redeployed.
The Bath Spa said Mr Meister's appointment was never seen as long-term and that he had been appointed to groom Mr Howard for the position.
TRAINING ADVICE
Four food and hygiene education and training consultants have linked up to form the Food, Health & Advisory Service in London.
They are Ben Fenton, Amin Dinno, George Couling and Peter Wild.
The team aims to provide an educational training package based on the syllabus used for the Institution of Environmental Health Officers' course.
FURUYA TO HEAD SALES
The New Otani group of hotels has appointed Takashi Furuya as director of sales, Europe.
Mr Furuya joined New Otani in 1974 working in international sales in Tokyo.
He moved to London in 1988 as assistant director of sales.
New Otani has also appointed Elizabeth Rees as sales executive.
AMANN GOES TO COPTHORNE
Eric Amann has been appointed to the new post of deputy manager at the Copthorne Slough-Windsor.
Mr Amann joins the Copthorne group from Forte's international division where he was director of food and beverage operations at the Royal Mansour Hotel, Casablanca, Morocco.
CAPITOL GAINS GAWEL
Lesley Gawel has joined Capital Catering Management Services, Reading, Berkshire, as operations manager.
Miss Gawel was previously with the Civil Service Catering Organisation (CISCO) where she was responsible for 27 outlets.
Miss Gawel replaces Janet Lawrenson who becomes business development manager, responsible for the company's expansion in the home counties, North-west of London.
MACRAE IN ACTING ROLE
David MacRae is acting manager at the Gatwick Penta Hotel, following the departure of Norbert Hummel.
Mr Hummel is to run Penta's new hotel in Moscow.
Mr MacRae has been at the hotel for five years.
He started as financial controller and then moved on to become executive assistant manager.
HOUSSIN IS GM OF OAK HOTEL
Bernard Houssin has been appointed general manager of the Oak Hotel Group from the Arcade Hotel in Portsmouth, Hampshire.
Guy Madec becomes general manager of the group's first hotel, the Oak Hotel Wigan, Greater Manchester.
He was previously deputy manager at the Arcade Hotel, Portsmouth.
SPECIALIST CONSULTANCY
Rachel Shackleton, formerly training director for Windjammer Landing in St Lucia, and Bea Van Gessel, assistant general manager of European Country Hotels, have joined forces to form their own consultancy.
Paradigm Management, based in Twickenham, Middlesex, will specialise in staff and management training, design of systems and control, and marketing.
IN OTHER MOVES
Didier Boidin to manager of the Hotel Inter-Continental, London, from resident manager Le Grand Hotel in Paris.
Jon and Helen Monk, previously at the Calais Campanile, are to manage the Cardiff branch of the French hotel and restaurant chain Campanile UK.
Joe Koizumi has been appointed Japanese concierge at the Gloucester Hotel, Kensington, London.
Dawn Henderson to travel trade sales executive with the Hotel Conrad, Chelsea Harbour, London.
Andrew Tilley to director of sales and marketing, the Balmoral Hotel, Edinburgh, from the Hilton Group in Hong Kong.
Bill Farrelly moves from Cornwall College to Richmond College, Surrey, as a lecturer on catering.
David Clarke, general manager of the Caledonian Hotel, Edinburgh, has been appointed chairman of the Edinburgh Principal Hoteliers Association.
David Mealing to Mount Charlotte Thistle's St George Hotel, Teesside Airport, from the Abernant Lake Hotel, Llanwrtyd Wells, Wales.
Andrew Magson, previously head chef at Burt's in London's Soho, has taken charge of the kitchen at Café Fish, London W1, replacing Ian McKenzie.
Before Burt's Mr Magson worked at Inigo Jones for five years.
Café Fish is now in its fifth year of offering a fish-only menu which ranges from moules marinière to bouillabaisse.
Produce for the restaurant is sourced daily from British ports, Billingsgate and Normandy.
BUSINESS
MANAGEMENT MISS
Management training centres are receiving an increasing share of the lucrative training course market at the expense of hotels, according to Gill Smillie, head of Conference Venues CountryWide.
Ms Smillie said organisers of training courses often complained that hotels were inflexible towards meal times, unaware of the needs of training and rarely offered the standards of presentation and technology required.
‘What is worrying for hotels is that the training course market is tasting a new set of standards, and may never return to hotels,’ she said.
CASH DIRECTORY
The Commercial Initiative has published the Directory of Commercial Finance Lenders , a comprehensive guide on sources of finance.
The guide features contact names and addresses of lenders; information lenders required from potential borrowers; lending criteria; details of special schemes and an index showing which lenders are active in 70 business sectors.
The guide is available for £55 from Commercial Initiative, 124 Lambton Road, London SW20.
LOOK TO EUROPE
Hoteliers will increasingly look to Europe in the next 10 years to satisfy their investment needs, according to Jonathan Bodlender, chairman of Horwath Consulting.
Horwath Consulting is sponsoring a two-day conference arranged by international conference organiser IIR at The Dorchester, London, on 22 and 23 October.
Twenty-two speakers from leading international companies will speak about investment opportunities and expansion in Europe in the 1990s.
Venture capital turns to leisure
by Richard Gordon
In the past year 3i, the venture capital company, has invested £30m in the leisure industry and it expects to spend more in the future despite the recession.
The investment by 3i represented a 73% increase over the previous year, which ended at 31 March 1990.
Robert Lowe, 3i's industrial adviser in the leisure sector, said the recession had resulted in acquisition prices returning to more sensible levels.
‘We are in a good position to help strong management teams take advantage of this,’ he said.
The company, which recently sold its stake in the Sheraton Edinburgh (see page 26), has not restricted its funds for leisure investment, according to Martin Woods, an accounting adviser working with Mr Lowe.
‘The funds are there for the right project.
‘We took the view in the press that hotel and leisure property prices were too high and therefore were cautious about investment.’
He said 3i had always taken a long-term view and had not been as badly hit by the recession as the banks had because it had been cautious.
‘Now that we are getting back to realistic prices and trading performance can justify capital costs, it makes more sense to invest,’ he said.
He said the gradual drop in interest rates was also contributing to the improvement in investment conditions.
‘Interest on borrowed money has been greater than profitability which required further funding by the banks.
Lower interest rates mean trading returns are more able to cover interest payments,’ Mr Lowe added.
The company believed more opportunities in the pub sector could materialise following the implementation of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission report.
•The latest drop in interest rates was also welcomed by Christie & Co, the property agent.
Managing director Kevin Eakin said that while the half percentage point cut would not have a dramatic effect, it was part of a series of cuts all in the right direction.
‘There is evidence that the market in pubs, hotels and restaurants has been picking up — we believe it bottomed out six months ago — and that is another welcome move in bringing purchasers out again,’ he said.
Christie Group has reported a pre-tax loss of £2.6m for the year to March.
The loss compares with a profit of £1.2m the previous year.
Industry cautious over BCCI collapse
Asian hoteliers and restaurateurs have been reluctant to disclose the extent to which they have been affected by the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI).
A spokesman for Control Securities — the largest Asian-owned UK company to be affected by the BCCI collapse — refused to comment on the issues.
But according to analysts, Control Securities, which owes BCCI about £2m of a £5m loan, will be hit by the loss of rent from two office blocks which it leased to the bank.
When new occupiers lease these properties, Control Securities will have to absorb a £7m loss in the value of these assets.
The true extent of the financial damage will only be known when the company announces its year-end results at the end of July.
An angry spokeswoman for Edwardian Hotels said the group was not prepared to make any comment on BCCI.
A spokesman for Sarova Hotels said: ‘In the past we have had a satisfactory working relationship with BCCI and the current situation has not presented problems.’
Ryan Hotels blames losses on tourism
Ryan Hotels, the Dublin-based hotel and tour operator, has been badly hit by the downturn in tourism.
In the six months to 25 April, the company recorded a loss of I£509,000 (£461,000), a turnaround from a pre-tax profit of I£362,000 (£336,000) in the previous year.
Turnover was down from I£8.25m to I£7.02m.
Ryan chairman Conor McCarthy said the Gulf War had seriously disrupted travel to Ireland and the US tourist market had yet to recover, although bookings from the Irish, UK and Continental markets were strong.
PROPERTY
JARVIS SELLS
The 70-bedroom Salutation Hotel, Perth, Scotland, one of the Embassy hotels bought by John Jarvis in 1990, has been sold for an undisclosed sum to Strathmore Hotels.
The purchase is the first for Strathmore, which was recently founded by Ronnie Rickard, former managing director of Norscot Hotels.
The company plans to develop a chain of 15 to 20 two- and three-star hotels in Scotland and Northern England over the next five years.
The sale was handled by Druce Hotels & Leisure International.
FOREIGN BUYER
The Grosvenor House Hotel in Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, has been sold to an overseas investment company.
Knight Frank & Rutley, which handled the sale on behalf of the vendor Frames Welcome Hotels, said the purchaser was an overseas trust which intended to extend the hotel.
M4 SERVICES
Rank Motorway Services has opened a £7.9m service area on junction 47 of the M4 at Penllergaer, Swansea.
More than 100 staff will be employed at the facility, which has self-service and fast food restaurants, a 50-bedroom Rank Motor Lodge and a restaurant for lorry drivers.
ADVANCE PLANNING
Planning consent for a Center Parc at Longleat, Wiltshire, has yet to be gained, contrary to a report in Caterer (11–17 July).
REFURBISHMENT
Floating restaurant the Tattershall Castle has been towed to Chatham, Kent, for a £1m refurbishment.
It will return in mid-August and reopen at the beginning of September.
•Turn to Classified to see what is on the property market.
Equity dries up for hotels
by Richard Gordon
The hotel industry faces a search for investors as property values slump worldwide and loans exceed asset values.
According to Kay Dymock, partner of estate agent Jones Lang Wootton's international hotels division, the challenge for the hotel industry in the '90s will be the search for equity.
The estate agency has identified institutions as the most likely equity source in Europe.
‘While some institutions have made public share investments in hotel companies, the property departments remain shy of hotels,’ she said.
Hotels most likely to interest international investors would be those with strong revenue rather than those with development potential.
The UK institutions would be the most difficult to persuade to enter the hotel market because of the short-term pressures on fund managers.
‘We are looking at Continental institutions such as pension funds which take a more long-term view or are more entrepreneurial.’
Bill Cross, chairman of TransAct, a newcomer to the European hotel broker scene, said there was enormous demand for new international-style hotels.
Huge sums were involved, he said, but nobody was sure where the money would come from.
‘Institutions have a jaundiced view of hotel property.
Unlike offices, the level of income fluctuates although sometimes over a longer period it fluctuates at a higher level than commercial.
‘So for institutions equity investment in hotels is perhaps a little too speculative.’
However, investors worried about the instability of the hotel market could be reassured with leases rather than management contracts, he said.
‘With leases they miss the opportunity for super profits but they are guaranteed a return of 7% initially and then up to 10%.
They would have to wait until the property is sold before the super profits come in.’
Arthur de Haast of Jones Lang Wootton said institutions needed evidence of hotel performance as a real estate investment.
New owner for Sheraton Edinburgh
The original developer of the Sheraton Edinburgh has sold the 263-bedroom hotel to a new company, Hotel Corporation of Edinburgh Holdings.
Sheraton will continue to manage the hotel.
Capital Hotel Partnership, the hotel's developer, was a joint venture between ITT Sheraton, Prudential Venture Managers and finance company 3i.
The Hotel Corporation of Edinburgh is chaired by Robert Gibbons, senior partner of Fox & Gibbons, solicitors.
Mr Gibbons is also chairman of bottle water company Highland Spring.
Fox & Gibbons is a law firm in the Middle East and has specialised in Middle East fund management for more than 25 years.
Arthur de Haast, a partner of Jones Lang Wootton, which advised the vendor, said the new owner was taking a medium to long-term view on the investment.
Conran plans wharf complex
Sir Terence Conran, former chairman of retail conglomerate Storehouse Group and developer of the Bibendum restaurant, is spearheading the development of a restaurant and retail complex at Butler's Wharf near Tower Bridge in London.
Le Pont de la Tour, as the complex will be known, will cost about £1.25m and will occupy 10,000sq ft in a converted riverside warehouse.
It will include a 105-cover restaurant, bar and grill seating 60 people, a wine merchant, speciality food store and bakery.
Partners in the project, which is due to open in September, include Joel Kissin, formerly general manager of Bibendum and Hilaire, and David Burke, a former sous chef at Bibendum.
FOOD PRICES
Fresh and flavourful
Make the most of British pork because prices are low for the time of year.
Lean minced beef is on offer this week in most areas and there are some good buys to be had with topside, silverside and rump.
New season's lamb is superb and there are plenty of lamb cuts on offer.
Make the most of home-grown strawberries as the season is now at its peak.
Prices will vary from area to area and if we get heavy rain supplies will fall, forcing prices to rise.
Very much the same applies to raspberries.
Imported will still be arriving though to keep supplies at a reasonable level.
Other new season good fruit buys are gooseberries, redcurrants and blackcurrants.
Currants are usually expensive because they are labour-intensive to pick.
Look for new season's cauliflowers.
The quality this year is first class.
Spring greens are at their best and quality primo cabbage is the best green buy this week.
CAREERS & TRAINING
Pub chain trains for Europe
Taylor Walker is benefiting from a customer care programme that it believes will enable it to compete with its European counterparts.
Taylor Walker managing director David Longbottom said: ‘Unlike our European counterparts, in the UK we do not perceive bar work as having professional status.
Bar work is thought to be transitory, undemanding and unskilled.
We are trying to correct this with training programmes and staff recognition schemes.’
The customer care programme includes four simple charters which cover all aspects of hospitality from hygiene standards to a cheery welcome to each and every customer.
The brewery employs people to visit its pubs anonymously to quantify the effects of these charters.
These inspectors nominate those staff they feel deserve extra recognition.
Taylor Walker training manager Nick Leach said barstaff were tested by the area manager to see if they knew the names of at least 100 customers, plus their regular drink.
Youngsters learn how
Contract caterer Gardner Merchant is to provide catering instruction for children's charity Barnardo's latest training restaurant.
Dr B's Kitchen in Belfast, Northern Ireland, will train up to 16 young people with learning difficulties for employment in the catering industry.
The restaurant opened earlier this month.
Gardner Merchant is already providing instruction at Barnardo's other two units, Dr B's Kitchen in Harrogate, North Yorkshire, and Dr B's Caribbean Restaurant in Leeds.
Recruitment takes off thanks to Springboard
by Bally Sall
Springboard — London's one-stop career centre — was a resounding success in its first five months due to financial contributions and the support of hotel and catering businesses.
But, according to the director of the London Tourism Manpower Project Peter Evans, more needs to be done.
By the end of March, after five months of operation, Springboard had placed 3,000 people in work, and, despite the recession, had handled over 200 vacancies a week.
It also recorded over 2,000 inquiries from employers on the centre's computers.
Nearly 60 companies — including Travellers Fare, McDonald's, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Mount Charlotte Thistle Hotels — have used Springboard as a recruitment base.
McDonald's recruitment officer Christina Pellini, who is hiring trainee managers for the 50 units the company plans to open this year, uses Springboard once or twice a month because ‘it provides good quality people’, she said.
‘It is very well organised and books interviews for me.
All I have to do is turn up and see the applicants,’ she said.
SUCCESS
Springboard's job centre manager, Colin Foster, said the success was due to its high penetration of the market.
‘We are getting a high percentage of the available jobs.
We fill 60% of all vacancies, which is quite a good conversion rate,’ he said.
Mr Evans said he had been pleased with Springboard's activities in its first year.
But he added: ‘An awful lot still needs to be done about the image of the industry.
In some cases, we have met with open hostility, particularly from some parents, and we need to do more to dispel this.
‘They have walked away from the catering and hospitality industry stand, dragging their child with them, and said ‘You don't want to join that!’’
But if this good work is to continue, Springboard needs increased financial support from its patrons and sponsors because the Government's contribution so far this year is nil.
‘The London City Action Team contributed £75,000 last year.
This year there will be nothing so we shall have to tighten our belt and concentrate our efforts on giving value for money,’ he said.
He believes much more can be done with more resources and that the industry needs Springboards in other conurbations such as Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow and Bristol, Avon, if people are to attach a lot more importance to it.
Springboard's other activities have included industry representation at careers fairs and conventions, visits to teachers and schools and invitations for schools to visit its offices.
TECHNOLOGY
Power to the people
Efficient plant is only part of the answer to rising energy costs.
Other considerations are price of energy and the way its use is controlled.
Geoff Tyler reports
There are two ways to cut the price of energy.
One is to shop around the electricity companies and the other is to generate it yourself.
Eventually every electricity user will be able to buy from whichever supplier offers the best deal.
In practice this will be one of the 14 regional companies (the old boards).
At present a hotel has to have a peak demand of over one megawatt, a tall order, but in March 1994 — if not earlier — users with a 100kW demand will be given shopping freedom.
The annual bill for 100kW users is somewhere above £20,000, depending on tariffs used.
Later, in April 1998, the demand limits will be removed altogether and everybody will e able to shop around.
A hotel in Manchester will be able to buy its electricity from, say, Eastern Electricity in Clacton, Essex, and negotiate the prices and tariffs in the same way goods are bought from a private vendor.
This is good news for the hotelier who is prepared.
Many do not take full advantage of the various daytime, night and off-peak tariffs on offer from their electricity company.
To get a 5% or 10% saving the hotel will need to know its exact electricity consumption pattern and what the overall result of each tariff profile on offer will be.
A more intriguing possibility is to generate power in the hotel.
Until recently, CHP systems — combined heat and power, also called co-generation — have been only for large hotels and have meant high capital outlays.
Mow small systems are technically feasible and schemes exist which involve the hotelier in no capital cost at all.
The few dozen hotels already operating CHP, I forecast, will soon be joined by hundreds more.
Combined heat and power systems are, basically, oil, gas and sometimes solid fuel engines driving generators for electricity and capturing heat from the cooling system and exhaust gases for the hot water and central heating system.
The unit goes in the basement, plant room or wherever, and the hotel comes off the grid supply of electricity — although it is sensible to retain a connection for emergencies.
EFFICIENCY
At first glance CHP seems inefficient — but it is not.
Conventional electricity generation loses to the atmosphere enough heat for the needs of every home, office and factory in the country.
Estimates put grid-generated power at 25% to 35% efficiency after heat and transmission losses.
A hotel's conventional boiler for heat production alone usually achieves 70% and standby electricity generators, 50%.
According to Harwell Laboratory's energy technology support unit, in CHP systems 80% to 90% of fuel used is converted to electrical power and heat.
The proportion varies between systems but a typical profile is about 50% heat and 30% to 40% electricity.
What do these figures do for the bottom line?
One example in Torquay, Devon, has proven itself over a few years.
Torquay Leisure Hotels manages the adjacent Derwent and Victoria hotels, which have a total of 270 bedrooms and a swimming pool.
Its trial with CHP started in November 1986 with a Countryman WaterMota gas-fuelled CHP system with an electrical output of 48kW in the Derwent.
Success led to a second CHP system in 1989 for the Victoria.
The Derwent's energy cost savings were £3,000 in the first year and now run at more that £4,000 a year.
The Victoria's savings are over £5,000 a year.
Payback on the investment is on target at four-and-a-half years for the Derwent and an even shorter period for the Victoria.
Managing director of Torquay Leisure Hotels, Laurence Murrell, points out that for the system to be financially successful, the units must run for the maximum possible number of hours.
BALANCE
‘The most critical factor in achieving this has been to establish the correct balance between the CHP units and the (supplementing) boiler plants and to maintain that balance,’ he said.
That advice is echoed across the CHP industry.
It is possible to install an over-large CHP unit and sell the excess electricity it generates back to the grid.
In practice the price obtained will be less than the generating cost, so as a business proposition it is a non-starter.
Most specialists advise sizing the CHP unit to cope with regular peak demand, make it work like crazy as Murrell suggests, and use current from the grid when demand outstrips the generator's capacity.
Forte's Penthouse Hotel in Manchester, is another example.
It has a 38kW gas-fuelled unit from Combined Power Systems which is achieving net savings of £2,700 on energy bills with an annual gross electricity cost reduction of 61%.
Forte has gone over to CHP with enthusiasm.
The group has Combined Power Systems in 14 hotels with another 28 on order.
Most involve no capital outlay, being supplied under the discounted electricity purchase scheme.
Combined Power Systems, in conjunction with Norweb, installs the units and maintains them.
The hotelier buys the fuel.
The heat if free of charge and electricity generated is sold to the hotel at a discounted rate  set to show an overall saving against the fuel cost.
Offering similar schemes is Cogen Systems, part of Midlands Electricity.
Its zero outlay option is just that.
Its shared outlay option involves the hotelier paying the installation cost and buying fuel but having he system run and maintained by Cogen, with a consequently much lower electricity charge.
CHP sizes are cost-effective — now down to about 17kW electrical output — and suitable for the average 25-bedroom hotel.
However, in the absence of a restaurant or any other areas of demand for power and heat, such as a swimming pool or sauna, it pays to be cautious.
Checking the electricity bill will show if consumption is greater than, say, 20,000kW/hr a month.
If it is, investigate CHP.
First call could be to the CHP Association, an independent body which will send lists of member companies and general information.
Second call could be to those CHP companies prepared to offer a free initial energy analysis.
A questionnaire which asks about the systems now in use and for figures from electricity bills is all that is involved.
Among those who will do this are Combined Power Systems, SPP Energy and British Gas.
But generating or buying-in low-cost electricity and heat is pointless if the hotel wastes it.
There is obvious merit in good insulation, using only the most efficient kitchen appliances, heating systems and such.
But topping out with computerised control can save energy by matching usage accurately with need.
CONTROL
Building Energy Management (BEM) systems can now operate the CHP generation plant automatically, ramping its output up and down as reflected by the power load called for by the BEM's control of the building.
That control will include switching off heat and lights in unoccupied rooms, regulating heating systems to precise comfort control levels and running air conditioning only when the air sensors show it to be necessary.
This systems then bring all this together graphically on to a computer screen — which can be the hotel's back-office system to avoid duplication.
Honeywell's new Deltanet Graphic Central, for example, displays the status of comfort controls, energy management, fire and security systems fully integrated.
The operators can, of they have a mind to question the systems' automatic decisions, run through the status of the entire building or a single valve.
More importantly, the display highlights any system or area experiencing abnormal conditions, whether plant malfunction or unacceptable ambience levels.
How such systems are set is a matter for the hotelier.
Landis & Gyr's new system in the new Forte Hotel in Exeter, Devon, for example, is usually set for guest and function rooms to be controlled at 20°C between 6am and 10am and from 4pm to midnight.
At other times temperature is reduced to 18°C unless, using local controls, guests set temperature to their own liking.
Water temperature to all areas is regulated in a similar manner, as is kitchen ventilation.
The new Holiday Inn at King's Cross, London, will also have a Landis & Gyr system, controlling energy, fire and security systems and elevators when it opens next year.
One big cost in BEM system, wiring plant and rooms to the computer, can now be avoided by using the mains cabling itself as the data communication network.
Drayton Controls offers such a system which claims to have overcome the line noise problems experienced by earlier mains-data-line techniques.
Not all BEM efficiency relies on sophisticated computer control.
Allen-Martin includes in its range advanced energy management systems using techniques such as sonic sensors to determine when a room is occupied, but the company also has a more down-to-earth suggestion.
This a bedroom key for receptacle which turns on energy systems only when the fob is inserted — and turns them off again when the guest takes the key out to leave the room.
SAVINGS
At the Lakeside International Hotel in Camberley, Surrey, this idea alone was credited with saving £3,500 a year — and the system only cost the hotel £3,900.
Other examples of hotels saving large sums of money with BEMs include the Exeter Arms Hotel near Exeter, which saved £1,700 a year in one of the earliest hotel examples of computerised BEM, a Drayton system, back in 1982.
These days BEM systems cost little or no more than conventional controllers so the Exeter Arms' payback period of two-and-a-half years would be much shorter today.
As a start in calculating one's own energy costs and spotting where the savings could be made, the department of Energy's Energy Efficiency Office has published two free booklets, both entitled Energy Efficiency in Buildings , in editions for hotels and catering establishments.
•For details, contact the Energy Efficiency Office, 1 Palace Street, London SW1E 5HE.
CHP Association, 35–37 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0BS.
Drayton's MCS mains-borne system simplifies and reduces the cost of installation by utilising existing mains wiring
AWARDS
FEMALE TEAM WINS THROUGH TO FINAL
An all-female catering unit from Hainault, Essex, has won the first stage of a nationwide competition being held by Sutcliffe Catering to find the best Indian theme day at one of its units.
The eight women head Sutcliffe's catering unit at P&O Containers at Hainault, and competed against 60 units from its City & Central London/Essex region.
They received a £500 Argos voucher from Caterplan and Booker Fitch Food Services and go forward to a grand final with Sutcliffe's five other regional winners.
Entries were judged on food presentation, staff dress, restaurant decor, innovation and increased covers, as well as the presentation of the entry.
ROYAL HONOUR FOR SLEATH
Shaun Sleath, operations director of Forte Penthouse Hotels in the Midlands, has been awarded the Prince Philip Medal 1991.
The medal, presented by the Duke of Edinburgh at Buckingham Palace, is awarded each year to a holder of a City & Guilds qualification who has gone on to a senior management position in their chosen field.
This is the first time that the award has gone to somebody from the hotel and catering industry, or indeed from the service sector as a whole.
Mr Sleath gained his City & Guilds certificates in catering and cookery at Huddersfield Polytechnic in 1968.
MONDAVI WINE SCHOLARSHIP
Andrew Salter of the Spa Hotel, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, has been awarded the Wine Guild of the UK 1991 Robert Mondavi Scholarship.
The judges were impressed with Mr Salter's initiative and ability in the selection, care and understanding of wine.
Mr Salter wins one week as the personal guest of Robert Mondavi at one of California's wineries.
The scholarship is open to those aged 21–30 with Wine and Spirit Higher Certificate or equivalent and who have been in full-time employment in the catering industry for at least two years or have experience of direct sales in on-licensed premises.
CHEMISTRY OF SUCCESS
More than 1,000 wines and spirits from 30 countries are undergoing detailed chemical analysis in the first stage of the 1991 International Wine and Spirit Competition.
A panel of six judges will choose winners after a series of stringent tests.
Twelve international and nine national trophies are to be awarded in different classes.
A trophy and bursary will be awarded to the Winemaker of the Year at a presentation on 14 October in London.
This year has seen a 30% increase in entries from South Africa, bringing its total to 160.
The USSR and Argentina have each made a submission for the fist time in the competition's history.
DOMINO'S EURO CHAMP
Bernard Hammon, manager of Domino's Pizza at Shepherd's Bush, London, has been voted the company's European Manager of the Year.
Twenty-four-year-old Mr Hammon received the award from Domino's Pizza founder and chairman Thomas Monaghan at the Domino's European Award banquet in Manchester.
The Manager of the year awards are open to Domino's staff who have been managers for more than nine months.
STAKIS MARKS STAFF SERVICE
Stakis Hotels recently presented Stakis Highland Lodges' Peter McIntosh with a £1,000 travel voucher and a gold and diamond pin in recognition of his 25 years' service.
Two staff — Colin McKenzie, also of Stakis Highland Lodges, and Vincent di Nozzi of the Dunblane Hydro — received 20-year service awards of a gold watch plus a gold, emerald and diamond pin.
The Dunblane Hydro's general manager, Mike McCartan, and assistant bar manager Nick Darby, received 10-year awards of crystal decanters and glasses, plus gilt pins.
Stakis president Sir Reo Stakis presented the awards at Glasgow's Grosvenor Hotel.
In all, 24 staff were rewarded.
RITZ CHEF SETS RECORD
Guy Krenzer, senior sous chef at the Ritz, has become the youngest chef to be awarded the title of Meilleur Ouvrier de France (MOF).
Twenty-six-year-old Mr Krenzer receives his medal from President Mitterrand at the Elysée Palace, Paris.
He joins Michel Roux as one of only two MOFs working in the UK.
HEART BEAT DOUBLE
A Hampshire leisure park's caterers have won two healthy eating awards,
The 170-seat Wagoners restaurant and the 60-seat Station Tearooms and Paultons Park, Romsey, Hampshire, have won Heartbeat Awards in the national Look After Your Heart campaign.
The Wagoners self-service restaurant offers hot and cold menus, and the Station Tearoom provides a variety of snacks on its menu.
‘We have always demanded he highest standards from our catering staff,’ said Paulton's catering manager Gary Weldon-Jones.
‘I believe that the new legislation and initiatives such as the Heartbeat Campaign should be welcomed because they can only serve to benefit the industry.’
Through to the final: P&O Containers, Hainault, Essex team in Sutcliffe Catering's Indian day competition (Left to right, rear): Dorothy Waldock, unit manager; Lorraine Webb, second chef; Clara Roberts and Maureen Talbot, catering assistants; Kerrie Thaddeus, head chef;(front) Catherine Hermon and Beryl Taylor, catering assistants.
The eighth member of the unit catering assistant, Stella Panayi, was on holiday at the time of the photograph.
See first story.
Krenzer: youngest MOF
MENUS
Dinners with a difference
written and selected by Francis Bissell
For once Bernard Gaume sat down and enjoyed dinner in the Chelsea Room.
I do not know if it was the first time since his appointment as executive chef at the Carlton Tower in 1968, but I do know it was a rare occurrence to see him even emerge from his kitchen, let alone dine.
On this occasion, however, he was driven out by a handful of his protégés, now all executive chefs elsewhere in London.
They and many of Gaume's friends and colleagues came together one evening in May to celebrate his 40 years in the kitchens of the world with a sumptuous dinner, matched by a fine selection of wines.
David Chambers of Le Meridien was responsible for the foie gras starter, Vaughan Archer of the London Hilton for the broth of scallops, Martin Davies of Brown's Hotel for the wild salmon stuffed with tomato and cream courgettes.
The stuffed saddle of lamb was the work of John King of Les Ambassadeurs, and Martin Docket, chef pâtissier of The Connaught, prepared the apple pastry dessert.
The wines were all from excellent recent vintages, including the fine 1988 white burgundy and an Alsace wine, which perfectly complements foie gras with is light, grapey fragrance on the nose and multiple layers to flavour on the palate.
Clarets of 1981 are much in evidence now, following the introduction of the 10-year rule.
Indeed, many clarets, even the classified growths, are drinking before their 10th birthday while others, of course, will take much longer to come around.
Now is about right for many of the 1981s, which are, however, not great wines, but very engaging and drinkable and at relatively affordable prices, even those with the well-known names.
I was also sent details of a most interesting menu served at a banquet for Prince Charles and the Prince's Youth Business Trust held in Warwick Castle.
A vegetarian Indian banquet was prepared and managed by staff of the Bombay Brasserie, supported by the chef from the parent company, the Taj Group of Hotels in India.
According to Arun Harnal, one of the main challenges was the transport of the large charcoal-fired tandoor to the basement of the castle in order to make fresh naan bread for the dinner.
The descriptions of the dishes are tantalising indeed, starting with spinach fritter in ‘tangy sauces’ and yoghurt soup with white radish and pepper.
Next came a dish cooked to a recipe from the Royal House of Sailana, vegetables simmered in an almond and pistachio sauce, followed by aubergines stuffed with mint and coconut chutney and baked in a banana leaf.
A dish of crisp okra and one of basmati rice cooked in tomato juice and Indian herbs followed.
Fresh Alphonso mangoes and Indian petits fours completed the meal.
I imagine the royal visitor, and indeed most of the other guests, found the even a welcome change from the same old banquet menus!
THE CHELSEA ROOM
Hyatt Carlton Tower, London
OCCASION: Bernard Gaume's 40 years in the kitchens of the world, 15 May COVERS: 90 CHEFS: David Chambers, Vaughan Archer, Martin Davies, John King, Martin Dockett
FOOD AND BEVERAGE MANAGER: David Loewi
WARWICK CASTLE
Warwickshire
WINE: Moët & Chandon Champagne
OCCASION; Prince's Youth Business Trust Banquet, 21 May
COVERS: 95
CHEFS: Udit Sarkhel and Satish Arora
MANAGER: Arun Harnal of the Bombay Brasserie  
Mark Clayton
Mark Clayton's cooking has grown in stature with his job responsibility.
Janet Harmer reports
Mark Clayton's cooking has progressed in the year he has been head chef at Eastwell Manor, near Ashford, Kent.
Now working in a larger kitchen and with more staff than in his previous position as head chef at Turner's restaurant in London, he is able to produce more intricate dishes with a greater number of components to them.
The development of Clayton's first course — a guinea fowl terrine with apple, celery and shallot dressing — is typical of many that now come out of kitchen.
‘It was a team effort, starting life as a coarsely shopped terrine and developing into the layered terrine it now is, showing off the colours and textures of the ingredients,’ he says.
The roast fillet of lamb with herb crust to follow is a classic dish, presented by Clayton with great finesse.
The wild mushroom and leek timbale provides added interest and the sauce, made piquant by a combination of white wine and white wine vinegar, provides the perfect cutting foil to the fatty lamb.
‘It's a well-balanced dish on which we've worked hard on both taste and presentation,’ Clayton says.
He describes the passion fruit mousse as the perfect dessert to finish a fairly rich and substantial meal.
‘Although I love traditional British desserts such as jam sponge, I can never manage to eat them at the end of a three-course meal,’ Clayton says.
‘This mousse gives a superb robust flavour, yet is light and very fresh tasting.’
Wines to accompany Clayton's dishes have been chosen by Eastwell Manor's restaurant manager, Philip Ashworth.
To partner the terrine, Ashworth suggests a refreshing 1987 Cabernet Sauvignon rosé Simi.
‘This won't upstage the strength of the terrine and will also make an ideal apéritif for a summer's day.’
The delicate flavour of the English new season lamb needs something light and fruity, says Ashworth, recommending a red burgundy 1986 Aloxe-Corton.
The 1989 orange muscat flora from Brown Brothers is the choice to partner the dessert.
PASSION FRUIT MOUSSE WITH CREAM FILLED BRANDY SNAP
(Serves 4)
MOUSSE 4 passion fruit (garnish) ½lb passion fruit pulp, using about 25 passion fruit 5oz double cream 4oz castor sugar 5 eggs
BRANDY SNAPS 2oz butter 2oz castor sugar 2oz flour 2oz glucose
CREAM FILLING ¼pt whipped cream dash white wine juice of ¼ lemon icing sugar to taste
Mousse: whisk all ingredients together.
Strain and place in moulds.
Cook in a water bath at 350°F for about 30 minutes.
Allow to cool.
Brandy snaps: mix all ingredients in a bowl.
Place thumbnail-size pieces on a baking tray and cook in a hot oven until golden brown.
Remove from oven, leave for about 1 minute then roll each in the shape of a cigarette.
Serve: turn the passion fruit mousse out on to the centre of the plate.
Fill the brandy snaps with the cream mix.
Scoop the pips out of the passion fruit, reserve for garnish.
Spread some on top of the mousse.
Place half a passion fruit on the plate with some pips falling out.
Arrange two brandy snaps on each plate and serve.
COARSE GUINEA FOWL TERRINE WITH APPLE, CELERY AND SHALLOT DRESSING
(Serves 12–15)
TERRINE 2 guinea fowls 6oz pork fat 8 shallots, chopped 1lb duck livers ⅛pt port ⅛pt madeira ⅛pt veal stock ¼pt olive oil 1½lb bacon rashers freshly chopped herbs (chervil, tarragon, parsley, coriander and chives) salt, pepper brioche
SHALLOT DRESSING 15 shallots, finely chopped 1 dstsp finely diced celery 1 dstsp finely diced apple ¼pt white wine vinegar 4 cherry tomatoes 1 sprig fresh thyme 1 bay leaf 1lb mixed salad leaves (lollo rosso, curly endive and radicchio) olive oil, to taste 1 dstsp hazelnut oil salt, pepper
Terrine: remove the breasts and legs from guinea fowl.
Bone the legs and mince the leg meat, pork fat and 4oz of the duck livers through the coarse plate of the mincer.
Seal the breasts and remaining livers in hot olive oil, season and allow to cool.
Reduce the veal stock and alcohol by one third, allow to cool.
Add the chopped shallots, stock and herbs to the minced forcemeat and season.
Line a terrine with bacon rashers leaving an overlap for the top.
Fill the terrine with layers of forcemeat and guinea fowl breast.
Fold over the bacon to cover the top.
Cook in a water bath in an oven at 280°F for about 45 minutes.
Sauce: place the chopped shallots in a pan and add the vinegar, thyme and bay leaf.
Bring to the boil and allow to cool.
Whisk in olive oil to taste and season with salt.
Serve: slice the terrine, place on centre of plate.
Toss the salad leaves lightly in hazelnut oil and season.
Quarter the cherry tomatoes.
Arrange the salad leaves and cherry tomatoes around the terrine.
Add some celery and apple to the shallot dressing and spoon around the guinea fowl terrine.
Serve with toasted brioche.
CAREER TO DATE
Mark Clayton joined Eastwell Manor as head chef just over a year ago.
He was previously head chef at Turner's restaurant, London.
His first position, after training at Thanet Technical College, Broadstairs, Kent, was at Boodle's, the London club.
This was followed by experience at the Capital Hotel, London, and the Toastmaster Inn, Burham, Kent, as chef de partie, before returning to the Capital Hotel as sous chef.
His next move, also as sous chef, was to Chez Nico to work for Nico Ladenis when he was at Shinfield, Berkshire.
He then took his first head chef position for the opening of Brian Turner's restaurant in 1986.
ENGLISH LAMB FILLET, ROASTED AND TOPPED WITH A HERB CRUST AND SERVED WITH A MUSHROOM AND LEEK TIMBALE IN A PIQUANT SAUCE
(Serves 4)
LAMB 1 pair of long best ends of lamb freshly chopped marjoram, mint, tarragon and parsley white breadcrumbs from ½ loaf of bread 1 tsp Dijon mustard 5 shallots, chopped ⅛pt clarified butter ½lb shiitake mushrooms ½lb yellow pleurote mushroom 1lb leeks duck fat
PIQUANT SAUCE 2pt veal stock ⅛pt white wine vinegar ⅛pt white wine 2 shallots, sliced 4oz butter peppercorns bay leaf fresh thyme
THYME BUTTER fresh thyme 1 shallot ⅛pt white wine ⅛pt chicken stock dash white wine vinegar dash double cream 12oz butter
Sauce: reduce the white wine vinegar, white wine, shallots, peppercorns, bay leaf and thyme.
When almost dry add the veal stock and roasted lamb bones.
Simmer gently until reduced.
Pass through a muslin cloth and finish with the butter.
Lamb: remove fillets of lamb from the best ends.
Chop the bones and refine for the sauce.
Cut the lamb into four portions.
Wash and chop the leeks.
Blanch in boiling water quickly and refresh in cold water, drain.
Slice the mushrooms, reserve four small yellow pleurotes for garnish.
Sauté the mushrooms in duck fat and drain.
Mix the mushrooms and leeks and season.
Press the mix into a buttered timbale mould.
Wash and chop the fresh herbs.
Drain the excess water in a cloth but do not re-wash.
Prepare the breadcrumbs in a food processor, add the herbs, seasoning and chopped shallots (which have been cooked in a little white wine until dry).
Mix, adding some clarified butter to form a firm paste.
Thyme butter: reduce all the ingredients, except cream and butter.
When reduced, add cream, bring to boil.
Whisk in butter to taste.
Do not reboil.
Pass and keep warm.
Method: roast the lamb, keep pink.
Brush lamb lightly with Dijon mustard.
Apply the breadcrumbs, mix evenly and gratinate under a salamander until golden brown.
Warm the leek timbales in a steamer (or microwave if in a plastic mould).
Finish the sauce to correct consistency.
Sauté the four yellow pleurotes in duck fat, keep warm.
Serve: arrange the timbale in the centre of the plate.
Slice each portion of lamb into three pieces.
Top the timbale with a pleurote.
Spoon the piquant sauce around the lamb and spoon a little thyme butter over the timbale.
Serve immediately.
HOTELS
MARKETING MAGIC
A carefully targeted marketing plan ensured Balbirnie House an occupancy rate of over 50% during it first 18 months of business.
Lorna Pettipher reports
Balbirnie House, near Glenrothes in Fife, set itself a double challenge when it opened in November 1989: not only did it launch into a depressed economy, but during a traditionally poor month for Scottish hotels.
Yet the team of four businessmen which owns and operated Balbirnie House has achieved an average occupancy rate of 50%–60% ever since opening.
Resident at Balbirnie House from day one has been managing director Eric Brown, who initiated the project.
Since 1977 Brown had been looking to buy a business in Scotland, where his family, roots and contacts are.
He describes himself as a ‘career manager’ and has extensive experience of hotels.
Between 1973 and 1981 he was general manager at the Golf View Hotel in Nairn, during which time its turnover increased by 800%.
In the wake of this success, Brown planned to buy a going concern and turn round a business that was trading badly.
He spent almost 10 years looking for a Scottish hotel near a large population centre, but found nowhere suitable.
He also considered buying a castle in the Borders and converting it, but all the available properties were too distant from any population centres or local infrastructure of any significance.
Prices were too high in the Aberdeen area and, once again, people too thin on the ground on the West Coast.
As possible locations for a hotel became increasingly focused, Brown realised that he needed partners.
A banker introduced him to Balbirnie's future financial director Michael Thomson, a chartered accountant and managing director of Peter Thomson Wine Agencies in Perth.
They worked together for six months in project planning and Brown took a teaching job at the Strathclyde Business School which also allowed him to keep looking for hotel sites.
He was there for 18 months.
Alan Russell was the next partner to join the Balbirnie team.
He had sold Chapeltoun House in Ayrshire, which he had built up over 10 years, and was looking to invest in another business.
Brown had worked with Russell earlier in his career and both felt that their respective skills complemented one another.
‘My commercial strengths are marketing, identifying opportunities and building up businesses,’ explained Brown.
‘Alan Russell is a brilliant chef-proprietor.
We add to each other 's abilities.’
The final member to join the Balbirnie partnership was Nash Broaddus.
Broaddus — owner of Prodesco, a textile company in Pennsylvania, and an American with extensive business interests outside catering — was a friend and former hotel client of Brown, and had always wanted to be involved in the hospitality industry.
His partnership strengthened the Balbirnie team in shareholding terms, broadening its equity base.
Balbirnie House was purchased from the Glenrothes Development Corporation (GDC).
The 200-year-old mansion was once the home of the Balfours of Balbirnie and them the headquarters of the GDC.
The freehold was purchased at a reasonable price in a complicated deal that allowed for a sensitive refurbishment of the grade 1-listed building and a limit of 30 hotel bedrooms.
Two million pounds was spent on the ensuing refurbishment, which took approximately 10 months.
‘We didn't know until September 1989 whether we would be open or not before Christmas,’ recalls Brown.
‘But November 1989 it was, so we had to hold back and then ‘go for it’ very late in the day to launch the hotel.
We have had to spend a disproportionate amount of money on marketing and selling.’
The disproportionate amount in question has been nearer 10% of the annual budget, in comparison to the 5% that Brown would normally expect to spend in marketing a new hotel.
There were about 25 cocktail parties to launch Balbirnie, and employees from other hotels in the region were among the guests.
‘We did everything that we could  think of to get the name Balbirnie flying up there,’ Brown says.
‘Advertising in the local and national Scottish press raised awareness of our existence.
Inviting other hotels' employees to see Balbirnie made our name and product familiar to them.
We could then be recommended to people by them when their hotels were full.
We offered prizes in competitions and made donations to charities.’
Brown describes his product as a country mansion in a 400-acre park.
He identifies potential markets and then targets them individually, although sometimes interests clash.
‘Even at a local event, marketing can be complicated.
If you go for the business community in Glenrothes you risk losing the rest of the local market, who may perceive the hotel as too upmarket for them.
Our bar lunches, for example, are as reasonable as any hotel's in the area.
Yet customers walk through an entrance with 24ft stone pillars to reach our bar and they expect prices to be high in such an environment.’
Bar meals act as an important shop window for the hotel — a means of attracting potential customers to the restaurant or to stay — and staff at Balbirnie always give personal tours to anyone wishing to view the hotel.
So, despite high overheads, bar meal prices at Balbirnie are deliberately kept at a competitive level.
Room rates are pitched at £69 for a single and up to £140 for a de luxe double.
Dinner in the main restaurant is £22 a head without wine.
A programme of national and international guest-chef visits to Balbirnie, to cook with head chef George Mackay, has also helped to raise its profile.
Brown's working day starts at 6.30am and doesn't really end.
He expects to stay at the hotel for some years to come to oversee operations.
‘I have never had to run so fast in a job in my life, and the incredible speed of things at the moment is all thanks to the recession,’ he says.
‘My job now is to focus on areas that yield business and pare down initiatives that have not been fruitful.
Incentive markets, conference markets, Scottish Tourist Board and British Tourist Authority contacts are all working well for us.
The trick is to keep bringing in people to view Balbirnie — business clubs, individuals — anyone.’
Balbirnie House
Eric Brown, the initiator and managing director of Balbirnie House
PRISON CATERING
JAIL BREAK
Inmates work successfully alongside prison officers to produce 2,400 meals a day at Pentonville prison.
Natalie Valios reports
The kitchen looks like any other to be found in an establishment catering for large numbers.
But there is one big difference — excluding supervisors, it is manned by people who don't want to be there.
For these are the kitchens at HM Prison Pentonville in North London.
Built in 1872, the Victorian prison has had its fair share of history.
It was originally used for prisoners waiting to be deported to Australia, and it also housed the infamous Crippen and Christie who were both hanged and buried there.
Pentonville is still an all-male prison where inmates continue to slop out, although a new sanitary system with toilets is being installed.
The prison caters for short-term stays, with one-third of prisoners being unconvicted and awaiting trial.
About 28 inmates and nine officers, including woman officer Alison Ashton, work shifts to produce 2,400 meals a day for the 800 inmates.
Everything, including peeling vegetables, baking bread and butchering meat, is done on-site.
The kitchen at Pentonville was built in 1977, but a new one is planned for installation in a couple of years.
Surrounded by potential weapons, an inmate has to be given the all-clear by the prison's hard labour board to ensure potentially dangerous prisoners do not work in the kitchen.
As an extra precaution, the kitchen has a ‘shadow cabinet’ containing all the knives and butchering implements.
The locked cabinet was so named because there is a painted black shadow behind each knife to enable officers to keep a tally of those in use.
Two seemingly harmless items which inmates are forbidden to touch are essences and yeast.
These items are kept locked away as essences can make a lethal cocktail and yeast can be used to make hooch, an illicit drink.
Catering responsibilities for the prison lie with Mike Lamb, a prison governor whose title is G5 Caterer.
After training as a chef, he completed three years' National Service in the Army, and worked as a sales representative and marketing manager.
He later bought a restaurant in Scotland, before taking out a lease on a hotel in Scarborough, North Yorkshire.
Lamb, 53, joined Pentonville 11 years ago.
After spending six months as a landing officer, he moved to the kitchens.
‘Instead of looking after paying guests, I'm now looking after unpaying ones!’ he says.
For Lamb, catering is a very satisfying part of being a prison officer, but he does have dissatisfactions: ‘I don't think the rations are enough and there isn't enough variety.
What we produce is monotonous.’
The kitchen staff have to cater for all diets from vegan to diabetic, and from Muslim to Jewish.
Religious festivals are always observed.
In the bakery, which operates from 6am to 3pm, 400 loaves are baked daily, along with rolls, cakes, pizzas and quiches.
It is cheaper to bake on the premises than buy-in food.
When the ovens broke down it cost more than £1,200 a week to buy in the necessary items.
A weekly allowance of £13.14 is provided for each prisoner, plus an additional weekly supplement of 29p for meat-eating prisoners and 39p per week for vegetarians and vegans.
‘With this I can buy anything I like as long as it's food from suppliers approved by the Home Office,’ Lamb says.
Inmates are allowed two pieces of fresh fruit a week bought from another allowance of 20p.
Vegetables, milk and bacon come from a 400-acre prison farm, Hollesly Bay Colony in East Anglia.
There are eight prison farms in the UK run by the Home Office Farm and Gardens Department.
Lamb stresses the importance of keeping to a strict timetable for meals.
‘We are not providing food in a normal environment,’ he says.
‘It wouldn't matter if you were at home and lunch was half an hour late.
Here the routine timing of food, letters and visits is of prime importance.’
Breakfast is at 8am, lunch 11.15 am and tea (main meal) at 4.15pm.
The last meal is scheduled early because of the shift rota operated by officers.
All food is cleared away by 5pm.
The prison is locked up, the inmates are counted and the main staff go off duty.
A supper is served later in the evening.
A typical daily menu would be: breakfast — tea, porridge, bread with margarine and jam or marmalade, boiled egg; lunch — tea, soup and roll, beef curry or savoury mince, rice, peas and cabbage; tea — bread and margarine, chicken cutlet or meat and potato pie, mashed potatoes, marrow fat peas, tomato gravy, bread pudding and custard, tea; supper — trifle, tea.
A vegetarian and vegan option is always offered.
‘We operate a menu to get the best out of the rations,’ Lamb says.
‘We have to balance it so they last seven days.
It wouldn't do to run out of flour on day five.
Bread and pastries  in particular play an important role in the prison diet because of the roughage and carbohydrate content.
Food prepared in the kitchen is eaten only by the inmates.
The officer's mess is a simple operation outside the prison gates where an appointed officer prepares meals for his colleagues.
Only two outsiders are permitted to eat from the kitchen — the governor, who has to sample one meal every day to be able to answer any complaints the following day, and the doctor, who tastes the food two or three times a week to ensure that it is balanced and nutritious.
A 50g sample of each food item must be kept for 72 hours in case there is an outbreak of food poisoning.
There hasn't been one yet.
Prisons are exempt from having regular visits from environmental health officers, but in April 1992 this Crown Immunity will be lifted.
Senior officer Ken Sweeney said that the prison was already operating within the provisions of the new Food Safety Act: ‘Although we don't have to, we already invite in EHOs because we have nothing to hide and are open to advice.’
Sweeney has worked at Pentonville for almost nine years and is in charge of the general kitchen floor.
He works under Lamb.
‘Inmates want to work in the kitchen because it means they can be out of their cells for most of the day and can have a bit of extra food,’ he says.
‘But they tend to be heavy handed with the equipment, which generally lasts only half its normal life here.’
Sweeney points to the stressful nature of the job: ‘Prison officers used to join from the Forces,’ he says.
‘I was a ship's cook in the Merchant Navy and used to handling men.
But now prison officers are taken from all walks of life.’
In case of trouble when handling prisoners, alarms are positioned at strategic points around the prison.
Within one minute of being triggered, the alarm summons about 50 staff to the problem spot.
Its function is to stop injury to staff and prisoners alike.
As Lamb says: ‘It's a lifeline.’
•A version of this article first appeared in Caterer & Hotelkeeper 's sister publication Baking Update .
TRICON II
LIGHT at the end of the TUNNEL
The Cassons are now coming round to Tricon's point of view, but still need a bit of convincing.
Janet Harmer reports on the action they still need to take to meet their projected targets
THE STORY SO FAR
Philip and Lesley Casson bought the Valley Hotel in Ironbridge, Shropshire, for £415,000.
In the past three years they have spent £1m transforming the former run-down pub on the banks of the River Severn into an attractive 34-bedroom hotel with restaurant and conference facilities.
However, the combined effects of the recession and greater competition caused by the opening of new hotels in nearby Telford, together with a narrow marketing plan, have resulted in bedroom occupancy falling short of the Cassons' achieved target of 50%.
Tricon Foodservice Consultants has been brought in to give advice, but the Cassons have had some difficulty in accepting the drastic measures needed to ensure survival.
After lengthy consideration Philip and Lesley Casson now believe they can achieve the sales and labour cost targets contained in Tricon's projections, outlined last week.
But, unfortunately, they are having great difficulty in accepting the need to cut overhead costs, which are still far in excess of the target of 18% of turnover and are preventing the Valley Hotel from making a projected net profit by the end of the year.
The greatest area of concern involving overhead costs are: leasing and rental charges; heat, light and power; advertising; and sundry costs.
Leasing costs are high because some equipment purchased as part of the redevelopment was funded on leasing agreements.
In order to achieve a profit in the projected turnover, these costs must be halved.
The Cassons need to review each item on lease and consider whether to return it and cancel the lease, re-finance the lease on a longer term or seek a moratorium on payments.
One item on lease is a new in-house laundry which was acquired when high bedroom occupancy was anticipate and its was though that the hire cost of linen would be more expensive.
As well as reviewing the leasing of equipment, they must also consider the power and labour associated with the laundry.
The high cost of heat, light and power means that the Cassons need to seek advice form the utility companies over tariffs, rates and off-peak usage.
In the meantime, specific cost-cutting exercises need to be considered to bring the cost for the next six months down to about £9,000.
The Cassons' current advertising costs are high, so maybe now is the time to concentrate on direct selling.
A new budget of £1,500 for the next six months should be enough for local advertising.
Since last week's article, May's operating results for the Valley Hotel have been produced, showing a welcome increase in sales which indicate that the medium level sales shown in Tricon's profit and loss projection are achievable.
MARKETING PLAN
The Valley Hotel is competing directly with three- and four-star hotels — all of which have greater marketing resources — in the Telford area.
These hotels are offering competitive corporate business rates, as well as superior accommodation and leisure facilities which the Valley Hotel does not have.
But the hotel does have the advantage of being able to offer a scenic and historic location and the more personalised level of service that a small independent hotel can offer.
Tricon strongly advises the Cassons to realign the hotel's position in the marketplace to take advantage of currently untapped business.
The need to cut operating costs will restrict the time, energy and financial resources available to promote the hotel.
BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES
Overnight tourist visitors
The Valley Hotel is ideally situated to appeal to the overnight tourist, mid-week and weekend break markets.
But in the past the Cassons have not benefited from this market due to a reluctance  to offer competitive rates, service and special promotions.
The Valley is the only three-star hotel in the Ironbridge Gorge.
Also, there are 37 rooms in other hotels and inns, over 100 rooms in guest houses and B&Bs and accommodation for 80 people in self-catering — all representing a sizeable market for evening restaurant and bar business.
The Cassons can develop this market by:•Cultivating links with the Ironbridge Gorge Trust accommodation office and offering discounted rates and packages for chance bookings.
•Offering midweek packages at competitive rates •Creating an autumn-winter weekend break package and Christmas programme, and promoting them by sending a mailshot to all past guests.
•Exploring the benefits of joining a hotel consortium.
•Distributing sample menus and information to local B&Bs not offering evening meals; inviting owners for a free meal and making a special offer for guests.
•Offering retail sales within the hotel, eg local guides, souvenirs, chocolates.
Day tourist visitors
The Valley Hotel has three prime attractions to day tourist visitors — a large car park, excellent facilities for children and a large garden area leading directly to parkland and the River Severn.
Facilities for morning coffee and afternoon teas are very limited in the Gorge and opportunities exist for the Valley Hotel to service individual tourists  and coach tours.
This can be achieved by:•Leaflet drops and advertising at local tourist sites.
•Changing hotel signage to offer a more welcome image to non-residents.
•Encouraging use of the restaurant and bars for families through children's menus, Sunday lunch menus, barbecues and special events.
•Targeting coach companies and tour operators covering the Gorge.
•providing coffee and afternoon tea facilities — perhaps in the grounds and in the mews conservatory area.
Local social use
The completion of the new function suite offers the Cassons tremendous scope to promote the hotel as a social venue for local residents, associations and businesses.
It is an ideal location for wedding receptions, having large attractive grounds.
They could achieve this by:•Developing a Christmas programme.
•Developing a children's menu, Sunday family lunches and barbecues.
•Drawing up a programme of special events in the bar and restaurants and encouraging local newspaper coverage.
•Leaflet drops through newspaper deliveries, free newspapers, door-to-door, and at major local events.
•Using events held in the hotel, such as craft fairs, to promote other hotel facilities.
•Developing links with local societies and associations, such as the Lions, Rotary, Chamber of Commerce and Women's Institute.
Corporate business
A comprehensive programme of action to increase corporate business could include:•Inviting conference organisers and representatives from local companies to the hotel for open days and lunches.
•Forming a secretaries' club to offer discounts on meals, special interest events, wine-tastings, cookery demonstrations, sports days, hen nights etc. •Developing a Christmas programme aimed at office parties.
•Special offers for midweek residents such as wine of the month and bar promotions.
•Discount rates for back-to-back bookings to encourage use by contract engineers currently using the Travelodge and guest houses.
•Offering free accommodation for spouses.
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
Despite the hotel's attractive riverside location, there are both internal and external elements which need further attention to maximise the hotel's potential.
First, the hotel entrance, located on a main road, is fairly anonymous to passers-by.
Ideally, the hotel name should feature prominently on a large sign, either over the gateway opening or mounted above the wall each side of the entrance and angled to face incoming traffic.
At the same time as new signs are being made, the hotel name could be changed.
‘Valley’ alone is a rather anonymous name and does not capitalise on the hotel's location.
Tricon suggested that the ‘Ironbridge Valley Hotel’ is an improvement and probably more easily remembered.
Although the hotel's car park is a good size and is easily accessible, the large expanse of tarmac in front of the hotel tends to project an institutional image which could be softened by planting some trees and shrubs in large tubs.
The Cassons could capitalise on the hotel's pleasant gardens by introducing outdoor furniture and parasols.
This would help attract passing visitors to stop for a drink or meal and would visually soften the rather bleak appearance of the exterior brickwork.
Access to the bars and restaurant is currently achieved only through the hotel reception.
An external door to the main bar does exist and should be clearly indicated with external signs and menu boards.
The most attractive feature of the hotel interior is the layout and design of the new bedroom extension as a series of mews cottages reached by a conservatory courtyard.
This has the potential to be developed as a revenue-producing area.
With the addition of café-style furniture, planning and decorative lighting, it could be a pleasant café operation serving teas, coffees and snacks, as well as acting as a focus of activity.
There are two serveries in the bar, with seating accommodation divided by a double doorway.
One of the bar serveries could be removed, releasing extra space and removing the need for double manning.
The resulting room could be used for private parties and conference meals.
Tricon believes the restaurant suffers from its name, Chez Maw.
Tricon managing director Tony Horton says; ‘It sounds inelegant, its meaning is esoteric and I suspect it acts as a deterrent to potential external customers.’
The restaurant offers an extensive à la carte menu, with average spend for a three-course meal with coffee at £20 a head.
There is also a three-course menu of the day for under £13, but almost total emphasis is put on the promotion of the à la carte menu.
‘Careful consideration should be given to re-marketing the restaurant by introducing a style of menu that is more appropriate in style, content and price for the identified target markets,’ Horton says.
These basic proposals for the development of the hotel need not cost a great deal: Outside signage £2,000 medium term External planting £500 long term External furniture £1,500 short term Reception lighting £300 short term afé facility £2,500 long term Restaurant development £1,000 medium term
Tricon defines short term as being implemented this summer, medium term as within six months and long term as within one year.
•Next week in the final part of this series, Tricon assesses the long-term future for the Valley Hotel.
Philip and Lesley Casson were strongly advised to realign the hotel's position in the marketplace
LIQUID ASSETS
Simply English
Brian Jordan looks at a selection of English wines, and some of the opportunities they provide
More English wines are beginning to appear on wine lists as growers become increasingly professional about their production and marketing.
While the quality of English wines can now compare with estate-grown and bottled wines from Germany or Alsace — in that they are fairly uniform — they bear the crisply full-flowered taste we often look for in a good table wine or aperitif.
Well over 50% of restaurants in the UK now include English wines on their lists.
Many report that customers are beginning to show growing interest as awareness of traditional English food increases.
But they admit the interest is still largely experimental and that demand comes mainly from foreign tourists willing to try English fare.
The UK wine industry's new-found potential is largely a result of the planting of grape varieties more suited to our climate.
There are now more than 500 English vineyards, with the northernmost near Leeds where the temperature reached 94°F last August.
A vineyard was recently planted at Spennymore, County Durham.
The largest 25 producers account for more than 50% of the area planted and it is their names which are most often seen on merchant's lists.
Originally, most English vineyards contained the dull Müller-Thurgau grape, produced years ago by cropping the classic but late-ripening Riesling with the workhorse Sylvaner to produce a grape that appealed to few drinkers.
Although much has been learned in England about producing better wine from the Müller-Thurgau, it is in Germany where profits have financed research into better grapes for northern climates.
There, with names like Reichensteiner, Huxelrube, Faber and Bacchus, we find grapes better suited to our growing conditions.
Efforts with red grapes can, however, be described only as experimental, with the wines produced tending towards a deep rosé rather than a true red colour.
Don't be surprised by label names like Rosa Muscat, Auxerrois, Kerner/Kerning, Huxelvaner and others.
SPARKLING
Sparkling wine is still at the fledgling stage, but developments are taking place.
Those merchants offering Brut sparkling wine produced by the Méthode Champenoise include Carr Taylor (0424 752501) in Sussex, Lamberhurst (0892 890286) in Kent and Moorlynch (0458 210393) in Somerset.
Tenterden on the Kent/Sussex border (058 06 3033) is just releasing its first pink bubbly using mainly Pinot Noir grapes.
If organic is what you seek — and this is fast becoming big business — then try Dr Hugh Tripp's fully organic Seyval wine from Avalon in Somerset (0749 86393).
Another is Bewl Valley wines, produced by the Chapman family at the Bewl Valley Vineyard (0580 241741) near Tunbridge Wells, East Sussex, from Bacchus and Faber varieties.
Bewl Valley is beginning to reap the benefits after its first crop in 1987.
Bottles from this region sell wholesale at about £72 a case.
Most English wines have a fine fruit structure and a racily crisp freshness, so they are well matched to lightly flavoured fish — especially fish such as trout — and to light poultry dishes.
Chicken risotto and typically English dishes like rabbit pie, ham and chicken pie, and roast pork or veal accept the fruity dry palate of Müller-Thurgau or Seyval.
These wines also make a good accompaniment for vegetarian dishes, especially leek-based dishes.
If you serve English wines, remember not to over-chill them.
A cellar temperature of 10°C (50°F) is ideal.
Expect to pay about £50 to £60 a case for English wines, which will never be cheap because crop levels are seldom high and most vineyards are small.
Those wine merchants that do sell cases below the £50 barrier are Berkmann (071–609 4711) for Chiltern Valley; Deinhard Adgestone (071–261 1111); Eldridge Pope selling Wraxhall (0305 251251); Quellyn Robert, selling Lamberhurst (0244 310455) and Grants of St James with Saxon Valley, Tenterden and Staple St James.
Remember that more English wine is sold direct from vineyards than is offered through wine merchants, and in this way you can often negotiate a better price.
Lamberhurst, Kent — one of the vineyards which offers sparkling wine produced by Méthode Champenoise
FRYERS
Fried and tested
Manufacturers have been oiling the wheels of technology to make fryers slicker with the help of computerisation.
Many recent developments have resulted from the demands of large users wanting more from their fryers.
David Mascord reports
The humble fryer has come a long way since the days when it was little more than a heating element and a thermostat.
Although advances such as secondary high-limit thermostats, which cut off the power if the fryer overheats, are now fitted as standard on almost all machines, there have been plenty of other developments.
These include an increasing trend towards automation and computerisation and a greater awareness of methods for making effective, economic use of oil.
Large chains, such as McDonald's and Beefeater, spend thousands of pounds on research into frying technology and on the best ways of cooking their staple menu item, French fries.
To these large organisations frying is virtually a science.
Often co-operating with reputable frying equipment manufacturers and suppliers, they test everything from the critical point at which a food product fries best, to the recovery times for oil temperatures.
Consequently, many of the recent developments in deep-fat fryers have resulted from the demands of these large customers and from the manufacturers' experiences in supplying machinery designed to survive the hectic pace of the fast food industry.
In the long term, hotel and restaurant caterers at all levels will benefit from this co-operation because any innovations will eventually be offered as an option or even a standard fitting on the models if frying equipment they purchase.
But it is worth investing in brand new, state-of-the-art equipment for what is argued by some to be an unhealthy form of cooking?
And isn't there a danger that the demand for food cooked in deep-fat fryers will dwindle as a result of increasing publicity about healthy eating?
David Miles is national sales manager for Frankie Catering Equipment, supplier of electric Fri Fri machines, whose prices range from £220 for a ‘D’ series counter-top model to about £6,500 for the latest computerised suite.
Miles does not think that this is the case and believes frying is healthy, profitable and popular.
‘Alongside the coffee machine, a fryer is the most profitable piece of machinery in a restaurant — providing you use the right equipment for your purposes.
As far as Fri Fri is concerned, running costs are equal to half a penny for every pound of fried product,’ he says.
Like many others in the industry, Miles points to the number of fast food outlets opening every day as an indication of the continuing popularity of deep-fried foods and adds that unhealthy frying is caused principally by poor frying practices.
‘Frying is basically healthy because, if the temperature of the oil is correct, you seal the food instantly.
It becomes unhealthy if you overload the amount of product; use the wrong fryer for the job; or if you don't allow for the recovery period of the oil temperature.’
‘If you put a frozen product into oil heated to 180°C the temperature will immediately drop to maybe 145°C, so it is important to allow for the  recovery rate to let the oil return to 180°C to brown the chip.
‘Allowing for the recovery period is also important as far as the next cooking cycle is concerned.
Otherwise, if the oil is not at the right temperature, you end up boiling the food rather than deep-frying it.’
Miles recently visited the Electricity Association's testing laboratories to observe experiments on frying temperatures.
The tests showed that if a product which should be cooked at 180°C is deep-fried at the correct temperature to seal it and is cooked as recommended, it will absorb only 6% of its weight in oil.
However, when a product is fried at 10°C below the recommended temperature it absorbs 32% of its weight in oil.
‘Quite simply,’ Miles concludes, ‘frying itself is not a bad process to use but the deep-fat fryer has to be used correctly.’
The need to educate people, both to use deep-fat fryers properly and to clean and filter oil regularly, is a factor also referred to by sales and marketing director for Garland Catering Equipment, Keith Davies.
Garland supplies a range of gas and electric models, including what it claims to be the world's largest selling fryer, the Master Jet MJ35.
‘The biggest mistake caterers make is to put too many chips in a basket at a time.
The trick is to do it little and often — notice what they do in the fast food chains,’ Davies says.
‘Also caterers don't clean and filter often enough.
People will spend more on cooking oil during the lifetime of the machine that they did on the initial capital cost of the machine.
They will spend more than £40 a week on oil — that's £2,000 a year — but you could spend £3,000 on a modern filter system and that will be paid back in 18 months.’
Garland recently introduced its Footprint filter system, designed to fit under the Master Jet range of fryers.
It is an entirely ‘hands off’ method of filtration capable of filtering up to six fryers without moving from fryer to fryer.
An increasing number of suppliers of deep-fat fryers and accessories are trying to make the potentially messy process of filtration easier for caterers and many of their latest products reflect this awareness.
Just three examples are: a mobile filtration unit (price £1,341) from G.F.E. Bartlett, which heats filtered oil to prevent it becoming viscous; the mobile Fastfilter from Fast International, featuring a roller pump to ensure any solidified fat is pumped out and so, the company says, eliminating the need for heater coils; and Stott Benham's Fry-Saver, which costs £1,600 until 1 August, and is claimed to increase efficiency by providing 15 times more filtering area than standard filter paper.
Fish and chip shop chain Harry Ramsden's has recently installed £100,000-worth of Florigo frying equipment in its Guiseley, West Yorkshire, Blackpool and Glasgow outlets as part of a massive kitchen refurbishment programme.
The Guiseley installation is custom-built and consists of one eight-pan and one nine-pan range.
It has to cope with anything from 100 to 400 customers at a time.
‘The main advantage of the new fryers is the technology.
They are gas with electronic ignition and thermostatic control.
The controls are set to cook chips at 185°C and the temperature is displayed on the front of the suite which means the fryer doesn't have to keep his eye on each pan,’ says general manager Andrew Harding.
The Florigo fryers have a combination of round and square pans.
The square pans are for fish and the round ‘rapid recovery pans’ are for chips.
The shapes prevent them from bunching together.
‘With the previous pans we used you had 22lbs of chips ready at one time and about half way through you tended to lose the quality because some of the chips would get sweaty.
The new pans mean we have fewer chips ready more often.’
The other main benefit Harding sees is the internal filtration system in the Florigo fryer: ‘You can filter from one pan to another, drain the pan into a filtration tank and you can pump that into any other frying basin.
You can also filter four or five times a day.’
His recommendation to other caterers is to consider a unit with an internal filter  system simply because it means oil can be re-used, maybe three times a day.
Also, in his view, it saves on fuel and oil costs.
Some of the latest equipment is designed to use automation to cope with the combined problems of filtration and misuse of equipment by staff.
Garland developed the first on-site programmable deep-fat fryers as a result, Davies says, of difficulties caused by rapid staff turnover and the use of unskilled labour.
‘Caterers need to offer a consistent food product to their customers.
Consistency comes from either using the same staff all the time — which is unusual — or from automation.
‘Also you now have the phenomenon of the demographic time bomb.
In the next few years there will be fewer young people and these tend to make up the majority of staff in many outlets, so caterers — and particularly the large chains — will come to rely more on automation in the near future.’
One main advantage of computer control is that it can differentiate between real time and elastic time.
This means that if, for example, the cooking cycle is programmed for two-and-a-half minutes at a required temperature the machine will adjust to compensate for the fall in temperature which occurs when a frozen or chilled food will have been cooked for two-and-a-half minutes at the correct temperature.
Other automated items such as baskets and shake alarms (signalling the moment during cooking when it is necessary to shake the basket so as to ensure even cooking throughout) are already available as an option on many machines, while some units will even tell you when to change the oil!
US-made Broaster pressure fryers from Fast Food Systems offer the latter function.
Again these machines are computer monitored (a feature which is common on units from the USA and now more in evidence on European-made machines) with the computer simply emitting a beep and flashing up a ‘filter now’ sign when filtration should take place.
Pressure fryers are machines with a tight-sealing lid (rather like an oversized pressure cooker) designed to allow faster cooking at lower temperatures.
The cover over the top allows the moisture which comes off the food to stay beneath the oil and seal it.
Similar units are also available from Servequip and Barbeque King and are usually offered in both gas and electric versions.
Pressure fryers are used principally for dishes such as chicken, fish and mushrooms — but not chips — where the requirement is to keep the food moist.
Price may prohibit caterers who don't aim to specialise in this sort of food product.
The cheapest electric Broaster costs about £3,750, with prices rising to £6,150.
All have in-built filters.
Fast Food Systems supplies pressure fryers to Southern Fried Chicken outlets.
Bryan Soppitt, sales director for Fast Food Systems, which also supplies standard Dean fryers, agrees with his colleagues in the frying industry that the trend is toward de-skilling the frying operation so as to rely less on staff in order to achieve quality and consistency in the end product.
Soppitt foresees an increasing move to hands off filtration and stresses that oil must be treated gently.
‘Looking after your oil is paramount — the oil companies are always trying to educate their customers.
People who mix old and new oil or just keep topping it up are sacrificing the good oil for the bad.
‘Also certain operators are seduced by the price of cheap oil.
In pressure fryers especially, you need a quality oil because cheap oil will break down quickly under pressure.
‘Even though we try to tell this to our customers, some of them will pay £3,300 for a Broaster and then buy cheap oil.
If they want a good quality product, and they want a good life for their oil, they will have to buy good oil.
‘We recommend vegetable or groundnut oil — this also means that the food product is healthier because the frying medium is better.’
Most companies are willing to give customers the best service they can, and virtually all suppliers interviewed stressed their eagerness to talk to caterers about their individual needs to as to match the right product to the right task.
It is well worthwhile getting plenty of advice and shopping around.
BUYING TIPS
•Choose the right fryer for your application; don't buy solely on price.
•Consider your power and volume needs.
For electric machines one supplier offers this rough guide: look at the ratio of kilowatts (kW) power to litres of oil — you need roughly 1.5kW per litre of heated oil (heated oil is above the element).
In the case of gas models.
experts now believe you must think in terms of how much you need to produce.
Zanussi's 701 range and G. F. E. Bartlett machines, for example, are judged by the size of the batch cooked in each cycle.
•Is the fryer available in free-standing form or is it available as a modular unit to build into a suite?
•Does the fryer have a fast and efficient recovery time?
•How easy is it to clean?
Under the new hygiene regulations fryers are likely to come under close scrutiny because traditionally the job of cleaning them is one of the worst in the kitchen.
Does the fryer break down into easily manageable parts?
If electric, do the elements lift up to allow for thorough cleaning?
Does it have castors for all-round access?
•What safety features are available?
Is there a good quality second thermostat?
If it is a gas fryer, does it have a flame failure device?
•Does the machine have an effective cool zone into which loose particles of food can fall so as not to expose the oil to carbonisation, which will reduce the life of the oil?
•How much automation do you need on your fryer?
•Does it have an insulated pan for extra economy?
Fri Fri computer-monitored frying station from Franke Catering Equipment
The Florigo fryers at Harry Ramsden's Guiseley fish and chip emporium
Electroway 600 fryer from Moorwood Vulcan
WHAT'S NEW
Linpac sets store by green policy
Food packaging manufacturer Linpac has marked its announcement of a corporate environmental policy with the introduction of a 50% recycled polystyrene food container.
The policy, under the banner ‘Taking care of the world we share’, commits the company to carrying out regular environmental audits, training employees to improve environmental performance and using suppliers with a similar attitude towards the environment.
It also outlines the company's intention to participate in committees which influence legislative developments affecting packaging in the environment.
‘Polystyrene can, in theory, be recycled indefinitely,’ said Linpac director Terry O'Connell.
‘The problem with recycling is that we cannot determine the colour of waste material in advance.
The end product can come out in a variety of shades.
‘This is why food packaging products can only be 50% recycled.
The box has to be coated in a thin covering of virgin material to ensure that there is a consistent colour for labelling.
It is also important that the food comes into contact only with clean packaging.’
The process used to coat the recycled material was developed in the USA.
China showcase
Royal Doulton and Wedgwood are to produce the tableware for the restaurant and banqueting facilities at the new Queens Moat House (QMH) hotel in Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire.
The hotel incorporates the former home of Josiah Wedgwood and QMH wants the hotel to be a showcase for the work of the potteries.
Twelve other Stoke potters will also be supplying china to the hotel, which opens in September.
Council's code spells out Act
by Christina Simons
Westminster City Council has taken the initiative and published its own code of practice for caterers on the implications of the Food Safety Act 1990.
The code deals with the hygiene, design and construction of food premises, temperature control and cross contamination.
In two additional sections it deals with advice on food labelling and stock control.
Westminster chief environmental health officer (EHO) Robert Crozier, who masterminded the scheme, announced details of the code at a food safety conference organised by Cater Electric and Olympic Catering Equipment at Danbury Conference Centre, Essex.
He told delegates: ‘I have found it difficult to understand some of the regulations myself.
If I, as an EHO, find them difficult, how can caterers be expected to interpret them accurately?’
Under the legislation, managers of catering establishments could be held personally responsible for each breach of the regulation and each penalty could mean fines of between £2,000 and £20,000.
The code received a warm reception from conference delegates but several caterers in the audience criticised their local EHOs for failing to present a united front on the interpretation of regulations.
However, Mr Crozier made it clear that even if the code were adopted by every borough, EHOs could continue to interpret the law according to individual situations.
‘In my borough we have a lot of odd-shaped kitchens.
This makes it difficult for caterers to use the most suitable materials possible on walls and floor surfaces for maximum hygiene,’ he said.
‘To accommodate this problem we have written into the code of practice that caterers can use experimental surfaces under certain conditions.
This situation would not necessarily hold true for another council.’
PROSECUTION
Although Mr Crozier admitted his department was still gearing up to implement the legislation, he confirmed that once all the stall were fully trained they would begin prosecuting offenders.
‘And under the law, it is simply not enough to design a kitchen with good equipment in it — you must now have the means to monitor and control operations,’ he said.
He hoped that the code would be passed on via the Institution of Environmental Health Officers network and adopted by EHOs throughout the country.
The code has been welcomed by other London boroughs.
which have adopted 95% of its contents.
Mr Crozier advised caterers unsure about equipment or hygiene practices used in their kitchens to ring their local EHO and find out exact local requirements before making alterations.
A copy of Westminster's code of practice and other supplementary information can be obtained by telephoning Theresa Riley in 071–798 1093.
Associations cool to EC proposal
A draft European Community regulation proposing that producers label their food-stuffs with a Protected Graphical Indication (PGI) or Designation of Origin (PDO) has been given the thumbs-down at the consultation stage with trade bodies describing it as ‘protectionist and unnecessary’.
The proposal sought to apply the appellation contrôlée principle to food with regional characteristics.
However, of the 34 trade and consumer bodies and enforcement authorities which responded to the House of Commons Select Committee, the majority said the differences between PGI and PDO categories were ‘too ill-defined to be readily discernible and, moreover, failed to offer other benefits.’
Consumer groups claimed full and clear labelling of food products would be preferred, which would enable customers to choose between similar products and ‘to decide for themselves as to what constituted the best quality at a given price.’
Agricultural producers, however, welcomed the idea and said quality foods could be encouraged and preserved by recognition and protection under the proposed rule.
David Curry, Parliamentary Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & Food, concluded that the balance of opinion was against the regulation and significant amendments would have to be made to the proposal to make it acceptable.
Salmon safe
Recent press reports that salmon from Scottish fish farms were contaminated with the unlicensed chemical Invermectin have been condemned by Professor Randolph Richards, Deputy director of the Institute of Agriculture at University of Stirling, as unsubstantiated.
FOOD
Cheesecake
Luvable Lemon Lush Cheese Cake is a frozen dessert with a digestive biscuit base topped with layers of baked and unbaked lemon cheese and fresh cream.
The cake is finished with piped cream, white chocolate flakes and a lacing of lemon curd.
Portions can be cut while frozen, and the cake takes between 15 and 30 minutes to defrost.
Flour mixes
A selection of flour-based mixes has been added to the Happy Chef own-label range, including De-Luxe Sponge Mix, Batter Mix, Scone Mix and Shortcrust Pastry Mix.
All come in 3kg sizes and prices start at £2.79.
Pâtés
Brussels, Ardennes, Garlic and Provencale are the latest flavours in the range of Farmhouse Spreading Pâtées from Plumrose.
Each comes in a 75g rectangular tub and has a clear, resealable lid.
Choc pud
White Lightning is a 14-portion dessert made of chocolate fudge and meringue, with three layers of chocolate sponge topped with white chocolate mousse.
Chicken burger
Yankee Chickenburger in a Bun is a pre-cooked, microwavable, breaded burger with dill mayonnaise in a sesame-seeded bran bun.
It joins the Yankee Hot Dog as the latest in the Yankee range of microwavable snacks.
Both products are packed in sealed wrappers, 12 to a case.
Bulgarian jams
Bulgarian premium jams are being brought into the UK under the Naturall label.
The strawberry, plum, peach, black cherry and apricot jams are said to have a high fruit content and contain no artificial colours or preservatives.
Margarines
Country Range margarines now come in 12.5kg-bulk, 2kg soft and 2kg-sunflower sizes, as well as 48 × 250g packets.
Fudge cake
Florida Orange Fudge Cake has chocolate fudge sandwiched between orange sponge.
The dessert is covered in chocolate and topped with orange hearts.
Cold meats
Five slicing cold meats have been launched by Princes in 4lb sizes.
Pork & Pepper — spicy chopped pork with red and green peppers; Pizza Roll — spicy chopped pork with hunks of garlic salami, black olives, red popper and gherkins; Turkey Roll; Chicken Roll; and Chicken & Ham Roll.
Bouillons
Menu Bouillon is a range of Italian bouillons in 1kg tubs, six to a carton.
Beef, Chicken, Vegetable and Low-Fat Granular Beef flavours are said to be high in meat, chicken or vegetable extracts.
FOODSERVICE
State-of-the-art hot meal vendor
CAFE Quick is a state-of-the-art vending machine which dispenses freshly cooked meals from frozen in less than a minute.
It holds 216 packets of food in a freezer unit fitted with a first-in-first-out stock rotation system and an alarm, which will shut down operations if the temperature gets too high.
Once the machine is activated, either by coins or cards, a hydraulic lift places a plate with the selected food into a microwave for defrosting.
The food is then pushed out of its protective package and left in its serving dish to be cooked in a hot-air oven.
After cooking, the protective cardboard outer is removed and the cooked food dispensed.
The machine is fitted with a computerised management system to control stock flow.
Café Quick costs £9,500 and has a three-product menu choice of chips, chicken and pizza.
The manufacturer estimates that break-even point could be achieved with 14 meals per day.
Fridge store
The Stainton is a refrigerated storage unit with rubber-tyred castors for easy movement.
The unit has a stainless steel chilled storage cabinet with an integral blown-air refrigeration system which, the manufacturer claims, can be maintained at 3°C to 5°C.
Bar bits
An Appetiser Stand, Cherry & Lemon Dispenser and Ice Cutting Tongs are all part of a range of bar accessories from Mitchell & Cooper.
Moulded, splinter-proof cutting blocks, called Barboards, are also available.
These are made of heavy-gauge metal with a polished stainless steel surround.
Time stickers
Time and temperature indicators are small stickers which can be placed in the outside of food containers and will change colour from white to red of food temperature rises above 12°C for more than two hours.
Food package
Hot'n'Tender is a hot food package from Servequip, which the company claims will enable independent caterers to project a corporate image.
Henny Penny pressure fryers and display/holding cabinets form the centre of the package, with uniforms, menu screens and point-of-sale material also available emblazoned with the Hot'n'Tender logo.
Heavy weight
The Linkline Trolley is designed to ease the transportation of heavy loads such as beer kegs, crates of bottles and dishwasher racks.
The trolley has rollerbearing wheels with rubber tyres, can turn on its axis, and can be manoeuvred easily with one hand.
It is available with retaining chains or webbing straps.
Power box
Koolatron is a 12-V portable insulated box which can keep its contents either warm or cool by using a portable power pack.
To cool, the motor forces air out of the box, so lowering the temperature.
To warm, air is taken from outside the box and combined with heat generated by the motor.
The largest capacity box of 1.2cu ft holds the equivalent of 48 × 12oz cans and the smallest capacity model holds nine 12oz cans.
In addition the 0.9cu ft model has a built-in cutting board.
Cool pads
Chill Pads, which maintain chilled products at temperature, are claimed to be longer-lasting than ice and more effective than eutectic plates.
The Chill Pads are made from disposable, non-toxic material divided into 40g sachets.
Each sachet contains dry crystals which expand on contact with water to form a solid, ice cube-shaped gel.
The sachets can be frozen individually or in sheets for use in cooling boxes.
Chill Pads can be cut to length and are packaged in 120m rolls, costing £240.
Café Quick meals take less than a minute to heat up
Chill pads can be frozen individually or in sheets
KITCHEN
Complete cooking
The SC20, a 20-grid steam convection oven, can be used in sous vide or cook-chill operations.
The SC20 is a convection oven, a steamer, and a combined steam/convected air oven in one.
It can cook food at temperatures of between 40°C and 100°C, and comes with a roll-in oven rack and loading trolley.
The list price is £11,109 and includes a meat probe and six gastronorm-sized grid shelves.
As a basic air convection oven, the SC20 costs £7,995.
Combi oven
The Jetwave Series 2 combination oven has a 700-watt microwave, a 2,400-watt infra-red grill, and can be used as either a forced air or natural convection oven.
Each cooking function can be used singularly or simultaneously and the controls are said to be simple to operate.
It also features a pyrolytic self-cleaning cycle which, when the oven reaches temperatures of 480°C, burns off all dirt and grease leaving a wipe-away ash deposit.
The oven door becomes self-locking at 300°C.
Hot cupboards
Guardsman Hotcupboards (below) now come in mobile versions.
The 70cm GM2 with a 240-plate capacity costs £497, and the 360-capacity, 100cm GM3 costs £590.
The hot cupboards are also available with bain marie service tops in a choice of seven combinations of half- or quarter-gastronorm containers.
Dough mixer
A pizza dough mixer, which rotates in the opposite direction to the mixing tools, is said to eliminate cleaning problems and prevent the dough riding up the side of the bowl.
The bowl is removable for ease of cleaning, and the unit is finished in stainless steel and comes in 12kg, 20kg, 30kg, 40kg, and 60kg sizes.
Boiling table
A solid-top boiling table has been added to the Yeoman series of gas-fired cooking equipment.
The boiling table measures 90cm wide and 73cm deep and is made with a cast-iron top with a single burner under a bull's-eye in the middle.
Heat input for the table is 7.38kW, and it comes with adjustable feet on stainless steel legs.
Moulds
Specialist moulds for pâtisserie work are being imported from French company Matinox.
Letter presses, pyramids, flowers and leaves are just some of the shapes and patterns available.
Eight burners
The Masterchef range of medium-duty cooking equipment now includes an eight-burner range with a double and single oven.
The unit is made in stainless steel and has cast-iron pan supports with removable drip trays underneath.
Other items in the range include: a 60cm or 90cm grill; a six-burner Masterchef range with double oven; a four-burner Masterchef; the Masterfry fryer; and a six-burner range with convection oven underneath.
Modular range
Snack 650 is a modular range of medium-duty cooking equipment from the Italian-made Giga Series.
The range includes a selection of hobs, griddles, fryers, bain-maries, chip scuttles and sink units, as well as a convection oven and pasta cooker.
Base cupboards, worktops, stands and refrigerated base units are also available.
All are supplied in either gas or electric models.
Oven-to-table
Maitre d'hotel is a range of oven-to-tableware in solid stainless steel with gold-plated handles.
Various sized cloches, terrines, gratin dishes and légumiers are available.
Refrigeration
The Broadside range of refrigeration units from Stott Benham consists of a 1,400-litre, a 700-litre and a 500-litre model, all of which have removable interior fittings for easy cleaning.
All three models have foam insulation and a thermostatically controlled, forced-air cooling system.
Leak detector
Energy leakage in commercial and domestic microwaves can be checked and monitored with the hand-held TEK-500 Microwave Leakage Detector.
The monitor has four lamps which indicate levels of energy leakage, and an alarm sounds if hazardous levels are found.
It costs £129.
The SC20 steam convection oven