

Forget Kylie — here come the crisp bags Yorkshire students are making music for the ears of world famous composers with everything from sneezes to zips.
Martin Wainwright reports.
HUNCHED over something very similar to the control deck on Starship Enterprise, Sam Coombes slid up the tape-monitor levers and pressed a series of buttons marked ‘Remix’.
The resulting squawk — actually a recording of Sam and five friends rubbing their fingers on a damp window pane — will soon be played to a dauntingly expert audience through 30 loudspeakers in Huddersfield town hall.
Amazingly famous music supremos Oliver Messiaen, Pierre Boulez and John Cage are coming to the Yorkshire town for the annual Contemporary Music Festival, Britain's highlight in the world of electro-acoustic chords and allied disharmony.
The six teenage composer-musicians from Fartown comprehensive, off the Bradford Road, have been chosen to join them, in a project designed to widen interest in a specialised and frequently off-putting field.
‘Serious contemporary music is not a popular art form and electro-acoustic music is particularly unpopular, even among contemporary musicians,’ admits Robert Worby, one of two composers helping the Fartown team with their own three-minute piece.
The three celebrated composers visiting Huddersfield are all in their seventies.
They and their colleagues are particularly eager to generate interest among the young.
The humorous, self-mocking twist to much contemporary music is helping, according to Sam & Co.
Hard, they say, to be too overawed by a character like Cage, whose music includes Roaratorios and a piece composed solely for the white keys on the piano.
Not to mention his composition Four Minutes 33 Seconds, technically described as a period of ‘apparent silence’.
Performed in Fartown's Portakabin classroom, where 14-year-old Sam and his team are working, this would consist largely of the rhythmic hum of Kirklees education department's antiquated wall-heaters and 13-year-old Nicola Bradford's occasional sneeze.
‘Perhaps those are sounds you could use in your own composition,’ speculates the school's head of music, Paul Chamberlain, whose quest for strange noises has led to the possibility of him poaching the National Curriculum's science of sound course from Fartown's physics department.
The piece prepared by the six young musicians includes a crisp packet being scrunched, playing cards flicked with the skill of a sharper and the zip on 14-year-old Sunjeev Singh's bag buzzing backwards and forwards.
But underlying the oddities is a competent musical framework; all six have reached either grade five or six in the conventional music syllabus.
They have benefited, too, from Kirklees council's encouragement of music in an area particularly strong in the brass and choral tradition.
Fartown's mixture of council estates and tree-lined avenues overlooking ICI's smoky chemical plant provides regular recruits for the Huddersfield choral society and local brass bands.
The group's clarinettist Tracy Redfern and flautist Philippa Bradford, Nicola's older sister, have just got back from a visit to Germany with Kirklees junior wind band.
Sunjeev's community — there are plenty of Asian-origin Yorkshire families in Fartown — is meanwhile beginning to add its own distinctive musical contribution.
Sam, who's a year above the others, has started on his GCSE in Performing Arts, a portmanteau course which covers video, dance and drama as well as music.
His five friends are likely to follow a similar route in 1990.
But the chances of a future Messiaen, Boulez or Cage being nurtured at the comprehensive seem slim.
A cautious ‘different’ was the most exciting adjective found by Nicola, Philippa, Sunjeev, Tracy and violinist Joanne Faley to describe contemporary music.
They have enjoyed the project, including working with practising composers like Robert Worby and Stephen Montague (who remembers meeting Stravinsky during his own schooldays).
But only Sam, asking hopefully if he can control the town hall's lights as well as the synthesiser, looks likely to follow Messiaen and Boulez rather than Kylie and Bros.
Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival runs from November 16 — 26.
Details from the festival office, Huddersfield Polytechnic.
(0484 422288).
What's going on/Stephanie Nettell.
Should rainforests be used for hamburgers?— trees destroyed for cattle ranches — is the question asked by Takeaway, which combines music, dance and action in a show devised by nine- to 20-year-olds of Cambridgeshire.
Cambridge Arts Theatre until November 18 (tel: 0223 352000).
THE Cherub Company gives a black and hellish view of Webster's Jacobean classic, The Duchess Of Malfi, using the shadowy vaults of St George's Theatre, 49 Tufnell Park Road, London N7 (tel: 01-607 1128), until November 18.
POPULATION Concern, which runs 30 projects in 23 countries, asks sixth-formers to join a sponsored water-only fast for up to 24 hours between November 20 and December 3.
Last year St Wilfrid's School, Blackburn, raised £2,500, and runners-up Antrim Grammar, Northern Ireland, raised £1,828; they will receive their awards at Population Concern's Conferences in Harrogate and Warwick (November 13, 14).
Details from Population Concern, 231 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 9AE (tel: 01-631 1546).
AN annual Stage Pass, £12, allows under-30s to buy two tickets, discounted up to 50 per cent, for a range of concerts, operas, musicals, ballet, theatres and jazz, in Bristol, London and Newcastle upon Tyne.
Details tel: 01 379 6722, or write to Youth & Music, 28 Charing Cross Road, London WC2 ODB with date of birth and day and evening telephone numbers.
Jackboots beneath the serge Television.
By Hugh Hebert
THERE was one point when the hair on the back of my head began to lift.
Not at Paul Hill's remembrance of beatings past, when he could hear the sound of steel-tipped boots running to take part in the fun, and once heard a principal medical officer, no less, telling colleagues: ‘Don't walk his face, don't walk his face.’
Not even the time he was dunked head first in a tub of dubious liquid, and brought up gasping for breath: ‘Make him sing God Save the Queen!’ they shouted.
Brutality, as Hill describes and felt it, was a bitter part of his prison life; you just learnt to get down on the floor as fast as you could and cover up as best you could.
But it was Gerry Conlon's account of being interrogated after the Guildford bombings that made the scalp crawl.
We know your mother works at the Royal Victoria Hospital, they told him, we know where your sister works, and there are sectarian killings down there.
‘They told me they could arrange an ‘accident’.
And I believed they were capable of murdering my mother, I honestly believe they would have murdered my mother — that's why I signed the statement.’
The account he gave just after his release was that the threat had been that a British soldier might ‘accidentally’ shoot one of the women.
A few months ago even, this would have seemed improbable.
You might have assumed this was the police bluffing and bullying.
Yet given what we have learned about links between the security services and the Loyalist paramilitaries in Northern Ireland, and the deep suspicion about surrogate murders, you can't shrug off the shiver Conlon's words bring.
There were daunting moments in last night's First Tuesday (Yorkshire), but few of them matched that hint of a jackboot under the blue serge.
It's right that the Guildford Four have told their stories now to Grant McKee and Ros Franey and First Tuesday, the programme and the producers who dug away, and did much to keep the case alive.
And they told it without on-screen questioning, though the programme is skilfully structured to give it a coherence it might have lacked.
Carole Richardson's is the most haunting face.
You have to hope that its blankness will slowly dissolve and let life in.
Just once a couple of tears rolled down.
It was when she described seeing film of the results of the bombing on television, and thinking: ‘They think I did that!’
Armstrong seems the least permanently damaged on the surface.
He pays tribute to his treatment at Gartree prison, he apologises to the bomb victims' families that they have had to keep reminding them of their loss: ‘But we had to fight for our freedom.’
Hill expresses the way time has cheated them: his daughter was born while he was remanded in custody, and is now 14: ‘She would change dramatically and I didn't feel a change in myself mentally.
I'm still 20 in my head.
Nothing's happened to me.
I haven't lived.’
But again it was Conlon, the slightly wild-eyed Irish poet of the quartet, articulate, flamboyant — remember that extraordinary exit through the front door of the Old Bailey — who cut deep into the collective conscience.
He described being taken over the years to see his sick, and finally dying and almost certainly innocent father in another prison.
He was convicted with the Maguires in the parallel case of a ‘bomb factory’.
And he tells how none of the assembled guards and officials could look his father in the eye as he protested his innocence.
Only the nurses could do that.
And at the end, Conlon drew the one hopeful conclusion: ‘If this stops capital punishment ever coming back, the time I've spent in prison will be well worth it.
If this stops another innocent person going to prison, it'll be well worth it…
‘I've had numerous prison governors say to me, Yes, Conlon, we know you're innocent, but there's nothing we can do about it.
We get a custody order, and that's it.
What sort of system of justice is that?’
IT wasn't the only programme last night to shine light into dirty corners.
Inside The Brotherhood (Granada), produced by Claudia Milne and Martin Short, dug into the most notorious area of Masonic influence, local government.
In Southend, where 3,000 of the 50,000 adult males are reckoned to be Masons, it went into the case of what you might call Preferential Allocation of Council Property, and the battle of one councillor, Christopher Hudson, to break the grip of the men on the Square: ‘We can't have a secret society operating within the framework of a democracy,’ he said.
‘It's a paradox, it's a nonsense.’
Though over the years, from Southend to Tyneside and the Government's own Property Services Agency, there's all too much evidence that this is exactly what we do have.
OPERA: Edward Greenfield finds the Medea at Covent Garden relentlessly loud Cool, but not Callas enough.
IT was Maria Callas who, a generation ago, singlehandedly dragged Cherubini's Medea back into the 20th century repertory.
This operatic adaptation of classical tragedy, Euripides and Seneca distantly viewed via Corneille, proved then to be a formidable vehicle for a great singing actress.
With her unique vehemence Callas built the crazed obsessions of the heroine into a memorable final scene, when in agony Medea murders her own children to spite Jason, the husband who has rejected her.
With Callas the piece had one's hair on end.
She recorded it at La Scala, and in 1959 gave five performances at Covent Garden in that same production borrowed from Milan.
Now with a soprano who has already successfully taken the role in a revival at the Buxton Festival, Rosalind Plowright, Covent Garden is staging its own new production directed by Mike Ashman with sets by Bernard Culshaw.
Sadly the whole evening tends to confirm just how single-handed Callas' achievement was back in the Fifties.
One distinct side of Plowright's voice has a Callas-like bite, a hard edge combined with vibrancy.
In her portrait of Medea — or Medee as she becomes in this staging of the original French version — this is what she uses consistently.
She is unrelentingly loud, making one long to hear the gentler, sweeter Plowright voice, if only to enhance (by contrast) the impact of the outbursts.
Her performance even brings a touch or two of Callas' distinctive ‘bottled’ tone, and under pressure on top the voice tends to spread in a rather similar way.
Yet there is no question of one's hair rising.
Plowright as an actress is no fire-eater, however hard she tries.
One basic trouble with Medea is the mediocre quality of invention in so much of Cherubini's score.
It is true that structurally his numbers, with solos and ensembles intermingled, have a freedom and originality that point forward directly to Berlioz and Wagner.
Yet when so much of the writing seems to have been done on automatic pilot, with dozens of sequential passages of unashamed banality — even at the opening of the overture — this is a score that demands some injection whether of fire or persuasiveness in the performers, to make one forget the musical flaws.
It does not help that Cherubini allows too little variety of pace, and that his lyrical gift is limited too.
Even when as in the Act 2 aria for Medea's servant, Neris, he attempts a flowing canzonetta and decks it with a distinctive bassoon obligato, he lets the number go on far too long, or so it seems when as here the bassoon roars out in determined competition with the mezzo, Claire Powell.
Medea's aria with the children before the murder in Act 3 also promises a higher musical flight, only to fall into squareness.
Mike Ashman has opted to set the piece firmly at the period of composition.
This 19th of Cherubini's 34 operas was conceived and written at the height of the Revolutionary Reign of Terror.
Tricolors abound and Jason is made up to look like Napoleon.
But the symbolic period point is overstressed to the verge of comedy, when in the final scene of destruction the figures of Marianne with her red cap of Liberty, the skeleton Death with his scythe and the Angel of Justice are hastily let down in tableau from the flies.
Otherwise the sets are based on a bare raked platform overlooked by a gallery, and with an enormous window let into the back wall for the offstage wedding scene of Act 2.
Perversely set designer Bernard Culshaw scatters the stage in Act 2 with great polystyrene rocks, and then removes them for Act 3, when the stage directions do specify just such rocks.
Did he get his acts mixed up, I wonder?
The Russian heroic tenor, Alexei Steblianko, from the Kirov in Leningrad is the least comfortable with a French accent, but then on the first night he was battling with a throat infection.
Robert Lloyd as King Creon is handsome of voice and person — the most assured principal — and the bright-toned American soprano, Renee Fleming, makes a promising Covent Garden debut in the disappointingly brief role of Glauce (Dirce in the French), Jason's new bride.
Mark Ermler draws generally crisp and lively playing from the Covent Garden Orchestra, but it is uphill work with such a score, hardly helped by what is happening on stage.
For third North only OPERA: Edward Greenfield on a loud Medea at Covent Garden Angry, not Callas.
IT WAS Maria Callas who, a generation ago, singlehandedly dragged Cherubini's Medea back into the 20th century repertory.
This operatic adaptation of classical tragedy, Euripides and Seneca distantly viewed via Corneille, proved then to be a formidable vehicle for a great singing actress.
With her unique vehemence Callas built the crazed obsessions of the heroine into a memorable final scene, when in agony Medea murders her own children to spite Jason, the husband who has rejected her.
With Callas the piece had one's hair on end.
She recorded it at La Scala, and in 1959 gave five performances at Covent Garden in that same production borrowed from Milan.
Now with a soprano who has already successfully taken the role in a revival at the Buxton Festival, Rosalind Plowright, Covent Garden is staging its own new production directed by Mike Ashman with sets by Bernard Culshaw.
Sadly the whole evening tends to confirm just how single-handed Callas' achievement was back in the Fifties.
One distinct side of Plowright's voice has a Callas-like bite, a hard edge combined with vibrancy.
In her portrait of Medea — or Medee as she becomes in this staging of the original French version — this is what she uses consistently.
She is unrelentingly loud, making one long to hear the gentler, sweeter Plowright voice, if only to enhance (by contrast) the impact of the outbursts.
Her performance even brings a touch or two of Callas' distinctive ‘bottled’ tone, and under pressure on top the voice tends to spread in a rather similar way.
Yet there is no question of one's hair rising.
Plowright as an actress is no fire-eater, however hard she tries.
One basic trouble with Medea is the mediocre quality of invention in so much of Cherubini's score.
It is true that structurally his numbers, with solos and ensembles intermingled, have a freedom and originality that point forward directly to Berlioz and Wagner.
Yet when so much of the writing seems to have been done on automatic pilot, with dozens of sequential passages of unashamed banality — even at the opening of the overture — this is a score that demands some injection whether of fire or persuasiveness in the performers, to make one forget the musi cal flaws.
It does not help that Cherubini allows too little variety of pace, and that his lyrical gift is limited too.
Even when as in the Act 2 aria for Medea's servant, Neris, he attempts a flowing canzonetta and decks it with a distinctive bassoon obligato, he lets the number go on far too long, or so it seems when as here the bassoon roars out in determined competition with the mezzo, Claire Powell.
Medea's aria with the children before the murder in Act 3 also promises a higher musical flight, only to fall into squareness.
Mike Ashman has opted to set the piece firmly at the period of composition.
This 19th of Cherubini's 34 operas was conceived and written at the height of the Revolutionary Reign of Terror.
Tricolors abound and Jason is made up to look like Napoleon.
But the symbolic period point is overstressed to the verge of comedy, when in the final scene of destruction the figures of Marianne with her red cap of Liberty, the skeleton Death with his scythe and the Angel of Justice are hastily let down in tableau from the flies.
Otherwise the sets are based on a bare raked platform overlooked by a gallery, and with an enormous window let into the back wall for the offstage wedding scene of Act 2.
Perversely set designer Bernard Culshaw scatters the stage in Act 2 with great polystyrene rocks, and then removes them for Act 3, when the stage directions do specify just such rocks.
Did he get his acts mixed up, I wonder?
The Russian heroic tenor, Alexei Steblianko, from the Kirov in Leningrad is the least comfortable with a French accent, but then on the first night he was battling with a throat infection.
Robert Lloyd as King Creon is handsome of voice and person — the most assured principal — and the bright-toned American soprano, Renee Fleming, makes a promising Covent Garden debut in the disappointingly brief role of Glauce (Dirce in the French), Jason's new bride.
Mark Ermler draws generally crisp and lively playing from the Covent Garden Orchestra, but it is uphill work with such a score, hardly helped by what is happening on stage.
Rosalind Plowright as Medea
For third South arts QEH..
By Meirion Bowen Ligeti Festival.
WHETHER writing new pieces or extending old ones, Ligeti comes across — almost like Birtwistle — as a convergent musical thinker.
If all his mature compositions were laid end to end and glued together, they might well form one big work.
This unitary vision was particularly well-exemplified in the final, four-hour concert in the Ligeti Festival at the QEH, which featured the premieres of two further piano etudes and of the five-movement version of his Piano Concerto.
The first six etudes, completed in 1985, were stimulated by Ligeti's studies of rhythm in sub-Saharan music and the multi-layered polyrhythms in the pianola works of Conlon Nancarrow: and the two new ones drew partly on ideas from gamelan music.
But all this, along with his fascination with rhythmic displacements in Chopin and others, disappeared within a distinctively Ligetian interplay of line and colour.
It required from the pianist an unbelievable independence of hands and fingers, so that unevenly spread accents and criss-crossing figurations appeared to drop into place without obvious effort.
Volker Banfield here achieved all that was demanded of him technically.
But his playing was studiously uncommunicative and prosaic, unresponsive to the poetry behind the notes — e.g. in the cool Bartokian chords that closed the eighth study.
In the Piano Concerto it was, of course, an asset to have a soloist who could keep his head amid all the intricate polymetrical pulsations of the first and third movements.
Banfield extracted little drama, however, from the exchanges between the piano and different orchestral groups in the fourth and fifth movements.
In his hands, the work became a latterday baroque concerto grosso, with the pianist as one soloist among many, whereas the range of invention and harmonic emphasis in the work implied a far more provocative interaction of roles.
While the concerto had sounded complete and satisfying in its original three-movement format, the additional movements opened up new horizons and changed its structural proportions without distorting any of its existing perspectives.
If anything, its additional colours brought extra glitter to the music, and this quality was certainly seized upon by the London Sinfonietta under Elgar Howarth, who eagerly compensated for the pianist's lack of a trenchant or subtle delivery.
Reserve and reticence of expression, on the part of solo cellist Christopher van Kampen and the Sinfonietta, were more aptly applied in the context of Ligeti's Cello Concerto (1965), a sparsely-written, lapidaric work that discloses the absolute minimum within its unbroken span of 26 kaleidoscopic episodes.
This work made an effective bridge to the equally spare and fastidious Four Capriccios Opus 9 by Gyorgy Kurtag (whose music Ligeti has generously welcomed into his Festival, just as he insisted on having the composer share the stage at the end).
Kurtag is Ligeti's opposite — a divergent musical thinker whose every new work might be by another composer, were it not for the extreme compression that is constant to his style.
In the settings of four aphoristic poems by Istvan Balint for soprano and 14 players — which Kurtag began in 1972 and recently revised — the outside influences declared themselves quite readily, whether they were from East European folk music or Webern: and in this performance, the soprano Adrienne Csengery and Sinfonietta excelled themselves with sudden flashes of colour and bursts of intense virtuosity.
Man in the Moon.
By Paul Fisher Ironmistress.
IRONMISTRESS uses heavy metallic imagery to tell of Martha Darby, a character based on a real 19th century widow who inherited an iron works.
‘His hand was welded to my back’, she tells her daughter of the courtship with the paterfamilias now buried in an iron coffin.
During a comical lesson on how to catch her man, Little Cog is told she must weep not buckets but spoons.
The language also taps a Laurentian vein where mud, blood, heat and simmering violence are mashed together.
Read into it what you will: industrial fable, feminist tract, family psychodrama or a sly portrait of the modern Iron Lady.
Martha clangs about her business, her hair dragged into a tight bun, a bustle behind her and keys at her waist.
‘The first time I held those keys, I put them in my mouth and felt my bones had turned to gold,’ she announces.
Her assimilation of a male world develops into a psychotic taste for swallowing pens and spoons.
It gives her tummy ache and she administers something similar when she flattens her daughter's body, locking it in the tightest of corsets.
After that scene there is little else that needs to be said about the strictures on Victorian women.
The daughter opens and closes the play on a swing, her hair free but a soundtrack of synthesised chords and foundry clatter emphasising this is no Fragonard.
Until a routinely hopeless marriage, Louise Waddington delivers Little Cog's speeches straight at the audience, up into the Gods.
Her pale eyes are everywhere.
Everything pours inwards as Gillian Brown's dead-eyed Martha discovers obsessive control can lead to personal dissolution.
While she celebrates market forces and a ‘world where you and me and God are a giant machine with separate bits’ she is forging fears of her own futility and death.
The director, Thomas de Mallet Burgess, delicately underlines the personal in April de Angelis's allusive script though he can't assert himself when the play slithers into magical realism.
At the end highway robberies, riots and an unspecified sense of comeuppance is what we are left with.
A heavy metal vision of post-Thatcherism, maybe.
Man in the Moon, Chelsea, 01 351 2876, to November 25.
Culture Shocked Feminist fans may be outraged by her apparent change of image, but it's no sell-out, as Michelle Shocked tells Lucy O'Brien.
THE recent release of Michelle Shocked's single On The Greener Side has sent seismic reverberations throughout the music industry.
She appears in the video wearing a lime green mini-dress, surrounded by impassive Schwarzenegger beefcake types in dinner suits, her face fully made up, her mouth gleaming with bright red lipstick.
From the gal who swore she'd rather be dragged across a plain by wild horses than wear lipgloss, this comes as something of a surprise.
It's not so much a reconstruction of image as proof that Shocked's confidence is growing.
Instead of being terrified of commercial mainstream pop, she's now manipulating its stereotypes.
The video is actually a parody of Robert Palmer, the slithering lounge lizard of pop who four years ago thought it cool to cast his videos with countless women dressed exactly the same, acting like mass-produced mannequins.
‘Intuitively I know that's as misogynist as it gets,’ says Shocked.
She also knows that the media tendency to lump together women singer-songwriters in a ‘gee whiz, gosh, women are now making it’ syndrome is patronising, if not pernicious.
‘They may as well call it ‘Women who don't wear make-up’,’ she chuckles.
‘It's less threatening for men to lump women together and deal with them as one, rather than pointing out the differences.’
Shocked has taken a brave step.
Although she turns up for the interview her customary peaked-capped urchin self, she is worried that her feminist interpreters will consider her video a sell-out.
‘If I soften the edges — whether I need to personally or whether it's being imposed on me — I feel I'll be letting down the revolution.
Whoever dictated this?
This is pure projection on my part!
At one time I was a nihilistic punk with a mohican and a ring in my nose.
I think in the course of time I'll find a middle If I soften the edges — whether I need to personally or whether it's being imposed on me — I feel I'll be letting down the feminist revolution.
ground, but I also carry that sense of responsibility.
I'm in a position to defeat stereotypes, to work for the greater good for women who don't enjoy the privileges that I have.’
Far from letting down the side, Shocked is projecting a freshly combative image.
Her humour is a weapon that has pole-vaulted her out of the solid folk-roots category, an alternative scene that would have kept her firmly away from the mainstream.
Musically, too, she's been striding into new territory, celebrating all kinds of Forties swing on her latest LP, Captain Swing.
With its loud, luscious harmonies, raunchy guitar and full brass band, the record is commercial country blues peppered with lyrical bons mots and that female troubadour sensibility.
‘The music warrants being filled out,’ Shocked says.
‘It's about tension and relaxation, the interaction between musicians.’
Speaking in a slightly formal Texan lilt, Shocked exudes a quiet charisma and wry stubbornness.
When under pressure, though, she is said to throw tantrums, to distance herself from those around her and just take off.
Inside Michelle Shocked there is a fierce loner.
Now 26, she spent many years after college hitchhiking around the world, drifting through the punk scene in San Francisco to demonstrations in Dallas, squats in Amsterdam and the women's peace camp in Cosmo, Italy, before a British producer recognised her itinerant musical talent and signed her up with the bestselling Texas Campfire Tapes LP.
Is Shocked still a wanderer?
‘I've put it on the back burner, but have never given up the long-term goal of going round the world by sailboat.
When you hear about these floating islands of garbage in the Pacific, it makes it a little less appealing, but it feels like the sea is the only wilderness left.
Once you lose sight of land, you may as well be in space.’
Shocked is making plans to sail with her father, who long ago began building a boat, until marriage and fatherhood distracted him from finishing it.
She is pleased at the rewarding relationship she has with him, though it's something she has had to fight to keep.
A young child when her parents divorced, she regained contact with him at 16, after she left her mother.
She hasn't spoken to her since.
‘She threw me out.
It was very hard for me.
I was brought up in Gilmer, Texas, as a fundamentalist Mormon.
It was a closed community with the habit of passing down ultimatums — for example, you were created to be a wife and mother.
I'm never getting married, so where does that leave me?
There was no place for me.
My mother believed that if she was gonna get to heaven, I had to marry.
What kinda religion is it that would encourage the parent to shelter the child from any outside influences and punish it by putting it out in a world you never had any way of learning about?’
Shocked's reponse was to learn, and fast.
She put herself through many risky experiences on the road, along with some vigorous political activity.
Her lifelong mission has been to counter fundamentalist hypocrisy in any form, but she admits she'd now like to resolve the conflict with her mother.
‘She must be going through a lotta pain too.’
Shocked looks glumly at the table, anxious to put her past behind her, yet concerned to put things right.
‘It's as if she's dead,’ she says quietly.
Then she perks up.
‘I find it interesting that there's this whole small town that claims me, that I want nothing to do with.
It's my revenge fantasy —‘One day they'll be sorry!’'
Shocked is coming to terms with her loss her own way.
After protecting herself during her travelling years by dressing like a boy, she is temporarily hanging up her hat and exploring her sensual, feminine side.
Hence the saucy video and red lipstick.
But Shocked the political animal is still very much intact.
Currently based in Los Angeles, she's active in the US urban homelessness campaign, organising the protesters so they can ‘squat on the White House lawn’.
‘This fall the homeless will be mobilising into one big movement with thousands marching on Washington.
I feel I'm in a position to push a more radical programme on them, to stay there and work with what I can.’
Michelle Shocked begins a national tour on November 16.
Her album, Captain Swing, is out now on London Records.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE wom