

Quote….
PEOPLE in the West are talking about traps built into the proposed DDR travel liberalisation law.
There is good reason for this.
DDR citizens have a right to a passport but only conditional rights to a visa for departure.
Possible reasons for non-approval run the gamut from the usual to the astounding.
That a visa for travel to West Germany can be refused on ‘moral’ grounds is highly unusual; a regard for ‘national security’is much more the norm…will it mean no visas for all ‘bearers of state secrets’, a category which can be variously defined from one individual case to the next?…
Judging by the mood prevalent up till now in the DDR the planned freedom of travel will scarcely influence those who want to leave because their patience is at an end and their trust in the government has been destroyed.
Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung, November 7
Diary.
By Andrew Moncur
FOR THE first time, to his knowledge, the forces of law ‘n’ order have been tampering with items mailed from the US to Maurice Frankel, director of the Campaign for Freedom of Information.
Twice on the trot packages have been opened for inspection by HM Customs.
Where, in both cases, did the correspondence come from?
The American Privacy Foundation, as it happens.
And the subject matter?
Interception of communications and the Official Secrets Act.
OUR CORINTHIAN Prince Charles (well, he's either surmounted by acanthus leaves or those are his ears) is making another film.
A follow-up to his epic Omnibus documentary A Vision Of Britain — known, to the vulgar masses, by the indelible subtitle: It Really Is Appalling.
This one is expected to be called A Vision Of The Earth.
Those involved at the BBC have adopted a more handy working title.
Inevitably, it's become known as Even More Appalling.
RESELECTION Corner, an exciting new service to diary readers.
Labour MPs are now, of course, thrashing through the business of submitting themselves winsomely to their local parties.
It seems sensible to start collecting the otherwise unreported trifles of this Important Democratic Process (all entries gratefully received).
Like these events in Knowsley North, where the sitting tenant is George Howarth.
A regional official, checking on progress, discovered that the reselection procedure was moving pretty slowly.
The blasted Fabian Society was insisting on a postal ballot of all its members there.
How much time was that going to take, for heaven's sake?
Oh, not long.
There are only three of them — and that includes George Howarth and his wife, Julie.
HERE'S a rather touching letter to the troops from Captain Robert Maxwell, headed simply: Our Home.
He's been taking soundings about the possibility of shifting Mirror Group Newspapers, lock, stock and Joe Haines's basket, south of the Thames to Great Dover Street while Maxwell House, his Holborn HQ, is flattened and rebuilt.
And he's decided against it.
‘I have been most of all impressed by the contention that removal to such an area would be damaging to the morale of journalists.’
Well, what can you say?
Meanwhile at Our Home the unspeakable ingrates seem bent on some sort of work-to-contract.
It's all to do with their continued wilful rejection of Captain Bob's morale-boosting pay and conditions package which, for some reason, they deplore.
Ooh, the ingratitude.
GREAT Corrections Of Our Time (No.198).
From Liverpool's public health annual report: ‘Page 6, figure 1: the drawing of the graph does not accurately reflect the figures quoted in the commentary and ‘births’ and ‘deaths’have been transposed.’
GETTING the Government's message across is all very well.
But having it dished up twice in just 19 days — in what seems suspiciously like identical form — seems to be going it a bit.
Compare and contrast (1) the speech made by a civil servant (acting in the absence of the late Lord Trafford) to the annual conference of the Independent Hospitals' Association in Birmingham, on October 19; and (2) the address by Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the new Health Minister, to yesterday's meeting in London, on the Private Health Care Sector After The White Paper.
Question: can you detect any difference?
Is recycling a sound idea?
Answers on a postcard, please, to: Department of Health, Whitehall, London SW1A 2NS.
YOU'LL recall that Tory MP Nicholas Soames was sighted in the Commons wearing an unlikely lapel badge: Tortoise Lovers Against Cruise.
He actually bumped into Her Indoors, who peered, looked bewildered and retired (if the use of this word has caused either [a]rejoicing or [b]total collapse in the markets, apologies).
Anyway, the badge was a gift from Labour's leading tortoise-fancier, Tony Banks.
Bunter Soames, vastly amused, has asked for others — which he also promises to wear.
Mr B was last seen hurrying to fetch a badge which reads: Fat Tory Bastards Against The Bomb.
Or, possibly, Loopy Old Bats Against ditto.
WET FISH enthusiasts will love this entertainment offered to residents, on special terms, by Westminster City Council.
February 15: Faust.
‘Gounod's ever popular score and the dramatic story of the man who sells his sole to the devil.’