

Glad to be male Hip-hop, body pop, rap, heavy metal — why do large chunks of pop get rubbished, ignored or mocked?
Paul Oldfield and Simon Reynolds reckon it all comes down to sexual politics.
TODAY THE right-on music press and the quality newspapers are embarrassed by many of the successful new sub-genres of pop.
That's because these musics are ‘masculinist’, ‘sexist’, ‘macho’, even so it's said, ‘fascistic’.
The offenders are legion.
There's hip-hop (e.g. Public Enemy's incendiary rhetoric and racism) and rap (superstuds like LL Cool J); there's European body pop (Front 242, DAF) and hard gay club music; and then there are the electronic-based bands who thrive on totalitarian and paramilitary imagery (Laibach, Nitzer Ebb).
And that's not to mention heavy metal, the original cock-rock, and all its new offshoots.
In this decade of ‘caring’ rock, with its explicitly raised political consciousness and its ‘new men’like Geldof, Bono and Sting, such hard, macho musics easily seem anomalous and distinctly dubious in their appeal.
Papers like the NME and the Guardian can't ignore these masculine genres, but find it hard to understand or reinterpret them: instead they've devised several strategies for skirting round them.
First, the press hails the bands that sound more politically correct than others in the genre.
With a little effort, almost anybody can be construed as an exception to the rule.
Thus the papers are relieved by the new, softer, explicitly pacifist and green hip-hop, like De La Soul; or by reformed characters; or by rappers who turn out to be pillars of the community (Run DMC funding Sunday schools, or KRS-One starting a Stop The Violence campaign).
Another tactic for making the music palatable is to seek out women who work in these boys-own genres.
Girls can be praised for paying boys back in their own currency, for cutting them down to size, or for challenging the male domination of the music business.
The same critics who complain about male bragging and posturing manage to enjoy rudeness and limited musical ability when girls are involved: then it's irreverent and un-ladylike, a challenge to our stereotypes.
Roxanne Shante's put-downs of men are meant to be feminist; and suddenly we're meant to respect Salt'n'Pepa's greed, opportunism and exploitation of their own bodies.
When the press finally has to confront masculinist music head on, it gives up any attempt to reclaim it, and tries instead to deny its allure by poking fun at it.
Heavy metal is ‘pantomime stuff,’ only ever written up with voyeuristic superiority.
And rap or club musics are written off as repetitive, unimaginative and boring (as if rock and pop are beacons of literacy and complexity).
Machismo is neutered by being assumed to be synonymous with stupidity and tedium.
Grown-up critics manage to deny its appeal (probably the very same priapic excitement they derived from rock in their unreconstructed youth) because it seems to be at odds with their sexual politics.
All this means that most critics never get to grips with masculinity's perennial fascination.
Nor do they see how such music can, after all, be a deconstruction of machismo.
In fact, hip hop and body pop aren't so much concerned with pure aggression as with survival.
Throughout Western culture there's less sense of expanding opportunity (the original motor of youth music) and more fear, more sense of being embattles.
Urban life's now seen as a threat to our vulnerable individuality: the jungle of the ghetto, the ‘urban hell’ that rap music talks about, becomes a paradigm for all of us.
This feeling that we must fight to preserve ourselves against a hostile world is paralleled by deep male fears of losing bodily integrity and idenity.
Men harden themselves against outer threats and against inner weaknesses, against the femininity that lurks in us.
The survivalist culture of the ghetto insists that, instead of leading ever fuller lives, we should strip ourselves down for action and retaliation: it's a culture fascinated by war games, fitness, one-upmanship.
Hip Hop's bluster and brutalism makes sense in this context.
The New York graffiti craze, which meant just spray-painting your name again and again, was the most basic, single-minded assertion that you exist in an indifferent world.
The gladiatorial rapping, the sportswear, the symbolic confrontations (‘dissing’) are all about self-assertion.
And on a grander scale, there's the controversial battle-readiness and barricades rhetoric of acts like Public Enemy and Niggers With Attitude.
Here rappers become vigilantes or revolutionaries: machines for dispensing rough justice or revenge.
Hence the obsession with Kung Fu films and Judge Dredd comics.
The use of brute force for righteous ends appeals strongly to rap's adolescent male following, of course.
Such music can be distinctly ambiguous.
It's true that it seduces us with its pulse-quickening thrill, but it also serves as a privileged glimpse into the paranoia, loneliness and tunnel vision of the male survivalist.
Hip-hop tells us that city life is impoverished, that real violence, as opposed to the symbolic stare-downs, is horrific.
We'd compare this inside view of machismo with the deconstruction of masculinity in Scorsese's films: in Taxi Driver, for example, we're drawn into vicarious participation in a spectacular massacre, only for the camera to draw back and reveal the real carnage, suffering and shock that such an exercise of male power entails.
There's a similar drive to reduce yourself, to harden yourself, in another kind of pop: European body and club musics.
Here the emphasis is on bypassing your higher faculties and submitting to the fundamental, libidinous drives of your body.
Instead of making yourself a killing machine, now you make yourself a sex machine (look at titles like ‘Body To Body,’‘Drive’).
Worse still, say the critics, the beats that mimic the will to power, the homoeroticism of the music, and the use of technology in the service of a new barbarism and strength-worship, make this ‘fascistic’ music.
Bands like DAF (‘Do The Mussolini’), Yugoslavia's Laibach (makers of ‘totalitarian art’), and England's Nitzer Ebb practically invite misunderstanding by flirting so heavily with images of power, fascism and totalitarianism.
But in fact, they're as much about power over yourself and self-belief as they are about domination of others.
Nitzer Ebb especially think of life as one long siege, a purifying test of your inner strength.
And the heavy disco work-out of such bands (an influence on house and new beat music) sounds like body-building, the epitome of self-testing, of strength built up for its own sake.
If such music is totalitarian, that's because it's about total control and exploitation of your powers.
And, beyond that, we ought to see that some of the latest European music is only ‘fascistic’ in ways that are almost the opposite of male triumpalism.
The sturm und drang of current favourites The Young Gods is the sound of strength being expended.
This is the old Futurist ideal of living dangerously, of self-sacrifice.
According to some theorists, that's the only way men can let down their macho defences: in blood-letting, catastrophe, a suicidal willingness to put your life on the line.
In all these musics, we're allowed to thrill to the experience of super-masculinity.
There are dangers in that.
Some hip-hop or heavy metal fans might not see further than the pleasure of destruction, might be real-life misogynists and miscreants.
But for many of us, the music lets us get under the skin of maleness and see its impoverishment, numbness, struggles with weakness, and dangers, as well as the exhilaration.
Surely that's a better way to deal with machismo than trying to deafen ourselves to its allure.
Hip-hoppers Public Enemy…‘controversial battle-readiness and barricades rhetoric’ Salt'n'Pepa.. challenge to stereotype or exploitation?. for tabloid arts p 20
Spreading the word Weekend attractions.
THE Birmingham Readers and Writers Festival, now in it's sixth year, is rightly regarded as a jewel in Birmingham's civic crown.
Featuring a range of performance and community events, it manages to combine top-of-the-range literary activity and discussion with more accessible events, giving the literary festival a broad appeal without losing its essential focus on words and the wordy.
This two-week festival starts today with the announcement of the winner of the Smarties Book Prize, a day of associated children's activities, and the beginning of an ambitious community event to construct the longest poem in the English language.
This evening, Perrier Award-winning stand-up comic Simon Fanshaw takes the stage at the Midland Arts Centre Studio (10pm) with his current-affairs based comedy show (10pm).
The latest works in Chatto and Windus's much maligned but nevertheless intriguing Counterblasts series come under the scrutiny of writer Marina Warner and anarchist author Colin Ward (tomorrow, 2.30pm).
Highlights of the rest of the Festival include: beat poetry readings by Michael Horovitz; the premier of Edward Bond's new play, Jackets; and the launch of the Book Trust's Out Of Africa anthology featuring work by, among others, Ebbon Dibba.
The Festival continues until November 25 and is based at the Midlands Arts Centre but events take place throughout the city.
Further details and booking on 021-440 3838.
Telling tales.
ONCE upon a time people indulged in the ages-old craft of telling stories to each other— but then television and video stepped in and took the words out of our mouths.
These days the practice of story-telling is so rare that it has acquired the status of an art form.
Hence the third International Storytelling Festival which takes root at the South Bank Centre before moving on, in various forms, to Leicester, York, Bristol, Reading, Manchester, Barrow-in-Furness and Llantwit Major.
It boasts a stirring menu of international wordsmiths including two Inuit Eskimos who will ‘throat dance’— they stand nose-to-nose bouncing their voices off each other 's throats to produce a bewildering array of sounds.
Another pair — Sheref Tasilova and Murat Cobanglu from Turkey — engage in ‘bardic duels’.
One of these involves a competition of improvised verse where contestants have needles placed in their mouths to prevent the pronounciation of certain syllables — not a technique to practise at home.
Further details and full programme from the South Bank on 01-928 8800 Californian poet La Loca appears in the Birmingham Readers and Writers Festival, Birmingham University, next weekend THIS CAPTION FOR TABLOID PAGE38 Peter O'Toole and Sarah Berger in Keith Waterhouse's Jeffrey Bernard Is Unwell at the Apollo: see Theatre
Art for the asking Gallery.
THERE are many people who would love to buy the work of young British artists: there are plenty of young artists in Britain who would love to sell it.
Often, the main obstacle between them is the prospect of dealing with forbidding galleries charging forbidding commission fees.
The Gallery page in Weekend Guardian unites buyers and artists for no commission or fee at all.
It provides a unique display of modern British art for those who wish to shop — or simply window shop.
Anyone interested in buying a painting should contact the artist directly at the telephone number given.
Note to artists: Because of the overwhelming response we now have several weeks' supply of pictures for the Gallery page.
Please don't send us any more slides for the time being.
ABOVE: Decisions by John Wells (0344 772134 or 0227 711623).
Oil, 20ins x 30ins, £200.
BELOW: Illusion de Beaute by P.A. Knight (969 3210).
Gouache, 17ins x 24ins, £340.
LEFT: Scoraig by S. Hogan (031 5562618).
Oil, 6ft x 2 ½ft, £400.
PAGE t12
I WAS pleased to read the Image Makers column (Weekend Guardian, November 4).
However there is an error in it which should be corrected.
The Peace Pledge Union was not founded by Siegfried Sassoon in 1936.
It is true that Sassoon was prominent member from its early days, but the PPU was in fact founded by Dick Sheppard in 1934.
Peter Kennard's photomontages are powerful anti-war images and as such we should be pleased to have them around.
They are, as you quote John Berger saying, ‘effective…means of exposing official lies.’
However, many of the ‘official’ lies are so deeply buried in the narrative of everyday life that they have become almost invisible.
So much so that they are seen as ‘natural.’
Guns, real or toy, litter advertisements.
Power tools coming from the hip, gunslinger style, or British Gas portraying the contented family enjoying the warm glow of its new central heating.
Mother, daughter and father with son on his shoulders holding a toy gun at the apex of a neatly composed pyramid.
Just because not everyone may spot the toy gun in this ad and attach a certain symbolic significance to it, it does not mean that it is not there nor that it has no effect.
Despite the growing sensitivity about sexual and racial stereotypes and their effects on shaping attitudes, the role of and reference to weapons in advertising continues to be marginalised.
Nothing sinister is implied by the portrayal of weapons in advertisements, we are constantly told, they are simply props.
At this point in the twentieth century we should no longer be so innocent.
We know that images are not neutral.
‘A picture is worth a thousand words’ precisely because it is a part of a complex, usually unconscious, web of references.
Unless we understand this process we will remain as superstitious and powerless to change the world for the better as were our forebearers.
The Remembrance ceremonies this coming weekend will be part of that myth-making process which, while acknowledging the horror of war, will also be justifying war as means of solving conflicts.
The British Legion's advertising campaign with jackbooted Germans marching in front of Parliament preys on our fears and offers a solution — namely we've got to be armed to our teeth to prevent such a thing from happening.
This is a neat piece of propaganda and perhaps we should remember where propaganda like this was honed to perfection.
Jan Melichar.
Dick Sheppard House, 6 Endsleigh Street, London WC1.
JULIE BOSTON raises several important points in her letter on African literature (Weekend Guardian, October 28).
I'm sure she will be pleased to learn about the formation of the Association for the Study of Caribbean and African Literature in French, which brings together a group of academics involved with the teaching of this literature at university level.
The limitations of a movement based around university French departments are obvious.
Nevertheless an important start has been made and some students are being exposed to a segment of African literature.
The diversity of papers produced for the conference in November 1988 which gave birth to the association, as well as the enthusiastic reception accorded to the novelist and film maker Sembene Ousmane when he addressed the participants, suggest that the teaching of African literature in French has not involved the depoliticisation of its content that often occurs when works of art become the object of academic study.
Moreover, the attention the association has paid to cinema has offered a space in which it has been possible to raise the issue of the production and distribution of narrative and dramatic works in African languages.
Finally, and outside the university context, it is perhaps worth mentioning that the Camden library service has a good loan collection of African writing.
Obviously, one hopes that other groups will attempt initiatives of this kind, or are already engaged in comparable initiatives of their own.
As Ms Boston suggests, we are all enriched by an engagement with Arican literature and culture.
James Leahy.
520 Ben Johnson House, Barbican, London, EC2.
NO DOUBT I shall not be the first person to point out to your wine buff Malcolm Gluck (Domaine Anthea ‘87, et al, Food & Drink, October 28) that it was Althea — not Anthea — who received a note written from prison.
And that Colonel Richard Lovelace, not John Gay, wrote the note.
It is to be hoped that Gluck's judgments on wine are better than his knowledge of English poetry.
It's bad enough that he should get two things wrong about what is perhaps one of the best known poems in the English language.
But were your sub-editors asleep?
Presumably they are paid their fabulous salaries to spot errors such as these.
Eric Winter.
Mossley, Manchester.
I AM glad you publicised Victoria Stone's campaign for legislation to prevent learner drivers being supervised by, perhaps, an equally young but recently-qualified driver (Weekend Guardian, October 28).
But one fact was wrong: Kate Stone was not the supervising driver in the accident; Claire Powell was.
Both girls were killed outright.
(Mrs) Rita Hetherington.
Kingswinford, West Midlands.
MARIANNE MACDONALD (Weekend Guardian, October 28) obviously considers that no area of London is worth consideration outside the over-priced borough of Islington.
Surely she should be encouraging people to improve the quality of life in such areas as Tottenham, where housing can still be bought and rented at realistic prices.
We may not have many estate agents and delis in Tottenham, but I like it here.
T.D.Haws.
25 The Avenue, Tottenham, London N17.
This year's Reith lecturer, Jacques Darras, is an outsider in his own culture who believes in a cross-cultural unity.
Nina-Anne Kaye reports.
The poet breaking down the barricades Radio.
JACQUES Darras is a man of many parts: poet and translator, Dean and professor of English at the University of Picardy, publisher, linguist, and self-confessed outsider.
In Britain he is virtually unknown.
The irony of this is certainly not lost on him.
As this year's BBC Reith Lecturer, it is precisely this lack of cultural cross-fertilisation (and its origins) which he expounds as the major obstacle to a fully united Europe.
In his lectures entitled ‘Beyond the Tunnel of History’, which take the French Bicentenary as a starting point, Darras plumbs and unravels the shared histories of Britain and France with their mutual misconceptions.
By guiding the listener through his very personal European museum, he endeavours to suggest ways in which a tangible partnership in 1992 and beyond may flourish.
European union is his leitmotiv.
Born in 1939 near Crecy in Northern France, his childhood was overshadowed by women, war and, inevitably, the Germans who occupied their village.
‘I heard so much about resisting that I developed a very derisive concept about men at war,’ Darras explained, ‘strange for a boy of five.’
When his father, frustrated after years as a POW, returned, he tried to lay down the law.
Young Darras rebelled.
‘It took a very long time to reconcile myself with my father.’
He admits to having wanted always to write poetry but doubts whether he can attribute that entirely to his rebellion.
‘My tremendous love of language and languages must be the main reason and my love of nature and the North.’
A conventional classics education at the equivalent of anOxbridge college brought him to Paris.
‘The last thing I wanted to do was teach.
I didn't know what career I wanted which baffled the system so they sent me to Edinburgh for a year.
I did end up teaching — but not French.’
Married by 20 with a child, he had to earn a living.
‘I really do feel I sacrificed myself.
I just wanted to be a poet.’
Darras is a tall man, with northern features, courteous in his manner and brimming with charisma.
‘Poetry places me in a very special position — as someone who in the end came to terms with society but not enough to be socially acceptable.’
Darras relishes the splendid isolation that his undisputed status as poet confers, and the power that language bestows.
Several other traits make Darras something of an outsider, set apart from French cultural orthodoxy.
Aside from his love of the open spaces, rugged land, and seascapes of the North and the diversity of its culture, his teaching of a non-Romance language is considered tantamount to a betrayal.
Moreover to advocate exposing French tradition to foreign literatures, citing Whitman, Williams, and Pound, as seminal influences, to translate them in addition to David Jones or Basil Bunting, and to deny any allegiance to the French poetic mainstream is received in some circles with incomprehension.
Darras is unrepentant.
His passionate love of the English language is absolute: his wit and fluency are its testimony.
In this centenary year of Lord Reith's birth, Daniel Snowman, chosen by the BBC mandarins to produce the 1989 lectures, decided to break with tradition.
He invited a non-native English speaker, one who could cast his net across several disciplines and one who would agree to talk freely from notes rather than the traditional script.
‘I'm really making a plea in the lectures that if the British want to get involved in Europe, they should show a few signs, be prepared to learn other languages, open up to other cultures.
These aspects are never debated.
Yet they are the crux.
‘Economics is much easier.
Everyone understands the common language of money.
Europe is such a priority to me.
I wouldn't mind English being the only language — it certainly makes me unpopular.’
Darras' writing and translating have however been received with great acclaim.
Just published last year were his evocative chapters called Le Genie du Nord (Grasset, Paris), reflecting his preoccupation with the North, the fields of war, the detrimental effects of nationalism and his hopes for Europe, complemented by La Maye (Trois Cailloux, Amiens), a 500 page semi-autobiography in poetry and prose written in a variety of styles and voices.
‘That really squares with my notion of polyphony — my guiding principle in art as in life.’
The poems are intended to be read aloud as in the late middle ages, a period to which Darras is keenly attracted because national and linguistic boundaries had not yet hardened.
‘We must return to multiplicity, where the single nation state is no longer supreme.’
It is possible.
Darras and his wife live in English, as he calls it, one of his sons in German and when they go down the street, they live in French.
IDON'T want to be tied down by someone else's notion of nationality.
It's my fight against the Right.
I'm trying to divorce birth from place although I don't want to create a Communist society.
It must come from the people themselves: art and culture can play an enormous part.’
It could be argued that Darras' vision is quixotic.
He is quite prepared to accept this criticism.
‘It will take a long time, we are just emerging from the dark ages, but things don't happen if you don't make them.
People will have to shift — on their own basis and in their own lives through coaxing and imposing, disengaging themselves from nationality.
I know I demand a very high price.
It's the privilege of a poet.’
The Reith Lectures, a series of six talks on BBC Radio 4, start on Wednesday, November 15 at 8.15pm.
Jacques Darras: ‘We are just emerging from the dark ages’.
for tabloid arts p 21
3rd south arts Almeida..
By Michael Billington I Miss My War.
I MISS My War at the Almeida is a first play in English by Iraj Jannatie Ataie, an exiled Iranian poet who was a political prisoner under the Shah's regime and whose A Cry With Sewn Lips (in Farsi) made a moving impression at the Theatre Upstairs four years ago.
His new play, about the corrupting effect of a patriarchal, militarist culture, is clearly written from the heart but it subordinates characterisation and structure to the promulgation of its message.
Its hero, Sya, is a crippled Iranian soldier who arrives in London with his sister, Sohy, seeking medical treatment.
We learn that he has not only killed his brother-in-law for opposing the Iranian government but that he unrepentantly believes that ‘war is the source of love and hope and satisfaction.’
And in Britain he finds his views are strangely echoed.
His landlady, Penny (a slatternly version of Odysseus's Penelope), treats Sya as a substitute for her missing soldier-husband, while her lodger Burt, a footloose unemployed actor, yearns to swap his decadent native land for the iron certainties of Iran.
I get the impression that Mr Ataie has decided what he wants to say and then created characters to fit his theme.
Thus Sya, who announces that ‘one who believes in war believes in God’ and who beats his sister with a khaki belt, is an inflexible symbol of a militaristic ethos.
Equally, Penny remains on one level as a deluded fantasist who believes, very like an Iranian woman, that a wife's duty is to wait for her husband's return from the wars.
The only character who shows any internal conflict or dramatic progress is Sohy who gets a glimpse of Westernised freedom (symbolised by the abandonment of her veil) but who cannot easily shake off a lifetime of enslavement.
Not only are the characters walking symbols but Mr Ataie uses poetic metaphor (the text is filled with references to stallions and horses) as a means of camouflaging daily reality.
We never learn how Sya and Sohy have raised the money to come to Britain any more than we discover how the unemployed thespian lodger pays the rent.
And Mr Ataie's thesis that the British have a deep-seated reverence for war is too easily symbolised by having Penny make Remembrance Day poppies or court Sya in front of a military monument.
Mr Ataie writes with undoubted passion but insufficient technique.
His production for the Mazdak Theatre Group is, however, well designed by Penny Fitt whose set consists of teeming military icons.
Kulvinder Ghir as the iron-jawed Sya, Soudabeh Farrokhnia as his mutinous sister, Patti Love as the pining Penny and Sylvester McCoy as her drunken lodger all turn in perfectly good perform- ances.
But, though it is heartening to find an Iranian writer bravely grappling with the problems of exile and turning a critical eye on the values of both his native and adopted countries, Mr Ataie will write better plays when he admits the theatrical importance of contradiction and argument.
At the Almeida (01-359 4404) until November 25 and then on tour to Newcastle, Sheffield, Leeds and Manchester.
Town and Country Club.
By Steve Dodd The House of Love.
IT was an important homecoming for London's most chic guitar group.
The House of Love admitted it themselves, apologising for their shyness, because after all, this was the biggest gig yet.
An important occasion for the fans, too, whose allegiance to this post-psychedelic foursome borders on total dev- otion.
Tickets sold out weeks beforehand, and if you want to see the band now your best chance will be in some of the more obscure locations ever played.
Widnes, Blackburn and Greenock are on the list already, and the group invites suggestions from towns which don't often get to see bands.
John O'Groats, get your bid in now.
The House of Love inherit their particlar brand of psychedelia from early Echo and The Bunnymen and the Teardrop Explodes.
At times, the similarities are too close for comfort, edging towards the derivative.
Powerful, multi-layered chords pile up, the ornamentation provided by guitarist Terry Bickers's occasional inspired excursions through the harmonics.
The smart groups know this grand approach appeals to the twentysomethings, and from U2 and Simple Minds they have all done it before.
But the House of Love do offer something of their own — a willingness to play around with the pace of the music, cutting off the power to switch suddenly into a softer, more lyrical approach.
This is clear in their best songs like Christine and Love In A Car.
Live, their better work justifies some of the admiration the group have received in the music press, showing a quality the clinical approach of their record producers managed to suppress.
They are a humble, unassuming bunch on stage.
Only Terry Bickers seems to want to be a pop star, attacking the music with flailing arms.
Not full blown excess, but perhaps a demi-Pete Townsend.
Singer Guy Chadwick was all smiles and thanks, saving one little outburst of annoyance for the final encore, a solo semi-acoustic blues number, Secrets.
This is the B side of the new single and truly atrocious.
The twentysomethings sniggered so he told them to shut up, gaining an instant roar of approval from the same people.
Whimsy with bite, what could be cooler?
The new album is out early next year, and should provide another couple of minor classics.
With luck, a few years will bring a greatest hits compilation.
Now that would be worth having.
1st north arts Leeds..
By Albert Hunt Troublesome Behviour.
PILOT Theatre is a community theatre group based in Wakefield.
Every year it devises (in its own words)‘an issue-based play for 14-plus.’
This means that its touring shows are normally only seen in secondary schools.
Two public performances this week at Leeds Polytechnic's Studio Theatre of the group's latest show, Troublesome Behaviour, have allowed theatregoers to see what they have been missing.
Troublesome Behaviour has been devised by four actors working with director, Martin McNicholas.
Set in a room in a student hostel in Sheffield, it explores the tensions between Jem, a student from Darlington, his Salvation Army father, his African Muslim room-mate, Musa, and a girlfriend, Trish.
Jem has been beaten up in the street by three men.
He has been injured and is clearly in a state of shock.
At the end of the play, he takes a box full of sleeping pills and washes them down with wine — both pills and wine have been affectionately supplied by Trish.
The apparently aggressive Musa, tenderly tries to keep him conscious until the ambulance arrives.
The play is very compelling — it would make a riveting hour on TV.
The characters are closely observed and sympathetically played.
Stephanie Gascoigne is particularly convicing as Trish, the girl who cares for Jem, but doesn't want to become emotionally committed.
The group's publicity suggests that the issue being dealt with is mental illness, which led a therapist in the audience to say that none of the characters seemed to him to be mentally ill.
(He added that in his hospital ‘the people who are mad are the attendants.’)
To me, Troublesome Behaviour is about four people desperately trying to make contact with each other.
At Leeds the play made a very direct contact with the audience.
I hope that in future more of this highly professional group's work will be made available to the public.
Pilot Theatre tel: 0924 220406.
1st north arts Sheffield.
By Tim Brown Leonce and Lena.
READ any good Buchner lately?
Admittedly not, and while all his three plays are read more than seen, this one is read about more than read.
The fact is, however, that Leonce and Lena is more than a fizzled-out digression into comedy by the creator of Woyzeck.
Between the dud sections of melancholic philosophical banter the dialogue flares menacingly, crackling and spluttering like a damp 150-year-old firework that constantly threatens to go off.
By this fitful light you see Buchner, crazily ahead of his time, trying to invent the Theatre of the Absurd without much understanding of the essential carpentry of comedy.
Lindsay Posner's productiion in the Sheffield Crucible Studio gratefully propagates allusions to absurdist clasics.
The mad tinpot tyrant King Peter (Gerrard McArthur)— who can't pull up his own trousers — presides over the play from a gold-plated lavatory worthy of Ubu Roi.
The runaway Prince Leonce and his veminous, thieving philosphical sparring partner Valerio, after pawning their clothes for food, loaf about in the forest in long johns swapping paradoxes like two men waiting for Godot.
And Leonce (Adam Cotz) happens to look exactly like that potent influence in anarchist theatre, Hamlet.
What comes their way is not Godot but Princess Lena.
They marry and, in a deeply cynical pantomime ending, inherit the reins of tyrany.
There are two sharp Mervyn Peake caricatures — by Gillian Hanna in a brief, chilling appearance as Leonce's mistress, and by Derek Hutchinson, whose brutishly powerful Valerio is the main event of the evening.
But the rest of the act lacks this savagery and Posner should surely have aimed for more laughs earlier — at present the audience only relaxes, by the usual process of familiarity, around the half way mark.
Sheffield Crucible Studio until December 2.
Tel: 0742 769922.
1st north arts Buxton.
By David Ward King Lear.
THREE side-by-side playgoers in the Buxton Opera House dress circle followed the text in their Signet Shakespeares throughout this four-hour Lear.
They turned their pages in perfect harmony and experienced a decent run through of a difficult text rather than an intense spiritual journey.
Six out of ten to the Oxford Stage Company; could do better.
John Retallack is a bright director but keeps only a very light hand on the tiller here; this is not so much director's theatre as anonymous the- atre.
Which puts quite a burden on an uneven cast.
The Fool, played by Raymond Greenaway, is a follower of the Eddie Grundy method and contributes nothing.
Goneril and Regan (Deborah Findlay and Carla Mendona) wear smart haircuts and padded shouldered outfits but flounce and droop like exiles from The Importance of Being Earnest.
Edmund (John Kazek) is a ludicrous, ranting, kilted boor who seems to have strayed in from the Scottish play.
It's Lear and Edgar who rescue the night.
Simon Kunz manages all the baffling Poor Tom stuff with conviction and, in his scenes with Gloucester, generates the kind of anguish so often missing elsewhere.
Philip Voss overcomes some obstacles — including at one point being dressed in a Babygro — to chart the King's decline.
The battle with the tigerish daughters is managed with gathering incredulity, the storm and trial flounder a bit(mainly through limp direction), and the last scenes, culminating in the reconciliation with Cordelia, are honest and dignified.
Lear's death may not have been devastating, but I was sorry to see him go.
Helpful hint: skip the very long first half and take your seat after the interval.
At the Buxton Opera House tonight (Tel: 0298 72190 or 0298 78939).
Yul Brynner…the King on the treadmill at the London Palladium in 1979, and (right) Rock Brynner, in London this week PHOTOGRAPH: DAVID SILLITOE.
How does a son live his own life in the shadow of an overpowering father who is also a worldwide star?
Rock Brynner tells Helen Oldfield how he sprang the Hollywood brat trap The King and me YUL Brynner died in 1985.
For his son, Rock, who had spent most of his life adoring his father like a god, ‘it was somewhat like the feeling…it's late at night and you're alone on the Tube riding with a bunch of thugs and they get off your car.’
And he quotes John Mortimer's kinder phrase from Voyage Round My Father about ‘the step into the sunlight when no one is taller than you.’
Four years later he has written Yul's biography, which is partly a show biz life and partly a much sharper settling of accounts between father and son.
He untangles his father's early life — tangled chiefly by Brynner himself who always told interviewers a different story — from Switzerland to the farthest reaches of Russia and then to Paris as a teenager in the Thirties, where he joined a Romany gypsy troupe.
Brynner's life in America is better known: the movies, some outstanding, like The Magnificent Seven, many terrible; the wives; the lovers — Judy Garland, Marilyn Monroe, Marlene Dietrich, Joan Crawford (a businesslike woman in love as in other affairs, making their encounter ‘among the least erotic half hours’ in Brynner's life); and above all the role that he created and that in the end devoured him, the King of Siam.
The book is no Daddie Dearest, though the two were estranged for many years.
Rock became aware that the thrilling, magical father, who had taken his young son backstage, on the road, drinking, water-skiiing, was gradually becoming a resentful tyrant.
He was disappointed, too, that his father had given up artistic ideals in the pursuit of money.
From Brynner's point of view, Rock thinks, his son was both a living rebuke and a terrible financial failure, and his drinking didn't help either.
They were reconciled in the months before Brynner's excruciatingly painful death from cancer.
But the will, which Rock read in a newspaper, was at first hard to take.
Brynner had left virtually everything to his fourth wife, ‘the dancing girl’ as Rock invariably refers to her, and not one personal possession to his son or his four younger daughters.
Later he came to rationalise that, seeing it as part of a family pattern.
‘He's abandoned everyone else in his life, from his mother and father and his sister, three wives and hundreds of girlfriends, to his acting coach.
He didn't single out his children for this.
And I had to my satisfaction traced it back to Jules and Boris [Yul's grandfather and father, both of whom deserted their families].’
One of the achievements of the book is to keep the bitterness that developed in later life wholly unsuspected in the early chapters.
Besides, he'd learned a long time before that you can love a person without loving what they do.
Towards the end, as the stage show of The King And I moved triumphantly from city to city, Rock began to feel like the boy who could see the emperor had no clothes.
‘Nobody else could see that the man was on a financial treadmill, that his expenses were so huge he had to spend 50 weeks a year on the road to afford two weeks in his castle in Normandy.’
Since the book appeared in America, Rock has been surprised by the letters he's received ‘from people who live in the suburbs or small flats where the father is the king, where his armchair is the throne.
The Archie Bunkers of the world.
I had not seen that it would would have that special resonance.’
But Brynner was a star as well as a powerful personality and Rock's own life tells of the effect that had.
His childhood was concertina-ed (though he says now, gleefully, that it's never too late to have a happy childhood)— something he shared with his life-long friend Liza Minnelli.
‘We were nine when we were sent to boarding shool.
I had my first car when I was 10, with a chauffeur.
We'd go out on the town, hit a few cocktail parties, go dancing, and I'd drop a few hundred quid on a weekend.’
There's a bleak line in the book when, his parents divorcing, his father leaving for Europe, Rock quotes himself, aged 11, saying ‘I'll be OK, Dad, I won't need Mom so long as I can have the limo.’
By the time he was 17, he was a student at Trinity College, Dublin, having already spent a semester or two at Yale, and well on his way to becoming an alcoholic.
I was in the same Mental and Moral Science class as him and I can't say I noticed.
He was the kid who went back to be Frank Sinatra's bar-tender in the vacation while the rest of us were toting Christmas mail for the Post Office.
Maybe he did splash out on exotic ‘boilermakers’— beer with a Jack Daniels chaser — while the rest of us supped halves of Guinness, and his hands shook a little.
It was part of the mystique, or so we thought.
In a way, as Rock puts it, he was trying to relive his father's life on fast-forward.
After graduating he wrote and performed a one-man play, Opium, depicting Jean Cocteau's struggle to overcome addiction.
Years before, in Paris, Brynner had been a friend of Cocteau's and his opium dealer.
Brynner, too, studied philosophy briefly.
‘Yul, as an acrobat, was a flying clown.
I, a generation later, became a street clown, albeit a hippy.’
Yul drove Michael Chekhov's theatre company on tour and sparred with Sugar Ray Robinson.
Rock became roadie for The Band and was Muhammad Ali's bodyguard.
Yul was married four times, Rock already three.
PRESSED for the pros and cons of being the son of one of the famous, Rock replies: ‘I think I'm among the most blessed of people who ever lived and I think Liza is too.
There are others who are dead, Paul Newman's son, Mary Tyler Moore's son — there are a lot of casualties.
To be known as somebody else's something, whether it's husband of the prime minister or nephew of the chairman of the board, is to be like some kind of vestigial appendage.
‘But let me add, Liza and I got a great education.
We travelled literally from the week we were born, we met millions of the most exciting and dynamic personalities.
Sal Mineo was like my big brother, James Dean was my buddy…
‘Yul was determined that every question I asked be answered.
At 10 or 11, I read On The Beach, Neville Shute's book; I thought it was frightening, so he called in an air force general to explain it to me.
It was always so.
When I was 12, my great hero was Van Cliburn because he'd just won the Tchaikovsky Competition, so he was invited over and played on my spinet.’
But do remarkable achievements make remarkable people?
‘Well, there are some real schmucks out there.’
The one thing he never wanted was an acting career —‘I'd seen that…’
And now he's broken free from the pattern and from the addictions, first alcohol then cocaine.
He's a writer and a historian, and he's growing his hair half-way down his back for his next one-man show.
He's ‘squeaky clean’— he gets high flying his own plane.
‘Alcohol did me the greatest favour, which is that it brought me down to earth.
I was otherwise condemned to be a Hollywood brat.
By the age of 23, I'd starred in a one-man show on Broadway and when the play closed I confronted the truth that if I wasn't the star of a play I couldn't feed myself.
So I became Red Hat the clown and travelled among the street people (in Europe), a little drunk, but not crazy drunk in those days.
I learned a thousand crafts.
I have a hundred different ways to earn a living.
I can function in the real world.
I was meant to grow up something like Desi Arnaz Jnr and that's not what happened.’
Yul: The Man Who Would Be King is published by Collins, £15. for tabloid arts p 19