

MANY DESKTOP computers can generate high-quality digital sound, but apart from games and music programs, most software emits only beeps.
Bill Gaver has ideas which could change all that.
As a research project at Apple, Gaver added sound effects to the Macintosh's desktop interface to produce the SonicFinder.
Now at Rank Xerox's Europarc, in Cambridge, he is continuing his work on sound.
Gaver is not so much interested in musical instruments or laboratory oscillators as in whistling wind, splashing water and hurrying footsteps.
This is sound we hear with ears tuned by a billion years of evolution.
‘Most of the sounds that we are surrounded by are not musical sounds,’ Gaver argues.
‘When we hear such sounds we do not pay attention to things like pitch and timbre.
Instead we think about what made them.’
On hearing footsteps, ‘I think ‘footsteps’; and maybe even, ‘those are the footsteps of somebody walking quickly.’
Maybe it's a man, maybe it's a woman.
I can tell what they are walking on, maybe; perhaps whether they are going upstairs or downstairs.
That is what I call everyday listening.’
Gaver sees the possibility of establishing a new framework for talking about sound.
‘Instead of talking about basic acoustics and the physics of sound itself, and then how that maps to our experiences of things like pitch and so forth, you can talk about sources of sound and the physics of sources of sound and how we experience those.’
The precedent for this approach is the work done on vision by the psychologist James Gibson, from the 1950s onwards.
‘He talks about things that are intuitively relevant to everyday life.’
Gaver's recent doctoral thesis at the University of California, San Diego, included work on the use of sound in computer interfaces.
But he began by scouting out the field of timbre perception from a Gibsonian perspective.
Presenting data is not Gaver's prime concern.
‘I am trying to give people information about what's happening inside their system,’ he explains.
This leads to the idea of auditory icons, which indicate the nature of objects inside the computer, by alluding to some object in the real world.
‘Everything makes sounds,’ Gaver explains as he sits down at his Macintosh.
‘If I select an object it's like hitting it.
And the kind of sound it makes depends on the kind of object it is.
A file makes a kind of dull wooden sound, folders make a slightly sharper sound, applications sound like metal.
Discs sound sort of hollow…’
The sounds vary with the size of the object.
Little applications make a high-pitched ‘clink’ when probed with the mouse, big ones a beefier ‘clunk’.
Folders (the icons for directories) have the same property.
‘If a folder has a lot of stuff in it, it sounds bigger than one which is fairly small.
Discs make sounds which depend on how much space they have.’
When you use the mouse to drag an icon to a new position, in copying a file for example, the sonic feedback continues.
‘If I pick up something and drag it it makes this white noise sound,’ Gaver demonstrates.
It is a nondescript sound like the sigh of a carpet as furniture is shoved across it.
‘That sound changes as I go from the window that I picked it up in, to a different window, or to the desktop.’
The sighing changes in tone.
‘If I hit a container like a folder or a disk while I am dragging, then the container makes its sound and the dragging sound stops.
That turns out to be very nice for finding targets.’
Mac users will know how important it is to drag icons to the correct position.
‘Dragging also depends on size, so if I pick up a bunch of stuff I get a lower dragging sound than if I pick up just one.
So that again is just to keep reality going.
‘If I open the folder,’ Gaver continues, ‘I get this whooshing sound which also depends on the size of the folder.’
Scrolling a file within a window generates a series of ‘plunks’ going down or up in pitch.
Resizing a window makes a tapping sound.
Selecting a window makes a glassy clink.
Is all this actually helping?
‘The idea is just to associate sounds with as many events as possible, and to hold off worrying about how useful they are,’ Gaver replies.
It was not always easy to pick an appropriate sound effect.
One which caused trouble was the simple act of opening a window.
Gaver manoeuvred house windows and taped the noises and they sounded terrible.
‘It took me a while to realise that of course I am not really opening a window: something is zooming forward and appearing out of nothing.
And that's something that does not happen in the real world.’
PERHAPS the biggest challenge is to find the perfect sound to accompany an action which has no equivalent in real life.
Gaver's principle here is to look for plausible extensions of reality.
The film Star Wars demonstrates this perfectly, both in sound and vision.
Take the light sabre, the futuristic hand weapon which resembles a rod of roaring, incandescent gas.
‘That of course does not exist,’ he says.
‘And yet you can look at the thing in Star Wars and the sounds it makes are just perfect for it.’
As windows open and close on the Macintosh screen, the SonicFinder makes impressive whooshing sounds.
Apple has added the necessary ‘hooks’ for a sonic interface, in release 6.04 of the Macintosh system software.
But the all-important file of sound effects is not, at present, included.
However, Gaver reports that quite a few people within Apple use his SonicFinder in their daily work.
Maybe they like to know the computer is still doing something while they look away from the screen.
Maybe it helps to generate the sense of ‘direct engagement’ in your work that comes when you forget you are using a computer at all.
But if you do not think sound is important, try watching Star Wars with the volume turned down.
Randall Smith of Xerox PARC in California is another believer in the value of meaningful sound.
He has added sound to his Alternative Reality Kit (Computer Guardian, October 1, 1987), a simulated world where you, the user, can change the laws of physics.
There are thuds and boings when objects collide.
Sound ‘increases the sense of tangibility,’ says Smith.
In the new version, Shared Ark, you are likely to encounter other people doing their own experiments from their own workstations.
It doesn't matter that they may be 700 miles away at the other end of a data link.
At any time only a small part of Shared Ark's simulated world is visible on any one user's screen.
But in the background you can hear the murmur of other people's activity and this, Smith argues, is one of the things which makes Shared Ark work.
You don't have to pay attention, but you are likely to notice a sudden hush, or any sounds of special significance.
‘Have you ever heard your name mentioned in a crowd?’ asks Smith.
In commercial computer applications, he believes sound will be particularly important in collaborative tasks, where people need to be alert to what colleagues are doing, without having it distractingly thrust upon their attention.
Tony Durham writes the Over the horizon column in Computing magazine.
Sound ideas: Bill Gaver.
‘I am trying to give people information about what's happening inside their system'PHOTOGRAPH: MANNI MASONS.
Steve Cassidy hears the noises off.
SOUND on the Apple Macintosh has its roots in comedy.
Games have made noises through the Mac speaker ever since its introduction, and many early systems were afflicted with a true celebration of the typical Mac programmer's sense of humour.
This was a small operating system patch by the name of MacPuke, which made the innocuous little beige box belch in a particularly corpulent, beer-sodden way when the operating system decided to eject a floppy disc from the drive.
This and similar programs have spread through the Macintosh community's excellent Public Domain (PD) software network.
And nowadays, users of the newer Macs may benefit from larger speakers and earphone sockets, projecting sounds which the original machines mumbled.
One game, called Net Trek, which has recently made the transition from PD to commercial product, uses sounds sampled from the Star Trek television series to accompany the user's attempts to pilot around a galaxy of other Mac users, when all the machines are connected together by the network.
It is a very strange experience, walking the corridors of a large company, to hear loud blasts of phasers and the firing of photon torpedoes echoing to and fro from various offices.
Sounds may be provided as simple files, or built into Apple's free do-it-yourself hypertext program, Hypercard.
Many PD sources offer Hypercard ‘stacks’, which are simply collections of sounds, accessed by pushing on-screen ‘buttons’ to play them.
Educorp, an American PD library, offers a wide range of these.
Some are simply short sound bites taken from classic cartoons.
Bugs Bunny screaming ‘Ooooh, Pru-NELLA!!’ can liven up many a telephone answering machine tape.
The Educorp catalogue also lists some more contemplative, or just curious, examples, including the Bogie Stack.
This features the most hackneyed sections of the soundtrack of Casablanca.
I can't think of a single occasion in which this might come in handy.
The pinnacle of Mac sound replayers is undoubtedly SoundMaster.
It takes up where MacPuke left off, offering a whole range of activities the computer is likely to perform, and the opportunity to attach any sound to them.
Thus your machine may start up with the HAL 9000 self-test (‘I am completely operational and all my circuits are functioning perfectly’) from Kubrick's 2001, or ‘Space, the Final Frontier’, the striking lead-in to Star Trek, or ‘We're not in Kansas anymore, Toto’ from The Wizard of Oz.
Suppliers like Educorp and Somak Software bundle up discs containing SoundMaster and libraries of sounds, including the favourites mentioned above.
They cover a broad range of themes, with a heavy bias towards space opera, cartoons and Monty Python.
A machine which closes down with Michael Palin enthusing: ‘Ah, I see you have the machine which goes PING!’ and which signals errors by way of Eric Idle's angry, affronted ‘Ni!’is very hard to accuse of alienation.
But one that has had the error beep replaced by a robotic voice screaming ‘Attention!’ is likely to have the opposite effect, as is one that ingests a floppy disc accompanied by a long drawn out grumble taken from a soggy passage in the Star Wars trilogy.
And if, when I turn my Mac on to upload this article, you hear James Brown screaming: ‘Fellas, I'm ready to get up an’ do MAH thang!’don't fret.
It's only the computer.
The Educorp PD software catalogue is available from Translatum International, Saithaelwyd Ucha, Holywell, Clwyd CH8 8NU (tel: 0352 710276).
Sid Smith tests the Portfolio, Atari's new wallet-sized electronic organiser The pound in your pocket.
I KEEP a pretty exclusive pocket.
It's previously rejected the yuppie Filofax (too big), the Microwriter AgendA (nasty keyboard), and the Psion Organiser (both of the above).
Now the £249 Atari Portfolio claims to offer crucial functionality to every inside pocket — or at least to replace its own bulk in existing inhabitants.
In computer terms, its bulk is certainly low.
The wallet-sized Portfolio weighs just over a pound, yet opens out to reveal a qwerty keyboard and an eight line by 40 column display.
The keyboard is minute: the tiniest typist I know couldn't squeeze all her fingers into the ‘home’ position.
But forget 10-digit typing and you're soon skipping across the keys with the irritating agility of people who never sweated in front of a Pitman's chart.
There's no tactile feedback from the square, shirt-button sized keys, but sufficient space between them to trap most errors.
There's no such justification for the LCD (liquid crystal display) screen: it's just small.
However, the display is good of its kind, and the hinge means that the screen can be tipped to whatever angle is convenient.
Along with its size, the Portfolio's claimed PC compatibility is its most eye-catching feature.
However, the machine has a basic memory of only 128K, a not-very-standard keyboard and screen, no disk drive, and an operating system called DOS, which stands for DIP Operating System, after the machine's British designers.
In short, it seems inevitable that most PC software will need some kind of re-write to run on the Portfolio, and some of it will never fit at all .
It's true that Atari is offering a card drive for desktop PCs, and battery-backed add-in memory cards, but these cost over £1 per kilobyte.
It also says major applications will be made available on plug-in cards but, as always, computer buyers should only assess what they can see, not what might turn up who-knows-when.
However, Atari has at least launched a PC interface box, which adds one third to the Portfolio's size and cost.
Fortunately it works well, since the machine has an obvious role as the portable data capture device for a desktop PC.
Portfolio owners can also check whether the machine's five resident applications — calculator, diary, address book, text editor and spreadsheet — can challenge the current contents of their inside pocket, including those old-fashioned paper diary and address books.
Like most electronic diaries, the Portfolio's has no advantage beyond its Alarm.
Even word processing functions such as Search and Copy are hardly significant for the tiny quantity of text usually involved.
Address books are different.
There's more text, they get changed less often, and a Search function is genuinely useful if you can remember everything about a person except their surname.
Having said that, the not-outrageous address file on my desktop machine was over 40K long — requiring much juggling between the Portfolio's silicon drive and general memory.
ODDLY, the address file would not go into the address book application, for reasons (I assume) to do with the latter's format demands.
However, the text editor was more accommodating, and had all the utility of the address book except its auto-dialler, which only works with tone-phones (you hold the machine's tiny speaker against the phone) and anyway makes you look like an idiot.
The calculator is OK, but by itself wouldn't earn the machine pocket space.
It offers five memories, basic arithmetic functions, powers and factorials.
You can't save calculations, but you can track back through a chain of arithmetic, alter figures, and see the alterations reflected in the final sum.
The spreadsheet is 127 by 255 cells and has some level of Lotus 1-2-3 compatibility.
But if you're expecting to import data from a PC, then first check the long list of unsupported 1-2-3 commands, each of which generates an error message on the Portfolio.
And are you really sure you could do anything useful on a spreadsheet display only four cells by six?
All of which brings us to the text editor.
Forget touch typing and full-screen editing, of course: the Portfolio's keyboard and screen suit it only for note-taking, and its resident editing software is inadequate for anything more enterprising.
Nevertheless, the editor does offer several advantages over that of, say, Sir Clive Sinclair's Z88 laptop — notably the excellent undelete and block operations.
However the lack of a word count function is a grievous ommision in any machine with limited display space.
So could the Portfolio work its passage in the average pocket?
As always, only the individual user can tell.
But buyers most likely to be satisfied probably already own a desktop PC, perhaps with an important text file which they'd be glad to carry around for reference.
They probably also have some need of on-the-spot data entry, either in the form of text notes, or limited spreadsheet work.
In hardware terms, the Portfolio is the best electronic ‘Filofax’ currently available.
Its PC compatibility is a distraction for most users of standard applications, but the resident ones are as good as any available.
Pocket PC power: Sid Smith and the Portfolio — the best electronic ‘Filofax’ currently available?
PHOTOGRAPH: GRAHAM TURNER OVERNIGHT FILE
Will patients or the computer industry benefit as the new NHS contract forces GPs into the micro-chip age?.
As Jane Feinman reports, for many doctors the technogical revolution is already proving a nightmare Kicking and screaming
COMPUTERISATION has become an urgent problem for Britain's 36,000 family doctors.
Their new contracts, starting on April 1, 1990, are virtually unworkable without the use of information technology.
General practice is thus being forced kicking and screaming into the computer age.
But this revolution in what must be Britain's most valued public industry, is taking place in the market place.
Central planning has a noticeably low profile.
Less than six months before the contract is enforced, the Department of Health has still not issued specifications for software producers.
That means programs have still not been written for a whole range of complex new tasks that GPs will be asked to do.
Nor has the Department decided whether it is going to contribute towards the considerable capital cost of new computers, causing doctors to put off to the last minute a decision on which system to choose.
With only a third of Britain's 10,000 practices so far computerised, and practice systems costing on average well over £20,000, 1990 will be a bonanza year for the computer industry.
Market research shows at least 3,500 practices plan to computerise in the next 12 months, and this is almost certainly a conservative figure.
Vamp, one of the three big companies specialising in the medical business, is currently placing 80 to 100 computers a month.
‘We are gearing up to do 200 systems a month,’ said its marketing director, Ian Collins.
‘Even so, we expect that there will be huge logjams.’
An estimated 40 new firms have already joined the big three specialising in GP computers since the Government's controversial plans for a management orientated NHS were published in January.
With no regulation of the industry, there is no way to police the cowboy end of the market, which the experts say is now well represented.
Scores of computer consultants have appeared to provide ‘specialist’ help.
And rumours of takeovers of the small companies by giants such as IBM and Hewlett-Packard abound — so far with no foundation.
But for GPs the technological revolution is proving a nightmare.
‘It is an absolute shambles,’ says Dr Glynn Hayes, a GP and president of the British Computer Society GP specialists' committee.
‘The Government is railroading through a new contract which depends on the comprehensive computerisation of practices.
Yet most practices still do not have a computer, and the vast majority will start working the contract without the information technology expertise to manage it.’
FAMILY practitioner committees, which both pay and monitor NHS independent contracts, are equally unprepared.
‘FPC records of patient registration are inaccurate,’ warns Dr Hayes.
‘Their recall systems for cervical cytology to enable GPs to carry out smears,-a major new task under new contract — are notoriously inadequate.
Practices are actually in danger of going bankrupt through computer errors on the part of the administrators.’
One well-organised practice which is currently computerising its patient registers has taken the trouble to check the corresponding FPC register.
It took about 300 hours, but it was time well spent, the practice believes, because of the number of inaccuracies in the FPC register — around 40 per cent.
It will be one of the few practices that will be able to turn round and tell the FPC that it has got it wrong, claims its senior partner.
There are other complex tasks required of software which the suppliers admit they have not yet cracked, such as reaching targets for immunising all two-year-olds in the practice.
This is another requirement of GPs from April 1990, but many mothers are advised by the health visitor to go to a health authority clinic to be immunised.
The GPs' database will have to differentiate between infants who have not been immunised and those not immunised by the GP.
How the computer will get the data is an outstanding question.
With payment by results, in the absence of an answer, GP pay is going to be skewed.
The crisis has been caused partly by the reluctance of self-employed family doctors to invest the considerable sums needed to computerise.
Both the Department of Health and the Royal College of General Practitioners have signalled for years that good general practice should not ignore the microchip, but to little effect.
The benefits could be overwhelming.
Computerisation allows doctors to expand their largely reactive role of sitting in the surgery waiting for ill patients to come to them.
A computerised age/sex register enables the practice to carry out screening tests, and identify levels of morbidity in the community to facilitate planning and concentrate better levels of care on the elderly, the chronically ill and the disabled.
Computers can also enable hospitals and GPs to talk to each other far more quickly and efficiently, to book out-patient appointments, get the results of lab tests and receive information when a patient is discharged from hospital.
But it is not only the general practice units that are often mismanaged.
Hospitals are developing computer systems which are often not compatible with one another and are being used as little more than expensive word processors.
Of course, lack of funding for systems and training, capital costs and development are at the root of the malaise over computerisation — and this is not a new problem for the NHS.
If doctors are worried about entering the new era of ‘market medicine,’ it is partly because they feel under-equipped for it.
But is the private sector really going to provide the investment and planning needed for this sudden introduction of information technology?
OVERNIGHT FILE
Microfile.
By Jack Schofield Computer editor
MULTI-PROCESSING Unix will soon be available as a standard product, SCO MPX, from the Santa Cruz Operation.
And applications programs won't need to be rewritten to take advantage of it.
MPX uses technology originally developed by Corollary, demonstrated by SCO on the Zenith Z1000 in February, and announced with the Compaq Systempro mini earlier this month.
It comes as an extension to SCO's Unix V (which is also part of the Open Desktop suite) for systems based on Intel's 80386 and i486 processors.
SCO's Doug Michels claims, ‘You can now build a PC-based workstation, server or departmental mini that will outrun virtually any computer based on today's Risc microprocessors or proprietary CPUs.’
SCO MPX runs on the Corollary 386/smp and 486/smp, Compaq Systempro, Apricot VX FTserver, Zenith Z1000 and Mitac Series 500.
Each copy of SCO MPX supports one extra processor, up to a maximum of 16 processors on one machine, with 15 copies of MPX.
A two-processor system should support about 128 users.
SCO MPX will be available early next year and cost £750.
Mach too.
AS EXPECTED, subscribers to the Open Software Foundation, a software house set up by IBM, DEC and others, have voted to change course.
Originally the OSF was to produce a version of Unix based on IBM's implementation, AIX.
Now that AT&T is shipping the standard System V Release 4, why bother?
(If it is compatible with V.4, who needs it?
If it isn't, who wants it?)
Instead the OSF is to use the Mach 4.3BSD-compatible multi-processing version of Unix, developed at Carnegie-Mellon University.
This is best known from Steve Jobs' NeXT workstation, but the OSF will use code from Encore's implementation for its Multimax range.
‘Significant portions of IBM's AIX will be incorporated.’
Encore has been shipping Multimax superminis for over a year and has now sold (and shipped) two to the OSF's development lab in Boston.
The OSF/1 Unix will also aim for high security (B-1 level), but it is not now expected to appear before November 1990.
1-2-3 compatible.
LOTUS Development and Word Perfect Corp have announced a technology partnership under which they will develop a user interface for Lotus 1-2-3/G and Word Perfect for OS/2 Presentation Manager.
In effect, it seems Word Perfect will use program code written by Lotus.
Users will thus get the same menu commands on 1-2-3/G and Word Perfect PM, so the two products will look as though they are from the same company.
But there will still be differences.
For example, Lotus uses F1 for Help while Word Perfect uses F3.
Manuscript, Lotus's word processor, will not be rewritten for Presentation Manager, and there can't be much future for Plan Perfect, Word Perfect's spreadsheet, on OS/2 either.
X party.
THE inaugural meeting of the X User Group was held on Tuesday.
Its aims are to promote awareness of X and provide a forum for the discussion of technical issues.
A newsletter, an annual exhibition and a directory of X products are also planned.
For details contact Niall Mansfield at Unipalm Ltd in Cambridge (tel.: 0954 211797).
Comms course.
TEESSIDE Polytechnic is launching the UK's first computerised course in computer communications.
It will be taught using ‘distance learning’ methods, including printed materials, electronic mail and online conferencing.
Students on the part-time course will work from home, visiting Middlesbrough only for the final examination.
A 512K DOS-compatible PC with GEM is required, but other software will be provided.
The £70 course, which starts in January, is aimed at secretarial and business staff, and can be taken by the disabled.
It will lead to a Certificate in Computer-Mediated Communication Systems.
Contact Paul Mayes on 0642 218121 ext 4367.
Mac Mag.
APPLE Macintosh users are, by convention, rich, so few will blanche at the arrival of Mac Publishing monthly magazine.
It costs £10 per copy.
Still, it's very good, and subscribers get a disc containing at least one font with every issue.
In spite of the title, Mac Publishing also covers Macintosh presentations and multi-media.
It is published by Future Publishing, tel.: 0225 446034.
Real mouthful.
CHAIRSIDE Publishing of Seattle has written an ‘expert system’ for dentists.
The dentist feeds in the patient's record, and the program prints out from one to 10 pages of personalised explanation and advice in everyday language, for the patient to take away.
Chairside's president, Lee Zehrer, a trained dental hygenist, admits, ‘it's a fairly new application for dental offices.’
The program was written using KnowledgePro, from Knowledge Garden Inc, and will be launched later this month at the Greater New York Dental Meeting.
It runs on DOS-compatible micros and will probably cost $14.95.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Jack Schofield on how MIT's networking system is throwing open the windows X marks the future.
EVERYONE agrees that computing in the 1990s will be dominated by client-server networks, but there is no agreement about the form these will take.
The microcomputer firms foresee networks of micros taking over, and the minicomputer firms see networks of minis, while IBM has come up with Systems Application Architecture (SAA), designed to maintain the mainframe's iron grip on corporate data processing's throat.
However, there is an alternative which doesn't presuppose the use of any particular kind of computer, or even any particular kind of network.
It was developed as part of Project Athena at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and goes under the unexciting name of X Window.
MIT wanted students on its campus network to be able to use a wide range of different host computers at the same time, but using only one terminal.
The system therefore had to be both hardware and network independent.
But the host computers also had different user interfaces, and students couldn't be expected to learn them all.
Therefore the workstation had to have software to manage the screen display too.
As MIT was using Sun and Apollo workstations, a user-friendly, mouse-operated graphical display was the obvious choice.
The solution was to create a ‘message-passing’ communications system with a window manager, which is basically all X Window is.
It defines the X Protocol which carries packets of data from the host computer to the terminal (which, in a workstation, can be in the same box).
A library of ‘primitives’, called Xlib, is provided for drawing windows, graphics and text and controlling inputs.
The window manager is a specialised program which responds to X protocol requests.
The window manager is used with Xlib (or, at a higher level, the X toolkit, or an X toolkit with predefined objects called ‘widgets’) to build a graphical user interface.
Examples include the Sun/AT&T Open Look, the OSF's Motif, and DEC's DECwindows.
The confusing thing about X is that it reverses the nomenclature used in microcomputer networks.
In X Window, the host application (the one running on a supercomputer, mainframe or whatever) is the client, while the workstation or terminal (running the window manager) is the server.
X Window started from W, originally developed at Stanford University, and grew through various versions, with MIT eventually starting to license its code to other users.
By January 1987, when it was clear that X Window really worked across multi-vendor networks, there was a joint statement of support for it by Apollo, Data General, DEC, Hewlett-Packard, Masscomp, Siemens and Sony, amongst others (not IBM).
A year later the X Consortium was founded.
Its aim is to co-operate in the development of the X-standard and get it accepted by the International and US standards bodies, ISO and ANSI.
Firms such as AT&T, IBM, Apple, Bull, Sequent and Sun are members.
The latest implementation, X Window Version 11 Release 3, emerged a year ago, and has been widely adopted by Unix suppliers and by DEC, with Unix (Ultrix) and VAX VMS versions.
X11R3 has also been adopted by the X/Open group which is driving the implementation of ‘open systems.’
With an X workstation or terminal, you can open a window into any X application on any machine on the network.
Overlapping windows on the same screen could come from, say, a Cray supercomputer, a DEC mini and a Sun workstation.
A 386-based PC running Unix can also be used as a workstation using Locus's XSight, which is X11 server software.
This is included as standard in SCO's Open Desktop Unix suite.
For networked applications you can use an X terminal, which is, not surprisingly, a terminal designed for running X Window applications.
It has a its own memory and processor, and X Window server software, but no disc drive.
You use it just like a dumb terminal, the difference being that instead of a plain text screen, it provides a mouse-and-windows interface.
X terminals appeal for two reasons.
First, they are cheap.
(Acer's Xebra 100 X terminal costs about £500.)
Second, they give users a microcomputer-style interface while leaving the applications, and the host computers on which they are running, in the control of the data processing department.
X terminals include the Network Computing Devices' NCD 16 and NCR's Towerview, both of which use Motorola 680x0 processors, and Acer's Xebra 100, which has an Intel 8086.
For some purposes a micro can be used with X terminal software.
Locus offers PC XSight, which is X terminal software for PCs running DOS — but it doesn't let you run DOS programs at the same time.
Similar software is available for the Apple Macintosh and, in Germany, the Atari ST.
So far, few X-applications are available (50 packages?) but enough to show promise.
Examples include the Uniplex office automation system (word processing, spreadsheet, database, electronic mail etc), Access's 20/20 spreadsheet, Owl's Guide hypertext system, Frame Technologies' FrameMaker desktop publishing package, Ixi's X Desktop and the X.Emacs editor.
X-compatible versions of Informix, Oracle and dBase have also been shown.
Vertical applications have just started to appear, one of the first being Cambridge Micro's package for estate agents (Computer, June 1).
X Window is certain to be a success because it allows for applications running on any manufacturer's machine and any multi-tasking operating system to be used by any X-based workstation or terminal.
It provides a graphical interface with ‘common user access’ without insisting on the use of an Intel or Motorola or particular Risc chip, or a particular operating system, or even an operating system at all.
So, X seems to offer more than IBM's SAA, over a wider field, quicker, with less effort, and at a lower cost.
It will be interesting to see what happens when data processing managers eventually notice it.
OVERNIGHT FILE