

A Country Diary: CROOK, Co.
DURHAM
These are the quiet days before winter.
For most of this week the landscape has been draped on shifting fog patches.
On some days the top of Pea Hill has been bathed in brilliant sunshine, while the valley of the River Wear ahead has been awash in a sea of grey, with tentacles of fog creeping outwards along hedges and gulleys into fields.
We have yet to experience any hard frosts, so autumn leaves still cling to branches and there are still a few flowers of white dead nettle, red campion and yarrow to attract the last of the drone flies.
Hedgerows take on an additional dimension on foggy days; when the distant landscape is blotted out immediate surroundings assume a new prominence.
Hundreds of spiders' webs, suspended between twigs bearing yellowing leaves and clusters of scarlet rose hips are decorated with water droplets that sparkle in the weak sun that occasionally penetrates the murk.
Amongst the dead hogweed umbels and seed heads of willow herb there are clusters of ladybirds, packed into tight groups in every available crevice.
Ladybirds have done well out of the exceptional summer, as have sweet chestnut trees; this is the first year that I can recall collecting chestnuts locally that are large enough to eat.
The warmth and mildness has brought a fine crop of toadstools.
The most spectacular of these have been some magnificent specimens of Verdigris agaric, Stroparia aeruginosa, shown to me by Maureen Defty, a local farmer.
They had sprouted from buried wood in the vegetable garden and sported livid blue-green, slimy caps.
We had our first moderate snow fall in mid-November last year, but so far it looks as though this winter will be milder than ever.
One sign of approaching winter comes from the parties of siskins feeding on catkins of birch seeds, moving from tree to tree in noisy flocks.
PHIL GATES
Diary.
By Andrew Moncur
A STRANGE silence from the Government — the people who brought you the Spycatcher saga — as a book goes into print, giving the inside story of security activities and assorted hanky-panky in Northern Ireland.
Not a peep from the Treasury Solicitor; the D-Notice Committee obviously didn't (notice, that is).
Fred Holroyd, a former military intelligence officer, has written a detailed account of the dirty war in Ireland.
Cross-border operations, kidnapping involving loyalists hired for the purpose, the role of the SAS and infighting between the security services.
What more can you do to upset a woman?
His book, War Without Honour,(£6.95) was released yesterday by a Hull-based independent, the Medium Publishing Co.
Mr Holroyd was attached to MI6 in the province between 1973 and 1975.
You might imagine that the Government doesn't want to disturb this particular can of invertebrate, limbless burrowing creatures.
WHACK.
Stan Bate, his worship the Lord Mayor of Stoke-on-Trent, drives off from the first tee to open officially the city's new municipal golf course at Weston Coyney.
Splendid.
Then he departs, leaving the course to the eager golfers.
Whack.
The first hole.
Thwack.
The second.
Kersmack.
The third…
Hang about.
There isn't an actual hole, as such, on the third green.
Nor on the fourth, the fifth, the sixth or the seventh.
This is, for a golf course, a bit of a drawback.
‘They weren't cut because the course was opened earlier than expected,’ said a spokesman.
Well.
MUNICIPAL Oddities (Part II).
Tory-controlled Westminster City Council lays down strict rules for elected persons.
Page 30 of the Members' Manual says that it is not ‘appropriate for council stationery or postal facilities to be used to indicate the party allegiance of any member or group’.
So, when Councillor Peter Bradley replied to a letter from a resident he was careful to describe himself only as a member of ‘the minority party’.
She wrote straight back, asking ‘Which one?’
His response: ‘You may not believe this but I'm not allowed to tell you on council notepaper.’
She fired back: ‘Is this not bureaucracy gone raving mad?’
So Mr Bradley asked the managing director (sic) of Westminster, Bill Phillips: ‘What am I to do?’
He has now received this answer: If you wish to disclose your party, you must do so without using council facilities.
‘I would ask you to note further that, in this connection, describing oneself as a member of ‘the minority party’ is in itself an indication of one's party allegiance, given that the political make-up of the council is widely known.’
So you can't even say that.
Thank you very much.
PS: Mr Bradley is a L****r member.
THANKS to yesterday's Wall Street Journal for this comment, putting events in Berlin into true perspective.
US investors, it says, don't quite know what to make of the outbreak of peace.
‘We were all joyous at the scenes of people climbing on the Wall but the problem is, how do you make money on this?’ said Charles Clough, chief investment strategist at Merrill Lynch.
THE LENGTHS they're prepared to go to, just to persuade Conservatives that there is a Europe out there, anchored somewhere off the coast of England.
Sealink British Ferries are running a special offer: a day trip to France for only £7 (if you travel as a foot passenger).
The condition: you have to be a Tory party supporter.
US TRAVELLERS have seen democracy reaching new heights.
When bad weather threatened an American Airlines flight from Chicago to New York the pilot, it emerges, offered his passengers the choice: shall we turn back or go on?
Let's have a show of hands.
Stewardesses conducted the count.
The result: a heavy majority for pressing ahead.
Only four dissenters supported the Survival Party.
In the event, the plane was forced to land midway between the two cities anyway.
Oh, dear.
An inquiry follows.
ASMALL exchange overheard in the bang-up-to-the-minute House of Commons.
Sir Peter Blaker (Con.
Blackpool South): ‘Bless my soul, Alan.
What are you doing here?’
A pause.
Sir Alan Urwick: ‘Actually, I'm the new Sergeant at Arms.’
GOOD grief.
Prepare yourselves for Muhammad Ali, the fragance.
The once elegant bruiser is launching a brand of eau-de-Cologne, bearing his name.
Floats like a butterfly, stinks like a…