

American Football: Birmingham find a home.
VILLA PARK, the Aston Villa soccer club ground, will be the home of the Birmingham club competing in the new International League of American Football.
The team, yet to be named in full, will play their opening home game against Rome on April 16.
Last week Chelsea's Stamford Bridge ground was named as the London venue, and the Midland announcement completes the line-up for the six-nation competition, which will consist of a 12-game season which runs from April to July.
England and Italy will have two teams, with West Germany, the Netherlands, Spain and Finland represented by one.
Rugby Union: Oxford University 18, Major Stanley's XV 33 Revels expose Oxford's slack.
By Robert Armstrong
OXFORD badly need to brush up their slapdash act on the training ground before they meet Cambridge at Twickenham in just under three weeks.
Sloppy handling, poor co-ordination and a lackadaisical defence left them well adrift of Major R V Stanley's XV at Iffley Road yesterday.
Any match of nine tries (five by Stanley's) is bound to be entertaining but Oxford committed so many errors in every department that it was hard to keep a straight face while assessing their contribution.
In addition their captain Brian Smith persisted with his wayward goal-kicking long after it became apparent that he should pass the task to someone else.
Perhaps it was asking too much of Oxford, who have not won a game for a month, to exercise the same shrewd control at half-back demonstrated by Farr-Jones and Porta.
Injuries to key players have hampered their preparations and possibly undermined confidence.
In contrast Stanley's usually made the inspired calculations of a good invitation side out for a scoring spree.
Although they lost the Australian wing Ian Williams with a shoulder injury early on, their back division was outstanding, especially Mullin and the Canadian full-back Gareth Rees.
Farr-Jones was clearly in a mood to enjoy himself before joining the Barbarians to take on the All Blacks at Twickenham on Saturday.
Stanley's took the lead after two minutes with an opportunist try by Mullin, when Porta's attempted drop goal rebounded from a post.
Eight minutes later Mullin's perceptive cross-kick found Rees unmarked for an easy short-range try.
Stanley's, moving the ball wide with crisp facility, stretched their lead to 18-0 when Rees broke down the left and crashed over with muscular help from Watkinson.
Eventually Oxford, setting up a succession of strong drives down the middle, disrupted Stanley's confident rhythm and Reader dived over from an untidy ruck.
After the break Oxford maintained their forward impetus, scoring a push-over try, and thereafter the sides alternated tries, culminating in the best of the afternoon when Smith, Hein and Curtis combined in a 60-metre break down the right which produced a diving touchdown for Curtis.
It was the kind of romantic flourish that Oxford may have to produce several times over at Twickenham next month.
SCORERS: Oxford: Tries: Reader, Van Der Merwe, Okoli, Curtis.
Conversion: Smith.
Stanley's XV: Tries: Mullin, Rees 2, Porta, Farr-Jones.
Conversions: Porta 5.
Penalty: Porta.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY: M Oliver; G Hein, D Richards, D Curtis, S Okoli; B Smith (capt), S Taylor; M Jones, T Hayashi, D James, M Merrick, T Coker, J Fewtrell, M Reader, W van der Merwe.
MAJOR R V STANLEY'S XV: G Rees (British Columbia and Canada); I Williams (Eastwood and Australia; E Quist-Arcton, Harlequins, 13min), B Mullin (London Irish and Ireland, capt), A Watkinson (Kew Occasionals), R Vessey (Northampton); H Porta (Banco Nacion and Argentina), N Farr-Jones (Sydney University and Australia); A Everett (University of Cape Tn), M Howe (Bedford), T Willis (Narbonne), E Peters (Loughborough University), J Howe (West Hartlepool; D Wood, Kew, 49), D Cooper (Richmond), G Taylor (Loughborough University), G Bertrand (Narbonne).
Referee: R Quittenton (England)..
Fergus Aherne of Ireland and the Welshman Gary Jones have been brought in as replacements for Gary Armstrong and John Jeffrey in the Barbarians' team to play the All Blacks on Saturday.
Basketball: Spanish galleons sink the English.
By Robert Pryce
IN THE absence of Joel Moore (Achilles tendon) and Francis Drake (retired), the Spanish carried too much firepower in this European Championship match.
Apart from a shaky start and the threat of a squall in the second half, conditions in the Aston Villa Leisure Centre proved entirely to the liking of the bigger galleons, Spain beating England 99-83.
The 6ft 9in Antonio Martin (21 points) and the 6ft 10in Ferran Martinez (12 points) proved mobile enough to inflict irreparable damage to the English interior defences, and the 6ft 5in Jordi Villa Campa (22 points) sank everything in sight.
England's limited attacking options were reduced to the occasional fast break and the low-percentage shot.
Peter Scantlebury took an age to find his range.
From 15-14 down, Spain took control with a 26-6 burst.
Clark's burst saw off the Spanish zone and then a desperate English press reduced the margin to 11 points with seven minutes to go, but that was as close as England were to come.
Boxing: Jacobs spies the ladder.
By Jack Massarik
MOTHERWELL Civic Hall is a long way from Las Vegas, but when Gary Jacobs defends his Commonwealth welterweight title there tonight against Donovan Boucher, the Canadian champion, he will be aiming to take the international spotlight from old stagers like Lloyd Honeyghan and Kirkland Laing.
A 23-year-old Glaswegian based in London, the wiry southpaw with the swarming style was voted boxer of the year last season, when he travelled to Las Vegas and beat the Mexican Javier Suazo for the IBF International championship for boxers ranked between No.10 and No.30 in the world.
Last April he outpointed the fancied George Collins, and he takes a dim view of last week's easy win by Laing over Collins at Reading.
‘I don't think people should read anything into that,’ he said.
‘Collins was unbeaten when he faced me and he didn't look the same fighter coming off a loss.’
After that, however, Jacobs was clearly outpointed by the former world champion James McGirt in New York.
‘At no stage, though, did he look like knocking me out, like most of his opponents,’ said Jacobs.
‘I learnt a lot that night and think I'm a better fighter for it.’
Boucher, who has lost only three of his 23 fights and carries a powerful right-hand punch, will represent a fair test.
Paul Hodkinson, the undefeated British and European featherweight champion, faces a substitute European opponent in his home town of Kirkby on December 13.
Farib Benredjeb of France replaces Italy's Salvatore Bottiglieri, who is injured.
Najib Daho of Manchester defends his Commonwealth lightweight title against Carl Crook of Chorley in Preston on January 24.
Spurs away to the holders.
THE Littlewoods Cup holders Nottingham Forest were given another home draw in the quarter-finals, with Tottenham the visitors in the potential tie of the round if they can overcome Tranmere in a replay at home next week, writes Ian Ridley.
Oldham received scant reward for their exploits, being sent to the winners of the Swindon v Southampton tie next week.
Coventry are away again, either in the North-east against Sunderland or the South-west against Exeter.
West Ham will be at home to Derby, for whom their former striker Paul Goddard is such an important figure.
The matches are scheduled for the week beginning January 15.
LITTLEWOODS CUP: Quarter-final draw: Swindon or Southampton v Oldham, West Ham v Derby County, Exeter or Sunderland v Coventry City, Nottingham Forest v Tottenham Hotspur or Tranmere Rovers.
Demonstrations may disrupt SA tour — Barlow.
By David Foot
GLOUCESTERSHIRE's new acting manager and senior coach, Eddie Barlow, last night met the county's former skipper David Graveney, due to lead the rebel tour of South Africa, and told him he feared the tour fixtures might not be completed.
Barlow believes the tour risks nullifying the progress being made towards ending apartheid and that Graveney's party may be affected by demonstrations.
‘I have my reservations about whether the tour will be completed as arranged,’ he said.
Graveney said: ‘Eddie is certainly entitled to his opinions.
I respect them, especially so as he has just come from South Africa.
But I have been in regular contact with Ali Bacher and he assures me there are no problems over the tour and that it is definitely on.’
Barlow, a South African and former skipper of Derbyshire, was officially appointed yesterday on a three-year contract to take effect from 1990.
He had an ‘affable chat’ with Graveney and other members of the Gloucestershire team, who suffered from poor results and sagging morale last season.
Tony Wright will be the third captain in as many years.
David Lawrence will be staying with the county after signing a new four-year contract.
Kent had expressed interest in the pace bowler.
Courtney Walsh will be re-signing, and it looks increasingly likely that the Zimbabwean all-rounder Kevin Curran will also stay with Gloucestershire.
England's four-day match against the Leeward Islands on their West Indies tour has been switched to St Kitts and begins on February 2.
The one-day international in Guyana has been changed to March 7, with the second Test there now starting on March 10.
Leicestershire's Young England fast bowler Richard Edmunds has been seriously injured in a road accident.
Edmunds, aged 19, has undergone emergency surgery for chest injuries at Leicester's Groby Hospital where his condition was described as ‘serious but stable’.
Marseille take option on mixed bag of Eurostars.
By Ian Ridley
MARSEILLE, the Manchester United of French football — except that they won their championship last year — have moved in advance of next summer's World Cup marketplace to strengthen their team for next season.
Chris Waddle's club, who this week took their spending for the season so far to £14 million by signing the Nantes player Didier Deschamps, have signed agreements with four players which give them priority should they wish to sign any of them.
The players are Dragan Stojkovic of Red Star Belgrade, Argentina's Diego Latorre, the Dane Fleming Povlsen, of PSV Eindhoven, and Cologne's Thomas Hassler.
Ruud Gullit could also come on the market after the next World Cup.
The AC Milan player, who has not played since last May's European Cup triumph over Steaua Bucharest because of a knee injury, is involved in a contract dispute with the club.
The Dutchman is seeking an extension to his contract, which expires next summer, of three years and £7 million.
The club however are believed to be in no hurry to agree until he proves his fitness.
He is expected to play again in January, specialists having approved his return to training, but is unwilling to turn out too soon, as he did against Steaua after surgery, for fear of jeopardising his chances of playing in the World Cup.
Milan denied, however, that they plan to cut his current salary, as they have a right to do under Italian rules when a player has been out of action for more than six months.
Gullit is one of several long-term casualties missing from the Milan side as they take on Barcelona in the Nou Camp stadium in the first leg of the European Super Cup tonight.
Another, their influential sweeper Franco Baresi, is to have a metal plate inserted in the left arm he broke in Sunday's derby win over Internazionale.
Milan, also without Carlo Ancelotti and Fillipo Galli, have only three fit reserves, in the midfield player Angelo Colombo, winger Marco Simone and striker Stefano Borgonovo, and the manager, Arrigo Sacchi, will have to reshuffle.
Diego Maradona, the only player in Italy to earn more than Gullit, played in Napoli's Uefa Cup third-round home leg against Werder Bremen yesterday after taking painkillers for a back injury, but was largely ineffective as his side lost 3-2.
The holders, who beat another West German side, VfB Stuttgart, to take the trophy last season, fell behind to goals by Neubarth and Riedle before their Brazilians Alemao and Careca struck to level the scores.
However Bremen's New Zealand striker Wynton Rufer secured victory in the dying seconds.
Uefa has announced that the European Cup final on May 23 will be played in Vienna, and the Cup-Winners' Cup final on May 9 in Gothenburg.
Sailing: Pressure on as speeds drop.
By Bob Fisher in Fremantle
THE leading yachts on the second leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race were almost in line abreast yesterday as they approached the finish at Fremantle.
Fisher & Paykel was the most northerly of the line, which ranged through Steinlager 2, Rothmans and Merit to the south-east.
With 450 miles to go, an area of high pressure will decide the finishing order.
The New Zealanders Grant Dalton and Peter Blake, skippers of Fisher & Paykel and Steinlager 2, agree that the winner will be decided in the final miles.
‘It's a matter of who has the right line past the high,’ said Dalton.
Blake said: ‘Tacking the way through the lighter winds will decide who wins the leg.’
The yachts are slowing down as they approach Fremantle and the effect of the high-pressure zone becomes apparent.
The two maxi-sloops, Lawrie Smith's Rothmans, of Britain, and Pierre Fehlmann's Merit, of Switzerland, could make a last-day attempt to overtake the two New Zealand ketches, swinging up the West Australian coast to make full use of the sea breeze.
Rugby Union.
The Welsh Rugby Union has appointed Ron Jones, a retired headmaster, as regional director for Wales for the 1991 World Cup.
He is honorary secretary of the Central Glamorgan RU.
Speedway.
The three-times world champion Erik Gundersen, from Denmark, has retired after receiving serious spinal injuries in a crash at Bradford in September.
Golf.
David Graham, the Australian former US Open and US PGA champion, plans to retire next year.
John Roger Jones, a 45-year-old Walker Cup selector, was yesterday named captain of the Welsh amateur team.
Swimming.
The East German Olympic champion Silke Hoerner, who won the 200 metres breaststroke gold medal at the Seoul Games, has retired.
Cyclo-cross.
Steve Douce, the British champion who missed the Nations Cup race at Wolverhampton with badly bruised ribs, is expected to be fit for the second round of the Falcon National Trophy series in Leeds on Sunday.
Rugby Union.
Leicester will be without their centre Paul Dodge and possibly the flanker Ian Smith for Saturday's Courage league game at Harlequins.
Dodge has suspected cartilage trouble and Smith a twisted ankle.
Hockey.
The unbeaten Welsh Premier Division leaders Whitchurch must travel to University College Aberystwyth in the quarter-finals of the Welsh Cup.
Chepstow or Northop Hall are at home to Swansea, Monsanto entertain Cardiff, and British Steel travel to Polytechnic of Wales in ties on December 10.
Tennis.
Ken Flach, a former Wimbledon doubles champion with his American partner Robert Seguso, is racing to get fit for the Nabisco World Doubles Championship at the Royal Albert Hall in London on December 6-10.
Flach, who left the court at Wembley in a wheelchair after spraining an ankle and tearing ligaments in the Silk Cut Championships, said in Missouri yesterday: ‘I have always viewed the Masters in London as the culmination of my tennis year.’
Snooker: Clean-up break for Hendry.
STEPHEN HENDRY, beaten by Doug Mountjoy in last year's final, overwhelmed Barry West 9-1 in their best-of-17-frames fourth-round match in the Stormseal UK Open at Preston Guild Hall yesterday, writes Clive Everton.
The 20-year-old Scot's break of 141 robbed Andrew Cairns, a first-season professional from Blackpool, of the £2,000 break prize for the pre-televised phase.
Tony Knowles had breaks of 72 and 127 and, in the last frame of the afternoon, a 68 clearance in taking a 6-2 interval lead over Tony Drago.
Steve Davis took a 6-2 lead over Cliff Wilson.
Davies recovers his deposit with a treble.
HYWEL Davies, who lost £50 after an unsuccessful objection at Wolverhampton on Tuesday, recovered it handsomely yesterday with a 54-1 treble on Precious Link, Breakfast Car and Wizzard Artist at Plumpton.
It took his score for the season to 20 and, ironically, he was on the receiving end of an unsuccessful objection.
After Precious Link had led turning for home in the Peter Cazalet Memorial to score by six lengths from Super Express, Simon Earle, rider of the runner-up, complained that his mount had got unbalanced and made a mistake at the second last because Precious Link had taken his ground.
The stewards established there had been interference, but it was accidental and had taken place before the second last and thereby did not count under the rules.
Unlike Davies on Tuesday, Earle got his deposit back.
Precious Link was 2lb out of the handicap and trainer Bill Turner got a mild shock when he found that Davies was also putting up 3lb overweight.
The six-year-old was also bumped at the start and Davies's feet knocked from his irons.
The Sherborne trainer commented: ‘He had a lot of problems last year, a bit of leg trouble and he was breaking blood vessels, but I think we've cured both problems.’
Breakfast Car was well fancied for the Car Parks National Handicap Chase despite an 11 month absence.
He took command three from home and won by ten lengths, but Davies, with a typical wisecrack at trainer Gardie Grissell, exclaimed: ‘I thought you could train — he blew up at the water.’
The Heathfield trainer commented: ‘Breakfast Car bashed a leg in his last race and got a bit of heat in it, so we turned him away for the rest of last season.
Rest is now the accepted cure.
It's very hard to find a vet to fire a horse, they're liable to get prosecuted by the RSPCA.
Breakfast Car will probably have to go up a grade and go to slightly posher places.’
Wizzard Artist, who ran on Lingfield's all-weather Flat course a fortnight ago, completed a great day for Davies with a slick, 12 lengths win in the Jevington Novices' Hurdle.
Davies, who will be 33 next month, enthused: ‘I'm still loving the game.
The Captain (Tim Forster) is very good to me and there's no pressure on either of us now that I'm no longer stable jockey.
That's my first treble this season, but I once had a four-timer and a second from five rides at Newbury.’
Squash: Gregory bows to Jahangir.
JAHANGIR KHAN took 34 minutes to dismiss Paul Gregory, the last British survivor, from the Stuttgart Open, writes Richard Jago.
The top seed won 15-11, 15-11, 15-7 with a display of sustained violence that has been less characteristic of the heavier, more creative but slower Jahangir than the earlier version.
Gregory acquitted himself honourably but was increasingly on the retrieving end.
Jahangir now meets Chris Dittmar, who beat him twice in last month's world championships.
Today also sees another repeat, between Rodney Martin and Jansher Khan.
Martin came from two games down against his fellow Australian Chris Robertson.
He is more than the greatest of stroke-players and he was patient enough to take advantage of Robertson's flagging energy and win 12-15, 9-15, 15-5, 15-12, 15-8.
The same mixture of steel and sparkle could give him a hat-trick over Jansher.
Martin beat him when Australia took away Pakistan's world team title last month, and again in the US Open final on Saturday.
Skiing: Park City creates a fantasy on the carpet John Samuel reports from Utah on an artificial but nonetheless entrancing start to the World Cup season.
‘THIS is the place,’ said Brigham Young as his wandering, persecuted tribe of Mormons finally set eyes on the Great Salt Lake and the Wasatch mountains rising in fairyland fantasy before the rising sun.
Today, America's Thanksgiving Day, it is certainly the place to be for the world's best technical and all-round skiers.
Never before has a main World Cup season opened so early.
Four races over the next four days — men's and women's giant and special slaloms — pick up where Australia and Argentina left off in August.
Often America has ended the main programme.
Two seasons of snow famine have changed all that.
Because of its advanced snow technology, it is America first this season.
And a fantastic sight it makes.
A barrage of snow cannons have laid 10 million gallons of snow in the Park City race area known as Willi's Face.
The first men's giant slalom racer out of the starting gate today will swing and glide over a carpet of manmade snow 80 centimetres deep.
It is woven as only the American artificial-snow industry knows how.
Without it there would be no party over the next four days.
For the mountains are sullenly short of the natural commodity, their dun-coloured pelts still autumnal.
‘The worst since 1976 but that's not stopping the show,’ says the ski area chief, Craig Badami.
The local papers are full of hype.
‘Hey, come to the ski party,’ they carol to Salt Lake City's quarter-million citizens, about 80 per cent of them Mormons.
‘It's America's skiing Disneyland.’
Mormons remain devout people.
Their sportsmen like Johnny Miller or Billy Casper give 20 per cent or more of their earnings to the church.
They do not touch hard liquor or even coffee.
But they know how to party.
Three years ago the first ever races here drew 12,000 fans for the flashing lights, thunderous music, fireworks, balloons — and, yes, the ski racing.
Park City, 25 miles out of Salt Lake, is an old mining town Brigham Young would hardly have cared for.
But it is a serious ski place, for years housing the US Ski Racing Association's head office, the heart of a fragile mountain area about 50 miles wide and 150 miles long with some of the best powder snow — when it does snow — anywhere.
Today the world's top giant slalom men lock for vital early points in the World Cup battle culminating in Sweden in March.
Scandinavia struck the early blows at Thredbo, Australia, with Lars-Borje Eriksson, perhaps the new Stenmark, winning from Norway's Ole-Christian Furuseth.
Last season's champion Marc Girardelli was fourth, Alberto Tomba, Italy's Olympic sensation, fifth.
The three times overall champion, Switzerland's Pirmin Zurbriggen — recently married — was sixth.
A devout Catholic, he has said this will be his last season while he devotes himself to his family.
Some Swiss wonder whether a family responsibility will perhaps work the other way, and he will stay on for the 1992 Olympics.
ither way, like the ebullient newly married Severiano Ballesteros of two years ago, he could ski to a new crest this season.
Technically the Austrians have come on strongly, Rudolph Nierlich winning two slalom golds at the Vail World Championships.
He was ill and below form in Australia, but has gone well in training here.
The Utes who once inhabited these regions handed down tales of gods as entities with a wry sense of humour, human faults and even a mean streak.
By Sunday the world's top skiers may share something of their understanding.
Nottingham Forest 1, Everton 0 Police escort for referee.
By David Lacey
THE Littlewoods Cup holders returned to the last eight of the competition last night in unusual and, Everton would claim, unjust circumstances.
Nottingham Forest had almost despaired of breaking down Everton's rebuilt defence in an entertaining tie at the City Ground when Lee Chapman won the match seven minutes from the end.
While there was nothing extraordinary about the goal, Chapman turning in a free-kick Clough had driven through a crowd of players towards the near post, the reason the free-kick was awarded left Everton disgruntled.
Their goalkeeper, Neville Southall, was preparing to clear the ball upfield and making no haste about it when the referee, George Tyson, booked him for time-wasting and awarded Forest the indirect free-kick which was to decide the match.
Not for the first time this season MrTyson needed a police escort as protesting losers surrounded him at the end.
Everton, still without their regular centre-backs Ratcliffe and Watson because of injury, again tried to make up for this by playing Snodin as a spare centre-back behind Keown and McDonald.
This gave them a cushion of safety but often meant that the opposition found it easier to make space in midfield.
However, it also meant that the sort of movements which normally flow through Clough had to be accurate to the point of perfection if they were not to be enmeshed in blue shirts.
Two minutes before the half-hour Forest appeared to have achieved this when Pearce exchanged passes with Clough and burst clear into the penalty area on the left.
Southall, who had earlier blocked a close-range shot from the England left-back taken from a similar angle, looked more vulnerable this time but Pearce drove the ball past the far post.
With so many players forced to defend, Everton found few opportunities to attack in any strength.
However, a free-kick from Nevin nearly brought them a goal immediately before Pearce should have given Forest the lead.
Keown nodded Nevin's kick square and Newell's diving header drew a smart save from Crossley, his first of the game.
Crosby's acceleration and close control were a frequent worry to Everton on the right but seven minutes before half-time the winger only seemed to have got past Snodin by fouling him.
The referee, however, allowed play to go on with Everton prostrate and protesting and when the cross came over the defence seemed to use less than legal means to stop Chapman reaching it.
Tyson, two of whose penalty decisions contributed to the recent battle of Highbury between Arsenal and Norwich, this time gave nothing, but by half-time he had cautioned Sheedy and Pearce for fouls.
Forest began to lose momentum in the second half and found themselves forced to defend for longer periods.
Nottingham Forest: Crossley; Laws, Pearce, Walker, Chettle, Hodge, Crosby, Parker, Clough, Chapman, Rice.
Everton: Southall; McDonald, Pointon, Keown, Snodin, Ebbrell, Nevin, McCall, Sharp, Newell, Sheedy.
Referee: G Tyson (Sunderland)..
Soccer: Rangers' mystery £5 million backer.
By Russell Thomas
RANGERS have clinched a £5 million sponsorship deal, the biggest in the British game, but aim to keep the identity of the backer a secret until a chosen launch date.
There has been strong speculation that Pepsi Cola are putting up the money but David Murray, Rangers' owner and chairman who bought the club exactly a year ago yesterday, is giving nothing away.
Murray confirmed only that the deal had been agreed and that it would go a long way towards cutting Rangers' overdraft of £9.5 million.
The club are paying about £30,000 a week in interest charges.
Murray said: ‘The aim is to have the overdraft cut to around £3 million or £4 million by the end of the year.
If we can achieve that, I will be reasonably pleased.
‘There will be no trading loss this year despite the fact we have bought new players.’
Aston Villa have raided the Caribbean for an 18-year-old striker that their manager Graham Taylor calls ‘a little gem’.
Dwight York, who played for Trinidad and Tobago in Sunday's World Cup defeat by the United States, has agreed to sign a three-year contract with Villa, where he is due to arrive on December 13.
A £5,000 fee has been agreed but the deal is subject to a work permit.
Taylor said: ‘We are hopeful that we have found something a bit special.’
York had a five-week trial with Villa at the start of the seasan after being spotted when the club played two games in Trinidad in the summer.
An Australian striker, Alastair Edwards, has agreed to join Brighton in a deal worth about £60,000 to Sydney Olympic.
Edwards, 21, has played for Australia youth and under-21s and, after appearing in the 1987 World Youth Cup finals in Chile, had 18 months with Rangers without breaking into the first team.
Brighton's reserve striker Martin Lambert has joined Wycombe Wanderers for £15,000, and the GM Vauxhall Conference club's manager Jim Kelman has also made an offer for Aldershot's unsettled midfielder Glen Burvill.
Colin Morris, sacked by Scarborough, is to play for Boston United on a non-contract basis.
Watford's reserve goalkeeper Mel Rees has joined Southampton on a month's loan with a view to a permanent transfer.
Blackpool must pay £35,000 for Nigel Hawkins, the 21-year-old striker signed from Bristol City, if he becomes a first-team regular at Bloomfield Road.
Blackpool, who offered just £2,000 against City's valuation of £70,000, will also have to hand over 25 per cent of any profit on a subsequent transfer.
Brentford have signed Bournemouth's central defender Paul Miller on a month's loan.
The 30-year-old player was a colleague of the manager Steve Perryman at Tottenham.
Notts County's defender Willie McStay, brother of the Scottish international midfielder Paul, has joined Hartlepool on a month's loan.
Middlesbrough's goalkeeper Stephen Pears is back in light training after eight months out through injury and illness.
He hopes to be challenging for the first team by Christmas.
Stan Mortensen, Blackpool's hat-trick scorer in the 1953 FA Cup final win over Bolton, is to be made an honorary freeman of the town.
Cricket: Red rose blooms in business David Hopps on how Lancashire reaped record profits.
LANCASHIRE announced record profits of more than £306,000 yesterday, a staggering achievement which hardly reflects county cricket's traditional hand-to-mouth lifestyle.
Many counties remain so untouched by the commercial age that lost balls are still classified as a major item of expenditure.
Lancashire, by contrast, have invested heavily in the daily earning potential of Old Trafford, now the best equipped ground outside Lord's; in deepest Rawtenstall even that qualification would be judged unnecessary.
The county's turnover for the last financial year, close to £2 million, differs markedly from counties less well blessed.
Derbyshire, for example, will struggle to reach one-third of that figure.
The assessment of Bob Bennett, the county chairman and an Isle of Man tax exile, would slip naturally into Financial Report.
‘We have extended our operations in the business field,’ he said.
‘Activity over 12 months of the year has been an important factor.
But the prospects that the North-west economy might not be as buoyant next year could affect our performance in 1990.’
The Test and County Cricket Board hand-out rose in an Ashes summer from £338,000 to a new high of £473,000; and Lancashire's successful season on the field, fourth in the championship and winners of the Refuge Assurance League, almost doubled match income.
The TCCB will give serious consideration this winter to the damage to techniques caused by a preponderance of one-day cricket, yet Lancashire's last three Sunday matches at home accounted for almost £80,000.
Only one bugbear remains: the members' obstinate refusal to grant full rights to Lancashire's women subscribers, including access to a pavilion which remains a bastion of male chauvinism.
At last year's annual meeting, 60 per cent of members supported the committee's plea for change; they will again seek the requisite two-thirds majority at Old Trafford on December 9.
Bennett has set out the supposed pros and cons in the annual report.
Why should Lancashire allow women members?
Numerous reasons are given.
Some are moral: the overcoming of inequality, and a woman's fundamental right to partake in club affairs.
Some are financial: the risk of deterring sponsors and the benefit of additional subscriptions.
The arguments against include: members should not be forced to share facilities with women, the pavilion may be too small, the pavilion has no women's toilets, women have adequate facilities of their own, some men wish to get away from women, and ‘lady subscribers’ might not wish to become full members.
Maureen Fitzgibbon, chairman of the women's steering committee, said: ‘This time we think we will do it.’
Of those who responded to a questionnaire, 83 per cent of women subscribers supported the principle of full membership for women.
But only 62 per cent responded, and half wanted the option of staying women subscribers.
Rugby League: Leigh 6, Wakefield Trinity 24 Conway's heavenly touch inspires Trinity.
MARK CONWAY, a perky scrum-half with a nice line in inventiveness, did much to help Wakefield to this victory at Hilton Park last night, writes Edward Kennedy.
He played an important role in the first three tries as well as kicking four goals, one from the touchline.
It was an important win for Wakefield, lifting them over Warrington, Widnes and Sheffield into sixth place.
They began slowly, but dominated the second half.
Leigh, after impressive wins over Widnes and Featherstone Rovers, were very disappointing.
They were predictable in attack and, as was proved all too often in the second half, fragile in defence.
Just when it seemed that a try would be too much to hope for after 30 tedious minutes, the crowd were treated to two first-class efforts, from Ledger and Fox, playing his first game at Hilton Park since he left Leigh for Leeds three years ago.
Conway, whose delicate chip set up Fox's try, landed a splendid goal to make it 6-6 at half-time.
Wakefield soon took the lead for the first time when Conway's towering kick bounced over the line for Mason to touch down near the posts.
Three minutes later Jackson broke straight from a scrum and Perry's pace put him clear to score.
Although Thompson, the hooker, was sin-binned for 10 minutes for a foul in a tackle on Platt, Wakefield were never troubled and two minutes after he departed Wilson dribbled past a swarm of defenders to score by the posts.
Conway improved all three tries.
Leigh: Johnson (Platt, 72min); Ledger, Moimoi, Jeffrey, Standish; Ruane, Beardmore; Street, Ropati, Case (Brown, 68), Collier, Potter, Platt (Dean, 68).
Wakefield Trinity: Perry; Fox, Leuluai, Mason, Wilson; Jackson, M Conway; Kelly, Thompson (B Conway, 72), Glancy, Lazenby (Bell, 72), G Price, R Price.
Referee: A Burke (Failsworth)..
Skiing.
John Samuel at Park City, Utah, on the opening races of the new season Cannons put smile on Willi's Face ‘T HIS is the place,’ said Brigham Young as his wandering, persecuted tribe of Mormons set eyes on the Great Salt Lake and the Wasatch mountains.
Today, Thanksgiving Day, it is certainly the place to be.
Never before has a main World Cup season opened so early.
Four races over the next four days — men's and women's giant and special slaloms — pick up where Australia and Argentina left off in August.
Often America has ended the main programme.
Two seasons of snow famine have changed all that.
Because of its advanced snow technology it is America first this season.
A hundred snow cannon have laid 10 million gallons of snow in the Park City race area known as Willi's Face.
The first man out of the starting gate today will swing and glide over a carpet of man-made snow 80 centimetres deep.
Without it there would be no party, as the natural commodity is in short supply, the worst since 1976.
Today the world's top giant slalom men lock horns for vital early points in the World Cup battle which ends next March in Sweden.
Scandinavia struck the early blows at Thredbo, Australia, with Lars-Borje Eriksson, perhaps the new Stenmark, winning from Norway's Ole-Christian Furuseth.
Last season's champion, Marc Girardelli, having switched skis for a reported half a million pounds, was fourth, Alberto Tomba, Italy's Olympic sensation, fifth.
The three times overall champion, Switzerland's Pirmin Zurbriggen — recently married — was sixth.
A devout Catholic, he has said this will be his last season as he devotes himself to his family.
Some Swiss wonder whether a family responsibility will perhaps work the other way, and he will stay on for the 1992 Olympics.
Either way, like the ebullient newly married Severiano Ballesteros of two years ago, he could ski to a new crest this season.
Technically the Austrians have come on strongly, Rudolph Nierlich winning two slalom golds at the Vail World Championships.
He was ill and below form in Australia, but has gone well in training here.
The Utes who once inhabited these regions handed down tales of gods as entities with a wry sense of humour, human faults and even a mean streak.
By Sunday the world's top skiers may share something of their understanding.
Soccer: Littlewoods Cup, fourth round: Oldham Athletic 3, Arsenal 1 Double by Ritchie ends 66-year wait.
By Stephen Bierley
OLDHAM Athletic, who had never beaten a First Division side since they dropped into the Second Division in 1923, made up for 66 years of not altogether patient waiting with a pulsating victory over the League champions Arsenal at Boundary Park last night.
The Pennines fairly shook.
No supporter of the Latics dared dream it, but suddenly the improbable was a throbbing, joyous reality.
Two goals from the irrepressible Andy Ritchie, his 13th and 14th this season, and a third by the 20-year-old midfield player Nick Henry, and Arsenal were sunk with only the trace of a last-minute goal by Quinn.
Despite many and varied flurries of activity in the first 40 minutes, Arsenal seemed reasonably secure if not inspired.
They held their line and competed hard in midfield, damping down Oldham's initial verve and preparing themselves for more of the same in the second half.
Then Oldham struck.
Winterburn almost put the ball into his own net from Milligan's cross, O'Leary recovering an awkward situation.
Almost immediately Smith had an excellent chance for Arsenal but stumbled.
Oldham took up the attack again and Barlow, who had a fine match at left-back, totally containing Rocastle, floated in a deep cross beyond Winterburn.
The predatory Ritchie chested the ball down and hammered a volley past Lukic.
Arsenal had no choice but to attack as soon as the second half began.
A neat step-over by Rocastle sent Thomas hurtling in on goal but Rhodes moved sharply off his line to smother the shot.
From the resulting corner Rhodes made another fine save, hurtling to his right to deflect away Dixon's rising shot.
Finally, with Arsenal pressing hard, he clawed away Quinn's careful header from Thomas's drag-back.
Quinn held his head in disbelief.
Worse, far worse was to follow.
Bunn, who scored six goals in the previous round against Scarborough, this time turned into the provider, putting Milligan clear and free.
He was hauled back on the edge of the area by O'Leary, a ‘professional’ foul for which the Arsenal central defender was booked.
Holden's 64th-minute free-kick clattered the wall and the ball fell to Henry, who drilled a low shot from more than 30 yards inside Lukic's right-hand post.
In another 10 minutes any remaining Oldham doubts were dispelled.
Ritchie passed to Irwin and then ran on to head the cross past Lukic.
Arsenal were stitched and stuffed, with no question of a fluke.
Not for the first time this season their defence had been found wanting and Oldham exploited the weaknesses to the full, owing a special debt to the inspiration and tireless running of Henry and Milligan.
George Graham was not amused.
He called his team's performance ‘unacceptable’.
But he also said: ‘Let's not take any credit away from Oldham.
They were tremendous, and outplayed us in the first half.
The plastic pitch is no excuse.
We trained on an artificial pitch for two days this week and we should have done a lot better.’
Joe Royle, the Oldham manager, was full of praise both for Graham and his own team.
‘George was brilliant,’ he said.
‘He could have blamed this and that but he said we deserved it.
The manager's attitude shows why they are champions.
He took it on the chin.
‘One or two people will be ready to put this down to plastic but our goals were nothing to do with plastic.
This was a great performanc.
We rattled them from the first minute and didn't give them any breathing space.
We were helter-skelter for 90 minutes and we scored three great goals.
In the past we have had cup walks, not runs.’
Oldham Athletic: Rhodes; Irwin, Barlow, Henry, Barrett, Warhurst, Marshall, Ritchie, Bunn, Milligan, Holden.
Arsenal: Lukic; Dixon, Winterburn, Thomas, O'Leary, Adams, Rocastle, Richardson, Smith, Quinn, Jonsson (Groves, 65min).
Referee: R Gifford (Llandradach)..
Soccer: Littlewoods Cup, fourth round:Oldham Athletic 3, Arsenal 1 Double by Ritchie ends 66-year wait.
By Stephen Bierley
OLDHAM Athletic, who had not beaten a First Division side since they dropped into the Second Division in 1923, made up for 66 years of not altogether patient waiting with a pulsating victory over the League champions Arsenal at Boundary Park last night.
The Pennines fairly shook, and Quinn's last-minute volley meant nothing.
Andy Ritchie put Oldham ahead just before half-time with a thumping volley and then, with Arsenal heaving and straining to equalise, Nick Henry struck a wonderful second goal in the 64th minute.
Oldham's joy was complete when, 10 minutes later, the effervescent Ritchie fed Irwin and then ran on to head home the full-back's cross for his second goal and Oldham's third.
At this point the Arsenal fans began to drift home, their evening well and truly over.
Oldham worked diligently to put Arsenal under maximum pressure from the start, and both O'Leary and Dixon had anxious moments as they strove to adjust to both the home attack and the artificial turf.
Arsenal's breaks were few but always threatening and Oldham, after a first flurry, found openings increasingly elusive.
Nevertheless as half-time approached Irwin struck an excellent shot from just outside the penalty area after Winterburn had headed out Marshall's cross.
Lukic must have seen the ball extremely late but still managed to get down well.
Shortly afterwards Milligan's cross was almost turned into his own net by Winterburn, O'Leary recovering an awkward situation, but Arsenal could do nothing when Barlow, having a fine match at left-back, floated a diagonal cross to the very back of Arsenal's defence.
The ball eluded Winterburn, and Ritchie, Oldham's leading goalscorer, chested the ball down and crashed a fierce volley beyond Lukic.
Arsenal had no option but to take the attack to Oldham in the second half and Rhodes had to save from Thomas, Dixon and Quinn, but when a magnificent ball by Bunn sent Milligan streaking for goal he was hauled back by O'Leary, who was booked.
Arsenal were to pay for it.
Holden battered the free-kick against the wall and after a scramble the ball fell to Henry, who struck a low shot from more than 30 yards past Lukic.
Oldham Athletic: Rhodes; Irwin, Barlow, Henry, Barrett, Warhurst, Marshall, Ritchie, Bunn, Milligan, Holden.
Arsenal: Lukic; Dixon, Winterburn, Thomas, O'Leary, Adams, Rocastle, Richardson, Smith, Quinn, Jonsson (Groves, 65min).
Referee: R Gifford (Llandradach)..
Golden performance wins him many Aintree friends.
By Ken Oliver
JOHN McConnochie and Arthur Stephenson were both satisfied with the outcome of the Edward Hanmer Memorial Chase after their horses fought out a thrilling finish in the three mile handicap at Haydock yesterday.
Victory went to McConnochie's Golden Friend, whose win puts him in line for a tilt at next year's Grand National, while Stephenson's The Thinker proved that he will again be a force to be reckoned with in the Cheltenham Gold Cup in March.
The big disappointment was Yahoo.
The even-money favourite was never moving in his best style and was pulled up before the 15th fence.
The stewards inquired into the running of Yahoo and accepted Tom Morgan's explanation that: ‘He lost his action and didn't feel right and there was nothing else I could do but pull him up.’
David Nicholson was quite pleased with Charter Party.
The 1988 Gold Cup victor led until two out, where lack of fitness told, and he finished third, 11 lengths behind the winner.
Graham McCourt can do little wrong at the moment and he gave Golden Friend a superb ride.
He and Chris Grant, on The Thinker, jumped the last together, but it was always on the cards that McCourt would have the upper hand.
However, full credit must go to The Thinker, who, giving a stone, battled all the way to the line and was beaten only one length.
Arthur Stephenson thought that his 1987 Gold Cup winner would need the race and 20-1 about him repeating the feat at Cheltenham again looks good each-way value.
McConnochie, who trains at Stratford-on-Avon and was formerly assistant to the now retired Mercy Rimell, said: ‘I think Golden Friend is an exciting prospect for the National.’
This was McConnochie's third success in his career and he gave a hint that there may be more to come in the Hennessy at Newbury on Saturday, saying: ‘Gala's Image should run well as long as the ground is not sticky.’
With Bigsun missing the Hennessy, Richard Dunwoody replaces John White on Brown Windsor, the 5-2 favourite.
David Elsworth is still looking for a jockey for Ghofar.
The Elsworth stable had good news regarding Barnbrook Again, who worked with all his old zest yesterday and will run in the North Street Chase at Newbury on Saturday.
Martin Pipe has a tremendous record at Haydock.
The Wellington trainer, who has a strike rate of just over 37 per cent at the Lancashire course, landed a double there yesterday with all-the-way winners Tri Folene and Star's Delight, and it would come as no surprise if he doubled that score today.
He could well land the opening three races with Royal Wonder, Pertemps Network and Huntworth, while Star's Delight can make it two wins in as many days by taking the Rainford Conditional Jockeys Handicap Chase.
Royal Wonder (1.00) is in cracking form.
She completed a hat-trick with a 12 lengths victory over previous scorer Milleone at Nottingham last month and should prove too sharp for her rivals in the Northern Junior Hurdle.
Pertemps Network (1.30) has frightened off all but two rivals in the Makerfield Novice Chase.
The five-year-old won eight of his ten hurdles races last season and looks the ideal type to do extremely well over fences.
After throwing away certain victory at Ascot, Huntworth (2.00) gained consolation with a two lengths win over Glenside Jerry at Devon two weeks ago.
This fine jumper is fanced to end the winning sequences of both Nautical Joke and Conclusive in the Save And Propser Handicap Chase.
At Wincanton Imperial Brush (1.45) is awarded the nap in the Wessex Handicap.
He ran well when third to Highland Bounty in a hot handicap at Cheltenham recently.
Motor Sport: Toyota take a Short cut.
By Mike Greasley
SAVIOURS come in many forms.
Today Toyota are pinning their hopes on Phil Short, a 45-year-old Yorkshireman from Ilkley.
Short, who actually stands 6ft 6in tall, could prove the key to Spain's Carlos Sainz winning his first Lombard RAC Rally for Toyota.
Short was co-driver for the British hope David Llewellin, but on Tuesday their British-prepared Toyota Celica crashed out of the five-day, 2,000-mile event.
Last night, however, Short received a phone call.
The British team co-ordinator Alistair Roberts explained: ‘Nobody knows Yorkshire better than Phil.
It's worth getting him involved.
His knowledge could be crucial.’
Sainz could have done with him yesterday, when his lead was slashed by a charging Pentti Airikkala.
On wind and rainswept stages in the rugged Border country, the Mitsubishi driver was fastest on nine of the day's 10 stages.
The 27-year-old from Madrid had started yesterday's penultimate leg with a comfortable lead of 1min 36sec, but when he arrived at Newcastle last night it had been trimmed to 31sec.
Enter Short.
Today's final 78 miles of stages are over the notoriously deceptive Yorkshire forest roads.
With long straights and blind brows often hiding corners, experience counts for a lot.
With more than 20 years of rallying behind him, Short could give Sainz, or more importantly his co-driver Luis Moya, extra information which could make all the difference between winning, losing, or, even worse, crashing.
Moya is on only his second RAC.
Sainz is doing his third.
‘Last year was my first ‘blind’ rally, the first without having practised the stages,’said Moya.
‘I thoroughly enjoyed it but felt five years older after the experience.’
Compare this with Airikkala.
He has won four international rallies based on today's RAC stages and has been rallying almost exclusively in Britain since 1975.
Airikkala, 44, has even forsaken his native Finland to live in Britain.
Airikkala's Irish co-driver Ronan McNamee knows the forests equally well, but points out that trying to read the roads from a map is not so easy, particularly at speeds of up to 130mph.
‘Sometimes it works fine but other times it's a complete mess,’ said McNamee.
‘But we do know Yorkshire well.
‘We wanted to start the final day within a minute of Carlos.
Obviously we believe we can make up the time on roads we have been over quite a few times.’
The pressure is all on Sainz, known as ‘The Matador’ for his attacking and courageous driving style.
A former Spanish junior squash champion, he is one of a new breed of southern European drivers challenging the traditional domination of the Finns and Swedes.
The leading British driver is Malcolm Wilson, whose Opel was just out of the top 10 last night in 11th place, two minutes ahead of Gwyndaf Evans in his Ford Sierra in 12th place.
Scotland's Jimmy McRae was an unlucky 13th after surviving transmission problems and a brush with a bridge in his Ford.
Nottingham Forest 1, Everton 0 Tyson at centre of new controversy.
By David Lacey
THE Littlewoods Cup holders returned to the last eight of the competition last night in unusual and, Everton would claim, unjust circumstances.
Nottingham Forest had almost despaired of breaking down Everton's rebuilt defence when Lee Chapman won an entertaining fourth-round tie at the City Ground with a smartly taken goal seven minutes from the end.
While there was nothing extraordinary about the goal itself, Chapman turning the ball in at the near post after Clough had driven an indirect free-kick low through a crowd of players, the circumstances in which the kick had been given were a little odd and left Everton looking apoplectic.
Neville Southall, whose saves had prevented Forest running away with the game in the first half, gathered the ball and started to think about clearing it but in the view of the referee, George Tyson, he had thought too long.
A bemused Southall found himself cautioned for time-wasting and a few seconds later had to pick the ball out of the net.
Not for the first time this season Tyson needed a police escort at the end as he was surrounded by protesting players.
Colin Harvey, the Everton manager, ushered his team away.
The TV playback showed that Southall had held the ball for 13 seconds, although it did not seem as long at the time.
Harvey said later that he thought the decision had been harsh and added that there had been no warning given about time-wasting before the game, although he accepted that Tyson could have mentioned it to the players during the match, a fact confirmed by the referee as he left the ground.
Just over a fortnight ago two of Tyson's more controversial penalty decisions had help spark a free-for-all at the end of the League match between Arsenal and Norwich City which led to both clubs being charged with bringing the game into disrepute.
On the balance of last night's play, Everton were entitled to feel that they had done enough to take Forest back to Goodison Park.
Although they were still deprived by injury of their regular central defenders Ratcliffe and Watson, they managed to defend efficiently by using Snodin as a spare centre-back behind Keown and McDonald.
Even this appeared unlikely to stop Nottingham Forest in the first half.
Hodge and Parker commanded the midfield, Crosby and Rice, strongly supported by Laws and Pearce, drove forward on the flanks and it seemed only a matter of time before the right sort of cross reached Chapman or Clough.
Nottingham Forest later lost their momentum and McCall and Sheedy were now able to establish lasting contact with Newell and Sharp.
Crossley had to move quickly to save a glancing header from Sharp and just when it looked as if Forest might be more grateful for a replay Chapman won the tie.
Just what constitutes time-wasting is a matter for the referee's discretion, and if Tyson felt that Southall was deliberately using up precious seconds he was entitled to award Forest that crucial free-kick.
But everybody knows that, in other games at other times with oter referees, goalkeepers will dally and dawdle to a greater degree and get away with it.
To be effective this kind of refereeing has to be consistent.
Otherwise the letter of the law is an ass.
Nottingham Forest: Crossley; Laws, Pearce, Walker, Chettle, Hodge, Crosby, Parker, Clough, Chapman, Rice.
Everton: Southall; McDonald, Pointon, Keown, Snodin, Ebbrell, Nevin (Cottee, 85min), McCall, Sharp, Newell, Sheedy.
Referee: G Tyson (Sunderland)..
Welling swelling.
ON A night of Littlewoods Cup upsets it was left to Welling to perform similar derring-do in the FA Cup, writes Jack Massarik.
A first-half header from their former Crystal Palace defender Mark Hone saw off Gillingham, their near neighbours of the Fourth Division, 1-0 in a first-round replay.
It was the GM Vauxhall Conference side's first win over League opposition.
Fulham became London's sole representatives in the second round when they beat Bath 2-1 at Craven Cottage.
When Gary Smart gave the Beazer Homes League side the lead things looked bleak for a team winless for 11 games, but John Marshall and John Watson sealed a determined victory.
The recalled Torquay striker Jimmy Smith celebrated his 20th birthday with two goals in three minutes during a 4-0 win which dashed Sutton's hopes of another upset.
Phil Lloyd headed the opening goal.
Dartford's hopes also crumbled rapidly when Exeter scored three times in an eight-minute spell in the second half.
The Fourth Division side ran out 4-1 winners.
Colin Johnson scored Dartford's consolation goal.
Burnley came from behind to beat Stockport 2-1 at Edgeley Park and could thank their new signing Ron Futcher for the equaliser after Edwards had given the home side the lead.
O'Connell seized on a bad back-pass to lob the winner.
In the Littlewoods Cup two goals by Derby's McMinn disposed of West Bromwich Albion, and Manchester City's misery continued when Coventry put them out with a 16th-minute goal from Regis after a Redmond error.
Rangers, beaten 1-0 by Aberdeen last night, yesterday announced a £5 million sponsorship, the biggest in British football, but declined to name their backer until the deal is signed.
Their Glasgows rivals Celtic were held to a 1-1 draw by St Mirren.
Sailing: Leaders neck and neck.
By Bob Fisher in Fremantle
THE leading yachts on the second leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race were almost in line abreast yesterday as they approached the finish here.
Fisher & Paykel was the most northerly of the line, which ranged through Steinlager 2, Rothmans and Merit to the south-east.
With 450 miles to go, an area of high pressure will decide the finishing order.
The New Zealanders Grant Dalton and Peter Blake, skippers of Fisher & Paykel and Steinlager 2, agree that the winner will be decided in the final miles.
‘It's a matter of who has the right line past the high,’ said Dalton.
Blake said: ‘Tacking the way through the lighter winds will decide who wins the leg.’
The yachts are slowing down as they approach Fremantle and the effect of the high-pressure zone becomes apparent.
Fisher & Paykel was the first to be affected as speeds dropped from more than 11 knots to only eight.
Athletics.
Tony Morrell dashed Steve Cram's hopes yesterday when he informed the AAA that he would be fit to compete for England in the Commonwealth Games 1500 metres.
Tennis.
The projected £4 million Grand Slam Cup has brought the sport's international community to a state of deadlock, writes Alan Page.
At a meeting in Frankfurt, the West German Federation has refused to bow to mounting pressure from the Grand Slam committee to sanction the cup.
‘We believe it is bad for German tennis,’ the federation's chairman, Claus Stauder, said.
Boxing.
Monty Wright landed the decisive win in England's 6-5 victory over Poland in the amateur international at HMS Nelson, Portsmouth, last night — a unanimous points triumph over Jan Kopreckocaika — in front of the England Commonwealth Games selectors.
He will be hoping his performance will earn him a place in the 10-strong squad for New Zealand in January.
Mark Edwards, the ABA middleweight champion already in the Auckland squad, also won the vote of all three judges against Robert Buda, but the England captain Richie Woodhall got through only on a majority decision against his fellow Olympic bronze medal winner at light-middleweight.
American Football.
Villa Park will be the venue for the Birmingham club in the new International League.
The opening home game is against Rome on April 16.
Rugby League.
St Helens have signed Tea Ropati, the New Zealand centre, who was invalided home with a knee injury early in the Kiwis' English tour.
The League board last night deferred a decision on a new contract for the Great Britain coach, Malcolm Reilly.
Hockey.
Rob Thompson, of Hounslow, is unable to travel with the England team leaving for Oman and Pakistan on Monday because of his law examinations, writes Pat Rowley.
England will play a Punjab XI between their two Tests against Pakistan in Lahore.
Ice Hockey.
As part of Britain's world championship preparations, a British Select will meet the Swiss club Davos at Nottingham on December 7, writes Vic Batchelder.
Davos play Durham Wasps a day earlier.
American Football.
Villa Park will be the venue for the Birmingham club in the new International League.
The opening home game is against Rome on April 16.
Rugby League.
St Helens have signed Tea Ropati, the New Zealand centre, who was invalided home with a knee injury early in the Kiwis' English tour, writes Edward Kennedy.
The League board last night deferred a decision on a new contract for the Great Britain coach, Malcolm Reilly.
Hockey.
Rob Thompson, of Hounslow, is unable to travel with the England team leaving for Oman and Pakistan on Monday because of his law examinations, writes Pat Rowley.
England will play a Punjab XI between their two Tests against Pakistan in Lahore.
Ice Hockey.
As part of Britain's world championship preparations, a British Select will meet the Swiss club Davos at Nottingham on December 7, writes Vic Batchelder.
Davos play Durham Wasps a day earlier.
Tennis: Germans reject Grand Slam.
By Alan Page in Essen
THE projected £4 million Grand Slam Cup has brought the international tennis community to a state of deadlock.
At a meeting in Frankfurt the West German Federation refused steadfastly to bow to mounting pressure from the Grand Slam committee to sanction the cup.
‘We believe it is bad for German tennis,’ the West German Federation's chairman, Claus Stauder, said in Essen yesterday.
‘They tried everything to convince us but we didn't buy it.
They clearly didn't expect we would stand firm.’
The Grand Slam committee, including the chairman of the Wimbledon committee Buzzer Hadingham, and the International Federation are now in the embarrassing situation of having their event outlawed by the most powerful federation in the game.
Stauder referred to ‘this exorbitantly rewarded and grotesque event which gives the winner more prize money than Boris Becker has made this year’.
He admitted the federation could not stop the tournament.
‘But we cannot and will not sanction it,’ he said.
German fears are fourfold: uncontrollably escalating prize money; a form of financial saturation-bombing of the wealthiest tennis market in the world; downgrading of the German Open, which has a tradition stretching back 80 years; and a clash with the ATP finals scheduled for Frankfurt three weeks earlier.
For Stauder, the solution may lie in a merger of the ATP finals and the Grand Slam Cup.
Tranmere Rovers 2, Tottenham 2 Tranmere flying high in pursuit of another scalp.
By Cynthia Bateman
THE Tranmere Rovers players were so high on good publicity before this match that their manager, John King, said he would have to pull them down from the ceiling.
Now they are going through the roof en route to the moon, having forced Spurs into a replay.
Terry Venables was left picking his side up off the floor.
The Third Division front-runners, who had already knocked Millwall out of this competition and have not lost at home for 12 months, refused to be intimidated, then turned the tables.
Spurs have never been the same in cup competition since Port Vale knocked them out of the FA Cup.
But Venables had promised that his men would be made of sterner stuff this time, and their first-half guile and style foiled Tranmere's honest endeavours.
On the half-hour Gascoigne, put through by Thomas, meandered through the open gate of Tranmere's back yard to take the lead with a low, hard shot into the right-hand corner.
Tranmere wasted a good deal of splendid midfield work in the first half with long-range speculative shots into the stand.
But six minutes into the second half their central defender Vickers, who appeared to be standing several yards offside, received a pass from Bishop and his close-range shot levelled the score.
A petulant Gascoigne tried by fair means and foul, to his own discredit, to twirl the Tranmere defence, but it was the sleek performance of Lineker, playing deep, that provided the few chances Spurs had.
Both Samways and Allen brought fine saves from Nixon, and Samways had a goal disallowed.
But Tranmere, cocky even before the equaliser, played with skill and tenacity.
They took the lead when Steel headed in Hughes's perfect cross as Spurs' formation began to look as ragged as a returning Battle of Britain squadron.
Spurs' humiliation was compounded when Lineker mis-kicked wildly a few feet in front of goal and fell flat on his back.
It looked as though Spurs had regained their self-respect a few seconds later when the England striker appeared to net a Samways cross, but in fact Tranmere's full-back Higgins had put the ball past his goalkeeper.
VIPs in the crowd of 13,789 retired to the Tranmere Suite, where the scroll of memorable matches includes Tranmere's 1-1 draw with Spurs in a 1953 FA Cup tie.
What it does not mention is that the little club from the wrong side of the Mersey crashed out 9-1 in the replay, their worst defeat.
Tranmere Rovers: Nixon; Higgins, Pike, Bishop, Hughes, Vickers, Morrissey (Malkin, 71min), Harvey, Steel, Muir, Mungall.
Tottenham Hotspur: Thorstvedt; Thomas, Polston, Bergsson (Stevens, 69), Howells, Mabbutt, Samways, Gascoigne, Stewart (Walsh, 80), Lineker, Allen.
Referee: L Shapter (Torquay)..
Tranmere Rovers 2, Tottenham 2 Spurs tossed a lifeline.
By Cynthia Bateman
TRANMERE ROVERS, of the Third Division, forced a replay against a shaken Spurs side who were rescued by a Higgins own goal in the 69th minute of this Littlewoods Cup fourth-round tie.
Rovers have never been the same since they knocked Newcastle and Wimbledon out of the Centenary Trophy.
Their manager, John King, said his players were so high on publicity that before this match he had to pull them down from the ceiling.
Terry Venables was left picking his players up off the floor after Tranmere, who have not lost at Prenton Park in 12 months, achieved a worthy draw against their lofty visitors.
The Tottenham manager had said that his team would be tougher than the ones that were overturned by Port Vale and Bradford in notorious FA Cup defeats, and better than the one that struggled against Southend in an earlier round of this competition.
But it was Spurs' guile rather than their aggression that earned them a first-half lead when Thomas put Gascoigne through.
He was able to meander past the Tranmere defence and finish with a low hard shot that spun past Nixon's outstretched hands.
Gascoigne, appearing riled by some of the rough-and-tumble of Tranmere's enthusiasm, teased and toyed with their defence, beating one, two and three defenders, only to fall foul of three more when a simple pass would have done the business.
Lineker showed him how it is done, playing deep and feeding Samways and Allen with slick passes that brought two excellent saves from Nixon, a disallowed goal by Samways, and a reaction from the Tranmere defence which was somewhat reminiscent of a metal crusher in a scrapyard.
But Tranmere were not all hustle and bustle.
They had their moments of flair but they wasted good midfield work with speculative shots into the stand.
Only one, a volley by Muir — released by Venables when he was manager of Queen's Park Rangers — caused Thorstvedt any anxiety.
Six minutes into the second half, Tranmere, always alert and certainly never overawed, equalised through a shot from their central defender Vickers who, viewed from the stand, looked offside by several yards.
Tranmere now were not only confident but cocky, and as Spurs deteriorated into a formation as ragged as a returning Battle of Britain squadron it was the Third Division side who found space and time.
In the 62nd minute Hughes crossed perfectly for Steel to head them into the lead.
A mis-kick in front of goal by Lineker compounded Spurs' humiliation.
But seconds later both the England striker and his team recovered their self respect when he netted a Samways cross — although it finally went down as an own goal by Higgins.
Tranmere Rovers: Nixon; Higgins, Pike, Bishop, Hughes, Vickers, Morrissey, Harvey, Steel, Muir, Mungall.
Tottenham Hotspur: Thorstvedt; Thomas, Polston, Bergsson, Howells, Mabbutt, Samways, Gascoigne, Stewart, Lineker, Allen.
Referee: L Shapter (Torquay)..
West Ham 1, Wimbledon 0 Dicks sent off, five booked on night of the steamers.
By Ian Ridley
AMESSY match disgraced by a series of violent tackles and subsequent scenes of inflamed confrontations between players was, quite out of context, settled by a breathtaking goal by Martin Allen 10 minutes from time.
West Ham had their captain Julian Dicks sent off and four other players were booked, as well as the Wimbledon physiotherapist.
Just when you thought it was safe to watch another Wimbledon game…
Their disciplinary record has slowly improved under Bobby Gould and they will point out, correctly, that West Ham played as great a part in the mayhem.
That cannot excuse them, however, and the FA will probably be interested in both teams' excuses.
It was the third time in three weeks that such ugly scenes had been witnessed at London grounds.
The referee, Alfred Buksh, who rarely had control of a game that at one point seemed unlikely to be completed, booked Wimbledon's Phelan, Wise, Young and the physiotherapist, Steve Allen, for treating an injured player without permission, and West Ham's Allen and Dicks, before his dismissal.
Forty three minutes of crass, artless thumping of a ball, just shaded by Wimbledon by virtue of Young's header being cleared off the line by Keen, preceded the first flare-up.
Wise fouled Dicks near a touchline and the West Ham left back responded with a retaliatory elbow.
Young led, in terrace parlance, the steaming in, which at one stage involved at least 10 players with punches appearing to be thrown.
The nearby crowd surged forward and police had to intervene.
Only Wise was cautioned — Phelan's earlier had been, curiously, for delaying a throw-in — and the referee missed an opportunity to establish his authority.
Five minutes into the second half Allen challenged Young late and this time Sanchez led the steamers, closely followed by Dicks.
This time Allen and Dicks were cautioned, Allen fortunate not to be shown a red card as he harangued the referee.
Another posse gathered around the referee in the 56th minute after Young's high challenge on Allen, for which the Wimbledon defender was booked.
Yet another occurred four minutes later after Dicks's scything tackle on Wise, for which a sending-off could be the only outcome.
All this was ‘played’ to a backdrop of police ejecting incensed supporters from terrace and stand.
The referee, who needed a police escort from the pitch, was pelted with missiles as he spoke to an officer.
His refusal of a penalty when Allen was fouled by Curle made matters worse, but he was correct in ruling that Brady had already fouled Segers.
Slater also had a shot cleared off the line by Joseph.
Poor Brady, a ballet dancer in a bearpit.
And then there was Devonshire, who at least attempted to get West Ham going.
The hype surrounding Justin v John Fashanu did not materialise but Justin came on, only to miss from a few yards as Sanchez intervened, leading to his injury and the booking of the Wimbledon physio.
Finally a goal came.
Slater sent Ward away on the left and his cross was met by Allen who unleashed a stunning volley into the net of which Marco van Basten would hve been proud.
Even then, Cork had a late chance to equalise but screwed his shot wide.
‘There were four or five incidents which nobody is pleased to see,’ admitted Gould.
‘I will be dealing with it in-house.’
His West Ham counterpart, Lou Macari, was less open.
‘I want to avoid it,’ he said of the ‘little incidents’, but, when pressed, added: ‘You can't control footballers on the field.’
Neither are West Ham fans likely to agree with his saying: ‘Our supporters are only interested in us getting into the next round.’
West Ham: Parkes; Potts, Dicks, Strodder, Martin, Keen (Fashanu, 70min), Brady, Slater, Allen, Ward, Parris,(Devonshire, 41).
Wimbledon: Segers; Joseph, Phelan, Ryan, Young, Curle, Fairweather, Cotterill, Miller (Cork, 75), Sanchez (Scales, 70), Wise.
Referee: A Buksh (London).