

In good faith Open Space..
THE Gospel Truth?
(November 28) was interesting for the assumptions its author, Jayne Greenwell, deemed to be facts.
For example, ‘No child of practising religious parents will miss out on religious education — it will be provided at home.’
Who says so?
It may be provided at Sunday school but I would think that the average Christian parents have the same feeling of unease about discussing faith with the children as they do about discussing sex.
Jayne Greenwell also assumes that the existence of God is not a fact but ‘a matter of opinion’.
The truth is that people don't react to reality; they react to their perception of reality.
My perception of God is real and I can understand that for her he isn't.
What I can't understand is who she thanks when she wants to be thankful, for example when her son was born.
If God is not a fact, then what have atheists to fear if their kids learn about him?
If something is nothing, how can it affect anything?
Terry Wynn Member of the European Parliament Merseyside East
AS SOMEONE involved in religious education, I share Jayne Greenwell's concern, but cannot agree with her solution that RE be taken out of the curriculum.
It is too important in that it enables children to understand how religion influences individuals and societies, and to explore how people form their own beliefs and values — including atheism.
However, I would denounce the kind of RE she describes because it imposes beliefs rather than explores them.
In this respect it contradicts the approach to education in general which is to enable children to acquire critical skills and achieve the kind of understanding that makes knowledge their own, not that of their parents or society.
Ways of teaching RE to young children have received too little attention, and teachers are given woefully little training — consequently the one mentioned in the article is probably left to teach as she was once taught.
W Owen Cole Chichester
IWOULD urge Jayne Greenwell not to be concerned about her son's religious instruction.
My son, aged four, believes in God and Jesus, as I did as a child.
He also believes in fairies, witches, sea monsters and Father Christmas.
I am confident that when he reaches his teens he will challenge and possibly reject religion as he will earlier have rejected his other fantasies.
It was an aphorism of my parents-in-law that in order to respond to the arguments of the religious persuaders, it was essential to be thoroughly familiar with the content of the bible.
So don't worry, Ms Greenwell: your son's religious education lessons will provide him with the ammunition that he needs to oppose traditional religious beliefs.
Jane P Sutherland Reading
JAYNE Greenwell overlooks the fact that Christianity is the soil in which the roots of the ethnic British are grounded.
Most of the praise-worthy efforts to reflect minority cultures in our schools are based on religious festivals — Hindu, Moslem, Sikh or Jewish.
Our children have a right to know why we have Christmas and Easter, crosses on war memorials and a coronation service; why the centre of every English village is a parish church; and why English literature resonates with Biblical imagery.
They have even more of a right to know if they are not being told at home.
This is not the same as ‘force-feeding’ doctrine; one can sympathise with Jayne Greenwell's reservations, but we should be careful what gets thrown out with the bathwater.
Anne Kiggell Editor, Prep School London SW14 PAGE wom
Another day.
December 7, 1786: I am in a fair way of becoming as eminent as Thomas a Kempis or John Bunyan, and you may expect henceforth to see my birthday inserted among the wonderful events in the Poor Robin's and Aberdeen Almanacks, along with the black Monday and the battle of Bothwell Bridge.
(Robert Burns to Gavin Hamilton, Letters: 193l).