

US hopes high of winning ballot to secure Pacific island nuclear base.
By A Correspondent
ISLANDERS in the tiny Pacific state of Palau vote in a referendum on February 6 for the seventh time on a deal with the United States which would give the US strategic military rights in the Western Pacific only 500 miles from the troubled Philippines.
Washington is optimistic that voters will at last consent to a treaty called the Compact of Free Association.
The US has been trying for a decade to clinch the deal, not least because it would give its nuclear forces control of what is seen as the strategically vital Pacific zone and a new set of options if its Philippine naval and air bases are threatened.
But the 11,000 island voters have rejected the treaty in six referendums since 1983.
Opposition to the deal is being led by Palau's small but powerful group of traditional women elders, who say the agreement would have a devastating social economic and political impact on Palau's society and culture.
The compact would grant the US options on exclusive military rights in and around the Palau archipelago for 50 years.
In exchange, Washington would provide Palau with $460 million in aid over 15 years.
Palau's constitution bans nuclear activity unless agreed by at least 75 per cent of voters.
All referendums so far have failed to reach the required majority, although more than half the electorate voted in favour.
Schizophrenic dance of Kids of Fame Simon Tisdall in Tegucigalpa reports on Honduras' love-hate relationship with the US and its addictive cultural trappings.
By Simon Tisdall in Tegucigalpa, Honduras
AT the store on the corner, three drunken men are trying to eat the same hot dog.
Across the road, an army conscript in battle fatigues watches.
Somewhere along the dark street, somebody is crying.
It is past midnight in down town Tegucigalpa, and it's time to go home.
And here, at last, come the Kids from Fame.
Chela and Urna are dancers at La Fama night club, a grotty little joint comprising one bar, 15 or so rickety wooden tables, and an illuminated picture of a woman's bottom which flashes on and off.
But La Fama has a stage.
And that is what really interests Chela and Urna.
Like the thousands of young people who crowd the narrow streets of Tegucigalpa, the Kids from La Fama are obsessed with the trappings of North American culture.
A fancy New York dance school it isn't, but for Chela and Urna the spotlit stage at La Fama is an alluring link with the much-emulated, much vilified empire to the north.
Such schizophrenia, when it comes to the ‘yanquis’ is common throughout Central America.
And in another way, the Kids from Honduras symbolise one of the region's most pressing problems — the population explosion.
Like its neighbour Nicaragua Honduras is growing beyond its means.
Last month, the IMF declared Honduras ineligible for further funds after it failed to repay debts of $16 million, bringing its overdue obligations to $26.5 million.
The World Bank has taken similar action because of $57 million arrears.
Through the Caribbean Basin Initiative, the US is attempting to encourage export industries in countries such as Honduras, in addition to direct financial aid.
But this, in turn, reopens the issue of national dependence on Uncle Sam.
And in any case, the particulars of such a seeming unequal struggle are of little immediate help, or interest, to the Kids from La Fama.
Since dancing cannot earn them a living, Chela and Urna are into self-help, and it is as humiliating in personal terms as any perceived national, cultural subservience to the US.
Urna is the most forward.
She sits at the table and smiles, asking firmly for a solo-brandy and coke in separate glasses.
She is young but not so young as Chela, who says she is 18 but looks 16 at the most.
Chela, too, has a solo.
When they suggest a dance to my companion, Wesley, there seems no harm — but it turns into a smooch.
Solos become doubles, and doubles trebles.
And the Kids from La Fama grow ever more possessive.
‘Now we have to go,’ say Chela and Urna suddenly.
‘But there is a problem.’
The problem turns out to be the boss of the club, who says we must pay $8 if the girls are to leave.
Outside, I wait for Wesley, who is negotiating Chela and Urna's release.
Finally, here they come, the Kids from Fame, Honduras-style, giggling yet purposeful.
‘Where do you want to go, we'll drop you in a taxi,’ I say.
All three now look at me incredulously.
And the penny drops.
‘Back to the hotel, man, come on!’ says Wesley.
It took 30 minutes of argument, a great deal of soothing of apparently hurt professional pride, and not a little money to persuade Chela that it was time to call it a night, alone.
It was normal, argued Wesley.
It was expected, warned Urna.
It was very, very sad, thought I, as the army conscript across the road laughed at the prostitution of his country's future.
Christians say 40,000 were assembled against them Syria ‘planned mass assault’ on Aoun.
By David Hirst in Beirut
IT may never be known whether the Syrian army ever really did intend to seize Baabda Palace, drive out General Michel Aoun, and install the new President, Elias Hrawi, in his place.
But if it did, it was apparently to have been a big affair — no mere helicopter-borne ‘surgical strike’— in which sheer weight of numbers and firepower could have been expected to guarantee ultimate success.
Very heavy Syrian casualties would apparently have been deemed a lesser price to pay than the probable failure of anything less than what the general's men say was planned: a full-scale armoured and infantry assault involving 40,000 men on five main axes along a 50-kilometre front.
The likelihood that, after all the fanfare and ultimatums, it is not going to happen, or at least not for the time being, is another boost for the ‘rebel’ general in his lonely defiance of Lebanon's Muslims — indeed, a good many of its Christians, too — much of the Arab world, and international communities.
The Tayif agreement was supposed to be a formula for peace, but last week it came close to becoming a recipe for one of the biggest, almost certainly the most ferocious, battles of the 14 ½-year war.
It might be argued that historically the Maronite Christians have done much to bring this near calamity on themselves, that Gen Aoun is only the latest, probably the last, in a long line of revolts against an Arab and Mulsim environment to which this most stiff-necked of Arab minorities refuses to adapt itself.
Recently, one prominent, hitherto militant Christian commentator did argue that.
But last week such arguments looked academic: the Maronites were facing the first-ever full-scale invasion of their traditional mountain heartland, and the survival of ‘Christian Lebanon’ was at stake as never before.
There was no question but that the army, the Lebanese Forces militia, and a whole new wave of volunteers would have put up a desperate resistance.
Even if the new President had entered his official residence, he would have no standing in his own community, and what, after all, is the point of a Maronite President if it is not to integrate the Maronites within the traditional confessional system which — readjusted in the Muslims' favour — the Tayif agreement perpetuates?
If that agreement is already deeply ailing, the Syrian invasion would have killed it off.
The plain fact is that Syria, together with the principal promoters of the Arab League ‘peace plan’ such as the US and Saudi Arabia, and its reluctant supporters such as France, have taken fright at its enforcement.
In Malta, President Bush — in agreement with President Gorbachev — said there must be no more bloodshed in Lebanon.
France has said that it would support the side that restarted the war.
The Arab ‘troika’ has called for restraint by all parties.
In other words, they don't want Syria to strike.
But that puts them all in a real quandary.
For at the same time they still see no alternative to Tayif, and still see Aoun as the one great impediment in its way.
Yet, now more than ever, force would appear to be the only way of ousting the general, and Syria alone capable of supplying it.
There is fresh talk of a general blockade against the enclave.
The diplomatic one has already begun.
But Lebanon's inter-communal boundaries are so porous, so criss-crossed by reciprocal interests — with, for example, East Beirut controlling most of West Beirut's water and electricity supplies — that an economic blockade would probably require a much greater political will than the shambles which Hrawi's ‘legitimate’ administration could ever muster.
States don't advertise such intentions, but there can be no doubt that Syria, for one, is working overtime on a means of killing the general.
The other factor on which the architects of Tayif have been counting is divisions within the Christian community.
President Bush himself, no less, effectively called on Gen Aoun's loyalist troops to rise against him, but, though some senior officers oppose his high-risk strategies and resent his authoritarian style, they are unlikely to move in the recent climate of public adulation for the great new champion.
The same is true of those other centres of Maronite power, such as the Lebanese Forces militia.
On a one-day visit from Washington, where he now resides, the US ambassador expressed his exasperated surprise that the Lebanese Forces had not joined the ‘legitimate’ government.
The divisions are certainly latent, but the very manner in which, especially since President Muawad's assassination, Syria has been trying to enforce the peace plan — with such haste, threats and bluster — tends to blunt rather than sharpen them.
It is not the general who must go, his aides say, it is Tayif which must change.
And for all his stubbornness he is in fact hinting at his readiness for a deal.
He is ready, he says, to consider Syria's ‘vital interests’ in Lebanon, and by that he appears to mean that its army could stay in the Beka'a Valley, provided it is clearly intended for defence against Israeli attack and not for interference in Lebanon's internal affairs.
It is, on the face of it, a very considerable offer.
But it is very doubtful whether Assad could accept it: it would mean ditching Tayif and recognising the general.
But Aoun seems sure that, if he just hangs on regardless, some other miracle will in due course come to the rescue.
A continent with an identity crisis In the final page of the Guardian's pre-EC Strasbourg summit conference analysis of politics and society Martin Kettle argues against easy optimism.
LAST weekend, the BBC broadcast a documentary about the attempts of ballet historians to reconstruct Nijinsky's lost choreography for the 1913 Paris premiere of Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring.
The programme ended with a complete performance of the ballet as the historians think it must have looked on that epochal occasion.
Anyone who has read about the cultural life of that period knows that Diaghilev's Russian Ballet created a sensation throughout pre-1914 western Europe.
Watching the Nijinsky recreation it was suddenly possible to understand why.
For this was something which came from right outside the audience's experience or expectations.
It was barbaric, foreign, and, above all, Russian.
Today, it is no longer possible to imagine such a thing happening.
Nothing in European life, even in Albania, retains that capacity to shock, even to shock people who have never left West Cumberland in their lives.
Europe is still a continent of separate localities and traditions, but it is infinitely more homogeneous than it was.
Less than two centuries ago, when the English Romantics saw the Alps they could only stare with wild surmise.
Today, more than 100 million Europeans are gearing up for this winter's invasion of the ski-slopes.
Every year, more Europeans learn a little more about one another than their ancestors ever knew.
They take more foreign holidays.
They make more business trips.
In the last ten years the number of phone calls from Britain to other European countries has multiplied two and half times.
Even so, in countless places around Europe, people behave and think in ways which are totally distinctive.
Stand in a French village when the Tour de France goes by and you are participating in an event which is unambiguously French.
Go to a provincial Italian opera house and you enter a quintessentially Italian world where the relationship between performers and audience is a private ritual.
Talk to a Hungarian reformer about the political crisis and you will soon learn that he is literally obsessed with the situation in Budapest.
In every case, such encounters have their European dimension.
The Tour de France is now broadcast daily into most European countries and you can find 6-year-old children in London who will argue the merits of Fignon versus Lemond.
Opera, too, is beamed around the Continent like never before; tonight's Verdi first night at La Scala is on radio and television channels across Europe.
And persons of average political sensibility in many lands eagerly study the transformations in Hungary and seek to draw lessons from the changes.
Yet in all these random examples, which are each dimensions of the new Europe, it wouldn't occur to the participants for one second that they are being European.
The British are not in any sense unique, though they may be an extreme example, in their preoccupation with themselves and their own ways.
To expect Europe to become a single warm cultural bath is simply to mistake the nature of the European, and indeed any other, identity.
To be European in France is to think globally about a French-led political Europe which will challenge the power of Japan and America.
But to be European in Lithuania or Scotland is to assert your nationality and the wish to get Moscow or London off your back.
To be European in Italy is a logical extension of what is already assumed to be one's natural multiple identity within a family, a city, a region and a nation.
And to be European in southern England, is to make a political statement against Thatcherism, philistinism, and English insularity.
WHERE ARE the boundaries of Europe?
Before people talk of Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals, they ought to look at the map and understand what they are saying.
If you stand on the border of Hungary and the Soviet Union, you are nearer to Lisbon than the Urals.
If we truly share a common European home, then its logical capital is Kiev not Brussels.
The mental and emotional boundaries of Europe are even harder to draw.
Europe is both a fact of life and an aspiration.
It is a place we live in and an ideal to which some aspire.
There are Turks and Israelis who passionately consider themselves Europeans but there are Muslims and Jews for whom Europe is simply a hostile place where they live.
No nation and no government has been more conscious of the need, as they perceive it, to build barriers protecting European civilisation against American and Japanese audio-visual cultural imperialism than the French.
Yet this is also the government which has fought most ruthlessly to bring EuroDisneyland to Marne la Vallee in the early 1990s.
The embodiment of the new Europe is often said to be Mikhail Gorbachev.
But he is a man presiding over a collapsing economy and a discredited political system.
Looked at from the West, Franois Mitterrand or perhaps Karl-Otto Pohl, president of the Bundesbank, might seem more appropriate technocratic candidates.
But is there not a case for saying that we are currently witnessing the historic counter attack of Christian Democracy, which has summoned up the traditions of Eastern Europe to redress the balance of the West?
In that case, the most truly emblematic figure in the new Europe is actually Pope John Paul II and Gorbachev's visit to the Vatican last week was the new Canossa.
For there are many Europes and they are all dominated by history.
As 1989 ends, it is tempting to imagine that Europe is emerging into a wholly new identity, governed by peace not war, common aspirations rather than sectional concerns.
In this Europe there is a Benetton in every high street, Badoit and Czech Budweiser in every fridge, an Armani jacket in every wardrobe, Beaujolais Nouveau on every table, cable and satellite television channels in many languages in every living room, an Umberto Eco novel on every bookshelf, a Volvo in every garage, where CDs of The Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment lie casually next to Eurythmics, and where nipping across to Paris for the day is as natural as doing a day's business in London.
It's an attractive vision, up to a point, and it has a certain reality.
But it is basically an illusion and, what is more, a very old one.
THERE have been what Jacques Delors calls ‘European projects’ before.
Some have been religious, mostly conceived by or on behalf of the Papacy, attempting to impose Catholic hegemony over schism, protestantism, and even Judaism and Islam.
Others have been ideological in other ways, on behalf of the French Revolution and the Rights of Man, or the power of reactionary princes in the age of Metternich.
Mostly they have been military, the attempt of one nation to subdue the rest.
Philip II of Spain came close to achieving it, before he was defeated by, among others, half naked English mercenary soldiers who ‘for thieving and brawling had no equals’— the ancestors of the football fans who are plotting next year's ‘English invasion of Italy’.
Louis XIV had good try and Napoleon an even better one.
For the first half of the last century, most European nations assumed that France would somehow try to repeat the project.
After 1870, their attention switched to believing that Germany was a more dangerous antagonist, a belief which was borne out until 1945.
Since then, and until very recently, Europe has been united against the fear, which would have seemed as absurd in previous centuries as it still does to many in the 1980s, of Russia.
And now?
To hear some people talk, you would think such things are all in a jumbled undifferentiated past, much as the Louis XIV's palace of Versailles with its real hall of mirrors now also houses Jacques-Louis David's massive celebrations of Napoleon and of the revolution which brought down the Bourbons.
‘A few years ago, many thoughtful men, in no way given to utopian ideas, had begun to hope that Western Europe would never again be the scene of the awful horrors of war.
Everything seemed to favour that belief.
Old feuds of race were diminishing, rivalries and prejudices were by degrees fading out.Such frequent and such intimate relations had thus been established between nations, that it seemed as if they must soon unite in one family, in one single federal state.
No nation in Europe, had the question been fairly put to them, would have answered that they wished war.’
A few months later, as Emile de Laveleye goes on to say in this essay of 1871, the Franco-Prussian war broke out, setting in motion the sequence of European conflicts which led, ultimately, to the obliteration of the centre of Berlin in 1945.
It seems somehow presumptuous to believe that in 1989 Europe has emerged into a cloudless world in which such things are now no longer possible.
Berlin, the haunted city of Europe.
BERLIN is where old Europe died in 1945 — bombed into smithereens as no British city was ever bombed.
Yet Berlin is also where the new Europe of old ideals has been born again in 1989.
If you can understand Berlin then perhaps it is also possible to make some sense of what Europe may now become and of what it means to be a European.
But how does one make any sense of Berlin?
Like Europe itself, it is a place of ghosts and a hall of historic mirrors.
Its future, like the future of Europe, lies in understanding its immanent past.
Before November 9, the visitor to the derelict Potsdamer Platz, where no trams run on the ancient tramlines which now lead nowhere, could mount the viewing platform by the tourist kiosks on the western side and peer across the Grepo border guards' free fire zone at the drab buildings a quarter of a mile away in the east.
A little to the left in the no man's land in front of the buildings was a grass mound.
It was truly a funeral mound.
It is all that remains of Hitler's bunker, the place of Gotterdammerung.
Rabbits used to play on it, one of the few places in Europe where rabbits were in no danger of being shot.
Today the bunker mound is still there.
Only now it is more difficult to spot because they have taken away the visitors' platform and the view through the most celebrated new gap in the Berlin Wall is often obscured by the steady stream of tramping East Berliners and their Trabant cars.
Soon, you suspect, that grassy mound will become a skateboard park.
AS THE East Berliners cross into the West, they see some unusual sights.
All around them are the forestastes of the Europeannesswhich, even if they don't opt for it, is certainly the one they are going to get.
They are offered cups of tea from a steaming cauldron by British soldiers.
Little red leaflets headed Herzlich Wilkommen! are pressed into their cold hands; the leaflets give them the deeply resistible news that they that they can get discounts on all burgers at the BurgerKing shops across West Berlin.
At the back of a huge lorry, free samples of Bahlsen biscuits are being dispensed.
A queue at the Mercedes-Benz double decker bus waits patiently for more freebies as the Trabants double park with immunity.
On the edge of the crowd the inevitable party of Japanese tourists busily video the scene, turning history into home movies, acting out Andy Warhol's belief that the 20th century could only know a thing was true if it was on TV.
These past days have been matchlessly hectic in downtown West Berlin.
It's hard to tell yet which of West Berlin's identities attracts the ‘Ossies’ most.
Beacon of freedom?
Shop-window of capitalism?
The middle-class half of Prussia's lost capital?
The gay and risque nightlife?
West Berlin is all these things and more to the inhabitants of the GDR.
What we are witnessing is the eager consummation that follows a long and passionate seduction.
What will it look like after the honeymoon?
Berlin's brightly lit streets are swimming with happy people.
But along the margins the ghosts still lurk.
Here, in Tauentzienstrasse, where Isherwood lodged in different days, as the East Berliners queue for fruit and cheap stereos, a Turkish beggar sleeps in a doorway with a notice round his neck saying ‘Hunger.’
IN Wittenbergplatz, the Christmas shoppers crowd into the Kaufhaus des Westens.
It is that same KaDeWe — you pronounce it ‘cardayvay’— where 60 years ago a Hungarian band played popular dance music favourites in the chic top floor restaurant.
Their speciality was tunes like In Sans Souci — to remind Twenties Berliners of that nice Sunday afternoon tram ride they could take out to Frederick the Great's summer palace at Potsdam — a trip no West Berliner has been able to take for half a century.
The KaDeWe is a vast department store.
In the new Europe, where consumerism is the new religion, department stores are important temples.
They all manage to look much the same.
Go into Printemps in Paris, Rinascente in Milan, de Bijenkorf in Amsterdam, or the KaDeWe and you could be in any of the others.
Even more important, the products are the same too.
But if KaDeWe looks like the others inside, there is something very different about it outside.
By the Wittenbergplatz U-Bahn station there is something which looks like a very large public information notice, which in one sense it is, but which is in fact a memorial.
It says simply ‘Places Of Horror Which We Must Never Forget’ and then lists ten concentration camps from Auschwitz to Bergen-Belsen.
Anyone can see that the breaching of the Berlin Wall is a great symbolic event as well as an actual one.
One month on, November 9, 1989 is already enshrined as one of the key dates of 20th century German and European history.
Streets are being named after it.
But it is an easy event to oversimplify.
Many different things will eddy back and forth as the link between east and west Europe is reopened.
Without a knowledge of history, George Bush's wish to see the Olympic Games in Berlin in 2004 would seem unproblematically splendid.
But because we cannot escape history it also seems either naive or even wicked.
It is precisely because Berlin is such a true mirror of so much European history that it always seems to embody so much of the darker, subconscious side of the European identity.
GO DOWN to the Kreuzberg district of Berlin now and you get a more nuanced picture.
of the new Berlin and the new Europe.
Here by the Oberbaum bridge across the icy Spree is what used to be a quintessential Cold War Berlin scene.
Across the river in the east it is not far to the site of the Gestapo cells where the young Erich Honecker was locked up in March 1945 for organising Communist resistance against the Nazis.
Today Honecker is in custody again and the tradition over which he presided is said to have run its course.
On the western side this was always an area characterised by a militancy which is presumably going out of fashion now too.
A century ago, weavers and bricklayers in this working class district won some of the earliest strikes for the ten hour day.
Down the road at Kottbusser Tor, workers fought in the streets in 1920 to defend the Weimar Republic against the Kapp putsch.
Today in the Green Party stronghold of Kopernickerstrasse banners hang from windows.
They plead ‘Money for all Foreigners.
Neither Kohl nor Krenz.
No to reunification.
Fight together against both capitalists and bureaucrats.’
But in the street below, the East German trippers pour back home laden with cans of Coca-Cola and Corn Flakes past smiling border guards all anxious to please.
This is Turkish Berlin, where the ‘guest workers’ whose predicament has been brought to wider notice by the brilliant investigations of Gunter Wallraff live in poor housing, on low wages, and amid great hostility.
For some of them, eagerly selling six-packs of beer on street corners, the new Berlin is full of opportunities.
Yet for many of these inhabitants of the new Europe, the breaching of the Wall is another nightmare, opening the gates into West Germany to a mass of high-skilled, low-wage workers who are white and German.
The great dream for Germany could be the great nightmare for Germany's Third World population.
But it is not just a question of Turks in Berlin or even Turks in West Germany.
For the Turks of Kreuzberg read the Maghrebins of Marseille, the Pakistanis of Bradford, or the Somalis of Rome.
The same issue exists in all the important societies of Europe.
For such people the European identity is a threat as much as a promise.
The need to face such things is never far away in Berlin.
On the walls of U-Bahn stations these days there are posters which have been put there by the Red-Green coalition which governs the city under Walter Momper.
The poster shows 25 faces of different ages and races.
Underneath it reads BerlinerInnen (the anti-sexist way of saying Berliners in German) aller Lander vertragt euch -Berliners of all countries get on together.
It could be a statement of fact, an expression of hope, or even an order.
Few cities anywhere in Europe can match the cultural richness of Berlin.
This is not just a liberal euphemism for the city's ethnic diversity.
Berlin's buildings — such of them as have survived — tell the story of the pioneering ages of modern design.
Its cabaret tradition and its popular music are unrivalled.
Its theatres are the stuff of legends.
It has an unmatchable symphony orchestra that seems to be the envy of the entire Japanese nation.
What place could better embody all that is best about the European identity?
THREE years ago, the Colorado-based Aspen Institute held a conference in West Berlin to discuss the development of multi-ethnic societies in western Europe.
It was a generally constructive attempt to discuss the fact that 2 or 3 per cent of the population of most big European countries is now from the Third World, something which those who rhapsodise about the ‘European identity’ often ignore.
The guests were put up in the Inter-Continental Hotel which overlooks the stretch of the Landwehr Canal into which the Freikorps threw the dead body of Rosa Luxembourg in 1919.
The conference was held at Wannsee, the place where the Nazis met to decide on the final solution.
MARTIN KETTLE
Obituary: J.P.M.Millar.
Plebs power
ALWAYS known by his initials, J.P.M.Millar for more than 40 years ran the National Council of Labour Colleges; an organisation which through classes, lectures, weekend and summer schools, and the massive number of correspondent courses organised by his wife Christine, provided shots and shell for the emerging Labour movement.
Catering for more than 100,000 students a year, the Millars had a major influence on the dissemination of socialist ideas.
When the rush of Labour MPs came into the Commons after the 1945 election, about two thirds were former students or tutors of the NCLC.
The NCLC was born out of a strike at Ruskin College in 1908 about the class bias of Oxford education.
Ten of the 54 strikers formed the nucleus of the Central Labour College, backed by the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, the South Wales Miners' Federation, and the Amalgamated Society of Engineers.
Hostility from Oxford landlords caused the college to move to Earls Court.
The students shared the cooking and domestic chores.
Millar came to the NCLC in 1923, first as press officer, but he soon became general secretary.
He continued until 1965, when the NCLC was handed over to the TUC.
The decision to wind up coincided with Millar's retirement, but owed more to the competition from the TUC's own education department and the Workers' Educational Association.
Millar said: ‘The WEA was subsidised by the state and we were not.
The WEA provided orthodox education, orientated to the capitalist system.
We provided a socialist system of education.
Would you expect the devil to be subsidised by heaven?’
Millar was obstinately determined to change the content of education.
Though never a left-winger in current terms, he wanted the socialist viewpoint expressed in every facet of learning.
‘Knowledge is power — the right kind of knowledge,’ he liked to say.
A strain of independent socialist thinking runs through his courses, pamphlets, and articles for Plebs, the NCL journal he edited.
Millar told me: ‘Labour's view of education has always been limited.
It wasn't so much as how to achieve a new social order, but how can I ensure that my son or daughter gets a better job than I did.
That was the object.
Before you can have a revolution you have to break down the existing system.’
The Millars retired and moved to Dartmouth.
The house had a double garage which Millar turned into a study and office.
Jam-packed with a complete run of Plebs and sets of the TUC and Labour Party conference reports, it was here that he wrote his book The Labour College Movement.
Allen Saddler J.P.M. Millar, born April 17, 1893; died December 2, 1989 international page 23 PAGE
Israel suspends ban on intifada protest songs.
By Ian Black in Jerusalem
ON the eve of the second anniversary of the intifada, a row has broken out over two popular Hebrew songs which protest strongly about treatment of the Palestinians in the occupied territories and Israeli indifference to the situation.
The Minister of Education, Mr Yitzhak Navon, said yesterday that he was suspending a ban on the songs by the state-run Broadcasting Authority pending a final decision by the attorney-general.
The Broadcasting Authority voted on Tuesday to stop the playing of Apres moi le deluge, by Nurit Galron, and Had Gadya, by Hava Alberstein.
Likud members won after Labour representatives insisted that the vote was illegal.
Ms Alberstein's song is a powerful modern version of an ancient Aramaic ballad sung around the Passover ‘Seder’ table by Jews celebrating the Exodus from Egypt.
The singer was following an old tradition of adapting the ceremony to give it contemporary relevance, adding to the festival's famous ‘four questions’ about the meaning of Passover a new and troubling one.
‘On all other nights I ask only four questions, /but tonight I have another one: /How long will this circle of terror continue? /Hunter and hunted, beater and beaten, /when will this madness end?’
Some of the words of Ms Galron's song, which explores the theme of guilt and responsibility for the uprising while Tel Aviv makes merry, were read out in the Knesset yesterday in the course of a stormy debate marking the second anniversary of the intifada.
Mr Yossi Sarid, of the leftwing opposition Citizens Rights Movement, quoted from the lyrics: ‘Don't tell me about the girl who lost her eye.
Don't tell me about the girl who lost her childhood.’
In other developments yesterday, the East Jerusalem Palestinian activist, Mr Faisal Husseini, was banned from entering the West Bank or Gaza Strip for six months.
Mr Husseini was accused of helping to co-ordinate rival Palestinian factions and encouraging civil disobedience campaigns.
The Israeli Peace Now movement condemned the decision, but defence sources said the order was based on detailed reports about Mr Husseini's political activities.
Mr Husseini insists that all his activities are peaceful.
Mr Husseini, the most senior supporter of the PLO in the occupied territories, has spent much of his time recently trying to prevent the killing of Palestinians suspected of collaborating with the Israeli authorities.
The High Court, meanwhile, rejected an appeal by a rightwing MP to deport two other leading Palestinians suspected of being involved in the leadership of the intifada.
They are Mr Sari Nusseibeh, professor of philosophy at Beir Zeit University, and Mr Radwan Abu Ayyash, chairman of the Palestinian Journalists Association.
Israeli troops yesterday clamped a curfew on the 650,000 Arabs in the Gaza Strip in an effort to avert unrest on Saturday.
An army spokesman said the curfew would continue until further notice, but army radio said it would be lifted on Sunday.
Journalists will only be allowed in the area under army escort.
Ten die in clash with Turkish security forces.
By Jane Howard in Ankara
NINE rebels and a soldier were killed in a clash with Turkish security forces near the Syrian border, Ankara authorities said yesterday, adding claims that Kurdish separatists receive foreign support.
The incident occurred 48 hours after three men and a woman were shot dead allegedly infiltrating up the River Tigris by boat.
Regional nerves have been strained by a plan to cut off water from Syria and Iraq for a month, and by the Syrian shooting down of a Turkish civilian plane in October.
More than 1,300 people have died in separatist fighting in the last three years for independence for Turkey's estimated nine million Kurds.
Ankara signed a security protocol with Syria two years ago in an attempt to tackle the problem of cross-border support.
In return, it promised not to play its one trump card — water.
The Euphrates River rises in Turkey and flows through Syria and Iraq into the Persian Gulf.
Syria especially needs the water for irrigation and electricity-generating turbines.
The Arabs are worried that if Turkey diverts water into massive hydro-electric and irrigation schemes they will be left without water.
At the weekend, Ankara revealed plans to divert the water for at least a month from January 13 to begin filling the huge Ataturk dam.
A hastily-assembled six-man Iraqi delegation arrived in Turkey yesterday to discuss the plans, which they fear could affect rice and wheat crops in central and southern Iraq.
Kremlin hold reins of the GDR army.
By David Fairhall and Michael Simmons
THE 120,000-strong GDR army, alone among the Warsaw Pact armies, is under the direct operational control of the Soviet forces stationed alongside them, who outnumber them by about three to one.
It can therefore be assumed that the Soviet commanders are fully aware of the situation, if not totally in control of it.
From Moscow, Mr Gorbachev is believed to have given personal orders that his troops should stay firmly in their East German barracks during recent demonstrations and not respond to local provocation.
There is no reason to suppose that the Russians are seeking trouble and the same has so far been true of the East Germans.
On that evidence, therefore, and in spite of last night's ominous phrases that the government would not tolerate ‘chaos and anarchy’, it seems that the statement is more likely to be a specific warning — that people breaking in to armouries to steal weapons or ammunition could expect to be met by physical force — than a sign that the military are planning a political takeover.
Although the deposed Communist Party leader, Mr Egon Krenz, has been credited with countermanding orders to issue live ammunition to troops standing by to deal with the Leipzig demonstrations, other sources indicate that it was the military district commander who stepped in to avoid bloodshed.
There must be some question as to how reliable the East German troops would be in such a situation, bearing in mind that most of them are conscripts, and that about 30,000 of them have recently been released from military service to man understaffed factories.
If it came to straightforward riot control, the most appropriate force would probably be the 12,000-strong People's Police Alert units, under the control of the ministry of the interior.
East German defence spending, at around 11 per cent of the national budget, is marginally higher proportionally than in West Germany.
There are nearly twice as many military personnel in East Germany per 1,000 of the population.
West Germany said yesterday it had agreed to cut its armed forces by nearly a fifth to 400,000 by the mid 1990s if US and Soviet negotiators agreed on cutting conventional arms.
Plans to lengthen military service from 15 to 18 months will also be scrapped if the talks succeed.
The number of reservists will be increased from 28,400 to 40,000, while defence spending in 1990 is set to rise by 2.8 per cent.
Verdict near in Miami race trial.
By Mark Tran in Washington
ONE of Miami's most racially charged trials in recent years was nearing a climax yesterday, as the jury deliberated on the fate of a Hispanic policeman whose killing of two blacks sparked off rioting in January.
There are fears that the acquittal of William Lozano will set off renewed riots in a city fraught with racial tension between Hispanic and black communities.
Mr Lozano was charged with manslaughter when he shot and killed a black motorcyclist in the rundown neighbourhood of Overtown.
The single shot instantly killed 23-year-old Clement Lloyd, and his passenger, Allan Blanchard, who was 24, died of injuries after the motorcycle crashed.
The incident precipitated three days of violence and looting that tarnished Miami's reputation at a time when the city was preening itself for one of America's premier sporting events, the Super Bowl.
The presence of hundreds of journalists for the game ensured the kind of publicity that Miami preferred not to have.
Extraordinary precautions have been taken to defuse tempers in case of acquittal.
Key testimony has been broadcast live on television and radio to help keep the city fully abreast of the proceedings and to show the wheels of justice turning.
Mr Lorenzo contends he fired in self-defence because he was about to be run down by the motorcycle, which was being chased by a police car.
Mr Lloyd was carrying marijuana and $1,514 in cash, and his blood contained alcohol, marijuana, and traces of cocaine.
The prosecution argues that Mr Lorenzo was in no danger and could have stepped out of harm's way.
The case has again focused attention on tension between Miami's police force and the city's black community.
Twice in the last decade police shootings of blacks have set off extensive rioting.
PAGE
France backs Soviet plan for European conference.
By Reuter in Kiev
PRESIDENT Franois Mitterrand of France threw his weight yesterday behind a Soviet proposal to bring forward to next year a 35-nation conference to hammer out the future shape of Europe.
‘President (Mikhail) Gorbachev floated the idea,’ Mitterrand told a joint news conference with the Kremlin chief after the two men met in Kiev.
‘I cannot speak for the other 33 countries who are not here, but as for me, I would say if this happened in 1990 it would be good,’ he added.
Earlier, a Soviet official accompanying Mr Gorbachev said the Kremlin leader would express his support for an all-European conference next year to examine the burning issue of German reunification.
Mr Gorbachev proposed during a visit to Italy last week that such a conference be convened in 1990.
It was originally scheduled for 1992 as part of a series of follow-up meetings to the 1975 Helsinki conference on European security and co-operation.
The West German Foreign Minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, on Tuesday gave his conditional backing for the conference, which would include the United States and Canada as well as all European countries with the exception of Albania.
He said Bonn was favourably disposed to such a conference if it were well prepared.
Pakistan arrests of opium farmers triggers protests.
By Kathy Evans in Peshawar
PAKISTANI authorities have for the first time begun arresting farmers in the North West Frontier Province who have been found planting opium for next year's harvest.
The farmers, in Buner, an area controlled by the government, were charged with the crime of growing opium.
Anti-narcotics agents see the arrests as test cases in the government's efforts to curb next year's harvest, which provides Britain with 80 per cent of its heroin supply.
Opium farmers' income is tiny compared with Pakistan's drug barons and owners of heroin laboratories, and they are regarded by many as the impoverished, innocent end of the country's narcotics business.
Their annual income on an acre of opium poppy is about £300.
The arrests provoked a protest march led by a member of the provincial assembly and former government minister, Mr Abdul Karim Barbak, of the opposition Awami National Party.
The ANP is known to support poppy growers.
Its leader, Mr Khan Abdul Wali Khan, argues that in the absence of large-scale development in the area or alternative jobs, the government should compensate the farmers for their crop, or simply buy the whole lot.
The arrests occur amid allegations by Pakistan's leading suspected drugs trafficker, Haji Iqbal Baig, against a number of government ministers.
In an interview, Mr Baig alleged that during last year's general election campaign, three cabinet members had received financial assistance from him.
Mr Baig, a Lahore business man, was the subject of a BBC documentary four years ago about a Japanese heroin smuggler who was caught in Amsterdam and sentenced to 10 years' jail.
The BBC film alleged that his Pakistani supplier was Mr Baig.
Last summer, he surrendered to Pakistani authorities for an investigation, but he was freed on bail three months later because of lack of evidence.
His release highlighted how ineffective the campaign against drug traffickers by the Prime Minister, Ms Benazir Bhutto, has been.
Le Pen seeks to expel migrants.
By Paul Webster in Paris
THE National Front leader, Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen, yesterday called for the mass expulsion of coloured immigrants as the government announced emergency integration measures.
Mr Le Pen told Le Figaro that all immigrants who had entered France since immigration was officially stopped in 1974 should be repatriated and that immigrants' families should be refused entry.
Mr Le Pen also made an anti-Semitic attack on a Jewish government minister, Mr Lionel Stoleru.
He suggested that the police search the Sentier area of Paris, centre of the Jewish-run garment industry which depends on immigrant labour.
The cabinet announced 48 measures to speed up integration of the country's immigrant population, including a permanent inter-ministerial committee on integration.
However, the announcement was submerged by the controversy following Mr Le Pen's attacks.
He called for a general election.
The racist movement polled 61 per cent in the Dreux byelection on Sunday, compared to only 16 per cent a year ago.
A member of the Union for French Democracy and a former friend of the Le Pen family, Mr Jacques Dominati, told fellow centrist MPs that the National Front was ‘an extremely dangerous party.
‘In Mr Le Pen's entourage there are racists, xenophobics, and anti-Semites.
That was why I broke all my links with them.’
The only National Front MP elected in last year's general election, Mrs Yann Piat, said she resigned from the party a year ago because she ‘realised that the Front was a dead-end movement and a danger to our country.’
The National Front's recent revival in national and local polls, after losing nearly all its 33 MPs in last year's general election, has thrown leftwing and opposition parties into disarray.
Bishop's ban hands victory to pro-abortion candidate.
By Chris Reed in San Francisco
AROMAN Catholic Democrat who supports abortion has won a California State Senate seat in a traditional Republican constituency, thanks to the unintentional help of her bishop.
Bishop Leo Maher, head of the San Diego diocese, banned Mrs Lucy Killea from communion after the 67-year-old grandmother began screening television commercials promoting her support of women's right to choose abortion.
Bishop Maher denounced them as ‘in complete contradiction of the moral teachings of the Catholic Church.’
As the first Catholic public official in America to be banned in this way, Mrs Killea became an overnight celebrity, featured in newspapers and appeared on peak-hour television.
Her opponent, Mrs Carol Bentley, a 44-year-old Presbyterian Republican opposed to abortion, tried to ignore the fuss, relying on the area's 49 per cent registered Republicans, as compared with 38 per cent Democrats.
Feminists threw their weight behind Mrs Killea's campaign, and hundreds of students attended a rally in support of abortion rights.
Finally, Mrs Killea turned what had looked like a hopeless contest into a 51-49 victory.
The ballot gives further notice to conservative Republicans how dangerous the abortion issue has become for them.
Editor says black South African paper is threatened with closure.
By Victoria Brittain
ZWELAKHE Sisulu, the editor of South Africa's biggest black weekly newspaper, says the New Nation is under threat of closure.
Mr Sisulu, who obtained a passport after pressure from European Community ambassadors, is in London after visiting Holland and Belgium on a campaigning trip to save the paper.
‘This is the most decisive phase of South African history and it is crucial that the New Nation should not be closed, because the political impact of information on our people is so great,’ Mr Sisulu said yesterday.
The son of Walter Sisulu, the recently released ANC leader, Zwelakhe Sisulu was detained without trial for nearly two years in the early days of the state of emergency.
Since his release a year ago, he has been prevented from working as a journalist.
His restrictions are among the most severe imposed on about 700 activists under emergency laws.
Speaking in public, as he cannot do at home, Mr Sisulu said that this weekend's conference in South Africa called by the Mass Democratic Movement to bring together all anti-apartheid forces was likely to call for intensified economic sanctions.
President De Klerk, he said, had not begun to address the central issue, ‘that is, the creation of a non-racial democracy in a unitary state’.
Gorbachev proposed end to naval nuclear weapons Gorbachev proposed end to naval nuclear weapons.
By Martin Walker in Washington
PRESIDENT Gorbachev formally proposed the abolition of all naval tactical nuclear weapons at the Malta summit, White House sources confirmed yesterday.
The proposal would have restricted nuclear weapons at sea to strategic missile submarines.
It was rejected out of hand by President Bush, who also refused to include the US Navy in conventional arms control agreements.
New details of the summit conversations are emerging in the course of White House briefings, including a surprisingly frank assessment by the Soviet leader of the looming economic crisis.
Mr Gorbachev told the Americans that the Soviet people would judge his perestroika by how quickly he could get food and consumer goods into the shops.
‘This is my ultimate test,’ Mr Gorbachev told the US President over their long summit lunch on Saturday.
The Nato leaders also discussed Mr Gorbachev's economic crisis and the prospect of mounting civic unrest during their Brussels summit on Monday, White House officials confirmed yesterday.
The troubles of the Soviet economy are fast becoming a pre-occupation of the Western allies.
The fate of the rouble, rather than British interest rates, was the main topic of Mrs Thatcher's talk with the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Mr Alan Greenspan, during her recent Washington visit.
Although they were not explored during the post-summit press conference, many additional items were discussed by Mr Bush and Mr Gorbachev, including the traditionally vexed question of Star Wars, the Strategic Defence Initiative.
On the first morning of the summit talks, in the plenary session, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, presented a draft of a possible joint declaration to be issued after the summit.
This declared that the two sides haveagreed to launch more extensive discussions on anti-satellite weapons and other space arms issues.
The matter was dropped when the US objected to the idea of a joint declaration and, pleased by the generally positive tone of Mr Bush's presentation, the Soviet team did not return to it.
Mr Gorbachev never referred to the SDI in any of the other summit sessions, said US officials.
By contrast with the Geneva and Reykjavik summits between Mr Gorbachev and the former president, Mr Ronald Reagan, which were dominated by SDI, the issue has dropped down the superpower agenda.
The Malta summit also discussed an important American proposal to host an international conference on global warming next year.
This follows widespread criticism of the Bush Administration's scepticism at international conferences so far.
Mr Bush suggested an international meeting at the White House next spring of scientific, economic and environmental officials to discuss responses to global climate changes.
Inviting the Soviet Union to send participants, Mr Bush said he was ready to host another conference next autumn to negotiate a treaty, after the final report of the UN-sponsored Inter-Governmental Panel on climate change.
US officials believe they have not heard the last of the Soviet proposal for naval nuclear disarmament, which was carefully phrased to echo a similar plan put forward unofficially by the veteran US arms negotiator, Mr Paul Nitze.
The Soviet plan would scrap all nuclear mines, torpedoes and depth charges, as well as cruise missiles and nuclear bombs and missiles carried on naval aircraft.
There is a powerful body of opinion in the defence establishment which supports such a ban, on the grounds that the US Navy's superiority can only be reinforced if its Soviet counterpart is deprived of the only weapons which could be expected to destroy a US aircraft carrier with a single hit.
The US Navy is already retiring three types of short-range nuclear-tipped missiles, the Asroc anti-submarine missiles, the Terrier anti-aircraft nuclear missile and the submarine-launched Subroc missile, targeted against enemy submarines.
This would leave nuclear-armed bombers, cruise missiles and depth charges.
Mercenaries ‘set to stage Suriname coup’.
By AP in Amsterdam
A GROUP of white, English-speaking mercenaries is apparently getting ready to overthrow the Suriname government, the country's former deputy premier, Mr Andre Haakmat, said yesterday.
Up to 30 armed men had commandeered a bus and were driving it towards Zanderij airport near the Surinamese capital, Paramaribo, according to Mr Haakmat.
Heavy fighting with government troops was expected to break out soon.
The men were believed to belong to the same group which attacked an army outpost near Kraka, 37 miles south of the capital, on Monday, killing seven people.
‘There are several versions of what's going on, but one is that it's an attempt to overthrow the government’ of President Ramsewak Shankar, he added.
On Monday, the Suriname News Agency reported that a group of men had commandeered a bus carrying aluminum workers 60 miles south of Paramaribo.
Suriname radio said it was an apparent coup attempt.
But others in the Surinamese capital speculated the mercenaries could be connected with a Colombian drug baron, who escaped from custody last week, Mr Haakmat said.
The armed group was not believed to be connected with the Jungle Commando guerrilla group which has been fighting the Suriname Government on and off since 1986, he said.
France ends aid to Comoros.
France has decided to cut off aid to the Comoros Islands until the French mercenary, Mr Bob Denard, and his men, who seized control 10 days ago, leave the archipelago, government sources said yesterday.
France is the Comoros's chief funder.
The second largest backer, South Africa, said on Monday it was suspending aid and demanded the withdrawal of mercenaries.
— Reuter.
Arabs drop UN vote.
The Arab group at the UN decided yesterday not to press for a vote on upgrading the PLO's UN status after the General Assembly President, Mr Joseph Garba of Nigeria, urged the sponsors to drop their resolution.
— Reuter.
Contras continue.
The US said yesterday the contras should not disband this week, as required by a regional peace agreement, because Nicaragua has not fulfilled conditions of the pact.
The US will continue its ‘non-lethal’ assistance to the rebels until February.
— AP.
Somali offensive.
Somali rebels said last night they had captured the country's second-largest city after ‘an all-out offensive’ that prompted many government troops to defect to their side.
— AP.
Lenin under attack.
Polish protesters hurled paint and petrol on a monument to Lenin in Krakow and set it on fire yesterday before clashing with police, who used force to break up the second anti-Soviet disturbance in a week.
— AP.
Government and opposition bargain over cabinet offices Czech PM threatens to quit unless he gets backing.
By Ian Traynor in Prague
MR Ladislav Adamec, the Czechoslovak Prime Minister, threatened to quit last night, as hard bargaining continued for a second day with the opposition over the shape of the new government.
Mr Adamec had talks with the opposition leader, Mr Vaclav Havel, on the cabinet lineup.
He later went on national television to state that he would stand down unless his new government gained public backing.
‘If the government does not have these conditions, I cannot take any responsibility for what happens.
In this case there is only one honest situation — to ask the President to let me resign.’
The opposition Civic Forum, which rejected the Communist- dominated cabinet unveiled by Mr Adamec at the weekend, is demanding a more representative government staffed mainly by experts.
Mr Adamec said that he was having trouble recruiting such experts into the cabinet.
The Prime Minister's threat appeared to seek a weakening of the opposition demands, but may also have been directed at hardline elements in the Communist Party reluctant to yield any further to the opposition.
‘I cannot act under pressure of one group of citizens,’ Mr Adamec said in a televised address, referring to the Civic Forum group which has led resistance to the Communist-dominated government he announced five days ago.
Earlier, Mr Karel Urbanek, the new party leader, had his first talks with Mr Havel and, according to the latter, backed the opposition's call to rid the government of ‘discredited figures’ in favour of‘young, able experts’.
Mr Adamec is to reveal his proposed cabinet to the opposition tomorrow before making it public.
In what is a highly fluid situation, a senior opposition source said that he expected Forum ministers to be in office by the weekend.
The Forum source said that the Communists may retain half the cabinet seats, but that this was the absolute maximum the party could expect.
It was clear that the longer the current unstable crisis atmosphere persists, the stronger the opposition's bargaining position becomes.
If its demands for a ‘representative’ government are not met there is likely to be a general strike on Monday.
Mr Urbanec, who is to hold further talks with Mr Havel today — this time in front of television cameras — conceded that the party realised it was held in deep mistrust by the public, and accepted that henceforth it could only be part of the political spectrum.
But Mr Urbanec pointed to hardline resistance to change within the party by revealing to the opposition that he had spent three hours seeking, apparently in vain, to persuade regional party barons that their ‘policy of power’ could not continue.
As Mr Urbanec met the opposition for the first time, it appeared increasingly likely that his predecessor, Mr Milos Jakes, would eventually find himself behind bars.
The burgeoning opposition movement here has also extended itself to the army.
Military Forum was set up by more than 300 servicemen to demand an end to Communist control of and greater democracy within the armed forces.
Singh gives home affairs job to Muslim.
By Derek Brown and Ajoy Bose in New Delhi
IN a bold move to defuse rising communal tension in India, the new Prime Minister, Mr Vishwanath Pratap Singh, yesterday named a Muslim as home affairs minister.
The appointment of Mufti Mohammed Sayeed, aged 53, was the biggest surprise in a list of cabinet appointments notable for its ingenuity.
Mr Singh, who heads a minority centrist government supported from the outside by both right and left factions, has spent three tortuous days compiling the core of his administration.
The home minister's job was the most bitterly contested.
Some of the most formidable kingmakers in the National Front movement were keen on the post, including Mr Devi Lal, the deputy prime minister, Mr Arun Nehru, the party's leading strategist, and Mr Ajit Singh, the ambitious son of a former prime minister, Mr Charan Singh.
Mr V.P. Singh outwitted them all with his choice of the mufti, a gesture of reconciliation to the nation's 100million Muslims, who have been on the receiving end of bloody communal violence in north India.
At the same time, he has put a warning shot across the bows of the rightwing pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which has already committed its 88 members of parliament to supporting the minority government.
The BJP has indignantly denied charges that it is a communalist force.
For the Prime Minister, who had been thought a prisoner of factional forces inside and outside his party, the mufti's appointment was a resounding declaration of independence.
So too were several of the other key portfolios handed out yesterday, 18 hours after ministers were first named.
Mr Devi Lal, for example, who had been lobbying hard for the home ministry to add to his deputy premiership, had to content himself with the agriculture ministry.
As the self-appointed peasant patriarch of India, he had no choice but to accept this minor post.
Mr Devi Lal's younger but ferociously competitive rival, Mr Ajit Singh, was given industry, traditionally the most lucrative of all ministries.
But Mr Singh, with his clean reputation, is not expected to capitalise on his power to sanction or veto industrial projects.
Mr Arun Nehru, cousin of the last prime minister and a member of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, appears to have been marginalised.
He has been given commerce and tourism.
The foreign ministry goes to Mr Inder Kumar Gujral, an urbane and scholarly former information minister in the only other non-Congress government, that of the late 1970s.
Much is expected of him by India's neighbours, whose relations with New Delhi deteriorated in the last two years of Rajiv Gandhi's government.
The Sri Lankan President, Mr Ranasinghe Premadasa, has expressed the hope that relations will improve.
His foreign minister, Mr Ranjan Wijeratne, arrived in Delhi yesterday with a message of goodwill, no doubt accompanied by a plea for the remaining Indian ‘peace-keeping’ troops to be removed from the island.
The finance ministry, beset by mounting internal and external debt, has gone to Professor Madhu Dandavate, a sober and respected academic and parliamentarian.
He said yesterday his first priorities would be to tackle inflation and the widening trade gap.
More ministers will be appointed by the end of the week.
For the moment, Mr V.P. Singh has retained a number of portfolios, the most senior of which is defence.
That could be the carrot to dangle before the leading dissident in his party, Mr Chandra Shekhar, sulking in isolation after his weekend defeat in the leadership tussle.
Mr Shekhar has declared his undying loyalty to the new government, without revealing whether he would join it.
‘Mr V.P. Singh is the Prime Minister.
I respect him and will offer him full co-operation,’ he said enigmatically.
Amid the intrigue and power-play, there is an endearing homeliness about the process of forming the Indian government.
The new Prime Minister was obliged, yesterday morning, to send a driver to find out the telephone number of one of his key ministers, before Mr Singh could pass on the good news of his appointment.