

Singh steps out for peace in Sikh heartland.
By Derek Brown in New Delhi
THE new Indian Prime Minister, Mr Vishwanath Pratap Singh, travelled to the heart of battle-scarred Punjab yesterday to score an emotional public-relations victory.
Huge crowds turned out to cheer as the Prime Minister, spurning elaborate security precautions, rode through the city of Amritsar to the holiest shrine of the Sikhs, the Golden Temple.
He told the throng: ‘The people of Punjab have given me a lot of love…
I will now move in an open jeep instead of a bullet-proof car.’
At the temple, Mr Singh prayed alongside his deputy, Mr Devi Lal, and his Punjabi foreign minister, Mr Inder Kumar Gujral.
Masses of Sikhs jostled and crowded round him as he made his parikrama, the ritual clockwise walk around the marble margins of the sacred lake.
This was the gesture which leading Sikhs had pleaded in vain for the previous Prime Minister, Mr Rajiv Gandhi, to make.
And although there is as yet no solid evidence that a political settlement of the Sikh question is in sight, the change of government has brought a new spirit of reconciliation on both sides.
Mr Singh pledged yesterday that his administration would ‘move very fast’ to bring peace to Punjab.
He had come to pray, he said, not to make a political or official visit.
‘With the love and co-operation of Punjabis and the strength of God, I am confident that peace will once again return to the state,’ he said.
For most of the Eighties, Punjab has been wracked by vicious conflict between the security forces and half a dozen incoherent but well-armed groups ostensibly fighting for a free Sikh state of Khalistan, the Land of the Pure.
The violence was dramatically stepped up after the storming of the Golden Temple in mid-1984 by the Indian army.
For the past few years, the death count has been running at roughly 10 a day, with blood feuds and general gangsterism adding to the mayhem.
The previous Congress Party government tried to lay part of the blame on Pakistan, saying that Khalistan terrorists had been trained and armed across the frontier.
Most observers, however, believe the problem started with cynical Congress intrigues to split the main Sikh Party, the Akali Dal.
The manoeuvre succeeded, though at a dreadful cost.
There are now at least half a dozen Akali factions, both moderate and militant.
The former tried to reach an accord with New Delhi, but their state government was replaced by direct rule following the assassination of the Akali leader, Mr Harchand Singh Longowal.
The strongest Akali faction by far is now that led by Mr Simranjit Singh Mann.
He and his followers won 10 of the state's 13 parliamentary seats in last month's general election, with Mr Mann himself scoring a dramatic victory from his prison cell.
On the day his result was announced, he was released after five years of detention without trial, still defiantly declaring his faith in the Sikh cause.
But in the short and euphoric interval, even Mr Mann has softened his approach, indicating that he was now prepared to accept the constitution of India, and distancing himself from the latest demands by the ultra-belligerent Sikh student movement for an alternative government.
In the wake of the Mann group's victory, and the strident noises from the Student Federation, some reports from Amritsar had spoken of a return of terrorism to the temple itself, scene of bloody battles in 1984 and again last summer.
One of the direst warnings, pleading for immediate though unspecified action, came from the state Governor, Mr S.S. Ray.
But already, as a staunch Congressman, he knew his time was up.
Yesterday he resigned and was replaced by Mr Nirmal Kumar Mukarji.
Mr Ray's last warning was both unheeded and unnecessary.
As Mr V.P. Singh paid his humble respects at the seat of Sikh pride and piety, the militants' guns and the swords were put away.
The police security guards too were discreet, and allowed the people of Punjab, both Sikh and Hindu, to surge round their Prime Minister.
Jews split over women's group.
By Mark Tran in Washington
ADECISION by B'nai B'rith International to expel its women's affiliate threatens to tear apart the world's largest Jewish organisation.
The simmering dispute erupted in public when the B'nai B'rith International board of governors adopted a motion to expel the 120,000-member B'nai B'rith Women unless the affiliate relinquishes its autonomous status.
B'nai B'rith Women, legally incorporated as a separate entity in 1962, also faces legal action challenging its right to use the B'nai B'rith name.
‘B'nai B'rith International's decision-makers now seek total control over their empire.
They will brook no independence,’ said the president of B'nai B'rith Women, Hyla Lipsky.
Expulsion of the women's group would mean a significant drop in the total membership of 500,000 at a time when numbers joining are declining.
The president of B'nai B'rith International, Mr Seymour Reich, said the organisation made the expulsion threat reluctantly and after several years of negotiation.
He believes that B'nai B'rith Women's determination to remain autonomous works against the trend of creating a new organisation for the 21st century comprising men and women.
He sees the decision to fully integrate the women's arm into the organisation as a way of boosting membership.
‘It's ironic,’ said Mr Reich.
‘Here we are offering them full equality with men in B'nai B'rith, and their leadership is rejecting that offer.’
Although not a political organisation, B'nai B'rith Women has taken high-profile stands on contentious political issues.
The organisation, against the wishes of B'nai B'rith International, took a public stand against the nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the Supreme Court because of his anti-abortion stance.
Poland sees Council as first step to membership.
By AP in Brussels
THE chairman of Poland's foreign affairs committee said yesterday his country would request membership of the European Community and all other European institutions.
‘Yes, Poland is seeking a place in all European institutions,’ Mr Bronislaw Geremek said after meeting with the presidents of the Commission.
Mr Geremek said as a first step Poland would soon seek full membership in the Council of Europe.
In November, Hungary became the first East European nation to apply for membership to the council based in Strasbourg, France.
A condition for membership of the EC is that the country must be a full parliamentary democracy.
Mr Geremek said he had told EC officialsthat ‘the process of democratisation in Poland is irreversible’.
PAGE
Mass murder was ‘revenge on feminists’.
By Penny MacRae in Montreal
POLICE say a young loner who claimed feminists had ruined his life was responsible for a bloody shooting spree at a Montreal university in which 14 women were killed.
Thirteen others — nine men and four women — were wounded in the rampage on Wednesday that shattered the festive end-of-term mood at the French language Universite de Montreal, Quebec's largest.
Details began to emerge yesterday of the gruesome attack — the biggest mass murder in Canadian history.
Police said the gunman, in his early 20s and identified only as Marc, carried a hit list with the names of 15 women in a letter found on his body.
The gunman shouted ‘I want the women’ as he roamed the engineering buildings at the university, spraying bullets before turning his semi-automatic rifle on himself.
The dead, 13 of them students, were on three different floors of the building.
In one classroom, the gunman divided the students by sex to separate sides of the room and then started shooting the women.
‘He told them, ‘You're women, you're going to be engineers.
You're all a bunch of feminists, I feminists’,’ said one student, Robert Leclerc.
‘My friend Natalie replied, ‘No, it's not true, we're not feminists,’ but the gunman fired into the group.’
Police said the three-page letter found in the killer's back pocket blamed women for the disappointments in his life.
‘All the words he uses are what you would call anti-feminist,’ said a police officer.
The letter indicated the killer had been rejected by the Canadian armed forces for being anti-social, police said.
Distraught parents kept an all-night vigil at the university where a temporary morgue was set up.
One police officer arrived at the scene to find his daughter dead on the floor.
‘It was just like Rambo,’ said one of the scores of horrified students who fled from the university after the massacre.
The Quebec premier, Mr Robert Bourassa, condemned the killings as a ‘barbaric carnage’ and declared three days of official mourning.
Food pledge for Ethiopia.
By Reuter in Brussels
THE Community yesterday promised 44,000 tonnes of new food aid for Ethiopia in an effort to save millions of people threatened by starvation.
The pledge brings total EC food aid to Ethiopia to 175,000 tonnes, after a 30,000-tonne gift of cereals in November, officials said.
Under a special programme, aid worth about 10 million ECUs (£8 million) would also go on transport and other urgent supplies.
Ethiopia has asked for 377,000 tonnes of food to fend off famine in Eritrea and Tigre.
United Nations experts say as many as four million people are facing famine after a severe drought and crop failure.
PAGE
Mojahedin ‘plot against republics’.
By John Rettie in Moscow
AFGHAN guerrillas have been infiltrating Soviet Central Asia with ‘narcotics, arms and other instruments of subversion’ in an attempt to overthrow Soviet rule and set up Islamic governments, according to the KGB chief in the Soviet republic of Tadjikistan.
It has long been a nightmare in Moscow that the region could be highly vulnerable to Islamic militants from the indigenous population's ethnic and religious brothers across the borders in Afghanistan and Iran.
These fears have grown apace since the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan gave rise to bitter hostility towards the Russians among many Afghans.
Under Mr Gorbachev's policies of glasnost and perestroika, Central Asians have also begun to express their resentment at what they see as Russian exploitation of their land during the Stalin and Brezhnev eras.
Now, in the first detailed account of what were apparently serious efforts by the Mojahedin to subvert Soviet power, Tass has quoted Mr Vladimir Petkel, the head of state security in Tadjikistan, as saying the situation had become considerably worse since the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
‘Over the past few months, state security organs and border guards exposed and suppressed several attempts by special agencies of Afghan armed opposition forces to recruit Soviet citizens,’ he said.
They were to be induced to carry out ‘hostile activities on Soviet territory with the help of foreigners penetrating into Tadjikistan across the border’.
A number of Afghan agents, as well as some of their Soviet contacts, were caught, according to Mr Petkel.
One, named as ‘Engineer Bashir’, was described as ‘a field commander, head of an intelligence centre and deputy leader of the Islamic Party of Afghanistan’.
Bashir and an assistant named Mirahmad were said to have recruited Afghans from the border provinces of Badakshan and Kunduz who ‘underwent a special training course in the armed opposition camps’.
These agents ‘were to induce Soviet citizens to collaborate in the delivery of narcotics, arms and other instruments of subversion into Soviet territory.
Their final goal was to create bases in the Tadjik Republic from which to destabilise the situation in Soviet Central Asia, and to mobilise forces aiming to overthrow the system existing in the Soviet Central Asian Republics’.
An arms cache was found in the house of ‘a certain Azimov’ who was alleged to have been recruited by Bashir's agents.
Tass said journalists were shown money and hand grenades seized from him and a tape recorder ‘with the text of the oath Soviet citizens were expected to take when recruited’.
Two Afghans, among several arrested trying to cross the border, ‘admitted that they belonged to an intelligence group entrusted with the organisation of an underground anti-Soviet movement in Tadjikistan, whose purpose was to turn the republic into an Islamic state’.
A number of people had been put on trial, Mr Petkel said.
But the Tass report had a happy ending — from the Soviet point of view.
‘Two criminal cases, involving one Soviet and one Afghan citizen who openly confessed and repented their actions against the Soviet Union, have been discontinued.’
Trade accord sought in Gulf.
By Reuter in Nicosia
COMMISSIONER Abel Matutes, visiting Gulf Cooperation Council states, said yesterday that the EC and GCC were discussing the possibility of a trade agreement as a step toward free trade.
The EC runs a $4.4 billion trade surplus with the GCC, an economic alliance linking Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates.
Most EC goods enter almost duty-free.
Members are pressing for freer European access for the products of their petrochemical industries.
Mr Matutes, who is EC commissioner for Mediterranean policy and Latin American relations, arrived in Muscat from Saudi Arabia.
PAGE
Pretoria to halve military service.
By David Beresford in Johannesburg
SOUTH Africa is to cut national service for young whites by half, as part of a reduction in the country's reliance on the military establishment.
The State President, Mr F.W. de Klerk, announced yesterday that conscripts would do only one year full-time military service, instead of two.
Speaking at the opening of a new headquarters for the state arms-manufacturing corporation, Armscor, he said other cuts in the military establishment would be disclosed next year.
The announcement follows the dismantling of the National Security Management system — the ‘shadow’ system of government by security chiefs — and ties in with plans to reduce the military budget by about 15 per cent, or £375 million.
The moves will be seen as further evidence of Mr De Klerk's commitment to a political, rather than a military, solution to the country's long-running crisis.
The latest decision will immediately affect about 35,000 young white men due to begin service next February and more than 15,000 scheduled to start in August.
Other race groups are not required to do national service.
The news was welcomed yesterday by the End Conscription Campaign, which has been running an increasingly effective protest against national service on the grounds that servicemen are used to oppress the country's majority population.
Recently 771 conscripts publicly announced their refusal to do military service as part of a national defiance campaign by the anti-apartheid community.
Several young whites are already serving terms of imprisonment for refusing to serve.
The Afrikaans weekly newspaper, Vrye Weekblad, has named a South African conscript who, it says, was required to do his military service as a spy.
A report in today's edition says that the youth, aged 19, was sent to the Netherlands by Military Intelligence to infiltrate an anti-apartheid group, the Committee of War Resisters.
Nicaraguans see red over economic ruin Grinding poverty, not revolutionary zeal, is the real election issue, Simon Tisdall writes from Masaya.
NICARAGUA suffered an attack of ‘Red Dizziness’ this week — in the Spanish, Marea Roja, a bug caught from eating tainted sea food.
But in a week that marked the opening of the campaign for February's elections, the red dizziness was not confined to restaurants.
In Masaya, a dusty, impoverished town to the south-west of Managua, supporters of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) turned an election rally into a raucous, joyful rampage on Wednesday night.
With the blue and white Nicaraguan flag fluttering amid the Sandinistas' red and black banners, a jeep-borne President Daniel Ortega led an anarchic procession to the accompaniment of bands, singers, dancers, and the alarmed squeals of a tethered pig.
The message for the Nicaraguan opposition was simple: On February 25 ‘we will bury you!’
The revolution which triumphed in 1979 would triumph again.
A second revolution may well be on the way in Nicaragua, but one not to the liking of the FSLN.
President Ortega faces the most potent challenge to his leadership since the Sandinistas took full control in 1981.
The challenge comes not from the US, not from the contra rebels, nor from hostile neighbouring countries, but from within.
In short, the government is being called to account for the economic disaster that is present-day Nicaragua.
As a Managua businessman put it, ‘I used to sell fridges.
Nobody bought them so I began to repair fridges.
But nobody has their fridges repaired any more, they can't afford it.
So all the fridges stay rusted, and I have no work.’
For many Nicaraguans, the deciding election issue will have little to do with the rhetoric of purist revolutionary solidarity.
They are no longer proud to be poor.
Official figures show that private consumption under Sandinista rule has fallen by 70 per cent.
Real wages have fallen by 90 per cent since 1981.
Unemployment is rising, with the industrial sector expected to contract by 20 per cent this year.
The flight from the countryside has compounded the misery of the urban poor, traditionally the bedrock of Sandinista support.
Government measures to peg back inflation have deepened the recession.
The Sandinista campaign slogan, ‘Everything will get better’, seems in this context an admission of defeat.
Their platform emphasises their achievements in reducing child mortality and enhancing rural education, and seeks to present the FSLN as an experienced, united party.
The main opposition alliance, the 14-party Nicaraguan Opposition Union (UNO), is portrayed as opportunist and divided and infiltrated by pro-contra, Somoza-era hangovers.
But a series of opinion polls have suggested, very roughly, a 30-30 split with 40 per cent of the electorate undecided.
If the Sandinistas have their problems, so too does UNO.
Its presidential candidate, Mrs Violeta Chamorro, brings to the fray a symbolic appeal as the widow of the murdered publisher of La Prensa, but lacks any political experience — a fact that becomes embarrassingly clear when she appears in public.
UNO's acceptance of US campaign fund donations and Mrs Chamorro's appointment of the former contra director, Afredo Cesar, as her adviser, has opened her to charges of collaborating with the US.
The main theme of the UNO campaign is reconciliation.
The alliance plays on the prospect of an end to the US trade embargo and increased foreign aid in the event of an UNO victory.
It has pledged to end the deeply unpopular draft and to reduce the 80,000-strong army.
The US and the Soviet Union have publicly backed the electoral process, which was agreed last February.
Moscow continues as the main Sandinista financier, pumping in about $465 million in economic aid.
But given the democratic revolution on its own doorstep, the Soviet Union is now distanced from its long-time proteges.
For the US, the emphasis is on securing a free and fair election, which the State Department seems to believe will result in an opposition victory.
The US has alleged intimidation by turbas divinas — pro-Sandinista thugs and claims to have evidence of voter intimidation by the army.
Washington has also threatened not to recognise the poll result if Congressional observers are barred from joining those of the UN, the OAS, and the Jimmy Carter foundation.
It is unclear whether a democratically defeated FSLN would relinquish power.
After 10 tumultous years of substantial achievement and disastrous mistakes, the Sandinistas control the army, the unions, the youth movements, much of the media and the money — what there is of it.
Did Daniel Ortega struggle so hard and so long, suffer seven years in jail, and defy the mighty US at such cost to his country, only to drive his jeep into the sunset?
It is a dizzying thought.
European Community Hungary granted £800m loan deal.
By Reuter in Brussels
THE European Commission on Wednesday approved an EC loan of one billion Ecus (£800 million) to help Hungary overcome severe balance of payments problems, the first organised for a non-EC country.
EC Commissioner Henning Christophersen said the five-year loan was highly exceptional, ‘but then we're in a highly exceptional situation’.
It was conditional on Budapest agreeing a structural adjustment programme with the International Monetary Fund and implementing market-based economic reforms.
It should also not take the place of fresh funds from Western banks, Mr Christophersen said.
‘The loan would be another concrete expression of the Community's support [for]Hungary's progress towards democracy and a market economy.’
Mr Christophersen urged EC governments and the European Parliament to give speedy approval to the loan, which will be paid in three instalments.
The operation to raise the money on international markets could start next February if there were no procedural difficulties, he added.
Because of the EC's standing in markets, the loan would be raised on the best possible terms, but it would not be a subsidised, ‘soft’ loan, Mr Christopherson emphasised.
The Community would monitor Hungary's programme to restructure its economy on more market-oriented lines, and disburse the second and third tranches of the money only if satisfied about progress.
The Community was working in close cooperation with the IMF, and the loan was intended to complement its efforts.
PAGE
.
By Simon Tisdall in Tegucigalpa, Honduras
AT the store on the corner, three drunken men are trying to eat the same hot dog.
Across the road, an army conscript dressed in battle fatigues watches.
Somewhere along the dark street, somebody is crying.
It is past midnight in Tegucigalpa, and it's time to go home.
And here, at last, come the Kids from Fame.
Chela and Urna are dancers at La Fama night club, a grotty little joint comprising one bar, 15 or so rickety wooden tables, and an illuminated picture of a woman's bottom.
But La Fama has a stage.
And that is what really interests Chela and Urna.
Like thousands of young people who crowd the narrow streets of Tegucigalpa, the Kids from La Fama are obsessed with the trappings of North American culture.
A fancy New York dance school it isn't, but for Chela and Urna the spotlit stage at La Fama is an alluring link with the much-emulated, much vilified empire to the north.
Such schizophrenia, when it comes to the ‘yanquis’ is common throughout Central America.
Through the Caribbean Basin Initiative, the US is attempting to encourage export industries in countries such as Honduras, in addition to direct financial aid.
But this reopens the issue of national dependence on Uncle Sam.
And the particulars of such a seeming unequal struggle are of little immediate help to the Kids from La Fama.
Since dancing cannot earn them a living, Chela and Urna are into self-help, and it is as humiliating in personal terms as any perceived national, cultural subservience to the US.
When they suggest a dance to my companion, Wesley, there seems no harm — but it turns into a smooch.
Solos become doubles, and doubles trebles.
And the Kids from La Fama grow ever more possessive.
‘Now we have to go,’ say Chela and Urna suddenly.
‘But there is a problem.’
The problem turns out to be the boss of the club, who says we must pay $8 if the girls are to leave.
Outside, I wait for Wesley, who is negotiating Chela and Urna's release.
Finally, here they come, the Kids from Fame, Honduras-style, giggling yet purposeful.
‘Where do you want to go, we'll drop you in a taxi,’ I say.
All three now look at me incredulously.
And the penny drops.
‘Back to the hotel, man, come on!’ says Wesley.
PAGE
Iraq launches own missile.
Iraq said yesterday it had launched a 48-tonne three-stage rocket into space and announced the local manufacture of new long-range missiles.
The minister in charge of weapons manufacture, Mr Hussein Kamel Hassan, said in a message broadcast by Baghdad radio, that the 80ft rocket was launched from al-Anbar space research base west of Baghdad on Tuesday.
— Reuter.
Slovenia alliance.
Three main opposition groups in Yugoslavia united yesterday to contest Slovenia's first free elections scheduled for next March, Tanjug news agency reported.
— Reuter.
Mugabe allays fears.
The Zimbabwean President, Mr Robert Mugabe, yesterday reiterated earlier pledges to resettle hundreds of thousands of black families, but allayed white farmers' fears that their land would be seized with minimal compensation to mark the tenth independence anniversary.
— AP.
El Salvador kidnap.
Leftwing rebels in El Salvador held an American civilian overnight and lectured him on US intervention while keeping his thumbs tied behind his back before letting him go, the US Embassy said yesterday.
Meanwhile, leftwing guerrillas renewed their assault on the capital, setting up positions in at least seven neighbourhoods.
— Agencies.
Boat people appeal.
US Republicans asked President Bush, in a letter released yesterday, to call on Britain to reconsider its policy of repatriating Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong.
— Reuter.
Racist gamble.
Caesars Hotel Casino in Atlantic City was fined $250,000 on Wednesday for removing black women from a dice table for a high-stakes gambler who wanted to gamble only with white, male dealers.
— Reuter.
Comoros protest.
The Comoros presidential guard yesterday used teargas and clubs to disperse about 1,000 student protesters demanding that the French mercenary, Mr Bob Denard, and his men go home.
— AP.
Rebels attacked.
Planes bombed a second rebel-held town in southern Sudan, in the latest of a number of bombing raids since peace talks between the Sudanese Government and Sudan People's Liberation Army rebels collapsed earlier this week, a UN official and rebel spokesmen said yesterday.
— AP.
Bidding for red star.
Eighteen companies are bidding for the contract to remove the red star from the dome of Hungary's Parliament, writes Michael Simmons.
The government has decreed that, from the end of this month, only the national colours and the coat of arms of the new republic can can be displayed.
Officials say removing the star will not be easy.
Warning on free market.
By Reuter in Brussels
THE 12 Community governments have speeded up implementation of rules to create their barrier-free market but are still far behind schedule, the Commission said yesterday.
The single market programme requires each member state to turn 279 rules and regulations into national law.
More than half have been approved by ministers already.
But in a report for EC leaders at Friday's summit in Strasbourg, the commission said only 14 of 86 measures that should have come into force by mid-November had been fully implemented by all 12.
That, however, was an improvement compared with the seven out of 68 in mid-August.
PAGE
Territory for peace no longer an impossible dream on eve of anniversary Intifada forces sea change among reluctant Israelis.
By Ian Black in Jerusalem
YITZHAK Rabin was looking even more than usually impassive on Wednesday night as he watched Israel Television's special programme marking the second anniversary of the outbreak of the Palestinian uprising.
The Defence Minister barely flinched as the camera zoomed in for a close-up of his face as they ran the famous film clip from mid-December, 1987, in which he promised that it would all be over by Christmas.
No one could have predicted then that the unrest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip would still be going on two years later, so Mr Rabin was playing fairly safe when he said in a brief interview at the end of Wednesday's programme that the uprising would probably continue well into 1990.
Israel can cope.
The mass demonstrations of the first year are rare these days and the army and Shin Bet security service have been chalking up success after bloody success in hunting down the masked youths who throw petrol bombs and kill collaborators.
Many soldiers would prefer to be fighting a ‘real’ war against armed guerrillas in south Lebanon, but no more than 95 men, mostly reservists, have refused to serve beyond the pre-1967 green line.
Intifada draft-dodging barely exists.
So far, the military situation is tenable: the army shifts its men around, from the Lebanon border, to training exercises, to the West Bank and Gaza, and then back to Lebanon again.
The general staff is unhappy and the squaddies disgruntled, but no more than that.
The economy can stand the strain too: a 5 per cent drop in the GNP this year is deemed manageable.
Palestinians still come to work in Israel, industry has adjusted and tourism shows signs of recovering.
The legal system, many feel, is being eroded.
Fifty thousand Palestinians have been through the prisons since the intifada began; scores of Arab children have been shot dead.
But rough justice on one side of the green line does not necessarily mean rough justice on the other.
Not yet, anyway.
Subtly, though, in other, more subterranean ways, the uprising has changed — and is still changing — Israeli society.
Arabs are no longer seen as cowardly and loathsome terrorists; their determination and solidarity has impressed their enemies.
Even the most hawkish Israeli cannot ignore the readiness for sacrifice that the Palestinans have displayed.
Mr Yitzhak Shamir, the Likud Prime Minister, seems to recognise this too.
His refusal to deal with the PLO is practical, not emotional.
Palestinians can still seem demonic.
The cruel killings of real or imagined collaborators have helped restore this image, yet who has forgotten that Jews executed traitors during their own struggle for national liberation?
Mr Shamir's Stern Gang was no exception.
For the 20 years between the 1967 war and the start of the intifada there was coexistence of sorts between Arabs and Jews, even if, in the words of Moshe Dayan, it was the uneasy coexistence of a rider and his horse.
That no longer exists.
‘The achievement of the uprising,’ says the journalist Nahum Barnea, ‘is that the vast majority of Israelis who were happy with the status quo are now much more unhappy with it.’
This has created a new sense of potential fluidity in political attitudes.
Apart from the hard core of settlers and Greater Israel ideologues, many ordinary people have become more open to discussion of the future of the West Bank and Gaza.
Territory for peace is not an impossible dream.
But this does not preclude extreme and non-peaceful solutions.
Those who believe in the ‘transfer’ of Palestinians now believe in it more openly.
At the same time, though, there are more people who can, perhaps for the first time since 1967, imagine that the Jews could go west, back into the green line, or into new borders adjusted to rid themselves of their Palestinian burden.
It would be premature — and misleading — to try to translate these slowly shifting attitudes into a readiness for dramatic change.
All Israel's responses to the intifada have so far been dictated externally, by the Palestinians or the Americans.
There is still no substantial domestic pressure on Mr Shamir to make concessions.
The Labour Party is still a partner in the national unity government.
Anniversaries are arbitrary events, and nothing will change when the uprising's third year begins tomorrow.
Yet Wednesday's decision by Egypt — in close consultation with the PLO — to accept a US mediation plan means that an Israeli-Palestinian meeting is now likely in the New Year.
A long, hard struggle lies ahead to convert the achievements of the intifada into real movement towards a diplomatic settlement.
West Bank elections and an Israeli withdrawal still seem a remote possibility.
The uprising is certainly an historic event, but the conflict over Palestine has been going on for a century now.
A lot of international help will be needed to get things moving.
In a rapidly changing world, preoccupied by Eastern Europe, the American Administration may not have the time or patience to devote to Israelis and Palestinians.
The war may well just go on and on.
Both sides remain stubborn.
The Palestinians are tired but still defiant after their long struggle and most Israelis, like Mr Rabin, remain confident that they can cope, even if their doubts are beginning to nag.
It is a dangerous moment, pregnant with hope teetering on the edge of despair.
Miami relaxes as policeman is found guilty of killing blacks.
By Martin Walker in Washington
THE tension that has gripped Miami began to ease yesterday as a policeman, William Lozano, was found guilty of manslaughter over the killing of two young black men on a motorcycle in January.
Three days of rioting by Miami's black community followed the killing, and police and city officials were on full alert yesterday for a resumption of the riots if the jury acquitted the Hispanic-American policeman.
All police leave and holidays were cancelled.
Two police armoured cars stood outside the courthouse.
The six-person jury unanimously found that Lozano had improperly used his gun.
Lozano had claimed that the motorcycle was aimed at him, and that he had no time to leap out of the way.
His shot killed the motorcyclist, and the passenger died of injuries after the bike crashed.
Lazano, who has been in the force five years, will be sentenced on January 24.
He faces a maximum term of 60 years.
East Berlin pursues pillars of the old establishment.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
IN East Germany two men, formerly regarded as untouchable pillars of the old regime, have, rightly or wrongly, become the focus of over-zealous and sometimes bizarre persecution by the legal authorities and an indignant public.
Mr Alexander Schalck-Golodkowski, the previous state secretary for foreign trade gave himself up early yesterday to the police in West Berlin, where he is now under arrest.
He is accused by East Berlin, which has asked for his extradition, of embezzlement, corruption, and illegal dealings in arms and foreign currency.
A glittering figure on the international financial circuit, he not only provided East Germany with much-needed foreign currency but also played a central part in all political and economic exchanges with West Germany over the past 30 years.
He has protested his innocence, saying that before fleeing East Germany last weekend he dissolved the GDR's hard-currency accounts in Switzerland and transferred the sum of Dm60 million (£22 million) to East Germany's state bank.
He said he had always worked for the benefit of his country and could not be held responsible for how the hard currency he procured was spent by its leaders.
Sources here said that if Mr Schalck-Golodkowski was put on trial his inside knowledge of life under Mr Erich Honecker could prove highly detrimental to the already disgraced former East German leaders.
But while Mr Schalck-Golodkowski's innocence or guilt must remain a matter for the courts, the detention of his friend and lawyer, Mr Wolfgang Vogel, clearly was in breach of the law.
It demonstrated the excesses that are possible in the present climate of confusion and for which the chief public prosecutor has apologised.
Mr Vogel, detained on Tuesday and held for 10 hours in a solitary cell, was arrested because the prosecutors believed he would reveal the whereabouts of Mr Schalck-Golodkowski.
For almost 30 years he was a key negotiator for East Berlin on ‘humanitarian questions’ and a confidante of Mr Honecker.
Spy swaps, prisoner exchanges, and negotiations to free the thousands of East Germans that this summer sought refuge in West German embassies, were his domain.
He said yesterday: ‘I was told that the buying-out of political prisoners by West Germany and the spy swaps were immoral and against the law.’
Summit offers chance to improve British image in EC Hurd faces test of beliefs on Europe.
By Michael White in Strasbourg and Hella Pick
THE Strasbourg summit, which begins this morning, will prove a critical test of the political skills of the new Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, six weeks after he inherited the post in which Mrs Thatcher has tormented and overruled his predecessors.
Mr Hurd, who dared to speak French on French Radio this week, is as instinctive a European as the Prime Minister is not.
But loyalty and prudence will require him to do good by stealth this weekend if he is to restore Britain's tarnished European image.
Apart from last month's Elysee supper-summit, this is his first outing with Mrs Thatcher.
Tensions over the degree of British commitment to eventually joining the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) during the Madrid summit in June contributed to Sir Geoffrey Howe's removal from the Foreign Office in July.
During Mr John Major's brief tenure he was made to look foolish on his one co-starring trip — the Commonwealth conference in Kuala Lumpur — by the Prime Minister's repudiation of the South African statement he had negotiated.
Unlike Mr Major, Mr Hurd is an experienced former diplomat and a Foreign Office Minister of State who has sounded made-for-the-job since day one, which is why he would probably not have got it but for the Lawson affair.
In what are often highly technical arguments where tone matters a lot, he sounds like a politician who would join the ERM as soon as practicable — possibly by the end of next year — just as Sir Geoffrey, Mr Heseltine and Mr Lawson would.
Mrs Thatcher does not sound that way.
Labour, which wants immediate negotiation on its own four-point terms of entry into ERM, now paints Mr Major as a Thatcher poodle on the issue.
That may be wrong.
And a Hurd-Major axis could prove crucial if the Prime Minister is to be dragged in when inflation, and the exchange rate, have drifted down far enough.
Meanwhile, Mr Hurd loyally reflects the cabinet line on Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) embodied in the treasury's ‘competing currencies’ paper issued on November 2 as an alternative to the Delors report's Stage II and III — the creation of a single central bank and currency.
Labour, too, rejects the independent central bank concept run by what Shadow Chancellor, Mr John Smith, has called ‘central bankers who inhabit a world comfortably insulated from European electorates’— in other words undemocratic and deflationary.
Mr Hurd has no trouble stressing the need for a liberalisation of European markets in which Britain has often led the way.
He protests that the French-backed Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) to promote Delors II and III is premature when the consequences of Stage I — including next July's abolition of French and Italian exchange controls — are far from clear and the preparatory work not done.
He is less conspicuous in opposing the Social Charter as a costly threat to jobs if the standards of Germany are to be imposed on countries like Britain.
And, like Sir Geoffrey and Mr Heseltine, he routinely sets up federalism as a straw man to knock down.
But he does not use the harsh, emotive language of the Prime Minister.
In a speech in Oxford last weekend he stressed voluntary co-operation and diversity.
‘European union is not a goal or an event.
It is a process.
Against that background I do not believe that the path of federalism is the right one for the Community.’
Such use of the word ‘union’ is un-Thatcherite.
So Mr Hurd will use his diplomatic skills — and his French — in Strasbourg to keep the temperature down and take the rough edges off disagreement, while advancing with pragmatic caution greater British involvement in the rapidly evolving structure of the Community.
He does not favour its enlargement but does favour new forms of association for EFTA and the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe.
By contrast, Mr Major was a novice Foreign Secretary whose skills and stamina were tested to breaking point when — alone — he tried to modify the draft South African statement in Kuala Lumpur.
Mr Major won enough useful points in support of Britain's well-advertised aversion to punitive sanctions to have been able to brief Sunday papers about a ‘British victory’.
It is not clear whether he knew then that Mrs Thatcher had decided to sign the statement and then issue her own alternative.
Informed sources say that Mr Major was informed ‘rather late’ when much of the Thatcher outburst had already been drafted by Charles Powell, her private secretary, who had accompanied her to the weekend retreat of Lankawi.
When Mr Major gave an unhappy press conference late on the Sunday night, his permanent secretary, Sir Patrick Wright, and other FO officials sat at the back of the room, suggesting either moral reinforcement or a watchdog role.
Mr Hurd needs no minders, but the 60 Tory MPs who declined to support Mrs Thatcher for leader last week, plus MEPs, this week's Lords report and many industrialists will be looking to him for a more emollient performance in difficult circumstances.
He has at least one advantage over his three predecessors, including Mr Francis Pym.
As things stand he does look ‘unassailable’.
China slates reform wave.
By Stephen Vines in Hong Kong
THE Chinese Premier, Mr Li Peng, yesterday made what is believed to be his most forthright attack yet on the reforms sweeping Eastern Europe during a private meeting with a delegation from Hong Kong.
According to delegation sources, Mr Li said that Beijing was fortunate to have had the foresight to crack down on its democracy movement in June, preventing China from being thrown into the ‘turmoil and confusion’ now prevailing in Eastern Europe.
China has shown some restraint in commenting on events in Eastern Europe and has made its views evident only in oblique ways.
For example, the Chinese Communist Party pointedly sent a warm message of support to the conference of the hardline Romanian Communist Party.
However, events in Eastern Europe were evidently uppermost in Mr Li's mind during his meeting with the Hong Kong delegation which was in Beijing to discuss the future of the British colony.
Simon Long adds from Beijing: China seems to be retreating into a diplomatic posture reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution, at odds with both Washington and Moscow, and firing frequent broadsides against all-comers for alleged interference in its internal affairs.
Yesterday, East Germany was in the firing line for having received the Dalai Lamai, exiled spiritual leader of Tibet, in East Berlin on Wednesday.
China also ‘could not tolerate’ the award given to the Dalai Lama in Paris, and ‘condemned’France for permitting the exiled democracy campaigner, Yan Jiaqi, to ‘conduct activities against the Chinese Government’.
China was similarly indignant about plans for the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama on Sunday, the anniversary of last year's demonstrations in Lhasa.
Star Watch A comet for Christmas:..
By Alan Pickup
THE newly-found Aarseth-Brewington comet should brighten rapidly this month as it sweeps southwards through Ophiuchus in our morning sky, perhaps to become a naked eye object before it dips too far south to be seen from Britain.
Its path is plotted on our star map, with its position marked every fifth morning.
The stars near the middle of the map rise in the east at 05.00 tomorrow and at 04.00 on Christmas Day, climbing to reach the places shown above the ESE to SE horizon at daybreak tomorrow and by 07.00 on Christmas Day.
Most of the brighter stars plotted are of the second magnitude, while the fainter ones are of the fourth.
The comet was close to the ninth magnitude on November 16 when it was discovered by amateur astronomers in Norway and the United States.
As it moves towards Perihelion on December 27, 45m km from the Sun and 140m from the Earth, it is doubling in brightness every four days or so.
The path is definite, but predictions of its brightness and appearance are very uncertain, although it is likely to develop an upwards pointing tail.
It may reach the sixth magnitude by December 10 and the fourth on about December 20 when it moves inside Mercury's orbit and passes the star Zeta Ophiuchi.
It may be brighter than the third magnitude by Christmas morning, but by then it will be low and difficult in the SE twilight.
Egypt accepts US talks plan.
By Deborah Pugh in Cairo
AFTER two months of agonising diplomatic wrangling, Egypt, with the apparent tacit agreement of the PLO, has agreed to the five-point formula of the US Secretary of State, Mr James Baker, for talks between Israel and the Palestinians.
The next step will be a round of preliminary talks between the Egyptian and Israeli Foreign Ministers and Mr Baker to be held in Washington early next month.
The aim of these talks will be to set up a dialogue between Palestinians and Israelis in Cairo on elections in the occupied territories.
The Washington talks will centre on the crucial issue of who will represent the Palestinians.
On the official level, the PLO is still insisting that ‘it is ready to accept to deal with the Baker plan’ but only if the composition of the Palestinian delegation is publicly selected by the PLO.
Egyptian insistence on this position would lead to a withdrawal of Israeli participation, given the refusal of the Prime Minister, Mr Yitzhak Shamir, to deal directly with the PLO.
The Egyptians, while insisting that they do not speak for the Palestinians, appear ready to fudge the principle of PLO selection of the Palestinian delegation to ensure Israeli participation.
A source close to the Egyptian foreign ministry said: ‘We are trying to circumvent the ideological issue.
We will choose PLO delegates.
Any Palestinian who speaks will have to have the approval of the PLO, but this will not be said publicly because we don't want to give Shamir the chance to withdraw, which we think he's looking for an excuse to do.’
Reports from Jerusalem yesterday showed the usual split in government reaction.
The Defence Minister, Mr Yitzhak Rabin, welcomed the Egyptian acceptance of the Baker plan, while Mr Shamir's aide, Mr Avi Pazner, gave a restrained response.
‘We are waiting to receive the content of the Egyptian response from the United States,’ Mr Pazner said.
‘When we receive it we will study it carefully and later decide how to react.’
The Americans are clearly hoping that it will be possible to bring the Palestinians and Israelis around the negotiating table without confronting the contradictions and achieve an historic breakthrough.
The PLO leader, Mr Yasser Arafat, who was in Cairo earlier this week, appears to be giving tacit support to the Egyptian strategy.
He has, at least, not publicly opposed Egypt's diplomatic initiatives.
The Egyptian Foreign Minister, Dr Esmat Abdel Meguid, yesterday undercut recent reports that a rift was developing between the PLO and Egypt.
He said in Tunis that Egypt had held consultations with the PLO before officially accepting the Baker plan.
Hrawi will resign unless Aoun goes.
By Reuter in Beirut
PRESIDENT Elias Hrawi has threatened to resign if he fails to topple General Michel Aoun, whom he accused of blocking his way to unite and bring peace to Lebanon.
‘I did not come to the presidency to become a president who will consolidate partition or to manage a crisis,’ he said yesterday.
‘I have come to restore Lebanon's unity and extend the sovereignty of the government over Lebanese territory.
‘When my patience runs out with all the mediation and when I exhaust my capabilities I will issue a statement to all Lebanese and apologise.
I will tell them ‘this is your actual situation’, and leave.’
Mr Hrawi has not been able to move into the presidential palace in the Beirut suburb of Baabda because it is occupied by Gen Aoun.
He said foreign mediators had asked him not to use force to break Gen Aoun's control of the enclave.
He refused to set a time within which he would step down, saying he was giving diplomacy time to solve the crisis peacefully.
It was essential to act quickly to avert the partition of Lebanon into religious cantons.
‘The country is living on a volcano, in a field of mines,’ he said.
‘I am against war and operations which disrupt peace and cause death and destruction,’ Mr Hrawi said.
But he added that patience had limits and he might wait a few days or two weeks.
Syrian forces, Lebanese troops, and militiamen have been poised for a week for an attack to seize the palace.
Diplomatic sources said Syria had increased its troops in Lebanon from about 30,000 to 45,000 since Mr Hrawi's election.
Mr Hrawi said no decision had been taken yet for a military showdown.
He accused Gen Aoun of using as ‘sandbags’ the thousands of Christians who have gathered outside the palace to deter an attack.
Spain swears in unchanged cabinet.
By John Hooper in Madrid
THE Spanish Prime Minister, Mr Felipe Gonzalez, decided against reshuffling his cabinet to stabilise a political climate which had become increasingly unpredictable since the October 29 general election, sources close to him said yesterday.
The unchanged team was sworn in yesterday by King Juan Carlos.
Fresh elections are pending in three of Spain's 52 constituencies after judges annulled the results, citing widespread irregularities.
The quasi-liberal Spanish Socialist Workers' Party, which topped the poll six weeks ago, is now one seat short of an overall majority in the Congress of Deputies.
The Socialists suffered a sharp drop in votes and seats.
Mr Gonzalez managed to win a vote of confidence in the first round only with the support of a Canary Islands deputy who is widely regarded as a parliamentary spokesman and lobbyist for the Tenerife banana planters.
Mr Luis Mardones was the only deputy elected for the Independent Groupings of the Canaries (AIC).
An unchanged cabinet had been widely expected, but only as a temporary measure because of the uncertainty caused by the courts.
The verdicts gave up to three months for new polls to be held.
Government sources, however, suggested that that the Prime Minister would not necessarily change his team after the final outcome became known.
Several opposition parties interpreted Mr Gonzalez's attitude as defiance of public opinion.
A spokesman for the largest opposition group, the People's Party, said the Prime Minister was acting ‘as if nothing had changed’.
Mr Gonzalez has also come in for criticism from within his own party.
A leader of Socialist Left, a radical pressure group, said the confirmation in office of the old team was ‘a serious mistake, because it signals the endorsement of an economic policy criticised by a lot of people’.
Mr Mardones cast his decisive vote, on Tuesday night, after the Prime Minister promised to ‘consider’ his tiny group's demands.
Soviet Union appears to accept reunification of two states is inevitable Kremlin agrees to plan for German confederation.
By Hella Pick Diplomatic Editor
THE Soviet Union accepts in principle confederation between East and West Germany, and expects that this key move towards German reunification will be ratified next year at the summit meeting of the 35 signatories of the Helsinki Declaration.
This has emerged from briefings by the West German Foreign Minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, to members of the German Bundestag about his visit to Moscow earlier this week.
It represents an important clarification of the Soviet position on German unity, after Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, the Foreign Minister, and other senior Soviet spokesmen took issue with Chancellor Helmut Kohl's 10-point plan for German reunification.
It seems to show that the Soviet Union has already accepted the inevitability of a drawing together of the two Germanys.
The Soviet leader's main aim for the summit, apart from celebrating the conclusion of a treaty on conventional arms cuts in Europe, would be to discuss the German question within the context of the momentous changes in East-West relations.
Mr Gorbachev insists, as a condition to German confederation, that the 35 — which include the US and Canada, as well as the two Germanys and all other European states except Albania — must formally reaffirm the permanence of the Oder-Neisse line, the present Polish-German border.
This would also bind an eventually merged Germany, which the Soviet Union recognises might be born when Nato and the Warsaw Pact give way to a new European security system.
President Bush also came away from his talks with Mr Gorbachev in Malta convinced that the Soviet leader recognised that German reunification may turn out to be unavoidable, but that it must come as part of a wider European endeavour to end the post-war division of Europe.
The Soviet leader's main concern is to avoid an ‘artificial’ acceleration of the process.
But, as Mr Gorbachev said at his Malta press conference, ‘in order to remain realists, we should say that history decides the processes and fates on the European continent, and also the fates of those two [German]states.’
Mr Gorbachev first called for a Helsinki 2 summit next year in Rome last week.
He envisaged a ‘commonwealth of sovereign democratic states’ to give substance to his concept of a common European home.
President Franois Mitterrand voiced strong support for the idea after his meeting with President Gorbachev in Kiev on Wednesday.
President Bush has agreed that the conventional arms treaty should be signed at summit level, and the Americans know that this means in practice that Mr Gorbachev will have his Helsinki 2.
Although only the 23 Nato and Warsaw Pact countries are directly involved in the arms negotiations, the treaty will come under the umbrella of all Helsinki Declaration countries.
Nato and Warsaw Pact foreign ministers are expected to meet in Vienna in March to review progress of the conventional arms negotiations.
The two Germanys do not need foreign approval before moving towards confederation, the head of Chancellor Kohl's Christian Democrat party, Mr Volker Ruehe, said in an interview published today.
Rebel troops end siege of Manila area.
By Sheila Coronel in Manila
ABOUT 400 rebel soldiers returned to their barracks yesterday morning, ending the siege of Makati after they had occupied the capital's affluent business district for six days.
The mutineers, all members of an elite scout-ranger regiment, marched to a nearby army camp, defiantly saying that they did not surrender to the government.
‘We have won some victories,’ said Capitain Danilo Lucas, a West Point graduate who took part in the rebellion.
‘We are not surrendering, we are voluntarily going back to barracks.’
In the central Philippine city of Cebu, meanwhile, negotiations with the 200 army rebels who seized an air force base are at a stalemate.
The air force general leading the mutineers refused to give up control of the base even as the seige of Makati ended.
As the military mutiny dragged on for the sixth day, President Corazon Aquino asked Filipinos to ‘join hands and consolidate our resources to rebuild what we have destroyed’.
Military officers said more disruptions by mutinous soldiers were still possible.
‘I can not guarantee that there will be no more coup attempts,’ said the armed forces spokesman, Brigadier-General Oscar Florendo.
During a meeting yesterday, Mrs Aquino told her cabinet ‘to take a long, hard look at ourselves in order to see what it is we did wrong and what else needs to be done so we can all benefit from this tragic experience in our lives’.
She is expected to implement measures to address the popular grievances that have helped to fuel the mutiny.
In the past month, Mrs Aquino's popularity has declined, and there was growing disenchantment with her government's ability to provide adequate transport and power, and to contain corruption.
Government officials say that state of emergency declared by Mrs Aquino on Wednesday should make it easier for the government to control prices and improve transport and other services.
The decree allows the government to take over public utilities and businesses.
A cabinet reshuffle is expected to follow.
Replacing cabinet secretaries who are popularly perceived as ineffective was ‘part of the stocktaking that has to be done’, the press Secretary, Mr Adolfo Azcuna, said.
At the same time, Mrs Aquino is mobilising popular support for her beleaguered government.
In an emotional television appeal yesterday, she called on Filipinos to bring their families to a mass today at a religious shrine on a main motorway in suburban Manila.
The spot marks the place where where hundreds and thousands gathered in February 1986 for a popular uprising that overthrew the late President Ferdinand Marcos, and made Mrs Aquino the President.
Cardinal Jaime Sin, the influential Archbishop of Manila, who called on Filipinos to support the uprising against Marcos, joined Mrs Aquino's appeal.
‘The future of the nation is in your hands,’ he said in a radio broadcast.
The rebels left Makati after negotiations with military officers and marched back to their barracks with rifles, bazookas, and machine-guns, chanting: ‘No surrender, the fight goes on.’
Brigadier-General Arturo Enrile, the government negotiator, said the mutineers had initially demanded Mrs Aquino's resignation, but eventually ‘reason prevailed over whatever political or ideoligical convictions they had.’
Gen Enrile went on: ‘I told them they would be treated fairly, justly and humanely but they must be man enough to take the consequences of their actions.’
At the camp, the rebel troops were welcomed with a banner that read: ‘Welcome home.’
They shook hands and embraced government soldiers.
‘We will not surrender even if it takes forever,’ said Corporal Roy Bantung.
‘The government must change.
The president must change her policies.’
France ends aid to Comoros.
France has decided to cut off aid to the Comoros Islands until the French mercenary, Mr Bob Denard, and his men, who seized control 10 days ago, leave the archipelago, government sources said yesterday.
France is the Comoros's chief funder.
The second largest backer, South Africa, said on Monday it was suspending aid and demanded the withdrawal of mercenaries.
— Reuter.
Arabs drop UN vote.
The Arab group at the UN decided yesterday not to press for a vote on upgrading the PLO's UN status after the General Assembly President, Mr Joseph Garba of Nigeria, urged the sponsors to drop their resolution.
— Reuter.
Contras continue.
The US said yesterday the contras should not disband this week, as required by a regional peace agreement, because Nicaragua had not fulfilled conditions of the pact.
‘Non-lethal’ assistance will continue until February.
— AP.
Somali offensive.
Somali rebels said last night they had captured the country's second-largest city after ‘an all-out offensive’ that prompted many government troops to defect to their side.
— AP.
Lenin under attack.
Polish protesters hurled paint and petrol on a monument to Lenin in Krakow and set it on fire yesterday before clashing with police, who used force to break up the second anti-Soviet disturbance in a week.
— AP.
Bogota truck bomb.
A truck bomb exploded yesterday in Bogota, hour, killing and injuring hundreds of people, destroying stores and damaging the federal police headquarters.
Police blame the cocaine cartels.
— AP.
Cuban war dead.
Cuba said that more than 2,000 of its soldiers were killed while fighting abroad over the last three decades, nearly all of them in Angola.
— Reuter.
PAGE
Thatcher refuses to budge on unity.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
BRITAIN yesterday took comfort from reports of an alleged overnight breach between the West German Chancellor, Dr Helmut Kohl, and the French on the need to set a date for a Community monetary union conference.
Before she left for Strasbourg, Mrs Thatcher refused to budge in her hostility to the EC Social Charter and the Delors plan for economic and monetary union.
Senior ministers last night emphasised that the British position had remained unchanged since the Madrid summit, where they had stressed that adequate preparation had to be made long before stages II and III of the Delors plan could be settled.
They took comfort from Dr Kohl's apparent embrace of the need for more detailed discussion of the Delors proposals and more powers for the European Parliament and restated their belief that a conference on economic and monetary union should not be held hastily.
The ministers interpreted Dr Kohl's statement as a move towards their position.
The Prime Minister gave no hint during her performance in the Commons yesterday that her language at Strasbourg will be any less caustic than the manner she has adopted at recent Commonwealth summits.
She said she believed the adoption of the Social Charter would ‘cause a great increase in unemployment not only in this country but in others as well, and would probably end in Fortress Europe’.
Despite warnings, Mrs Thatcher stressed her leadership role in Europe, saying that it was Britain which had put up an alternative scheme to the Delors plan and had taken the initiative over the idea of associate EC status for East Germany.
These would be considered alongside the Delors plan, would go beyond its stage I, and would not require any central bank or common currency, but would result in more consistent monetary policies, Mrs Thatcher insisted.
The Labour front bench exploited the recent disclosures over hidden subsidies to sweeten the sale of the Rover Group, telling Mrs Thatcher that she went to Strasbourg with a tarnished reputation.
But her more confident mood was sustained by an intervention during the House of Commons prime ministers' question time by the former Labour cabinet minister, Mr Peter Shore.
An unreconstructed anti-Marketeer, he punctured Labour's new pro-European image by describing the Kohl move as a ‘welcome respite from the headlong rush into European union’.
To loud Conservative cheers, he demanded a serious study of the constitutional and economic consequences of monetary union, adding that it should not be a study confined to European central bank governors.