

IMF hopes for quota boost to aid Eastern Europe.
By Alex Brummer Financial Editor
OFFICIALS from the Group-of-Seven largest seven market economies will gather in Frankfurt today to put the finishing touches to a plan designed to lead to a $35billion increase in the resources of the International Monetary Fund.
A substantial increase in the IMF's quotas, which determine its lending power, is seen as particularly urgent given the heavy financial needs of Eastern Europe.
According to montary sources, the IMF is close to signing a Letter of Intent on the management of the Polish economy which will unlock a loan of up to $700million.
It has also held discreet discussions with the Hungarian Government -although progress is slow.
The Frankfurt meeting of officials is expected to prepare the way for a full meeting of the Interim Committee of Finance Ministers at IMF headquarters in Washington in January.
Such an extraordinary session of Ministers is unusual but the Americans, among others, are anxious that the thorny issue of the quota increase be resolved.
Now that the US, the IMF's largest shareholder, has agreed a quota increase the main dispute is a wrangle over rankings in the IMF hierachy with the Japanese demanding their place as an economic superpower be fully recognised.
Negotiations have been complicated by the refusal of the developing countries to cede any of their voting power to the Group of Seven.
In September agreement was held up when the then Chancellor, Mr Nigel Lawson, seemed reluctant to allow any change in the IMF's structure which resulted in a drop in Britain's position as the second largest shareholder within the Fund, even though it is now the sixth largest market economy.
It is becoming increasingly clear that once the IMF has agreed short-term adjustment strategies with the major Eastern European governments, the way will be paved for the kind of large scale Western assistance which leaders such as Poland's Mr Lech Walesa have called for.
As part of the West's action plan for Poland, a series of steps will follow the IMF's Letter of Intent.
These will include a bridging loan of $500million from the World Bank to International Settlements in Basle; debt relief from the Paris and London clubs; a World Bank credit of up to $1.7billion together with up to $1billion in funding from the EC.
Aid on a similar scale is also being put together for Hungary.
The Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development is to launch a review of the Eastern European economies, starting with Poland.
A team of experts hopes to create a blueprint for the development of countries moving from Communist control to the free market.
The need for the West to respond to Eastern Europe has quickened the pace of the desultory debate on IMF quotas.
Bond's empire in the balance.
By Lisa Buckingham
THE future of Alan Bond's shaky worldwide brewing, property and media empire may be decided today when the Australian courts are expected to rule on whether to appoint a receiver to the three crucial group companies.
If the court goes against Mr Bond he could become the most spectacular corporate failure in Australia's business history and one of the largest industrial collapses in the world.
John Spalvins, the head of Adelaide Steamship which holds a key 20 per cent stake in Bell Resources, has asked the Western Australian Supreme Court to appoint a receiver to that company along with Mr Bond's master company, Bond Corporation, and his private family concern, Dallhold Investments.
The first move in the latest court assault against Mr Bond — which he says he will contest vigorously — came after the market closed on Friday.
If share dealers beat a rapid retreat this morning, Bond's bankers — already at the end of their tether — may be forced to move in on the whole group.
Mr Spalvins' attack on Bond comes amidst a number of other problems.
Bond has missed a fifth deadline for the A$2.5billion joint venture brewing deal with the New Zealand group, Lion Nathan, and the Western Australia State Government Insurance Commission has said it is considering winding-up proceedings.
Kerry Packer has launched a complex, lowly valued and hostile bid for Bond's media interests whilst efforts to pass on stakes in British Satellite Broadcasting and Airship Industries have so far failed.
Without key asset disposals, the brewery deal and further respite on about A$8billion of debt, Bond's business empire will fail.
The receivership of Bell Resources would force Bond Corporation to repay a $A1.2 billion loan which could spark a domino collapse of other debt agreements.
Has the Boesky show trials boom overplayed itself?
American Notebook.
By Mary Brasier
IVAN Boesky is back on the streets of New York City.
The doyen of insider trading may be a shadow of his former power after paying fines of $100million and spending two years in prison, but his legacy lives on in criminal trials on both sides of the Atlantic.
New York has always been the place to come for a good show trial.
In this land of the lawyer, there is no more appropriate place for picking up the social, business and political threads of the city than a spectacle viewed from the public benches of a federal court.
Hotel queen Leona Helmsley drew bigger crowds than some Broadway plays, and the periodic trials of corrupt city officials get better viewing ratings than some television sit-coms.
But for the sheer number of performances, there has been nothing to compare with the serial trials of white collar criminals.
Most have stemmed from evidence provided by Boesky three years ago when he was caught making millions on hot tips from his network of investment bankers, lawyers and brokers.
To minimise his sentence, Boesky pointed the finger at people he had dealt with.
He walked around for weeks wired to a police tape recorder, and spent hours admitting his past indiscretions to investigators in the US and UK in an outpouring probably not rivalled since Don Juan went into the confessional.
His admissions have provided New York with a regular diet of charges against the newly rich and recently humbled as stockbrokers, arbitrageurs and merchant bankers have paraded through the Manhattan courts.
Watching Gucci-shoed bankers hauled off trading floors in handcuffs is a viewing sensation which falls somewhere between Dynasty and Keystone Kops.
And like all popular American programmes, British audiences are not being spared the export version: in the new year the Guinness trial begins.
Defending charges which range from insider trading to more obscure practices like stock parking and failure to comply with statutory regulations, those indicted in New York and London have become players in a wider drama, witnesses to a bigger crime in which business ethics were corrupted by a decade which praised money-making not morality.
This may be smugly satisfying to those of us who sit on the sidelines, but even ardent moralists must soon start to wonder whether the Boesky boom in show trials has overplayed itself.
One reason is a case which dragged painfully towards a close in Manhattan last week.
The GAF trial is famous for its longevity.
The case has already resulted in two mistrials, and with GAF III, prosecutors are making what must be a final attempt to get their men.
The essence of the case is that GAF and its vice-chairman, James Sherwin, tried to manipulate the price of Union Carbide, in which GAF had a shareholding which it subsequently sold.
The star witness at this trial (if you ignore Swedish actress Liv Ullman who played a cameo part last week) is Boyd Jefferies, former head of a Wall Street broking firm.
Mr Jefferies is helping the US Government prosecute GAF not merely because he is a public spirited citizen but in order to be able to swap a prison sentence for the privilege of teaching children to play golf in Aspen, Colorado.
Mr Jefferies featured strongly in the confessions of Ivan Boesky and he is quoted in an American magazine this month as saying: ‘If the government was going to bring me down for something like this, I am going to bring down a lot of other people with me’.
This domino method of criminal justice has been repeated elsewhere with dubious results.
The prosecution's success rate does not augur well for the two trials which will really test the quality of Boesky's information and the deal that he pulled off with government lawyers.
In March, Boesky is the star witness at the trial of Michael Milken, the junk bond king who faces 98 charges of securities fraud and who worked closely with the disgraced arbitrageur.
Milken's indictment was the prize that Boesky delivered to his prosecutors — it was even cited by his lawyer when he tried unsuccessfully to have Boesky's three-year prison sentence commuted earlier this year.
Milken refused to play the game of domino justice, so the case against him will stand or fall on its own merits.
There are no spin-off trials of conspirators fingered by Milken which can comfort the prosecution if it loses.
And there are many who think that is what will happen.
When it comes to Guinness, can UK prosecutors do better than their American counterparts in putting Boesky's tipoffs to good use?
There are some striking parallels between the show trials of New York which have stemmed from the Boesky confessions and the Guinness case.
They range from the UK equivalent of plea bargaining to the curiosity that while Boesky, a confessed criminal, can arrange special deals with the prosecution, those charged with lesser offences have to spend three years keeping lawyers in clover while waiting for their turn at justice.
And in the best New York tradition, Guinness too will be a show trial — handing out not merely verdicts on the defendants in the dock but on the City at large.
Can the Crown avoid the excesses and mistakes of which white collar crime fighters in the US are accused?
As for the GAF trial, it will probably live as a symbol of prosecution farce and the flaws of the Boesky boom.
The Wall Street Journal, which talked this week of the ‘absurdity of the charges’ in the GAF trial, concluded: ‘What's on trial as much as GAF is whether federal prosecutors in the Wall Street cases know whom to prosecute, with whom to plea bargain, and whom to leave alone.’
It is to be hoped that the Guinness trial will show that the UK authorities do know just that.
Water shares scaled down.
Millions who applied for the minimum 100 shares in the great water sell-off are likely today to be told their applications are being met in full despite a huge oversubcription to the £5.24billion privatisation.
But applications for larger numbers of shares are likely to be scaled back substantially after the offer was oversubscribed by 4.7 times..
Director's pay boost.
The highest paid director at Mr Kipling-to-Bisto group, Ranks Hovis McDougall, was awarded a 22 per cent salary increase to £269,000 in the year to September despite the group being under continued takeover threat.
Chairman Stanley Metcalfe also saw his pay rise by 17.4 per cent to £142,000.
The boardroom rises at the company compare with a rise in profits of 13 per cent.
Resignations rumoured.
Sir Derek Alun-Jones, chairman of Ferranti, and some other directors of the troubled group are said to be ready to resign in February once a share issue to raise £187 million in finance for the group is agreed by shareholders..
Edelman in trouble.
Asher Edelman — the US corporate raider who has stalked the Bhs to Habitat group Storehouse — has run into big financial reversals on both sides of the Atlantic.
Arbitragers said Edelman had lost $40million to $50million on a stake he had taken in Storehouse and is facing financial problems at Datapoint which he heads.
US warned on foreign investor curb.
By Martin Walker in Washington
FRESH legislation to curb the growing level of foreign ownership in American industry should be avoided, a study from the prestigious Washington-based Institute for International Economics has warned.
But it is becoming increasingly important that an accord on foreign corporate investment is negotiated between leading industrial nations.
And there may be cases when the US Government should, in the national interest, take extraordinary powers over foreign-owned companies, the report states.
According to the high level survey, carried out by two senior government advisers, foreign-owned companies in the US are ‘virtually indistinguishable ‘from domestic organisations in terms of wages, value added per worker and the amount of research and development undertaken in the United States.
And it argues that, despite growing public concern following deals such as the sale of Columbia Pictures and New York's Rockefeller Centre to the Japanese, there is no need for tough new legislative curbs.
But the officials do accept the controversial point that the American Government may take action against overseas-owned groups in its own national interest.
‘To protect national security by ensuring access to critical foreign technologies, the US may have to condition defence procurements from foreign countries or mandatory licensing of their technology to US firms, or mandatory investment in the US by such foreign companies,’ the IIE report says.
Written by MIT Professor Paul Krugman, formerly on the staff of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, and Professor Edward Graham, formerly in the office of international investment at the US Treasury, and later at the OECD in Paris, the report will be scanned carefully as indicating the current thinking of the Washington policy-making establishment.
‘Much public attention has been focused on foreign puchases of real estate, however, foreign ownership of banking and manufacturing is much more important’, the report argues.
And while the bulk of public controversy has focused on Japanese investment, Britain plays by far the biggest role, accounting for 31 per cent of all foreign investment in the US, as much as the next two investors, the Dutch (14.9 per cent) and the Japanese (16.1 per cent ) combined.
Britain's eminence is likely to be brief.
Nine years ago, the Dutch played the biggest role, with 25 per cent of investment, compared to Britain's 16.6 per cent.
Just as Britain pumped the proceeds of North Sea Oil into the US economy, the Dutch in the 1960s and 1970s were investing the proceeds of North Sea gas.
With the oil running down, the Japanese are poised to overtake the British investment share in the near future.
In the financial sector, huge increases in the assets of Japanese affiliates, due largely to purchases of highly-leveraged US financial firms, have quickly enabled assets of Japanese-controlled firms in the US to exceed those of other countries.
But this is mainly a balance sheet phenomenon.
Measured by value added or employment, Japanese investment is modest.
The surge in foreign acquisitions of US firms since 1986 is attributed to the fall in the dollar, and to the reform of corporation tax in the same year.
Between 1981-6, corporate tax rates were much harsher on US affiliates of foreign owned firms, who found their low US taxes offset by the reduction of tax credits in their home countries.
This meant that a US-owned company paid less net taxes.
In 1987, the last year for which complete figures are available, foreign investment accounted for 7.6 per cent of US stocks (up sharply to 8.9 per cent last year), while foreign share of US manufacturing was 12.2 per cent, and of US employment a much smaller 3.5 per cent .
Foreign Direct Investment in the US, by EdwardMGraham and PaulRKrugman, Institute for International Economics, 11 Dupont Circle NW, Washington DC 20036. $11.95
Battle lines are drawn for control of the Norfolk Capital hotels group.
By Tony May
TODAY will see the opening shots in a fierce £130million battle for control of the Norfolk Capital hotels group, best known for its St James Club in London.
Mr Peter Tyrie is trying to oust Norfolk's managing director, Peter Eyles, through a mangement buy-in using a 12.6 per cent stake, acquired from the Mount Charlotte group, for £17million, as a springboard.
The Norfolk board meets today and Mr Eyles is confident it will reject what he terms, Mr Tyrie's ‘preposterous attempt at personal aggrandisement.’
Mr Tyrie's buy-in package includes a management contract linked to future movement's in Norfolk's share price which is described as ‘lavish.’
After an initial payment of £500,000, Mr Tyrie and his partners would receive a lump sum of £2million if Norfolk's shares reached 50p and a further £5million if they topped 60p.
On Friday its shares jumped 2p to 32p as the market got wind of some kind of deal, valuing the group at £130million.
Solicitors' firms are caught out by the housing market collapse.
By Ben Laurance
SIGNS are beginning to emerge that the survival of some firms of solicitors is being threatened by the collapse of the housing market.
Many law firms have already laid off employees: a large Midlands firm has got rid of 35; a firm in East Anglia is about to shed some conveyancing staff; and the Law Society's Young Solicitors Group has set up a helpline to provide counselling and advice for young lawyers who have been made redundant.
One medium-sized firm of solicitors in East Anglia has written to its staff asking them to forgo their pay for December.
The firm says it simply cannot find the cash to meet its wage bill.
East Anglia has been particularly affected by the fall in the property market.
House prices there boomed in 1987 and the first-half of 1988 and have since fallen more sharply than in most other areas.
The Law Society says it is not aware of any firms, so far, which have gone under because of the property slump.
Recent figures for conveyancing are not available.
In 1986, about 1.78million properties worth £73billion changed hands.
In 1987, there were 1.96 million conveyances worth £103 billion.
Estimates suggest that since then, the number of house sales has fallen by about 40 per cent.
For a small firm of solicitors in a market town, conveyancing has accounted for about half of all fee income.
So the recent fall in house-moving business would have cut gross income by about a fifth and net income by much more.
The housing slump has also had a major impact on removal firms.
The British Association of Removers, which represents 750 removal companies across the country, believes housemoving business is down about 40 per cent.
‘There is a temporary blip in the market because some people are trying to press ahead with their moves before Christmas,’ said Mr Eric Bourne of the BAR.
‘But generally speaking, it has been difficult since September 1988.
‘Some firms have reduced their staffing levels substantially, but people in the industry are generally trying to hold on to experienced staff.’
Some one-person removal firms have disappeared, said Mr Bourne.
‘But within our association there has been no noticable number of bankruptcies.
‘It has gone on for 15 months and so far most firms have managed to survive, but they can't go on like this for ever.’
Racal on line for double figures This week..
By Robin Stoddart
THE outlook for retail sales is seen by Midland Montagu Research to be of ‘pivotal importance to the economy.’
Sales are usually much bigger in the run-up to Christmas than in the rest of the year, and low sales would indicate that consumer's confidence is broken and would also harm business confidence.
Leading lights of the service sector, headed by Racal, could produce results that go some way towards alleviating the gloomy economic prospects again this week, even if Friday's poor inflation figure can't be glossed over.
Some top exporters, notably English China Clays and Dowty, are also delivering interim statements.
Racal Telecom's progress in car telephone and data transmission is expected to double six month's profit, tomorrow, from the previous £30.6million.This will be instrumental in boosting the Racal Electronics parent to just over £80million, from £62.4million.
Dowty may be able to show a near £10million profit gain to about £42million, against £32.5million although the shares have been moving uncertainly in the face of the engineering strikes and concern over defence expenditure.
Granada will report profits of £160million, against £143million, also tomorrow, if brokers have revised their estimates right in line with deteriorating TV retailing and rental trends.
The North-West programme franchise remains highly lucrative, with under three years to go before renewal or a reshuffle.
English China Clays has been downgraded on the stock market because of its housebuilding stakes, but quarrying and the main international paper industry supply business are far more important.
Only a few millions extra profit on the previous year's £145million are likely to be revealed today.
TODAY — Interims: Berkeley Group, Philip Harris Holdings, JLI Group, Learmouth and Burchett Management Systems, Marling Industries, Scottish and Newcastle Breweries, Waterglade International, Whitecroft.
Finals: Airtours, Carlton Communications, English China Clays, Eurocopy, Hardys and Hansons, Holmes and Marchant Group, Venture Plant Group, Wolverhampton and Dudley Breweries.
Economic statistics: Food Facts (3rd quarter) Producer price index numbers (Nov-provisional) Retail sales (November) TOMORROW — Interims: BSS Group, Creighton's Naturally, Dowty Group, Halma, Melville Street, Racal Telecom, Turnbull Scott Holdings.
Finals: Archimedes Investment Trust, Blick, J A Devenish, Granada Group, Mining and Allied Supplies, Polar Electronics, Richards, Shaftesbury, TMD Advertising Hldgs, Titon Holdings, Vaux Group.
WEDNESDAY — Interims: Authority Investments, HP Bulmer Holdings, Charter Consolidated, Fuller Smith and Turner, London Securities, Benjamin Priest, Stewart and Wight.
Finals: Baggeridge Brick, Chemring Group, GW Thornton THURSDAY — Interims: Brown and Tawse Group, Eliza Tinsley, Eve Group, Fine Art Development, GM Firth, Gold Greenless Trott, Hunter Saphir, London Merchant Securities, Alexander Russell.
Finals: Associated Paper Industries, City Site Estates, Compass Group, Hoskyns Group, Johnson and Firth Brown, Arthur Lee and Sons, Shoprite Group, Speyhawk, UK Land, Watson and Philip.
Economic statistics: Labour market statistics: average earnings.
FRIDAY — Interims: Asda Group, Booth Industries, Brasway, Bristol Evening Post, British Build and Engineering Appliances, CHIndustrials, Compco Hldgs, John J Lees, TGI, Wellman.
Finals: Grainger Trust, Guinness Mahon Holdings, London Scottish Bank, McCarthey and Sons, Strata Investments.
Economic statistics: Retail prices index..