

Bulgarian opposition scents victory.
By Mike Power and Denise Searle in Sofia
ABOUT 50,000 people packed Sofia's Alexander Nevesky Cathedral square yesterday to demand round-table talks between the Bulgarian Government and the new opposition grouping, the Union of Democratic Forces, to solve the country's economic and social crisis.
Similar rallies in many towns called on today's crucial Community Party central committee meeting to give up immediately the party's leading role in society and introduce multi-party democracy.
In freezing temperatures and light snowfall, the enthusiastic and emotional crowd in Sofia heard Bulgaria's most radical demands so far and called for the ousted leader, Mr Todor Zhivkov, to stand trial for fraud and mismanagement.
One speaker, Mr Nikolai Vassilev, urged ‘a Nuremberg trial of Zhivkov and other criminals from East European totalitarian states like East Germany and Czechoslovakia’.
The Union of Democratic Forces, launched last week, is equivalent to East Germany's New Forum or Czechoslovakia's Civic Force.
Its organisers increased their demands after last Friday's central committee meeting accepted a key demand of the union and ousted many Zhivkov supporters from the Community Party leadership.
‘If the new party leader Petar Mladenov thinks this action will pre-empt our demonstration and weaken us,’ said the union's secretary, Mr Petar Beron, ‘then he is wrong.
If we can achieve so much before the demonstration is even held then much more is possible.’
The rally called for the resignation of the central committee and municipal party bosses; the disbanding of Communist Party control bodies in work places, the legal system, militia and armed forces; and the separation of party and state finances.
Speakers called for immediate action to reverse Mr Zhivkov's national and religious assimilation policies towards the ethnic Turks and Bulgarian Muslims.
Mr Mikhail Ivanov, of the Committee for Reconciliation, said: ‘Ethnic and cultural rights and traditions must be respected.’
Members of the minorities arrived in Sofia two days before the demonstration fearing they would be stopped from attending.
Reports reached rally organisers that 1,000 Muslims were turned back at Gotse Delchev on their way to Sofia.
‘A special commission on Bulgaria's ethnic conflicts is needed to expose the guilty people,’ said the union president, Mr Zhelyu Zhelev.
He went on: ‘The round-table negotiations that we proposed should include the Communist Party, the government and our union, and should agree on a new constitution.
Free elections would then be possible in a year's time when all parties could participate equally.’
Mr Zhelev fears that elections may be called before alternative platforms and candidates are ready, giving the Communist Party a clear run.
Economic reform will dominate today's central committee meeting.
A special commission under Mr Mladenov's deputy, Mr Andrey Lukanov, will report on ‘defamations in economic and social policy’.
This will include revelations about corruption in the Zhivkov regime.
On Saturday the trade union paper Trud revealed that Mr Zhivkov's grandson began a five-year study course in Switzerland last October at a cost to the state of over £1,000 a month.
Election fever in Brazil as worker closes poll gap.
By Jan Rocha in Sao Paulo
BRAZIL could be within a week of electing Latin America's first worker President, Mr Luis Inacio da Silva, commonly known as Lula.
Although opinion polls still show the centre-right's candidate, Mr Fernando Collor, leading by five million votes, the difference between them has dropped from 13 to six points in one week.
A World Cup-like atmosphere grips the country.
On buses, in bars, markets and queues can be heard only ‘Lula or Collor?’
An audience of over 60 million watched last week's first television debate between the two.
A poll showed that Mr Da Silva won it, burying the myth that as an ex-factory worker with only a few years schooling he is unqualified for the presidency.
He is also winning the televison propaganda war, cleverly mixing attacks on his adversary with humour and straightforward appeals to help change Brazil.
Over 100 leading actors, actresses and singers have joined his campaign.
Voters recognise household names from their favourite soaps, singing the campaign song, Lula La (Lula There — in the presidential palace).
After a hesitant start, the other leftwing and progressive parties who were defeated in the first round have joined Mr Da Silva's campaign, along with the Socialist and Communist parties, which already supported him in the Popular Front coalition.
Mr Collor, badly rattled by the spreading pro-Lula mood, and the rapid erosion of his lead in the polls, cancelled his rallies this weekend, sacked his propaganda co-ordinator and called his advisers to an emergency meeting in Brasilia to replan strategies.
Mr Collor's problem is that although money is no obstacle to his multi-million dollar campaign, it does not make up for the thousands of enthusiastic party militants campaigning for his rival.
Mr Collor's National Reconstruction Party was created as an election vehicle and has only a handful of members.
His attempt to win southern gaucho voters by playing up family links there backfired when he got his regional expressions muddled up.
His campaign now seems to be down to its last card — to brand Mr Da Silva as a dangerous radical who is bent on introducing Stalinist communism into Brazil.
‘They will replace the green and yellow of the national flag with red,’ he warns.
Fear of communism has worked in Brazil before, but it is questionable whether in today's world it will still do so.
In any case, Mr Collor has only one week before the election on December 17, to put this message across.
Brazil's President, Mr Jose Sarney, is required by the constitution to leave office by March 15.
He has said repeatedly that he will serve out his term, but the pressures on him to quit early are expected to grow after next Sunday's vote.
Under his government, inflation rose by 41.4 per cent in November alone.
Czech leaves jail to join leadership.
By Tyler Marshall in Prague
THE pace of political change has been rapid here, but for no one has it been faster than for Mr Jan Carnogursky, who will be a deputy prime minister.
In the space of only two weeks, the Slovak lawyer has moved from dissident to defendant to government minister.
For him, life began to turn on a Sunday evening two weeks ago in his Bratislava prison cell after he had been pardoned by the country's president, Mr Gustav Husak.
‘The warder came and told me to dress and led me to an officer of the court,’ the small, self-effacing lawyer recalled in an interview on Saturday.
‘He said I had been pardoned by the president.’
Mr Carnogurksy was charged with subversion for organising a pro-democracy petition, but was found not guilty by a Bratislava court on November 23.
The prosecutor appealed and Mr Carnogursky was returned to prison.
On Friday, Mr Husak announced a widesweeping amnesty which included a general pardon for those charged with subversion under the notorious Article 98 of the penal code often used to stifle political protest.
‘I am very pleased to accept the pardon,’ Mr Carnogursky said with a smile.
While he had known of the groundswell of resistance to the regime, experiencing it outside of jail was something else.
‘Of course I'd had newspapers, but I wasn't able to feel inside the atmosphere outside.
‘I was released late in the evening.
I took a tram home.
I saw posters that said ‘free elections.’
When I was arrested in August, one charge against me was that I said I wanted free elections,’ said Mr Carnogursky, aged 45.
The next evening he addressed a large anti-government rally in Bratislava and within 48 hours of his release, he was negotiating with the prime minister about political change.
On the eve of his ministerial appointment, Mr Carnogursky said he was not interested in revenge.
‘Members of the secret police and wardens behaved in a correct way towards me,’ he said.
‘I'm a lawyer.
I'm used to suppressing my feelings.’
His swearing in by Mr Husak will bring together the two opposite poles of Czechoslovak politics — the unyielding dissident and the man most closely connected with the hard-line Communist regime that followed the Soviet-led 1968 invasion.
Still, Mr Carnogursky said he would feel little bitterness when he shook hands with the man who symbolised the state apparatus.
‘Even Husak has spent many more years in jail than I have,’ he said.
-Washington Post
SA anti-apartheid groups vow to step up struggle.
By Patrick Laurence in Johannesburg
THE biggest gathering of anti-apartheid organisations in South Africa's history ended at the weekend with a commitment to intensify the ‘struggle against apartheid and exploitation’ and a sharp denunciation of the government's reform policies.
However, delegates from the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM) failed to endorse the resolutions which had been hammered out in hours of debate and decided instead to take them back for further discussions by its supporters.
The convenors of the conference were drawn from two ideological camps in South Africa's extra-parliamentary opposition: the Mass Democratic Movement (MDM), which is ideologically aligned to the outlawed African National Congress, and the BCM, which was founded by Steve Biko and sees itself as a third force between the ANC and the banned Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC).
Co-operation between these two forces in organising the conference — which was attended by more than 4,660 delegates, representing nearly 2,140 organisations — was in itself an achievement, as Mr Murphy Morobe, of the MDM, noted.
It was a further achievement that delegates from these two, until recently hostile, camps could clash sharply in debate during the conference without acrimony, although black consciousness delegates from Natal threatened to walk out at one stage.
The key resolution called on representatives to approve the Harare declaration on negotiations with the government of Mr F.W. de Klerk.
Although adopted by the Organisation for African Unity, the declaration was originally drafted by the ANC in consultation with its allies in South Africa.
With BCM delegates reserving their position, the remaining delegates adopted the Harare declaration and further resolved to call for a ‘constituent assembly, established on a non-racial basis and representing all the people of South Africa, to draw up a new constitution for our country’.
They declared that the ‘only way to defeat apartheid is by broadening the base of anti-apartheid forces’.
Their statement reflected, in part, the determination of the MDM to selectively recruit forces and organisations serving in government-approved institutions, including legislative assemblies in the ‘black homelands’ and town councils in the black townships.
But, dating back to Biko's days, the BCM has a strong tradition of ‘non-collaboration,’ which means shunning all contact with ‘collaborators’serving in government-established institutions.
Any move in that direction may raise resistance in BCM circles and exacerbate misgivings about the MDM's ‘flirtations’ with bantustan leaders like General Bantu Holomisa of the Transkei and Mr Enos Mabuza of KaNgwane.
The conference exposed other rifts in the black community.
The Africanists, whose ideological sympathies lie with the PAC, decided not to attend, asserting they had not been invited to serve on the convening committee.
Also not represented was the Zulu-based Inkatha movement, led by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
Aides' night flight attracts heavy congressional fire.
By Martin Walker in Washington
THE US Secretary of State, Mr Jim Baker, yesterday sought to fend off the growing criticism of the new US initiative towards Beijing, arguing that the priorities were to prevent China from retreating further into isolation, and to show support for moderates in the government.
‘And they are going to have to help us, if we are going to preserve this relationship,’ Mr Baker said, signalling expectation of Chinese concessions on human rights.
This has aroused hopes that the Chinese dissident physicist, Mr Fang Lizhi, who has been given sanctuary in the US Embassy in Beijing, might be released under a Chinese guarantee that he will not be arrested.
Democrats in Congress led the condemnation of the surprise arrival of two senior Bush Administration aides in Beijing.
But Republicans, too, were concerned that the Administration's now legendary caution in foreign affairs, and its unwillingness to move far from the sentiments of the opinion polls, should have been cast aside in such a cause.
‘It is another example of the President's tendency to kowtow to Beijing in spite of the failure on the part of their government to relax the repression they have imposed,’ Mr Stephen Solarz, chairman of the House foreign affairs subcommittee on Asian and Pacific affairs, said yesterday.
Washington was startled by the 2am White House announcement of the visit to Beijing by the National Security Adviser, Admiral Brent Scowcroft, and the Deputy Secretary of State, Mr Lawrence Eagleburger.
Both are proteges of Dr Henry Kissinger, who began the US rapprochement with China nearly 20 years ago.
‘The night flight to Beijing makes everything we have said about our disgust and revulsion at the Chinese Government's action into empty words,’ complained a congresswoman, Ms Nancy Pelosi, sponsor of the law vetoed by President Bush, which would have allowed Chinese students to remain in the US after their visas expired.
Republicans began to express concern yesterday that the President's personal commitment to China, where he was ambassador in 1972, was putting him at odds with public opinion still revolted by the brutal repression in Tiananmen Square.
Responding to the criticism, Mr Baker said isolating China would only ‘compound the tragedy’.
Gorbachev says party must not oppose change John Rettie reports from Moscow on Gorbachev's attempt to retain the power of the Communists.
By John Rettie in Moscow
PRESIDENT Mikhail Gorbachev has warned his Communist Party colleagues that if they delayed in dealing with ‘overdue changes,’ they could suffer the same ‘excesses’as their brothers in Eastern Europe.
His warning was couched in elliptical terms, in a wide-ranging speech to the party's central committee on Saturday.
He pointed out that in many countries of Eastern Europe, Communists had been forced into coalition or out of government.
‘The truth, about which we spoke so often in the past few years, has been reaffirmed once again— where there is a delay in dealing with overripe problems, excesses are inevitable,’ Gorbachev said in the Tass transcript of his speech.
And although he passionately rejected demands from radical Soviet reformers to abandon the party's monopoly of power, at least at this moment, he insisted that only the most far-reaching changes could solve the Soviet economic crisis.
The depth of this crisis persuaded members of the radical Inter-Regional Group of congressional deputies to abandon their call for a two-hour strike today, in demand of a revision of Article 6 of thr constitution which enshrines the party's monopoly.
Instead, a meeting of just under half the 400-strong group, an alliance of reform-minded parliamentarians, adopted a compromise resolution allowing each of its members to take independent political action.
‘The Inter-Regional Group called on all voters to adopt resolutions at rallies and meetings and to send letters and telegrams and find other ways to support the demand,’ Tass reported.
The strike call was originally made by the human rights activist, Dr Andrei Sakharov, and two other leaders of the radical Inter-Regional Group, who want the Congress of People's Deputies, which meets tomorrow, to discuss the amendment of Article 6 of the constitution, which guarantees the party its dominant position.
But at a meeting of the party's central committee on Saturday, Mr Gorbachev hotly opposed ‘any attempt to diminish the importance of the party, or undermine its authority.’
He denounced efforts to ‘organise a political strike on the eve of the congress’, the country's supreme legislative body.
Those who did so were ‘trying to demoralise Communists, reduce their effectiveness at a turning-point for perestroika, and set the workers against the party’.
Significantly, though, the Soviet leader added that since a new constitution was being prepared, any article could come up for review, and this included Article 6.
There was, he pointed out, no such article in the first Soviet constitution, adopted in Lenin's time.
Mr Gorbachev's clear message was that the time had not yet come to abolish the party's monopoly of power, but that it might well do so when a new political structure had been worked out, and the present economic crisis overcome.
To force the pace now was irresponsible, and could lead to a power vacuum.
The establishment of a new political system based on law was a highly complex matter and needed careful consideration, he said.
The new constitution under consideration would be discussed by the crucial party congress to be held in October next year.
Mr Gorbachev reportedly offered to resign at Saturday's meeting after Kemerevo party chief Alexander Melnikov ‘really let himself get carried away and said something like this: ‘Is it proper to go bowing to the capitalists? to go asking a blessing from the Pope?’ ' according to a conservative Central Committee member.
The source said Mr Gorbachev ‘was touched on the raw’ by the criticism of his moves to make peace with the West, and offered to resign if the full Central Committee agreed with Mr Melnikov.
Mr Gorbachev was immediately supported and Mr Melnikov wound up apologising.
Mr Gorbachev also had a sharp message for the Lithuanian party, which is planning to break away from the Soviet Communist party.
‘We regard the CPSU [Soviet party]as a consolidating, uniting force,’ he said, ‘as the guarantor of this Soviet land, of the protection and increase of its power, and of the strengthening of its international authority.’
The entire party leadership is also clearly worried about the party's prospects for the forthcoming elections to soviets at both local and republican level.
The old revolutionary slogan ‘All power to the Soviets’ is as much Mr Gorbachev's as that of the radical reformers.
He wants the party to stop running the country, but merely to inspire and guide it.
If, however, the party is rejected at the polls, it could be left without any role at all.
The election period, which will last about six months, was launched yesterday in Estonia and Latvia, where voters elected local soviets.
Because the polling system is new and complex, the results will not be known for several days, but most observers expect the local party's candidates to come in far behind the Popular Front and other unofficial groups.
But what happens in the Baltic, or indeed many of the smaller among the country's 15 republics, pales into insignificance compared with how the party fares in Russia.
White House envoy's visit is bid to repair rift with China Washington breaks the ice in Beijing.
By Simon Long in Beijing
PRESIDENT Bush's National Security Adviser, Admiral Brent Scowcroft, was greeted warmly by the Chinese leader, Mr Deng Xiaoping, yesterday during an unannounced weekend visit to Beijing which tacitly buried the US ban on high-level governmental contacts with China.
‘I believe this visit of yours is a very important one,’ said Mr Deng during a meeting in the Great Hall of the People.
‘In spite of the disputes and differences between us, after all, Sino-US relations have to be improved.
This is something that is necessary for world peace and stability.’
Admiral Scowcroft's visit at the head of a senior delegation including the Deputy Secretary of State, Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, seemed to offer China's leadership a face saving way to patch up its rift with Washington, with whom China's relations have been at their lowest ebb since Mr Nixon's trail-blazing 1972 trip to Beijing.
Ostensibly, Admiral Scowcroft's mission was to brief China's leaders on the Malta summit.
But the visit amounted to an urgent appeal from Washington to stop what has seemed an inexorable downward slide in its relations with Beijing since the bloody crackdown on anti-government protests in June.
The admiral said he had come ‘to bring new impetus and vigour into our bilateral relationship’.
China rolled out the red carpet for him and his team.
After a lengthy discussion with the Foreign Minister, Mr Qian Qichen, they met the Prime Minister, Mr Li Peng, and the Communist Party leader, Mr Jiang Zemin.
Significantly, Mr Deng once again gave the lie to any impression that his ‘retirement’ last month is to be taken literally.
His formal meeting with the US delegation ignored the pledge he made then only to meet ‘old friends’ from abroad privately and not to discuss politics.
He asked Admiral Scowcroft to tell the President: ‘There is a retired old man in China in the Orient, who is concerned about the improvement and development of Sino-US relations.’
Mr Deng's personal appeal to President Bush was as close as China came to reciprocating the one the United States had made in sending the mission.
In June, Washington imposed a package of sanctions on China.
Military exchanges, subsidised government loans, and high-level official contacts with the Chinese Government were frozen.
President Bush has come under congressional pressure to step up the sanctions.
Instead, he has lifted one.
The White House spokesman, Mr Marlin Fitzwater, explained that while the President ‘deplores the tragedy of Tiananmen Square last June…
China, nevertheless, remains part of the world around us’.
Since June, China has reverted to the rhetoric of an earlier era in its diatribes against the US.
Mr Deng himself has accused the United States of being ‘too deeply involved’ in the anti-government protests.
On Friday the US charge d'affaires in Beijing was summoned to the Foreign Ministry to hear a ‘strong protest’ about President Bush's decision to execute by administrative means the provisions of a congressional bill he had vetoed, allowing some of the estimated 40,000 Chinese students in the US to extend their visas.
Until last month heavily armed soldiers stood guard outside the US embassy in Beijing, where China's best-known dissident, the astrophysicist, Professor Fang Lizhi, and his wife took refuge in June.
Ex-president Nixon came to Beijing at the end of October, in what appeared to be a fence-mending expedition which backfired.
Unused to the candid expression of American outrage which Mr Nixon voiced, China's leaders only stiffened their attitude.
They insisted that the massacre was China's internal affair, that China had done nothing to harm the United States' interests, and that it was up to the US to take the initiative in repairing relations.
So it is not surprising that China's leaders have welcomed President Bush's envoy.
But it remains unclear what the next step could be.
Two of the main issues in bilateral relations — Professor Fang and his wife, and the Chinese students in the United States — are not susceptible to easy compromise.
What is puzzling is why the United States should hand such a diplomatic prize to China at a time when the original strategic basis of the friendship, mutual hostility to the Soviet Union, seems more tenuous than ever.
The spectre of an isolated, xenophobic China is one that neither Washington nor Moscow welcomes.
And, for all the cordiality surrounding the Malta summit, the US is probably anxious to retain its satellite intelligence stations in China.
If the US team were hoping to hear that martial law may soon be lifted, they may have been forestalled by a tiny but significant demonstration on the streets of Beijing.
Witnesses say that six protesters unfurled two banners outside the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television on Saturday afternoon.
One read ‘Why is China so poor?’
It was the first reported public protest in Beijing since June.
Next year ‘is crucial for Delors plan’.
By John Palmer in Strasbourg
THE European Community has 12 months in which to achieve a breakthrough to full economic and monetary union or the whole project may have to be put on ice until the end of the next decade.
This is the view of many EC experts and officials after the weekend summit here.
The decisions taken by the heads of government — in the face of Mrs Thatcher's lone opposition — mean that the Community will deliberately accelerate progress to supra-national monetary union.
But EC governments will have to agree on what changes to make to the Treaty of Rome by the end of 1991, if the timetable is not to be derailed.
‘Events in the outside world, as well as within the Community, give us an exceptional window of opportunity at present,’ a senior European Commission official said yesterday.
‘Realistically, those same political developments could turn sour unless we maintain a clear sense of forward momentum.
Loss of momentum could mean a return to the stagnation which prevented the Community evolving in the 1970s.’
Agreement on revisions to the Rome Treaty by the end of 1991 would allow a further 12 months for the delicate business of securing the endorsement of all 12 national parliaments.
This would allow the council of ministers and the putative EC central bank to move ahead with the supra-national second and third stages of the three-stage European monetary union (EMU) strategy of the European Commission president, Mr Jacques Delors, at, or very soon after, the beginning of 1993.
The West Germans still talk about a full EMU not being operational before the summer of 1994 — when the next direct elections to the European Parliament are due.
But success or failure for the entire project may have been determined long before then.
Preparations for the special inter-governmental conference on a new European monetary treaty will begin almost immediately.
The main responsibility will fall on the Irish Government, which takes over the presidency of the EC council of ministers at the end of the month, and the Italians, who take over in July.
There are two important issues to be resolved before the character of the economic and monetary union will be determined.
The first is whether the union will be almost exclusively monetary, with the EC central banking system being closely modelled on the narrow counter-inflationary objectives of the largely non-accountable Bundesbank, and with other economic objectives left exclusively in national hands.
Bonn, The Hague and London would much prefer the Community to keep to this narrow route to EMU, although the British Government still does not see that even its competing currencies alternative leads to a European central bank.
But a majority of Community governments, particularly among the poorer countries, will insist on a much broader definition of economic union and one which involves a huge increase in resources for the less productive and competitive regions of the EC.
This in turn links with the second great issue: just how, and to whom, should the council of ministers — and, by extension, the EC central bank — be accountable.
Although Mrs Thatcher insists that accountability should exclusively be through national governments to national parliaments, this is not favoured by others.
The European Parliament will not be slow in following up the demands put to the summit by Mr Enrique Baron, the Parliament's president, for it to be given sweeping new powers by the inter-governmental conference next year.
Hiding behind the future role of the European Parliament is the spectre — as seen from London — of the bandwagon for full European political federalism.
The fact that Mrs Thatcher talks less today about the dangers of ‘national’ sovereignty from the Delors version of EMU and more about the ‘threat to national parliamentary accountability’has not been lost on MEPs.
They will also certainly invite MPs from all 12 national parliaments, as well as governments and the commission, to special constitutional reform hearings to be held probably next summer.
Some leading MEPs believe an alliance with reform-minded MPs must be struck if leaders like Mrs Thatcher are to be prevented from setting up an economic and monetary union, which is essentially uncontrolled by any democratically-elected body.
One suggestion is to create a European Parliament senate or upper house, consisting of delegations of MPs in proportion to their strength in their national parliaments.
Only when all these questions have been answered will the 12 governments decide whether to recommend the amended Rome Treaty to their parliaments.
That will require unanimity.
But all the signs are that if Britain still withholds its endorsement, the other 11 will conclude an agreement among themselves outside the formal EC framework.
Leader comment, page 18; Splendid isolation, page 19
Britain banks on German doubts.
By Economics Correspondent
ALTHOUGH few summits ever produce clear-cut decisions, the main outcome of Strasbourg could be the reshaping of the European economy in the 1990s, with a process set in train which aims to create a third homogeneous bloc to challenge the United States and Japan by the end of the century.
At the nuts and bolts level, significant progress was made towards achieving a full internal market by January 1, 1993, with member countries heeding the warning of the Europen Commission president, Mr Jacques Delors, that further delays in implementing the raft of legislation could cause real problems.
On the single market, there was little dissension.
The summit unanimously agreed that a market of 320 million people would improve growth prospects and trade.
It was when the 12 started to discuss what would happen next that differences started to appear.
For the British delegation, the pace of change proposed was far too hasty.
With Eastern Europe in turmoil and the single market far from complete, it was risky to start talking about European Monetary Union and the social charter.
Mrs Thatcher sees nothing in the single market which cuts against the grain of her policies over the past decade, since it should promote the free enterprise culture within the EC.
However, most of the other members saw the social charter as a necessary counter-balance.
But, even more significantly, they viewed the goal of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) as the logical next step of a single market.
The inter-governmental conference set up at Strasbourg to look at EMU will consider two main sets of proposals.
On the one hand, the British Government is championing the idea that currencies and economies should be left to compete against each other within a system which encourages both monetary co-operation and national autonomy.
The Treasury believes its plan would lead to a convergence of inflation at a lower rate and evolution towards fixed exchange rates.
On the other hand, there is the blueprint for EMU laid down in stages two and three of the Delors report, a far more ambitious scheme which would mean a European central bank, a single currency, a framework for budgetary policy and, in effect, pave the way for political union.
For many members of the EC, that would not be a problem.
They have acknowledged that the West German economy is by far the strongest in Europe and that as members of the exchange rate mechanism their interest rates are already affected by the Bundesbank's decisions.
Some countries — such as France — see EMU as a way of winning back some power from the West Germans, since a European central bank would mean all the members of the EC having a say in how policy is conducted.
As a result, President FRanois Mitterrand's support for Chancellor Helmut Kohl's policy on German reunification at Strasbourg was dependent on the West Germans agreeing to set up the government conference by the end of next year.
However, the Italians, currently running an enormous budget deficit, may not be happy with constraints on fiscal policy, while the less-developed nations will want structural reforms to ensure that the major economies do not cream off all the benefits.
The Bundesbank sees little virtue in surrendering power to a European central bank.
Mrs Thatcher believes that an Anglo-German alliance could be forged to scupper some, if not all, of stages two and three of the Delors report.
According to some West German sources, a softening of Whitehall's hardline on the social charter would help that process.
.
By Larry Elliott Economics Correspondent
THE chances of British entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System before the next election were significantly reduced at the Strasbourg summit, as the Prime Minister maintained her hard-line opposition.
Despite the pressure which has been building up on the government in recent months, including growing dissent within her own party, she reiterated her old misgivings about the monetary system and added a new one for good measure.
Speaking at the end of the two days of talks, Mrs Thatcher said it had helped some countries combat inflation.
But she doubted whether it would work as well once the system, dominated by West Germany, was diluted by other countries less committed to the policy of bearing down on prices.
Its success had been that both the people of West Germany and its central bank, the Bundesbank, had a deep-seated fear of inflation.
They had known the effects of hyper-inflation and ‘were more fearful of it than anything else’.
There was a danger that the anti-inflation tendencies of the Bundesbank would be watered down by other European countries where control of prices was less of a priority.
‘The moment you go from the rigid and valuable discipline of German bank and people to mixing it up with other disciplines, other views, other ‘let's have a bit of inflation here and there’ economies, you lose the very thing which leads you to want to join.’
Observers saw Mrs Thatcher's comments as little more than the latest in a series of delaying tactics.
They pointed out that economies prepared to allow ‘a bit of inflation here and there’ would include Britain, where the inflation rate is already one of the highest in the European Community and set to rise from 7.3 per cent to around 8 per cent later this week.
Indeed, the other EC countries put little pressure on the British delegation to speed up the ERM process, concluding that the time for concessions to Mrs Thatcher's doubts was now over.
New challenges face Civic Forum.
By Jon Bloomfield in Prague
THE announcement yesterday of Czechoslovakia's first majority non-Communist government since February, 1948 was a dramatic victory for the umbrella opposition group, the Civic Forum.
In the three weeks since its formation, the Forum has toppled the Stalinist old guard regime and negotiated a broad-based coalition government, including several of its own nominees.
It now faces the harder and more protracted task of ensuring a smooth and efficient transition to free elections and a democratically-elected government.
After the recent heady events, the Forum is now entering a new phase.
The qualities that have stood it in such good stead will now need to be applied in a different context.
Mr Jan Urban, one of the Forum's inner core, readily acknowledges the shift.
‘We can't continue with this anarchist democracy, with everything based on goodwill and working 22 hours a day.
We shall have to change into a proper, organised, political force.
‘We shall have to prove able to provide professionally competent people for government posts.
It's easy enough to find a President, but not everybody can improve the economy.’
Stalinism is dead politically but it still dominates the security and state apparatus.
‘We have to stay together until the dragon is slain’, says Mr Urban.
But with the lure of free elections that is already proving difficult.
The jockeying for position has begun and the Civic Forum's statement that it intends to contest those elections has met with opposition from within its ranks.
The People's Party and the Czechoslovak Socialist Party, which functioned as proper political parties before 1948 and have since had a satellite existence, have begun to flex their muscles.
In Slovakia, Christian Democratic clubs have been formed before the establishment of a party, and it is expected that counterparts in Bohemia and Moravia will follow.
Following a large congress of agricultural co-operatives last weekend, preparation is in hand to form a new Peasants' Party.
And the Greens have also set themselves up.
Most significantly, perhaps, given the very deep commitment here to social justice and equality, moves are under way to establish a modern Socialist party.
Logic points to the emergence of a party that draws on both the Marxist traditions of the Prague Spring and on the social-democratic movement that was forcibly amalgamated with the Communists after 1948.
While understandable, these developments bring dangers.
As Mr Urban says: ‘Everyone wants to look colourful and be a leader but I am afraid of it.
I fear a political Balkanisation.’
It is that fragmentation that the Forum has to strive to avoid.
Yet the skill it has shown in the last three weeks suggests it is well equipped for the tricky tasks ahead.
.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
BY electing new and reform-minded leaders, East Germany's Communist party hopes to have won a breathing space in its battle for credibility and survival, six months before the first free elections are due to be held.
The new chairman, Dr Gregor Gysi, told an emergency party congress at the weekend that the SED had made a start in ‘breaking with Stalinism,’ but added that there was still a long way to go in ‘overcoming Stalinist structures’.
By electing Dr Gysi by an overwhelming majority, the SED rank-and-file made a radical break with the past, rallying behind the party and its call for a ‘democratic renewal of socialism’.
The SED underlined its willingness to leave behind old structures and traditions by abolishing both the politburo and the central committee.
It now has a chairman, four deputies and a 100-member executive.
The reforming trio of Dr Gysi, Mr Hans Modrow, and Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, the Mayor of Dresden, is now heading the party.
But in East Berlin and other East German cities yesterday, thousands joined protest marches and demanded a fundamental cleansing of the SED and thorough investigation of corruption charges against former party leaders.
Posters said the SED stood for Sauwirtschaft (piggery), Egoismus (selfishness) and Diebstahl (theft).
The party has lost half a million members since the fall of the old leaders under Mr Erich Honecker in the middle of October, and recent disclosures of corruption and economic mismanagement.
Its membership now stands at 1.78 million.
It was only after a stirring call for unity from Mr Modrow, the Prime Minister, that the 2,700 delegates rejected proposals for the SED to be dissolved and a new party founded.
However, the party will give itself a new name when it resumes the congress next weekend.
In a symbolic gesture to underline the grassroots drive for renewal, the delegates handed Dr Gysi an outsize broom with which to continue the purge of those still rooted in old thinking.
In a closed session, Mr Modrow appealed to the delegates not to allow the party to disintegrate.
He said that during his recent visit to Moscow, President Gorbachev had given a warning that the failure of East Germany's reform process would not only destabilise the GDR but also have ‘serious repercussions’ for perestroika in the Soviet Union.
Mr Modrow also criticised the party's former leader, Mr Egon Krenz, who he said had been far from honest in saying he was a reformer.
Mr Krenz, sitting dejected among the delegates in the penultimate row of the sports hall where the congress was held, stepped down as party leader a week ago.
The party congress apologised to East Germans, saying that the previous SED leaders were responsible for plunging the country into deep crisis which threatened its existence.
It promised to adopt more democratic structures and said it would be an equal partner with other political parties.
Dr Gysi pledged that glasnost and democracy would become features of East German society, but added that he did not underestimate the difficulties the party faced in regaining a measure of popular trust.
‘
First of all, we have to learn how to trust one another again.’
PAGE
Tough job ahead for new party chief.
By Our Correspondent in East Berlin
DR Gregor Gysi, East Germany's new Communist party (SED) chairman, was shunned as a dangerous idealist reformer by the country's discredited leaders only a few weeks ago.
But now the party faithful have appointed him crisis manager of a party still threatened by disintegration.
The defence lawyer, aged 41, who comes from an old Berlin Jewish family, has impressive qualifications for what may become his most difficult case so far.
His proven integrity, the inquisitorial style of the anti-corRuption drive he has led, and a combination of wit and considerable self-confidence are qualities badly needed by a party that has lost almost all credibility.
Dr Gysi made his attempt at power before 2,700 demoralised party delegates at this weekend's emergency congress as if delivering an impassioned plea in court, throwing up his arms and heaving his shoulders as he made a point.
The only candidate, he received 95 per cent of the votes.
He will head the party at least until a regular party congress confirms the new leadership structure ahead of East Germany's first free elections next May.
Dr Gysi had the advantage of being a completely new face in mainstream East German politics, after previously concentrating on defending dissidents and fighting for the recognition of opposition groups.
With his tie awry, an alert pair of eyes sparkling behind gold-rimmed spectacles, he impressed the party by coming to the point rather than indulging in what he called the prefabricated speeches he had always hated.
Dr Gysi, who has worked as a lawyer since 1971, and is divorced with two children, is the son of Dr Klaus Gysi, a former East German minister of culture, ambassador to Rome, and state secretary for church affairs.
The father opposed Hitler and spent a year in a Nazi concentration camp in occupied France, then returned to Berlin in 1945 to help build a new Germany.
The younger Dr Gysi used a term from the 1920s when he said he stood for a ‘third path between Stalinism and capitalism’.
Recalling that ‘this country was built on ruins’, he added that it remained his aim to strive for a classless society.
‘I would describe myself as a Communist but other Socialist traditions are also important.’
Points of accord.
By Reuter in Strasbourg
THE European Community leaders attending the summit here agreed to:
Help Eastern European countries embracing democracy, and declare support for the reform policies of President Mikhail Gorbachev;
Endorse reunification of the two Germanys
Accelerate the EC's drive towards economic and monetary union andmeet in the second half of 1990 to consider creating a single currency and a European central bank;
Adopt, with the exception of Britain, a charter guaranteeing workers' rights in the single European market to be created in 1992.
Dalai Lama warns Chinese.
By AP in Oslo
THE Dalai Lama, accepting the Nobel Peace Prize yesterday, warned he is reconsidering proposals to China to end the 40-year political struggle and occupation of his Himalayan homeland, Tibet.
The exiled spiritual and political leader of Tibet was awarded the prize for his advocacy of non-violence in seeking an end to Chinese rule.
He said China's rejection of his 1987 plan, which drew criticism from his own supporters as being too conciliatory, was forcing him to rethink his approach.
But ‘our struggle must remain non-violent and free of hatred,’ he added.
The Dalai Lama, who fled to exile in India after a failed uprising in 1959, has called for Tibetan autonomy over domestic affairs, with China retaining control over military and diplomatic affairs.
Beijing has rejected his formula.
In Beijing, the Communist Party's official newspaper People's Daily sharply criticised the Dalai Lama and the Norwegian Nobel Committee for its choice.
China's Foreign Ministry spokesman, Mr Jin Guihua, said the peace prize served only to encourage Tibetan separatists in their attempt to undermine the unity of the Chinese nation.
He called the Nobel decision ‘gross interference in China's internal affairs’.
The Dalai Lama sent a message of encouragement to the democratic movement in China, which was suppressed with tanks in Tiananmen Square.
‘In China the popular movement for democracy was crushed by brutal force in June this year.
But I do not believe the demonstrations were in vain, because the spirit of freedom has been rekindled among the Chinese people,’ he said.
Mitterrand in immigrant call.
President Franois Mitterrand of France yesterday called for the deportation of illegal immigrants and for sanctions against their employers, but said he believed guest workers should have voting rights.
His remarks, in a television interview, followed big electoral gains by the anti-immigrant far-right National Front.
-Reuter.
Roof kills Briton.
A British tourist, Mr Edward Gait, and a West German were crushed to death and 12 other foreigners were injured when a restaurant roof collapsed in Arona, Tenerife, police said yesterday.
-Reuter.
Food crisis.
The Sudanese Government said yesterday that three towns — including Juba, the biggest in the south — are about to run out of food.
Brigadier Dominic Kassiano, a member of the ruling junta, told the army newspaper Guwat al-Mussalah that food supplies in the towns of Juba, Wau, and Malakal would not last long.
-Reuter.
Belgian canonised.
The Pope yesterday canonised a Belgian cleric and teacher, Mutien Marie Wiaux, who died early this century.
-Reuter.
Troop pullout plan.
Fighting erupted in Beirut yesterday shortly after President Elias Hrawi was quoted as saying that Syrian troops would leave parts of Lebanon as soon as he had overcome the resistance of troops of General Michel Aoun in the Christian enclave.
-Reuter.
Taiwan anniversary.
Thousands of Taiwanese rallied yesterday to mark the 10th anniversary of an anti-government riot and demand the release of dissidents involved in the 1979 incident.
Opposition leaders made speeches during the gathering in the southern city of Kaohsiung, and some planned to walk along the route where the disturbances occurred.
-Reuter.
Operation for PM.
The Israeli Prime Minister, Mr Yitzhak Shamir, went into hospital yesterday for a hernia operation.
-Reuter.
Bus crash deaths.
At least 19 people were killed when a bus skidded off the road into a ditch in India's northeastern Assam state yesterday, the Press Trust of India reported.
-Reuter.
Passports promise.
MPs demanded yesterday that the Jordan Government free all political detainees.
The Prime Minister, Mr Mudar Badran, responded with promises to return passports confiscated from people suspected of political offences and amnesties for opponents.
-Reuter.
Chad elections.
Voters lined up before dawn in Chad yesterday to participate in the first national election in 20 years in this war-torn former French colony.
A ‘yes’ vote is expected in the referendum on a new constitution.
-Reuter..
Malaysia visit.
Sir Michael Quinlan, Britain's permanent under-secretary of defence, arrived in Kuala Lumpur yesterday for three days of talks about purchases of military equipment.
-Reuter.
Superpower talks mooted in C America.
By Simon Tisdall in San Jose, Costa Rica
THE United States and Soviet Union will be invited to take part directly in resolving the conflicts in El Salvador and Nicaragua, under proposals worked out by the foreign ministers of the five Central American peace plan countries in a pre-summit meeting here.
The plan envisages ‘dialogues’ between the rebels of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and the Salvadorean government, and between Nicaragua's Sandinista Government and the contras.
The talks would be held under the auspices of the UN International Commission for Support and Verification (CIAV), perhaps in the context of an international conference attended by the secretary-generals of the UN and the Organisation of American States.
The US and the Soviet Union would send representatives to both sets of talks.
In San Salvador, meanwhile, the FMLN issued a communique setting down its conditions for a truce.
The communique, sent to the Central American meeting through Venezuela's President Carlos Andres Perez, called for an immediate ceasefire, but demanded that several high-ranking military officers be scrapped and recent anti-terrorist laws be repealed.
The rebel terms were immediately rejected.
The plan to involve the superpowers is said to have the backing of President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica, the main motivator of the peace process.
The invitation to the superpowers, if approved at the Central American summit which opened belatedly here yesterday, could provide a way out of the continuing confrontation between the US and the Sandinistas and ensure free elections in Nicaragua in February.
The US could also use its influence with the Salvadorean Government and army to achieve a ceasefire and eventual settlement, it was suggested.
Central America is the only remaining area of foreign policy dispute between the superpowers.
Bringing in the superpowers, however, would force an unwilling Washington to confront the problems caused by its continuing non-military support for the contras.
On the other hand, Sandinista backing for the FMLN rebels would be likely to prove untenable.
So far the US, like the European Community, has preferred to leave the Central American leaders to work out their own solutions.
Last Friday, the US rejected a Soviet suggestion that the two superpowers act as guarantors of the peace process.
The discovery of 24 Sam-7 anti-aircraft missiles in the debris of a light plane which crashed in El Salvador last month threatened to wreck the summit and led the Salvadoreans to suspend relations with Nicaragua.
The issues of weapons shipments, attempts to achieve a ceasefire in El Salvador, and the stalled demobilisation of the contras were expected to dominate the two-day summit, which Mr Arias described at the weekend as critical to the future of the peace process.
Mr Arias, and the Honduran and Guatemalan presidents appeared pessimistic about prospects for the meeting.
Their gloom was deepened by exchanges at the foreign ministers' meeting, when Nicaragua accused Costa Rica and Honduras of conniving in support of the contras.
Sharp exchanges were also expected between the presidents of El Salvador and Nicaragua, Mr Alfredo Cristiani and Mr Daniel Ortega, over the missiles affair.
On arrival, however, Mr Cristiani said he was looking for reconciliation and wanted a ceasefire in El Salvador.
Mr Arias said at the weekend that the ‘mimimum for success’ was an agreement for an end to military operations by both sides in El Salvador.
The other main subject of discussion will be the refusal of the contras to demobilise under the terms of the Tela accord signed by the presidents last August.
Although the Sandinistas have repeatedly pledged democratic elections in February, Mr Arias was said to be fearful that a failure to disarm, relocate or disband the contras could provoke a Sandinista cross-border sweep against the rebels and cancellation of the polls.
Military ‘no coup’ pledge.
By Reuter in Sargodha, Pakistan
PAKISTAN'S army chief pledged yesterday that the day of military coups there was over and he sought no role in government.
Speaking to reporters during Pakistan's biggest military manoeuvres, General Mirza Aslam Beg said the army was dedicated to forging itself into a formidable fighting force and had no ambitions to meddle again in politics.
‘If I had any political objectives I would have been sitting in my cantonment (barracks) scheming and planning,’ Gen Beg said.
Pakistan's history has been punctuated by army coups and periods of martial law, but Gen Beg has played a major stablising role since the death of military president Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq in August last year.
There were fears that the army would take over after Gen Zia died in an unexplained air crash, but Gen Beg made it clear that he favoured holding the elections that brought Benazir Bhutto to power.
Briefing reporters at the control headquarters for the Zarb- e-Momin exercises near Sargodha, he said the army ‘is not going to repeat the same history again’.
Pakistan's military appears instead to be concerned with the country's neighbour and traditional foe — India.
Under the present Prime Minister, Ms Benazir Bhutto, relations have warmed but Pakistan's military remains unconvinced.
All Pakistan's military resources, bolstered by 150,000 troops freed in February from the eastern border with Afghanistan, are directed at India.
India and Pakistan have fought three wars since independence from Britain in 1947.
Emergency Communist party congress makes radical break with the past East German leader pleads for time to reform state.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
BY electing new and reform-minded leaders, East Germany's Communist party hopes to have won a breathing space in its battle for credibility and survival, six months before the first free elections are due to be held.
The new chairman, Dr Gregor Gysi, told an emergency party congress at the weekend that the SED had made a start in ‘breaking with Stalinism,’ but added that there was still a long way to go in ‘overcoming Stalinist structures’.
By electing Dr Gysi by an overwhelming majority, the SED rank-and-file made a radical break with the past, rallying behind the party and its call for a ‘democratic renewal of socialism’.
The SED underlined its willingness to leave behind old structures and traditions by abolishing the politburo and the central committee.
It now has a chairman, four deputies and a 100-member executive.
The reforming trio of Dr Gysi, Mr Hans Modrow, and Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, the Mayor of Dresden, now heads the party.
But in East Berlin and other East German cities yesterday, thousands joined protest marches and demanded a fundamental cleansing of the SED and thorough investigation of corruption charges against former party leaders.
Posters said the SED stood for Sauwirtschaft (piggery), Egoismus (selfishness) and Diebstahl (theft).
The party has lost half a million members since the fall of the old leaders under Mr Erich Honecker in the middle of October, and recent disclosures of corruption and economic mismanagement.
Its membership now stands at 1.78 million.
It was only after a stirring call for unity from Mr Modrow, the Prime Minister, that the 2,700 delegates rejected proposals for the SED to be dissolved and a new party founded.
However, the party will give itself a new name when it resumes the congress next weekend.
In a symbolic gesture to underline the grassroots drive for renewal, the delegates handed Dr Gysi an outsize broom with which to continue the purge of those still rooted in old thinking.
In a closed session, Mr Modrow appealed to the delegates not to allow the party to disintegrate.
He said that during his recent visit to Moscow, President Gorbachev had given a warning that the failure of East Germany's reform process would not only destabilise the GDR but also have ‘serious repercussions’ for perestroika in the Soviet Union.
Mr Modrow also criticised the party's former leader, Mr Egon Krenz, who he said had been far from honest in saying he was a reformer.
Mr Krenz, sitting dejected among the delegates in the penultimate row of the sports hall where the congress was held, stepped down as party leader a week ago.
The party congress apologised to East Germans, saying that previous SED leaders plunged the country into deep crisis which threatened its existence.
It promised to adopt more democratic structures and said it would be an equal partner with other political parties.
Dr Gysi pledged that glasnost and democracy would become features of East German society, but added that he did not underestimate the difficulties the party faced in regaining a measure of popular trust.
‘
First of all, we have to learn how to trust one another again.’
Aquino calls for harsh penalties.
By Reuter in Manila
PRESIDENT Corazon Aquino yesterday called for tough sentences against coup leaders while the military launched a big manhunt to track down those still at large.
‘We have to make sure that justice is done, that those who are guilty will be meted out the full penalty,’ she told reporters after attending a funeral service for a pilot who died wiping out the rebels' air support in last week's attempt to overthrow her.
Her call came after the surrender of the last group of rebels holding out at a military air base at Mactan in the central Philippines.
A military spokesman said that a batch of 120 had been put on a ship to return to their units in Cagayan de Oro on the southern island of Mindanao.
The maximum penalty for mutiny in the Philippines is a life sentence, but in five previous coup attempts the most severe punishment for leaders was 12 years' hard labour.
Urging the country to unite behind her after the trauma of the sixth uprising against her government in less than four years, Ms Aquino said she was determined not to allow ‘any aggressor to wrest our freedom and democracy away from us.
Two air force helicopters dropped flowers from the sky during the service for air force Major Danilo Atienza, who died after destroying rebel planes which had attacked Ms Aquino's palace on December 1.
The military said it had launched a big manhunt for army coup leaders who escaped when their men surrendered.
The armed forces chief-of-staff, General Renato de Villa, told reporters the military was asking President Aquino to offer cash rewards to those who turn in rebel leaders.
Around 400 leftwing priests, students and human rights activists staged a demonstration near Ms Aquino's palace yesterday and condemned her for seeking US help to crush the coup attempt.
They urged people to join Communist guerrillas to overthrow her government and later marched to the US embassy where they chanted ‘out with US bases’ and mocked President George Bush for offering military aid to Aquino.
An armed forces spokesman, Mr Oscar Florendo, said about 1,800 rebel officers and men had surrendered since the six-day coup attempt was snuffed out in Manila last Thursday.
Still at large were several of the top men, including cashiered Colonel Gregorio Gringo Honasan, leader of a coup attempt against Ms Aquino in August 1987, and Lieutenant-Colonel Rafael Galvez, who led a siege of Manila's business district.
Kashmir set to give in to kidnappers.
By Derek Brown in New Delhi
FRANTIC attempts were being made last night in the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir to negotiate with the secessionist rebels who kidnapped the daughter of the Indian Home Minister, Mufti Mohammed Sayeed.
Ms Rubiya Sayeed, aged 21, has not been seen since Friday night, when she was seized by seven gunmen from a minibus in the state capital, Srinagar.
The kidnappers, claiming to belong to the Jammu and Kashmir National Liberation Front (JKNLF), later demanded the release of five imprisoned militants.
They said Ms Sayeed would be killed unless the five were freed by 7pm today.
But last night, JKNLF leaders in Pakistan, where the movement maintains its headquarters in exile, said they would postpone the execution until it became ‘unavoidable’.
Mr Amanullah Khan, chairman of the JKNLF, told a press conference in Rawalpindi that Ms Sayeed should not be condemned for the crimes of her father, whom he denounced as a traitor.
Mr Khan was deported from Britain some years ago, after Kashmiri militants killed a Birmingham-based Indian diplomat.
He denied that he had prior knowledge of Ms Sayeed's abduction, but confirmed that the JKNLF leadership was in contact with its ‘field workers’.
Last night, the Jammu and Kashmir Minister, Mr Mangat Ram Sharma, said the state government would comply with the kidnappers' demand.
But negotiations had been complicated by the militants changing the names of the men they wanted out of prison.
Mr Sharma told the United News of India agency: ‘I am sure an agreement will be reached with the militants tonight or tomorrow morning, as we will release the terrorists demanded by them.’
Three of the five men named in the latest militant list were brought to Srinagar last night.
Two others are imprisoned in the state capital.
The kidnap poses a severe test for the infant government of the Prime Minister, Mr Vishwanath Pratap Singh, which has been in power only nine days.
The appointment of the mufti was applauded as a bold gesture of reconciliation to the Muslim community.
Delhi's response has been complicated by the existence of the lame-duck Kashmiri state government of Dr Farooq Abdullah, who fought last month's general election in alliance with the then governing Congress party, and which is deeply unpopular in the valley.
To augment the state machinery, the central government has rushed senior officials and team of troops from the Black Cat commando unit to Srinagar.
Meanwhile, there has been a torrent of condemnation of the kidnapping, including several from Indian Muslim groups, who denounced it as grossly un-Islamic.
Ms Sayeed, a third-year medical student, was not involved in the turbulent politics of the Kashmir Valley.
The JKNLF and several other militant groups have stepped up their campaigns of civil unrest, strikes, and outright terrorism, to press their demands for a free Kashmir or union with Pakistan.
Delhi has blamed the unrest on Islamabad, accusing it of arming, training and inspiring the subversives, a charge Pakistan denies.
Superpower talks mooted in C America.
By Simon Tisdall in San Jose, Costa Rica
THE United States and Soviet Union will be invited to take part directly in resolving the conflicts in El Salvador and Nicaragua, under proposals worked out by the foreign ministers of the five Central American peace plan countries in a pre-summit meeting here.
The plan envisages ‘dialogues’ between the rebels of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and the Salvadorean government, and between Nicaragua's Sandinista Government and the contras.
The talks would be held under the auspices of the UN International Commission for Support and Verification (CIAV), perhaps in the context of an international conference attended by the secretary-generals of the UN and the Organisation of American States.
The US and the Soviet Union would send representatives to both sets of talks.
In San Salvador, meanwhile, the FMLN issued a communique setting down its conditions for a truce.
The communique, sent to the Central American meeting through Venezuela's President Carlos Andres Perez, called for an immediate ceasefire, but demanded that several high-ranking military officers be scrapped and recent anti-terrorist laws be repealed.
The rebel terms were immediately rejected.
The plan to involve the superpowers is said to have the backing of President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica, the main motivator of the peace process.
The invitation to the superpowers, if approved at the Central American summit which opened belatedly here yesterday, could provide a way out of the continuing confrontation between the US and the Sandinistas and ensure free elections in Nicaragua in February.
The US could also use its influence with the Salvadorean Government and army to achieve a ceasefire and eventual settlement, it was suggested.
Central America is the only remaining area of foreign policy dispute between the superpowers.
Bringing in the superpowers, however, would force an unwilling Washington to confront the problems caused by its continuing non-military support for the contras.
On the other hand, Sandinista backing for the FMLN rebels would be likely to prove untenable.
So far the US, like the European Community, has preferred to leave the Central American leaders to work out their own solutions.
Last Friday, the US rejected a Soviet suggestion that the two superpowers act as guarantors of the peace process.
The discovery of 24 Sam-7 anti-aircraft missiles in the debris of a light plane which crashed in El Salvador last month threatened to wreck the summit and led the Salvadoreans to suspend relations with Nicaragua.
The issues of weapons shipments, attempts to achieve a ceasefire in El Salvador, and the stalled demobilisation of the contras were expected to dominate the two-day summit, which Mr Arias described at the weekend as critical to the future of the peace process.
Mr Arias, and the Honduran and Guatemalan presidents appeared pessimistic about prospects for the meeting.
Their gloom was deepened by exchanges at the foreign ministers' meeting, when Nicaragua accused Costa Rica and Honduras of conniving in support of the contras.
Sharp exchanges were also expected between the presidents of El Salvador and Nicaragua, Mr Alfredo Cristiani and Mr Daniel Ortega, over the missiles affair.
On arrival, however, Mr Cristiani said he was looking for reconciliation and wanted a ceasefire in El Salvador.
Mr Arias said at the weekend that the ‘mimimum for success’ was an agreement for an end to military operations by both sides in El Salvador.
The other main subject of discussion will be the refusal of the contras to demobilise under the terms of the Tela accord signed by the presidents last August.
Although the Sandinistas have repeatedly pledged democratic elections in February, Mr Arias was said to be fearful that a failure to disarm, relocate or disband the contras could provoke a Sandinista cross-border sweep against the rebels and cancellation of the polls.
Slave debate revived in US.
By Martin Walker in Washington
THE long-mocked idea of reparations to compensate black Americans for the slavery experienced by their ancestors is now before the US Congress, and its supporters say the $1.25 billion package to compensate Japanese-Americans who were interned during the second world war has created a legal precedent.
Mr John Conyers, a black Democratic congressman from Detroit, has introduced legislation to establish a federal commission to study the impact of slavery upon blacks and to recommend to Congress a range of appropriate remedies, including possible reparations.
A full reparations bill has no realistic chance of being enacted, but it promises to re-open a potentially bruising debate about the black experience in the US.
In the last session, Congress passed a bill to give some 60,000 Japanese-Americans compensation of about $20,000 (£12,500) each for having been interned, without trial, simply for being Japanese, after the 1941 Japanese assault on Pearl Harbour.
Lawyers are already claiming there is no real precedent, because the Japanese being compensated are those who personally experienced internment, whereas no US black can claim direct and personal damage by ‘the peculiar institution’.
‘Reparations has been on the agenda for almost every generation of black Americans,’ said Mr Walter Fauntroy, the District of Columbia's representative in Congress.
‘It helps promote and stimulate more thinking about making adequate restitution for black slaves.’
Mr Kwame Afo, a leader of the Provisional Government of the Republic of New Africa, one of the nationalist groups prominent in the campaign for reparations, estimated the costs to the US Government of proper reparation at some $4.1 trillion — close to a full year of the US gross national product.
Mr Afo's organisation also demands that Congress grant blacks the five southern states of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and South Carolina to be established as a separate nation.
Security police wait for boot as people's power arrives.
By Reuter in East Berlin
EAST Germany's vast security police apparatus, once a fearsome state within a state, looks like becoming the next centre of Stalinist power to fall to the country's ‘people power’ revolution.
The hulking headquarters of the Office for National Security, which has branches across the country, stands behind a high wall, cameras on its roof trained on the streets all around.
But on the inside, the revolution has already arrived.
Police stand guard, not to keep people out but to ensure nothing is taken away as investigators sift through secret files, looking for evidence of official misdeeds.
The security apparatus, known as Stasi by the people who feared it, is on its last legs after 39 years of running agents, snooping on dissidents and harassing critics of the ruling Communist party.
Its former head, Mr Erich Mielke, for years the man who knew all the secrets and pulled all the strings, is under arrest and facing corruption charges.
The new head, Lieutenant-General Wolfgang Schwanitz, has rushed to polish its tarnished image by opening its doors to citizens demanding entry and cutting staff by 50 per cent.
Those who do leave are having problems finding employers who will take them on, or being accepted by new colleagues.
‘This office has been so discredited that I think it has to be disbanded,’ the party's new reformist leader, Dr Gregor Gysi, said at the weekend.
The exact size of its staff is secret but was estimated at about 20,000 in the early 1980s.
The final decision on their fate lies with the government.
East Germans expect it to scrap the security police wing while shifting its intelligence work to the interior ministry or a new agency.