

Gorbachev tough over German unity.
By John Rettie in Moscow
IN HIS strongest warning yet that Moscow would brook no attempt to reunify the two Germanys, President Gorbachev has pledged that the Soviet Union would ensure ‘no harm’ came to East Germany.
The German Democratic Republic ‘is our strategic ally and a member of the Warsaw Pact,’ he told a Central Committee meeting on Saturday.
In an implicit reminder that 380,000 Soviet troops were still stationed on East German soil, he said: ‘We firmly declared that we will see to it that no harm comes to the GDR.’
The Soviet Union was doing everything possible to ‘prevent interference from outside and to neutralise attempts at such interference’ in socialist countries undergoing dramatic political change in Eastern Europe, notably East Germany.
But ‘some western countries cannot resist the temptation to influence the processes under way.’
Noting that Communists were either sharing power or had lost it in several countries, he promised Moscow would not interfere in the internal affairs of any east European nation, since it believed in the free right of all states to choose their own system.
But, he warned, ‘they are not only our allies, but also our friends and neighbours.
We seek to ensure progress and stability in every way, as well as the inviolability of the post-war frontiers of all European states.’
Post-war realities had to be recognised, and this meant the existence of two sovereign German states, members of the United Nations.
‘Departure from this threatens to destabilise Europe.’
However, Mr Gorbachev made clear this did not mean the entire relationship between the two Germanys had to be frozen for ever.
‘Peaceful co-operation between them can and must develop.
As for the future, it will take shape in the course of history,’ within a European framework.
Speaking approvingly of his recent meetings with various European leaders, Mr Gorbachev singled out President Mitterrand, whom he met in Kiev last week, for special praise, particularly because of his ‘respect for present realities and the inviolability of established borders.’
He spoke optimistically about better relations between East and West in Europe, as well as improving ties with the United States.
This not only gave good grounds for peace and stability in Europe, but also opened up the prospect for bigger cuts in military spending.
This should do much to ease the burden the arms race had put on the Soviet economy.
Important differences with Washington remained, ‘but it is important that a different, more businesslike and reasonable approach has appeared.
Accordingly, we are now taking a more optimistic view on prospects for a peaceful settlement.’
No compromise, says deselected Labour MP.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE Labour MP, Mr Frank Field, who was deselected by his Birkenhead constituency party on Friday night, is expected to tell Mr Neil Kinnock today that he will not compromise on his demand for one member, one vote in the party.
Mr Field, MP for Birkenhead since 1979, won a majority of the individual members' votes in last week's secret ballot.
He is unlikely to be satisfied with an offer to re-run the reselection procedure if it can be proved that there have been any serious breaches of the party's rules.
Mr Field lost the nomination to a local Transport and General Workers' union official, Mr Paul Davies, because he failed to secure sufficient votes in the trade union section.
A Labour Party spokesman said yesterday that Mr Kinnock would ask for evidence of Mr Field's claims of Militant activity in the Birkenhead party when he meets the MP today.
‘In order to be valid, the reselection in Birkenhead had to be run in accordance with the rule book,’ he added.
‘If there is evidence to the contrary, then the National Executive Committee will act.
All that is material to this case is what substantial evidence Frank has to back up his claim about Militant infiltration.
Everything else is immaterial.’
The Labour leadership is keen to separate the issues of one member, one vote and the controversy surrounding the reselection in Birkenhead which has been run under the local electoral college rules approved by the party conference.
Senior party figures argue that it is impossible for the rules to be changed to restore the nomination to the sitting MP.
Any retrospective rule change would place a question mark over the reselections of Mr George Galloway in Glasgow Hillhead and Mr Ron Brown in Edinburgh Leith, who were both nominated on a majority of trade union votes.
Mr Field has agreed not to make any statement about his next course of action before his 11.30am meeting with Mr Kinnock, but he said that his supporters in Birkenhead had told him they did not want to see a fudge.
Mr Field has previously threatened to force a byelection if he won a majority of the individual votes.
‘My supporters in Birkenhead have been telling me I should not be in a mood to compromise,’ he said.
‘They do not want a fix but a resolution of the issues, that the Labour Party moves to becoming more democratic and an immediate resolution of the situation on Merseyside.
‘When you have the Russian empire collapsing within a matter of weeks it seems ridiculous to say we cannot move faster.’
Although Mr Kinnock and leading party figures have publicly backed moves towards one member, one vote in the party the annual conference is not due to discuss the issue until 1991.
The influential soft-left pressure group, the Labour Co-ordinating Committee, yesterday issued a statement saying that unless impropriety could be proved the result in Birkenhead should stand.
‘The only way to resolve this problem is for the leadership to announce its intention to propose rule changes for next year's party conference to introduce straight, undiluted one member, one vote for the selection of party candidates,’ it added.
‘In the meantime everyone in the party has a responsibility to stick to the rules agreed by the party conference.’
Mr Davies yesterday offered to re-run the contest under the party's 1985 rules when the matter was decided at the party's general management committee by delegates elected by wards and the trade unions.
‘I am not interested whatsoever in causing any damage to the Labour movement,’ he said.
‘It is my life.
As he [Mr Field]was elected and then reselected under the old 1985 procedure and he accepted those victories with a certain amount of good grace, I would hope he would accept that procedure.
If he loses I hope he would accept it with equal good grace and if he wins I will be a good loser and help him out in the general election.’
But Mr Field immediately rejected the offer, saying he was not surprised that Mr Davies had not suggested re-running it on a vote of the individual membership.
‘Birkenhead has finished the block vote,’ he added.
Mr Field has also written to Mr Rod Todd, general secretary of the TGWU, demanding an inquiry into the union's branches on the Wirral, Merseyside, before the selection procedure was under way.
Mr Todd made clear at the weekend that he thought Mr Field was a bad loser, saying he appeared to think he was God's gift to Birkenhead.
The reselection went to two rounds.
The first round result was: Individual members' section: Frank Field 159, Paul Davies 75, Cathy Wilson (Militant supporter) 48.
Trade union section: Field 15, Davies 25, Wilson 11.
On the second round Ms Wilson was eliminated.
Individual members' section: Field 165; Davies 113.
Trade Unions: Field 16, Davies 35.
Since the trade union votes count for 40 per cent of the local electoral college, Mr Davies was declared the nominee.
Some 282 of the 410 members of the Birkenhead party voted in the contest.
Final bid to salvage £5bn plan for station.
ALAST ditch attempt to salvage the £5 billion scheme to redevelop King's Cross station will be made by British Rail tomorrow, writes Michael Smith.
A special committee of MPs meets to decide the fate of a controversial bill under which the main line and underground stations would be transformed and a new terminal and platform built for Channel Tunnel trains.
The committee, chaired by Mr Neil Hamilton, Tory MP for Tatton, was forced to delay a decision last week when two Labour MPs, Mr Bob Clay (Sunderland North) and Mr George Galloway (Hillhead) could not attend.
Tomorrow's meeting is seen as the last opportunity to decide on the bill which would allow redevelopment to commence in 1991.
BR regards the 120-acre project as a unique opportunity to relieve congestion on crowded suburban commuter services, upgrade InterCity facilities, and provide the necessary increase in capacity to cope with the Channel Tunnel rail link.
Postponement would mean a two-year delay in improving services from King's Cross and the nearby St Pancras station and the implementation of safety measures arising from the King's Cross underground fire in 1987.
Local residents and the London boroughs of Camden and Islington want the redevelopment shelved until the Commons has seen the delayed bill for the high speed rail link, not now due to be resubmitted until next November.
The boroughs also express fears that redevelopment will mean worsening traffic congestion and the loss of homes and jobs.
BR is expected to argue that the location of the Channel Tunnel terminal at King's Cross is secondary to the major improvement in domestic services and will call the BR Property Board chairman, Sir James Swaffield, and London Regeneration Corporation chief, Mr Godfrey Bradman, to back up its case.
Safe drink limit is challenged.
By Stephen Cook
DRINKING limits currently recommended by doctors are challenged in a book which says an extremist ‘anti-alcohol lobby’ has become too influential.
One contributor to Drinking to Your Health, published today, says that most men can drink up to 70 measures of alcohol a week without seriously affecting their health, but 42 measures would be safe.
Dr Thomas Stuttaford, a former Conservative MP who works for the private health group, Bupa, also says moderate drinking can reduce stress, prevent heart disease, provide nutrition, and help relaxation.
The medical Royal Colleges recently agreed that 21 measures a week for men and 14 for women is sensible.
Damage to liver, brain and muscles begins above that, they say.
A measure is a half pint, a glass of wine, or a pub spirit.
The book is published by the Social Affairs Unit, a rightwing pressure group headed by Dr Digby Anderson.
His introduction says that experts' recommendations will soon amount to teetotalism.
He said yesterday that there was studies of harm from alcohol varied greatly, and the basis for 14 and 21 was ‘not all that solid.’
Other contributors say that informal social restraints on drinking are more effective than government control, advertising does not induce excessive drinking, and random breath testing might reduce drink-driving.
Education about alcohol in schools cannot compensate for home and community, it is argued, and education should value alcohol use and encourage individual responsibility.
Mr Don Steele, spokesman for Action on Alcohol Abuse, said the book tried to revive arguments that the industry lost three years ago.
He defended the 14 and 21 figures, which most people stayed under.
‘We're not anti-alcohol, but we're worried about health and marketing.
Twenty per cent of people in hospital are there because they drink too much.’
EC to soothe Moscow on Germany.
By John Palmer in Strasbourg
EUROPEAN Community leaders will move quickly this week to reassure the Soviet Union that their support for the future ‘unity’ of the German people at the weekend EC summit is conditional on the maintenance of peace and stability in Europe.
President Franois Mitterrand will spell out the conditions for unification set by the European Community governments to President Gorbachev.
The same message will be delivered when the ambassadors of the Four Powers — Britain, France, the United States and the Soviet Union — meet in Berlin today.
The meeting, believed to have been suggested by the Soviet Union, is the first such encounter since 1971.
This implies a dramatic shift in Moscow's non-committal stance on the Western allies' 1987 Berlin Initiative, which is expected to be the main subject of today's talks.
The plan calls for Berlin to be made a centre for international conferences and youth exchanges and for improving air traffic to the city.
It also suggests picking Berlin as an Olympic Games site.
The summit declaration on Germany, which spoke about ‘unity’ rather than‘reunification’, was reached after a protracted and at times acrimonious debate among the 12 EC heads of government.
Although the summit unanimously endorsed the declaration, one foreign minister said later: ‘We leave Strasbourg with some sense of unfinished business over the German question.’
There was a sense of nervousness about the evolution of the East German situation.
‘The fact that the regime has so quickly and so completely imploded in East Germany could risk a reunification of Germany almost by default before long,’ one diplomat said.
‘The key question is how will the Federal Chancellor and his government play this whole issue in their own general election next year?’
‘If they are tempted to play the nationalist card to ensure their re-election and counter the far right Republicans, that could make the Soviet Union very uneasy indeed,’ he went on.
‘If the process is allowed to achieve a more relaxed rhythm of its own and we are given enough time to handle the international consequences, the Soviet leadership probably could live with the kind of confederal links between the two Germanys which are under discussion now.’
For her part, Mrs Thatcher emphasised that the references to future German unity in the declaration was ‘a very carefully drafted section and we spent a very long time on it’.
The summit declaration said: ‘We seek the strengthening of the state of peace in Europe on which the German people will regain its unity through free self determination.
This process should take place peacefully and democratically, in full respect of the relevant agreements and treaties and in all the principles defined in the Helsinki Final Act, in the context of dialogue and East-West co-operation.
It has also to be placed in the perspective of European integration.’
The summit also agreed to aim at completing an ambitious co-operation agreement with the new government in East Germany before the middle of next year.
This could lead to a democratic East Germany moving on a ‘fast track’ to a privileged form of associate membership of the Community ahead of other reforming East European states by virtues of its very close economic links with West Germany.
turn to page 20, col 4
EC reassures Moscow on unity continued from page one The Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, is expected in Brussels on Wednesday to sign a trade and co-operation agreement with the EC, French officials said.
The 12 EC foreign ministers will, on the same day, join a meeting of the 24 Western industrialised nations to review emergency aid to Hungary and Poland.
While accelerating moves towards faster internal integration, the Strasbourg summit also set an equally tight timetable for setting up a common ‘European economic area’ by the end of next year with the six countries of the European Free Trade Association.
The commercial aspect of this 18-nation common market are relatively uncontentious but what remains to be resolved is how far the EFTA governments will be consulted before decisions of the EC Council of Ministers.
The Irish Government, which takes over the Presidency of the European Community at the end of the month has expressed its determination to give higher priority to environmental issues.
Having simply ignored Mrs Thatcher's opposition to economic and monetary union and the Social Charter, EC leaders were at pains not to underline her complete isolation.
President Mitterrand spoke of his ‘respect’ for her arguments, Chancellor Kohl said she had ‘not refused her co-operation’, and Mr Haughey said she had ‘participated fully’.
Given Mrs Thatcher's relatively non-confrontational stance at Strasbourg, they hope by the time key decisions have to be taken over EMU next year, the British Government will have reviewed its EC strategy.
Delors plan, page 7; Leader comment, page 18; Michael White on splendid isolation, Elie Wiesel on German reunification page 19
Fast moves on soccer draw.
By Staff Reporters
THE English soccer authorities have moved with uncharacteristic speed to try to minimise possible fall-out from the World Cup meeting of England and Holland, the European teams whose supporters are most associated with hooliganism, in the Sardinian capital of Cagliari next summer.
Cagliari — population 225,000, stadium capacity 38,800 — is a city with its own strong soccer culture, and its own football hero, Luigi Riva (pictured below, and, left, as celebrated by a lifesize statue in a local bar), who played for Cagliari as a left-winger when they won their one Italian league title in 1970 and was a prodigious scorer.
After the World Cup draw at the weekend, which paired teams to play in Sardinia, the Football Association chief executive, Mr Graham Kelly, spoke with his Dutch counterpart and said there would be close liaison in the next few months.
Ticket allocations will be of particular concern.
‘We have to get it all battened down very tightly,’ he added.
Mr Millichip has also held discussions with officials of the Irish Republic — also drawn in the same group.
Mr Kelly said that everything would be strictly controlled in Cagliari.
‘The points of entry will be very closely watched and we will co-operate fully with the authorities in Sardinia.
‘We started talking and planning months ago.
Now the build-up will become intense.’
The pairing was the one feared most, because of painful memories of violence at last year's European championship in West Germany.
But Mr Kelly said: ‘A lot of people are applying to join our travel club.
We are hopeful that it will be a true festival of football.’
Not only do the World Cup organisers have to keep England's and Holland's supporters apart, they will also have to cope with Ireland's peaceful ‘green army’, which could number 20,000.
But the FA pointed out that Holland and the Irish Republic would be based primarily in Sicily and would play only one game each in Sardinia.
Mr Colin Moynihan, the sports minister is expected to visit Italy again in early spring, perhaps travelling to Sardinia.
Fifa, soccer's world governing body, played down the pairing.
A spokesman, Mr Guido Tognoni, said: ‘I have the feeling everyone expects hooligans, but we are being more positive.’
Mr Roberto Dal Cortivo, the Cagliari official responsible for sport, sounded optimistic.
‘We are not worried about violence.
Every city wanted these teams — they pull in a big crowd.’
Mr Antonio Matarrese, head of the Italian Olympic Committee, suggested that having the match in Sardinia might be something of a blessing.
‘That way the supporters can be more readily controlled, by being sent to islands where they can be neutralised.’
However, Irish centre-back Mick McCarthy predicted misery for Irish supporters who would have to hop between Sardinia and Sicily.
David Lacey, page 14
Photographs: Toby Glanville
Agency ‘neglecting safeguards’ on fish farms.
By Rob Edwards
THE European Commission is to investigate complaints that the Government has neglected its environmental responsibilities towards fish farming in Scotland.
The Marine Conservation Society, a national organisation, alleges in a 54-page document that Britain has failed to meet the terms of a European directive requiring an assessment to be carried out where a proposed development is likely to have a significant environmental impact.
The society says that the Crown Estate, the governmental agency responsible for leasing the seabed to fish farmers, is an inappropriate overseer because it has a financial interest in promoting the industry.
The estate is criticised for lacking ecological expertise, being undemocratic and largely unaccountable.
It is said to have made no provision for the protection of sea lochs, to operate without an overall development plan, and to have made little attempt to monitor the farms it has approved.
The estate's guidance notes on environmental assessments are called ‘vague and minimal’ and some criteria ‘arbitrary and extreme’.
There is no requirement to prevent or reduce any significant adverse effects on the environment.
Mr Martin Gravestock, the estate's chief official in Scotland, rejects the accusations.
‘The Crown Estate is a public body which is fully accountable for its actions.
We are able to stand aside and not have regard to financial implications,’ he said.
‘We do have a clear strategy.
We carry out all our assessments in a professional way, using professional staff who have to balance many things including environmental and ecological issues.’
A spokeswoman for the European Commission said that the complaint would be investigated.
Previous complaints by environmental organisations, like those on drinking water, have resulted in the Government being prosecuted.
Since the directive came into force in July last year only one fish farming application has been subject to an environmental assessment: a plan last October by Marine Harvest for salmon cages in Lamlash bay on the island of Arran.
The society argues that the assessment was inaccurate and inadequate, particularly as it made no mention of potentially toxic chemicals.
The assessment was accepted and the application granted by the Crown Estate, although the area of the farm was reduced and the number of salmon cages cut from 58 to 30 for other reasons.
Mr Gravestock denied that the environmental assessment was inadequate, but added: ‘We do accept that there were lessons to be learnt.’
Two children die, as number of cases triples in a week Hospitals on brink of ‘red alert’ for flu.
By Gareth Parry
HOSPITALS in many parts of England and Wales may be put on ‘red alert’ and ban non-emergency admissions from today as the worst flu epidemic for 14 years sweeps the country, increasing admissions and seriously depleting nursing staff.
The Royal College of General Practitioners' research unit has designated the virus H3N2, English Flu, as having reached epidemic proportions, affecting more than 100 people in every 100,000.
The number of cases have more than tripled in a week, registering the highest increase since the 1975-76 epidemic — when a peak of 350 cases per 100,000 were recorded and 1,283 people died.
As thousands of schoolchildren have been kept at home in south Wales and the West Country, the epidemic is already believed to have claimed two young victims — Daniel Warrior, aged seven, from Bracknell, Berks, who died after his younger sister and mother both had flu last week, and 16-month-old Louise Allen, from Hemel Hempstead, Herts, who died in hospital on Saturday.
Children are believed to be more vulnerable than adults, who are thought to have built up an immunity after a similar, but much less virulent virus appeared last year.
Many hospitals in the north, south and west of England and in south Wales have already closed wards, unable to accommodate people with bronchial complications, like pneumonia.
Others have appealed for retired nurses to help bridge staff shortages.
The district general hospital in Barnsley, south Yorkshire called for such volunteers when 100 staff went sick.
Wards have been closed and admissions restricted in Southampton, Sheffield, Scunthorpe, Derby and Nottingham.
Many hospitals have brought in agency nurses.
The London Emergency Bed Service, which monitors the availability of hospital beds, yesterday recorded an increase of up to 50 per cent in demand.
It will decide whether to impose a ‘red alert’, for the first time since 1975, after collating the latest figures today.
Last week the service issued half of London with its first ‘yellow’ alert (one stage before ‘red’) for 11 years.
‘We are asking hospitals to mix up their specialities so that ENT (ear, nose and throat) patients are on wards with patients with other complaints,’ said Ms Sandra Mead, a senior watchkeeper.
‘A number of hospitals have had problems because of the nurses that have been hit by the epidemic.
King's College is facing some difficulty today and the Whittington had problems yesterday.
Hospitals are always working at near-capacity, so anything that upsets the balance automatically causes more strain.’
She added that the situation had got worse ‘almost overnight’.
Victims of English Flu suffer the classic symptoms of chestiness, weakness, fever and aching limbs.
Like other strains of flu, there is no known cure.
A Department of Health spokeswoman said: ‘Doctors are advising people with high temperatures to take analgesics and hot drinks to relieve the symptoms and keep warm.’
Patients usually recover after two or three days in bed.
FoE condemns Britain's environment record, but says PM has pushed issue to top of world agenda Downing St plays down meeting with Porritt Praise and blame for ‘green’ Thatcher.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent
TEN years of Conservative government has produced a poor record on environmental issues, but Mrs Thatcher's ‘conversion’ in the past year has meant she has done more than any other world leader to push the issue to the top of the political, business, and economic agenda, says a Friends of the Earth report.
In a comprehensive critique of the Government's record, FoE says the claim made by Mr Nicholas Ridley as Environment Secretary that ‘Britain had taken the lead’ on environmental issues was absurd.
Mr David Gee, director designate of FoE said: ‘Recycling rhetoric won't save the planet.
Unless Mrs Thatcher starts the 1990s with specific targets and timetables for energy efficiency, greenhouse gas reductions, ozone layer protection, pollution controls, and Third World debt cancellation, the children of the next millenium will never forgive her.’
It is likely that the main tenets of the report were passed to Mrs Thatcher during talks at Number 10 this month with Mr Jonathan Porritt, director of FoE.
A Downing Street spokeswoman yesterday sought to play down the significance of the meeting, saying: ‘The Prime Minister sees all sorts of people from time to time to talk about issues that interest her.’
The ‘green bill’ was welcome but was not sufficient, although it does mark the beginning of the end of the Government's doctrine of deregulation, the report says.
Mrs Thatcher, urged on by her more forward-looking environment ministers, is struggling to adapt to the political imperatives that environmental protection have produced.
The report says her conversion appears genuine and points to the cabinet-level environment committee she set up to convert the ‘ungreen and powerful’ Treasury, transport, and energy ministries, but time was running out.
Actions on environment ‘fail to back up good intentions’.
REVIEWING Government policy and achievements in several areas of concern, the Friends of the Earth report finds ‘some good intentions but relatively few actions to back up the words’.
Farming.
Environmentally-sensitive areas have been established to restrict the use of chemical fertilisers, though fewer than half those recommended by the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC).
Tax incentives removed for commercial forestry, but the Government failed to list Scotland's Flow country under the World Heritage Convention, and rejected most of the 1987 NCC report, which was to ensure new forests did not harm wildlife.
Deadlines to enforce provisions of 1986 regulations to control use of pesticides have been missed, and help to develop organic farming refused.
Planning.
The EC's Habitats Directive to give threatened species greater protection has been blocked.
Only 40 internationally-important wetlands have been designated, instead of the recommended 120; and only 25 per cent of sites suggested under the EC's Birds Directive declared protected.
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) not protected from damage.
Planning rules weakened, making it easier to build on greenfield sites.
Energy.
Plans to build a series of nuclear pressurised water reactors halted, although Sizewell B will still be completed; funding on promoting energy efficiency has been halved; insulation programmes cut by 60 per cent; 100 times more spent on research into nuclear power than on renewable energy.
After Chernobyl the public was not given adequate warnings, and radiation fallout was underestimated by 40 times.
No coherent policy on radioactive waste disposal.
Overseas aid.
£1 million given for tropical conservation work for Worldwide Fund for Nature, and another £100 million pledged for tropical forests.
Britain's aid budget has fallen to 0.32 per cent of gross national product, less than half UN's target of 0.7 per cent.
Most tropical forest aid has gone to industrial forestry and has done little to aid the poor or protect the environment.
Transport.
Spending on new roads has increased by a third since 1979, and is planned to double again; Okehampton bypass built through Dartmoor National Park; 110 SSSIs are threatened with road schemes.
The number of new cars is expected to rise as much as 142 per cent by 2025.
The Government has cut public transport subsidies.
Air pollution.
Ozone-damaging CFCs are being phased out, but not other equally-damaging chemicals in common use.
The Government hosted an international conference on ozone depletion.
It shelved the Clean Air Bill in 1987, but will tackle some problems in forthcoming Environmental Protection Bill.
Attempts to control power station emissions in Europe were blocked for five years.
The Government gave way in 1988, then went back on deal to cut nitrous oxide emissions by 30 per cent.
Water.
National Rivers Authority set up and £1 billion spent to control sewage discharges.
Drinking water frequently fails to meet EC standards; discharge limits relaxed for at least 1,800 sewage works to facilitate privatisation.
Water companies advised not to report breaches of EC rules on pesticides in drinking water.
Britain dumps more than seven million tonnes of sewage a year in the North Sea; 125 out of 338 bathing beaches failed to meet EC standards chiefly because of sewage pollution.
Waste hazards.
Inspectorate of Pollution under-financed and under-staffed.
It took threat of legal action from EC to implement directives on trans-frontier shipments of hazardous waste.
Moves to ban waste shipments to Third World countries blocked
Recycling.
Experiments as the Sheffield Recycling City have been backed, but the Government has refused to introduce recycling laws in line with EC directive on beverage containers.
Taxes on raw materials intended to spur recycling resisted.
Warming.
Mrs Thatcher recognised the gravity of the situation and helped focus world attention on the subject, but, with US and Japan, undermined moves to set targets for reduction of carbon dioxide emissions, and failed to adopt energy efficiency policies.
Research.
Centre for prediction of climate change set up.
Long-term research funding cut, with 500 scientists going at Natural Environment Research Council since 1983.
One in five marine science posts lost in 1989; in five years to 1987 research into renewable energy halved.
Big investment planned, but passengers ask when conditions will improve on peak-hour trains BR facing £500m bill for safety.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
BRITISH RAIL is conducting a separate detailed study of new safety measures, which are estimated to cost up to £500 million, after the inquiry into the Clapham Junction crash.
The report is expected to be given to the Transport Secretary, Mr Cecil Parkinson, in February after BR has assessed the scale and effect of the changes demanded by Sir Anthony Hidden's inquiry into the Clapham disaster last December, in which 35 people died.
However, the BR safety study is likely to be conducted outside the scope of the Government's financial targets for the railways which will be unveiled next week, at least two months before the safety report is published.
There will be considerable pressure on Mr Parkinson to ensure that safety is not compromised by lack of funds, and he has promised that money would be no obstacle to improving safety.
The Hidden report made 93 recommendations to improve safety procedures on the railways, in the emergency services and in government policy.
Of these, a total of 71 safety proposals were made for the railways.
But there is a widespread belief that the travelling public will be forced to meet a substantial share of the new safety costs through higher fares, because of the Government's policy of reducing taxpayers' support for the railways.
While BR has implemented some of the safety measures demanded by Sir Anthony, steps like the introduction of computerised signalling will require extensive design and testing work.
The new signalling system, known as automatic train protection, will be the biggest single item of expenditure arising from the crash, and is aimed at coping with the conflicting demands of high-density commuter trains and faster InterCity traffic on the same lines.
Trials for the signalling system have been accelerated as BR examines the feasibility of introducing it on the entire 11,000-mile network.
So far, BR has put into effect 19 of the 71 measures.
Twenty-two others are being implemented, and plans are in hand for a further nine.
BR has already begun the installation of aircraft-type ‘black box’ data recorders on new Network SouthEast trains, and is examining whether to make them a standard fitting in all trains.
It is also speeding up the installation of cab radios linked to signal boxes, and is adopting major changes in management practice to ensure that the safety measures are properly implemented.
More funds urged for troubled watchdog.
By Andrew Culf
THE Government was urged yesterday to tackle staff shortages and poor morale in Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, as concern grew over its ability to cope with the demands of the Environmental Protection Bill.
Labour's environment spokeswoman, Mrs Ann Taylor, said the inspectorate was ‘expected to perform miracles’ with insufficient staff and funding.
Concerns over its future surfaced a year ago and were heightened last week by the death of its director, Mr Brian Ponsford, whose body was found in a car at his north London home.
An inquest was opened and adjourned last week.
The Environment Minister, Mr David Trippier, said yesterday that a newspaper report linking Mr Ponsford's death with HMIP's staffing problems was irresponsible and a ‘thoughtless incursion into the domestic grief of his widow and family’.
He said morale at the inspectorate was improving, salaries had been increased by 30 per cent, and a recruitment drive was succeeding.
Mrs Taylor said she had been urging the Government for months to make public a report by Mr Ponsford confirming the morale problems.
She had not pressed for a statement at Westminster out of respect to his family.
‘There is no doubt that the new green bill is going to put a lot of extra pressure on HMIP,’ she said.
‘The Government is simply not providing the money to allow them to carry out their monitoring duties.’
The bill receives its first Commons reading in a fortnight.
The Environment Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, intends to introduce a system of integrated pollution control.
HMIP's policing function will be crucial in bringing to book companies that pollute air and waterways.
Mr Tam Dalyell, Labour MP for Linlithgow, yesterday wrote to Mr Patten demanding a full statement on the inspectorate in the wake of Mr Ponsford's death.
He asked whether senior officers who had resigned had given falling pollution standards as the reason and whether staff shortages were responsible for the failure to carry out half the tests that should have been performed.
Mr Dalyell also asked whether work on controls over radioactive emissions, particularly at Aldermaston, Amersham and Burghfield, was being hampered, and for the reasons for the recruitment difficulties.
The National Audit Office is investigating the inspectorate's efficiency, while the National Society for Clean Air said recent restructuring had ‘resulted in confusion and disaffection and seems unlikely to achieve any improvement in pollution control’.
Three key staff have resigned in the past year, and there have been frequent complaints that its establishment of 240 is too low.
Mr Trippier said a number of inspectors had left because of offers from the private sector, but morale had improved recently.
Parents criticise Press Council over Guardian adjudication.
By Andrew Culf
APRESS Council adjudication on a complaint against the Guardian has been criticised by the parents of missing London estate agent Suzy Lamplugh as ‘quite extraordinary’.
Paul and Diana Lamplugh complained about an article by Andrew Stephen, author of a book about their daughter's disappearance.
They claimed it was inaccurate, misleading and constituted a breach of journalistic ethics.
In an adjudication published today, the Press Council does not uphold the complaint, saying it represented a re-run of complaints made by the Lamplughs about Mr Stephen's book and was likely to ‘reopen and prolong a dispute which might be better left unpursued.’
Mr and Mrs Lamplugh said: ‘We are naturally disappointed that the council has refused to express a view on the statements we complained about, but has not upheld our complaint because they consider it was not appropriate.’
They added: ‘We consider the grounds on which the Press Council make their decisions are wrong and their press releases even contain a number of inaccuracies which they are unwilling to correct.’
They are urging a reformed Press Council to provide ‘effective and fair machinery’ to help those complaining about inaccurate and misleading statements.
Personal, page 33
Three charged in Ulster inquiry.
By David Hearst in Belfast
A FORMER Ulster prison officer was charged last night with collecting, recording and possessing information which could be useful to terrorists planning murders.
Dennis McGookin, aged 33, of County Londonderry, appeared at a special sitting of Belfast magistrates' court with two other men after being arrested by detectives investigating alleged security leaks to loyalist paramilitaries.
Roy Lambe, aged 25, of Belfast, was charged with having two rifles, a pistol and ammunition with intent to endanger life; possessing information likely to be useful to terrorists and raising money for the illegal loyalist group the Red Hand Commandos.
James Stewart, aged 23, of Belfast, was accused of having documents on IRA suspects likely to be of use to terrorists planning murder.
All three were remanded in custody until December 29.
Their court appearance brings to 26 the number of men charged by the inquiry team headed by Cambridgeshire deputy Chief Constable John Stevens, who was called to Northern Ireland three months ago to investigate allegations of collusion between security forces and Protestant paramilitaries.
The inquiry, due to be completed at the end of next month, has resulted in serious tension between the police and the Ulster Defence Regiment.
Twenty-eight UDR members were arrested during house searches in October; 22 of them were released without charge, and senior UDR officers are bitterly critical of the police operation using hundreds of officers.
The officers said innocent men's lives had been put at risk and their families had been forced to move house because identities had been disclosed.
But Mr Hugh Annesley, the RUC Chief Constable, who asked Mr Stevens to make his inquiry, has defended his actions, saying the surprise operation was the only way houses could be searched ensuring the security of the officers involved.
MI5 book gets go-ahead.
By Richard Norton-Taylor
THE head of MI5, Mr Patrick Walker, has allowed a former senior officer to publish a book that includes strong criticism of the Government's refusal to agree to independent oversight of the Security Service.
It is the first time a former officer has been given permission to write about MI5 since Sir Percy Sillitoe, the post-war head of the service, published his memoirs in 1955.
The book is by Mr John Day, who left MI5 in 1982 after 24 years in K Branch, responsible for countering the activities of Communist-bloc intelligence agents in Britain.
He was a member of MI5's fluency committee, set up to investigate allegations of Soviet penetration of MI5.
It was chaired at one time by Peter Wright, author of Spycatcher.
Mr Day was threatened with an injunction last year when he completed the final draft of his book, most of which deals with his career in the Royal Marines and as a civil servant during the Emergency in Malaya.
He agreed to take out what he calls two innocent chapters on his work in MI5 but insisted on keeping in his views on the need for oversight.
Three months after Mr Day sought official clearance, Mr Walker has given the go-ahead.
Mr Day proposes the appointment of Security Service commissioners to monitor MI5.
They would have ‘virtually free access to personnel and papers’, he said yesterday.
They would report to the Home Secretary and could be former armed forces officers, diplomats, academics, or even trade union officials.
Their annual report to the Home Secretary would be debated by the House of Commons.
‘Experience has shown that the Home Secretary on his own simply cannot carry out oversight of MI5,’ Mr Day said.
A similar proposal by the Tory backbencher Mr Jonathan Aitken — who wrote the foreword to Mr Day's book — during the Commons debate on the Security Service Act this year, was rejected by Home Office ministers despite growing support inside Whitehall for a system of independent oversight.
Hundreds dead in birds cargo.
The Dutch airline KLM is investigating why ‘many hundreds’ of birds out of a cargo of 15,000, including flamingoes, were found dead on arrival from Dar es Salaam at Heathrow, en route to Miami.
An RSPCA spokeswoman said it might prosecute: ‘This tragedy indicates the danger of trade in exotic birds.’.
Football fans injured.
Injuries to five spectators at Middlesbrough's home match with Leeds United were caused by a surge rather than overcrowding, police said.
Four die in crash.
A fourth person died yesterday after an M1 crash involving two cars and a coach near Milton Keynes on Saturday.
£1.8m lottery win.
Miss Philomena Conneely, 21, today collects a cheque for IR£1,940,852 (£1,860,000) in Dublin after her 50p ticket won the Irish National Lottery.
Party cancelled.
Police arrested 11 men with sound equipment on their way to a Saturday night acid house party in the New Forest.
Body in garden.
Police are consulting missing persons' lists to try to identify the body of a teenage girl found in a shallow grave in the garden of a Cardiff house.
Canal to be searched.
A stretch of the Grand Union Canal in London is to be dredged today after a severed leg wrapped in plastic was seen floating near Regent's Park.
NUT appeals to business in merit pay row.
SCHOOLS cannot be run like assembly lines, the National Union of Teachers says in a booklet being sent tobusiness executives to ask their help in opposing any move to pay teachers according to classroom performance.
The union fears that the Government intends to link merit pay and promotion to an appraisal scheme, and believes that instead it should be used to improve professional skills.
In September the Education Secretary, Mr John MacGregor, said heads and governors could appraise performance in deciding promotion and pay — just as managers in industry do.
He postponed implementing a scheme until more groups, including industry and business, were consulted.
Yesterday Mr Doug McAvoy, the union's general secretary, urged the CBI, the Institute of Directors and the Industrial Society to ‘build an alliance’ between education and business against performance-related pay in schools.
‘Education is much more difficult than many industrial and commercial processes to measure in a way that makes comparison possible,’ he said.
Elderly care crisis warning.
By David Brindle, Social Services Correspondent
BRITAIN will face a spiralling demand for long-term residential care of the elderly unless funds are made available for the rapid development of community services, a report warns today.
The warning that Government community care policies may fail to halt the residential care boom comes from Professor Nick Bosanquet, professor of health policy at the University of London, and Dr Alistair Gray, a research associate at Wolfson College, Oxford.
They calculate that the ageing population is adding 1 per cent annually to health service costs.
Between 1986-95, they estimate a 33 per cent rise in the number of over-75s hospitalised for short-stay treatment alone.
As a result, they say the health service must quickly adjust to big shifts in demand among specialities: while general surgery patients will rise by just 4 per cent between 1986-95, those in geriatric medicine will increase by 35 per cent, and those in urology by 42 per cent .
However, the report — commissioned by the National Association of Health Authorities and the Society of Family Practitioner Committees — warns that the main danger is a spiralling of demand for long-term residential care.
It says that without building on existing community services, residential care will expand even faster than the £1 billion growth in the 1980s, as measured by social security costs.
Claiming the 1980s have been wasted in the development of elderly-care services, it suggests a three-year programme of community services development costing £700,000 — or another 1 per cent extra funding — in each health district.
Will You Still Love Me?— New Opportunities for Health Services for Elderly People in the 1990s and Beyond; NAHA, Birmingham Research Park, Vincent Drive, Birmingham B15 2SQ; £15
Expulsions set to go ahead.
The forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong was expected to begin this week as the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, restated his intention to go ahead with the expulsions.
Page 20.
Flu sweeps country.
Hospitals in many parts of England and Wales may be put on red alert and ban non-emergency admissions as the worst flu epidemic for 14 years sweeps the country.
Page 4.
Treasury break-in.
Detectives are investigating a burglary at the Treasury, in which it is believed secret papers may have been photographed and proofs of potentially valuable coins taken..
Rover inquiry grows.
Secret tax concessions offered to British Aerospace to secure the sale of the Rover Group could take the ‘hidden sweeteners’ involved to a sum much greater than the £48 million already uncovered, it was claimed.
Page 2.
FoE praises Thatcher.
Mrs Thatcher's green ‘conversion’ has meant she has done more than any other world leader to push the environment to the top of the political, business, and economic agenda, say Friends of the Earth.
Page 3.
The Guardian.
We apologise to those readers who did not receive the Guardian on Saturday when mechanical problems at our London printing plant affected some later editions..
Arts, ReviewsWS31.
CartoonsWS33.
Classified AdvertisingWS22-29.
CrosswordsWS20.
EntertainmentsWS29.
Financial NewsWS11, 12.
Home NewsWS2-4.
International NewsWS6-10.
LettersWS18.
ListingsWS30.
Media GuardianWS21, 23.
ProfileWS17.
ObituaryWS33.
Sports NewsWS13-16.
StyleWS32.
TV, Radio and WeatherWS34
Rail passengers face fares leap.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
GOVERNMENT plans to slash subsidies for British Rail's South-east commuter and provincial services threaten to bring vast increases in rail fares in the 1990s.
Mr Cecil Parkinson, the Transport Secretary, has told BR that all subsidies for commuter services on Network South East — currently £141 million a year — will be removed by March 1993.
Tax-payers' backing for the loss-making provincial operation, now £400 million a year, will be cut by 25 per cent in the next three years, according to Mr Parkinson.
The decision means that annual government support for the railways will have dropped from well over £1 billion to around £300 million in 10 years.
The loss of government subsidies will be covered almost entirely by dearer fares for passengers.
Mr John Prescott, Labour's transport spokesman, has warned that the Department of Transport has already built the big increases into future planning requirements.
Mr Prescott said yesterday that separate DoT assessments for new transport facilities in London had assumed increases — after taking account of inflation — in southern rail and Tube fares of more than 40 per cent in the next 10-15 years.
‘London will be the only capital city in Europe where rail services are expected to make a profit,’ he added.
‘It is a policy that could lead to economic and environmental chaos.’
While Mr Parkinson will be anxious over the next few days to emphasise the benefits of BR's £3 billion investment programme, it is clear passengers will be paying increasingly more towards new rolling stock and equipment.
Mr Parkinson now faces the challenge of selling to the electorate a controversial policy of lower subsidies and higher fares.
The cuts in government support, to be unveiled in the next 10 days, will prompt protests from travellers, railway unions, environmentalists and opposition MPs, who will see the decision as fresh evidence that the Government is fundamentally anti-rail.
BR's fares have been raised by 1.5 per cent above inflation during much of the 1980s and the Government's proposals imply increases to four points over inflation in the 1990s.
Government backing for the railways has halved to around £550 million in the 1980s and the new calculations of support have been struck before taking into account the estimated cost of safety measures demanded after the Clapham Junction disaster.
Cuts in Network South East grants will increase the Government's pre-election risk of alienating Conservative voters in the South-east commuter belt where rail travellers are already unhappy over rail services.
There will also be concern that cuts in support for provincial services will threaten the viability of many rural rail lines.
Mr Parkinson recently signalled ministerial concern by blocking BR's plans for a 14 per cent fare rise in February.
Mr Prescott warned that rail passengers would pay for the grant cuts by higher fares and poorer service.
‘BR fares are already the highest in Europe, but further increases of this scale will be inevitable without a change in Government policy,’ he added.
Silver Fox rallies to Sally Ann.
By Martin Walker in Washington
MRS Barbara Bush has stepped up her relentlessly engaging campaign to become America's version of the Queen Mum by dashing to the rescue of a much-loved and out-dated institution — the Salvation Army.
In the nearest modern marketing has come to the skin-flintery of Ebenezer Scrooge, a growing number of American shopping malls have picked the Christmas season to ban the Salvation Army from ringing its bells and asking for money for its traditional Big Red Kettle collection boxes.
Mall operators argue that the Sally Army must be banned, or the precedent would allow a flood of other charitable panhandlers to invade their territory, and solicit a little of the money which should by rights be the monopoly of the retailers.
Learning of this affront to the Christmas Spirit from the Washington Post, the First Lady rallied her forces, put some bills into her handbag, summoned the Secret Service and sallied forth to Mazza Galleries, one of the few places in town which still allows the Sally Army to function.
Probably the highest-priced mall around the capital, Mazza contains a branch of Nieman-Marcus, the Texas-based department store whose prices are beyond belief and whose Christmas catalogues contain such essentials as solid gold swizzle sticks and stuffed toys with diamonds for eyes.
The First Granny, as Mrs Bush is becoming affectionately known, marched up to the uniformed bell-ringers beside the big Christmas tree, put ten bucks into the Big Red Kettle, and loudly announced how much she preferred patronising a mall that had the sense to permit the Salvation Army.
Colonel Jack Waters, the Salvation Army's Washington commander, estimates that the bans in the other malls will cost the charity at least $100,000 this Christmas.
But he will still be organising 13,000 volunteers into bringing some kind of Christmas to 125,000 needy, lonely or down-and-out people.
There will be toys, food baskets, mince pies and soup kitchens.
Mrs Bush, known to the President as the Silver Fox, seems to have started something.
In up-market Georgetown Park Mall, a retailers' revolt is now under way against the management, appealing directly to Colonel Waters to send in his troops, bells and all.
Steel shutdown revives fears.
By Peter Hetherington
AN EERIE silence will descend on the steel town of Motherwell next weekend when the big Ravenscraig strip mill winds down for a long and unwelcome seasonal break.
As the 3,200 workers leave the works for an uncertain future, British Steel will begin cooling down its three blast furnaces in a risky operation which has been attacked by a cross-party alliance, including the Scottish Secretary, Mr Malcolm Rifkind.
Although BSC says it is halting production for three weeks because of a sharp drop in demand, unions and all Scottish parties fear the unprecedented break could be a prelude to something much worse.
The steel unions are in no doubt that political pressure from the former Scottish Secretary, Mr George Younger, saved the plant, one of the Corporation's big five complexes, from closure in 1982.
Now Mr Rifkind has written to the BSC chairman, Sir Robert Scholey, asking for further assurances after meeting anxious union leaders.
BSC accuses the powerful Scottish lobby of interfering with market conditions.
‘The scale of the protest is totally disproportionate to the size of the problem,’ a spokesman said.
‘To the best of my knowledge the plant will close for three weeks and then come back.’
But over the past two years Ravenscraig's position has weakened.
In 1986, BSC closed its modern hot rolling mill, at nearby Gartcosh, with the loss of 800 jobs.
Recently, a modest £10 millions investment package was shelved.
Two main competitor plants — Llanwern and Port Talbot in south Wales — are being loaded to full capacity over the Christmas period.
In previous years, work had been shared during a slump in demand.
Mr Tommy Brennan, stewards' convenor, says they worked during the 1984-1985 miners strike — incurring the wrath of the NUM — after management warned that any cool down would threaten the works.
‘We believed it then and we still do today.
Engineers have told us that the blast furnaces are at risk.
If there is a cold spell we could be in trouble.’
By common consent, Ravenscraig has been kept alive since 1982 because workers have broken all production records.
BSC refuses to give unions a cost comparison with the other plants on the grounds that it is ‘commercially confidential’.
Mr George Quinn, the union steward representing craftsmen, says many workers are alarmed by an abrupt turnaround.
‘On November 1 they told us that normal Christmas arrangements would apply — that we would work for most of the holiday period — then they dropped this bombshell on November 22 and said we would be off for two weeks.
And then last week out of the blue they put production start-up back by another seven days.
Do you blame us for being worried?’
How the position of Communist Parties is changing in Eastern Europe SOVIET UNION: The party's guaranteed right to rule is under unprecedented challenge, particularly in the Baltic states.
Mr Gorbachev is resisting centrifugal pressure, but leaving the door open for future change in party's status.
POLAND: The party in effect lost its leading role in June when Solidarity's triumph resulted in Warsaw Pact's first, and still its only, non-Communist prime minister.
HUNGARY: First party in eastern Europe formally to abandon its leading role early this year.
At an emergency congress in October, the Communist Party voted to dissolve itself and become the Hungarian Socialist Party.
EAST GERMANY: Parliament dropped the party's constitutional right to rule last month after sudden revolution from below swept the old leaders aside.
At the weekend, a demoralised party elected a new leader and abolished the old centralised power structures of the politburo and central committee.
Party to be renamed next week.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA: Taking its cue from East Germany, parliament last week dropped the leading-role clause from the constitution after the growth of public protest.
Emergency party congress in nine days' time.
BULGARIA: Despite moves by reformist Communist leaders, the party clings to its leading role, but a burgeoning opposition movement is demanding an end to its monopoly of power.
ROMANIA: Leading role of party and of Nicolae Ceausescu does not appear under threat.
YUGOSLAVIA: Party's role central to argument between north and south over ethnic and ideological differences.
US to ship bomb-grade uranium to Romania.
By Alan George
THE US is planning to ship bomb-grade uranium to Romania despite fears that it may be working on a nuclear weapons programme.
The shipment of 16.48 kilograms of 93 per cent enriched uranium is destined for a 14-megawatt research reactor at Potesti, which was supplied by the California-based General Atomics company in the 1970s.
The material, manufactured by General Atomics about 10 years ago, has been in storage with the Department of Energy (DOE).
The US provided 38.7 kilograms of enriched uranium for Potesti in 1978.
This is now spent and the new consignment is needed to keep the reactor running.
Romania's State Committee for Nuclear Energy approached the DOE and the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) for the new supplies early last year.
An export licence was issued in August last year, and this has now been extended until August 31, 1990.
Washington's nuclear collaboration with Romania dates from the 1970s, when the West was vigorously encouraging President Nicolae Ceausescu to pursue policies independent of the Soviet Union.
At the same time, Britain concluded a series of major contracts with Bucharest, including a deal for the supply of Rolls Royce engines for a locally-produced fighter aircraft.
Although Romania is a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Mr Ceausescu boasted earlier this year that his country had the capacity to produce nuclear weapons.
Last summer, Romania reportedly warned neighbouring Hungary it was working on nuclear weapons and a ballistic missile system.
Engineers on Iraq's Condor-2 ballistic missile programme claim to have worked on a similar project in Romania.
Whatever Romania's military aspirations, Bucharest certainly has a record of carelessness with nuclear materials.
In 1986, Norway supplied Romania with 12.5 tons of heavy water, on the strict understanding that it would not be re-sold.
But Romania transferred the water either to Israel or India, prompting a formal protest from Oslo in May last year.
The US uranium shipment is being arranged by a Washington-based nuclear fuel management company, Edlow Inc.
Its International Vice-President, Mr Rod Fisk, asked whether the company was concerned over how the uranium might be used, said: ‘That's a question you have to address to the US Government.’
‘Sweeteners’ Rover inquiry may widen *.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
SECRET tax concessions offered to British Aerospace to secure the sale of the Rover Group could take the ‘hidden sweeteners’ involved in the deal to substantially more than the £48 million already uncovered, it was claimed yesterday.
The Commons Public Accounts Committee will today consider extending its investigation into the £150 million Rover Group sale, and may decide to examine Inland Revenue officials.
Lord Young, Trade and Industry Secretary at the time of the sale, offered at the weekend to appear before the committee to explain his role in the deal.
Labour's trade and industry spokesman, Mr Gordon Brown, who claimed at the weekend to have uncovered a further £10 million in sweeteners above the £38 million disclosed last week, continued yesterday to press the Prime Minister for details of the tax benefits offered to BAe, and to explain why Parliament has been deceived for more than 16 months about the true cost of the sale.
‘The confidential papers I have seen demonstrate that what were called various tax benefits were central to negotiations.
It is clear that at a meeting on July 4 between Lord Young and BAe, discussions included various tax benefits for Rover, to be achieved through the removal of the ring fence on tax losses and sympathetic revenue treatment.
‘In his letter of July 6 following the meeting, the BAe chairman, Professor Roland Smith, called for the removal of the ring fence around Rover capital allowances, capital losses, and trading losses, and asked the DTI to intervene with the Inland Revenue for ‘written rulings in advance to certain proposals to be made by BAe with a view to optimising the tax benefits’,’ Mr Brown said.
‘On July 12 Lord Young confirmed that tax agreements had been made with the Inland Revenue, and there had been an exchange of letters ‘on terms satisfactory to BAe’.’
As originally disclosed by the Guardian, the estimated value of the tax concessions alone offered at one point during the negotiations was close to £35 million, while the European Commission was led to believe that BAe would benefit by only £25 million from the easing of tax restrictions.
Some of the suspicions raised by Mr Brown, particularly questions surrounding the tax treatment of trading losses, suggest the final figure could be substantially higher.
He is to table a new series of questions in the Commons today which ask for details of the proposed package.
They include asking whether various capital losses could be written off against property companies owned by BAe; whether the Government was aware of BAe's attempts to use leasing companies to defray indirectly further tax bills; and what was the total trading tax loss written off.
The chairman of the committee, Mr Robert Sheldon, said yesterday he was awaiting detailed answers from the DTI to questions posed on Monday during his committee's examination of its permanent secretary.
The nature of those replies, which are expected to include details of the tax matters, will determine whether the committee decides to ask the National Audit Office to re-open its investigation of the sale, and whether it is necessary to summon Lord Young.
Less bulk and more brawn for kids.
CHILDREN born in the next decade will be slimmer, shorter, and better proportioned adults because of healthier eating habits, says a survey published today.
The new woman will be built like a dancer and — about 5ft 4in tall.
Within the next two generations a man over six feet will be an oddity rather than a subject of envy.
People born since the 1890s have been unnaturally large because they have eaten too much protein believing it to be essential for growth, says survey author Geoffrey Cannon in New Woman magazine.
‘Meat and animal-based foods were put forward as the most nutritious form of sustenance and this propaganda changed the shape of generations.
‘On a milky, fatty, meaty diet British girls and boys became taller, fatter, and broader than nature intended.’
But, as a direct result of their parents eating lots of fresh vegetables, fruit, and cereals, the children of the 1990s ‘will look very different from the bulky people bred in Britain since the 1890s.’
The new generation would be more intelligent, enjoy better health, and possess more energy.
Labour rules out ‘blanket’ credit control.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE shadow Chancellor, Mr John Smith, promised yesterday that the party's credit controls policy would not be designed to cover everything and ‘hermetically seal the economy.’
He told Channel 4's Answering Back that ‘a touch on the brake to reduce excess demand’ was all that was needed.
His remarks came as Labour employment spokesman, Mr Henry McLeish, denied reports that the party was considering replacing the automatic payment of welfare benefits with a policy which would require many unemployed either to find a job or to accept full-time training or higher education.
Mr McLeish said the report was ‘misinformed and mistaken.
There is absolutely no question of overturning the policy review in this or any other area.’
Mr Smith made clear that Labour's first response would be to seek entry to the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System and that its spending priorities would be pensions and child poverty.
Many spending commitments were achievable ‘in the lifetime of the next Labour Government if it runs the full term.’
Earlier this year Labour's policy review talked of ‘substantial changes’ to the EMS before joining.
Mr Smith believed a limit on bank lending could be agreed but, if not, banks would be required to deposit money with the Bank of England which was not available for lending.
Ambulance union leaders fight to stifle escalation.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
LEADERS of the five TUC-affiliated ambulance unions will meet regional representatives today to ensure that action is sustained in the nearly 13-week dispute, but to stifle any calls for escalation.
Both sides underlined their well-established positions on BBC radio yesterday.
The Health Secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke, insisted that the latest 9 per cent offer — tilted towards extra payments for highly-trained staff — was both ‘fair and constructive’.
A petition carrying 4.5 million signatures collected from the public by ambulance crews is to be placed before Parliament with the help of the Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, this week, calling for the dispute to be referred to arbitration, which Mr Clarke still opposes.
Today's meeting of the TUC-unions — NUPE, Cohse, TGWU, GMB, and Nalgo — is likely to concentrate on efforts to sustain support for the action through the Christmas period.
Leaders insist that only pockets around the country support escalation, but are aware of increasing frustration that the dispute remains unsettled.
Members of the non-TUC Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel will today begin receiving ballot forms and a letter from their ruling body explaining why APAP leaders agreed to recommend acceptance of an 18-month, 9 per cent deal thrown out by other unions.
APAP members in London — believed to be seriously disaffected by the association's stance in the dispute — will be met by an executive member, Mr Peter Kenney, in the first of a series of meetings to rally support for the union amid threats of a revolt following the resignation of the 132-strong Hertfordshire chapter last week.
He is to travel to Exeter and Derby in the next two days.
An APAP spokesman, Mr Brian Bruno, played down the revolt, saying as many staff were applying to join as were resigning.
Wry humour fails to ease daily trial of commuters.
Joanna Coles samples peak-hour service and discovers what all the fuss is about..
THE railwayman at Charing Cross was surprisingly forthcoming about return routes to Hastings.
‘Of course,’ he said, ‘what I'm telling you is strictly illegal.
You shouldn't be doing this at all.
You're supposed to come back by any reasonable route — but reasonable is not defined.
You can go all over the place.
It's worth the risk; you won't get caught unless you get a very alert conductor.’
He laughed.
‘And you won't find one of those.’
Such effusive collusion from any company employee would suggest that something, somewhere, had gone wrong.
This was British Rail, and as any passenger will tell you, something has gone very wrong.
‘It's a bloody disgrace — the whole service,’ said Mr Gary Constable, aged 32, a company director.
‘This station is an absolute disaster trap.
They've been building it for God knows how long, cancelling trains, people can't get on or off the platforms.
It can take 10 minutes to get off the train.’
A commuter from Crayford on Network SouthEast's Sidcup line, Mr Constable pays about £700 a year for his ticket but rarely gets a seat.
His colleague, Mr Peter Grove, is more determined: ‘I get to the station two trains before I need to.
You can't get a train otherwise.
The staff at Eltham are very pleasant, but the ones here are another matter.
Last week they got so fed up with commuters crowding round their screens to find out the train times — because the computer board wasn't working — they just switched them all off.
It was chaos.’
Mr Constable added: ‘There could have been a commuter rebellion last week.
If someone had got up a petition for that bloke who refused to pay his ticket because the heating didn't work, I would have signed it.
‘He'd better earn his £200,000, this new guy — sounds like we're going to pay for it.’
Mr Jeff Moore, an insurance broker based in Tunbridge Wells, agreed that it was equally difficult to get a seat on his train.
‘Two years ago my wife changed to first class to ensure a seat — it's another £700 — but she still doesn't get one.’
Once aboard the 17.01 to Tunbridge Wells the guard was in lively form.
‘This train is due to arrive at Tunbridge Wells sometime later today,’ he crackled over the tannoy.
At Tonbridge a fellow train man — as BR now prefers to call its conductors — announced: ‘This train is bound for London Bridge, fingers crossed.’
But the humour is not matched by efficiency, according to Mrs Maureen Allason, a housewife from Rotherfield in east Sussex, an ex-commuter.
‘Station staff at Charing Cross are a total disaster,’ she said.
‘Even if they know what you want to know, they won't tell you.
They can't understand the timetables.’
Her accusation was borne out by a driver at Tonbridge who contradicted the guard's timetable advice.
‘That little chap?
He don't know nothing — he's only been here 10 years.’
One year after the Clapham crash, safety also worries passengers.
When a conductor spilt a cup of boiling water over Mrs Allason's mother there was neither a first aid box on board nor a phone to call for help.
She was awarded £500 damages.
Mr David Wickert, a charity's aid organiser who commutes from Kent four times a week, said: ‘Hurtling along at 60 mph with the train crammed full is terribly dangerous.
I don't see why there aren't seat belts.’
He was not impressed by BR's public relations campaign.
‘If they gave hard facts instead of patronising advertising it would be better.
‘You need to be a genius to know what ticket to use.
They should have consultative groups where passengers could give their opinions.’
Mrs Allason agrees.
‘British Rail should train their staff as to what they're supposed to do.
BR should acknowledge it's a service industry.
And I'd rather they did something about the service instead of advertising that they're getting there when they're patently not.’
First expulsions of Vietnam boat people may start this week.
By Steve Vines in Hong Kong and Alan Travis, Political Correspondent
THE forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong was expected to begin this week as the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, restated his intention to go ahead with the expulsions.
One Vietnamese man was killed and three injured early yesterday amid indications of rising tension at Hong Kong's detention centres.
Speculation about the deportations have reached fever pitch in Hong Kong.
Although officials remain resolutely silent, there is a widespread belief that the British Government will authorise the colony's administration to go ahead with the first batch of mandatory repatriations this week.
Mr Peter Haliday, the district police commander for the area surrounding the Whitehead Detention Centre, Hong Kong's largest camp for boat people, said the victims were attacked in their sleep by 10 men.
He said that he thought the attack arose out of a personal dispute.
Although it is impossible to be sure what happened, this latest incident follows a developing pattern of violence in the camps.
Aid workers, the only independent sources of information who have direct access to the camp inmates, say that fears about deportation are creating a tense atmosphere and that the Vietnamese are making preparations to avoid and resist attempts to send them home.
The Hong Kong Government is keen to start the deportations to deter new arrivals when conditions for sailing from Vietnam improve early next year.
‘It is important that mandatory repatriation is put in place before we face the prospect of another influx of boat people next year,’ Sir David Ford, Hong Kong's Chief Secretary, said.
A senior Hong Kong Government official said the deportations would either have to begin this week or wait until the new year.
The government was not prepared to invite the bad publicity that would be generated by starting deportations during the Christmas period, he added.
Extensive preparations are being made for the transport of the boat people back to Vietnam.
Previous departures of volunteer returnees have been handled by the colony's Dragonair airline.
But the government is now talking to Cathay Pacific Airways, which has a far larger fleet, and is investigating the possibility of using redundant British cross channel ferries for larger groups.
The major stumbling block is the unwillingness of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to monitor the well-being of the returned boat people in Vietnam.
Britain still hopes it can persuade the UN agency to change its mind when a special committee on refugees from Indo-China resumes its meetings in mid-January.
Voluntary aid agencies in Vietnam have also rejected the task, leaving it to Britain's tiny embassy in Hanoi.
The Vietnamese authorities are as keen as Britain and Hong Kong for the start of the deportation programme.
They see it as the first stage in widening contacts with Western Europe.
In London, the Foreign Office yesterday refused to confirm reports that the deportations would start as early as next Saturday and would only repeat the formula that they would take place sooner rather than later.
As Mr Hurd restated yesterday, the aim is to dissuade any further influx of boat people when the sailing season begins again in February.
Of the 57,000 Vietnamese in Hong Kong, some 17,000 would be resettled as genuine refugees, but the remaining 40,000 would have to go back.
‘In a year, 630 have returned voluntarily, which is good.
But none of these volunteers has yet come from those screened out — only 27 have volunteered out of the 4,000 who have gone through the process and been found not to be refugees,’ he told the Sunday Express.
‘At this rate returning the boat people will take years.
So my predecessors said we must face the sad business of obliging people to return home.
I looked at it afresh and came to the same conclusion.’
The Labour foreign affairs spokesman, Mr George Foulkes, yesterday demanded a government statement announcing it was abandoning the plan.
He accused ministers of subjecting innocent and terrified Vietnamese to a form of psychological warfare.
‘Instead of employing these appalling tactics with these families, it would be statesmanlike and more courageous to press the United Nations to lift its economic boycott of Vietnam now that Vietnamese forces have left Cambodia,’ he said.
A statement is expected before Christmas on how many of Hong Kong's 3 million British passport-holders are to be granted the right of residence in the United Kingdom.