

ERM outlook for Britain brightens.
By Alex Brummer Financial Editor
THE prospects for British membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) appeared to improve yesterday when the French government announced it would abolish exchange controls on January 1, clearing away one of the key obstacles Mrs Thatcher has cited in her opposition to entry.
However, Mrs Thatcher showed little sign, in comments to the House of Commons, of relenting over early participation in ERM.
She told MPs: ‘Stage one will not be completed until 1993,’ leaving open the possibility that Britain could stay out until after the next election.
Government sources said, however, that in the end it was the conditions which would eventually determine timing of British participation.
Aside from abolition of exchange controls by the other major economies, the Government insists that Britain's inflation rate be brought more in line with that of her trading partners, before Britain takes the ERM plunge.
As a result of recent mortgage rate rises, inflation in November could be as high as 8 per cent, compared with 3.2 per cent in West Germany.
Mrs Thatcher's reticence in the Commons contrasted with her more favourable tone toward the ERM in an interview with the Financial Times, in which she hinted at entry before the next election.
It was a development which boosted the value of the pound on the foreign exchanges, particularly against the US dollar.
The New York foreign exchanges took Mrs Thatcher's remarks as a sign that the deep-seated split in her government over Britain's role in the EMS is healing and that the challenge to her leadership on this issue may be over.
The pound climbed strongly against the dollar, jumping nearly three cents to $1.61 in New York trading, but in Europe it fell back almost three pfennigs against the Deutschmark after an initial boost from ERM speculation.
The French finance minister, Mr Pierre Beregovoy, had sent a flutter of excitement through the international financial markets when he announced at mid-morning that all remaining exchange controls would be swept away.
Abolition of exchange controls is a key facet of European Monetary Union and all the leading economies are obliged to remove them by next July.
Although France abolished controls over capital movements in March, it had left in place controls which among other things prevented French residents from holding foreign currency accounts in, for example, sterling or dollars.
Mr Beregovoy said that the French government's decision showed ‘our desire to accelerate economic and monetary union’.
Mrs Thatcher was apparently informed of the French decision during the Strasbourg session on monetary union last weekend and it may well have encouraged her to believe that Britain's European partners are now ready to take the difficult decisions which are a prelude to monetary union.
Of the leading economies within the Exchange Rate Mechanism, only Italy still has exchange controls in place.
Some of those close to the Prime Minister have argued that if the artificial barrier posed by exchange controls were removed, the French franc and Italian lira would be forced to face the reality of the free market.
There was little indication from the reaction of the French franc yesterday that market forces were about to unleash fresh instability on ERM.
The main factor in yesterday's currency trading was less the French decision to remove controls and more the underlying strength of the DM.
The West German currency continues on its upward path, in expectation of tightening of credit conditions by the Bundesbank early next year, and the buoyant prospects for the domestic economy.
The rush towards economic, if not political, integration for the two Germanys has led economists substantially to upgrade growth prospects for an even more prosperous Germany.
This has to some extent demonstrated the pivotal role the DM will play even in an enlarged ERM which includes sterling.
Politics, page 6; City Notebook, page 13
Government rift over 999 dispute *.
By Alan Travis and Political Correspondent Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
THE first split in the Government's ranks over the ambulance workers dispute appeared last night when it was disclosed that Mr David Trippier, the Environment Minister, had written to the Health Secretary saying he could see the logic in the ambulance workers' case.
Mr Trippier, who was said to be expressing the views of his constituents, wrote to Mr Kenneth Clarke on November 24 asking him to look again at the original 6.5 per cent pay offer, saying it was not fair.
He refused to publish the letter.
Hopes of a settlement at tomorrow's peace talks were dispelled yesterday when Mr David Rennie, chairman of the management side of the Whitley Council pay bargaining forum, ruled out any chance of a fresh offer to the ambulance unions.
Mr Roger Poole, chief union negotiator, accused Mr Clarke, of sabotaging the talks after the statement made it clear that the 9 per cent 18 month offer would not be improved.
It was stressed last night that Mr Trippier, once Mr Clarke's parliamentary private secretary, was unaware that a 9 per cent‘final offer’ had been made a week before his letter.
Mr Clarke, speaking on ITN's News At Ten last night, tried to limit the damage from the disclosure, saying: ‘All ministers, including David Trippier, agree with me that it cannot be right that National Health Service pay can be determined by industrial action of this kind taken by militant trade unions.
‘I do not accept that David Trippier is supporting the action of the trade unions, or is asking me to go to arbitration, or expects that the management, having made a final offer, should move from that final offer.’
But the disclosure is nevertheless damaging to the Government as the lock out of ambulance workers continues towards Christmas.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow Health Secretary, said the letter showed the Government could not defend the position.
‘David Trippier has dissented from the Government's position,’ he said.
‘Maybe he should consider his position.’
Talks aimed at settling the baggage handlers strike over work rosters, which has shut down Manchester Airport to passenger flights for two days, ended last night with a deal in sight.
The airport was set to remain closed today as talks continued, but a spokesman said the management was ‘fairly hopeful’ of a successful outcome.
Ministers face criticism on Barlow Clowes *.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE Ombudsman's report on the Barlow Clowes affair in which 18,000 investors lost £100 million is expected to be highly critical of ministers' role in the affair.
It is likely to be submitted to the Commons before the Christmas recess begins next week.
The Ombudsman, Sir Anthony Barrowclough, is telling MPs that the report is being finalised, though an early draft is believed to recommend that not all the investors should be compensated for the losses they suffered when the investment group crashed 18 months ago.
It is believed that the report will criticise successive corporate affairs ministers at the department of Trade and Industry, despite a claim last year by Lord Young, the former Trade and Industry Secretary, that an internal investigation concluded his department could not be held responsible, and could even throw the spotlight on the role of Lord Young.
The case turns on whether the department was legally responsible for supervising the group's unauthorised offshore arm, Barlow Clowes International, where most of the losses were incurred.
Some 11,000 investors had money in the offshore fund.
The report — which has taken more than a year to prepare in one of the most complex inquiries undertaken by Sir Anthony's office — will address the question of when the department first became negligent if it is shown to have been aware of the possible difficulties.
The report will also examine the department's decision to license Barlow Clowes's United Kingdom fund.
The report has been with the department's accountants for more than three weeks as they check its factual accuracy.
The exercise has enabled the officials involved in the original decisions to respond to the findings.
The Government will publish its response when the report is released.
Sir Anthony wrote yesterday to Mr Alf Morris, Labour MP for Manchester, Wythenshawe, two of whose constituents were the subject of a test case.
The couple, in their mid-70s, lost their life savings of £65,000 and had to sell their home.
Mr Morris said: ‘Many of the investors in Barlow Clowes were elderly people and some 500 have died since they lost their money.
‘If the Ombudsman's report recommends that compensation should be paid, the Government should act urgently and honour it.’
Business rate ‘will add 1pc to prices’.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE £8 billion national business rate will add 1 per cent to the retail price index and provoke political protests, Mr John Banham, the Confederation of British Industry director, predicted yesterday.
The full impact will become apparent early next month when the Inland Revenue publishes the results of its first revaluation of commercial rateable values for 15 years.
Mr Banham warned an Association of Metropolitan Authorities conference in London yesterday: ‘There may well be half a million furious business people, either with severely disappointed expectations because they expected to see their rate bills cut by half, or facing a succession of real increases of 20 per cent in their annual rates bills.
‘What seems now a cloud no bigger than a man's hand could turn out to be yet another inflationary and political storm for a government that could do without either.’
The introduction of a national business rate from April 1 is part of the Government's changes in local government finance which include the poll tax.
The rate will be fixed by Whitehall rather than local authorities.
Mr Banham accused Conservative MPs of failing to wake up to the issue, and of being ‘intellectually absent by command of the whips.
It was safe to assume, he said, that no more than a dozen MPs knew whether they should be reaching for the champagne or the shotgun when the Government announced last month that the business rate was to be set at 36p in the pound last month.
Mr David Hunt, the Local Government Minister, tried this week to blunt some of the anger in the business world by announcing a small concession in arrangements to ease the rate's introduction.
According to Inland Revenue estimates for England some 500,000 businesses, mainly in the South and West, will see their rates bills rise by 20 per cent in real terms for at least the next two years.
Nearly 200,000 of them will face such rises for at least five years.
Some 100,000 businesses, mainly in the North and the Midlands, which were expecting their rate bills to fall by at least 50 per cent, will see no significant change, said Mr Banham.
His stance was supported yesterday by the British Chambers of Commerce, which demanded that the Treasury rather than businesses in the North and Midlands should finance the three-year safety net to cushion the rate's impact in the South.
Mr Bryan Gould, the shadow Environment Secretary, predicted that the ‘nationalisation of the business rate’ would mean that businesses would not be interested in keeping local poll tax bills down, but would instead lobby hard for as much poll tax money to be spent on local services for them.
He said: ‘We can therefore expect, on government logic, local Conservative Associations to be taken over by business ratepayers bent on winning control of councils to promote spending on services and goods they either supply or would benefit them.
‘Housing, education and social services would obviously take a back seat.’
News in brief: French to drop exchange control.
The French smoothed Britain's way to accepting the Exchange Rate Mechanism by announcing the dropping of exchange controls.
Page 24.
Tapping the market.
More than 2.7 million water investors made a paper profit of nearly £400.
Page 13.
Grains of truth.
The Government and its chief medical officer disagreed over whether sugar is unhealthy.
Page 4.
Price of change.
April's introduction of a new business rate could add 1 per cent to inflation, the CBI said.
Page 5.
Deaths plea.
Forty thousand children are dying needlessly every day in the Third World and should be saved by international efforts, says Unicef.
Page 10.
Ambulance hopes fade.
Hopes of tomorrow's talks on the ambulance dispute producing a settlement before Christmas faded when the management side ruled out any new offer.
Page 3
Twelve held in crack raids.
Police, accompanied by community leaders, made 12 arrests yesterday after a three-week undercover operation in Notting Hill, west London, following complaints about an increase in gangs supplying the cocaine-based drug crack.
Prisoners escape.
Two prisoners escaped over the wall of Oxford prison last night by tying clothes together.
Police warned against approaching Richard Sean Hyland, 26, from Kentish Town, London, who was serving four years for armed robbery.
His accomplice was Steven Patrick Raymond, 44, from Highbury, London.
Drink-drive probation.
Jeremy Smith, 26, unemployed, of Leicester, was put on probation yesterday and banned from driving for 30 years after being convicted of his eighth drink-driving offence..
CND leader jailed.
Mr Robert Cole, a CND vice-chairman, was jailed for 14 days at Blaenau Ffestiniog, Gwynned, for refusing to pay a £150 fine imposed after he chained himself to a container of nuclear waste last August..
NUM loses appeal.
In the Court of Appeal yesterday the National Union of Mineworkers failed to overturn an injunction granted to its South Wales area in May, banning the union from issuing ballot papers for an election for a new national vice-president because of an ‘unlawful’ ruling by Mr Arthur Scargill.
Statue wins reprieve.
The Government yesterday extended by three months an export ban on Canova's marble statue The Three Graces, to give time to raise £7.6 million to prevent it going to the Getty Museum in California..
Habitat overcharged.
The Habitat store chain was yesterday fined £8,800 at Basingstoke for overcharging.
In January Habitat was fined £3,600 for similar offences in Croydon, south London.
Flowers but no remedy at Clapham a year on.
By Owen Bowcott
EXACTLY a year to the day after the Clapham rail disaster, the 6.20am Wessex Electrics express from Poole drew into Waterloo station without a two-way radio in the driver's cab.
Jumping down at the end of his journey, the driver admitted: ‘I still haven't got a phone.
I have to use one by the side of the rails.’
The driver of the same express was killed a year earlier when his locomotive careered into the rear of a stationary train from Basingstoke which had stopped to report a signals fault.
‘The only thing I'm worried about is getting up in the morning,’ said yesterday's driver, who asked not to be named.
His guard, Mr Robert Woodford, aged 23, explained: ‘We don't talk about the crash a great deal.’
Installing direct communications between drivers and signalmen was one of the recommendations of the report by Sir Anthony Hidden QC into the crash on December 12 1988, which killed 35 people.
On board the same early morning express yesterday from Poole — via Bournemouth, Southampton and Basingstoke — few passengers marked the anniversary of the disaster.
In a buffet car a group of five regular commuters toasted the memory of absent friends with glasses of champagne while they tucked into quails' eggs.
‘We are toasting missing colleagues who were with us in the buffet and who would have preferred us to do it this way, instead of being sombre,’ said Mr Christopher Reeves, a consultant engineer who joined the train at Southampton Parkway station.
‘Whenever the train brakes hard nowadays it shakes you up.
You do sweat a bit.’
His companion, Mr David Gilks, aged 41, who works in an insurance company, added: ‘This is how our friends would have liked us to remember them, rather than being stone-faced around a memorial.’
Mr Gilks was in the buffet car when the crash occurred.
He was knocked unconscious.
When he came round he saw the side of the train had been ripped open.
He clambered out and was taken to hospital suffering from cuts and bruises.
At Poole the contingent of reporters, sent out to jog the nation's memory into reliving the disaster, outnumbered legitimate travellers by nearly four to one.
In the darkened carriages most commuters, snatching another hour's sleep before dawn or reading newspapers, seemed unaware of the anniversary.
‘I think a lot of those people who remember most strongly are not turning up today,’ said an accountant from Poole.
‘Most people who use the train regularly know everyone who gets on at the first few stops.
There are some regulars missing.’
At Southampton a man in a pin-striped suit said he would prefer not to talk about the crash.
By then the tireless extroverts had gravitated to the buffet cars and were cracking jokes.
The train did not slow at the scene of the accident.
On the embankment up which rescuers had carried survivors, a small group had gathered to pay their respects.
Wreaths were laid at the base of a marble memorial.
Among those present was Mr Gordon Pettit, general manager for Southern Region.
He placed a wreath of yellow and white carnations with the message: ‘With deepest sympathy, from all those who work in British Rail Southern Region.’
Two ambulancemen, Mr Alan Woods and Mr Rob Lloyd of Putney Ambulance Station, who were among the first to arrive at the scene of the disaster a year ago, watched the morning trains speed by.
Mr Woods said: ‘It all comes flooding back.
We were the second crew on the scene and we did not leave the crash site all day.’
Ten minutes late, the overcrowded 6.20am express rumbled past Clapham Junction.
By that stage, passengers were already standing.
Later British Rail explained that the programme to fit radio telephones in all drivers' cabs was to be completed in January 1993.
It may be speeded up, a spokesman added.
MPs vote 3-1 to support war crime prosecutions.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
MPS LAST night voted by an overwhelming majority to support moves to allow the prosecution of alleged Nazi war criminals living in Britain.
The 348 to 123 vote, a majority of 225, is likely to provide irresistible pressure on the Cabinet when it decides within the next few weeks whether to press ahead with the necessary legislative changes.
It is possible that an enabling bill will be brought before Parliament next year, and the first trial could be within a year.
Such a decision would bring Britain in line with America, Canada, and Australia.
The prospects of cabinet endorsement of the change were enhanced by the personal backing of the Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, and the support of the Prime Minister.
Cabinet members voted nine to three in favour of allowing prosecutions to proceed, with 10 not voting.
Sir Bernard Braine, the Father of the House, who moved last night's proposal, said after the vote: ‘It was a startling majority.
We are very pleased.
‘The Hetherington report said we should get moving quickly.
Now we must.
The majority of people in this country have no idea of the awfulness of what was done.’
The emotional three-hour debate centred on whether to allow prosecution in this country of people who are now British citizens for acts of murder and manslaughter, or culpable homicide, committed as war crimes in Germany and German-occupied territory during the second world war.
MPs were given a free vote.
Their decision was in sharp contrast to last week's discussion in the Lords, where opinion fell heavily against proceeding against alleged war criminals.
This month's parliamentary debates follow the report of the war crimes inquiry, headed by the former Director of Public Prosecutions, Sir Thomas Hetherington, which followed up 301 allegations.
It was set up after a three-year campaign by an all-party war crimes group.
The report investigated seven cases in detail, and in four of them said there was sufficient evidence to mount a prosecution.
It said 122 other cases deserved further investigation.
An unpublished appendix to the report details allegations of the mass murder of Jews in the Baltic states, Byelorussia, and the Ukraine during the war by the Nazis and their collaborators.
The Home Secretary stressed last night that the Government had not yet decided whether to bring forward legislation, but he said he did not believe the Hetherington report could just be interred.
‘Sometimes one is brought face to face with facts which cannot be buried.
The terrible stories revealed in its pages, the evidence of foul deeds which is presented, cannot just be put aside or ignored.’
But as in last week's debate in the House of Lords concern was expressed about retrospective legislation and the practical difficulties of prosecuting alleged war criminals.
The former Prime Minister, Mr Edward Heath, opposed changing the law on these grounds, arguing that the main figures had been dealt with at Nuremberg.
‘There has been enormous pressure on this, and it has all come from California.
We know all about that,’ said Mr Heath, referring to the headquarters of the Simon Wiesenthal Centre, which has collected evidence of Nazi war criminals.
Politics, page 6
Chief medical officer disputes government statement Sugar report sparks clash on health risk.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Correspondent
THE Government and its chief medical officer clashed yesterday over the dangers of sugar.
Baroness Hooper, the Government's junior health spokeswoman, put her name to a press release which effectively said people could eat sugar without worry.
The press release accompanied a report on Dietary Sugars and Human Disease, which took a government-appointed panel of experts more than two years to prepare.
But Sir Donald Acheson, the Government's chief medical officer, highlighted paragraphs of the report which link sugar consumption with obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, and gallstones.
Sir Donald intervened after journalists at a Department of Health press conference questioned the veracity of remarks attributed to Baroness Hooper.
She said the report, from the Committee on the Medical Aspects of Food Policy (Coma), ‘does not support the view, as some people would have us believe, that sugars, at usual intake, have a direct adverse effect on general health.’
But Sir Donald said the report's advice was unequivocal.
‘Everyone should restrict sugar intake generally,’ he said.
The advice was not restricted to the prevention of tooth decay.
He described the ‘indirect link’ between sugar and a number of serious diseases and drew specific attention to the report's conclusion that sugar may contribute to excess food consumption and obesity.
Obesity, in turn, plays an important part in the development of a number of diseases, including diabetes, raised blood pressure, hyperlipidaemia (raised cholesterol), and arterial disease (disease of the heart and arteries) and gallstones, the report said.
Professor Harry Keen, the chairman of the Coma report, concurred with Sir Donald's assessment.
It would be ‘almost mischievous’ to blame sugar directly for causing heart disease, but it has a ‘seductive quality’without offering any nutrients other than calories.
‘If people are trying to reduce weight gain, especially because obesity affects blood fats and they want to protect their coronary arteries, then reducing sugar would be a good idea,’ he said.
The sugar industry has campaigned to separate sugar from medical conditions other than tooth decay, and has suggested that natural sugars, carbohydrates and frequency of consumption are more important to cavities than sugar itself.
The industry contributes widely to academic research.
Professor Keen denied yesterday that natural sugars were a significant cause of tooth decay.
Added sugar was the prime cause and levels of tooth decay, which had fallen from bad to mediocre, could not fall further until people, and especially children, cut back more on sugar, he said.
The British are among the biggest sugar consumers in the developed world, eating around 100grams or 4oz a day.
Consumption is not falling because cutbacks in the home have been offset by greater use of sugar in prepared foods and takeaways.
The Coma report recommends a general cut in sugar consumption and a substitution of fruit, vegetables and starchy foods.
It urges manufacturers to label sugar on foods but stops short of demanding legislation.
The Coronary Prevention Group yesterday welcomed the report.
‘I was astonished when I read the press release which bore no relation to the real recommendations in the report,’ said its assistant director, Ms Anne Hueghan.
The Sugar Bureau said yesterday that the report had dispelled myths and had concluded that sugar, apart from tooth decay ‘poses no threat to health’ at present consumption levels.
27,000 jobs on move to regions.
By David Lawson
COSTS and labour shortages are forcing a growing number of companies to flee from London.
More than 7,000 jobs were moved in 1989 and almost 20,000 more are due over the next two years with the government in the van, say researchers Jones Lang Wootton in a survey published yesterday.
Twenty companies moved this year, 49 are set to go by 1993 and another 23 are considering moving — and not just to the suburbs.
Half are going to the regions, especially the south-west.
Office rents have soared in London over the past couple of years but political factors are also significant as government departments make up more than a quarter of moves.
The Ministry of Defence is decamping staff to Newcastle while the Department of Social Security is sending 350 jobs to Belfast.
Among the private groups BP Exploration transferred 400 jobs to Glasgow this year.
Next year Chase Manhattan is sending 480 to Bournemouth and Barclays 1,000 to Coventry.
Embryo research backed.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
STRONG support for research on human embryos up to 14 days old came from the Medical Research Council yesterday, which adds its voice to that of the Royal Society, the Royal Colleges, and the medical charities opposing a ban.
The issue is the key feature of the Human and Embryology Bill which has just had its second reading in the House of Lords.
Dr Martin Johnson, a scientist speaking for the MRC, said the council spent £5 million last year on embryo and related research to help the 275,000 couples in Britain who have fertility problems at some time.
Central to the debate is the status of the human egg after fertilisation.
The council, like most scientists, argues that only after 14 days do the cells that will become the embryo become distinct from those of the surrounding tissue.
The term ‘pre-embryo’ is used to describe this stage, and would be the limit of any research.
The bill presents alternative clauses on whether or not to permit strictly-controlled research on early embryos, now carried out under the control of the Voluntary Licensing Authority.
Speaking at the launch of the MRC's annual report, Dr Johnson said the consequences for infertility treatment were serious if research was banned.
‘The capacity of the medical profession to improve treatment would stand still; it would be unethical to try to improve techniques.
‘Doctors involved with treating the infertile will leave the field or leave the country; many countries are only too willing to tap our expertise.’
Students face disruption over rejected pay deals.
By Celia Weston, Chief Education Correspondent
THOUSANDS of students could have their studies disrupted following the decision by the largest lecturers' union last night to reject the latest pay offers for staff in further and higher education colleges and polytechnics.
The decision provoked the polytechnics to say they would review the future of national bargaining, a move which has been gaining support among employers since the polytechnics gained their independence earlier this year.
The Government supports greater pay flexibility through local bargaining.
The National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education, which represents staff in both sectors, last night rejected an improved offer for further education staff and decided to go ahead with a one-day strike tommorrow and to begin boycotts of marking and examination setting.
Natfhe also rejected the interim pay offer from the Polytechnic and Colleges Employers' Forum for polytechnic and higher education college lecturers.
The decision could disrupt the studies of more than 350,000 students.
Like their colleagues in further education, the 17,000 lecturers in the sector have voted for a marking and exam boycott.
Mr Neil Fletcher, leader of the local authority employers, said Natfhe should cancel its strike and postpone the marking and exam boycott to give lecturers time to consider the new deal.
‘If this is responsible trade unionism, I'm a banana,’ he said.
Mr Roger Ward, chief executive of the Polytechnic and Colleges Employers Forum, said it was regrettable that Natfhe seemed determined to take on the employers right across the sector.
‘We will be convening a conference on Friday with the heads of all our institutions to review the future of national pay bargaining,’ he said.
The employers yesterday increased their offer to further education lecturers from 5.3 per cent for the year to April, to 8 per cent, with a £700 one-off, lump sum payment for the 17 months to September next year.
They gave Natfhe and the other unions until January 31 to accept or forfeit the offer.
Half the lump sum would be paid then and the other half on April 1.
The interim offer from the Polytechnic and Colleges Employers Forum included a 6 per cent pay rise from April to September this year and early negotiations on a further pay rise backdated to September 1.
Natfhe's executive last night recommended rejection of the offer because it was conditional on lecturers accepting changes to their working hours and because the £700 lump sum would not be included in basic pay calculations next year.
The employers are adamant that an agreement on working hours must be part of the deal.
Mr Geoff Woolf, Natfhe general secretary, said the offer amounted to only a 4.67 per cent increase with strings for the year to January.
Ministers consider green energy policy.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent
RADICAL changes in Government energy policy are being considered by a Cabinet committee which is fashioning the promised white paper on environmental issues.
Mr Christopher Patten, the Environment Secretary, using ‘value for money’ as his argument, is believed to be challenging the traditional thinking of the ‘ungreen’transport, energy, and treasury ministers.
Some measures may be in train before the white paper is published.
Mr John Wakeham, the Energy Secretary, is considering eleventh hour changes to electricity privatisation to allow new private power companies to make money from energy conservation as well as electricity generation.
Under the current wording of the legislation, companies can only make profits from supplying electricity and building new power stations.
Mr David Gee, director-designate of Friends of the Earth, published a report yesterday supporting Mr Patten, who he described as a ‘radical green’.
Getting Out of the Greenhouse shows that strict economic criteria could be used to modify energy policy to cut Britain's output of carbon dioxide gases, the biggest contributor to the greenhouse effect.
Using the Government's own research, Dr Tim Jackson, an environmental consultant, shows that carbon dioxide emissions could be cut by 46 per cent in 15 years without building any nuclear power stations.
He studied 17 ways of saving carbon dioxide emissions, in order of cost-effectiveness, and nuclear power came 15th.
Mr Simon Roberts, the FoE energy campaigner, said this illustrated the Government's ramshackle approach to energy policy.
The Department of Energy discovered the true costs of nuclear power after months of considering electricity privatisation.
‘They were not in control of energy policy.
They simply did not know what was going on.
They were in the hands of vested interests, not in possession of the facts,’ said Mr Roberts.
The report demands that the Government adopt value for money as its criteria, set targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions, and assess environmental taxation schemes.
Transport planning should be integrated with energy policy.
Switching from electricity to gas for heating, the most cost-effective way of reducing carbon dioxide emissions, should be obligatory in new buildings.
Improved efficiency in electrical appliances could be encouraged by making labelling on new items mandatory so consumers could choose the ‘greeenest model’.
Other cost-effective ways of reducing emissions included combined heat and power for housing, factories and hospitals, and lighting efficiency.
Some utilities in the United States had reduced electricity demand by giving low energy light bulbs to poor families.
Resources were finite and the £1million a day cost to the taxpayer of building the Sizewell B pressurised water reactor could be diverted to more cost-effective alternatives.
VAT should be removed from energy-efficient products.
Mr Gee said: ‘Scientists keep telling us that the situation is far more urgent than politicians are admitting.
We have 10 years to make the decisions which could save the planet.
We are banking on Mrs Thatcher realising this.
She could go down in history as the leader who pulled us back from the brink.’
Kidney donor tells of pain.
By Gareth Parry
TWO TURKS who sold kidneys for transplants in London were in so much pain when they were discharged that one had to carry the other out of the hospital, the General Medical Council's disciplinary committee heard yesterday.
Mr Coskun Yenici, aged 28, who sold his kidney for £3,000 to finance medical treatment for his father, had to carry the other donor, Mrs Hatice Anutkan, out of the Wellington Humana hospital after the surgery last November.
Mr Yenici told the committee in London he had believed he would be in the private hospital at least a month, but was ‘in and out within a week’.
Speaking through an interpreter, Mr Yenici — the last of four Turkish donors to give evidence — told Mr Roger HendersonQC, for the GMC: ‘We were suffering, in pain.
I left hospital at the same time as Mrs Anukan.
Her pains were far more severe.
I was carrying her in my arms out of hospital.
We went to a cold boarding house.’
Mr Yenici had put a Kidney for Sale advert in an Istanbul newspaper.
It was answered by a Turkish ‘kidney broker’, who said the £5,000 he was asking was too much.
Mr Yenici said he accepted £3,000 when the broker assured him his organ would be transplanted into a poor person in England.
The broker, Tunc Kunter, brought to London Mr Yenici and Mrs Hatice Anutkan, who had been left to raise two children alone and wanted money to meet debts.
The committee had heard she sold her kidney for £3,265.
Dr Raymond Crockett, a Harley Street kidney specialist, Mr Michael Joyce a urologist at Guy's Hospital, and Mr Michael Bewick, a leading kidney transplant surgeon all deny professional misconduct for their roles in removing single kidneys from the Turks and transplanting into private patients at the hospital in London.
The hearing continues today.
Mobile clinic cuts toll of Aids.
THE incidence of sexually-transmitted diseases among Plymouth's prostitutes has been cut by Britain's only mobile Aids clinic, which hands out free condoms and needles to intravenous drug users.
The service, which costs about £2,000 a year, also includes injections of donated Hepatitis B vaccine.
Mr Terry Roberts, a district public health adviser, started the Aids Truck, as it is known by its clients, two years ago.
The old Bedford ambulance is staffed by 10 trained volunteers, and patrols twice weekly in the red light district.
‘All signs are that it is making a real impact in reducing the spread of Aids,’ Mr Roberts said.
‘The most effective way to spread the message about safe sex is through prostitutes.
A good hooker can reach a wide audience.
‘Now we have some of the best-informed prostitutes in the country, and they have educated their clients.’
Since the service started the incidence of all types of sexually-transmitted diseases among prostitutes has fallen sharply.
Only two cases of gonorrhea were reported in the first 19 months, compared with four a week previously.
Prostitutes waiting their turn for treatment at the mobile Aids clinic in Plymouth's red light districtPHOTOGRAPH: ROGER BAMBER
Tang horse fetches record £3.7 million.
APOTTERY horse (left) made in China in the eighth century was sold at Sotheby's in London yesterday to a Japanese dealer for a £3.7million, a world auction record for any Chinese artefact, writes Donald Wintersgill.
The horse was sent last month to Hong Kong for exhibition, but was stolen from a warehouse there on November 14.
Police recovered it from a flat in Hong Kong on December 2 and arrested three men.
The figure, which is slightly damaged, was made during the Tang dynasty (681-907 AD), and put in a tomb.
The seller was the British Rail Pension Fund, which invested £40million in the 1970s on art and antiques, which are being sold off.
Huddersfield pours out the hard sell.
By Martin Wainwright
EAU d'Huddersfield, until now submerged among gritty northern brews like dandelion and burdock, is about to mount an assault on the Perrier market for continental mineral water.
Natural water from two 300ft boreholes beneath Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, is for the first time to be bottled, and sold to France.
A Pennine Spring label, depicting Mag Beck waterfalls behind Ben Shaw's Huddersfield drinks factory, will advertise a ‘pure, hard water’ previously available only in a sugary and distinctly un-French range of fizzy pops.
‘We've always used the bore water for our soft drinks, like dandelion and burdock and Irn Brew,’ said Mr Nigel Smith, Shaw's managing director.
‘It has taken the rise in bottled water drinking to make it practicable to sell it on its own.’
Judge adjourns decision on contempt to await House of Lords ruling over magazine writer who has refused to reveal his source Jail reprieve for journalist.
By Joanna Coles
ADECISION on whether a trainee journalist should be jailed for contempt of court was yesterday adjourned until next month pending a hearing in the House of Lords.
Mr Justice Hoffman said in the High Court that he had decided to suspend judgment until he knew how soon the House of Lords was likely to hear an appeal against an order forcing Mr William Goodwin, aged 23, who works on the Engineer magazine, to reveal confidential information.
After being assured by Mr Geoffrey Robertson, QC, defending, that the appeal process would be dealt with this week, he said he had decided to suspend judgment until January 15.
Earlier yesterday, the Court of Appeal refused an application by Mr Goodwin's employers, the publishers Morgan Grampian, to revoke the order forcing him to hand over notes containing confidential financial information concerning a company, which cannot be named for legal reasons.
The company alleges that the information came from a stolen document, and wants to take action against the source.
Mr John McDonnell, QC, for the company, had urged Mr Justice Hoffman to exercise the court's power to the full, saying that it might take a year for the case to be heard by the House of Lords.
The judge agreed that ‘it would be a denial of justice’ if the case took a year, but was told by Mr Robertson that an appeal would be dealt with this week.
Mr Robertson said it was ‘a reasonable prospect’ to suppose the House of Lords might take a different view of the case, and that should be taken into account.
Justice should be done but not in superabundance, he added.
Mr Goodwin said afterwards that he was glad to be spending Christmas at liberty.
The journalist's solicitor, Mr Geoffrey Bindman, added that he was ‘very satisfied’ at the outcome, not only because of the merits of the case but because his client had not had a chance to put his case against Mr Justice Hoffman's earlier ruling to give up his notes.
Rejecting Morgan Grampian's appeal earlier, Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, said he ‘most emphatically’ refused to grant a stay on the contempt proceedings because Mr Goodwin was not prepared to comply with any order to disclose his notes.
Sitting with Lords Justices Gibson and McCowan, he said: ‘If he has no intention of disclosing his source, whatever the House of Lords, which is the ultimate court of justice in this country, may say, then we see absolutely no reason why we should assist him.’
Morgan Grampian has given a court undertaking not to publish the information.
Lord Donaldson said that Mr Goodwin was a very young trainee journalist who only left university this summer.
‘His investigative talent, which he displayed in this instance, will no doubt stand him in good stead in the future and I hope that he will have a long and distinguished career,’ he said.
But it was the duty of the courts to enforce the laws made by Parliament.
The long-standing claim by journalists to be bound by honour to protect their sources should be subject to the law, as were those of doctors and bankers.
Four years for New York's hotel queen.
By Mary Brasier in New York
MRS Leona Helmsley, the hotel queen dethroned earlier this year by a New York court that convicted her as a tax cheat, was yesterday sentenced to four years' imprisonment and fined $7 million (£4.5 million).
Mrs Helmsley, aged 69, stood stony-faced as Judge John Walker sentenced her on 33 counts of tax evasion and conspiracy to evade taxes.
He said the terms should run concurrently so that she would serve four years.
She was found guilty by a jury on August 30.
Her 80-year-old husband, Harry, had been declared mentally unfit to stand trial.
Mrs Helmsley, dressed in black, had earlier walked to the front of the court and sobbingly begged the judge not to impose a prison term.
‘Your Honour, I'm more ashamed than anyone could ever imagine.
I beg you: don't let me lose Harry, too.
Please don't.
All my life has been work and each other.’
She is also to serve three years' probation and do community service at Hale House in Harlem.
In addition, Mrs Helmsley has to repay the taxes with interest to the Federal Government and New York state.
By the judge's reckoning, this comes to close to $2 million.
Mrs Helmsley will appeal against her conviction and sentence.
She was released on bail and driven to her Park Avenue flat.
If the conviction is upheld, the hotel queen's new palace could be a women's prison in Connecticut, about 20 miles from the $11 million mansion she refurbished at the taxpayers' expense by charging repairs to her business.
Mrs Helmsley was found guilty after a trial replete with tales of how she bawled out employees and charged $12 department store brassieres to her hotel.
‘Only the little people pay taxes,’ she told her housekeeper.
Love to loathe, page 24
Effect of student loans ‘unknown’.
ATORY MP yesterday made the first admission that the Government does not know whether children from poorer backgrounds will be put off higher education by the introduction of top-up loans, writes Celia Weston.
Under the Government's scheme, the Treasury will meet the costs of setting up and running a private company owned by banks to administer it.
Public money will be used to lend up to £420 a year to students in full-time higher education, which they will pay back at an inflation-linked rate of interest.
Critics of the Education (Student Loans) Bill, say that incurring debts will particularly discourage children from working-class families from going into higher education.
The Government says loans, to be introduced from next autumn, will share the burden of student maintenance more fairly between taxpayers, parents and students.
Mr Alastair Burt, MP for Bury North, told the first meeting of the committee examining the bill, that no one knew if it would be a disincentive or not.
‘There is evidence on both sides,’ he said.
Mr Burt is a former parliamentary secretary to the previous Education Secretary, Mr Kenneth Baker.
The Government alone could not provide the money for the further increase in student numbers it wanted.
‘If we were talking about tuition fees, not maintenance, then talking about serious disincentives would carry a great deal of weight,’ he said.
But the bill only concerned maintenance.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's education spokesman, earlier failed to convince the committee that the decision not to include Mr John MacGregor, the Education Secretary, on the committee was treating parliamentary procedures with contempt.
Thatcher eases her line on ERM.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent
MRS Thatcher last night coupled a softening of her hostility to British membership of the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) with a combative restatement of her intention to fight all the way against implementation of the Social Charter, the later stages of the Delors monetary union plan and greater powers for the Strasbourg parliament.
With senior cabinet colleagues making discreetly plain their desire to enter the ERM as soon as practicable, the Prime Minister ceased to give the impression that she wants to add further conditions to those announced at the Madrid summit in June.
Those conditions still stood, she told MPs, ‘but no one is suggesting that we dot every ‘i’ and cross every ‘t’before we look at it.’
The Prime Minister's routine report to the Commons after the European Community Council of Ministers' summit in Strasbourg last weekend produced modest evidence of what one Tory called a ‘softer and subtler’ tone towards the European project.
But Mr Neil Kinnock, the Opposition leader, insisted that ‘the rational and constructive’ tone of the Strasbourg communique occurred ‘in spite, not because of her.’
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal and Democratic leader, said the other community members had ‘not found her irritating only because they found her totally irrelevant.’
But the gratitude of pro-Market backbenchers was offset by the assurances she offered to anti-Marketeers like Tory Jonathan Aitken, and Labour's Peter Shore.
She sidestepped Mr Shore's demand for a select committee inquiry into the ‘enormous’ threat to Westminster's powers posed by the last two stages of the Delors plan, centralised banking and budgetary controls.
But she stressed her belief that Britain is winning allies for opposing what was only ‘a blueprint’.
‘We are in the early stage of what will be a long debate in Europe,’ she said.
‘A number of different viewpoints are already beginning to emerge.
Britain will play a full and constructive part in the debate while reflecting the view expressed in all parts of the House that stages two and three of the Delors proposals are not acceptable.’
Contrary to the French view that the forthcoming inter-governmental conference on EC unity will complete its agenda by late 1991, the Prime Minister insisted ‘no time limit is set for its work.’
Consistent with her belief that the single market is the key to European prosperity and ‘closer integration’ as well as‘an example and opportunity’to Eastern Europe, Mrs Thatcher stressed it at the expense of Delors and the Social Charter — for which she predicted ‘considerable difficulties’from many countries when detailed proposals emerged.
There was widespread support in the Commons for the summit's cautious formula on German reunification, which couples self-determination with respect for treaties and borders.
Dairy council and Boots rebuked over advertising.
THE Advertising Standards Authority yesterday rebuked two organisations for making bogus claims about the health advantages of milk, writes James Erlichman.
The National Dairy Council was reprimanded for an advertisement headlined: ‘Worried about Osteoporosis?
Consult a Specialist.’
The poster featured a milkman, implying that the calcium in milk could help overcome osteoporosis, a brittle-bone condition which afflicts some women after menopause.
The authority, which received five complaints, concluded that the claim was not justified.
Calcium might reduce the risk of osteoporosis but ‘there was no conclusive evidence demonstrating that calcium supplementation resulted in a regeneration of lost bone’.
The authority upheld a complaint in 1987 against Unigate over a similiar claim made for a calcium-enriched milk called Calcia.
The National Dairy Council had previously been criticised for a campaign suggesting that milk could protect children's teeth from decay, but a claim that the vitamin A in milk improved night vision was permitted.
In a separate adjudication yesterday, Boots was rebuked for claims made for its Farley's Junior Milk, a formula it recommends for babies over six months old.
Advertisements showed a cow's udder next to a bottle of the prepared milk, and claimed the Department of Health had recommended the product as better than cow's milk for babies older than six months.
The Department of Health said its guidelines did not justify the claim.
Ms Patti Rundall, of the Baby Milk Action Coalition which opposes unnecessary use of infant formulae, said: ‘We are delighted with the ruling, but Boots has not been chastened.’
Her organisation is preparing a complaint about a Boots advertisement for Ostermilk featuring a bra with two Ostermilk tins inside, which claims: ‘Any closer to breast milk and we would have to change the packaging.’
Hurd delays repatriation of boat people for a week PM rejects outrage on refugees.
By Michael White, Steven Vines cw-2Mark Tran and Patrick Wintour
THE Government last night signalled its determination to ride out the political storm surrounding its compulsory repatriation of Vietnamese refugees and said it would deport as many as necessary to convince thousands more would-be boat people not to seek refuge in Hong Kong next spring.
As a sop to angry opposition MPs and international agencies, the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, told the Commons that no more Vietnamese would follow the 51 deported during Monday night until the issue had been debated in the House on Tuesday.
The expulsions seem certain to resume, probably before Christmas.
Mrs Thatcher, in Commons exchanges with Mr Neil Kinnock, rejected criticism in Hong Kong and Britain and took a swipe at foreign critics by urging them to help accommodate the boat people.
Such criticism included a US call for an end to forced repatriation.
‘The United States deeply regrets the forcible repatriation of Vietnamese asylum seekers from Hong Kong to Vietnam.
We believe the British government should not proceed further with mandatory repatriation from Hong Kong,’ said the State Department spokesman, Mr Richard Boucher.
The US Secretary of State, Mr James Baker, had unsuccessfully tried to persuade Mrs Thatcher to relent when they met earlier this week.
Official US censure came amid strong condemnation from Capitol Hill.
The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr Claiborne Pell, called the expulsion a ‘disgrace’ and compared it to Britain's decision to forcibly return Cossacks to Stalin's Russia after the second world war.
In Hong Kong, expectations of violence in the camps did not materialise but aid workers believed the initial passivity would probably not last.
Eight men, 17 women and 26 children were flown from Hong Kong to Hanoi's Noi Bai airport.
A Vietnamese airport official said they went through the usual passport and customs procedures and then boarded buses to Soc San reception centre which was also the first stop for almost 600 boat people who returned voluntarily from Hong Kong earlier this year.
There are about 1,200 genuine volunteers in the Hong Kong camps awaiting repatriation.
In its need to show a determination to repatriate boat people, the Government decided it could not wait to send the volunteers home first.
That would have taken them past the vital February sailing time along what Whitehall claims is an organised escape route.
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees in Geneva called the British action ‘premature’ while other avenues were still open.
The steering committee on refugees resumes in Geneva next month.
In London, the British Refugee Council issued a damning attack on the Government's action following an emergency general meeting in London.
It was issued as Mr Hurd cited the council in his support when defending the repatriation to MPs.
Mr Hurd said the council had endorsed the screening procedure.
But the council said the Government's decision to repatriate had profound implications for asylum seekers all over the world and added that it was ‘utterly appalled’ by the action taken furtively in Hong Kong.
The action was ‘morally wrong, unworkable in practice, degrading to all involved and certain to provoke serious and justified criticism on the UK, the country ultimately responsible’.
It added that the procedures which have been in force since June 1988 for the screening of Vietnamese arrivals should be suspended forthwith.
In the Commons, Mr Kinnock accused Mrs Thatcher of ‘defending the indefensible’ by ‘giving instructions that in the middle of the night armed riot police raid children, women and men, shove them into cages and forcibly deport them to the country from which they fled’.
But, with the near-unanimous support of the Tory backbenches, the Prime Minister insisted over and over again that it was ‘perfectly in order’ to send illegal immigrants home.
And in an oblique swipe at her critics in the Bush Administration she added: ‘Those countries protesting at their return would do better if they offered to take some of them.’
Though some ministers are plainly more embarrassed than Mrs Thatcher appeared to be, the Government believes that the opposition has produced no serious alternatives to its blunt deterrent policy.
The numbers of non-political refugees could double to 80,000 when the sailing season starts in the South China Sea in February, the Government argues.
Ministers are convinced that unless they stand firm against economic migrants, the West faces ‘chaos and great unhappiness’ and they privately cite peremptory US treatment of unwanted immigrants from countries like Mexico and Haiti.
The unstated part of the equation is that they must be tough on the Vietnamese boat people because they are poised to be tough on Hong Kong's own claims to British passports.
Mr Hurd also announced that former Labour cabinet minister, Lord Ennals, would accompany Mr Timothy Raison, a Tory ex-immigration minister, to Vietnam next month to act as independent observers, bolstering the efforts of Britain's tiny diplomatic mission in Hanoi to monitor the 51's safe return.
Both men have been identified as broadly supporting the repatriation policy and Mr Hurd, who again appealed for voluntary agencies, including the United Nations, to end their boycott of the monitoring process, may be willing to expand the delegation.
The deportations have already been postponed several times under international pressure and Mr Hurd is the third Foreign Secretary to review a policy first outlined 15 months ago.
But there was little he or Mrs Thatcher in earlier exchanges, could do to mitigate what Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrats' leader, called ‘a shameful example’ of human rights policy and what the shadow Foreign Secretary, Mr Gerald Kaufman, said was ‘a policy of the three o'clock knock by police’.
Opposition leaders believe that more could have been done in Geneva to find an international solution.
Politics, page 6; Thailand may start own deportations, page 9; Leader comment, page 22
New code of practice for press.
THE recommended code of practice, which the Press Council hopes to operate from March 1 1990, is much fuller than that published recently by national newspapers, writes Georgina Henry.
It is based on ‘commonly accepted general principles of good journalistic practice’ built by council adjudications over many years.
The code states: Newspapers and journalists have a duty to defend the freedom of the press in the interests of the public, and to resist censorship.
The achievement of this objective is jeopardised by unethical conduct.
ACCURACY It is the duty of newspapers not to publish deliberately or recklessly inaccuracies or statements designed to mislead and to correct promptly and with due prominence significant inaccuracies which they have published, apologising for these where appropriate.
OPPORTUNITY TO REPLY It is the general duty of newspapers to allow a fair opportunity for reply when reasonably called for.
In particular it is the duty of newspapers to allow people or bodies they attack editorially a reasonable opportunity to reply.
PRIVACY Publishing information about the private lives of individuals without their consent is not acceptable unless there is a public interest overriding the right of privacy.
It is the duty of editors to ensure that inquiries into people's private lives are not undertaken, and information or pictures about their private lives are not published, unless inquiry or publication can be justified as being necessary in the public interest.
The Press Council's Declaration of Principle on Privacy should be observed.
COMMENT AND FACT Newspapers should not express comment on conjecture as fact and should distinguish between them, but they are free to be partisan.
SUBTERFUGE Newspapers and journalists serving them should use straightforward means to obtain information or pictures.
Their use of subterfuge can be justified only to obtain material which ought to be published in the public interest and could not be obtained by other means.
PAYMENT FOR ARTICLES Payments or offers of payment for stories, pictures or information should not be made to witnesses or potential witnesses in current criminal proceedings or to people engaged in crime or their associates except where the material concerned ought to be published in the public interest, and the payment is necessary to enable this to be done.
The Press Council's Declaration of Principle on Payment for Articles should be observed.
INTRUSION INTO GRIEF Newspapers and journalists serving them should avoid intruding into personal grief except where this is justified in the public interest.
In such cases inquiries should be carried out and approaches made with sympathy and discretion.
INNOCENT RELATIVES Newspapers should avoid identifying relatives of persons convicted or accused of crime unless the reference to them is directly relevant to the matter reported.
INTERVIEWING CHILDREN Journalists should not interview a child in the absence, or without the consent, of a parent or other adult who is responsible for the child at the time.
CHILDREN IN SEX CASES Save in exceptional circumstances where it is in the public interest to do so, newspapers should not, even where the law permits it, identify children as victims, witnesses or defendants involved in cases concerning sexual offences.
RAPE VICTIMS Newspapers should not identify victims of rape, or publish material likely to contribute to such identification.
PICTURES Newspapers should refrain from publishing pictures which are likely to exacerbate grief or cause distress, unless their publication is in the public interest.
RACE AND COLOUR Newspapers should not publish material likely to encourage discrimination on grounds of race or colour, and should avoid references to people's race or colour in prejudicial or pejorative contexts unless they are directly relevant to the story.
INSIDER DEALING Journalists should not use for their own profit financial information they receive professionally in advance of its general publication.
The Press Council's Declaration of Principle on Financial Journalism should be observed.
HOSPITALS Journalists should not use subterfuge to gain admission to hospitals or similar institutions.
They should identify themselves to a responsible official before entering, except in very rare cases where information which ought to be disclosed in the public interest could not otherwise be obtained.
CONFIDENTIAL SOURCES Journalists have a professional obligation to protect confidential sources of information.
Patten promises to strengthen hand of pollution agency.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent.
HER Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution will receive the necessary resources to police the controls in the forthcoming green bill, the Environment Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, said yesterday.
Speaking at an Association of Water Officers conference in London, he said he realised the credibility of the agency rested on the resources at its disposal.
Central to the green bill is the introduction of integrated pollution control.
Mr Patten said this meant that all releases of waste from large industrial processes would be considered together before a discharge licence was granted.
The pollution inspectorate, which is expected to oversee the process, is currently understaffed and personnel are suffering from low morale.
Industry has already complained to the Department of the Environment that controls will not be effective unless the inspectorate is respected and cowboy companies are aware that they will be prosecuted.
The inspectorate's director, Mr Brian Ponsford, who was found dead in his fume-filled car last week, had written a report outlining the difficulties of his department.
One of the problems, he said, was that staff were resisting a plan to relocate them from local offices, where they were in touch with industry, to remote district offices.
Mr Rod Perriman, the former chief inspector, resigned last year because senior inspectors were upset about the plans.
Five months later, Mr David Mills, deputy chief inspector for water and waste, resigned, too.
Mr Mike Thayer, director of the newly-created Western Region, resigned last month.
Press watchdog designs its teeth for the 1990s.
By Georgina Henry, Media Correspondent
THE Press Council yesterday unveiled wide-ranging proposals to improve its efficiency and win public and political confidence in voluntary regulation of the press.
The proposals include a detailed code of practice for journalists.
The 119-page report is the result of a 10-month review led by the Press Council's chairman, Mr Louis Blom-Cooper, who after meeting the full council yesterday said he expected it to take until next summer to reach final agreement on the recommendations.
Consultation with the council's constituent bodies and other interested parties will begin immediately, but the council is expecting considerable opposition — particularly from some national newspapers — to key recommendations.
Those likely to prove controversial include the new method of appointing press members of the council, the plan to directly involve proprietors in enforcing the code of practice on their editors, and the question of increased funding for the council.
But Mr Ken Morgan, director of the council, said yesterday he believed the recommendations would be supported.
The review follows persistent criticism that the Press Council is an ineffective body which commands little respect.
Its recommendations come two weeks after national newspapers published their own declaration of principles and code of practice designed to improve self-regulation and avoid legislation — an initiative supported by Mr Blom-Cooper.
Mr Peter Preston, editor of the Guardian, yesterday said: ‘This has been a long time coming and there are things in it like the enhanced role for proprietors that I'm not very keen on,’ he said.
‘But it is infinitely the best show in town at a time when legislation threatens press freedom and we shall do everything we can to support it through the arguments ahead.’
The main recommendations of the report are:
Membership: The size of the council will be reduced from 36 to 24, plus an independent chairman, split equally between press members and public members.
The Appointments Commission which selects public members will in future also select press members from names proposed ‘at large’, instead of being nominated by the constituent bodies.
Complaints procedure: The four-part procedure — complaint, response, comments and final rejoinder — will be retained for appropriate cases but a shorter and speedier process giving each side one opportunity to state its case should be introduced.
A ‘radical’ new procedure, under which complaints staff make inquiries by telephone or face to face with the parties to produce a summary for the complaints committee, is proposed.
The absolute right of an editor or journalist to opt for a personal hearing should be removed.
Privacy: an individual who believes a publication due to appear may constitute unwarranted invasion of privacy should be free to ask for the council's help.
If satisfied, the director should instantly contact the editor and put him on notice of a complaint.
Publication should remain at the editor's discretion.
Code of practice: Far-reaching proposals go much further than the code published by national newspapers.
Enforcement: The direct enforcement, by judicial or contractural means, of adjudications ‘is neither necessary nor desirable in the public interest’.
However, in appropriate cases an apology should be added to an adjudication.
The council should have the power to recommend the return of documents.
The council may recommend the nature and form of a reply or correction ‘including, in appropriate cases, where in the paper it should be published’.
Proprietors' or publishers' obligations: A positive public commitment to upholding the council's principles should be given.
The council expects its censure or serious criticism ‘to discredit editors and journalists at whom it is aimed and to be weighed by their employers’.
Complaints will in future be registered against individual editors by name.
Staffing and funding: Staffing should be increased and the council wants at least £1 million in 1991 (it expects £700,000 next year).
Code of conduct and other reports, page 2; Leader comment, page 22
Peaceful face of law-abiding Ulster.
By David Hearst
NORTHERN Ireland was one of the most peaceful regions of the United Kingdom last year, according to a government report published yesterday.
It had a lower recorded crime rate per 100,000 people than any of the 41 police areas in England and Wales.
According to a commentary on the report, Northern Ireland Crime Statistics, published by the Northern Ireland Office, the province was the ninth most peaceful in terms of crimes of violence against the person and had the lowest rate in the country for theft.
But it does have seven times the number of homicides.
The commentary urges caution when comparing the province's crime rate with others, but says: ‘The level of criminal activity in Northern Ireland is less than in some ostensibly more peaceful countries.’
In the category, ‘crimes of dishonesty’, the province was considerably more honest than England and Wales and a paragon of virtue compared to the United States.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary is solving twice as many crimes as it did 10 years ago.
The number of crimes which result in charges before a court has more than doubled in the last 10 years.
Last year, 45 per cent of recorded crime was cleared up — more than double the average rate in the United Kingdom.
Some of the biggest successes were recorded against scheduled offences.
More than 70 per cent of murder cases were solved in 1988 and the highest rates of detection were recorded among ‘offences against the state’, including the Northern Ireland Emergency Provisions Act and firearms legislation.
The report says attitudes towards the RUC have changed.
Forty-five per cent of Roman Catholics thought the police understood local problems, compared to 68 per cent of Protestants.
No more will be sent back before debate next week.
Labour attacks ‘three o'clock knock’ Hurd defends repatriations Boat people.
Paul Nettleton.
NO further repatriations of Vietnamese boat people will take place before a Commons debate on the issue next Tuesday, the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, told MPs yesterday.
He said the 51 people flown back from Hong Kong early yesterday had been removed ‘in line with procedures used worldwide to remove people refused permission to remain in a territory.
No firearms were carried and no force was used’.
But his shadow, Mr Gerald Kaufman, said: ‘The fact is that what this Government has adopted is the policy of the three o'clock knock by police.’
Mr Hurd won Tory cheers as he said: ‘Unless it is clear to people in Vietnam that those who do not qualify as refugees will be returned to Vietnam, Hong Kong faces the prospect of tens of thousands more arrivals in 1990.
That is simply not an acceptable prospect.’
Vietnam had agreed to the arrangements for repatriation and aid would be given to assist resettlement, Mr Hurd said.
Later he told Mr Michael Jopling (C. Westmorland and Lonsdale) that this amounted to US$60 per person to help with transport, food, medicines, training and tools.
Mr Hurd still hoped the UN High Commissioner for Refugees would agree to help the Hanoi embassy in monitoring conditions for returnees, and said he had already asked British non-governmental organisations for co-operation.
Meanwhile Mr Tim Raison (C. Aylesbury) and the Labour peer, Lord Ennals, would visit Vietnam next month as independent observers.
Further discussions will be held with Vietnam ‘about ways of screening new arrivals quickly, as they reach Hong Kong, so that those who are not refugees can be returned quickly and safely to Vietnam’.
The Government would seek international co-operation on checking the inflow of boat people at January's Geneva conference meeting.
Mr Kaufman asked why the operation had been carried out ‘under the veil of a news blackout.
If force was ruled out as you say, why were 150 riot police equipped with riot helmets, shields and batons needed to remove 51 people, of whom 43 were women and children?’
Mr Kaufman asked why there was no independent process of appeal under the screening procedures and why, if the Government objected to free movement of ‘economic refugees’ from Communist countries, ‘did the Government applaud the movement of such migrants from East to West Germany before the opening of the Berlin Wall?’
Mrs Thatcher, he said, was setting conditions on attending President Gorbachev's conference on human rights in Moscow.
‘The Prime Minister has shown herself completely unfit not only to attend any conference on human rights anywhere, but even to utter the very words.’
Sir Peter Blaker (C. Blackpool S) applauded Mr Hurd for his ‘courageous and correct step’ although Mr Hurd told him: ‘It was also unwelcome.’
Mr Hurd said the essential distinction was ‘between people who quite understandably want to move…somewhere else in order to achieve a more agreeable life, and people who are actually forced to do so by the well-founded fear of persecution.
‘Those who blur over that distinction do not understand its crucial importance for the successful handling of a whole series of intractable problems of which this is just, at the moment, the worst.’
For the Liberal Democrats, Mr David Steel said: ‘The feelings of people at what happened last night really vary from unease to repugnance that a British government should stoop to use a device which we have consistently condemned in others — namely the knock on the door in the middle of the night.’
Offering Mr Hurd his support, Mr Michael Heseltine (C. Henley), said: ‘It's quite impossible to explain to the Chinese population in Hong Kong that we're putting their relatives back across the frontier with the mainland day after day, and allowing boat people from Vietnam to remain in Hong Kong.’
Tory MPs want inquiry into TV job adverts ‘bias’.
By Paul Nettleton
ATORY MP yesterday wrote to the Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, the BBC chairman, Mr Marmaduke Hussey, and the IBA chairman, Mr George Russell, demanding an urgent investigation into the preponderance of broadcasting recruitment advertising placed with the Guardian.
Mr Graham Riddick, MP for Colne Valley, said he was reminding the chairmen ‘of their duty to political impartiality’.
It was time for them to put their houses in order, ‘and for the Home Secretary to insist they do’.
With Mr Norman Tebbit, the former Cabinet minister, he has sponsored an early-day motion, tabled yesterday and signed by 111 Tories.
This says that the BBC and ITV companies place four times as much recruitment advertising in the Guardian as in the Times and Independent.
The MPs have concluded this could explain the leftwing bias they allege in some TV programmes.
The motion states: ‘To recruit almost exclusively from the narrow minority group of Guardian readers whose views are predominantly leftwing is contrary to the spirit of the obligations of political balance in broadcasting and is an explanation of the self-righteous and unctuous hostility of broadcasters towards the present Government.’
A BBC spokesman said vacancies were advertised in other publications.
But the Guardian was ‘first in the field and remains the market leader in media advertising.’
The IBA said the Guardian was ‘an extremely effective advertising medium’ long before the Independent's launch.
Young's letters give details of Rover tax breaks.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
THE Government yesterday took the unprecedented step of releasing more confidential correspondence between Lord Young and British Aerospace, revealing new details of secret tax breaks and private concessions given by ministers over the Rover deal.
The disclosures reveal that Professor Roland Smith, chairman of BAe, wrote to Lord Young, then Trade Secretary, on the day the sale was announced, saying he intended to claim he was unaware of the secret correspondence between them on how to hide the £38.8 million ‘sweeteners’ deal from the European Commission and Parliament.
‘We propose continuing to completion on the basis that all material disclosure of relevant facts and circumstances has been made…and there is no foreseeable risk of subsequent invalidation of the European Commission's approval of state aid as being incompatible with Treaty requirements.’
The disclosures, which follow a fortnight of leaks sparked off by the Guardian's revelation of the sweeteners scandal — show how far Lord Young was prepared to go to sell Rover to the private sector.
The letters were placed in the House of Commons library, with a covering note from Mr Nicholas Ridley, the present Trade Secretary, to Mr Gordon Brown, Labour's trade spokesman, saying he had done this in view of the public interest.
The ministry said yesterday that it has had to hand over the file to the European Commission, which is investigating the Rover deal.
The Commons public accounts committee and trade and industry select committee have also been sent the documentation.
The disclosures show how British Aerospace won a further concession from Lord Young to fight ‘vigorously’ if BAe decided to scrap Rover's corporate plan to introduce new models and the European Commission sought to demand taxpayer's money back.
Lord Young sent to BAe a confidential Foreign Office memorandum of the talks between Sir David Hanney, Britain's ambassador to the European Community, and Mr Peter Sutherland (Sir Leon Brittan's predecessor as competition commissioner) on this point.
This revealed that the EC would only challenge BAe to honour Rover's plans if there were significant variations, and even then would limit the amount to be reimbursed by the company.
Details of the tax deal emerge in a confidential letter from Peat Marwick Mitchell, BAe's tax advisers, showing that the company could offset Rover's losses for tax purposes for three years without fear of a challenge from tax officials.
The letter said the Board of Inland Revenue would need to meet before any action could be taken, and BAe and Rover were guaranteed a hearing before action was taken.
The Revenue also agreed that if BAe set up a leasing company to take over new Rover plant, rental charges would be tax deductible.
Mr Ridley, in his covering letter to Mr Brown, defended the concessions.
‘Under normal tax law, these would have been available to the enlarged group under the same conditions and to the same extent as for any other UK group.’
However, the original terms of the Rover sale proposed to limit the tax concessions by ‘ring fencing’ the gain, because of the huge losses Rover had previously made.
The offer to back BAe if it changed Rover's corporate plan followed agreement by Lord Young to the £38 million package and further pressure from Professor Smith.
Mr Brown said last night that the fresh evidence still left the central question unanswered.
‘What is the true financial cost to the public of this deal, and why we have been deceived for 16 months?’
Late plea for Kent Opera.
By Nicholas de Jongh Arts Correspondent
LAST minute efforts to save Kent Opera from liquidation will be made tomorrow when members of the Arts Council's advisory music panel, led by Robert Ponsonby, the former BBC Controller of Music, meet Luke Rittner, the council's secretary-general.
The meeting comes amid fresh allegations from members of the music panel that they were press-ganged into rubber- stamping the council's decision to withdraw all subsidy from Kent Opera, although full information about the company was kept from them.
It has emerged that the council had been compelled to discuss the future of Kent Opera at its two-day meeting at Leeds Castle in November because the company had explained that it was on the verge of closure and insolvency.
A spokeswoman for the Arts Council said that Kent Opera's three-year plan had been rejected by a group including Mr Peter Palumbo, the council's chairman, Mr Rittner, and Mr Ken Baird, the council's music director, before the music panel met.
The Arts Council denied that the panel's opinions were not taken seriously and pointed out the council's method of work.
‘The panels advise.
The (governing) council (appointed by the Minister for Arts) decide.’
A leading member of the music panel said that they had not been informed in advance that the future of Kent Opera would be discussed in November.
He had never seen such a sparsely attended panel meeting; the panel had not been given any written papers outlining Kent Opera's financial position.
The Arts Council says the information was available.
The music panellist said: ‘If there had been a full panel meeting and if we had known certain things which were kept from us the decision might have been different.
‘Our conclusion was based on a (spoken presentation) by people who had already decided that Kent Opera would lose its subsidy.’
Another panel member said they been ‘lamentably under-informed’.
Cut by a royal blue pencil Points of Order.
By Ian Aitken
MOST journalists have become inured to the ministrations of sub-editors, a nocturnal breed in traditional green eye-shades who tip our carefully-honed words into the paper.
Subs on the Guardian are relatively light-handed, but reporters on some tabloids often have difficulty recognising their own work — especially if it clashes with the view of the proprietor.
But MPs aren't used to that sort of treatment.
So it came as something of a shock to Labour's Brian Wilson when he found that a Commons motion he had tabled had been…well, subbed a bit by the authorities of the House.
The motion congratulated the Australian Labour Party on defeating the amazingly right wing Sir Johannes Bjelke-Petersen after 32 years of power in Queensland.
But it then went on to make some disparaging remarks about the bestowal of a knighthood on such a person.
This represented the honours system at its most farcical, said Mr Wilson's original text.
The draft duly appeared on the Commons order paper last Tuesday.
But in spite of its long history of resistance to the throne, the Commons still bans direct criticism of the monarch, and it was evidently decided that Mr Wilson's motion implied criticism of the Queen for dubbing Sir Johannes.
So an embarrassed clerk in the table office wrote to Mr Wilson, advising him of proposed amendments to his motion.
The changes made it clear that it was Bjelke-Petersen, rather than Her Majesty, who was at fault.
The changed version appeared on the following day's order paper.
Mr Wilson now finds himself declaring his belief that it was ‘the conduct of Sir Johannes and his cronies’ which discredited the honours system, not the granting of the original accolade.
That is no doubt perfectly all right, but it makes you wonder why King Charles ever found it necessary to burst into the Commons with his soldiers, in search of the five rebel members.
Why weren't they ruled out of order before they transgressed?
TRAINED observers in the press gallery have been rather surprised that the behaviour of MPs has changed so little as a result of the television cameras' arrival.
By and large, the nice ones are just as nice and the nasty ones not much nastier.
Two members, however, seem to have undergone a major personality change.
One is the Prime Minister, who now bills and coos where she used to bellow.
The other is Mr Jerry Hayes, the Conservative member for Harlow.
Mrs Thatcher's transformation may have more to do with her political circumstances — i.e, isolation in a predominantly pro-European Cabinet — than with television.
But she certainly underwent pre-TV training, and so did Mr Hayes.
Readers of this column will be aware that Mr Hayes was once a fierce critic of the Government's running of the health service.
He has now become a passionate enthusiast for the Clarke reforms, and he made a speech of spectacular sycophancy in support of the health service bill on Monday.
But it isn't just his translation from rebel into loyalist which is startling, it is also his physical change.
He used to wear yellow ties and trendily-cut suits in eye-catching colours.
He appeared before his peers on Monday in the darkest of clerical grey.
This seems to be the deplorable advice which the image builders are giving to their political clients.
No unusual views and definitely no unusual gear.
ROGER STOTT, one of Labour's Northern Ireland spokesmen, was sipping a nightcap in a Belfast hotel recently and listening with genuine appreciation to a guitarist, when someone started taking flashlight snaps.
The guitarist stopped, throwing up his hand protectively.
‘No pictures for security reasons,’ he barked.
Then he added: ‘Social security reasons.’
DENNIS SKINNER, the Bolsover MP who has terrorised generations of ministers from his place below the gangway, has made a little bit of history this week.
Breaking the habit of a lifetime, he has joined a Commons standing committee.
This means that Mr Skinner, who voted in more Commons divisions than any other MP last session, will have to absent himself occasionally from the chamber.
And why is he depriving himself of voting regularly?
Because Mr Skinner is a former miner and the committee he has joined will be dealing with a bill to give the private sector a bigger share in the coal industry.
No fair share-out in privatisation.
By David Brindle, Social Services Correspondent
PRIVATISATION sales have only partially extended share ownership to all social groups, suggests the first comprehensive survey of shareholding.
Although the proportion of people owning shares has trebled, from 7 per cent to 21 per cent between 1984 and 1987, the typical investor in privatisations is a middle-aged professional man in the South-east.
Share ownership among young people, women, manual workers, people in the North, Wales and Scotland, and non-homeowners remains relatively low.
This detailed picture of the much-vaunted new share-owning democracy is presented in the 1987 General Household Survey, conducted by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, published yesterday.
Questions about shareholdings were put in 1987 for the first time, at the request of the Treasury, anxious to confirm and expand the conclusions of previous surveys by market research groups.
The 21 per cent figure for share ownership compares with estimates of 19 or 20 per cent produced by such surveys.
Eight per cent— more than a third of all shareowners — had investments only in privatised companies.
A quarter of men owned shares but only 17 per cent of women; 29 per cent of people aged 45-54 and 30 per cent of those aged 55-64 had shares, but only 18 per cent of those aged 25-34.
More than half all adults earning more than £350 a week were shareowners.
The average weekly income of a shareowner was £196, compared to £118 for the survey sample as a whole, although the average of those owning shares in privatised companies alone was £168.
Of this latter group, 39 per cent were classified in manual occupations, compared to 33 per cent for shareowners as a whole and 28 per cent of those who owned non-privatisation shares.
Only 8 per cent of people owning privatisation shares alone rented their home from a local authority or housing association, compared with 6 per cent of those owning other shares, although 25 per cent of the sample were such tenants.
Share ownership is shown to be most common in London and the South-east, both in general and for those holding privatisation shares alone.
General Household Survey 1987; HMSO; £13.90
Man from the FO scuttles two dreams at a stroke Sketch.
By Andrew Rawnsley
HOW terrible it can be when your dreams come true.
For years Douglas Hurd had a dream.
In that dream he saw a vision of loveliness: himself as Foreign Secretary.
Moreover, a humane, liberal, decent sort of Tory Foreign Secretary.
For years the Vietnamese boat people had a dream.
In that dream they saw a new life in a humane, liberal, decent West, run by people like Douglas Hurd.
They escaped tyranny, risked drowning and piracy, endured years in stinking, cholera-infested camps, in pursuit of their dream.
In pursuit of his, Mr Hurd endured several years in the worst jobs in Mrs Thatcher's Cabinets.
One day Mr Hurd woke up to find that he was the Foreign Secretary, pinched himself, and found that his first big job was forcibly deporting the boat people in Hong Kong back to Vietnam.
That's where their dream ended, too.
It was an untypically uncomfortable Foreign Secretary at the despatch box yesterday.
The hands that normally give the despatch box a confident caress gripped it in white-knuckled nervousness.
The usual pepper-grinder voice sounded unconfident and a little furtive.
The Prime Minister, at question time, was also very defensive.
Pressed to explain themselves, both Mr Hurd and Mrs Thatcher were full of injured guilt.
Neither he, nor she, could quite bring themselves to use the bald words ‘forcible repatriation’ for the planeloads of refugees being flown back to Hanoi, 30 Hong Kong dollars a head, cash on delivery.
‘It's perfectly in order to return illegal immigrants to their country of origin,’ she said.
Deportations had been, he said, ‘in line with procedures used worldwide to remove people refused permission to remain in a territory’.
Both had clearly spent the morning raiding the dictionary of euphemism.
Neil Kinnock and Gerald Kaufman had been as busy on the thesaurus of outrage.
‘Tyrannical…indefensible…shameful,’ from Neil Kinnock.
‘The policy of the three o'clock knock by police,’ from Gerald Kaufman.
‘What would you do?,’ shouted the Tories.
A fair question, which didn't get much of an answer.
Mr Kinnock was at his best when going easier on the general outrage, and harder on the specific details of the operation.
‘What excuse,’ he asked Mrs Thatcher, ‘have you got for giving instructions that in the middle of the night, armed riot police raid children, women and men, shove them into caged lorries and forcibly deport them to the country from which they fled?’
‘The police were not armed,’ she replied.
Ah, that's all right then.
What the Government really could have done without were attempts by some of its backbenchers to actually extract some moral credit from this episode.
Sir Peter Blaker, the Conservative MP for Blackpool South, wanted the Foreign Secretary to ‘accept my congratulations on taking a courageous and correct step’.
Michael Heseltine offered his praise for this ‘very lonely and courageous decision’.
This was a novel definition of courage from the Blaker-Heseltine dictionary.
Courage: to use riot police to round up and deport women and children against their will.
Mr Hurd had the grace to turn down their praise.
‘We now,’ announced the Speaker, ‘come to the debate on War Crimes.’
Just one of those unfortunate coincidences.
Let's hope.
Britain trails in right of confidence.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
JOURNALISTS in some European countries and in America have stronger rights to protect sources of confidential information than their British counterparts.
Sweden goes furthest, with legislation focusing on informers' rather than journalists' rights, and imposing an obligation on those working in the media to protect sources of confidential information.
‘Very serious grounds are needed to infringe anonymity, and it is generally accepted even by the Swedish judiciary that the public's right to be informed takes precedence over law and order considerations,’ said Ms Frances D'Souza, director of Article 19, the International Campaign against Censorship.
Similar laws are being considered in Norway.
In America 26 of the 50 states have published ‘shield’ laws allowing journalists to protect their sources, with certain exceptions which generally apply only if the information is relevant, cannot be obtained in any other way, and public interest is better served by disclosure than by keeping the source confidential.
In Britain the Contempt of Court Act 1981 allows a court to order disclosure if necessary in the interests of justice or national security, or for the prevention of disorder or crime.
Justice in this context has been defined in one case as ‘the administration of justice in the course of legal proceedings in a court of law’.
This could allow the court, as in the Goodwin case, to order a reporter to reveal his notes so the company whose information was leaked would know who to sue.
The US Supreme Court ruled in the 1970s that a black journalist had to reveal his source of information about the Black Panthers to a criminal grand jury.
A journalist in the US would rarely be subpoenaed to testify except in a fairly serious criminal case, according to Mr James Michael, senior lecturer in communication and information law at University College, London.
‘A company would be highly unlikely to get a journalist into court for the purpose of getting information about someone they had a claim against,’ said Mr Michael, an American lawyer specialising in international media law.
‘It would also be almost impossible for the plaintiff in a civil action to get an anonymity order for himself, as the company has in the Goodwin case.’
In America a journalist was sent to prison for refusing to disclose information which could have revealed the innocence of a person on trial, but prison would not normally be an option in a civil case.
There is a growing trend towards greater protection for journalists' sources in Europe, according to Ms D'Souza.
‘In West Germany, for example, journalists can refuse to give testimony, and Spain has incorporated the right to protect sources in its new constitution.’
A West German journalist who interviewed a man claiming to be an IRA terrorist won a court ruling last week upholding his right to protect his sources and forbidding the federal prosecutor's office from questioning him.
US outlines vision for new Europe.
By Anna Tomforde in Bonn and John Palmer in Strasbourg
THE US yesterday linked support for East Germany's new leaders with a new vision for a changing Europe in which Nato would adopt a more political role and Washington's ties with the European Community would be enhanced.
After outlining Washington's response to the recent changes in Eastern Europe, the Secretary of State, Mr James Baker, made an unscheduled visit to East Germany where he held talks with the new Prime Minister, Mr Hans Modrow.
It was the first time that a US Secretary of State held official talks with East German leaders on their own territory, underlining Washington fears that a collapse of the East German reform process could imperil developments throughout Eastern Europe.
In what he called ‘a new architecture for a new era’, Mr Baker outlined closer co-operation between Western Europe and the US which would bind the West closer together while at the same time ‘opening up the doors to the East’.
Washington, he said, stood by its commitment to overcome the division of Europe, Germany and Berlin, but this had to come about in a gradual process which satisfied German aspirations and met the ‘legitimate interests’ of all concerned.
Mr Baker declared his support for the EC ‘taking on increasingly important political roles’.
His remarks — to the Berlin press club — were received gleefully by senior EC officials in Strasbourg as evidence of US support for their view about how the community should evolve in the new European situation.
His views appear to contradict Mrs Thatcher's statement to the House of Commons that US policy towards European integration had not changed under President Bush.
In Potsdam — where the Prussian kings had their summer seat and where the wartime allies in 1945 decided the future of defeated Nazi Germany — Mr Baker assured Mr Modrow of US support for East German reforms.
‘We wanted to let the people of East Germany know about our support for the reforms taking place in this country,’ Mr Baker said later.
Mr Modrow said German reunification was not discussed at the one-hour meeting but the two sides had agreed to turn their dialogue ‘into co-operation’.
In his West Berlin speech on a New Europe and a New Atlanticism, Mr Baker, who had earlier held talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl, proposed strengthening Washington's links with the EC, possibly through a new treaty that would give the US a formal presence in EC institutions.
Overlaps between Nato and European institutions would inevitably grow, Mr Baker said.
Nato should be transformed into a political body capable of building a new security structure for Europe.
‘In our view there is no conflict between the process of European integration and an extension of the co-operation between the European Community and its neighbours in East and West.’
He described Nato as a forum where Western countries would work together to negotiate agreements between East and West and see that they were implemented and verifiable.
As Nato's military role was reduced, the European Security Conference could become the ‘most important forum of East-West co-operation’.
In a passage likely to upset Mrs Thatcher's belief in a ‘special relationship’ between London and Washington, he suggested that the US and the EC ‘work together to achieve, whether in treaty or some other form, a significantly strengthened set of institutional and consultative links.
We suggest that our discussions about this idea proceed in parallel with Europe's efforts to achieve by 1992 a common internal market so that plans for interaction turn to page 24, col 2
Baker outlines new vision continued from page one would evolve with changes in the community,’ he said.
Mr Baker also proposed establishing a permanent Nato arms control verification staff to monitor compliance with arms reduction and confidence building measures.
After his talks with Mr Baker, Chancellor Kohl toned down his enthusiasm for moves toward German unity.
One day after the four wartime allies underlined their interest in stability, he stressed Bonn's ‘vital interest in stability’.
In East Berlin, Pastor Rainer Eppelmann, chairman of Democratic Awakening, called for a transitional government to be installed before Christmas.
The Communist Party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, in a draft proposal for a new party programme, admitted that ‘state-administered socialism’ had proved a failure.
EC urged to help, page 8; Wider powers sought, page 8; Commentary, page 23
22COMMENT THE GUARDIANWednesday December 13 1989 The grim cargo of lost dreams.
EVERY day of the year, blue Hong Kong police buses with barred windows climb to the border with the Peoples Republic.
There, without ceremony and possibility of reprieve, an average of 50 men and women, the day's catch of illegal immigrants, are bundled back into China.
The number repatriated in this way has amounted to tens of thousands annually since 1980, when the present rules were instituted — a figure not too far from that of the boat people whom Britain and Hong Kong governments expect to send home to Vietnam.
It is a comparison which should give pause to those tempted automatically to condemn the Government.
Every day of the year, all over the world, governments work to control and manage the flows of migrants that wars, disasters, and, above all, the magnetic pull of centres of economic and cultural power, keep in constant motion.
Sometimes this means making extraordinary efforts to deal with desperate human need on a mass scale.
Sometimes it means making judicious individual decisions about marriages and family relationships.
And sometimes — often — it means sending people back, by force if necessary.
Heart and head pull against each other.
There can be no reasonable argument about migrants if one side takes the position that nobody should ever be sent back to anywhere, that the mere act of emigration in itself constitutes grounds for supposing that circumstances were unbearable in the country of origin.
But that is the position which some of the Government's critics seem now to occupy.
It is particularly illogical that this kind of argument should be coming from politicians who, in other contexts, would be the first to argue, and rightly, that Vietnam is not some kind of monster State, but merely a ramshackle and inefficient one that has lost its way.
It is a miserable and heart-breaking business to take peasant families who left Vietnam's poor northern provinces with visions of a new life in America dancing in their heads, who endured dangerous sea voyages, and who believed that Hong Kong's camps, however dreadful, were a way station to their dream — to take these families and to return them to the red dirt farms and meagre fishing villages from which they came.
And of course they will suffer consequences — at the very least those of wasted time and lost opportunities.
But neither London nor Hong Kong can legislate for dreams which are no longer capable of realisation.
The United States will not take these people.
Other affluent Western countries, which the migrants would accept as second best, won't take them either.
It is no good saying that, if Britain made a special effort, it might be able to persuade the United States and other countries to change their minds.
About this 40,000, maybe; but not about the next 40,000 who would fill the camps as soon as they were cleared.
Indeed, at root, that is what this dismal affair is all about.
It is about sending a clear signal to the villages of Quang Ninh and Ha Giang and Lang Son that there is no longer a road to Los Angeles by way of Hong Kong or, for that matter, of Thailand or Malaysia.
That road came into being after the end of the Vietnam war in 1975.
Along it came, at first, ex-soldiers and civil servants of the losing regime, men escaping detention or worse, middle class families pushed to the margins of society by new authorities with more ideology than common sense, southern farmers stripped of their affluence by misguided economic programmes.
America led the way in setting up an international system for dealing with the Indochina refugees.
The United States wished to discharge its debts to those with whom it had fought during the war; but it also came to see the volume of refugees as a kind of continuing proof that it had waged a just struggle against evil forces.
That is how a system for dealing with genuine refugees — the losers in Indochina's civil wars — became insensibly a system for turning North Vietnamese peasants into New York waiters.
As the number of former South Vietnamese army majors and persecuted intellectuals drifted down to infinitesimal proportions and the number of economic migrants grew, the United States looked the other way.
Vietnam was an evil State, the number of boat people coming out proved it; therefore any measures to discourage the refugees would be wrong.
It is a measure of hypocrisy that, at the same time, the United States took fewer and fewer of the migrants.
But, since last year's Geneva conference on Indochina refugees, all of the concerned countries, including the United States, have agreed that the flow of economic migrants from Vietnam should be stopped.
The only difference is between those countries, naturally not the most directly affected, who can pretend that voluntary repatriation will work, and those, like Hong Kong, who know it will not.
The inevitable short-term aim is to affect the decisions of would-be migrants.
There is, in glum reality, only one thing that will affect that: the knowledge that they will be sent back.
That has been the dilemma for Hong Kong — the necessity of staunching the flow — and they deserve understanding for a decision that carries all manner of risks for their own future as 1997 nears.
But it needs to be said clearly, too, that there is a longer term.
That, in an age of wonders in the Communist world, involves a fresh Western approach to the heart of the matter, the hopeless poverty of Vietnam.
Nobody should be too blithe here either.
Mr Douglas Hurd in the House yesterday shuffled uneasily between Washington wrath and Hanoi despair.
Nonetheless, as the Government endures months of opprobrium, there is a clear imperative to begin addressing the long-term, and small ways to make a start.
Vietnam, remember, shares with Argentina the distinction of being a country where the British Government doesn't match the aid resources of non-governmental relief organisations like Oxfam.
Getting moving here won't mitigate the despair; but it would at least show some capacity to think beyond the sourly inescapable.
Hot off the press.
YESTERDAY, by neat irony, featured the morning of the Master of the Rolls and the afternoon of the Press Council.
Before lunch, Lord Donaldson pronounced further on the case of William Goodwin, 23-year-old journalist for The Engineer.
‘Notwithstanding the general need to protect journalistic sources,’ he said, ‘this is a case where the balance comes down in favour of disclosure.’
After tea, the Press Council published — for further discussion — its 119-page self-reforming review, including a new code of practice.
In that code you will find the following injunction.
‘Journalists have a professional obligation to protect confidential sources of information.’
A general need: a professional obligation.
Two texts for our increasingly beleaguered times.
The Press Council review has seemed an age in gestation; and it is not in all respects wonderful.
Those who fought through the months to make it a much leaner, quicker body exercising true peer group pressure will be a touch disappointed.
The prospective councillors will number two dozen (rather than the sparse but active dozen originally sought); there will continue to be a rather odd balance of journalists and lay members, selected rather than nominated by a quangoid committee.
The weight of bureaucracy still hangs a trifle heavy.
Nevertheless, the review represents substantial progress.
It holds out the promise of swifter verdicts.
It appends that promise to a clear and comprehensive code of conduct (one that builds helpfully on the recently published Fleet Street set of principles).
And it adds to the sanctions the Council may take — positioning of judgements in offending papers; a privacy hot line; and, more controversially, hauling in proprietors to discipline editors.
The Council, in sum, is seeking most of the tools it needs to relaunch itself as an active, respected self-regulator.
It sees ways of making certain that small points of correction are dealt with speedily, and thus the chance of devoting extra energy to the broader guidelines and the delineation of greater issues.
This is the crucial change.
Through most of its existence, the Council has viewed itself as a slightly pettifogging, rather legalistic arbitrator.
But there was an introversion to that which meant that too few readers of too many newspapers knew what it was there for.
That was bad for newspapers and bad for the Council: but, worst of all, it meant that there was no independent body able to speak up for press freedoms under threat.
Perhaps, as the review gathers steam, this can now change.
It needs to.
The entrails of the law have been choking press freedoms throughout the nineteen eighties.
(Look back to the supposedly liberalising 1981 Contempt of Court Act and ask yourself whether its parliamentary proponents intended the general outcome that Lord Donaldson now proclaims).
The future — and the hope of escaping yet more damaging legislation — rests on greater attention to the Council and greater respect for its findings.
In short, professional regulation for a rough trade aspiring to become a profession (with the professional responsibilities invoked above).
This is not, in all respects, an appealing road.
Journalists aren't barristers or doctors.
They are imperfect players in an imperfect democracy; and they are there, from time to time, to write and investigate things that the closed worlds of the British professions would grind their teeth over.
A truly free press is a press which irritates and infuriates along the way.
A reformed Press Council, by these lights, tugs in the wrong, conformist direction (and, see its proferred code, is a sight too deferential to great and good bodies, like itself, who want to make papers toe the line).
But such philosophical dissent, at this point, is the stuff of dreams in a dreamworld.
As the Fleet Street editors themselves recognised a couple of weeks ago, many British papers have forfeited the strength on which their freedom depends: they are not seen as the defenders of freedom by their own readers.
With that relationship gone, they are at the mercy of more laws and more political meddling.
In which case, the only respite is too regain vestiges of trust; and the only clear mechanism for that is the over-arching responsibility of the Press Council.
Louis Blom-Cooper and his team made a reasonably promising start yesterday.
They deserve a brisk and supportive response from the industry.
They want to be the court of principle and last resort for British press standards.
It is crucial that they be given a wholehearted, well-funded chance; for otherwise the court of last resort may turn out to be the one where the Master of the Rolls holds sway.
Letters to the Editor PAGE
‘Tyrannical’, says Kinnock Question time.
Martin Linton.
THE Prime Minister yesterday defended the deportation of boat people from Hong Kong against a combined attack from opposition leaders.
‘It's perfectly in order to return illegal immigrants to their country of origin, otherwise there would be international chaos,’ she told MPs at question time.
Those countries which were protesting about the repatriation would do far better if they offered to take some of the boat people themselves.
The Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, said she was trying to defend the indefensible.
‘What excuse has she got for giving instructions that, in the middle of the night, armed riot police raid children, women and men, shove them into caged lorries and forcibly deport them to the country from which they fled?
‘Doesn't the Prime Minister realise that she is the only person in this whole shameful episode that can't make the excuse that I was only obeying orders, because she was the person giving the orders — and the orders are tyrannical.’
But the Prime Minister dismissed his remarks as ‘feeble and nonsense’.
The police were not armed and there was nothing unusual about returning illegal immigrants.
They put something like 30,000 Chinese refugees back over the border each year and it was a custom of international law that such immigrants are received back, she said.
Mr Kinnock could not go on ‘inflicting his anger on the people of Hong Kong’.
They were the people who were already ‘suffering greatly from having some 57,000 boat people there and more and more and more would come when the season came for them to leave Vietnam.’
The Liberal Democrat leader, Mr Paddy Ashdown, asked her to reconsider the ‘shameful example’ set by her Government's actions not only in sending the riot police in at the dead of night but in the blanket of secrecy surrounding the appeals tribunals which decided who were refugees.
People had been condemned without any rights to attend the tribunals, to have legal representation, to judicial review, or even to know why decisions had been taken against them.
Was this was ‘a good example to be setting to the Chinese Government’?
But the Prime Minister replied that each person had a right of appeal against tribunal decisions and that a report by the British Refugee Council had indicated how excellent the system was.
‘Those countries which have shown anger about it have not even agreed to take any of the 13,000 genuine refugees for whom we are still seeking a home.’
MPs support war crimes trials.
By Martin Linton
MPs voted by 348 votes to 123 last night in favour of legislating to allow the prosecution of alleged war criminals now living in Britain for crimes committed in Germany or German-occupied territory during the last war.
The Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, said the Government had not yet decided whether to go ahead with a bill, but his personal view was that it should accept the report of the War Crimes Inquiry to change the law.
The report by Sir Thomas Hetherington, the former Director of Public Prosecutions, and Mr William Chalmers estimated that there were three cases in Britain where the evidence was sufficient to bring a prosecution and up to 124 cases worthy of investigation.
His wish was not to rake over the past of men who had lived peacefully in this country since they came to Britain as refugees after the war, he said.
But the facts in the Hetherington report could not be buried.
‘We are not talking of excesses or cruelty by soldiers on soldiers in the heat of battle.
We are talking about premeditated acts of cold-blooded mass murder perpetrated upon defenceless citizens.’
Mr Roy Hattersley, the shadow Home Secretary, said he was deeply uneasy about rushing legislation through Parliament to try suspects who had already been named.
He questioned whether it would be possible to prosecute them with any chance of success with the present rules of evidence and he would be against proceeding if it meant changing the way in which the courts worked.
But he believed in principle the prosecutions should continue.
The former prime minister, Mr Edward Heath, said he had not heard one convincing argument which would lead him to support legislation to change the whole legal system in order to bring these alleged war criminals to trial.
The Tory Party had always opposed retrospective legislation.
‘If we had wanted to deal with it at the time, we should have taken the action then.’
In a free vote, cabinet members who supported the proposal were: Mrs Thatcher, Mr Kenneth Clarke, Mr Douglas Hurd, Mr Norman Lamont, Mr John MacGregor, Mr Cecil Parkinson, Mr Chris Patten, Mr Malcolm Rifkind and Mr Waddington.
Against were: Mr John Major, Mr Tony Newton and Mr Nicholas Ridley.
Most Labour MPs voted for the motion, most Liberal Democrats, including Mr Paddy Ashdown, voted against — as did Dr David Owen.
Europe airlifting flu vaccines to replenish British stocks.
By Stephen Cook
AN EMERGENCY airlift of flu vaccine from Europe was under way last night as stocks dwindled in Britain and the epidemic showed no sign of abating.
The Department of Health said tests would begin today on the vaccines to make sure they met British standards.
About 180,000 doses are expected within the next few days.
But the Influenza Monitoring and Information Bureau in London said the Department could waive or accelerate the tests if the vaccines had been adequately tested in other countries.
Three more hospitals in the north began taking only emergency cases — the Newcastle-upon-Tyne general hospital, the Newcastle Royal Victoria Infirmary, and the Derbyshire Royal Infirmary.
Some hospitals have lost 15 per cent of their nurses and in the south Ashford hospital, Surrey is using Red Cross volunteers.
About one in 10 health districts have hospitals on ‘red alert’— admitting emergencies only.
Many others are on ‘yellow alert’— limited routine operations.
A survey by the drugs company Beecham shows the incidence of flu is between 25 and 71 per cent higher than at this time last year.
The North and Scotland are worst hit.
Veteran looks back in anguish Wednesday People.
Dennis Barker.
WHEN he was 28, Dick Trafford went to work in Ormskirk as an ambulance driver in a workhouse, where the elderly poor worked for their keep.
When he was 50, he and his wife took over, as superintendent and matron, the old Oldham workhouse which had by then, under the National Health Service, become the Westlands Old People's Home.
He and most others thought workhouse conditions gone for good.
But yesterday, on his 91st birthday, Trafford, whose wife died in sheltered accommodation four years ago, told a community nursing conference in London that, though a Tory voter all his life who thought most of what Mrs Thatcher was doing was good, he saw a danger that old people might be heading back towards the workhouse if the Government went ahead with NHS cuts and changes in community care.
The spokesman for the First World War Veterans' Association, Trafford joined up at 15 on the first day of the war, giving his age as 18.
In the King's Liverpool Regiment, he went through Loos, the Somme, and Passchendaele and was wounded twice — a thumb torn off by shrapnel, his neck pierced by a bullet.
In 1926, when he became an ambulance driver at Ormskirk workhouse ‘conditions were not tip-top’.
Men had to wear rough cotton shirts and white corduroy jackets and trousers, to be easily visible.
The able-bodied had to saw up old railway sleepers and then chop up the pieces for sale as firewood.
One day a week, the men were allowed a dark suit to go out for the day to visit friends or relatives.
They were given an ounce of twist tobacco a week and two at Christmas, when they were also given a pint of beer.
‘Old people get pensions now, so much pocket money in old people's homes and better clothing.
But the government is cutting down.
I should think it is working the way of bringing back the workhouse through having too much economy.’
If Tories like him are wobbling, can softer voters be far behind?
Dick Trafford: fears for the elderly
Bakery workers begin voting on series of one-day strikes.
CHRISTMAS bread supplies will be at risk if bakery workers, who started voting on a pay offer yesterday, reject the deal.
Mr Joe Marino, general secretary of the Bakers, Food and Allied Workers, predicted a close vote.
He said no bread would be baked this Sunday in the first of a series of one-day strikes if the 9,000 workers who produce nearly 80 per cent of loaves throw out the deal.
Shop stewards have recommended accepting the offer of just under 9 per cent— worth £10 a week to most bakers — two extra days' holiday by April 1991 to make five weeks a year, and other benefits, including better sick pay.
The employers on Friday increased their offer of 7.6 per cent and one extra day's holiday, in answer to a 10 per cent demand with two extra days now.
The employers, the Federation of Bakers, are dominated by British Bakeries and Allied Bakeries.
Party host guilty of killing friend.
BENJAMIN Bream, stepson of the guitarist Julian Bream, was yesterday found guilty of stabbing a friend to death during an argument at a party.
An Old Bailey jury convicted Bream, aged 28, of the manslaughter of a building worker, Mr Sean Foster.
Bream, an antiques restorer of Barnes, south London, was cleared of murder.
His co-defendant, Alison O'Leary — Foster's girlfriend — was convicted of wounding Bream and assaulting a woman guest.
Both Bream and O'Leary, aged 21, will be sentenced today by Mr Justice Judge.
Mr James Curtis, for the prosecution, told the court the stabbing took place during a row at the party held at Bream's flat in January this year.
Bream stabbed Mr Foster, aged 24, so violently through the heart that the tip of the knife blade was bent against his spine.
At the start of the trial, Mr Curtis said the stabbing was ‘an example of the tragedy that can follow when people in anger resort to the use of knives’.
Bream, who had been adopted by Mrs Margaret Bream before she married the guitarist, had been drinking with friends at local pubs on the day of the killing.
They took a crate of beer back to his flat in his mother's home.
O'Leary accused her boyfriend of flirting.
When Bream intervened, he found himself locked in a ‘major battle’ with Foster.
Bream armed himself with a knife.
After the stabbing, the jury heard, Bream was seen holding a bloodstained bread knife — but it was not the fatal weapon.
Mr Foster, also of Barnes, was found lying on the floor with the knife that had killed him under his body.
Neither Bream nor O'Leary gave evidence.
Bream's counsel, Mr Charles Tilling suggested in his closing speech that another person at the party had carried out the fatal knife attack.
RSPB gains High Court hearing on Medway estuary dredging.
THE Royal Society for the Protection of Birds was yesterday given leave to challenge in the High Court a development scheme which it fears will damage the environment.
The scheme involves dredging the main channel of the Medway estuary to provide a storage base for import-export cargoes.
Mr Justice Hodgson, ordering an early judicial review rejected the argument of Swale borough council, which gave the planning permission in August, and the Medway Ports Authority, that the hearing could cost millions in disruption to works contracts, lacked a proper legal basis, and had not been brought promptly enough.
The reclamation would involve dumping the dredged material on the estuary's Lappel bank.
Dr Michael Clarke, the society's south-east England regional conservation officer, said yesterday: ‘The Medway estuary is recognised internationally as a conservation area, particularly for birdlife, and that is why we have taken this step of seeking judicial review.’
The society will argue at the full hearing that it had a legitimate expectation that it would be consulted by the council.
Part of the area has been designated as a site of special scientific interest under the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act and special protection has been sought under the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance.
The society says that, before planning permission could be given, the development proposal should include an environmental assessment report under the 1988 town and country planning (assessment of environmental effects) regulations.
No report was obtained by the ports authority.