

Another disturbing chapter in the history of the DTI Notebook.
By Alex Brummer
THERE will be those who portray the report of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration on the Barlow Clowes Affair as a triumph for the British system of financial regulation.
Yes, of course, they will say, there is clear evidence that the Department of Trade and Industry fouled up badly — maladministration as the Ombudsman likes to call it.
But what is really important, it will be argued, is that the system triumphed.
As a result of the Ombudsman's vigorous and admirably speedy deliberations, the hapless 18,000 investors who put their faith in the DTI imprimatur will be fully compensated and the integrity of the UK's investment apparatus has been preserved.
Moreover, if there was maladministration it is of little consequence now in that the new regime established by the Financial Services Act of 1986 has rendered the DTI's role in this matter redundant.
Such muddled thinking partly explains the complacency of the Corporate and Consumer Affairs Minister, Mr John Redwood, who accepted the findings ‘without prejudice.’
This cool response almost certainly reflects legal caution, but also a bland faith in the regulatory system.
Even before the report went to the printers, the Ombudsman, Sir Anthony Barrawclough, was told by the DTI's most senior officer that it intended to give its own view, in a separate document, on the responsibilities of regulators.
This is the kind of self-righteous behaviour at which Mrs Thatcher's Government excels.
The DTI's record in regulatory matters is not an honourable one.
Few drivers who bought car insurance policies from Dr Emil Savundra's Fire Auto & Marine in the mid-1960s will forget the culpability of then Board of Trade.
Nor will those investors and depositors who in the mid-1970s found themselves caught in a hurricane sweeping throught the secondary banking system after the collapse of Gerald Caplan's London and County Securities.
Suffice it to say that the DTI was the supervising authority for such fringe banks.
More recently its inconsistent behaviour over the publication of DTI reports into important City scandals has also raised questions of judgment, undue political influence and its due care to the public interest.
Tiny Rowland may have become a bore with his obsession over DTI's failure to publish the report on the House of Fraser — but on this occasion he is on the side of the Gods.
There can be no sense in the DTI's refusal to publish the House of Fraser report on the grounds that it might prejudice a Serious Fraud Office inquiry when it took the opposite course over Blue Arrow.
And while one is busy throwing the rotten eggs, who can forget the duplicity of the DTI over the disposal of Rover to British Aerospace.
It would be nice to write that despite these lapses of judgment, not to mention the occasional maladministration, investors and other stakeholders in business do not have to worry because of the safety superstructure which has been built since.
But there is little in the current regulatory structure which is designed to inspire the confidence of investors.
Indeed, even if supervision of Barlow Clowes had passed seamlessly from the DTI to the Financial Intermediaries, Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association (FIMBRA) there can be no guarantee the warning signs at Barlow Clowes, from intermingled funds to accounting inconsistencies, would have been unearthed.
With its unwieldly band of almost 8,200 members FIMBRA is an organisation in serious distress.
It is engaged in internecine warfare over the general provision of indemnity insurance for investors.
But this dispute, which has seen FIMBRA's Lord Elton off the field, is evidence of systemic problem.
The organisation, concerned with financial probity, is continuously in debt because its members refuse to pay the bill for self-regulation.
Moreover, its attempts to weed out the next Barlow Clowes are not considered impressive.
When suspending members for alleged wrongdoing it tends to act in the dark of night, refusing generally to explain its actions.
FIMBRA's incontinence is evidence of a system of self-regulation under stress.
With the populous FIMBRA offshoot of the Securities & Investment Board (SIB) bucking against the post-Financial Services Act regime, the whole concept of self-regulatory organisations is brought into question.
The Stock Exchange, for instance, has been remarkably successful in doing its own policing — witness the quick action taken in the case of the alleged share ramp at Williams Holdings.
But in contrast, the DTI has not been notably successful in bringing prosecutions against insiders based on the dossiers provided — as the Geoffrey Collier case demonstrates.
Even the SIB itself appears to be having self-doubts about the unwieldly monster it has created, particularly at a time when the City's self-regulation will have to be grafted on a more legalistic European Community framework.
The most interesting observations by the Ombudsman in the Barlow Clowes report concern the DTI's vision of regulation.
It points out that the licensing functions were lowly regarded and observes that protection of investors by definition requires a ‘rigorous and inquiring approach’.
Such comments about the DTI's effectiveness as a corporate policeman could have been made almost at any time over the last 30 years and in a multitude of cases.
Similarly, successive attempts by the City to regulate itself have, as in the case of FIMBRA, ended in disappointment.
It is easy to forget, for instance, that the Bank of England is still nursing along the remains of that 1970s darling, Slater-Walker.
Financial shenanigans clearly will not be eliminated by new, even tougher legislation to protect investors.
There is more than enough statutory law around.
What is needed are effective regulators and that is the common thread which runs from John Bloom and Bernie Cornfeld to Peter Clowes and Guinness.
Investors deserve a stronger, simpler and more tenacious system of enforcement than self-regulation can provide.
It is up to government to finance and provide it — but as far from the DTI as possible.
Bond tells shareholders his empire will survive.
By Jan Mayman in Perth and City staff
AUSTRALIAN entrepreneur Alan Bond yesterday appealed for the support of his shareholders, saying his debt-burdened brewing, property and media group would survive.
‘We have a mountain to move.
We can move it together,’ he told the annual meeting of his flagship Bond Corporation.
He was sensitive about questions of telephone tapping.
Australia is in uproar over allegations that one of his former executives organised the bugging of Robert Holmes a Court and leading Australian financial journalist, Terry McCrann.
Yesterday the Perth Daily News also claimed that the former executive who organised the alleged tapping approached the CIA in an attempt to discredit Lonrho, one of Mr Bond's most vociferous critics.
Mr Bond told the meeting: ‘I'm not going to discuss that sort of allegation — it's rubbish.’
In the face of the group's £4billion debts, he said: ‘We believe this company can be turned around again and prosper.’
The company's share price has fallen from A$1.87 in January to 14 cents on Tuesday.
Asked after the meeting if the current year could be worse, he said: ‘I can't imagine a worse one.’
Mr Bond said the company had sold its half-share in its headquarters, the RandI Bank Tower, for £54million.
The company hoped for early completion of a stalled £1.25billion sale of Australian brewing assets to New Zealand brewer Lion Nathan.
The only tough questions at the meeting came from three Dutch investment advisers who were representing family trusts with about £25million of Bond group convertible bonds.
The rich-poor gap widens.
The 1980s have been a decade of poverty for the poorly paid, with almost two out of every five full-time workers in Britain — nearly six million in all — now earning wages below the decency threshold set by the Council of Europe, the Low Pay unit says (writes Larry Elliott).
Its look at the 1980s shows a widening gap between rich and poor, with the low paid relatively worse off than when figures were first collected in 1886.
Including part-time workers, the LPU said almost 10million people were low paid and pay rises of 25.8 per cent would be needed to restore them to their relative position in 1979.
The Council of Europe defines the low paid as someone earning less than £163 a week in 1989.
Digest goes public.
Readers Digest is to go public in February, offering 21 per cent of its shares to investors worldwide.
The monthly magazine, founded in a garage by an American husband and wife, has a readership of 100million but will offer only four million shares outside the US.
RD's UK circulation is 1.5 million.
The flotation has been triggered by a group of US charities who were given shares by the magazine's founders and now want to cash in their holdings.
Banks' pact.
Standard Chartered and Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale yesterday signed a co-operation agreement to expand jointly in Europe.
Carron in talks.
Carron Phoenix, the Scottish sink manufacturer, is involved in talks which may produce a bid above the agreed 60p-a-share offer from Bene of France.
Bid rejected.
Sea Containers last night rejected the higher, hostile takeover bid from Anglo-Swedish rival Temple Holdings in favour of its own restructuring plan which involves it selling more than $1billion of assets.
Stake raises £116m.
John Gunn's debt-ridden financial services group, British & commonwealth , has raised £116million from the sale of its stake in the Irish office equipment to merchant banking group Woodchester.
Credit Lyonnaise, the French bank, has bought B&C's remaining 29.85 per cent stake.
EMAP turns radio dial.
EMAP, the publishing group, has increased its investment in local radio with the £1.41million purchase of Crown Communications' shareholdings in Radio Broadland and Suffolk Group Radio.
Appeal fails.
Abdul Shamji, chairman of the Gomba Group of Companies, yesterday lost his appeal against a 15-month jail sentence for giving perjured evidence about his personal fortune.
Shamji, who was also ordered to pay £28,960 costs, had asked the Appeal Court to reduce the sentence imposed on him at the Old Bailey on October 30.
Manx Chancellor goes.
The Isle of Man's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr David Cannan, was dismissed yesterday in the Manx government's first ever Cabinet reshuffle.
Mr Cannan blamed personality clashes.
Column held over.
Christopher Huhne's economics column has been held over until tomorrow.
Squeeze hits Greenall.
Warrington-based Greenall Whitley yesterday became the latest brewer to complain that the squeeze on spending is starting to hit beer sales.
The volume of beer sold through Greenall's pubs over the last couple of months has shown a fall on 1988 levels, said the group financial director, Mr Michael Davis, as he unveiled profits up 10.5 per cent to £52million for the year to September.
But there is no sign of a slowdown in bookings at Greenall's De Vere hotels chain.
There are now 25 De Vere hotels, after deals to buy the University Arms in Cambridge and the Grand in St Helier, Jersey.
The acquisitions — and the cost of converting scores of Greenall pubs into Premier House outlets providing food and with budget accommodation — pushed up the company's interest charge by 40 per cent to nearly £20million in the year.
Two thirds of Greenall's profits growth came from higher gains from selling pubs.
But the company insists that property profits will probably continue to rise as it buys and sells assets to reshape its business.
Around 50 pubs are currently on the market.
A revaluation of the brewer's 1,600 pubs showed that they are now worth £255million more than their book value.
Fletcher wraps up UK paper.
New Zealand pulp and paper makers Fletcher Challenge is well on the way to taking over UK Paper after its surprise 375p a share bid.
By late yesterday afternoon Fletcher had bought about 42 per cent of UK Paper, including the 4.5 per cent stake of former bidders Metsa-Serla.
Fletcher, one of New Zealand's biggest companies, said that everything was going to plan and that the UK Paper management team, including chairman Tom Wilding, will be staying on to run the company.
The bid values UK Paper at £299million.
Beaming Yorkshire.
Yorkshire Television, the independent broadcaster and programme maker, brightened shareholders' screens yesterday with a full year's pre-tax profits up from £15.64million to £18million and a dividend payout of 11.3p for the year as against 9.6p last time.
Income from the TV Times jumped from £1.4million to £2.1million with interest receivable more than doubling to £3.2million.
But the Exchequer Levy increased by £2million to £8.9million.
In short.
HARMONY Leisure, the pubs and hotels group where former GrandMet chairman Sir Stanley Grinstead is to join the board, has bounced back into the black.
Pre-tax profits for the six months to October 1 came in at £134,000 as against a full year's loss of £128,000 and a previous half time profit of £258,000.
MEDIRACE is raising £81.8million through a rights issue to cover most of the cost of the Evans Healthcare acquisition, which will propel it into a much bigger league.
Hong Kong: Shares lost ground in quiet trading.
Hang Seng Index: 2,879.42 (2900.21).
Tokyo: Stocks closed easier.
Nikkei Index: 38,439.10 (38,586.18).
Frankurt: Shares higher in lively trading.
FAZ index: 688.47 (686.12).
Paris: Stocks closed lower on continued interest-rate worries.
CAC index: 538.7 (541.6).
Diary of a financial fiasco 1973: Barlow Clowes & Partners formed by Peter Clowes and Elizabeth Barlow to deal in gilts.
1978: Mrs Barlow retires.
1984: DTI shows interest in Barlow Clowes and its ‘bond-washing’ activities.
DTI believes it is operating without a licence under the Prevention of Fraud (Investments) Act 1958.
November: Initial application for a licence submitted by the partnership.
December: DTI gets agreement to examine its books.
1985: February: Barlow Clowes incorporated and begins trading five months later.
March: Budget outlaws the ‘bond-washing’ scheme.
April: DTI writes to Barlow Clowes' solicitors expressing ‘concern’ about its business: Trade Secretary, Norman Tebbit, says he is ‘mindful to serve notice of his intention to refuse a licence’.
May: Full and formal application for a licence by Barlow Clowes.
October: After ‘prolonged negotiations’ DTI grants the licence.
1986: October: Licence renewed.
December: Barlow Clowes misses DTI deadline for submission of monitoring returns.
Deadline extended until February, which is met, but DTI queries the return.
1987: March: James Ferguson Holdings agrees to buy Barlow Clowes for £10million.
November 13: DTI appoints inspectors to investigate Barlow Clowes Gilt Managers.
1988: May 7: Peter Clowes resigns from the board of James Ferguson, parent of BCGM and Gibraltar-based Barlow Clowes International.
May 23: Securities and Investments Board orders BCGM to cease trading.
May 27: Official Receiver appointed provisional liquidator; special managers Cork Gully move in.
June 7: Ernst & Whinney appointed as provisional liquidators of BCI.
June 13: Trade Secretary Lord Young announces inquiry in DTI's handling of Barlow Clowes.
June 14: Shortfall revealed of up to £100million of investors' funds.
June 15: Peter Clowes arrested.
July: Investors group and legal steering committee formed.
October 20: Sir Godfray Le Quesne's inquiry is judged by Lord Young to have found no grounds for concluding that the Government's actions caused the losses.
November 8: The Parliamentary Ombudsman announces investigation of alleged maladministration into the DTI's involvement.
December 8: Peter Clowes and three associatesappear on theft charges arising from the affair.
1989: June: Liquidators sue Peter Clowes for the return of £84million alleged to be owed to 18,000 investors.
July: Lord Young is replaced by Nicholas Ridley.
October 25: Gibraltar lawyer James Levy appears in court on charges of conspiracy involving the use of false accounting departments.
November 1: Investment and Pensions Advisory Service — which received secret payments from Barlow Clowes having channelled £65million of investors' money into the business — wound up by the High Court.
Shares jump as financial discussions get underway Saga family in bid to go private.
By Mark Milner
SAGA, the tour operator for the over sixties, may soon follow in the footsteps of the likes of International Leisure Group and Richard Branson's Virgin Group by going private.
The De Haan family, which owns 63 per cent of the travel to financial services company, said it was considering an offer to buy the remainder of the shares at about £3 each.
At that price the whole company, which came to the stock market 11 years ago, would be valued at just over £54million.
Saga shares jumped 66p to 293p after news of the approach.
A bid would be subject to the family raising the £20million needed to finance the purchase of the shares it does not already own, but Mr Roger De Haan, who is leading the bid approach, said discussions were already under way with a bank and he was confident the money would be available.
Mr De Haan, who is also chairman of Saga, said the group could not enjoy one of the most important advantages of being publicly quoted — using its shares to fund acquisitions — because the family was determined not to dilute its controlling interest.
The company was founded by Mr De Haan's father and two of his brothers also work for the group.
‘We built it up, it is our baby,’ he said, adding that if the family allowed its interest to fall below 50 per cent it would risk being taken over by a hostile bidder.
‘We just don't want to be in that position.’
As a result ‘we have not been able to take advantage of what the City has to offer.’
On the other hand, however, Mr De Haan said the company had to put up with what it regarded as disadvantages of being publicly quoted.
There were occasions, for example, when the board felt a conflict between the need to distribute profits to meet the short term aspirations of the City and making medium and longer term investments in the business.
‘We think it would be better as a private company, without that pressure’, said Mr De Haan, though he said the move did not reflect any disenchantment with the City.
Mr De Haan said the original reason for going public was his father's concern that as a private company, with no market in its shares, the family might one day be faced with the prospect of having to sell the entire business to meet death duties.
The group got underway as a holiday company when Mr De Haan senior, who owned a Folkstone hotel, began arranging holidays for pensioners in the ‘off season’.
Since then it has widened its scope considerably, with packages ranging from the traditional fortnight at an English seaside resort to treks through the Himalayas and month-long tours in South America.
It is believed to sell about 250,000 holidays a year.
In recent years it has added to the services it provides for the retired to include financial services, retirement homes and magazine publishing.
In the six months to the end of July the group made a profit of £1.18million — 4.4 per cent down on the same period last year.
Saga has about 1,500 shareholders, with institutions accounts for around half the shares not held by the family and the remainder held by private investors.
Mr De Haan said a £3 a share offer would represent a 25 per cent compound annual growth for investors who had bought shares when the company first came to the stock market.
‘We believe it is a fair and generous price.’
The three independent directors on the Saga board said last night that they had noted the possible offer, adding that discussions ‘are at an early stage’ and a further announcement would be made ‘as soon as practicable’.
In the meantime shareholders were advised not to take any action.
An end to 19 months of torment.
By Daniel John
DELIGHT, elation and relief greeted the news of the government's decision to compensate investors for the bulk of the losses they had suffered in the collapse of Barlow Clowes.
For George Tyson and his wife, Rosie, it meant the release from a tormenting 19 months which saw their £15,000 savings put at risk.
‘I had given it up as lost,’ said Mr Tyson, who lives in South Ruislip, Middlesex.
‘We have lost money but at least we have got the bulk of it back.
At the same time, I'm elated and I can go back to the vices I did have,’ said Mr Tyson.
The 68-year-old former Clerk of Works at Harrow Council in London does not smoke, drink or gamble and has suffered two heart attacks.
‘I can go back to trout fishing with impunity.’
The Tysons should receive about £13,000 from the government, which will now be invested in a building society for him and his wife and their grandchildren.
For Betty and Trevor Lee of Stevenage, Hertfordshire, yesterday's decision should see them recoup just over £10,000 out of the £12,000 investment in Barlow Clowes International.
Before the government's retreat, their hopes were low.
‘My husband said that if we got 50 per cent back it would be something but this is very good news,’ said Mrs Lee.
And there was praise for the Barlow Clowes Investors Group, which, with Manchester solicitors Alexander Tatham, were at the forefront of the battle for compensation.
‘I don't think they could have done any more than they did.
They all worked very hard.’
Retired teacher Mary Simmonds of Blackwood, Gwent, greeted the news with ‘much relief.
I'm pleased but it's not compensation for all of the trauma we have suffered or the money we have lost if we had invested it elsewhere.
But we should be grateful for small mercies.’
She had £8,000 in the Gibraltar fund, a substantial slice of which was providing her with a monthly income.
‘I've had to be very, very careful and say ‘you can't afford it’.’
As for the future, she said she wouldn't speculate again but quickly corrected herself.
‘I didn't think I was speculating’ she said in a rebuke to the Government's attitude towards the advertised high-return, low-risk investment offered by Barlow Clowes.
It was the same and supposedly ‘safe’ haven which attracted former TV director Ray Elton from Belsize Park, London, to put £96,000 into BCI.
Along with 252 other investors, he is included in the £50,000-to-£100,000 category who the DTI says will get 80 per cent of their money back.
But while pleased, Mr Elton was scathing about Trade Secretary Nicholas Ridley's response to the Ombudsman's report to which the Government refused to accept responsibility for the affair.
‘It is an enormous relief but I think they have been very clever.’
The fixing of the amounts of compensation made it very difficult for the investors to refuse and it was aimed at defending the DTI from outright criticism as well as preventing public uproar, he said.
‘It is enough to prevent us taking them the court.’
As for the investors' representatives, businessman John Dyer and his committee at BCIG and Antony Gold and David Pine at Alexander Tatham yesterday represented almost the end of a daily nightmare.
Having lived with it for 19 months, John Dyer, an unlikely champion of investors' rights and one of the few ‘fortunates’ not hit hard by the collapse, was fulsome in his praise for BCIG's supporters.
‘They have made the best of a bad situation.’
Antony Gold described the compensation proposals as excellent, particularly for BCI investors ‘who could have been left out in the cold’.
Satisfaction was also expressed by Michael Jordan at Cork Gully and Nigel Hamilton at Ernst & Young, the joint liquidators of the two funds, who have so far recovered £60 million of the £190 million but knew from the beginning that anything like the Government pay-out for BCI was impossible.
And last night, Ian Burton, the solicitor representing Peter Clowes, the former head of the collapsed investment business, summed up his client's feelings.
‘He has all along been very concerned, irrespective of what people have said about him, about the plight of the investors.
He only hopes compensation will be sorted out as soon as possible.’
The day thrift turned into a nightmare.
By Daniel John
GEORGE Tyson is not a gambling man nor does he take unnecessary risks.
He doesn't smoke or drink, and even if he wanted to, two heart attacks and a by-pass operation have made the decision for him.
By his own account, Mr Tyson is thrifty and states quite proudly that neither he or his wife Rosie are a burden on any form of social or government support.
But that is why, at the age of 68, Mr Tyson is not enjoying what he had hoped would be a comfortable retirement.
A life of saving had, by 1985, given them a small nest-egg of £15,000 on which the interest would help supplement their pensions.
To the Tysons, that meant nothing extravagant — just an extra £135 a month to make life at home in South Ruislip, Middlesex easier.
That money was invested as might be expected of the Tysons.
And for three years, it earned its return, every month.
Until one morning in June 1988 when George Tyson turned on the radio to hear a small, investment business called Barlow Clowes had collapsed.
‘It was about 8.30am and I was just getting dressed when it came over on the news,’ said Mr Tyson, a former clerk of works at Harrow council, London.
Investors in Barlow Clowes since 1985, the Tysons had orginally put £10,000 into the UK fund and £5,000 in Gibraltar-based Barlow Clowes International (BCI).
Fate determined that a short while before the businesses failed, they transferred the £10,000 to BCI because of the better returns being offered.
In the days that followed, the Tysons found that they and 18,000 other investors had been the victims of a financial crash of global proportions.
Of the £190million invested in both funds, BCI investors faced a shortfall of up to £100million.
After the initial shock and disbelief, the Tysons grew angry — at the advisers who convinced them about Barlow Clowes, at the Midland bank manager who gave verbal assurances of its security, at the regulatory authorities responsible for the investment community and at the Department of Trade and Industry which allowed the company to trade.
‘I felt it was so safe, they were so professional,’ said Mr Tyson.
‘I feel appalled by the way these professional guardians have treated us.
If you were a gambling man it would not affect you, it would just be lost.
But this was not a gamble.’
Like so many investors, Mr Tyson found himself having to go back to work to ease the financial strain he had hoped to avoid.
Ironically, it was the Government which he partly blamed for the affair that gave him the chance to return to work after retirement.
A change in the tax rules affecting pensions was shortly followed by a job with the Department of Environment's Property Services Agency, a post which carries him through to March and may see him stay until he is 70.
Putting it as politely as he can, Mr Tyson said the whole affair ‘encouraged’ him to return to paid employment.
‘I hadn't planned to work at all.’
And like all of the other investors, he and his wife were in a quandry.
They wanted to do something but felt powerless.
Pursuing legal action would have cost them money they didn't have (unless it meant selling their house which was not an option) but doing nothing left them with the feeling that justice wasn't being done.
So they compromised and gave £100 to the Barlow Clowes Investors Group which was formed last July to represent the investors' interests and co-ordinate the fight for compensation.
That, says Mr Tyson, has been their only blessing.
‘They are dedicated people who clearly know what they are talking about and have guided us through it.
Those people are victims, too, but they have certainly kept us together.’
That aside, the last year has brought little respite from their own, very personal, crisis.
The Tysons have yet to see any cash payment from the liquidators who have been winding up BCI's affairs.
What little money has been recovered remains the subject of a legal tussle in the courts which may yet take months to resolve.
They have been told that their claim may only amount to around £11,000 of their £15,000 as capital gains tax is likely to be deducted from the total.
But until they get any money back, the Tysons find themselves in the position of the gambler who gambled all and lost.
Except that the Tysons don't gamble.
Monotype: Maxwell may bid.
SHAREHOLDERS in Monotype, the typesetting and graphic arts equipment maker, should soon be put out of their misery as Robert Maxwell looks ready to make a bid (writes James Morrow).
Monotype said yesterday it had received an approach ‘which may or may not lead to an offer’ from Mirror Group Newspapers.
There would be meeting this morning.
Monotype has already agreed to a 150p-a-share offer made by the US-based Pointplus.
Monotype shares closed 3p up at 158p.
Privatisation that got away shows how to share the corporate bounty Outlook.
By Roger Cowe
NFC stands as a monument to the irrelevance of both nationalisation and denationalisation; and as a monument to the vision of Sir Peter Thompson and his colleagues whose commitment to employee involvement has made the transport group, which was floated in February, the one privatisation that got away.
But only a hiatus at National Carriers caused by the closure of British Rail's door-to-door parcels service in 1980 stopped NFC going the way of other privatisations — into the pockets of disinterested individuals and institutions.
The resulting delay allowed Sir Peter to develop and lead the employee buy-out of the Pickfords and BRS group.
As a company with a heart and a determination to maintain employee control it is clearly a rogue among the 1980s herd of quick-buck, knock-down sales.
But it remains to be seen whether NFC is a throw-back to the 1970s or a model for the 1990s.
Whatever else it is, though, it has been successful in conventional business terms, although not as successful this year as the table suggests.
Reported profits soared by a third.
But the profits increase was helped by a suspension of pension fund contributions (shared with employees, unlike most companies) and other special effects.
Without those benefits the profits would have been lower than last year, although the core transport and distribution divisions did much better.
But the property profit is expected to continue growing.
Similarly the pensions holiday will continue for several years.
At any rate NFC (unique among public companies in giving a profits forecast) believes profits will grow by another 10 per cent in the current year.
That is good news in the light of worsening market conditions for the removals and holiday businesses.
The travel agency business has slumped into loss in the face of disappearing package holidays and market leader Lunn Poly's price-cutting tactics.
The worst is unlikely to be over yet.
NFC's caring approach makes it more reluctant than most companies to show employees the door.
But Sir Peter and his colleagues have also demonstrated their commitment to what the mission statement describes as ‘a participative and results-oriented management style’(my italics).
Staff in the travel business have already been cut by 15 per cent.
And the crunch comes next month when the company has to face the possibility of closing down or selling off the whole business — although this will be a last resort and an acquisition or joint venture may be more likely.
Such hard decisions must be made easier by the better outlook elsewhere in the group.
Contract hire and the managed distribution business known as ‘logistics’ have both done well.
And the property development operation more than doubled profits.
That does not prove that Sir Peter's participative style is reponsible, but it does prove that it is not irresponsible — as many bosses would claim.
The style includes a consultation exercise on future strategy, culminating in endorsement (presumably) at the annual meeting.
Objectives include ‘seeking improved employment opportunities’.
Sir Peter even suggested yesterday that business was not just about making profits.
‘It is about how you share them and who does well out of them.’
Many of Sir Peter's fellow company chairmen will scoff at such socialist sentiments.
But they might ponder whether such sentiments are more in line with the German and Japanese approaches that will probably dominate the 1990s rather than are their traditional capitalist values that have dominated the 1980s.
Strong words and clear rulings from a hard-hitting legal eagle.
By Daniel John
STRONG words and a tendency to make unambiguous rulings have epitomised Sir Anthony Barrowclough's five-year tenure in the office of Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration.
Popularly known as the Parliamentary Ombudsman, Sir Anthony has been surprisingly open about his work given the secrecy that pervades Whitehall.
Firm judgments of the cases he has investigated have often been accompanied by hard-hitting comments about the problems his office has encountered.
This is very much a product of his legal background which, in a career spanning 40 years as a lawyer, has seen him spurn a more lucrative profession to concentrate on the injusticesthat accompany bureaucracies like the Civil Service.
Born in 1924, his ambitions were delayed by the outbreak of the second world war in which he served in the Royal Naval Reserve from 1943, first in Coastal Forces and then on minesweepers, rising to the rank of lieutenant before being demobilised three years later.
He resumed his studies in 1948 at New College, Oxford, where he took a first class honours degree and was called to the bar a year later.
A steady rise up the legal ladder took him into the commercial law field and a range of broader experience as a member of both the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (1966 to 1969) and a legal member of the mental health tribunal for 22 years until 1982.
By then, he had been a Recorder for ten years and had become a QC in 1974, continuing in active practice until January 1985, since when Sir Anthony — he was knighted last year — has acted as both Ombudsman and Health Service Commissioner.
Both roles have involved handing out criticism, a task he has not held back from especially in this, the last year before he retires.
But for all of the work he has carried out, Barlow Clowes has proved to the largest and most complex in the office's 22 year history.
Even before he intervened last November, Sir Anthony had indicated the DTI might have a case to answer.
Yesterday, his uncompromising conclusions left no one in doubt that it did.
Names urge settlement.
By Ben Laurance
REPRESENTATIVES of 1,600 Lloyd's of London names who lost hundreds of millions of pounds through syndicates run by Mr Dick Outhwaite yesterday appealed for an out of court settlement of a threatened legal wrangle.
Mr Peter Nutting, chairman of the association which represents people who lost out when Mr Outhwaite pledged their money to meet US asbestos and pollution insurance claims, formally announced that writs have been served claiming negligent and reckless underwriting.
But he added: ‘We don't want our day in court…we would like to see a settlement.’
The writs are against 81 firms of Lloyd's members' agents and against the RM Outhwaite underwriting agency itself.
More than 1,600 names — the people whose personal wealth is pledged to meeting insurance claims — lost money when they found themselves having to meet huge bills for asbestosis and pollution claims after Mr Outhwaite agreed to take on the risks from other Lloyd's syndicates in 1982.
The committee headed by Mr Nutting has issued the writs on behalf of 814 names but hopes that more will join the action.
‘We are totally convinced as a committee that the losses that we are facing — losses on an unprecedented scale — are a result of reckless and negligent underwriting,’ said Mr Nutting.
The group maintains that by the time Mr Outhwaite agreed to take on the US risks, the dangers of asbestosis were already known: a Lloyd's working party had been set up in 1980 to look at the issue.
If the Outhwaite investors get their way in court, much of the burden of the claims could fall on other Lloyd's underwriters who sell ‘errors and omission’ policies, designed to cover against losses because a professional simply made a mistake.
A court hearing is unlikely before the end of next year.
‘I found very questionable that it was no (or little) concern that investors’ capital might be being eroded'
‘A regulatory agency ought, to my mind, by definition adopt a rigorous and enquiring approach’.
By Ben Laurance
A PICTURE of incompetence, lack of urgency and eagerness to hide anything which might embarrass Whitehall is revealed in yesterday's 170-page report by the Ombudsman, Sir Anthony Barrowclough, on the the Department of Trade's handling of Barlow Clowes.
Most of the facts about how an investment group could be allowed to draw in tens of millions of pounds of people's savings for years after regulators had first spotted that things were amiss at Barlow Clowes were revealed in a report by Sir Godfray Le Quesne commissioned last year by the then Trade Secretary, Lord Young.
The Le Quesne report was published 14 months ago.
It reported only the facts of the affair and drew no conclusions.
But yesterday's document from the Ombudsman is specific in pinpointing the areas where the Department of Trade Industry was at fault.
And its findings lay the foundations for Sir Anthony's conclusion that investors who lost money in Barlow Clowes should receive compensation from the Government.
The DTI showed ‘lack of a sufficiently rigorous and enquiring approach’ when looking at the activities of the investment group.
Most damningly of all, Sir Anthony concludes that in 1985 the Department already knew that Barlow Clowes did not maintain proper records, that it had been trading without a licence and that investment watchdogs were worried about the group's activities.
The DTI could have closed down the investment business there and then.
Instead, Barlow Clowes was granted a licence.
The DTI said it wanted to avoid the risk of a ‘disorderly collapse’ which would have threatened the savings of those people who had already put money into the funds.
Yesterday's report says: ‘The attractions of granting a licence, as a shield against accusations that the Department had — with the knowledge that the partnership was unlicensed — allowed them to carry on taking investors’ money, were allowed to cloud the thinking within the Department.’
It goes on: ‘Too little thought was given to the question of whether a legitimising licence would have been beneficial to investors.
‘If proper thought had been given to that, I think the conclusion must have been that it would not be beneficial…
I consider also that the decision in question was flawed to a degree by undue weight being given to the question of a disorderly collapse.’
Had Barlow Clowes been shut down in 1985, the total investment at risk in the offshore funds would have been less than £31 million.
By the time it was eventually closed in 1988, new investors had brought the total to £116 million.
Administrative and clerical errors by the DTI between 1975 and 1981 meant that the Clowes business was unlicensed.
On two occasions, once in 1980 and once in 1982, the DTI failed to act when it was told that Barlow Clowes was apparently dealing in investments without a licence.
And the department ignored the fact that a warrant for the arrest of Mrs Elizabeth Barlow, one of Barlow Clowes' founders, was issued in 1981 in connection with the collapse of a stockbroker.
‘The fact that the Department had, in effect, advised the partnership that it did not need a licence made it difficult for the Department to point a finger of blame at them,’ says Sir Anthony.
The lack of a licence in Barlow Clowes' early years may or may not have made a difference to the way investors' funds were handled during that time.
But if the British Barlow Clowes operation had been within the licensing net, it is more likely that the Department of Trade would have found out at a much earlier stage that Mr Peter Clowes was running a parallel offshore operation — first in Jersey and then in Gibraltar.
‘Matters of concern would have included the extent to which United Kingdom residents were investors in the Jersey funds, how they had come to be investors in those funds, how those funds were managed, whether they were kept separate from the United Kingdom funds or whether there was intermingling [the switching of money between UK and offshore funds]…and, ultimately, whether the Jersey funds as well as the United Kingdom funds could be properly accounted for.’
Sir Anthony goes on: ‘The information I have been given by the joint liquidators of BCGM [the British fund]and BCI [in Gibraltar]indicates that in the period up to December 1984 there had been frequent movements of money or securities between the United Kingdom funds and the Jersey funds and, most important of all, that at December 1984 the gilt-edged securities and cash held for the Jersey funds were at least some £3.65 million less than the funds’ obligations to investors.
‘But I think it highly unlikely that Mr Clowes could have found any means of ensuring that investigation of the matters in question was averted, while at the same time satisfying the Department that his operations could properly be licensed.
‘To my mind, it is a virtual certainty that the partnership's operations would have been brought to an end, in one way or another, within a relatively short time after…
December 1984.’
But it is in 1985 and subsequent years that Sir Anthony finds the Department of Trade's behaviour most lacking.
The central mistake was the Department's decision to grant Barlow Clowes an investment licence in 1985.
The DTI had plenty of ammunition to back a decision to withhold a licence.
The Department had evidence of ‘the very unsatisfactory state of affairs which existed within the partnership.’
Most importantly, the DTI asked Barlow Clowes to have its auditors, Spicer & Pegler, look at the accounts.
But the DTI did not appreciate that the accountants' study missed the central point of the Department's inquiry: the auditors were not asked to answer the simple question of whether there was enough money in Barlow Clowes' coffers to cover the amount owned to investors.
Sir Anthony says: ‘The Department were at fault in failing to appreciate that the instructions given to Spicers to carry out an audit of the partnership's client accounts would not, at least as regards some important Barlow Clowes portfolios, have enabled any reassurance to be gained on the score of the concern that the partnership could not make the payments of income they had guaranteed without eroding clients’ capital.
‘The portfolios which gave rise to this problem were those under which, besides guaranteed income payments, there was a guarantee that a stated sum would be repaid to the investor at the future maturity date of his chosen stock.’
After Barlow Clowes was granted its licence in 1985, warning signs kept reappearing.
And by summer 1987 — still a year before Barlow Clowes was closed — it was obvious that something was seriously wrong.
The Stock Exchange investigated Barlow Clowes because the company wanted to become a stockbroker.
It found some alarming evidence.
The Exchange spotted that Barlow Clowes' accounts were silent on the question of whether its investors' funds were sufficient to cover what savers were entitled to.
Specifically, the SE found that although Barlow Clowes claimed to deal only in government stock, ‘evidence of their dealing in equities also had been found.’
The Stock Exchange concluded that the accounts could be regarded as suspect because they made no reference to such business, according to Sir Anthony.
The Inland Revenue had told the SE that Barlow Clowes' advertising literature appeared misleading about the tax implications of investing in certain funds.
Clients did not receive regular information on where their money was invested or what their funds were now worth.
The Ombudsmansays of the SE's findings: ‘Among the authors’ conclusions was the view that ‘there must be substantial doubts as to whether the Barlow Clowes and James Ferguson companies and their directors can be considered fit and proper’for membership of the Stock Exchange.’
There was evidence that Barlow Clowes investors' money had been put into shares in James Ferguson, run by Mr Clowes' ally Guy von Cramer.
Sir Anthony says: ‘The paper concluded that the applications for membership could not be supported and that there should be a full inquiry ihnto the takeover activities and share dealings of James Ferguson and its related companies and connections, including the Barlow Clowes Group.’
The Stock Exchange's damning report was sent to the Bank of England and to the Department of Trade's Licensing Unit, which had responsibility for allowing financial groups to stay in operation.
The letter to the DTI was sent on July 2, 1987.
There was a further letter eight days later.
Sir Anthony says: ‘In his letter to the Licensing Unit principal, the Stock Exchange representative said that he was sceptical of the ‘bad guys becoming clean’ touch and was concerned about the future of the UK portfolio clients and the extent of resources within the portfolios.’
In the months leading up to the Stock Exchange's damning findings, the DTI's lack of concrete action was probably forgiveable.
Once the DTI knew of the Stock Exchange's findings in July 1987, there was no excuse for delay.
‘Nevertheless, it was not until September 18 that a decision was made that a section 105 investigation should be recommended by the Minister and the submissions to that effect did no reach him until October 13,’ says Sir Anthony.
‘The delays involved were altogether unacceptable in my view and I had no doubt that they amounted to maladministration.’
Late in September, the DTI Licensing Unit was given a heaven-sent opportunity to act.
Accountants Touche Ross asked for an extension of time for the filing of a ‘monitoring return’ giving details of Barlow Clowes' finances which was due by the end of that month.
The DTI could have responded by saying that the absence of the monitoring return was a serious matter, that it would allow a short extension, but that ‘consideration would need to be given to revoking the licence if a satisfactory and duly verified monitoring return were not received by the specified date.’
Sir Anthony concludes that the DTI did not adopt this tactic ‘as a matter of urgency’ because of the ‘inadequate grasp within the Licensing Unit of the detail of their powers under the Act which they had the task of administering.’
In other words, the DTI had failed to understand fully its own legal powers with which it could have put pressure on Barlow Clowes.
In the event, the DTI only launched a secret inquiry.
It took a further eight months before Barlow Clowes was closed down.
Sir Anthony concludes: ‘A regulatory agency — which is what the Department were, at the time, in relation to the protection of investors — ought, to my mind, by definition adopt a rigorous and enquiring approach as regards material coming into its possession concerning an undertaking about which suspicions have been aroused, and also as regards representations made to it on the part of the undertaking in question.
‘And it was, in my view, the lack of sufficiently rigorous and enquiring approach which led not only to the failure to appreciate that there was a Jersey partnership but also to some other of the faults I have identified.’
Ombudsman slams DTI on Barlow Clowes affair ‘Government ignored all warning signs for years’.
NICHOLAS Ridley offered £150million in ex gratia payments to investors in Barlow Clowes, but said the Government did not accept the main findings of the Ombudsman's report into the DTI's handling of the affair, writes Paul Nettleton.
The Trade and Industry Secretary told the Commons: ‘The Government is not asserting that the conduct of the department was beyond criticism, given the benefit of hindsight.
‘But in the Government's view the Department's handling of the case was within the acceptable range of standards reasonably to be expected of a regulator.’
The payments would be made ‘without admission of fault or liability’.
Mr Ridley said: ‘I give notice of our intention to pursue vigorously any claims which show prospects of reducing the cost to the public purse of these payments.’
He said recent legislation and jurisprudence made clear that regulators are not liable to investors.
‘The Government does not believe that it would be right for this case to be treated as a precedent.’
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade secretary, asked: ‘Why have we had to rely on the Ombudsman to confirm the mismanagement, the maladministration and incompetence that was widely known more than a year ago?’
It was strange that he was prepared to pay out £150million ‘and yet he continues to deny the Government's responsibility for mistakes and does not even apologise for his department's role’.
The reason for the payments was ‘not the fecklessness, gullibility or incompetence of the small investor, but the fecklessness, gullibility and incompetence of the Government, which for months and for years ignored all warnings’.
He asked: ‘Who in the Government intends to take responsibility for this negligence on a vast scale, that is now costing vast sums of public money?’
Mr Ridley said that of the five charges of maladministration the Ombudsman only attached ‘great significance’ to one which was a new point about the Jersey partnership.
The first criticism of the DTI dated from 1975, he said, adding that Mr Brown should not seek to make party political points.
He said the gross cost of the scheme would be £150million, but the liquidators expected to be able to return over £60million and the net cost would be reduced still further if sums were received from third parties.
Backbench MPs largely welcomed the compensation announcement, but insisted the Government must learn the lessons of the affair.
Mr Ian Stewart (C. Hertfordshire N) said Mr Ridley had announced a ‘handsome scheme of recompense’.
But he added: ‘It didn't require a great deal of insight in 1985 to appreciate that the business of Barlow Clowes was not at that time being run in a fashion which made it an obvious candidate for a licence.’
Mr Alf Morris (Lab.
Wythenshawe) welcomed a step forward for the victims of a ‘huge and vile swindle’.
Two of his elderly constituents had lost not only their life savings, but their homes.
But they had received a further ‘hammer blow’ with a demand yesterday ‘for thousands of pounds from the Inland Revenue for taxation which they had been told by Barlow Clowes had been deducted at source.
Shares tumble after Wall Street slump.
By Mark Milner
SHARE prices in London shrugged off Monday's sharp fall on Wall Street but then succumbed to fresh falls in New York late in the day.
Monday's 46 point drop in the US market meant a nervous opening in London but the fall in FTSE 100 index was confined to to single figures until mid-afternoon.
Then the index fell by almost 20 points below Monday's close after Wall Street turned a tentative opening into a 25 point slump.
The subsequent rally in New York came too late to help London shares.
At the close of trade, the Dow Jones index was 1.92 points lower at 2,695.61.
The FTSE 100 index finished 16.4 points lower at 2,342.1.
However, one share dealer commented that with many institutional investors reluctant to open aggressive new positions ahead of the new year, losses were expected to be contained.
On the foreign exchanges, the pound was a fraction down at $1.6020 but gained more than a pfennig to DM2.7760.