

Breakthrough in Aids cure hunt.
By Martin Walker in Washington
THE first serious prospect of a cure for Aids, rather than a treatment which delays its effects, has emerged when no trace of the Aids virus was found during the post mortem on a patient who had been treated with the standard AZT drug and a bone marrow transplant.
Doctors at the Johns Hopkins medical school in Baltimore say that after intensive tests they believe for the first time the Aids virus had been eradicated from the patient's body before he died from a separate lymphoma cancer.
The researchers warn that they will have to treat many more patients before they can report a cure, and that the expense and difficulty of obtaining bone marrow are likely to limit the number of possible treatments.
Further tests are under way at Baltimore, in California and at Seattle's cancer research centre, to see if the treatment can be repeated on other patients, and may eventually include some Aids sufferers who do not have cancers.
Lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system, often occurs in Aids victims, and bone marrow transplant is a standard treatment for sufferers from lymphoma and leukaemia.
The new treatment is based on the combination of the bone marrow and the AZT drug, which is being widely used on Aids victims.
Bone marrow is the source of immune system cells, and the transplant of new marrow was given after the patient's own bone marrow had been destroyed by doses of radiation and chemotherapy.
Simultaneously, the patient was given the AZT drug.
Writing in the current issue of Annals of Internal Medicine, Dr Rein Saral and Dr Kent Holland report that the new bone marrow grew and remained free from the Aids virus.
Tests on the 32nd day after the transplant showed no trace of the virus in the patient's bone marrow, nor in his blood.
Nine days later, the patient died.
‘No one has ever seen anything like that before,’ Dr Saral said.
‘Within the limits of detection, we have got rid of the Aids virus.’
Patten tackles Labour on second home curbs plan.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE Environment Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, yesterday wrote to Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour Party leader, demanding that he dissociate himself from proposals designed to stop the growth of second homes.
The move came as the Labour Party's housing spokesman, Mr Clive Soley, yesterday complained to the Press Council over newspaper reports that his party was proposing to ban second homes.
A Labour group reviewing planning law has proposed that local authorities be allowed to decide whether new second homes should need change of use planning consent.
Existing homes would not be affected.
The aim is to give councils some control over the future growth of second homes.
Mr Patten described it yesterday as a ‘spiteful and impractical and authoritarian plan’.
But Mr Soley defended the policy in an interview with the Guardian: ‘The problem is most acute in rural areas, such as the South-west, where there is a growing problem of ghost villages where 70 per cent of the houses are only occupied at weekends or during the summer,’ he said.
‘At the same time there is lack of accommodation for local people.
We have to offer the local authorities some way of restricting the growth of second homes,’ said Mr Soley.
He said the demand for such a policy came from within planning circles and from some Conservative-controlled councils in the South-west, Cumbria and North Wales.
Under the Labour plans, property owners who wished to convert their house to second home status would need to secure planning permission first from the local council.
Similarly it would be stated in the estate agents' particulars whether permission had been granted for a house which is up for sale to be sold to someone who wanted to use it as a second home.
At present such change of use consent is needed to convert a house into an office.
‘It would not be applied to someone who uses the house as their family home but works away from home for most of the week,’ said Mr Soley.
He added that in countries such as Italy the authorities charged double rates for the installation of such amenities as telephones, electricity and gas in second homes.
Mr John Wilkinson (C. Ruislip Northwood), who came sixth in the private members' bills ballot, yesterday announced a measure to make it obligatory to apply for planning permission before a dwelling house is demolished.
Mr Wilkinson, whose bill has a good chance of reaching the statute book, believes such a measure is necessary to curb growing surburban problem of overdevelopment through luxury blocks of flats being built by developers on plots previously occupied by a single house.
£31m to assess doctors.
By David Brindle, Social Services Correspondent
MINISTERS yesterday announced that £31 million will be available next year to develop computer systems to assess hospital doctors' success in treating patients.
Only £2 million is being spent this financial year but Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, said the extra would do more for the quality of patient care than any other aspect of the Government's health reforms.
Under the scheme, doctors will enter details of patients, their illnesses, their treatments and the results.
The announcement came as ministers tried to head off criticism that the reforms fail to address quality of care.
Earlier yesterday Mr Clarke told a London conference of health authority leaders that the district authorities emerge from the reforms as the ‘patients’ friends’, by assessing the health of their populations and meeting those needs when purchasing care from competing hospitals.
Mr Duncan Nichol, health service chief executive, said districts would in time need to draw up strategies for their populations, and specify measurable improvements.
The contracts between authorities and hospitals would not specify detailed quality criteria.
The £31 million will finance micro-computer terminals, ultimately one for every four doctors, and an eventual 1,360 monitoring staff.
Consultants' leaders are expected today to agree how results will be given to hospital managers.
Patients' names will not be passed on, and Mr Clarke said disclosure to district authorities, to inform care purchasing, was ‘some way down the track’.
Cuts in temporary nurses and overtime have been agreed by West Lambeth health authority, London, after its running deficit tripled to £1.5 million in a month.
Welsh way to health, page 19
Artists record anthem to aid boat people
Seumas Milne
The campaign against the repatriation of Vietnamese refugees from Hong Kong has become the latest cause celebre in the ufdrop
ARECORD in the Band Aid tradition of charity singles is this week being recorded this week to raise money for the Vietnamese boat refugees facing repatriation from Hong Kong.
by a group of pop musicians under the banner of ‘Rock Against Repatriation.’
The Bob Geldof of the ‘Rock Against Repatriation’ project is Steve Hackett, former Genesis ly guitarist, with who has assembled a group that includes ing Brian May of Queen, Mike Rutherford of Genesis, members of Tears for Fears and Marillion, Howard Jones and Bonnie Tyler to record Rod Stewart's 1970s hit, Sailing, made famous in the 1970s by and written by the Sutherland Brothers.
Recording begins in earnest today (thursday) in Peter Gabriel's studio in Bath, and and Hackett promises an ‘anthemic’ rendition.
But He says the record will be ‘less cameo-like and more cohesive’ than Geldof's Do They Know It's Christmas, Time, which ousted Paul McCartney to become the best-selling British record of all time in 1984. release is scheduled for mid-January.
The money is going to the British Refugee Council and the Save the Children Fund, but Hackett rules out giving passing any of the money to projects in Vietnam, where the refugee problem originates.
He also insists it Rock Against Repatriation will not be making just another showbiz charity record, but ‘This is going to be a protest record and a ‘symbol of hope’.
Hackett says no other issue has ever touched him as deeply as the forced repatriation of the Vietnamese.
and that he has ‘nightmares of Red Guards beating people to death.
‘Repatriation is evil, it smacks of the final solution.
Britain should find countries willing to take them,’ he said.
He believes that Britain should negotiate with other countries, the EEC and the United States, to take the Vietnamese.
‘I see that Paraguay has offered to take all of them and the Pope is on our side now.’
no ufend
Barlow Clowes investors win £150m payout.
By Daniel John and Alan Travis
THE Government yesterday agreed to pay £150 million in compensation to the investors of the failed Barlow Clowes group after it was castigated for ‘substantial maladministration’ by the Parliamentary Ombudsman over its handling of the affair.
In a decision which surprised MPs and investors, the Trade Secretary, Mr Nicholas Ridley, told the Commons that the bulk of the 18,000 investors are to get nearly 90 per cent of their money back in an unprecedented state payout.
However, Mr Ridley said the Government disagreed with the five main findings of Sir Anthony Barrowclough, the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration, whose 170-page report was released yesterday after a 13-month investigation.
Neither was the Government legally liable to pay compensation, he said.
But given the ‘exceptional circumstances’ and ‘out of respect’for the Ombudsman, substantial tax-free payments would be made.
The decision means those who invested up to £50,000 will get 90 per cent of their money, those who put in between £50,000 and £100,000 will receive 80 per cent, and those over £100,000 will get 60 per cent .
No distinction will be made between the two funds involved even though one of them was not the responsibility of the Department of Trade and Industry.
Only 255 investors put in more than £50,000, while 70 invested more than £100,000.
The department will now take charge of the legal battle to recover the Barlow Clowes funds and that money will offset the payouts.
Mr Ridley said the action would be pursued with the utmost vigour.
Mr John Dyer, chairman of the Barlow Clowes Investors' Group, which was set up to fight for compensation, said: ‘I really think investors ought to be deeply grateful.
It could have been so much worse.’
But he said the Government bore some responsibility for what had happened.
Labour's trade and industry spokesman, Mr Gordon Brown, asked how the Government could pay £150 million in compensation and yet not even apologise for its mistakes.
He said it was not the small investor but the ‘fecklessness, gullibility, and incompetence of the Government, which for months and for years, ignored all the warnings.
Who in the Government intends to take responsibility for this negligence on a vast scale, that is now costing vast sums of public money?’
Barlow Clowes collapsed in June 1988 putting at risk £190 million of investors' money.
Since then, liquidators have recovered £60 million and paid £34 million to investors in the UK business, Barlow Clowes Gilt Managers.
But 11,000 people who invested in the Gibraltar-based Barlow Clowes International, and who faced losses of up to £100 million, have yet to receive anything.
Seven people, including Mr Peter Clowes, former head of Barlow Clowes, face criminal charges as a result of the firm's collapse.
The smaller British fund had been licensed to operate by the DTI since 1985 and it had known about the business as far back as 1975.
It received a licence despite warnings from the Bank of England, the International Stock Exchange and Nasdim, a City regulatory body.
Sir Anthony launched his investigation last November following complaints by MPs and after an independent report into the DTI's role by the former Monopolies Commission chairman, Sir Godfray Le Quesne, which the then Trade Secretary, Lord Young, concluded cleared his department of any responsibility.
The Ombudsman found that the DTI committed errors in its advice to Barlow Clowes back in 1976 and if it had applied for a licence then it would not have been granted one.
He also ruled that if the DTI
Turn to page 20, column 3
Barlow Clowes investors to receive £150m compensation continued from page one had properly investigated an obscure Jersey partnership which had been licensed then it would have established a link between it and Barlow Clowes.
The Jersey operation turned out to be run by Peter Clowes and operated one of the controversial offshore investment portfolios which later collapsed.
If the link had been spotted, Sir Anthony concluded, Barlow Clowes's operations would have been halted in 1984.
This would have prevented the loss of nearly three-quarters of the money.
Faults were found in the DTI's procedures involving the scrutiny of an auditor's report of Barlow Clowes's funds.
Sir Anthony, who recommended full compensation, concluded: ‘A regulatory agency ought to my mind, by definition, to adopt a rigorous and enquiring approach as regards material coming into its possession concerning an undertaking about which suspicions have been aroused.
‘It was, in my view, the lack of a sufficiently rigorous and enquiring approach which led not only to the failure to appreciate that there was a Jersey partnership but also to some others of the faults I have identified.’
Mr Ridley defended the DTI's handling of the case and insisted it was ‘within the acceptable range of standards reasonably to be expected of a regulator’.
Details, page 11; City Notebook, page 10; Leader comment, page 18
Critics tone down attacks on legal reform plans.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
LEGAL peers renewed their attack on the Government's plans to shake up the legal profession yesterday, when the Courts and Legal Services Bill had its second reading in the Lords.
But criticism of the package, which will end the barristers' monopoly right to appear in the higher courts and transfer a huge chunk of the High Court's caseload to the county courts, was considerably less strident than when the original green paper proposals were debated last April.
Opening the debate yesterday, Lord Mackay said the bill's key aims were to ensure a voice for the users of legal services, and to make sure that decision-takers on legal services were answerable and took their decisions with the benefit of full and considered advice.
The proposals included a vital role for the judiciary in framing rules for advocates and preserved the independence of the legal profession, he said.
The bill gives four senior judges and the Lord Chancellor a veto over rules for solicitor advocates.
The judges must take account of advice from a lay-dominated advisory committee and the Director-General of Fair Trading.
Any judge refusing to approve the rules will have to give written reasons and can be challenged.
Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, and Lord Lane, Lord Chief Justice, two of the four senior judges with a veto, criticised the role given to them by the bill.
Lord Donaldson described the measure as ‘fatally flawed’ and attacked the framework for consultation and approval of the rules as a ‘choreographed quadrille’.
Lord Lane called for centralised control of advocates' conduct, enforced by the judges.
The bill proposes enforcement by barristers' and solicitors' separate professional bodies.
Lord Lane also launched a strong attack on the crisis in the crown and county courts.
In many cases morale had collapsed through underfunding.
‘It is a misleading fantasy to suggest that part I of the bill can be implemented when the infrastructure of the courts is crumbling,’ he said.
Lord Mishcon, Labour spokesman on legal affairs, described the situation in the county courts as ‘ludicrous’.
The Lord Chancellor's Department had twice the rate of resignations of any other government department, he said.
Lord Hailsham, a former Lord Chancellor, said it was paradoxical that a Government dedicated to privatisation should produce a bill whose object was to nationalise the judiciary and the legal profession.
Former Attorney General Lord Rawlinson said the reforms would lead to the destruction of the independent bar.
Artists record anthem to aid boat people.
By Seumas Milne.
ARECORD in the Band Aid tradition of charity singles is being recorded this week to raise money for the Vietnamese boat refugees facing repatriation from Hong Kong.
The Bob Geldof of the ‘Rock Against Repatriation’ project is Steve Hackett, former Genesis guitarist, who has assembled a group that includes Brian May of Queen, Mike Rutherford of Genesis, members of Tears for Fears and Marillion, Howard Jones and Bonnie Tyler to record Rod Stewart's 1970s hit, Sailing.
Recording begins today in Peter Gabriel's studio in Bath, and release is scheduled for mid-January.
The money is going to the British Refugee Council and the Save the Children Fund, but Hackett rules out giving any to projects in Vietnam, where the refugee problem originates.
He also insists it will not be just another showbiz charity record, but a protest record and a ‘symbol of hope’.
‘Repatriation is evil, it smacks of the final solution.
Britain should find countries willing to take them,’ he said.
Prince scorns new Bible and service in attack on ‘dismal’ use of English.
By Joanna Coles
THE Prince of Wales renewed his criticism of English teaching in schools yesterday and declared the English language had declined into a ‘dismal wasteland of banality, cliche and casual obscenity’.
He said he deplored ‘the abandonment of learning the rules of grammar by rote’ and stressed that higher standards of literacy were needed if Britain was to compete in an increasingly competitive world.
Teachers needed to give pupils ‘a vision of greatness’, he added.
‘If we encourage the use of mean, trite, ordinary language we encourage a mean, trite, ordinary world.’
The prince aroused anger among teachers last June when he attacked the teaching of English, claiming that many of his own staff could not write properly.
But yesterday he acknowledged the role of teachers.
‘I do not envy the task that teachers have, particularly in inner-city schools.
They need our sympathy in an exhausting task.’
However, it was the New English Bible and the Church of England's Alternative Service which took the brunt of the prince's speech as he presented the Thomas Cranmer Schools prize, sponsored jointly by the Spectator and the Prayer Book Society, at St James's Church, Garlickhythe, in the City.
The former was written in the style of an internal memo while the latter was crass and patronising, he said.
How can we expect to be lifted by the language of prayer ‘if the sentence itself needs to be lifted — by a stretcher?’ he asked.
The editors of the NEB patronised congregations by assuming that God was over their heads.
But God is supposed to be over our heads — that is the whole point, he said.
Stressing the need for the rich cadences and rhythms of the Book of Common Prayer, he said people loved them because they could remember them in times of crisis.
The prince compared the King James version of ‘Harken to my words’ with its modern equivalent ‘Give me a hearing’.
‘It might be accessible for all, but so is a desert,’ he said.
‘We have rejected quality in expression, just as we have rejected quality in the buildings in which we work and educate.’
The prince stressed that Britain had produced the world's most successful language but, as its use in the media and theatres showed, it had become impoverished, sloppy and limited.
He proffered a modern translation of Hamlet's ‘To be, or not to be’.
It ran: ‘Well, frankly, the problem as I see it at this moment in time is whether I should just lie down under all this hassle…
I mean, let's face it…know what I mean?’
Mr Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, welcomed the prince's apparent support.
‘Teachers alone cannot tackle the problems of society including the standards of literacy,’ he said.
‘They have to deal with what comes through the school gates.
‘Unlike architects, teachers don't choose the material and resources they have to work with.
I urge the prince to lead a partnership between teachers and parents.’
Mr David Hebblethwaite, secretary of the Liturgical Commission which helped produce the Alternative Service, said that if one translated the service back into the language of even 50 years ago, it would be ‘pretty incomprehensible’.
‘Certainly no one sets out to be patronising.
It depends on who's hearing it, but no one intended that,’ he said.
The Bishop of St Albans, the Rt Rev John Taylor, said he agreed with the prince about the beauty of Cranmer's language.
‘But that is a quite separate issue from the Alternative Services book which is an alternative way of enabling congregations who have not been well versed in Cranmerian language nevertheless to use a language which does reflect their longings and their prayers and can speak to them of God.’
Schools ‘need £1.1 billion for repairs’ next year.
By Celia Weston
LOCAL education authorities want to spend more than £1 billion on school repairs next year, three times the amount allocated for this year, the Labour Party said yesterday.
Mr John MacGregor, the Education Secretary, intends to announce the capital allocation to LEAs this week.
Mr Jack Straw, the shadow education secretary, said a Commons written answer from Mr MacGregor disclosed that England's 96 LEAs want permission to spend about £1.1 billion next year on state schools and £150 million on voluntary-aided schools.
Last year capital spending was £313 million, £220 million below its 1979 level, Mr Straw said.
Labour claims that central government capital spending on schools has been cut by 29 per cent in real terms since 1979, while LEA spending has been squeezed mercilessly.
The Department of Education and Science has estimated that state schools have a £3 billion backlog of repairs.
LEAs had asked for £34 million for this year but were allocated £13.6 million.
Labour has pledged to cancel the City Technology College programme to release £100 million immediately for repair and decoration of dilapidated schools.
It wants a commitment from Mr MacGregor to show no favouritism in distributing the £118 million earmarked in the autumn statement for building grants to voluntary-aided and opted-out schools.
MPs question £11m dons' pay waste.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
UNIVERSITY administrators who wasted £11.3 million of taxpayers' money by re-employing more than 200 redundant academics given ‘golden goodbyes’ averaging £80,000 each are to be summoned by the Commons public accounts committee to explain their mistakes.
The decision follows the disclosure in the Guardian on Monday of payments to 231 lecturers and professors which were in breach of Treasury regulations in a routine audit of the Department of Education's accounts.
MPs have decided to call Sir Peter Swinnerton-Dyer, chief executive of the Universities Funding Council, and Mr John Caines, permanent secretary at the DoE, to a hearing on February 28.
A report from Mr John Bourn, the Comptroller and Auditor General, to the committee recommended the hearing.
The mistakes follow a check by the National Audit Office, Parliament's financial watchdog.
This revealed that the University Grants Committee, the UFC's predecessor, had breached Treasury rules in allowing 20 universities to re-employ the lecturers and professors who had benefited from a £130 million early retirement programme.
The programme was part of a restructuring of university staff to prepare for a new market environment.
A total of 1,500 academics teaching subjects no longer in demand were offered generous compensation to retire early, while 1,000 new staff in more popular subjects were to be appointed.
The 231 staff were re-employed indefinitely — at cost of £50,000 each — some doing less work for the same money.
MPs are also to summon Sir Clive Whitmore, Permanent Secretary at the Home Office, to explain repeated failures by his ministry to curb TV licence evasion.
The hearing, on January 31, comes after a critical analysis by the NAO of the Home Office's record in combatting evasion.
Last year the ministry claimed it had made progress, only to find it had to revise its figures to reveal no progress had been made for five years.
Fresh investigations by the NAO to be published early next year include comparisons between private hospitals and the NHS; the privatisation of British Steel; the sale of the National Bus Company and the effectiveness of invalidity benefits.
Special investigations have also been carried out into British aid for India and the payment of pensions in Gibraltar.
Russia warns on German unity hopes.
By John Palmer in Brussels
THE Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, yesterday warned that demands for a rapid unification of Germany and the rise of rightwing German nationalism could threaten the peace and stability of Europe.
He implied that a united Germany might have to wait on an end to the division of Europe.
Mr Shevardnadze told members of the European Parliament that while the German people had the right to self-determination there would have to be ‘political, legal and material guarantees that German unity would not eventually create a threat to the national security of other states and to peace in Europe’.
In what was seen as an important statement of Soviet foreign policy in the face of growing demands for German reunification, Mr Shevardnadze posed seven questions which would have to be answered before it was ‘possible realistically to raise the issue…of re-establishing German unity’.
He suggested that a start to answering these questions should be made at a 35-nation European summit, under the auspices of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which the Soviet Union has suggested be brought forward towards the end of next year.
The seven questions were: What guarantees would there be that a united Germany would not threaten security and peace in Europe?;
Would ‘such a hypothetical Germany’ accept its existing borders?;
What would be the place of a united Germany in relation to the cold war alliances?;
Would a united Germany accept demilitarisation and ‘adopt a neutral status?’;
Would allied soldiers remain on German soil?;
How would a united Germany fit in with the attempt through the Helsinki process to end the division of Europe?; and, would the new Germany take into account the interests of others in concluding a European peace settlement?
The Soviet Foreign Minister left no doubt about his concern that some West German politicians might compromise the right of the GDR to self-determination by ‘offering prescriptions as to how and when to change the GDR system’.
He said this campaign raised ‘doubts about the authenticity of the eventual allegedly free choice’.
Speaking at a press conference later about the Bonn government's attitude to accepting existing borders and renouncing any territorial claims, he pointed an accusing figure at Chancellor Helmut Kohl for his recent plan for reunification.
This he unfavourably contrasted to recent statements by the West German Foreign Minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, accepting the inviolability of Germany's borders, notably the Oder-Neisse frontier with Poland.
Mr Shevardnadze deplored the fact that Germany's pre-1937 borders had not yet been ‘legally disbanded’.
In an apparent reference to recent demands by German nationalists and neo-fascists for one state with Germany's pre-1937 borders, he warned against ‘certain signs of political extremism, one that would ignore political realities and the historic memory of hundreds of millions of people’.
Anticipating his discussions in London later yesterday with Mrs Thatcher, the Soviet Foreign Minister said that the four Berlin powers had a continuing responsibility to preserve peace in Europe.
‘Surely the peoples of the Soviet Union are entitled to know what any changes in central Europe would mean for their future and their security.
We paid the price of 20 million lives for the existing European stability.’
Aware of the concern felt by many in his audience of European parliamentarians about the potential power of a united Germany, Mr Shevardnadze went out of his way to express agreement with President Franois Mitterrand that ‘no European country can act without due regard for the European balance, without taking into account the interests of others and the existing historical situation that resulted from the second world war’.
Before addressing the European Parliament, Mr Shevardnadze paid an unprecented visit to Nato headquarters in Brussels.
Text of the statement, page 8
Government faces compensation claims over EC deal Fishing quotas ‘may halve Scottish fleet’.
By Alan Hope in Brussels
AN AGREEMENT on fishing quotas reached by EC ministers yesterday could push half of Scotland's fleet to bankruptcy, Scottish Fishermen's Federation chief executive, Mr Bob Allan, said.
The Agriculture Minister, Mr John Gummer, and the Scottish Secretary, Mr Malcolm Rifkind, celebrated the small gains they had been able to negotiate, but admitted that the industry in Britain faced a tough time in the coming year.
The agreement, reached after 26 hours of talks in Brussels, will reduce British quotas for haddock and cod in the North Sea.
The result will be drastic cutbacks for East Coast fishermen, most of them in Scotland.
The industry would seek compensation from the Government for the effects of the quota cuts, Mr Allan said.
In Scotland about half of the 600 boats currently operating could be severely affected.
‘The figures don't constitute more than about six months of real and viable fishing for our fleet,’ he said.
‘What has happened is that we have been clawed back from the disastrous level of whitefish we started at to a position in line with the top end of scientific advice.’
The haddock quota for 1990 was set at 36,280 tonnes compared with 54,400 tonnes this year.
The final result is better than the 32,000 tonnes originally proposed by the Commission and is the maximum catch recommended by scientists to stop fish stocks disappearing.
Mr Gummer's determination to win the highest figures advised by the scientists failed for the North Sea cod quota.
Britain will have 46,180 tonnes in 1990, compared to 55,600 this year.
Scientists had recommended a maximum of 47,400 tonnes.
Mr Gummer claimed he had won the best deal possible.
‘There was no way we could come back to fishermen without the maximum available.’
He denied suggestions that the quotas would mean an immediate rise in fish prices: ‘There is no automatic relationship between this agreement and the price of fish.’
The junior fisheries minister, Mr David Curry said: ‘What we have agreed today is designed to ensure that there still are some fish left in 10 years time.’
The Government rejected attempts by the Fisheries Commissioner in Brussels, Mr Manuel Marin, to take control of parts of national quota management.
One measure would have forced British haddock fishing boats to lie idle for 10 days every month.
Another would have forced fishing for whiting and saithe to stop in the North Sea when the haddock and cod quotas were exhausted.
The Government and the British industry saw these proposals as an intrusion into national decision making.
While the Government supported the ideas behind the proposals, Mr Gummer said Britain preferred to take its own management decisions in co-operation with the industry.
Britain won a concession over mackerel fishing in western waters.
Because of the migration of mackerel over the notional dividing line between eastern and western zones, British fishermen had been faced with dwindling numbers of a healthy species.
British boats will now be able to take 28,000 tonnes of mackerel to the west of their own zone.
But Mr Rifkind appeared to rule out the scheme to pay fishermen to leave the industry.
A previous scheme had not worked, he said, and had been the subject of a scathing report from the Commons Public Accounts Committee.
‘We would be very reluctant to go down that road again,’ he said.
‘That is tremendously bad news,’ said Mr Allan.
‘Market forces will never take care of an industry as special as fishing.’
Tory MP found dead in car.
By Paul Hoyland, Michael White and Alan Travis
MR JOHN Heddle, the Conservative MP for Mid Staffordshire, was found dead in his car yesterday at a chalk pit near Canterbury, Kent.
A hose pipe was connected to the exhaust.
police said there were no suspicious circumstances.
The Conservative chairman, Mr Kenneth Baker, said last night: ‘He was a loyal and hard-working member of the party and a loyal and good friend.’
At Westminster MPs were astonished at the apparent suicide of a seemingly outgoing colleague with no problems.
Speculation about his death centred most persistently on financial worries.
Mr Heddle was a former surveyor and an underwriting member of Lloyds.
He had several directorships and property interests.
Mr John Brown, the Conservative agent for the West Midlands, said he had heard rumours about financial difficulties yesterday: ‘I do not know if there is any truth in them, and I cannot react.’
Mr Heddle, aged 48, was due to appear in court in Spain over a parking dispute while in Benidorm in May.
Police said he acted like a lager lout and hit an officer.
The MP vigorously denied assault and said he had been struck by the officer.
He said he would return to answer all charges.
The prosecution had sought a one-year prison sentence, to be suspended.
Mr Philip Jones, his constituency chairman, said yesterday that he did not believe the case worried him.
Mr Heddle had been MP for Mid Staffordshire since 1983, with a majority of 14,654 in 1987.
He was chairman of the Tory backbench environment committee.
He and his first wife, Judith, who died last year, had four children.
The marriage was dissolved in 1985, and in 1986 Mr Heddle married his second wife, Janet.
Mr Heddle lived at Hawkhurst, Kent, and had a constituency home in Lichfield.
Mr Jones said that his party and constituents would miss a ‘hard working and deeply caring Member of Parliament’.
The present constituency, redrawn in 1983 from the former Labour seat of Lichfield and Tamworth which Mr Heddle won in 1979, showed a strong swing toward Labour in the May council elections.
John Heddle…faced court appearance in Spain
Parking ban mars solstice tradition.
By Owen Bowcott
TOMORROW'S dawn celebration of the winter solstice at Stonehenge may attract up to 1,000 travellers.
Traditionally it is a peaceful event, without confrontation between police and what they describe as the hippy convoy.
This year the Wiltshire County Council has closed Larkhill Track, an old drove road near the stones where many travellers park their vans.
English Heritage has agreed to open Stonehenge from about 6am for the sunrise, but is closing the car park.
Both bodies fear that the travellers, once established near the stones, may not move on.
‘The solstice is the natural rhythm of the planet,’ said Mr Alex Rosenburger, editor of Festival Eye and a member of Travellers Aid Trust, yesterday.
He believed that many legitimate visitors would be forced to park on the main road because the council had closed the track.
‘They fear loads of hippies going with cans of Special Brew, but that's not true,’ he said.
Mr Rosenburger was recently acquitted on a charge of breaching the peace, having read out extracts from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights outside Salisbury Cathedral in the summer.
His protest was directed at the midsummer's day four-mile ‘exclusion zone’ at Stonehenge, imposed by Salisbury District Council and confirmed by the Home Secretary.
The trust, a charity which helps those who describe themselves as ‘New Age Travellers’, plans to appeal against the convictions and average fines of £50 plus costs imposed on 65 of the 130 would-be visitors who were arrested and charged with public order offences.
The trust aims to challenge the legality of the exclusion order, made under the 1986 Public Order Act, deeming two or more people walking towards the stones to be a criminal procession.
Mr Don Aitken, a trust member, said it hoped to bring a test case.
Arts, ReviewsWS27.
CartoonsWS29.
Classified AdvertisingWS22-25.
CrosswordsWS20, 29.
Financial NewsWS10-12.
Guardian SocietyWS21, 23.
Guardian WomenWS28.
Home NewsWS2-4, 20.
International NewsWS8, 9.
Law ReportWS29.
LettersWS18.
ListingsWS26.
ObituaryWS29.
PoliticsWS6.
Sports NewsWS14-16.
Young GuardianWS17.
TV, Radio and WeatherWS30
Mother's body kept in kitchen for three years.
AWOMAN kept her mother's body hidden among rubbish in her kitchen for almost three years, an inquest heard yesterday.
Miss Norma Scott, aged 23, failed to report her mother's death because she did not want the council to discover the squalid conditions at her home in Bilsmoor Avenue, Newcastle upon Tyne.
She did not even tell her father, John, aged 76, of his wife's death.
He never found her body as the kitchen was barricaded and he was afraid of dogs his daughter kept.
The death of Mrs Norma Scott, aged 54, in October 1986, came to light on September 7, when Newcastle council called in workmen to clear the rubbish as part of a scheme to upgrade houses in the area.
Her skeletal remains were found then.
Details of the police inquiry into the death were given by acting inspector David Hall at the resumed inquest in Newcastle.
He said that after 1983, Mrs Scott and her daughter decided to live in the kitchen with the dogs — which were never let out of the house — to stop them fighting.
Daughter Norma slept on the floor and her mother, virtually housebound because of varicose veins, in a bed.
The mother's health deteriorated and she died in the bed.
The next morning, her daughter covered the body with bedclothes and made a barrier, with fencing from the garden, to stop the dogs ‘interfering’ with it.
She then carried on ‘as normal’, even buying dressings for her mother's legs so her father would not know she had died, Mr Hall said.
When her father, a retired civil servant, asked her about his wife's condition, she would reply: ‘The same as usual.’
He eventually stopped inquiring.
Mr Hall said Norma had become ‘rather a recluse’, hiding the death from everyone.
‘She began to pile up empty tins and rubbish against the fencing until her mother's body was completely covered.’
During 1986, Mr Scott did once enter the kitchen, and when he did not see his wife assumed she was visiting relatives.
Mr Hall said Miss Scott had explained she did not give notification of her mother's death because she was afraid the authorities would discover the conditions in which they had been living.
The inquest heard she had spent time in council care as a child and feared something similar might happen again.
She knew she ought to report the death, but felt she could not because of the passage of time.
Mr Hall stressed there was nothing to suggest anything sinister about Mrs Scott's death.
The Crown Prosecution Service planned no action.
Before the death there were up to 15 dogs in the house, as the family's bitch produced two litters which were both kept — one set in the kitchen, and the other in a bedroom.
At the time of the discovery, five were left.
They were destroyed by the RSPCA.
Miss Scott and her father are now being cared for by Newcastle social services in a home for vulnerable people.
However, she attended the hearing and told the coroner she agreed with the police report.
A pathologist told the inquest it was impossible to say what caused Mrs Scott's death.
Summing up, the coroner praised the police for their investigation of what he described as ‘a most unhappy and distressing case’.
As there was no medical evidence on the cause of death, he recorded an open verdict.
Prince tilts at new Bible and service in attack on ‘dismal’ use of English.
By Joanna Coles
THE Prince of Wales renewed his condemnation of English teaching in schools yesterday and declared the English language had declined into a ‘dismal wasteland of banality, cliche and casual obscenity’.
He said he deplored ‘the abandonment of learning the rules of grammar by rote’ and stressed that higher standards of literacy were needed if Britain was to compete in an increasingly competitive world.
Teachers needed to give pupils ‘a vision of greatness’, he added.
‘If we encourage the use of mean, trite, ordinary language we encourage a mean, trite, ordinary world.’
The prince aroused anger among teachers last June when he attacked the teaching of English, claiming that many of his own staff could not write properly.
But yesterday he acknowledged the role of teachers.
‘I do not envy the task that teachers have, particularly in inner-city schools.
They need our sympathy in an exhausting task.’
However, it was the New English Bible and the Church of England's Alternative Service which took the brunt of the prince's speech as he presented the Thomas Cranmer Schools prize, sponsored jointly by the Spectator and the Prayer Book Society, at St James's Church, Garlickhythe, in the City.
The former was written in the style of an internal memo while the latter was crass and patronising, he said.
How can we expect to be lifted by the language of prayer ‘if the sentence itself needs to be lifted — by a stretcher?’ he asked.
The editors of the NEB patronised congregations by assuming that God was over their heads.
But God is supposed to be over our heads — that is the whole point, he said.
Stressing the need for the rich cadences and rhythms of the Book of Common Prayer, he said people loved them because they could remember them in times of crisis.
The prince compared the King James version of ‘Harken to my words’ with its modern equivalent ‘Give me a hearing’.
‘It might be accessible for all, but so is a desert,’ he said.
‘We have rejected quality in expression, just as we have rejected quality in the buildings in which we work and educate.’
The prince stressed that Britain had produced the world's most successful language but as its use in the media and theatres showed, it had become impoverished, sloppy and limited.
He proffered a modern translation of Hamlet's ‘To be, or not to be’.
It ran: ‘Well, frankly, the problem as I see it at this moment in time is whether I should just lie down under all this hassle…
I mean, let's face it…
You know what I mean?’
Mr Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, welcomed the prince's apparent support.
‘Teachers alone cannot tackle the problems of society including the standards of literacy,’ he said.
‘They have to deal with what comes through the school gates.
‘Unlike architects, teachers don't choose the material and resources they have to work with.
I urge the prince to lead a partnership between teachers and parents.’
Mr David Hebblethwaite, secretary of the Liturgical Commission which helped produce the Alternative Service, said that if one translated the service back into the language of even 50 years ago, it would be ‘pretty incomprehensible’.
‘Certainly no one sets out to be patronising.
It depends on who's hearing it, but no one intended that.
Cranmer's England was far more structured,’ he said.
Demo police win ban on prosecution.
SEVEN police officers charged after a demonstration at Mr Rupert Murdoch's News International headquarters in Wapping, east London, won their attempt yesterday to halt criminal proceedings against them.
The Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr Allan Green, QC, failed to overturn a magistrate's decision not to prosecute six of the officers, charged with conspiring to pervert the course of justice.
Lord Justice Watkins and Mr Justice Garland, sitting in the High Court, dismissed Mr Green's application to quash the ruling, made in May by Mr Ronald Bartle, a Bow Street stipendiary magistrate.
Mr Bartle had ruled the delay in notifying Sergeant Robert Goodger and Constables Ian Storrar, Nigel Pratt, Gavin Steff, Terence Chitty and Ivan Szubin of the allegation, and delay in bringing the prosecution was prejudicial and an abuse of the court process.
Lord Justice Watkins said Mr Bartle applied his mind to the correct principles of law and applied them in a manner which could not be faulted.
The judges also allowed an application by PC Russell Cherry, charged with wounding a man he arrested during the dispute, for an order quashing a decision by another Bow Street magistrate, Mr Geoffrey Wicks, to proceed with his committal.
They said Mr Wicks's decision was based on the flawed findings that the delay was justifiable and there was no prejudice.
The demonstration, in January 1987, followed the sacking of print workers by Mr Murdoch's newspaper group in its move from Fleet Street.
More than 15,000 protesters and 1,000 police were involved.
Mr Mike Bennett, chairman of the Metropolitan branch of the Police Federation, said last night: ‘I just hope that the honourable thing is done in relation to the 18 other officers who are still to come before the magistrate on January 25.’
Lord Justice Watkins said that in the case of the six officers, where two years — less 12 days — elapsed before the officers were summonsed, Mr Bartle exercised his discretion ‘without any flaw’.
He was acquainted with the facts, had the benefit of much of the argument later addressed to the High Court, and preferred the submissions made to him by counsel for the officers.
‘Those submissions have been amplified impressively before us.
We have found them compelling,’ the judge said.
In relation to PC Cherry, who had to wait the same period before being summonsed, Lord Justice Watkins said the delay after April 1987, when there was ample evidence to sustain a prima facie case against him, was ‘undoubtedly extreme’.
He was not persuaded by the argument that the only way the inquiry could be properly conducted was to see the whole picture before making any final decision on an individual case.
‘The mere fact that more than a thousand police officers know that their conduct is under investigation can, it seems to us, in no sense diminish the prejudice suffered by a particular officer against whom there was a prima facie case of the commission of a criminal offence at a very early stage of that investigation.’
Ms Brenda Dean, general secretary of Sogat (Society of Graphical and Alled Trades) said: ‘The decision will give the green light to a small minority of cynical police officers, encouraging them to build in unnecessary delays when they are investigating their own.’
Brandenburg to reopen before Christmas.
By Anna Tomforde and Michael Farr in Dresden
IN A gesture symbolic of the new relationship cemented in Dresden yesterday between East and West Germany, the leaders of the two countries announced that the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin would be opened before Christmas, probably on Saturday.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the East German Prime Minister, Mr Hans Modrow, said that, from Christmas Eve, West Germans would be able to cross without visas.
The two leaders will meet at the gate on Saturday.
Chancellor Kohl, on his first official visit to East Germany, was mobbed in the centre of Dresden by a crowd of several thousand shouting: ‘Germany, Germany’, ‘Helmut, Helmut,’ and ‘Germany united Fatherland’.
Minutes before Dr Kohl arrived at the Palace of Culture, the brass band on the Christmas market opposite played to the waiting crowd: ‘See the conquering hero comes,’ from Handel's Judas Maccabaeus.
But both Dr Kohl and Mr Modrow, aware that the hopes of many for reunification are growing by the day, and more quickly than the politicians can accommodate, tried to cool expectations.
A joint statement released after the first day of the summit stressed that both Germanys had to act responsibly, and take into account the concerns and interests of their neighbours and allies in East and West.
‘We should show understanding for the fear of our neighbours; we should take them seriously,’ Dr Kohl told the West German flag-waving crowd outside the Church of Our Lady, left in ruins by the Anglo-American air raids of February, 1945.
‘Self-determination is the right of all people in the world, including Germans, but it only makes sense when one does not lose sight of the concerns of others…we are coming to the end of a century which has seen the special responsibility of Germans for some terrible things.’
But he added: ‘My goal remains — when the historic moment comes — the unity of the nation.’
The joint statement underlined the importance of good neighbourly relations between the two German states for the stability of Europe and their contribution to a ‘new European architecture’.
But Mr Modrow, who emphasised the need for East Germany to exist as a separate state, said he and Dr Kohl agreed that a stable East Germany was an important precondition for peace and co-operation in Europe.
But the cautious words of the politicians were taken further by an impatient crowd, demanding: ‘Helmut and Hans, make Germany one again.’
There were also some aggressive shouts of ‘Down with the Communist Party’, ‘Reds out’ and occasionally, ‘Russians out’from mostly young supporters of the Right, a number of whom had travelled to Dresden for the occasion.
But on the whole, the several thousand, out of Dresden's total population of 520,000, who came to cheer Dr Kohl, represented a cross section of East German society, young and old.
The numbers swelled later as people streamed to the Neumarkt square after work to hear the Chancellor speaking in front of the church ruins.
Many brought with them East German flags from which they had cut out the hammer and compass, the Communist symbol.
Mr Modrow said he and Dr Kohl would be present at the opening of a pedestrian crossing through the Brandenburg Gate before Christmas.
More than any other landmark, the Brandenburg Gate, erected in 1794 as a triumphal arch, has come to symbolise the division between East and West.
The two leaders also agreed that visa and currency exchange-free travel to East Germany for West Germans and West Berliners, planned to come into force next January, would be brought forward to December 24.
Mr Modrow added that political prisoners held in East Germany would be released before Christmas in a further gesture of goodwill.
The two leaders will meet again at the end of January, and later to sign a treaty on co-operation and good neighbourly relations by next spring which is to cement what is being described as a ‘Treaty-based relationship.’
Meanwhile, a joint economic commission would look into ways of economic and industrial co-operation.
PM quells Hong Kong row over passport quotas.
By Michael White and David Hencke
MRS Thatcher yesterday marshalled the Cabinet behind a Foreign Office plan to give full British passports to at least 50,000 of Hong Kong's leading figures and their families, despite the misgivings of the Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, and other colleagues.
The bill is expected to sweep aside restrictions under the 1981 British Nationality Act which require six months prior residence before the granting of citizenship.
But confusion and uncertainty surrounding the Government's efforts to restore confidence in the colony are likely to continue after the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, makes his long-awaited statement to the Commons this afternoon.
Details of the legislation — including the points system whereby passports are allocated to senior Hong Kong government officials and businessmen — may not emerge until Easter.
Businessmen will get most passports, perhaps as much as two-thirds.
But no prospective beneficiary will be free to arrive until 1991 or later, raising private fears among some MPs that continued flight will mean a de facto Chinese takeover long before 1997.
Mr Waddington, a former immigration minister and rightwinger, seems to have gritted his teeth at yesterday's meeting and stood by the compromise hammered out at Mrs Thatcher's insistence in a cabinet committee.
Although she backed the plan to ‘keep Hong Kong prosperous’ until 1997 in the Commons yesterday, she let the Cabinet know she was displeased by the row.
But Mr Waddington's tone left colleagues in little doubt about his lack of enthusiasm about having to solve another minister's problems with legislation which will be attacked from all sides, including Tory rightwingers.
When MPs last night debated the related issue of compulsory repatriation of Vietnamese refugees from Hong Kong, they divided largely on party lines.
Some ministers, notably Mr Nicholas Ridley, registered scepticism about the wisdom of the scheme during the meeting and doubted their ability to sell it to MPs and voters.
It is intended to reassure key figures in Hong Kong that they have a ‘safety net’ and need not emigrate elsewhere if relations with China do not improve as the 1997 handover approaches.
But the changes to the immigration package made yesterday were minor.
One senior minister said: ‘There was nothing in it for the Right.’
Discrepancies remained last night between the Foreign Office's emphasis on 50,000 heads of families involved and what looked like a Home Office attempt to put a ceiling of 200,000-225,000 on the total number.
Estimates of the family multiplier have ranged from 3.5 dependants per head of household to five, adding to uncertainty and the widespread backbench Tory hostility to the reopening of what one called ‘a hideous wave’ of immigration.
Ministers believe that with several months leeway, they can overcome public fears and backbench resentments sufficiently to reduce the potential Tory rebellion from 50-70 votes — which could spell defeat — to a manageable 20-30.
The package is expected to allow all Hong Kong residents who qualify — officials, security staff and leading businessmen — to be given automatic British residence status, although Whitehall is keen to avoid loopholes which other Commonwealth citizens might exploit.
Although some Tory rebels claim their constituents fear intolerable pressure on homes and social services, others agree with Labour that the scheme is elitist, unfair and unworkable.
However, one Tory loyalist said: ‘If Gerald Kaufman wants to form an alliance with Tim Janman (a rightwinger), good luck to him.
We will defeat the extremists.’
The Liberal Democrats want twice as many admitted.
Their leader, Mr Paddy Ashdown, yesterday challenged Mrs Thatcher to ignore her own bigots and Labour's ‘moral bankruptcy.’
But in last night's debate on the boat people, Labour's junior foreign affairs spokesman, Mr George Foulkes, denounced compulsory repatriation as despicable and heartless.
He called for international reconstruction of Vietnam's economy.
Politics, page 6; Lost passports, page 9
Aldington gets £30,000 over Tolstoy book.
FORMER deputy Tory party chairman Lord Aldington yesterday accepted £30,000 agreed High Court damages and a public apology over war crimes allegations from the publishers of historian Count Nikolai Tolstoy's book, The Minister and the Massacres.
The full details of the settlement, agreed in June, were kept secret until after the hearing of Lord Aldington's libel action against Count Tolstoy and property developer Nigel Watts over a pamphlet repeating the allegations.
Last month, after a nine-week trial, the peer was awarded £1.5 million by a jury in that action.
However, yesterday's award is the first money the peer has received.
The £1.5 million has been stayed pending a possible appeal.
It was said yesterday that the book's publishers, Century Hutchinson, accepted that the ‘very grave charges’ were ‘entirely untrue’.
It had been alleged that the 75-year-old peer had in May 1945 defied orders, deceived superiors and conspired to bring about the tragedy which befell thousands of Cossacks and Yugoslavs, forcibly repatriated by British forces from Southern Austria to Soviet and Titoist forces.
Most of them were massacred or tortured on their return.
The peer's counsel, Mr Charles Gray QC, told Mr Justice Michael Davies in a statement in open court that the publishers had agreed to pay legal costs and not to repeat the allegations.
They accepted that there was no conspiracy.
Mr Gray said Century Hutchinson accepted that Lord Aldington was ‘a brave and dedicated officer with a deservedly distinguished war record and that at all times he was conscientiously seeking to implement the orders of higher commands without suspicion that atrocities would be committed by the Soviets and Titoists’.
After the statement was read, Mr Justice Davies — also the trial judge in the pamphlet action — said it would have been unfair to Count Tolstoy and Mr Watts if the jury in the action against them had been told that ‘responsible publishers’ had already paid money into court and agreed to apologise and withdraw a book containing similar charges as those made in the pamphlet.
The judge went on: ‘The fact that there is a difference in the figures between the settlement in the book action and the jury in the pamphlet action will not surprise anyone familiar with all the circumstances.
‘In so saying I express no view whatsover as to the correctness or otherwise of the jury's award’.
Biologists iron out gene theory.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
MODERN molecular biology has finally answered one of the most important questions thrown up by experiments in the last century on the nature of genetic inheritance.
A team led by Dr Cathie Martin at the John Innes Institute in Norwich, has isolated the gene which determines the ‘wrinkliness’ of peas.
The pattern of inheritance of this simple characteristic led the Moravian monk, Gregor Mendel, to one of the greatest insights in biology — character traits were not blended during passage from one generation to another but inherited as separate factors, later called genes.
Mendel had no idea how the genes made the peas become wrinkled.
But now, more than a century later, the Norwich team has found the answer.
Round peas contain much more starch than the wrinkled variety which contain more sugar.
The developing round peas produce a vital molecule, called starch-branching enzyme, which builds up complex starch molecules from sugar.
Dr Martin's team have shown that the wrinkled peas contain a defective gene for this enzyme and fail to make it.
They accumulate abnormal amounts of sugar which causes them to swell during development.
When they mature and dry out, however, they shrink and become wrinkled.
Dr Martin says that the team hoped the work would round off one of Mendel's experiments but the results have turned up a surprise.
The defective gene in the wrinkled variety contains an extra piece of DNA — the stuff genes are made of — which prevents it working properly.
But this piece looks like a member of a family of rogue ‘roaming’ elements called transposons that can move in and out of genes and may provide fundamental insights into gene functions.
‘The behaviour of transposons in other plants is a key feature of our research, but this result was completely unexpected,’ said Dr Martin.
PM quells Hong Kong row over passport quotas.
By Michael White and David Hencke
MRS Thatcher yesterday marshalled the Cabinet behind a Foreign Office plan to give full British passports to at least 50,000 of Hong Kong's leading figures and their immediate families, despite the misgivings of the Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, and other colleagues.
The bill is expected to sweep aside restrictions under the 1981 British Nationality Act which require six months prior residence before the granting of citizenship.
But confusion and uncertainty surrounding the Government's efforts to restore confidence in the colony are likely to continue after the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, makes his long-awaited statement to the Commons this afternoon.
Details of the legislation — including the points system whereby passports are allocated to senior Hong Kong government officials and businessmen — may not emerge until Easter.
Businessmen will get most passports, perhaps as much as two-thirds.
But no prospective beneficiary will be free to arrive until 1991 or later, raising private fears among some MPs that continued flight will mean a de facto Chinese takeover long before 1997.
Mr Waddington, a former immigration minister and rightwinger, seems to have gritted his teeth at yesterday's meeting and stood by the compromise hammered out at Mrs Thatcher's insistence in a cabinet committee.
Although she backed the plan to ‘keep Hong Kong prosperous’ until 1997 in the Commons yesterday, she let the Cabinet know she was displeased by the row.
But Mr Waddington's tone left colleagues in little doubt about his lack of enthusiasm about having to solve another minister's problems with legislation which will be attacked from all sides, including Tory rightwingers.
When MPs last night debated the related issue of compulsory repatriation of Vietnamese refugees from Hong Kong, they divided largely on party lines.
Some ministers registered scepticism about the wisdom of the scheme during the meeting and doubted their ability to sell it to MPs and voters.
It is intended to reassure key figures in Hong Kong that they have a ‘safety net’ and need not emigrate elsewhere if relations with China do not improve as the 1997 handover approaches.
But the changes to the immigration package made yesterday were minor.
One senior minister said: ‘There was nothing in it for the Right.’
Discrepancies remained last night between the Foreign Office's emphasis on 50,000 heads of families involved and what looked like a Home Office attempt to put a ceiling of 200,000-225,000 on the total number.
Estimates of the family multiplier have ranged from 3.5 dependants per head of household to five, adding to uncertainty and the widespread backbench Tory hostility to the reopening of what one called ‘a hideous wave’ of immigration.
Ministers believe that with several months leeway, they can overcome public fears and backbench resentments sufficiently to reduce the potential Tory rebellion from 50-70 votes — which in tandem with Labour could spell defeat — to a manageable 20-30.
The package is expected to allow all Hong Kong residents who qualify — officials, security staff and leading businessmen — to be given automatic British residence status, although Whitehall is keen to avoid loopholes other Commonwealth citizens might exploit.
Although some Tory rebels claim their constituents fear intolerable pressure on homes and social services, others agree with Labour that the scheme is elitist, unfair and unworkable.
However, one Tory loyalist said: ‘If Gerald Kaufman wants to form an alliance with Tim Janman (a rightwinger), good luck to him.
We will defeat the extremists.’
The Liberal Democrats want twice as many admitted.
Their leader, Mr Paddy Ashdown, yesterday challenged Mrs Thatcher to ignore her own bigots and Labour's ‘moral bankruptcy’.
But in last night's debate on the boat people, Labour's junior foreign affairs spokesman, Mr George Foulkes, denounced compulsory repatriation as despicable and heartless.
He called for international reconstruction of Vietnam's economy.
Politics, page 6; Lost passports, page 9
US satellites to go to China.
President Bush has approved the sale of three civilian satellites to China and lifted a trading ban.
The action removes a large part of economic sanctions imposed after the Tiananmen Square massacre.
The White House is under pressure from Congress to show results from recent secret contacts with Beijing.
Page 9.
German unity warning.
Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviet foreign minister, has warned that demands for a rapid reunification of Germany could threaten European stability.
Page 20.
Pilots' hours cut.
The Civil Aviation Authority has ordered cuts in pilots' hours after the discovery that flight crews have been falling asleep in the cockpit.
Page 4.
‘Threat’ to Scots fleet.
An agreement by European Community ministers on fishing quotas could push half of Scotland's fleet to bankruptcy, the Scottish Fishermen's Federation has said.
Page 2.
War book damages.
The former Tory party deputy chairman, Lord Aldington, has accepted £30,000 agreed damages and a public apology over war crimes allegations from the publishers of the historian Nikolai Tolstoy's book, The Minister and the Massacres.
Page 4.
Stella Gibbons dies.
The novelist Stella Gibbons, author of Cold Comfort Farm, died yesterday at her north London home, aged 87.
Obituary, page 29
Hamlet before and after.
Prince Charles yesterday parodied Hamlet to illustrate how literature could be destroyed by bad use of language.
Hamlet, Prince of Denmark: Act III, Scene I.
HAMLET: To be, or not to be: that is the question: Whether ‘tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them?
To die: to sleep; No more; and, by a sleep to say we end The heartache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ‘tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish'd.
To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: aye, there's the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause.
Charles, Prince of Wales: Act 1, Scene 1.
CHARLES: Well, frankly, the problem as I see it At this moment in time is whether I Should just lie down under all this hassle And let them walk all over me, Or, whether I should just say: ‘OK, I get the message’, and do myself in.
I mean, let's face it, I'm in a no-win Situation, and quite honestly, I'm so stuffed up to here with the whole Stupid mess that, I can tell you, I've just Got a good mind to take the quick way out.
That's the bottom line.
The only problem is: What happens if I find that when I've bumped Myself off, there's some kind of a, you know, All that mystical stuff about when you die, You might find you're still — know what I mean?
Palumbo demolition victory ‘exception to planning rules’.
By Madeleine Bunting
ACONSERVATION group has lost its High Court fight to save eight listed buildings in the City of London which are to be demolished by the property developer, Mr Peter Palumbo.
The grade two listed buildings on the Mappin and Webb site opposite the Mansion House are to be replaced by a single new building comprising offices, shops, a restaurant and a pub.
The proposed complex, designed by the architect James Stirling, has been described by the Prince of Wales as resembling ‘a 1930s wireless set’.
However, in the High Court yesterday, Mr Justice Simon Brown rejected claims by the group, Save Britain's Heritage, that the decision in June of the then Environment Secretary, Mr Nicholas Ridley, to grant planning permission was contrary to stated government policy, and should be quashed.
But he said he wished Mr Ridley had made clear that the strong argument for conservation was only over-ridden because of‘a combination of wholly exceptionable circumstances’, and that the case was ‘unique’ because of the high standard of the proposed scheme.
The judge said the case did not mark a sharp change in government policy, and emphasised it was not to be regarded of general application by planning authorities around the country.
The conservation group claimed the judgment vindicated their challenge, by narrowing the potentially damaging effects of Mr Ridley's decision.
‘The judge has set our fears at rest that Ridley's decision would be used as a precedent for demolishing thousands of other listed buildings,’ said Mr Marcus Binney, the group's president.
Mr Palumbo said he was delighted with the decision, and that the cost of delays has been £1million per day.
In his lengthy judgment, Mr Justice Simon Brown also acknowledged the ‘enormous controversy’ over the scheme.
But he said that his only concern was to establish whether Mr Ridley's decision had been in accordance with the law.
He concluded that it was.
‘Everybody accepted that the existing buildings were of both individual and group value, and not to be demolished save in favour of an outstanding replacement,’ he commented.
Following a public inquiry, the inspector had concluded a new building on the site provided a ‘vital opportunity’ for ‘a considered mature work by a British architect of international stature, of whose achievements the nation can be justly proud.’
It ‘might just be a masterpiece’, he said in his report.
In recognition of it being a charity which had acted in the public interest, the judge awarded only three-quarters of the costs, estimated at £50,000, against the conservation group, which is considering an appeal.
Video evidence plan for children.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
CHILD witnesses in trials for sexual or violent offences, cruelty or neglect will be able to give evidence by pre-recorded video rather than appearing in court if the Government accepts a Home Office advisory group's recommendations.
In its report, published yesterday, the advisory group on video-recorded evidence says no child witness in such cases should be required to appear in open court.
The Home Office yesterday broadly welcomed the report, but said it would consult interested parties before deciding on implementation.
The group, chaired by Judge Thomas Pigot, QC, a senior Old Bailey judge, recommends that the rule that children under seven or eight should not give evidence, laid down in a string of cases, should be abolished.
The rule, combined with the rule against hearsay which prevents criminal courts admitting evidence of a child's interviews with social workers or psychiatrists, has made it impossible to prosecute many alleged child abusers.
The group, which includes a barrister, a law professor and representatives of the police and social services, also suggests that in rape and other sexual assault cases, judges should no longer be required to direct the jury about the danger of convicting the accused on the uncorroborated evidence of the alleged victim.
Video-recorded interviews with police, social workers or others concerned with child welfare or criminal investigation should be admissible in court if the child is under 14, the group recommends.
For sexual offences, the upper age limit should be 17.
Where the case is to be tried by a jury in the crown court, the judge should decide at a pre-trial hearing whether to admit the video as evidence.
Videotaped interviews should only be excluded if admitting them would be contrary to the interests of justice.
Interviews should comply with a statutory code of practice and the judge should be required to take account of the code in deciding whether to admit the video.
Cross-examination by defence lawyers should also be videotaped at an informal hearing before trial, with the press and public excluded.
Defendants should be prohibited from cross-examining the child.
Most of the group suggests the court should be able to order, in the case of very young or disturbed children, that questions be relayed through a psychiatrist or someone who enjoys the child's confidence.
The barrister member, Miss Anne Rafferty, dissented.
Report of the Advisory Group on Video-Recorded Evidence, Home Office, 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT, £2 Leader comment, page 18
Ashdown claims ‘moral voice’ for the 1990s.
By Paul Nettleton
MR PADDY Ashdown yesterday staked the Liberal Democrats' claim to offer British politics a ‘moral voice’ for the 1990s, building on its stance over Hong Kong and the Vietnamese refugees.
He admitted the strategy posed risks to his party, but said: ‘I've got to be prepared, to continue to be prepared, to take risky positions to keep in the game.’
He went on: ‘Looking back, the fact that we were the first to say Thatcher should go over the Lawson affair meant that we were in the game.
The same is true of Hong Kong.
There is no benefit to my party, no benefit whatsoever, in simply taking safe positions.
‘If we're going to break through, we've got to be prepared to be quick on the button and to say quite risky things.’
In an end-of-year assessment at Westminster, Mr Ashdown admitted that when he became leader, his job had been to stabilise a party ‘in a fast downward spiral of disintegration’.
The party's September conference in Brighton ‘was the point at which we said ‘right, this is a political entity that's going to continue’.
I don't mind sharing the view, there were moments when I wondered whether it could actually be done.’
Mr Ashdown said progress for the party would be incremental.
‘I am determined that we build solidly rather than build fast.’
He said Labour's proposed end to support for the closed shop, rather than evidence of a changed attitude to Europe, was a piece of clever opportunism to get the party where it wanted to be.
He saw little sign ‘of the commitment to deepening European unity which is going to be the main thrust of European, if not domestic politics, in the next five or 10 years.’
On Mrs Thatcher and Europe, he felt she had been ‘locked in the bunker surrounded by sycophants so long that she's lost touch with reality.
‘I do think that this is a very important issue for us in politics.
We own this agenda.
I can feel the British people moving very fast towards a position we've held with some electoral drag for a number of years.
‘At the end of the day, what we're really looking for is the right byelection.’
A PRIVATE member's bill to introduce payments for Crown servants who were exposed to radiation during nuclear weapons tests and have since contracted leukaemia and other cancers, and to the dependants of those who have died, was presented to the Commons by Mr Bob Clay (Lab.
Sunderland N).
Mr Clay drew eighth in the ballot for private member's bills, but with only seven Fridays available for second readings has limited chances of seeing his bill made law.
THE Social Fund budget is to be increased by £3 million to increase allocations to 100 offices where applications have been higher than expected, Mr Tony Newton, Social Security Secretary, announced in a written answer.
Mr Newton also announced that the amount of savings elderly people may have before cold weather payments are reduced will be increased to £1,000.
SUBSIDIES totalling £11.6 million will be paid next year towards essential ferry and coastal shipping in the Northern and Western Isles of Scotland, Mr Malcolm Rifkind, Scottish Secretary, told Sir Hector Monro (C. Dumfries & Galloway) in a written answer.
FINAL allocations of water shares were 46.875 per cent to the public; 39.25 per cent to institutions and 13.875 per cent to overseas investors, Mr Michael Howard, water minister, told Mr Graham Allen (Lab.
Nottingham N) in a written answer.
TODAY'S BUSINESS House of Commons: Scottish questions; Christmas adjournment debate; Consolidated Fund Bill — all night session of short backbench debates.
House of Lords: Debate on international action to protect the environment.
Exploding myth of Thatcher folklore Points of Order.
By Ian Aitken
THE round of applause which the Prime Minister attracted at the European summit in Strasbourg earlier this month has already entered the folklore of Thatcherism.
It is presented as proof of the success of her softer approach to all those Frogs, Krauts and Wops who live on the other side the English Channel.
The story is that President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl led the clapping as a tribute to Mrs Thatcher's transformed behaviour.
Alas, like so many things which get into the history books, it wasn't quite like that.
According to very senior sources who were present at the final session of the summit, what actually happened was subtly different from the PR people's version.
They say that as the meeting was drawing to its conclusion, everyone was waiting for a certain person to utter a few graceful words by way of a thank-you to the summit host, Mr Mitterrand.
The designated person, it was thought, was the Irish Prime Minister, Charlie Haughey.
But time passed and, to everyone's embarrassment, Mr Haughey showed no sign of doing his bit.
So Mrs Thatcher, demonstrating hitherto unsuspected social graces, decided to step into the breach herself.
Declaring that she believed she was speaking for everyone, she expressed gratitude for the splendour of the hospitality provided by La Belle France, thanked the president personally, and added a few more words of the sort which well-brought-up people employ on such occasions.
When she finished, the rest of Mr Mitterrand's guests clapped politely, and they were joined by Monsieur le President.
It is anyone's guess why Mr Mitterrand applauded, though he is said to get on better with Mrs T than Euro-legend has it.
But the others were plainly endorsing her vote of thanks to their host rather than paying tribute to the newly-discovered ‘communautaire’ qualities of the Iron Lady.
THE sickening events in Romania over the past few days now leave Albania as the last resort of old-style Stalinism.
It is, in a memorable phrase from the 1930s, a faraway country of which we know little.
But thanks to its urgent need for ‘hard’(ie. capitalist) currency, even Albania was forced to open its borders to tourism some time ago.
One of the first tourists to venture into the former realm of King Zog was John Biffen, who soon discovered his fairly orthodox demeanor was regarded as offensively trendy by Albania's time-warped Bolshevists.
It wasn't just that copies of knitting patterns in a popular British magazine were regarded as subersive, or even that the border guards had strict rules about the permitted length of visitors' hair.
There was also the problem of Mr Biffen's shorts.
These were a survival from his army days and, therefore, some way from being sexually provocative.
But the pure Marxism-Leninism of Albania's then president, the late Enver Hoxha, decreed that shorts could only be worn on the beach.
Regrettably, Mr Biffen wore his on the brief journey from his seaside hotel to the beach.
This act of gross indecency provoked stern disapproval from the tour guide.
Mr Biffen, who was later to become Leader of the Commons and Lord President of the Council, and was eventually to be sacked by You-Know-Who for wholly ideological reasons, was marched back to the hotel to cover himself.
The event suggests the Albanian Communist regime might most easily be toppled by dropping tons of trendy magazines on Tirana.
MEANWHILE, admirers of Joseph Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili (Stalin to you) are scarce outside Albania nowadays.
Even the old-style British Communist Party has renounced him, along with pretty well all his works.
So colleagues were intrigued when posters appeared near the Guardian office recently, announcing a meeting to celebrate Uncle Joe's 110th birthday in a hall close to King's Cross station.
The celebrant was to be something calling itself the Revolutionary Communist Party of Britain (Marxist-Leninist).
Sadly, the reporter despatched to attend and describe this promising event was quite unable to find it.
Had it been April, one could have understood.
But December?
Perhaps it was the flu.
Tunnel travellers to stay in cars.
By Andrew Cornelius Business Editor
AFRESH row over Channel Tunnel safety is likely to follow yesterday's confirmation that passengers will not have to leave their cars and coaches when they travel through the tunnel.
It came as a relief for Eurotunnel, which otherwise would have needed to redesign the tunnel trains, causing delays in delivery.
The Anglo-French Intergovernmental Commission, which sets safety and security standards for the project, announced the decision after receiving advice from the Tunnel Safety Authority.
‘The current studies are sufficiently convincing for Eurotunnel to continue the development of its transport system on the principle of non-segregation of passengers for diesel and petrol cars and coaches,’ the authority said.
Passengers will have to be separated from light commercial vehicles, light vehicles with caravans or trailers and mixed-use vehicles like campers and mobile homes.
The company had already decided to separate drivers and passengers of heavy goods vehicles and motorcycles from their vehicles.
A further outcry from consumer groups and fire brigade unions is expected over the dangers from fire.
They have lobbied hard for complete segregation on tunnel trains, similar to the operation of cross-Channel ferries.
Eurotunnel welcomed the decision.
‘It enables us to continue to develop the project as conceived from the start,’ said a statement by Eurotunnel's co-chairmen, Mr Alastair Morton and Mr Andre Benard.
‘In the past four years, a great deal of research and design has gone into the safety of the project.
In the coming months we will begin a series of presentations to help the public fully understand our system.’
Muslims fight Rushdie threat.
By Sarah Boseley and Tom Sharratt
AGROUP of moderate Muslims yesterday launched a campaign to silence those calling for the death of the novelist, Mr Salman Rushdie.
The call came as two Iranian students were deported after being questioned in connection with threats to firebomb bookshops.
Mr Allama Abul Fateh Chisti, an Islamic scholar who is managing director of the Muslim Unity Study Centre in Southall, west London, and a prominent businessman, Mr Riaz Khalid, are the prime movers behind the British Muslim Alliance.
They hope to unite Muslim organisations in a peaceful campaign against Mr Rushdie's novel, the Satanic Verses, which they consider blasphemous.
But they want an end to all death threats against the novelist.
Mr Chisti said calls for the killing of Mr Rushdie had backfired.
‘We achieved nothing because the prime purpose of the movement was only to ban the book or withdraw the book from the shelves or have Rushdie brought before a court of law.
Instead of that, Rushdie became very famous and the book became a bestseller.’
He appealed for all Muslim organisations to join the Alliance.
‘If not, then I fear that this paperback edition will come and it will be sold on a very large scale and will be smuggled to other countries where it is banned and will be read in translation,’ Mr Chisti said.
The organisers hope their movement, which they say is supported by many Muslim organisations, will persuade the Government to order an inquiry into the Rushdie affair.
The organisers are planning a rally in February.
Mr Khalid said the Government could repair damage by agreeing to an inquiry.
He said: ‘The stance that the British government has taken has damaged its trade with Islamic countries.’
The leading moderate Muslim, Dr Hesham El-Essawy, chairman of the Islamic Society for the Promotion of Religious Tolerance, welcomed the organisation's launch and said it reflected the feelings of most British Muslims.
He said many were shamed by the outbursts from Muslims like Mr Kalim Saddiqui, the most prominent supporter of the Rushdie death sentence pronounced by Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini.
Mr Saddiqui was not impressed by the launch of the organisation although he wished it well.
The Home Office announced last night that two Iranians arrested on Friday under the Prevention of Terrorism Act are to be deported.
Two other Iranians arrested at the same time by Greater Manchester police were released without charge yesterday.
Mr Zahid Dar, a spokesman for their solicitors, said the other two may seek compensation for wrongful detention.
The two who are to be expelled are Mr Karen Abrinia, aged 32, and Mr Mehrdad Kokabi, aged 33, engineering students at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology.
It is understood that they were questioned in connection with threats to firebomb bookshops.
Fare rises, job losses and substitution to buses in rural areas forecast for 90s BR grant to be slashed by a third.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
DIRECT government grants for the railways are to be slashed by 33 per cent to £345million, after adjustment for inflation, in the next three years.
The cuts, which emerged in the new British Rail corporate plan for the early 1990s, will mean substantial real increases in passenger fares for the foreseeable future, more one-off sales of railway property, fewer jobs and substitution of rail services with buses insome rural areas.
In the wake of the Clapham Junction crash, the plan also earmarks £250million of capital investment on safety measures, but admits the true cost of improving railway safety will be significantly higher.
Despite the reductions in grant, Mr Cecil Parkinson, the Transport Secretary, is steering BR towards a record £5billion investment programme of modernisation for the 1990s, and is welcoming private sector involvement.
The latest cuts in public sector support follow a steady reduction in government aid from more than £1billion a year during the 1980s.
The main grant, the Public Sector Obligation, was sliced by 25 per cent between 1983 and 1986/87, and BR faces a further 29 per cent cut by the end of the current financial year in March 1990.
Details of the corporate plan are:
Grants to commuter services in the South are to be abolished by 1992/93, having run at over £300million a year as recently as 1985/86.
Grants of £94 million are forecast this year, and the new plan asks BR to produce, by December 1990, proposals for Network SouthEast to achieve significant progress towards a commercial rate of return by 1995/96.
BR forecasts continuing increases in demand in the congested South-east, and half the planned investment of £2billion up to 1994/95 will go on new rolling stock.
But the document warns: ‘Real pricing is assumed in every year of the plan, averaging approximately 2 ½ per cent per annum, consistent with the quality improvements which will be brought about by investment.’
Receipts per train mile are forecast to rise by 11 per cent up to March 1994.
The threat of more rises is apparent in a promise by BR to review by 1991 whether changes in quality targets can be justified, ‘taking account of passengers’ willingness to pay for them.’
BR says strenuous efforts are being made to improve punctuality, but admits overcrowding and cancellations on some services has reached unsatisfactory levels.
It says it is not possible to predict when loading standards can be met.
Public sector support for provincial services is being reduced by £77million to £345 million by 1992/93, from almost £550 million in 1985/86.
The corporate plan assumes a 6 per cent reduction in costs, a 14 per cent jump in receipts and a 15 per cent rise in the number of passenger-miles by March 1994.
However, it also assumes a reduction of 2,400 vehicles on the provincial network by 1993/94.
The plan notes ‘some lines may be the subject of bus substitution proposals to provide local transport at lower cost’.
Investment in the provincial sector is set to exceed £500 million over the coming five years, with half in new rolling stock.
The InterCity service, which received grants of more than £120million in 1985/86, is projected to make profits of £20 million in the current year, rising to £95million by 1992/93.
Business is scheduled to grow by 7 ½ per cent by March 1994, and BR admits prices ‘will relate to what the market will bear.’
Increases above inflation will be concentrated on long-distance commuter services, which BR says are ‘well below standard rates’ in the south.
InterCity is forecast to continue reducing costs and invest £750million within five years.
The freight operation, which received over £50million of support in the mid-1980s, is set to make profits of £22million in the current year and £50 million by 1992/93.
Investment within five years is put at £670million.
The parcels operation, which lost £18million in 1987/88, is set to earn profits of £9million by 1992/93, and investment is put at £35million.
BR is projecting to shed 1,000 jobs a year for the next five years, cutting the total workforce to 130,000 by 1992/93 — from around 200,000 in the early 1980s.
BR investment is forecast at £5 billion in the five years to March 1994, about double the rate of the past five years.
Some £1.49million is scheduled for infrastructure, £2.5billion for rolling stock and £836million for stations and terminals.
However, BR is concerned that the key assumption of the report — a UK annual growth rate of 1.7 per cent— will not be achieved.
It warns that because of the recent downturn, there is a significant risk growth will not be so high.
‘Clearly, this is worrying for the board as it prepares to address the new objectives for 1992/93.’
Rail fares to soar as grants are cut.
By Michael Smith and Patrick Wintour
RAIL fares are scheduled to soar in the next few years and at least 5,000 railway jobs will be lost following the Government's decision to slash grants for British Rail in the early 1990s.
The Transport Secretary, Mr Cecil Parkinson, announced yesterday that BR grants would be cut by a third from £516 million to £345 million by 1992/93 and that BR plans to shed 1,000 jobs a year up to March 1994.
Mr Parkinson told the Commons there was no need for ‘large fare increases’ but BR's corporate plan, also published yesterday, revealed a steady upward climb in the cost of travel.
BR warned that fares on Network SouthEast, where grants will be withdrawn altogether by 1992/93, would rise in real terms by 2 ½ per cent over inflation for the next five years.
Fares on provincial operations, where grants will be cut by 18 per cent, would face ‘selective real pricing’.
Network SouthEast will be the only European commuter rail operation not supported by public money, and Mr Parkinson has ordered it to earn a commercial rate of return by 1995/96, a move which implies further fare increases.
Fares on InterCity will relate to ‘what the market can bear,’ with real increases focused on long distance commuters.
Rail fares have been rising at around 1 ½ per cent over inflation in recent years and the new corporate plan also warns that BR has 12 months to assess whether passengers would pay even more for a better service.
While Mr Parkinson faced severe criticism from opposition MPs, rail unions and transport groups, he counter-attacked by promising £5 billion of capital investment and telling MPs: ‘To subsidise a service for which there is excessive demand is a very silly way of using national income.’
Mr Parkinson will face continued criticism of government policy to spend more on building roads while reducing support for public transport.
The former prime minister, Mr Edward Heath, signalled some Tory backbench unease by saying the Government had to realise there was a difference between subsidy and expenditure to help the environment.
Mr John Prescott, the Labour transport spokesman, said BR would lose £3.5 billion of public support by 1993, which would leave it at the bottom of the international league for support and top for fares.
He warned that the overall effect would be to drive the public back on to overcrowded roads.
The rail unions rejected Mr Parkinson's plans.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the National Union of Railwaymen, said the proposals would threaten essential measures like new signalling.
Mr Stephen Joseph, of the pressure group Transport 2000, said the plans would force people back on to the roads.
‘The Government is asking the railways to do more with less.’
Details, page 3
Adverse conditions disrupt service on Commons line Sketch.
By Andrew Rawnsley
CECIL Parkinson, the Transport Secretary, was due at the despatch box to make his statement about the future of British Rail.
But, in the finest traditions of BR, the service was inevitably subject to a series of unavoidable delays.
Mr Parkinson was delayed by a dense bank of fog ahead of him on the line — Nicholas Ridley, the Trade and Industry Secretary, making his statement about the Barlow Clowes affair.
The arrival of the Transport Secretary was further postponed by a slow-moving statement over frigate orders.
And first, there was a long interruption to normal service at Prime Minister's Question Time when two Tory backbenchers threw themselves in front of the House and got mown down by the Opposition roaring with ridicule.
Afterwards, everybody asked themselves: Was it a cry for help?
In the case of one of them, Andy Stewart, the Conservative MP for Sherwood, it almost certainly was.
Ever since he entered the House, the more brutish Labour members have harried Mr Stewart with heckles of ‘Give us a jig!’, and ‘Where's your kilt?’.
Anxious to prove that he is a serious figure, yesterday he presented Mrs Thatcher with the latest dire threat to the British way of life from the European Commission.
He asked for her help in resisting attempts to ban the sale of fresh turkeys at Christmas.
‘Will you,’ he asked her, ‘defy this gobbledygook?’
Oh dear.
This got Mr Stewart harried with new heckles of ‘Get stuffed!’
Still, it's an improvement on ‘Bring on Moira Anderson’.
The other Tory backbencher, Sir Michael Shaw, MP for Scarborough, prefaced his question to the Prime Minister with the words: ‘On this, her last Question Time of the 1980s…
’ He, too, was drowned out by some Labour jeering.
Composing himself, Sir Michael pressed on: ‘Would my Right Honourable Friend reflect on the great progress that has been made during the last 10 years in the well-being of our country and the competitiveness of our industries and…
’ On and on he swirled.
‘Furthermore…
’ Even his own side were groaning.
‘Briefly, please,’ implored the Speaker, to no avail.
Like the Yorkshire resort he represents, Sir Michael is famous for blustering high winds.
‘And would she look forward…‘
Mercifully, another cacophony of groans drowned out whatever it was Sir Michael was looking forward to.
Anyway, Mrs Thatcher liked it.
‘In the last 10 years we've created more jobs than ever before, higher living standards than ever before, better social services than ever before, higher living…
’ Had that one already, Prime Minister.
With Prime Minister's Question Time at last over, those of us waiting to catch the Parkinson statement now found it had been further held up while one of the defence ministers made a laborious job of unwrapping the Ministry of Defence's Christmas present for the navy — three new frigates.
Then, Mr Ridley turned up to make his statement about the Barlow Clowes affair.
As far as you could understand him, this was to the effect that since the Government was rejecting any suggestion that it was to blame for this scandal, since most of the alleged swindlers were difficult to bring to book, and since the investors who lost the money nearly all live in Tory marginals, then the one innocent party — the taxpayer — would foot the £150 million bill.
By this time, those hoping to catch the Parkinson statement had, in the finest traditions of BR, given up and walked.
East and West denounce suppression of protests ‘Massacre’ on streets of Romania.
By Ian Traynor in Budapest
TROOPS were reported to be patrolling the streets of the Romanian capital, Bucharest, yesterday as evidence mounted of a massacre in the town of Timisoara at the weekend and East and West moved to denounce the brutal clampdown by the regime's security forces.
The Yugoslav news agency Tanjug said there were unconfirmed reports that up to 2,000 people had been killed since the weekend.
In Timisoara, there were reports of more gunfire being heard yesterday morning.
Further unrest was expected in the town last night, as evenings have been the peak periods for the protests over the past five days.
As the country's political isolation reached unprecedented levels, the authorities appeared to have deepened its isolation by sealing the borders with the Soviet Union and Bulgaria, in addition to the earlier closure of the frontiers with Yugoslavia and Hungary.
The isolation made it virtually impossible to gain any conclusive information on the scale of the weekend violence, but a growing volume of eyewitness accounts spoke of hundreds being killed in a bloodbath at the hands of the army and secret police.
‘Tiananmen is nothing compared to Timisoara,’ said a Western student who entered Yugoslavia yesterday from the centre of the weekend carnage.
Tanjung said: ‘Witnesses claim that police are taking the arrested demonstrators to the central Timisoara square, where they beat them up and stab them with bayonets, before shoving them into lorries and driving them away no one knows where.’
Austrian television quoted a witness in Timisoara as saying he had seen lorries carrying away ‘cubic metres of bodies’.
The report said Romanian troops were hunting down and apparently executing anti-government demonstrators who escaped the killings in Timisoara.
A Hungarian with relatives employed at a Timisoara hospital told Budapest radio that at least 250 bodies had been admitted to one hospital and that the death figure was bound to be higher.
A doctor in Timisoara, contacted by the Catholic news agency Kathpress, said that the death toll could run to several hundred and that many hundreds more had been injured.
The Austrian news agency, APA, giving further details of the weekend clash which began after crowds tried to stop police evicting a popular priest and human rights campaigner, Pastor Laszlo Tokes, said tanks had driven into the crowds and soldiers opened fire without warning.
It quoted an Austrian-based Romanian doctor who had been visiting relatives as saying: ‘The first three rows of protesters collapsed dead or injured.
People stopped private cars and put the dead and injured in their boots.
Blood and torn clothing lay everywhere.’
Armed soldiers were reported to be patrolling the streets of Bucharest and the capital's students were said to be voicing solidarity with the protesters in the north of the country, in what appeared to be a menacing escalation of the crisis.
President Nicolae Ceausescu, however, remained unperturbed by the news and continued his official visit to Iran.
He assured Iranian leaders in Tehran in a banquet speech on Monday night that his country's economic and social position was ‘good, stable and balanced’, according to the official Agerpres news agency.
The superpowers deplored the violence and the rest of Eastern Europe issued protests.
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, said in Brussels that he had no specific details of the unrest but that any intervention by the security forces was highly regrettable.
Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Poland joined Hungary in condemning the clampdown by the Warsaw Pact's last hardline regime.
Leading world church organisations joined in the chorus of condemnation.
Britain protested to Romania over the violent crackdown on dissent and urged Romanian state employees to overthrow the Communist government for their own safety.
The Foreign Office Minister, Mr William Waldegrave, said: ‘The message we must get across is that those in the security services, those working for the state, should recognise that a day of reckoning will come for them as it has come for the East Germans and others.’
The leading Romanian playwright Mr Eugene Ionescu appealed to President Mikhail Gorbachev to help secure the removal of Mr Ceausescu.
A Western resident of Timisoara said that the scale of the violence in the town on Sunday was horrifying, while a Yugoslav lorry driver who came out of the region yesterday reported seeing fires.
But what now clearly looks to be the gravest threat to Mr Ceausescu's 24-year period of iron rule remained unreported by the Romanian media.
Popular revolt, page 8; Leader comment, page 18; State of fear, page 19
MacGregor admits Baker aim of 20 CTCs ‘overambitious’.
By Martin Linton
THE Education Secretary Mr John MacGregor conceded at question time yesterday that his predecessor Mr Kenneth Baker's target of establishing 20 City Technology Colleges by the end of this year had been ‘overambitious’.
He blamed the delays on ‘the realities of getting practical things off the ground’, but insisted that the Government was sticking to the original target figure and they were making ‘excellent progress’.
But Labour's shadow education secretary Mr Jack Straw said since only three of the 20 were in operation on the target date ‘why doesn't he recognise the CTC programme as an immoral and wasteful failure?’
Since the Government's own inspectors had said that half of secondary school children were being educated in substandard buildings why did he not cancel the CTC programme and use the money to repair Britain's crumbling schools?
Mr MacGregor said that to describe the programme as immoral was absolutely ludicrous.
‘There are always practical problems in getting planning permission and finding sites, and linking sponsors to sites.
‘But it is quite clear from the responses to the colleges that it was an excellent innovation.’
PM challenged to allow ambulance arbitration.
By Martin Linton
THE LABOUR leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, challenged the Prime Minister yesterday to allow the pay of 22,000 ambulance staff to be referred to a pay review body, as is done for 600,000 health service workers.
He urged her to acknowledge that she could quickly end the dispute by allowing it go to arbitration.
‘Or is it the case, as millions now believe, that she does not want a resolution to this dispute?’
Mrs Thatcher said that pay review bodies were only ‘given to those who do not go on strike, like the nurses’, and that some ‘militant’ ambulancemen wanted to withdraw the emergency service across the country to force through their pay claim.
She challenged the opposition leader to join her in urging them to accept the ‘generous’ pay offer ranging from 9 to 16.3 per cent over 18 months ‘or at least to have a truce over Christmas’.
The offer was backdated to April, and there were now arrears waiting to be picked up varying from £653 to £12,090; she hoped they would consider that it was a reasonable offer.
Mr Kinnock reminded her that the non-TUC Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel, ‘the kind of organisation she likes’, had by five to one turned down her pay offer.
‘Doesn't she get the message from that?
Because if she doesn't, I do; millions in this country do; and members of her own party do: that urging from the Prime Minister won't resolve the dispute — arbitration will.’
Attack over repatriation, is repulsed Boat people debate.
Martin Linton.
THE Government successfully defended the forced repatriation of Vietnam boat people last night when the Commons approved a supplementary estimate by 309 votes to 219, a majority of 90, with two Tory backbenchers rebelling.
The Foreign Office minister, Mr Francis Maude dismissed the Opposition's bitter criticism of last week's deportations, saying it came from those who could stand on the sidelines wringing their hands and decrying what was done.
But the Government had to face the realities and accept responsibilities, he said.
In the aftermath of the Vietnam war it had agreed to take in those fleeing from the persecution of a vindictive regime and agreed to resettle those who fled by boat.
But soon the nature of the exodus from Vietnam had changed and the majority were people seeking a more prosperous life.
By 1987 the numbers were so huge that the ability of the West to take in all comers was strained No force had been used in last week's operation, he insisted.
‘These were people who were being sent back against their will to a country they had sought to leave and it is inevitable that they should not be joyful, but there was no resistance.’
He also dismissed suggestions that the operation had been conducted under a blanket of secrecy when live television pictures were being screened worldwide as it was carried out.
Labour's spokesman, Mr George Foulkes, said that only a programme of assistance to Vietnam would improve the lives of the people there and encourage those who have already left to return.
‘Those who return will go back to an increasingly tolerable life and they will send messages back to those who are still in the camps and that will reinforce the voluntary return.’
Mr Foulkes agreed that if Britain resettled all the boat people and did nothing else, the flow would continue unabated and this will be increasingly difficult for Hong Kong and damaging for Vietnam.
But Labour believe Britain needed to tackle the root cause of the problem with a viable, long-term, humane solution.
‘We disagree totally with forced deportation as heartless and inhumane,’ he said.
Mr David Howell (C. Guildford), the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Select Committee, who opened the debate, said it had been a choice between the lesser evil of repatriation and the greater evil of doing nothing, which might inflict more cruelty, suffering and inhumane conditions on the people in the camps.
‘If we do not act then thousands more will come floating in on the early spring tides, maybe tens of thousands, even hundreds, and they will bring chaos and suffering on a scale far larger than anything we have seen so far,’ he warned.
‘There is no choice but to take an ugly and difficult decision to avert an even greater injustice, and those who cry halt and say there must be some other way, even though every conceivable way has been sought, would carry the responsibility for the even more catastrophic consequences of inaction,’ he added.
He regretted the Opposition had not agreed a bipartisan policy and it had to be asked why they had no similar feelings about the forced repatriation of people from Hong Kong to China ‘which goes on on every bitas big a scale as anything we are contemplating now’.
‘Those who argue that maybe we should just once more try to delay it must face up to the responsibility that they may, by their good intentions, create much more suffering than anything we have seen so far.
Washington's policy was ‘pure humbug’ on this issue, he said.
Most of the boat people wanted to go, not to Hong Kong, but to the United States.
But the United States was refusing to accept them.
The Liberal Democrat leader, Mr Paddy Ashdown, called last week's repatriation operation a ‘three o’ clock knock’, and warned that it set an ‘appalling example’to China, which would be responsible for the safekeeping of British subjects in the colony from 1997.
He criticised the system of screening and the appeals tribunal for refugees due to be sent back, saying they were forbidden to be present, allowed no legal representation, and were not told the reasons for decisions.
He called for action to tackle the difficulties without ‘shaming the reputation of this country and infringing the civil liberties of a few helpless people whose only sin has been to seek freedom and our protection’.
Mr Maude dismissed the alternative policies offered.
Increased aid was not going to discourage people immediately and it was inconceivable that increased voluntary repatriation could suffice on its own, he said.
Senior Tory Mr Julian Amery (Brighton Pavilion) joined those urging ministers not to be hasty.
‘There is no need to take the decision yet.
This is a problem which may be solved in Government time,’ he said.
Mrs Maureen Hicks (C. Wolverhampton NE) accused President Bush, the Pope, and the Archbishop of Canterbury of criticism without offering any positive action.
She told Mr Ashdown he did not represent an inner-city constituency such as hers, which would bear the brunt of any immigration.
‘I'm not a racist, I'm a realist,’ she said.
The two Tory rebels were Miss Ann Widdecombe (Maidstone) and Sir Philip Goodhart (Beckenham).
Frigates order keeps Tyne yard in work.
By David Fairhall Defence Correspondent
THREE Type 23 anti-submarine frigates have been ordered from Swan Hunter on Tyneside, the Ministry of Defence announced yesterday.
Without new orders, the shipyard would have run out of work by the end of next year.
The MoD is believed to have struck a hard bargain — at somewhere between £120 million and £130 million a ship — with Swan Hunter winning the work against ‘keen and commercial’ competition from Yarrows on Clydeside and Cammell Laird on Merseyside.
The order, announced in the House of Commons by the junior defence minister, Mr Michael Neubert, will be greeted with some relief in the Navy.
It may find it increasingly difficult to hold the Government to its promise of a 50-frigate Navy when the Warsaw Pact military threat is perceived to be diminishing.
HMS Norfolk, the first of the ‘Duke’ class Type 23 frigates, was built by Yarrow and accepted into the Royal Navy last month.
A further nine are now on order, essentially to replace the ageing Leander class ships.
The Controller of the Navy, Vice Admiral Kent Eaton, said yesterday that tenders for up to four more vessels would probably be invited next year.
Although Mr Neubert would not say how much the three Swan Hunter Type 23s will cost, it is thought to be about three-quarters the price of recently built Type 22 frigates, which have a crew of 240 as against 170 for the Duke class.
Students attack 5pc grant rise.
STUDENT grants will rise by 7.4 per cent in London and 5 per cent elsewhere in England and Wales in 1990 when loans of up to £460 a year are due to be introduced, the Government announced yesterday.
The new levels of grant — £2,845 in London halls or lodgings, £2,265 out of London and £1,795 for students living at their parental home — should remain frozen from next autumn as the loan scheme is phased in.
Current full grants are £2,650, £2,155 and £1,710 respectively.
The new grants were attacked by the National Union of Students as another cut in living standards when inflation was running at 7.7 per cent and housing costs, according to estimates from the committee of vice-chancellors and principals, had increased by 8.6 per cent.
Mr John MacGregor, the Education Secretary, said in a Commons written reply that the 1990 main grant and full year loan would amount to about 25 per cent more than the 1989 grant for most students.
But Ms Maeve Sherlock, NUS president, said students could lose far more in welfare benefits than they would be able to borrow — around £523 per term for every claimant in London and up to £900 a term for mature students in the capital.
The right to claim benefits will be withdrawn when loans are introduced.
The Government also disclosed that the present method of assessing parental contributions according to parents' residual income, after tax and mortgage payments, is to be retained for the time being.
The November 1988 white paper on the loan scheme proposed a move to gross income.
Mr MacGregor said further work was needed to resolve practical difficulties.
Next year parents whose residual income is below £11,500 will not be assessed for a contribution.
Most parents will pay £1 in £9.33 on residual income between £11,500 and £14,700, £1 in £6.66 on income up to £21,600 and £1 in £5.33 above that level.
The Government did not yesterday rule out including part-time students in its loans scheme, although it opposed excluding students in Scotland from the new legislation.
Main rates of Scottish student allowances will rise by 5 per cent, the Scottish Office minister, Mr Ian Lang, said in a Commons written reply.
The new grants (with current grant in brackets) will be: halls or lodgings in London: £2,780 (£2,585); elsewhere: £2,200;(£2,090); parental home: £1,660 (£1,575) Mr Mike Watson, MP for Glasgow Central, told the committee examining the Education (Student Loans) Bill, that Scottish students would suffer financial hardship because most Scottish degree courses were four years instead of the usual three in England and Wales.
Their debts at the end of a course would be even greater.
David Ward writes:
The Association of University Teachers decided yesterday to urge its 30,000 members to switch their accounts from banks which take part in the Government scheme for student loans.
The AUT's governing council, meeting in York, agreed to support a National Union of Students proposal for a one-day shut-down of universities in protest at the scheme with teach-ins on campuses.
The AUT plans to warn its own bankers, NatWest, that it may withdraw its own account in protest at the bank's support for the Government scheme.
Council members condemned plans to make universities bid for public money based on the number of students they expected to teach.
Mr Bill Trythall, the AUT president, said: ‘The pressure is on us to regard universities less as centres of academic excellence and more as productive enterprises, the analogues of manufacturing industry.’
Minister angers crews.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
AROW between health minister, Mrs Virginia Bottomley and Surrey ambulance workers has led to crews voting to step up their action on New Year's Eve, one of the busiest nights of the year.
It is the first time crews outside London have decided to cut themselves off from controllers and to accept only those calls put through by the police, the fire service, GPs, hospitals and the public.
The move, a reflection of the growing anger being felt by ambulance workers around the country, was announced as Health Secretary Kenneth Clarke acknowledged the dispute, now entering its fifteenth week, was unlikely to be settled before Christmas.
Mr Clarke was responding to calls from leaders of all the main Churches for the dispute to be brought to an end swiftly.
The six Church leaders warned: ‘Unless the dispute is resolved and a proper service is resumed as soon as possible, we believe that people's lives will increasingly be put at risk.’
The decision to escalate the action in Surrey for 24 hours from 7am on New Year's Eve was taken at a meeting in Redhill.
Crews belonging to all five TUC-affiliated unions, as well as members of the breakaway Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel, voted 99 to 10 to threaten escalation unless Mrs Bottomley recognised ambulance workers as part of the emergency services.
The vote followed a row which blew up during a meeting between five ambulance workers and Mrs Bottomley in her constituency, South West Surrey, on Friday.
Yesterday, she again said that 9 out of 10 of the journeys carried out by ambulance workers were concerned with non-emergency work.
There was ‘no real validity’ in the argument that they should be paid the same as fire-fighters and the police.