

Badminton.
By Richard Jago
DARREN HALL, seemingly able to run forever, won the Oracle English National Championship for the fourth time in five years at Crawley last night.
Combining powerful smashes with deft drop-shots, Hall, from Chingford, Essex, beat Steve Baddeley, the left-handed Sussex player, 15-18, 15-4, 15-4 in a 66-minute final.
Hall's speed was matched against the slightly greater power of Baddeley.
But the deciding factor was the latter's growing fatigue in the final stages.
Baddeley is now 28, four years older than his rival.
Hall kept him moving and gradually drew the sting from his opponent's game.
Hall, in fact, might well have won in straight games, as he led 9-6 in the opening game and then missed four successive smashes to allow Baddeley to go ahead for the first time at 10-9.
Baddeley, champion three times in the past, fought grimly and finally took the marathon first game after 24 minutes.
But Hall began to dominate, leading 6-0 and then 9-4 before taking the second game to level the match.
From 2-3 down in the third Baddeley was outplayed by his fleet-footed opponent.
The Sussex man noticeably slowed as Hall continued to switch the play.
Then, leading 12-4, Hall took three points running for a convincing victory.
Hall, annoyed at being seeded No.2 to Baddeley even though he is the present No.1, refused to labour the point: ‘I wanted to prove to everyone that I could play good badminton, not to show the seeding committee to be at fault,’ he said.
Rugby Union Predatory Cardiff prompt fears of transfer war.
By David Plummer
WHEN delegates of the Whitbread Merit Table clubs took time off from their deliberations over leagues last week to enjoy a day out at the University Match, they took the opportunity to complain to Cardiff about the legions of players who have made the journey to the Arms Park in recent months.
Two members of this summer's Lions squad, Mike Griffiths and Mike Hall, decided to leave Bridgend for Cardiff last week, while the Wales hooker Ian Watkins joined them from Ebbw Vale in August to be followed by Newport's Wales B wing Damien Griffiths and the Abertillery lock Stuart Nunnerley.
This week Newbridge's Wales B lock Andy Sutton trained with Cardiff and he too seems likely to join their squad.
They could now field a team featuring only two players, Nunnerley and the captain Tim Crothers, who have not been recognised by Wales.
Cardiff have always attracted players, but what has fuelled the apprehension of the other Merit Table clubs is that they, along with Newport, are now competing eagerly in the transfer market.
The Llanelli and Wales lock Phil May believes that in a couple of years Cardiff will become pre-eminent in Welsh club rugby both because of their magnetic appeal and because of Wales's economic geography.
May points to Wales's declining staple industries, such as steel and coal, remarking that new jobs are being created along the M4 basin close to both Cardiff and Newport.
With the wealth of connections in the two clubs, and the end of their squeamishness over protocol, May fears that even the two ascendant clubs in Wales — Llanelli and Neath — will be hard pressed to compete.
Cardiff have certainly adopted an efficient recruitment policy.
But they deny that car-park money or the like is finding its way into the pockets of players.
With both Cardiff and Newport dormant in recent years, other clubs have benefited from the movement of players; talent has been spread over a wider area.
But even then the only player of note Cardiff themselves lost was Mark Ring, and he returned from Pontypool after just a year.
The fear of Cardiff's rivals is that, without the same resources, they can only lose in a transfer war, and some are looking to the Welsh Rugby Union for legislative salvation.
The WRU yesterday turned down a request by the Merit Table clubs for a meeting tomorrow to discuss the proposed national leagues.
The clubs countered by saying they would boycott a scheduled meeting between the WRU's competition sub-committee and the leagues working party.
Racing: Little Polvier poised for his third National victory.
By Chris Hawkins
ARTHUR Stephenson, asked yesterday whether he will run The Thinker in Saturday's Coral Welsh National at Chepstow, replied that he is, ‘still thinking on it.’
For the bluff, reticent Arthur such wit suggests the Christmas spirit has already got to him but he added realistically that his decision depends on the state of the ground: ‘If it's bottomless he won't run.’
Chepstow is renowned for its soft ground and even two weeks ago after a prolonged drought the going was on the soft side.
The deluge since then must make heavy ground a distinct possibility and with The Thinker doubtful the sponsors current odds of 12-l Little Polveir look outstanding value.
Little Polveir is going for the National treble, having already won the Scottish version in 1987 and the Seagram Grand National last season.
The common denominator each time was heavy ground.
At Aintree he beat The Thinker just over seven lengths and is due to meet him on the same terms, although Jimmy Frost, his rider, may put up a pound or two more than the minimum 10st.
Bonanza Boy finished a remote eighth in the race and is 10lb worse off with Little Polveir but it is unwise to judge him on that performance which came at the end of a long season after some punishing contests.
It is better to judge him on his reappearance run at Chepstow when, despite being 11 kilos overweight, according to trainer Martin Pipe, he easily disposed of Run And Skip, with Little Polveir beaten out of sight.
Take that form literally and there is only one winner on Saturday as Bonanza Boy is bound to have come on for the outing.
An extra threequarters of a mile and heavy going puts the race in a different light, however.
Little Polveir does not get warmed up until he has gone three miles and Toby Balding has been training him specifically with Saturday in mind.
The Hennessy winner, Ghofar, looks nicely treated off bottom weight, including a 4lb penalty, although technically he is still 5lb out of the handicap.
Although I have a soft spot for him after his super-game Hennessy win, he does not appeal greatly as 7-2 favourite.
He had a hard race at Newbury, following one the previous week behind Man O Magic at Ascot, but as a six-year-old he looks too young for something as gruelling as the Welsh National — the last six-year-old to win was Miss Gaynus in 1932.
Cool Ground is an improving seven-year-old who will love the ground.
He won the Kim Muir at the Cheltenham Festival, having previously finished seven lengths second to Roll-A-Joint at Chepstow, with Little Polveir behind, over three and threequarter miles.
Roll-A-Joint has been disappointing this season and if he runs will be meeting Cool Ground on a stone worse terms, while Little Polveir is a stone better off with Cool Ground, who, at 10-1, is the other each-way bet.
He finished fourth to Baies and The Thinker at Haydock last week, running well for a long way.
At Folkestone this afternoon Fit For Firing (1.45) should give us some ammunition.
He looked unlucky when a close third to Going Gets Tough at Newbury on his chasing debut and has less to do here.
Weights for The Ladbroke Hurdle to be run at Leopardstown on January 13 were announced yesterday.
Beech Road has top weight of 12st and is set to give 10lb to his aspiring young stable-companion Morley Street, whom the sponsors make 10-1 joint favourite with Mick O'Toole's Lough Gale.
The latter on 9st 2lb needs a rise in the weights.
Welsh dairy farmer Sirrell Griffiths is hoping enough rain will fall at Kempton Park before Boxing Day to allow his former point-to-pointer Norton's Coin to take on Desert Orchid in the King George VI Rank Chase.
Griffiths trains just three horses at Nantgaredig, Carmarthen, and Norton's Coin is easily the best of them, supplying the permit holder with all his three wins last season.
The trainer's wife, Joyce, yesterday said: ‘We'd love to run Norton's Coin against ‘Dessie’ and will do so provided the ground is soft.’
‘People think we are mad to take on Desert Orchid, especially as Norton's Coin will probably need the run, but we have nothing to lose.
Besides, after winning such a good race as he did at Cheltenham last season when beating Beau Ranger, it is very difficult to find suitable opportunities.’
The ten entries are: Ballyhane, Barnbrook Again, Bishops Yarn, Bob Tisdall, Bonanza Boy, Desert Orchid, Norton's Coin, Pegwell Bay, Vodkatini and Yahoo.
The Jockey Club has announced it is to look again at the appeals procedure available to parties involved in disciplinary hearings.
It follows the controversial case of the ‘Beverley 11,’ when 11 jockeys were fined for allegedly refusing to obey the starter, which led to considerable debate on the courses of appeal open to the riders.
The subject was discussed at a meeting of members of the Jockey Club last week and spokesman David Pipe said today: ‘The Stewards have asked the Disciplinary Committee to review the well rehearsed arguments and produce a report in due course.’
Cycling Grey Guard goes west.
OLYMPIC and world champions from East Germany are poised to join leading Dutch professional teams in 1990, writes William Fotheringham.
Potential employers are lining up leading members of the ‘Grey Guard’, who have dominated amateur cycling in the 1980s.
Uwe Ampler, the 1986 world champion, looks set to ride with Ireland's Sean Kelly in the PDM team.
Ampler took gold in the 100km team time-trial in the Seoul Olympics and this year scored his third successive win in the Peace Race, the amateur equivalent of the Tour de France.
Jan Schur, a member of the GDR's gold medal-winning 100km team at the world championships in France this year, has also joined PDM.
PDM outbid a rival Dutch team, Buckler, who were confident of signing the pair to join their top West German, Rolf Golz.
A similar battle is taking place over the Seoul Olympic champion Olaf Ludwig, with the all-West German Stuttgart team fighting Panasonic, who recently paid £400,000 for the Soviet Olympic track champion Vyatcheslav Ekimov.
Rowing Henley closes loopholes to block the pot-hunters.
By Christopher Dodd
HENLEY Royal Regatta has changed qualification rules in an attempt to curb the tendency for ‘trophy hunting’.
Peter Coni, chairman of the Stewards, announcing the new rules yesterday, criticised a growing number of top crews for entering lesser events at Henley ‘rather than showing the ambition and confidence to try to win at a higher level’.
Coni said the trend was having a ‘seriously adverse effect upon domestic club rowing as a whole’.
Some clubs exploited loopholes by entering ‘cooked’ crews.
‘I think we have closed the loopholes now,’ he said.
One change intended to improve standards at Henley is the exclusion of Olympic and international oarsmen from certain events intended for club crews.
The Stewards yesterday reshaped the qualification requirements for the Ladies' Plate, Thames Cup and the corresponding challenge cups for four-oared crews.
The Stewards also introduced a new event for eights, the Henley Prize.
While the Grand Challenge Cup remains the blue riband open event, the Ladies' Plate reverts to its 1984 qualification, being open to student clubs, with composite crews only admitted from colleges of a single university or two or more schools, and entries being cut from 32 to 16.
A new rule for the Thames Cup states that no one— except coxes — may compete if they have rowed in an Olympic or heavyweight world championship event.
The Thames Cup also reverts to its pre-1984 qualification, being open to any club below Grand level, including student clubs, with no composites but retaining the present 48 starting places.
Then comes the Henley Prize for 16 crews from single colleges or schools.
The Princess Elizabeth for 32 school crews is unchanged, but the Special Race for Schools, started over a shorter course for those involved in exams, will not be held.
Entries for the Diamond Sculls have been reduced from 24 to 16.
Rugby League Regal return for King Ellery.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
ELLERY HANLEY will play his first game of the season for Wigan in their Regal Trophy quarter-final replay with Leeds at Central Park tomorrow, and a game already generating considerable interest could now draw a crowd of 20,000.
The club have kept this one very quiet as it was not expected that Hanley, who returned from a summer in Australia with a bad pelvic strain, would come back before the New Year.
To Leeds the news must have come like a blow from a steam hammer.
Wigan had intended to spring the former Great Britain captain on an unsuspecting St Helens, their arch-rivals, on Boxing Day.
However in the past few days Hanley has come through a series of rigorous tests, and his return was hastened by the absence of Andy Goodway, who broke a finger at Headingley last Saturday.
Hanley has been the most illustrious victim so far of the worrying modern phenomenon known as back-to-back football, which sees players performing practically non-stop here and in Australia.
For the game's big money-earners it is a difficult cycle to break, for all its obvious dangers.
Hanley's fitness, strength and dedication to the sport compel admiration even among his fellow professionals.
But the punishment to his body started to show itself during his summer contract with Western Suburbs, where reputedly he was earning £4,000 a match.
For the last month of his contract, Hanley played but did not train.
Wigan were dismayed at his condition when he came back, and there was a half-hearted threat from Central Park to demand financial compensation from the Sydney club.
He had a successful hernia operation but was a regular visitor to Harley Street as additional deep-seated groin trouble failed to respond to treatment.
By November, Wigan were promising to scour the world for a cure, while Hanley in his enforced idleness was reported to be depressed and frustrated.
Wigan have not done at all badly without him but his return, to loose forward, could not be more timely.
Goodway has been playing with consistent brilliance there this season, scoring 18 tries, but he will now be out for a month, and Hanley is no stranger to the position after spending earlier periods of his career mostly at centre or stand-off.
But it matters little where he plays; he is a prolific try scorer from any position, as a career total of 247 touchdowns testifies.
He is, indeed, entitled to be described as a great player, Britain's nonpareil of the 1980s, who was eventually recognised as such by even the hardened doubters in Australia after his summer with Balmain in 1988.
Leeds, who could not beat Wigan's 12 men on Saturday, cannot have dreamed that Hanley would figure in their pre-match planning.
But they have their own good news with the return to fitness of the GB forward Hugh Waddell, out with a broken jaw since November, and David Creasser, who has played only once this season.
Golf Faldo forced to take a back seat to Walker Cup team.
By David Davies
NICK FALDO, undoubtedly the most successful golfer in the world in 1989, collected yet another award in London yesterday when he was made the Ritz Club Golfer of the Year.
This goes alongside his BBC Sports Personality of the Year nomination on Sunday and his winning of the polls conducted by, among others, the British Sportswriters, Panasonic-LWT and even the American magazine Golf Digest.
Faldo won the US Masters in April by holing a 25ft putt on the second extra hole to beat Scott Hoch, who had missed from inside two feet on the first.
Faldo also won the Volvo PGA Championship and the Dunhill British Masters in May and June and, four weeks later, the French Open.
He failed to win the Volvo Masters, finishing second to Ronan Rafferty, but nevertheless it was a season of stunning success for the British golfer.
But he failed to achieve a clean sweep of the end-of-season awards.
The one that eluded him was that of the Association of Golf Writers which, asked to nominate who had done most for European golf, decided on the Walker Cup team that went to the United States and won the trophy there for the first time.
Faldo, who has a feud-ridden history with some members of the AGW, could be forgiven for thinking that this is yet another example of a lack of sympathy with his cause.
But the fact is that the golf writers have, in the recent past, been thoroughly spoiled for choice.
In 1985, when Sandy Lyle won the Open Championship and Bernhard Langer won the US Masters, the writers' choice was the Ryder Cup team and when Faldo himself won the Open in 1987 it was again the Ryder Cup team, who won in America, who were selected.
As Diane Bailey's Curtis Cup team were chosen in 1986 that means that in four of the past five years a team have come top of the poll.
It was always likely that this would happen again this year, given that the Walker Cup team were making history whereas Faldo, for all his brilliance, was the second Briton and the fourth European in the Eighties to win at Augusta.
Sailing Britain wait for protest news.
BRITAIN closed on the two teams ahead of them in the NorTel Southern Cross Cup series when Juno IV finished fourth, Heaven Can Wait seventh and Canon Express tenth in the fourth race yesterday — and there is a protest to be heard against two of the New South Wales team who lead the series, 11.5 points ahead of Australia and 21.5 ahead of Britain, writes Bob Fisher.
The protest is by Hong Kong's Foo2 against Cyclone and Great News, second and third yesterday behind the 83ft Drumbeat which claimed her third handicap win of the series by 3 ½min.
Tennis £4 million cup goes ahead.
THE Grand Slam Cup will go ahead next December despite the opposition of the Association of Tennis Professionals and the West German federation.
The International Tennis Federation yesterday reaffirmed its commitment to the new £4 million event but said it was still discussing objections with the ATP.
But an ITF spokesman, Ian Barnes, added that there was little chance of merging the £4 million event with the ATP finals three weeks earlier.
Barnes said Munich, Dortmund, Berlin and Stuttgart were interested in staging the new cup tournament.
Badminton: Hall runs Baddeley to ground.
By Richard Jago
DARREN HALL, seemingly able to run for ever, won the Oracle English National Championship for the fourth time in five years at Crawley last night.
Combining powerful smashes with deft drop-shots, Hall beat Steve Baddeley 15-18, 15-4, 15-4 in a 66-minute final.
Hall's speed was matched against the slightly greater power of Baddeley.
But the deciding factor was the latter's growing fatigue in the final stages.
Baddeley is now 28, four years older than his rival, and Hall kept him moving until he drew the sting from his opponent's game.
Hall, in fact, might well have won in straight games, as he led 9-6 in the opening game and then missed four successive smashes to allow Baddeley to go ahead for the first time at 10-9.
Baddeley, champion three times in the past, fought grimly and finally took the marathon first game after 24 minutes.
But Hall began to dominate, leading 6-0 and then 9-4 before taking the second game.
From 2-3 down in the third Baddeley was outplayed as Hall continued to switch the play.
Eventually, leading 12-4, Hall took three points running for a convincing victory.
But, despite his annoyance at being seeded No.2 to Baddeley even though he is the present No.1, he declined to labour the point afterwards.
Later Fiona Smith, who had beaten her greatest rival Helen Troke in the Commonwealth Cup at Bath last month, did so again in the women's singles final.
Smith, the England No.1, beat Troke 11-1, 11-7 in 27 minutes to take the title for the fifth time in seven years.
Outlook brighter for Grima.
THERE were compensations yesterday for Joe Grima, the New Zealand forward deeply upset on Monday after being struck off Widnes's register, writes Paul Fitzpatrick.
Not the least was his obvious popularity.
Swinton, who sold him to Widnes for only £7,500 in January last year, would like him back.
Salford are in the bidding, Oldham are keeping a keen eye on him and St Helens are reportedly interested.
It could also be that Widnes's match with Barrow last Sunday will be deducted from his current eight-match suspension.
He will not, though, be able to work off the remaining seven games until he joins a new club.
The League, who will discuss Grima's case today, has confirmed that Widnes are within their rights to demand a fee even though they have cancelled his registration with two years of his contract left.
Widnes's coach, Doug Laughton, says that the asking price will be ‘realistic’ so as to enable Grima to move quickly to a new club.
Also under discussion today will be the inclusion of Boblyn Tuavao — the Tongan forward who has replaced Grima as the club's third overseas player — in the Widnes side which beat Barrow at Craven Park last Sunday.
His registration was received at headquarters after Friday's 5 pm deadline and strictly the Tongan was ineligible.
But Laughton says the situation is ridiculous, claiming that the League was aware of Tuavao five weeks ago when Widnes attempted to have their hooker, the Australian Phil McKenzie, reclassed as a non-overseas player.
The disciplinary ‘purge’ took a curious turn yesterday with the one-match suspension of a referee and two touch judges for ‘failing to meet necessary standards’.
Warrington's Silk Cut Challenge Cup first-round match with Featherstone Rovers on Saturday, January 27 will be televised by the BBC.
Brazil exiles can tax Dutch.
BRAZIL can strike a psychological blow for South America's World Cup hopes tonight when they play a weakened Holland, the European champions in name if not substance, in Rotterdam in the Dutch FA centenary fixture that England abandoned because of fears of hooliganism, writes David Lacey.
The Brazilians, who beat Italy 1-0 in Bologna in October, have available their European exiles plus Bebeto, the exciting Vasco da Gama striker, and Ricardo Rocha, the Sao Paulo defender.
With the Brazilian championship decided, both have been released by their clubs.
Sebastiao Lazaroni, Brazil's team manager, may even put Romario, who has scored 50 goals in 51 games for PSV Eindhoven, on the bench in order to pair Bebeto with Careca of Napoli.
This would raise a wry smile from the Dutch manager, Thijs Libregts, who is finding it hard to discover a matching pair.
Ruud Gullit is injured and Ronnie Koeman, the Barcelona libero, has been ordered to rest for a week, and Milan, having won the World Club Championship in Tokyo, have advised Rijkaard and Van Basten not to play in Rotterdam.
In addition, Holland's four Mechelen players — Bosman, Erwin Koeman, Rutjes and Hofkens — are needed by the Belgian club.
To give his team some credibility without upsetting Milan, Libregts may give Rijkaard and Van Basten half a game, but much will depend on Wouters, Van Tiggelen, Kieft and Ellerman.
Brazil are unbeaten in 14 internationals since losing to Sweden, Denmark and Switzerland last June.
During this run they won the South American Championship for the first time in 40 years and qualified for the World Cup.
England meet them at Wembley on March 28, the date left vacant by the cancellation of the friendly against the Republic of Ireland.
Fifa set to stamp on pro foul.
THE FA's attempt to outlaw the professional foul, vetoed by Fifa seven years ago, may now receive official backing from the world body, writes David Lacey.
Graham Kelly, the FA's chief executive, hopes the idea will be adopted by the International Board when it meets in Rome next June.
Kelly has been asked to prepare a discussion document by the FA's referees committee.
‘I was encouraged by the way the idea was received by Sepp Blatter, Fifa's general secretary, when I met him last month,’ Kelly said yesterday, ‘and I've also been encouraged by his comments since then.’
The FA tried to stamp out the professional foul, a euphemism for cheating, at the start of the 1982-83 season.
Referees were encouraged to send off offenders for ‘serious foul play’ through a stricter interpretation of the laws.
Particular note was made of defenders and goalkeepers who brought down attackers breaking through and likely to score.
But Fifa objected, with the president, Joao Havelange, demanding ‘the abolition of the system introduced in the English League of sending off players who commit deliberate fouls to prevent a goal’.
This, remember, was said only a few months after Battiston of France suffered a serious neck injury when Schumacher, the West German goalkeeper, brutally bodychecked him in a World Cup semi-final.
Clamping down on the professional foul does not need a change of law, simply a change of emphasis by referees.
However the FA is to put a proposal in Rome to modify the offside law so that‘interfering with play’ becomes ‘seeking to interfere with play’in the hope of reducing the number of involuntary offsides.
The suggestion will be coupled with the proposal by the Scottish FA that a player no longer be offside if he is in line with the last defender when the ball is played.
Edwards hangs on to shares and control of United.
MARTIN EDWARDS, chairman and chief executive of Manchester United, insisted after a four-hour board meeting at Old Trafford yesterday that he would still not be rushed into selling his majority shareholding, writes Stephen Bierley.
In a brief statement Edwards said: ‘I have told my board colleagues that I will not be rushed and will come to a decision towards the end of the season.’
Amer Midani, United's second largest shareholder, had apparently annoyed Edwards last weekend by with his call for the public flotation of the shares.
Midani and his fellow director Nigel Burrows had hoped to buy out Edwards once Michael Knighton's takeover had fallen through.
But Edwards is believed to have increased his price from £10 million to nearer £30 million.
Despite considerable pressure, much of it from outside the club, there was little chance of a decision being taken yesterday.
Edwards has emphasised, ever since the annual meeting two weeks ago when he used his majority shareholding to secure Knighton a place on the United board that he would make his decision at the end of this season.
However, with attendances falling and United facing a potentially damaging FA Cup third-round draw away to Nottingham Forest, Edwards's hand may yet be forced.
By Stephen Bierley
MARTIN EDWARDS, chairman and chief executive of Manchester United, insisted after a four-hour board meeting at Old Trafford yesterday that he would still not be rushed into selling his majority shareholding.
In a brief statement Edwards said: ‘I have told my board colleagues that I will not be rushed and will come to a decision towards the end of the season.’
Amer Midani, United's second largest shareholder, had apparently annoyed Edwards last weekend by calling for the public flotation of the shares.
Midani and his fellow director Nigel Burrows had hoped to buy out Edwards once Michael Knighton's takeover had fallen through.
But Edwards, who was prepared to accept £10 million from Knighton, is believed to want nearer £30 million now.
Despite considerable pressure, much of it from outside the club, there was little chance of any crucial decision being taken yesterday.
Edwards has emphasised, ever since the annual meeting two weeks ago when he used his majority shareholding to secure Knighton a place on the board, that he would make his decision at the end of this season.
However, with attendances falling and United facing a potentially damaging FA Cup third-round draw away to Nottingham Forest, Edwards's hand may yet be forced.
Liverpool call for British Cup.
LIVERPOOL yesterday revived the idea of a British Cup to increase revenue and capture the imagination of English fans starved of top-class midweek football by the European ban.
Peter Robinson, Liverpool's chief executive, said the plan for top English, Scottish and Irish clubs to play a knock-out competition had been the basis for the agreement to reduce the First Division.
Liverpool and other members of the Big Five have rejected the Zenith Data Cup.
Robinson says: ‘We are playing on average 10 games less than when in Europe, and the fans aren't happy.’
Steve Bull is taking a two-day break from training.
The Wolves manager Graham Turner said the striker's first full England game last week had tired him so soon after a three-match ban.
The FA, with Football Trust assistance, must find £100,000 to cover the cost of sending English police the World Cup.
The Government are not contributing.
Oldham have signed the 20-year-old Manchester United reserve left-back Wayne Heseltine for £40,000.
North 30, Soviet Union XV 14 Heslop undoes Soviets.
By Our Correspondent
AN ICY reception awaited the Soviet Union touring side at Aspatria last night, but they did their reputation no harm by providing a stern test.
It was a good contest that will have given the England team manager Geoff Cooke at least one hint about filling the vacant places in his training squad for Lanzarote in the new year.
The Orrell wing Nigel Heslop scored two blistering tries to push his claim, opening the scoring with a scintillating try which Strett converted.
But Dzagnidze then followed his own kick for a try in the corner, and Mironov swept through for a try that Dzagnidze converted.
Strett had already restored the North's lead when Bryan Barley intercepted a Soviet move on his own 22 and Stuart Holmes released Heslop who galloped 50 metres for a superb try that Strett converted.
Strett soon afterwards worked a scissors with Hunter who raced clear of the cover for a try.
Strett again converted.
In the dying minutes Alexander Tikhonov scored a try; but almost immediately Bob Kimmins forced his way over for the final try, with Strett, almost inevitably, converting.
NORTH: I Hunter (Northampton); S Burnhill (Sale), B Barley (Wakefield), G Childs (Northern), N Heslop; M Strett (both Orrell), N Summers (Headingley); M Whitcombe (Sale), N Hitchen, S Southern (capt), R Kimmins, D Cusani (all Orrell), S Hodgson (Sale), S Gallagher (Waterloo), S Holmes (Cambridge University; D Cleary, Orrell, 68 min).
SOVIET UNION: N Dzagnidze; E Zvev, I Necheaev, M Parshin, I Mironov (capt); I Kuperman, I Frantzuzov; Z Bakiradze, R Malikov, S Molchanov, A Sokolov, S Sergeev, V Negodin (B Koroliov, 40), A Tikhonov, I Khairulin.
Referee: M Bayliss (Gloucester).
Zenith Data Systems Challenge Cup: Rangers 1, Arsenal 2 Davis leads way towards a minor satisfaction.
By Our Correspondent
EVEN Arsenal, who carried the distinction back to London, would not claim that they played well enough in Glasgow last night to be the undisputed champions of anywhere, no matter the vainglorious subtitle given to this friendly.
They were, though, marginally the more inventive in a game that showed signs of decline from the early stages.
The so-called unofficial championship of Great Britain was in trouble from the outset.
The kick-off had to be delayed because of a motorway accident, which left a decimated attendance of 31,000 in spite of a delayed start to facilitate the inconvenienced.
Worse was to follow for Rangers as Graham Souness's side, without the prolific McCoist, went a goal behind after 27 minutes of adisappointing game.
Arsenal's scorer was Paul Davis, playing his first game since April because of injury.
He looked as if he had been conserving all his energy since then for the moment when he took advantage of an error by Butcher to shoot strongly past Woods.
A long kick-out by Lukic was mistimed by the England defender and Davis seized on the ball to score from 20 yards without breaking stride.
Butcher was not the only one to look less than dazzling in front of the watching England manager Bobby Robson.
Tony Adams was uncertain at the heart of Arsenal's defence and those on the periphery of Robson's thoughts prior to the World Cup, such as Rangers' Steven and Walters, did themselves no favours.
It could have been worse for Rangers.
Merson had the opportunity to extend Arsenal's lead when Gough and Butcher misread one another 's intentions but, in keeping with the general tone, he was well off the mark.
The loss of Gough after the interval was another setback for Souness.
It is only two weeks since Gough came back from a multiple fracture of the cheekbone.
He was injured again when Quinn's boot made accidental contact with his face.
The idea of the night being irrevocably jinxed for Rangers seemed in doubt when Ferguson's cross was chested over the line by Johnston for the equaliser in the 50th minute.
But Quinn restored Arsenal's lead six minutes later, touching home a pass by Merson across the face of Rangers' goal.
Rangers: Woods; Stevens, Munro, Gough, Spackman, Butcher, Steven, Ferguson, Walters, Johnston, Brown.
Arsenal: Lukic; Dixon, Winterburn, Davis, O'Leary, Adams, Rocastle, Richardson, Merson, Quinn, Marwood.
Referee: D Syme (Rutherglen).
Ernie Walker, the retiring secretary of the SFA, said yesterday that Scottish football could have a two-month winter shut-down scheduled for as early as next season.
He said that all Premier Division clubs had indicated their approval.
PAGE
Zenith Data Systems Challenge Cup: Rangers 1, Arsenal 2 Davis leads way towards a minor satisfaction.
By Our Correspondent
EVEN Arsenal, who carried the distinction back to London, would not claim that they played well enough in Glasgow last night to be the undisputed champions of anywhere, no matter the vainglorious subtitle given to this friendly.
They were, though, marginally the more inventive in a game that showed signs of decline from the early stages.
The so-called unofficial championship of Great Britain was in trouble from the outset.
The kick-off had to be delayed because of a motorway accident, which left a decimated attendance of 31,000 in spite of a delayed start to facilitate the inconvenienced.
Worse was to follow for Rangers as Graham Souness's side, without the prolific McCoist, went a goal behind after 27 minutes of adisappointing game.
Arsenal's scorer was Paul Davis, playing his first game since April because of injury.
He looked as if he had been conserving all his energy since then for the moment when he took advantage of an error by Butcher to shoot strongly past Woods.
A long kick-out by Lukic was mistimed by the England defender and Davis seized on the ball to score from 20 yards without breaking stride.
Butcher was not the only one to look less than dazzling in front of the watching England manager Bobby Robson.
Tony Adams was uncertain at the heart of Arsenal's defence and those on the periphery of Robson's thoughts prior to the World Cup, such as Rangers' Steven and Walters, did themselves no favours.
It could have been worse for Rangers.
Merson had the opportunity to extend Arsenal's lead when Gough and Butcher misread one another 's intentions but, in keeping with the general tone, he was well off the mark.
The loss of Gough after the interval was another setback for Souness.
It is only two weeks since Gough came back from a multiple fracture of the cheekbone.
He was injured again when Quinn's boot made accidental contact with his face.
The idea of the night being irrevocably jinxed for Rangers seemed in doubt when Ferguson's cross was chested over the line by Johnston for the equaliser in the 50th minute.
But Quinn restored Arsenal's lead six minutes later, touching home a pass by Merson across the face of Rangers' goal.
Rangers: Woods; Stevens, Munro, Gough, Spackman, Butcher, Steven, Ferguson, Walters, Johnston, Brown.
Arsenal: Lukic; Dixon, Winterburn, Davis, O'Leary, Adams, Rocastle, Richardson, Merson, Quinn, Marwood.
Referee: D Syme (Rutherglen).
Ernie Walker, the retiring secretary of the SFA, said yesterday that Scottish football could have a two-month winter shut-down scheduled for as early as next season.
He said that all Premier Division clubs had indicated their approval.
FA Cup second round, second replay Reading 0, Welling 0 (aet) Senior discovers angels on the side of the Wings.
By Ian Ridley
NIGHTS such as these are forgotten when FA Cup final day comes around, the sun shines and two of the game's more illustrious names are competing.
Last night at Elm Park the rain lashed down, the wind howled and the quest was for memories and money — and a goal.
It would not come despite chances galore, especially for Reading and Trevor Senior — although in a heart-stopping moment for the home side Neil Clemmence headed against the bar with 10 seconds of normal time left — and the tie will resume at Welling tomorrow.
Welling have stuck to Reading like chewing gum to the sole of a shoe.
Each time Reading threatened to overwhelm, back came Welling — in last week's first replay with an equalising goal inside two minutes.
So it proved last night.
After an early fright, when Hone half-volleyed a good chance high for Welling, Senior had a header saved well by Barron, Payne sent another over and Gilkes, Reading's most dangerous player, was just too high with a powerful shot.
Senior did once turn the ball into the net but David Elleray was more alert than the referee of England's 1986 World Cup tie against Argentina and had noticed the hand of a mere mortal.
When Tait miskicked in front of a gaping goal, it seemed as though somebody up there was working for Welling.
But then Booker miscued the rebound from Clemmence's late header against the bar after White's good cross as Welling, remarkably, finished normal time the stronger.
Senior, twice, Whitlock and Wood, once each, headed at the Welling goal in extra-time but the Wings did not deserve to be clipped.
Sunderland will have to wait a little longer before knowing whether to turn left or right on to the M25.
Reading: Burns; Jones, Richardson, Beavon, Hicks, Whitlock, Wood, Tait (Leworthy, 66min), Senior, Gilkes, Payne.
Welling: Barron; Hone, Horton, Glover, Ransom, Clemmence, White (Burgess, 112), Handford, Booker, Robbins, Reynolds.
Referee: D Elleray (Harrow).
Boxing Board may stop Benn v Duran.
By John Rodda
NIGEL BENN's arrival on the world championship stage may have to be delayed or diverted to another country.
The British Boxing Board of Control, in a commendable exercise to shore up the credibility of the sport yesterday, questioned the plan for Benn to challenge one of boxing's legends, Roberto Duran, for his middleweight title.
It does so on two grounds: that Duran is no longer a champion and that he may not be fit.
John Morris, the board's secretary, has already suggested to the World Boxing Council that, since Duran was inside the middleweight limit when he lost to Sugar Ray Leonard, he should have lost that title, even though the pair were fighting for the world super-middleweight championship.
Dr Adrian Whiteson, the board's chief medical officer, said that, if Duran came to fight in Britain, he would want assurances about his weight.
Clearly Whiteson is suspicious that Duran may not have shed 30lb to get down to the middleweight limit for Leonard by wholly natural methods.
‘Duran does boxing no service by allowing himself to become so unfit,’ Whiteson said.
‘He was a shadow of his former self and a boxer cannot go into the ring semi-fit.
‘He should have an intensive medical examination and a complete psychological assessment before he could be considered to box Benn for that title.
‘We must protect the name of boxing.
I don't want any more Alis in the world in the shape of Duran or any other boxer.
It is difficult enough to defend boxing.’
In another move which shows that the board intends to live up to the word ‘control’ in its title, it sent a message to the Dominion Theatre in Tottenham Court Road, where Frank Bruno is playing in Aladdin, to the effect that Bruno will not be able to rub his genie's lamp and in a puff of smoke reappear in a world title fight.
‘We would expect to see him in a couple of warm-up fights, certainly someone in the top 10, before he fights Mike Tyson again, if that is to happen,’ said Morris.
Since there are plans for Tyson to come to Britain in July, Bruno could have a busy spring in the ring after he finishes on the boards in February.
He has not fought since he lost to Tyson in February and he indicated only last week that he would be prepared to fight again.
The board reports that the sport is in a healthy state.
It has 709 active professional fighters, with 280 tournaments promoted this year, both figures the highest since 1954.
Britain has more professional boxers than the rest of Europe put together.
BOOKS FOR CHRISTMAS.
Running away with himself
John Rodda enjoys a detailed study of Sydney Wooderson
SYDNEY WOODERSON and Zola Budd did not have much in common but they knew a special achievement and a peculiar failure.
They also shared the deep satisfaction which running brings, often more in preparation than in the race itself.
Their achievement was in pushing back the frontiers of distance running with world records.
Their failure was that, because of man's inhumanity to his fellow beings, they did not fulfil their potential.
Hitler's war deprived Wooderson of going into the Olympic arena in Helsinki in 1940 as a hot favourite for the 1500 metres; Budd's natural progression was hindered by her country's policy of apartheid.
This year there have been publications about both.
David Thurlow's Sydney Wooderson, Forgotten Champion, to celebrate the runner's 75th year, is a simple record of the man's achievements on the track; it is riveting.
Budd's tome Zola, written for her, pours out the turmoil and blame for the five years she spent trying to run with a foot in two worlds.
Too many people, pulling in various directions, mostly clinging to a percentage of her value, made her into the rag doll she often appeared on the track.
In the unpolluted air of the Thirties there were no such problems for Wooderson.
Running was his hobby, centred on the loyalty which a club like Blackheath Harriers generated.
If Wooderson was any different from his fellows it was that he tried harder; he had the old equivalent of tunnel vision, enhanced by a coach, Albert Hill, who had won the 800 and 1500 metres at a single Olympics.
What astonished everyone, from the time he started winning schools races to the glorious battles at the White City after the war, was that such a weedy looking person could perform such feats.
How did a man of 5ft 6in produce such an enormous stride in his sprint finish?
His rivals must have wondered too.
Thurlow concentrates on vividly detailed description of his races, mostly in the style of the time.
How did Wooderson get to Motspur Park?
On the train?
And were there ever family squabbles which ruined a race?
Probably not but, if there were, they are not part of this story.
Such things are left to Budd.
Thurlow's story is strictly that of a man pursuing his hobby and getting more and more embarrassed as the public eye focused upon him.
The first pinnacle of his athletic achievement should have been at the Berlin Olympics in 1936.
He had beaten the New Zealander Jack Lovelock in the AAA mile — one of five consecutive championship victories — but Lovelock, the more experienced runner, was using the race chiefly to see how and when this little man used that devastating sprint.
But they did not meet in Berlin.
Apart from one session a day, Wooderson's training included long walks with his brother Stanley.
On one of these he stubbed his foot in a rabbit hole and twisted his ankle.
He ran in his Olympic heat with the injury strapped but the pain was excruciating and he failed to reach the final.
He had broken a bone.
Would Wooderson have beaten Lovelock?
The runner himself thinks not.
‘I think the ordeal of the big occasion would have affected me and my nerves would have got the better of me.
He [Lovelock]was more experienced at running in major races.
He had been running in international events since the Olympics of 1932.’
Of course Wooderson could get things wrong — like the time he went for the British mile record and broke the world time.
But 1940 would surely have been a different tale, if 1937 and 1938 were anything to go by.
The last Briton to hold the world mile record, WG George in 1886 with a time of 4min 12 ¾sec, was at Motspur Park on August 28 to watch Wooderson's attempt.
Pacemaking then was more predictable than now; in a well-organised handicap someone like Wooderson always had a target just ahead.
The event had all the highs and lows of a record attempt.
The first quarter was in 58.6sec, and this 17 years before the first four-minute mile.
But by the end of the third lap the pace had slouched to 3min 7.2sec.
In that final quarter, though, Wooderson had a lot of people to pass — on the inside, of course, for this was a gentlemen's race — and he zipped smoothly from one to the next to the finish line.
The watches were stopped and everyone held breath as the timekeepers turned for consultation with the track referee.
That clearly meant a record — a world record of 4min 6.4sec.
‘I was only aiming for the British record,’ Wooderson declared in a state of shock which caused him sleepless nights for a week.
The following year he was back to Motspur Park to attack the half-mile record, a distance he did not often run.
He had never done faster than 1min 54sec before 1938 and he was attacking 1min 49.8sec.
Yet again he eked out his resources across the two laps to set a new best of 1min 48.4sec.
That was virtually the end of his two-lap running but his miling exploits continued, stubbed by the war and an attack of glandular fever.
Yet he was to run faster, 4min 4.2sec, and run arguably his most significant mile race at the White City in the first post-war match.
Britain was a long time recovering after 1945.
Though Wooderson failed to beat the two healthy Swedes Gundar Hagg and Arne Andersson before 54,000 people, his effort lifted the spirits at a time when, without the tension of war, there was still the dreariness of rationing and shortage.
It was the sort of contribution to British life which might have brought him an honour.
Perhaps he declined it.
But that performance and the world record before the war inspired one young spectator at the White City, Roger Bannister, who was to run the first four-minute mile nine years later, and set off a string of British world record breakers, Derek Ibbotson, Sebastian Coe, Steve Ovett and Steve Cram.
Wooderson continued running for a few years, winning the European 5,000 metres and stretching his span of achievement from world record breaker at half-mile to national cross-country champion over nine miles in 1949.
As Thurlow sums him up, ‘in everyday life he was a small insignificant man in an ordinary suit…but take off the uniform of the city solicitor and put on the running singlet and the track shoes and the transformation was amazing’.
Within the sport his contribution was always acknowledged; outside, it never properly was.
Sydney Wooderson — Forgotten Champion by David Thurlow; British Sports Association for the Disabled, 34 Osnaburgh St, London NW1, £4.95 plus 50p pandp.
Zola by Zola Budd and Hugh Eley; Partridge Press, £12.95.
Sports Politics Call for cash facts on Games.
LIBERAL Democrats on Sheffield City Council are asking to be told about the financial state of GB Universiade, the company organising the World Student Games in 1991, writes John Rodda.
The council this week announced that the company has cash-flow problems.
Further meetings examining the situation went on yesterday and the council plans to make an announcement today.
‘Hopefully we will have some good news about the television contract,’ said Cllr Peter Price, the council's deputy leader and the man behind the project to bring the Games to Sheffield.
However, David Chadwick, a member of the Liberal Democrats group on the council, said: ‘All my requests to the chief executive of the council for financial details about this company have been turned down.
We must know whether this company is insolvent and therefore whether it should continue trading.’
The council is providing the Games infrastructure at a cost of over £100 million, and has three leading members among the directors of GB Universiade.
At the next council meeting on January 3 the Liberal Democrats intend to call for the resignation of the three — Price, the council leader Clive Betts, and Mrs J C Barton, chairman of the education committee, all Labour members — on the grounds of conflict of interest.
Ashes used in ratings ploy.
THE loss-making Sky Television is hoping to boost its poor ratings with live ball-by-ball coverage of England's 1990-91 Ashes tour of Australia.
Pictures produced by Australia's Channel 9 will be screened at 10.0 or 11.0 pm through to the next morning.
Sky is also showing the World Series Cup, comprising 16 one-day internationals between Australia, England and New Zealand.
The station is already showing live coverage of England's tour of the West Indies next year.
Soccer London fighters are let off lightly.
By David Lacey
THE Football Association revealed a velvet hand in an iron glove last night when they fined Wimbledon and West Ham United a mere £20,000 each after finding the clubs guilty of bringing the game into disrepute following a 17-man fracas during the Littlewoods Cup tie at Upton Park on November 22.
Much heavier punishments had been expected.
Each club have been fined the same amount as Arsenal, who were found to be the less culpable party in the mass scuffle with Norwich City on November 4.
Norwich, who in spite of an outstandingly good record of behaviour were fined £50,000, must be wondering if this is the same Football Association who dealt with them so severely only last month.
Fines of at least £50,000 were being widely predicted yesterday and there was speculation that Wimbledon's punishment might even top the £75,000 Chelsea had to pay last year after crowd trouble at Stamford Bridge.
Wimbledon had been expected to bear the brunt of the FA's displeasure because of their past record.
They had already been hauled up eight times, the first during the summer of 1981, and had been fined a total of £23,200.
‘The commission took into consideration their record over the past five years,’ said Graham Kelly, the FA's chief executive, ‘but they also noted that they had taken steps to improve it over the last 18 months.’
Another pointer in favour of Wimbledon and West Ham was that the clubs had already taken action or announced their intention to take action against certain players involved in the incident.
When Norwich and Arsenal appeared at Lancaster Gate the FA was concerned not only that neither club had condemned the incident immediately but that Norwich had not given any indication that they were going to punish some of their players, apart from fining them for making comments to newspapers.
‘The commission took into consideration the fact that the Wimbledon manager, Bobby Gould, was recommending to his board of directors that action should be taken against one particular player for his part at Upton Park,’ said Kelly.
The incident occurred a minute before half-time after a tackle from Dennis Wise, Wimbledon's England B winger.
‘They had regard for the previous exemplary record of West Ham and the fact that they have already taken action against their players concerned,’ Kelly added.
Julian Dicks, the West Ham captain, was sent off in the 61st minute for a late tackle on Wise and the referee, Alf Buksh, needed a police escort at the end of the tie, which West Ham won 1-0.
Lou Macari, the West Ham manager, was reported to have said it was impossible to control players once they had taken the field.
Gould's post-match view was: ‘I don't think anybody is pleased to see that on a football field.’
Buksh booked five people including the Wimbledon physiotherapist, Steve Allen, and in his report to the FA mentioned ‘an unruly disturbance’.
It was this, plus echoes of the Arsenal-Norwich affair, that prompted the FA to follow its own precedent by bringing further disrepute charges against clubs rather than individual players.
Kelly implied that each case had been judged on its merits, but the previous fines were criticised by politicians and police as being too lenient and the FA can expect more of the same after its latest decision.
Kelly and the FA are determined to press ahead with plans to harden up the rules for next season in order to deduct League points from clubs who offend.
In the meantime all those due to appear in the FA Cup third round in the New Year have received a letter from Lancaster Gate reminding them that the FA has the power to throw them out of the competition if their players become involved in mass brawls.