

Times change but the victims don't Television.
By Hugh Hebert
WITH the continent the way it is, the end of Made in Latin America (BBC-2) was inevitable.
It was the shooting dead in August of Colombia's poll-topping Liberal presidential candidate, Senator Luis Carlos Galan.
He arrived at the crowded town square near Bogota and was born shoulder high to climb up onto the back of a truck to make his campaign speech.
The shots sounded like no more than a bad cough.
True, there was the other mass gathering-a packed hall in Medellin, Drug City, listening as poets challenged the deadly fluence of the Mafia through writing that has the characteristics of war work: defiant, angry, and sad.
But what you carry away in the back of your eye is the image of two very still figures, in foetal folds, on the platform of that truck as everyone else dived for cover.
Mike Dibb's series has been sometimes confusing, lacking in structure.
But it has made us aware of the crusted, jewel-bright variety of Latin America behind things that more often lump its nations together.
Drugs, debt, dictators, destitution, maracas, machismo, priests, peasants, tangos…
The Venezuelan poet Juan Liscano sits by the sea and tells us that Europeans ‘tend to classify us as exotic birds-parrots, or toucans…’
But the truest expression of Latin America, he says, is its culture.
You shake a sheaf of poems in the face of killers; you do paintings with Uncle Sam as an anaconda; and writers talk of five centuries of resistance to oppressors who may change-colonists, missionaries, generals, coke bosses-but whose victims remain the same.
That is one kind of identity.
Bandung File (C4) also ended last night-really ended, the last programme of its fourth and last series, for reasons still not clear-with a profile of the only Arab ever to win the Nobel Prize for literature, the Egyptian novelist and poet Naguib Mahfouz.
He took the cameras round the back alleys of Gamalliyya, the district of Old Cairo where most of his books are set.
A district that in this film still looks like a Bible story invaded by the internal combustion engine.
The street names, he tells us, have stayed the same since the 10th century.
Traditionally there was no distinction in Arabic between the language used in conversation, in correspondence, or in literature.
That distinction is recent, stemming partly from Mahfouz's determination to make language match his theme.
His use of Arabic, we're told, is as different from the traditional forms as Dickens is from Chaucer.
It sounds like a man who has squashed five centuries of a nation's literature in his palm.
His early work about the alleys of Gamalliyya was fundamentally on the side of the revolution-the one that failed to dislodge the British in 1919, and that finally threw out Farouk and brought Neguib and later Nasser to rule Egypt.
After Nasser, he says, his themes seemed to refer to a vanished society and for five years Mahfouz wrote no books.
When he began writing again, he had given up realism for allegory about the conflict between, among other things, science and religion.
And the traditional religious leaders did not like it.
Mahfouz was applying the spirit of scientific inquiry to spiritual matters.
The row erupted again when he won the Nobel last year, and the citation named the offending work.
But this time the religious extremists' anger took a more dangerous form.
The death threats began.
The threats are threats, not official sentences.
Unlike Salman Rushdie, he can still take his walks through the back streets of his chosen city.
Now, he says, he has a great desire to write.
But the themes elude him.
And you can't really be surprised.
Diary.
By Andrew Moncur
SEASON'S greetings to Sir Gordon Manzie, chief executive of the Property Services Agency.
He has been traipsing about, explaining to staff the joys of privatisation which await them.
No fewer than 23,000 copies of a glossy PSA calendar have been given to the troops.
These feature such triumphs of design in the Government service as Richmond House, workplace of K.Clarke, the ambulance crews' friend.
That building was valued by a private firm — well, it's that sort of Government — at a cost of £40,000.
It eventually emerged, after dogged questioning in parliament, that the PSA would have done the same job for £1,500.
Anyway, off goes Sir Gordon to Ashdown House, Hastings, home of about 1,000 agency staff.
A rostrum is prepared.
In front of it, lumme, a pile of 650-odd PSA calendars.
Unwanted gifts.
‘Dear Sir Gordon,’ says a note, ‘…
We should be helping to conserve the environment and discouraging the unnecessary destruction of trees.’
And what happened after he visited his Scottish HQ in Edinburgh?
Signs appeared on the hot-air hand-driers in the ladies' and gents': ‘If you missed Sir Gordon's speech to staff and wish to hear a recorded version, press this button…‘
DEAR Doctor.
So, we're feeling a bit peaky are we?
Please tick: Yes, we are; or No, we're not.
The Liberal Democrats have, very ambitiously, been conducting a national survey among GPs about the likely impact of the Government's proposals for the health service.
This is reckoned to be the largest exercise of its type since the reforms were put forward, blood pressure started to rise, nostrils began to flare and so on.
Now comes the business of sorting out the returned forms.
Most of the questions may be answered with a tick.
But some spaces are left for the doctors’ comments.
Oh, good grief.
Their handwriting.
‘We can't read what most of them say,’ muttered a party spokeswoman.
‘Most of these forms are like prescriptions.’
GREAT Corrections Of Our Time (No.198).
Construction News: ‘We would like to point out that the name of Balfour Beatty's project manager [at a site in Edinburgh]is Mike Izzy.’
Turn back to the original feature about that very development.
And who do we have here?
The builder's project manager, Alex Fishface.
Yes, that's Fishface.
AND THERE goes Terence Heiser, Knight Commander of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (KCB), Permanent Secretary at the Environment Department, appearing before the Public Accounts Committee.
This event is billed in the House of Commons information bulletin as an outing by Sir Terence Heiser KGB.
THANKS a lot, whoever delivered to homes in Roehampton yesterday, on behalf of the Metropolitan Police, folders of helpful Christmas crime prevention hints.
Like this: ‘Try and make the house look occupied when it's left unattended…
’ What a good idea.
But not so terribly easy when a folder of crime-fighting guidance is left propped against every front door.
MEANWHILE, if you're not actually strangling a turkey at the moment then you might like to do the next worse thing and plunge into the unsavoury giblets of the 1990 calendar of the National Association of Conservative Graduates.
They seem proud that it's offended just about everyone; it enjoys the billing ‘Tasteless — the Sun’ in the association's latest mailing.
This calendar marks special dates, thus.
The sinking of the Rainbow Warrior; the death of Blair Peach; and so on.
WHO, BY the way, is getting the biggest postbag at Westminster at this joyful time?
K.Clarke, of course.
It's an infallible indicator of unpopularity, according to experts in the mail room.
TIME for another selection of winning entries for the Vicar's Competition: captions for the nineties.
‘President Mandela of Azania welcoming Premier Sillars of the Republic of Scotland to his 80th birthday celebrations.’
(Elspeth Loades); ‘Lord James Goldsmith (right) announcing his plans to demerge the USSR.’
(Anon.);
‘Frank Naylor being presented with the memorial award for making most contributions to Guardian diary competitions without having any printed.’
(Frank Naylor).
JUST a word now about Santa Claus.
The one who carried out a hold-up in Philadelphia — and, while waiting, sang ‘We wish you a merry Christmas…
‘No, don't tell me the police are looking for a getaway sleigh.
AND J.Danforth Quayle's secret servicemen have been off, at taxpayers’ expense, for three weeks' skiing tuition.
In order to guard the V-P on his hols, you see.
Last year one got a little out of control — and ran over Marilyn, Mrs Quayle.
COMMENT THE GUARDIANWednesday December 20 1989 Killing behind a closed border.
HORROR at what is happening in Romania is every bit as justified — even if the details of the killings in Timisoara are obscure — as the global protest at the events six months ago in Tiananmen Square.
There are enough case histories now to begin to establish a typology of last-ditch tyrannical L action.
The State regards itself as threatened by Counter-revolution; its apparatus of power is theoreti cally entitled to employ all means at its disposal; the great leader person ally authorises the use of force (and who dares contradict him?); the army and security forces lumber in with a grotesque over-use of fire power — in this case including heli copters — and within minutes there are bodies in the streets.
Just how many bodies is still an open ques tion.
As the June events in China showed, eyewitness accounts are necessarily very fallible.
Not every one who stumbles is a casualty; not every casualty is fatal, and the grim sight of a few corpses can easily overwhelm statistical accuracy.
But no matter what the final total may be, the Ceausescu regime has crossed a line which sooner or later should prove fatal for it.
At first sight, the location of protest sub stantially among Romania's alien ated Hungarian minority suggests that it may be more easily confined by the leadership in Bucharest.
But the wholly unpredicted speed-up of events elsewhere in Eastern Europe should make us wary of assuming that the Romanians must be so much further behind.
The two official Party newspapers in Bucharest  admitted a threat to ‘the whole socio-economic construction of Romania’— implying a threat to the regime itself.
Mr Ceausescu's Stalinist rule is such an easy target for condemna tion that there is a danger of over-reaction.
Wild talk of intervention — whether by Hungary, or by a War saw Pact which has somehow redis covered its lost unity, or even in a joint operation with Nato — is merely post-cold war romancing.
Short of a situation of mass genocide (Kampuchea or Idi Amin's Uganda) individual peoples have to be left to fight their own battles, if they are to generate genuine and lasting solu tions for their own futures.
Nor should the West be excessively high-minded now in condemning a regime which once served its anti-Soviet purposes so well.
Mr Ceausescu may have become somewhat more dictatorial in the past decade, but it is not a qualitative change.
He was already a very unpleasant person when he was entertained in Buckingham Palace by the Queen in 1978.
He was equally sinister two years later when the Foreign Secretary Carrington visited him with a strange request for help in promoting the neutralisation of Afghanistan.
The Hungarian minority was already complaining bitterly then of persecution — their plight widely regarded as the unfortunate flip-side of Ceausescu's ultra-nationalism, which at least kept the Russians at bay.
Ms Nadia Comaneci was still performing on the long bar for Romania, but her gymnastic trainers had already defected to the US.
None of this stopped President Carter from sending a senior envoy to Bucharest in December 1978 to express his praise for ‘Romania's independence and US-Romanian friendship.’
This year's special mis sion of appeasement was paid (twice as we now discover) by President Bush's special envoy Mr Brent Scowcroft to Beijing.
Outrage apart, grand diplomacy still has its own special rules.
The terms at Trade.
YESTERDAY's statement from Mr Nicholas Ridley on the Bar low Clowes affair marks an extraor dinary about-turn for a Government which has always denied any legal responsibility for the losses suffered by 18,000 investors.
A year ago, remember, Mr Ridley's predecessor as Trade Secretary, Lord Young brushed aside all legal, moral or hu manitarian reasons for rescuing investors.
Today the Government, of course, still denies legal responsibility — presumably to frighten off any other claimants — but will dispense £150 million of taxpayers' money to com pensate investors of both the Barlow Clowes UK fund and the Gibraltar based international fund (which isn't covered by the Department of Trade's writ and which offered rates of interest on allegedly gilt-edged stock which were not possible with out tax avoidance).
That £150 million will be reduced after the liquidators have handed over the money they expect to recover (at least £60 mil lion) and possibly more if other claims are pursued by the DTI.
But it is still a very large sum indeed, which may be viewed with some in credulity by the millions of lower paid people who have been hit by the Government's attitudes on, for example, child benefits.
Mr Ridley, who was not involved in any of the original decisions, is no supporter of the nanny state either.
He is coughing up because the Om budsman has found five separate cases of maladministration which, the minister admits, amount to a moral if not a legal responsibility.
The counter argument is that investors ought to have known that there was a risk involved, particularly those who put their funds in the Gibraltar fund at suspiciously high rates of interest in order to avoid UK taxation.
However, the Ombudsman found that the UK and Gibraltar funds were closely linked and that, if the Department had moved swiftly enough to revoke the UK licence, the Gibraltar fund could not have continued to exist.
Three of the instances of maladministration related to the licensing of the Chesh ire-based savings group in 1984/85, where the Ombudsman felt that there was enough evidence to have ordered Barlow Clowes to cease op erations.
The DTI was found not to have heeded a number of warnings from authoritative sources about the dubious status of the Clowes em pire: witness the Bank of England, the Stock Exchange and the regula tory bodies.
He was not impressed either by the Department's argu ment that to have revoked the licence would have triggered a dis orderly collapse, allowing the smart money to get out and leaving pen sioners high and dry.
Yesterday's report was welcomed by both sides of the House and, hopefully, will prove the last case of its kind now that the savings indus try has set up its own investor com pensation scheme.
It is important for the Government to pursue other involved parties — including the company itself, but also the finan cial advisers who put savers into the Gibraltar fund without inquiring too much about how it was able to offer such high rates of interest, not to mention the auditors who looked at the books.
Meanwhile, though, the savers can count themselves very fortu nate, particularly those in the off shore fund who now stand to get nearly all of their money back.
This Government is rarely so generous with the taxpayers' money, espe cially to people who seek out an in vestment opportunity which doesn't involve paying UK tax.
A little thank you to the Ombudsman would not go amiss.
Video justice.
PERHAPS the biggest distortion to the scales of justice in Eng land and Wales is about to be removed.
Inconceivable though it may seem, some of the most abused victims in the country have the greatest difficulty in having their voices heard.
Many, despite the seri ous injuries they have suffered, are completely barred from the courts.
Others are allowed to testify, but then the judge is required to warn the juries about the dangers of ac cepting that testimony.
Yesterday, though, the independent committee set up by the Government to look at the admissibility of pre-trial video interviews of abused children called for radical changes.
Undoubtedly the narrow legal conservatives — both on and off the bench — who run the criminal justice system will continue to resist the move; but HMG will not be able to ignore the arguments set out in the report.
Child victims of physical and sexual abuse have suffered too long.
It is time their voices were heard.
Most attention will concentrate on the pre-trial video recording recom mendations.
Since the London borough of Bexley experiment proved successful, many areas are now using joint teams of social workers and police officers to inter view children who have been abused.
There are numerous advan tages.
It allows an early and full account to be recorded before the child's memory fades; reduces the chance of parents or other interested adults influencing what the child says; removes the need for a succession of professional people to probe at length and in detail the traumatic experiences of the child; exposes any leading questions made  the interviewers; and allows people to observe the non-verbal as well as the verbal messages the child wants to make.
But, true to its timid traditions, the English crimi nal justice system still excludes these videos from court hearings be cause of the hearsay rule; a rule which has never been definitively formulated but which crudely pre vents statements made out of court by a witness to someone else being admissible.
The committee, how ever, sensibly note the long list of exceptions to this rule and insist that pre-recorded videos should be added.
One of the many benefits of this proposal will be the readiness of more defendants to plead guilty, thus reducing the length of the trau matic process.
The committee's proposed proce dural changes, however, though less ‘dramatic’, will be even more im portant.
All children under 14 will be presumed to be competent wit nesses.
All should give unsworn evi dence.
The recommendations will over-rule — and not before time — the 1958 Court of Criminal Appeal ruling in the Wallwork case.
This ruling has effectively meant that children under eight are almost never called and no child under five is ever called.
Yet, just over the bor der in Scotland, children as young as four frequently testify in abuse trials.
The most perverse element of the English system is that if a child is not called, the hearsay rule pre vents anyone else — a parent, doctor or policeman — from repeating in court what the child said out of court.
Many abusers have escaped through this loophole.
The committee sensibly want to remove the child from crown court trials, but their solution of prelimi nary hearings is questionable.
These are meant to be informal, but will be conducted in front of judges with legal teams on either side.
Informal ity in the eyes of English lawyers will be far from informal to the child.
Direct video links, already in troduced, look a much better bet.
Letters to the Editor PAGE
Nikki Foster on the real curse of single motherhood Sole writes Fear and loathing..
THERE seem to be two distinct periods in a heterosexual woman's life when being single is acceptable.
As a young adult, mate-hunting with the pack, you are regarded with tolerant amusement; elderly and/or widowed, you are usually afforded a kind of uncommitted sympathy and concern.
The middle-aged mother, however, who has dependants, a job, a mortgage and a car — all the trappings of the standard nuclear family, but without the visible support of the person normally responsible for such things — is generally treated like a rabid dog, something acknowledged as being in the neighbourhood but to be avoided at all costs.
This is nowhere more apparent than in the leafy avenues of middle-class suburbia, among the 2CV owners and Guardian readers, the teachers and social workers, where family life is pictured tumbling happily among Early Learning Centre climbing frames, glowing cosily out from safely bohemian pine-scrubbed kitchens.
I have recently moved, with two children, two cats and an apparently treacherous abyss where a husband ought to be.
I obviously made some fundamental mistakes within the first few days of my move.
I failed to place a cardboard cut-out of a male person lying, in a posture of total exhaustion, in one of the darker recesses of the living room.
His silence and inertia would have only made him more lifelike and I would, at once, have been treated as ‘one of the girls’.
I failed to play a tape throughout the weekend of a drill relentlessly droning away in some shelfless room out of sight.
I failed to arrange any stereotypical symbol of masculinity in the porch where all visitors would see it instantly: a pair of size ten wellingtons, a cricket fixture list, a rifle perhaps.
The result of this ineptitude was that I was rumbled as a single parent within days, if not hours, and subsequently approached as if I were a fatal poison masquerading as a person.
This may sound extreme, but it isn't.
Single mothers are seen as totally destabilising, a threat to life as couples know it.
Because there are children and therefore the woman has obviously been part of a couple at some point, there is an assumption that in her single state she is critical, cynical and undermining of couples around her.
Women seem fearful of becoming too friendly with a single mother; fearful that if they spend too much time with her, they might just get a taste for something that is denied them.
What a single mother represents may seem touchingly attractive: not having to cook another adult's meals, or wash his clothes; being able to go to bed when you want; being able to go to sleep when you want.
These are tiny freedoms, and if a woman enjoys being part of a couple, they should count for nothing.
But then this leads to the idea that perhaps a number of women do not enjoy being part of a couple and that a single woman in their midst acts like a demented lighthouse: enticing hapless travellers, by its safe and steady beam, on to the rocks below.
Men, of course, would not make friends with a single mother for the reason that men do not make friends.
They make ‘drinking companions’ and ‘football teams’and ‘colleagues’.
They have sex with women or they dislike them, sometimes both.
There are, however, some men who assume that a single mother must be looking for a husband.
They are husbands, ergo, she is looking for them.
Working on this delusion, they then feel either excited and act like silly children or confused and act like silly children.
To be fair, the assumption that a single woman must be seeking the refuge of coupledom again is common to men and women.
Yet it's a theory without logic: if you'd just had an Austin Utterly Dependable break down and fall to bits, would you really want another one?
That argument has to rest on the principle that it makes other owners of Utterly Dependables feel better if everyone has one!
I have attended ‘social events’ at my children's school at which only the staff have spoken to me.
I have joined classes where I've leapt about to Michael Jackson or thrown my pot and been surprised at the sound of my own voice when I've paid the babysitter.
Divorced people, and therefore single parents, have had a bad press lately.
They are, according to recent research, bringing up the next generation of offenders, truants, divorcees and generally inadequate people.
Maybe this is why I am treated as if I've polluted the town's water.
Frankly I don't believe that households in which one parent spends all his waking moments either out of the house or refitting the patio doors or under the bonnet of a car are doing a better job than I am, where the kids are concerned, but I haven't got any statistics to prove it.
It seems ironic that I pose such a threat to the natural order: an innocuous, above-averagely exhausted woman, mainly preoccupied with children's needs, work, letters from the bank and Sainsbury's, but sometimes longing for a chat, a good laugh, an exchange of views.
Most coupled people's preoccupations and needs are very similar but they nurture the hope that their partner will support and fulfil them.
Maybe the single parent is seen as somehow highlighting the cracks that couples think they've covered over.
Meanwhile, single mothers will sit and watch the TV and watch the advertisements which all show either happy couples or one single person doing something for an unseen other: ironing his shirts, organising their mortgage, driving his Audi to visit her.
The only thing single women do on the ads is eat chocolate or feed the cat, so I've stopped watching: it's too depressing.
I'm too busy trying to make a tape of someone mowing the lawn who is also trying to watch the Cup Final, who is trying to get the rest of the family to shut up.
I'm sure if I play that next Saturday, it'll be the instant passport to any social scene.
PAGE wom
ALICE PERKINS works four days a week as a high-level administrator at the Department of Social Security.
She works intensively from nine to six, skipping lunch and often taking work home to do after her two children, William, 9, and Charlotte, 7, have gone to bed.
However, on Fridays she has a day at home.
That one day, Perkins says, makes a fantastic difference.
‘It means being able to count on time each week to deal with whatever the home priority is.
Instead of having to come home from work and worry about wrapping up the Christmas presents, or writing letters to friends, or having a long conversation with someone in the family who needs a bit of support, and fitting all that in after the children have gone to bed and the supper's been washed up and you really ought to be reading papers for tomorrow's meeting, I know I have a chunk of time when I can get on with doing all that.
Nobody's got any expectations of what I do on that day.
‘I had worked as an Assistant Secretary (senior manager) full time for three years in a very heavy job and I was beginning to feel I was permanently breathless.
So I asked whether, at the end of that job, I could work four days a week, and I was favourably surprised at the reaction I received.
People could see why I wanted to work in that way and did what they could to make it possible.
‘It was partly wanting to say to my children that on one day a week I could always take them to school.
I'm now available, if it's during their holidays, to do something with them myself.
I felt it was very important at this point in their childhood because I think they are such good company at this age.
At the moment they think being with their parents is absolutely wonderful and that's not going to last for ever.
I felt that this was a very brief phase and if I didn't cash in on it now, I wasn't going to get the chance again.
‘Since I've worked part time I've also become a parent governor at the children's school and most Fridays during term time I go in and listen to children reading.
I can also get my hair cut, do some gardening, go to an art exhibition — things that just got squeezed out altogether beforehand.
‘I decided on four days because I reckoned that that's as near to being a full-timer as you can be, while still gaining something significant for yourself.
It meant that I could still do what I regard as a worthwhile job.
I recognised it could mean marking time but I don't think in practice that has happened.
‘Sometimes there are meetings scheduled on Fridays and I feel reluctant to miss them.
However, that does have its positive side — it gives my staff the opportunity to go to meetings and take responsibility when I'm not there, so it can be used in quite a developmental way.
You do also have to be fairly well organised, using your time ruthlessly on the top priorities.
‘I've been working this way for 18 months now and I'm really happy with how it's going.
It's been a real success.’
PAGE wom
Quote….
JUST last week, General Manuel Noriega, already the supreme ruler of Panama, had himself named head of government and ‘maximum leader for national liberation’ by his personally appointed legislature, which went on to pronounce the country to be in a ‘state of war’with the United States.
Why would he find it in his interest to ratchet up a challenge to a foreign power that has, after all, an impeccable legal position in Panama and a considerable military position?
It seems a case of a dictator generating a sense of hysteria and national besiegement to rally people around, but the weekend's shooting incidents pose an apparently deliberate provocation to an American presence that is firmly rooted in treaties between the Panamanian and American Governments, and they force the question of whether Noriega is bent on invalidating those treaties.
Washington Post, December 19
Working mothers are faced with two choices: follow the male career route and spend little time with their children or sacrifice their prospects, knowing that working part time means low status and low wages.
Maggy Meade-King reports Part exchange SIXTY-SIX PER CENT of British mothers who work are considered to do so part-time; 11 per cent work 40 or more hours per week.
Twenty-two per cent of French women work part time and 64 per cent work 40 hours or more per week.
Fifty per cent of mothers returning to work part time do so in lower level jobs than those they left at childbirth.
Even where both partners work full time, 72 per cent of domestic tasks are done mainly by women.
Most British mothers choose to work part time.
They spend a short period at home full time while their children are small, then look for a job that will fit in with their family commitments.
The majority need the money and many enjoy the social life and stimulation of work outside the home.
However, they also want to spend time with their children.
In addition, lack of good, affordable pre-school and out-of-school childcare, and responsibility for the care of elderly relatives and household chores means that part-time work often seems the only practical option.
A happy compromise between the needs of family and work, you might think, but the end result is a sharp downgrading in the work returning mothers do.
A Thomas Coram Research Unit study, New Mothers At Work: Employment And Childcare, found, for example, a woman who moved from being an Executive Officer with the DSS to childminding, and another who moved from bank clerk to cleaner.
As many mothers rely on their partners for childcare, they often work out-of-sight, nil-promotion night shifts.
When their children go to school, they may take on a morning job in a shop or making school dinners.
At any rate, it is the service sector that benefits most from this army of workers who have to sacrifice pay and conditions for convenient hours and proximity to home.
Even women in well-paid jobs, who can afford childcare and domestic help, face a stark, all-or-nothing choice.
Most career jobs expect people to work more than nine-to-five hours, to travel abroad or move house if necessary, maybe to attend conferences at weekends or socialise in the evenings; in short, to put work before family.
Those who are not prepared to do so may find that their promotion's blocked or they're shunted into a backwater — one experienced insurance broker of my acquaintance, for instance, was offered a job in the stationery department!
Part-timers or job-sharers are increasing but still a rarity in the middle or higher levels of management.
It seems to be a question of if you can't take the workaholic heat, get back to the kitchen.
Women must either follow the male career route and spend little time with their children, or drop out for the vital middle years that filter out the top managers.
Part-time solicitors, accountants or doctors will rarely become partners in their firms; they are at best marking time, at worst barring themselves for ever from the higher reaches of their professions.
Even women who do work traditionally seen as compatible with motherhood may be disadvantaged.
Part-time teachers, for instance, will not be promoted and even those who work full time will often not apply for positions with extra responsibility because of their commitments at home.
Generally, part-timers work in low-status, low-wage occupations because that's all that's on offer at the hours they can work.
The West Yorkshire Low Pay Unit found recently that, while part-time work was increasing in their area, women were actually being paid a lower percentage of local full-time wages than they had received a decade ago.
Those who work less than 16 hours per week (or eight hours after five years with one employer) also lose employment rights such as maternity leave, unfair dismissal protection and redundancy payments.
All those working less than full-time hours (generally 35 or more per week) may find themselves barred from pension, profit-sharing and preferential company loan schemes.
Britain and Eire are alone in the EC in treating part-timers differently.
In France, for instance, where there are no incentives for employers to take on part-timers (in the form of our lower National Insurance contributions and lack of rights and benefits for part-timers) and far more extensive subsidised childcare facilities and parental leave, far fewer mothers work part time and more are in higher status occupations, according to the Department of Employment's French And British Women's Employment Comparisons.
Indeed, many British employers may be illegally discriminating against their part-time workers.
If they are predominantly female, and 83 per cent of part-timers are, the equal pay legislation may entitle them to the same benefits and conditions as their full-time colleagues.
The Manufacturing, Science and Finance union negotiated an agreement last year, for instance, that entitled part-time women working for Norwich Union to benefit from a mortgage subsidy scheme.
We are likely to see more agreements offering better deals to part-timers, to entice mothers back to work, as the demographic changes begin to bite.
However, none of them is likely to affect those workers who fall outside of collective agreements; the contract workers and the many women who work for small manufacturing or service sector employers.
For them, especially, it's time we caught up with the rest of the European Community and extended to all workers employment protection, pro rata benefits and pay, as well as parental leave and childcare.
The good news is that the need to retain skilled and experienced workers is encouraging the more enlightened employers to offer better terms to people who want to work reduced hours.
Most Civil Service departments, for instance, now allow their staff to work part-time at their current grades, with pro rata pay and benefits, such as pensions.
There are currently over 28,000 part-time staff in Government Service and, while the great majority of these are in the junior grades, ten per cent of women at Principal level and above (senior staff) now work part time.
While this may mean working only one day less per week, that one day may provide a vital breathing space for women like Alice Perkins, working in demanding, pressurised jobs, and it may just allow them to remain on a career path that will take them into positions of power.
A male colleague of Perkins', working at the same grade, is also taking a day off a week to spend more time with his children and perhaps this is the most heartening news of all.
It offers a vision of a future in which the importance of both parents spending time with their children is recognised, as is the right of both sexes to use their skills in the workplace to the extent of their abilities, for the benefit of us all.
New Mothers At Work: Employment And Childcare and the forthcoming Motherhood, Employment And Childcare: The Early Years, by Julia Brannen and Peter Moss, are both published by Unwin Hyman.
French And British Women's Employment Comparisons was compiled by SDex, PWalters and DAlden for the Department of Employment.
PAGE wom
The lost spirits of Christmas present Living alone after being in care can be too much.
Helen Brown reports on the ones who can't cope.
‘C.
HRISTMAS IS very hard to deal with,’ says 22-year-old Mark.
‘If you've been in care most of your life, there's nowhere you can go.
A lot of my downfalls have been over Christmas.
I end up crawling inside bottles of drink.’
And Mark is one of the lucky ones — he at least has somewhere to sleep.
Thousands of young people will be spending this Christmas on the streets because they have no home to go to, and over a third of them will have spent most of their childhood in care.
Fewer than one child in every hundred is taken into care, yet, in London alone, at least one in every three young homeless people has a background in care.
And often it's not that they never had anywhere to live, it's just that they couldn't cope with the responsibilities and the isolation of living on their own.
It's difficult enough to manage for yourself when you first leave home, but if you've spent your childhood in an institution, you probably don't even know how to change a light bulb, let alone keep a rent book.
On their 18th birthday, and sometimes even before, anyone in care is considered to be an adult and able to fend for themselves.
They are suddenly faced with finding a place to rent and budgeting the cost of living.
Housing authorities have a general duty to house ‘vulnerable’ people but a recent survey by the National Children's Home found that only 50 per cent of authorities would classify as vulnerable a young homeless person with no parents and no support.
A young care-leaver's chances of being made a housing priority vary from one in three in Scotland to one in four in a London borough or metropolitan authority, to only one in eight in the South of England.
Even if a place is found there's the bills.
Years of moving from one home to another, having meals cooked for you, never having to think twice about leaving lights on or taps dripping is hardly the best preparation for surviving in a bedsit on a YTS wage of £29.50 a week (trainees don't qualify for income support).
One unforeseen bill and the debts start piling up, one long delay in receiving housing benefit and the landlord may throw you out.
Many people find themselves homeless within a year of leaving care.
Fred, from Newcastle, still finds things hard, even after spending time in a ‘halfway house’ which let him get used to paying his own way.
‘It was such a shock to me,’ he said.
‘When nobody was there, I just didn't know what to do.
At 18 I was saying ‘I'm a man and ready to tackle this’.
But I'm 20 now and I still haven't grasped it yet.’
Perhaps more difficult even than the financial juggling is the isolation and loneliness.
One boy, a friend of Mark's called Kenny, who was living in a hostel in Croydon, was housed on the 13th floor of a frequently vandalised tower block in Camberwell.
He was only a few miles away but for him it might as well have been a million miles.
Cut off from the only social contact and emotional support he had known, he went downhill and ended up being arrested for stealing.
Mark himself has had two attempts at living independently.
He is intelligent and articulate, and bitter at the way the years he spent in care have handicapped his chances: ‘I went into care when my family broke up.
I was moved from home to home.
There was one time when I moved 14 times in seven months — that really disrupts your education.
It also means you have real problems building relationships because you just expect to lose friends all the time.
Most of the people who have been close to me over the years have been paid to be.
‘And then at 18, or in my case at 17, they take you away from everything you know and stick you in some broom cupboard of a bedsit.
I had no preparation for that at all.
Everything fell down around me.
‘I started drinking very heavily, using aerosols, dope, pills.
It got rid of problems until the next morning.
And then the rent demand would come, and things would get worse and worse.’
Mark was ‘rescued’ by a Barnardo's project, based at the Cleevedon Hostel in south London, which helps young people to work gradually towards total independence.
He now shares a house near the hostel with four other care-leavers and has stabilised a great deal.
But there are too few projects like Cleevedon, and too little money to help more than a handful of youngsters every year.
Mark is visibly angry with ‘them’, the faceless bureaucrats who made the rules that nearly lead to his ruin.
‘They take you away from your family because they say the state can be a better parent.
But in the end it's not — because at 18 you're just dropped.
I'm not asking for more than any other 22-year-old — just the same.’
Angela McRobbie investigates the long-term effects of living in care Home from home?.
‘I.
KNEW nothing about sex.
They never tell you anything.
When I came on with my period, I didn't know who to tell.
I was petrified.
I didn't even know what pregnancy was.
The doctor said to me, ‘Haven't you been told about these things?’ then sat and explained it all to me.
And I cried because I didn't know what had happened.
They persuaded me to have a termination.’
Donna, 22, interviewed in Women, Crime and Poverty by Pat Carlen (OUP, 1988).
Whatever the conditions are that force a young person to run away from home, there is no doubt that institutionalised care exacerbates them.
A recent study by Professor Pat Carlen shows that of 39 female adult criminals, 22 spent a substantial period of their childhood and adolescence in care.
The young people who come into care are drawn almost exclusively from the ranks of the poor and disadvantaged and though many reasons are given for the move, frequently it is the inability of the family to cope with illness, bereavement, divorce or remarriage.
(Recent attention to cases of child sex abuse has resulted in children rather than young people being taken into care; teenagers are more likely to act out their distress by running away and only reveal why much later.)
The single most startling fact for girls, however, is that they tend to be taken into care for ‘status offences’ rather than for breaking the law.
While for boys the ‘justice’ rather than the ‘welfare’model prevails, between 70 and 80 per cent of girls in care in this country are there as a result of parents or step-parents calling in the social services because they feel their daughters to be ‘beyond parental control’or ‘morally at risk’.
Initially the girls welcome a private space away from the family.
As one young woman I spoke to put it: ‘I thought at least I'll be going to a place where these people are not my parents so they won't be able to put a hand on me.’
But once the bleak regime of institutionalised care hits young people, the relief of being away from an unhappy family situation sours into feelings of failure and rejection.
Another girl, placed in a children's home at 13 after her mother had a nervous breakdown and her father left for another woman, described her shock at finding it was also a place of ‘correction’ for young offenders.
‘I had been rowing with my dad since I was little, so I didn't want to go to his new family with my brother.
The social workers told me I would like the home and that I could stay on at my old school and still have the same friends.
But when I got there I found I was in with kids who'd been nicked for stealing or who'd been on drugs or alcohol or glue, and girls who had been on the streets at 13.
That made me feel I must have done something to deserve this.
It was my fault Mum got ill and Dad went off with someone else.’
Many girls do manage to survive and come out able to build up a life for themselves, but the odds are stacked against them.
Two depressing scenarios emerge from Carlen's research into the long-term effects of care on young women.
First there is an increase in misdemeanours — the type of behaviour a girl might be ticked off for at home but which in care results in her finding herself further up the custodial ladder in a Community Home with Education.
Minor misdemeanours can place her in a position of great vulnerability, subject to the whim of whoever happens to be on duty, and institutional life, by definition, is less flexible, less forgiving, than the ‘normal family’ home.
Siblings will, for example, invariably fight and argue their way through childhood.
For Cecilia, however — a young black girl placed in care at 13 because her mother couldn't cope — the fact that she could express anger and upset with her sister, whom she dearly loved, resulted in social workers suggesting a move, ‘for her own good’, to a smaller family-style establishment in the country, miles from the inner city community in which she had grown up.
She stayed there for three years and lost track of her sister during that time.
Sometimes anger is the only resource left in a situation like this.
Cecilia eventually hit out against the home's petty rules and forced the social workers to come up with an alternative.
Within a week she was living with a black foster parent, in the area in which she had grown up, and was able to resume contact with her sister.
The second social consequence of care that emerges from Carlen's work is that not only is the education of the young person seriously neglected, but so, too, is the emotional development.
Cecilia has done well — she is now on a polytechnic degree course — but nothing in her years in care prepared her for independent living.
And for other girls in Carlen's study, the scars of having been in care are more vivid.
Many have been psychologically damaged, like Yasmin, whose continuous self-injury meant that she was moved into a more punitive environment.
Fortunately, over the past few years there have been attempts by social services and local authorities to review the value of care for young people.
(And the Children's Bill currently going through Parliament will seek to give them more rights and protection.)
Voluntary organisations like the Rainer Foundation are at last being listened to and boroughs that ten years ago might have had a dozen children's homes now have only a couple.
Such successes have pushed social workers and government agencies to consider preventative interventionist work, with the girl in question and with her family.
The CARLI (Care Alternatives Resources Liaison Information) project in Basildon brought together Rainer workers with social workers in an attempt to reduce the move into care of over 100 young girls.
Day care, counselling, group activities and continuous support reversed this trend and, in recognition of the difficulties that often emerge between teenage girls and step-parents, a support group was set up to arbitrate and seek solutions.
Other initiatives have also developed.
Where a period of ‘cooling’ care seems inevitable, a ‘planned care experience’, with set deadlines and clear outcomes, is recommended.
Where abuse is disclosed, a teenage girl will be counselled and provided with ‘safe, defensible space’ in the form of a foster home or place in a hostel.
The value of early intervention is stressed.
It is vital, however, that agencies involved in alternatives to care continue to listen to those who have been through the system.
None of Cecilia's ‘placements’, for example, managed to create anything vaguely resembling the warmth and informality of a real home.
She was forced time and again to face the fact that, for so many of those into whose care she was put, it was just a job.
‘What I would like to see,’ she says, ‘is more regular checks done on those who work in care or offer homes to young people, because once they get through the vetting, if anything goes wrong, then it's always you who's to blame.
Nobody ever points the finger at them.’
See Young Guardian on page 17 for more on coping with life after care.
Guardian Women is edited by Louise Chunn PAGE wom
A big shove-off for the boat people News round-up.
By us75Melanie McFadyean
IT WAS 3am when prison officers in riot gear ran into Phoenix House holding centre in Hong Kong.
Francis Maude, the Foreign Office minister responsible for Hong Kong, called them ‘counsellors’.
Hong Kong's chief secretary, Sir David Ford, said: ‘Our first concern was the safety and dignity of the people concerned.’
The people, who accused the authorities of assault, were 26 children, 17 women and eight men, herded on to an aeroplane and sent, against their will, back to Vietnam, a country from which they had fled.
America disapproved of the repatriation but did not offer to take any refugees.
Vietnam's acute poverty, which the boat people are trying to escape from, is a legacy of the war the Vietnamese won against the US.
The world was outraged.
But nobody made a fuss about another repatriated group, the 55 people sent back last week to mainland China by the Hong Kong authorities.
This year 13,000 illegal Chinese emigrants have been repatriated from Hong Kong.
They return to the government which massacred the students demonstrating peacefully for democracy in Tiananmen Square in June.
APSYCHOLOGIST whose research suggests that almost a fifth of pupils are being bullied has called for government action to tackle the problem.
An official campaign almost halved bullying in Norway and similar action should be taken in Britain, said Dr Peter Smith of Sheffield University.
His survey of 1,000 children found that 18.3 per cent of secondary and 17.1 per cent of middle school pupils claimed to have been bullied.
Many said they were regularly bullied — 8 per cent of secondary pupils at least once a week and 5.5 per cent of middle school pupils several times a week.
GOODBYE to the lager lout?
A survey has found that people under 24 are cutting down on alcohol.
Five years ago 440,000 young people went to a pub once a day; the number is down by 150,000.
There are three million more teetotallers than 10 years ago, with an increasing trend away from liquor, especially among young women.
More than 80 per cent of 18 to 24-year-olds agreed with random breath testing and ID cards, as did more than half of the 15-17 age group.
Bad news for publicans and wine merchants, good news for livers.
TUT TUT.
Cards depicting Santa in horribly compromising positions are selling like hot cakes.
A spokesman from the firm responsible said: ‘Some of the designs might be a bit near the knuckle, but the bonking snowmen have been so sucessful that we've commissioned even more variations for next year.’
Mary Whitehouse said they are ‘contrary to the spirit of Christmas.
Decent people should refuse to buy anything from shops that sell these cards.’
NO MISTLETOE this year in Minnesota's State University.
A psychology instructor complained it ‘sanctified uninvited endearments’ and encouraged sexual harassment.
Law Report.
Abuse of justice may follow delay in investigation:.
Queen's Bench Divisional Court Regina v Bow Street Magistrate, ex parte Director of Public Prosecutions Regina v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate, ex parte Cherry Before Lord Justice Watkins and Mr Justice Garland December 19 1989
MERE delay which gives rise to prejudice and unfairness may by itself amount to an abuse of the process of the court.
In such a case the court has power to stop the prosecution in its tracks.
The Divisional Court held that the delay in investigating and bringing proceedings against police officers involved in incidents arising out of an industrial dispute at Wapping in East London, amounted to an abuse of the process of the courts and the prosecutions were stopped.
The facts.
On January 24 1987 a demonstration with 12,000 to 15,000 demonstrators took place at the premises of newspaper proprietors in Wapping and there were many arrests.
It was alleged that police officers over- reacted or committed breaches of discipline and even criminal offences.
The next day the Metropolitan Police Commissioner referred the complaints to the Police Complaints Authority.
The authority decided to wait until all the evidence was in before interviewing any officer involved in the incident.
Nobody was interviewed until a year later.
On December 17 1987 a notice under regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 was served in general on the officers under investigation.
On February 17 1988 a formal specific regulation 7 notice was served on PC Cherry telling him of the allegations.
On May 3 1989 committal proceedings began in respect of six officers who were charged with conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.
Mr Bartle, the stipendiary magistrate, declined jurisdiction to hear the charges on the ground that the delay in the investigation and prosecution of the case constituted an abuse of the process of the court.
The DPP sought judicial review of that decision.
At the end of May 1989 committal proceedings began in respect of PC Cherry who was charged with unlawful wounding.
Another stipendiary magistrate, heard argument about abuse of the process and came to the opposite conclusion from Mr Bartle, namely that delay in Mr Cherry's case did not constitute an abuse of the process.
Mr Cherry sought judicial review.
The decision.
For the DPP Miss Goddard said that mere delay is not capable of being an abuse of the process unless the delay is so great that what is sought by the Crown is no longer the vindication of justice but amounts to oppression or harassment of a defendant.
In long and complex cases delay was inevitable and had to be accepted, so why then, she asked, should that not be so in a simple case.
Mr Lawson asserted that the right to a trial without delay had long been established: see Magna Carta Chapter 40: and such a fundamental principle was valueless unless a court had power to enforce it by not tolerating abuse of its process.
Lord Justice Watkins said the Divisional Court could review an order of the magistrates' court made for the purpose of preventing an abuse of its process and had done so on a number of occasions.
Delay was nowadays, perhaps too often, a feature in both civil and criminal cases and had been considered by courts countless times.
There was no warrant for not following the ample precedent for the proposition that mere delay which gave rise to prejudice and unfairness could by itself amount to an abuse of the process.
What had to be demonstrated to the court was that the delay complained of had produced genuine prejudice and unfairness.
All the relevant facts were before the two magistrates who were weighing them up to decide whether it was more likely than not that there was prejudice and unfairness that led to an abuse of the process.
The Divisional Court concluded that Mr Bartle exercised his discretion without flaw.
In Mr Cherry's case Mr Lawson submitted that the decision to postpone service of a specific regulation 7 notice was mistaken and contrary to Home Office guidance, particularly when a criminal offence was involved.
Miss Goddard urged that the decision not to serve the notice was correct in view of the complexity of the whole investigation.
In Cherry's case the magistrate's conclusion was that the delay was extreme but justifiable and there was no prejudice.
His Lordship said the power to stop a prosecution in its tracks must only be used in a clear case.
But their Lordships had concluded that in Cherry's case the magistrate's finding that the delay was justified was wholly untenable.
It was perfectly proper to infer prejudice from the mere passage of time: in Cherry's case the magistrate's decision was based on two flawed findings of justification and no prejudice.
The DPP's application was dismissed and Mr Cherry's application was granted.
Appearances: Tudor Owen for the officers in the first case, Edmund Lawson QC and Michael Egan for Mr Cherry, all instructed by Russell Jones & Walker; Ann Goddard QC with Nicholas Ainley in the first case, and with Oliver Sells in the Cherry case, all instructed by the DPP; James Holdsworth instructed by the Treasury Solicitor for both magistrates.
Shiranikha Herbert barrister
Letters: WLW writes: The Czech reformers in their moment of victory were particularly shaken by the death of Andrei Sakharov, the pre-eminent champion of civil rights not only in the Soviet Union but in its sphere of influence as well.
His intelligent and uncompromising struggle was always an inspiration to them in theirs.
Only the other day a leader of the student movement in Prague said that the first letter of support they had received from abroad after baptising the revolution in their blood on November 17 was from him, with the signatures of four other Soviet Academicians.
When the news was broken to Vaclav Havel in the middle of Jon Snow's television interview he stopped the cameras, appalled, much too moved to be able to make an appropriate instant response.
Nicolas Walter adds: Andrei Sakharov was a convinced humanist and a prominent figure in the world humanist movement.
In 1983 he was one of the original members of the international Academy of Humanism, and in 1988 he received the International Humanist Award ‘in recognition of his long-standing contributions to the cause of human rights, the scientific outlook, and the ideals of humanism.’
For twenty years, in fact, he was the most active and admired humanist in the world.
Textbook case of growing Soviet honesty Commentary.
By Jonathan Steele
SPARE a thought, as the Eighties come to an end, for the new-wave re-writers of Soviet history.
Over the past three years they have turned one of the most dishonourable Soviet professions into something worthy of admiration.
The lies, omissions, and distortions which used to characterise historical research and teaching have come to an end and, with every day, honesty about the past is capturing more territory.
It is not just a question of new ground being broken in the academic journals and literary magazines.
An astonishingly frank, and therefore pessimistic, view of Soviet history is now the basis of instruction in Soviet schools.
Take the latest ‘History of the Soviet Union’ for children in the final two years of school, which my son, Benjamin, brought home the other day.
In some areas it goes further in its handling of Stalinism than the conventional wisdom in the Soviet media, and certainly than official party spokespeople have done.
Children used to be told of one triumph after another.
In the previous textbook printed in 1981 the chapter on Stalin's campaign against the kulaks was headed: ‘The victory of collective structures in the countryside’.
The Stalin constitution of 1936 was called ‘The Constitution of Victorious Socialism’.
Now everything is upside down.
The new book talks of the 1936 constitution as ‘a contradiction between word and deed’.
On paper, it says, the constitution was a step towards genuine democracy by providing for direct and secret elections, and widening citizens' rights.
‘In fact it contradicted the practice of Stalinism, and actually made it illegal.
The constitution and daily life were in sharp divergence.
This was obvious to anyone who could think,’ it says.
In an almost throw-away sentence the book gives one of the highest figures for the number of those whom Stalin killed or imprisoned during collectivisation and the purges: ‘According to preliminary estimates, the total number of victims of the repressions was around 40 million.’
The textbook discusses the Nazi-Soviet pacts, and in particular condemns the Treaty of Friendship, ‘which caused consternation among Soviet people and Communists abroad.’
It points out that Stalin wiped out the entire leadership of the Polish Communist Party in 1937.
It attacks Soviet policy in the winter war with Finland, and says the recognition of a puppet Communist government set up by emigre Finnish Communists was a serious mistake.
All these points were approved for printing some months before they became official policy.
The textbook is vague on the sensitive issue of annexation of the Baltic states.
But it does state that ‘immediately after Soviet power had been restored there as a result of complicated processes in international and internal life’ abuses of power and human rights violations were committed.
It is not surprising that the total reversal of the ideology of the past is having its effect on Soviet pupils.
Benjamin reports that his classmates openly say things which were never said a year ago.
‘Lenin is to blame’ and ‘If we hadn't had the revolution we would at least be living like people’are two typical sentiments.
Nowadays the term ‘comrade’ with which pupils addressed each other in class debates is only mentioned derogatively.
The new textbook is the second one to have emerged since the crisis of early 1988 when the authorities announced that school graduation exams in history were being abolished.
The gap between what history teachers were telling their classes and what people instinctively knew to be true had become unbearably wide.
Teachers ran the risk of looking like idiots or liars.
A re-written textbook was rushed out last autumn, but it was little better than its predecessors.
Stalin was praised as a great theorist and organiser, and for crushing Bukharin's ‘rightist deviations’.
The latest textbook is an enormous improvement.
Two of its three authors are among the leading radical historians.
Yuri Korablev, deputy chairman of the Scientific Council on Complex Problems of the History of the Great October Socialist Revolution was one of the first to publish an article recognising that Trotsky was the driving force behind the creation of the Red Army.
Yuri Borisov is a section head at the Academy of Science's Institute of History.
Both men have been prominent in the academic debates which have helped to make the current revolution in historical studies one of the most significant of the many upheavals Gorbachev has sanctioned.
A parcel from London recently landed on my desk with what turns out to be the best analysis of it, Soviet History in the Gorbachev Revolution by Professor R W Davies of Birmingham University's Centre for Russian and East European Studies (Macmillan, hardback £29.50, paperback £7.99).
Davies points out that Gorbachev took a conservative attitude to Soviet history for the first 18 months of his time in power.
Even his magnum opus, Perestroika, written in the summer of 1987, contained the amazing notion in its first edition that ‘if it had not been for collectivisation, we could have died from hunger in the war’.
The main impetus for change came from Gorbachev's close colleague, Alexander Yakovlev, who was the first Politburo member to ask publicly whether there had been alternatives to the command-administrative system.
He has also been the main advocate of pluralism, and of not assuming there is only one correct interpretation of the past.
He was probably responsible for the corrective Gorbachev gave in January last year to his own speech on the 70th anniversary of the revolution in 1987.
That speech disappointed many analysts with its cautious assessment of the l920s and 1930s and its justification of rapid industrialisation.
Two months later Gorbachev was saying his comments were not the Tablets of Moses.
‘The understanding of our history we achieved in preparing for the 70th anniversary of October is not something frozen and given once and for all.
It will be deepened and developed in further research,’ he declared.
The new openness expressed in the academic debates, and the latest school textbook, still leaves many issues unanswered.
The acquisition of the Baltics, and post-war policy in Eastern Europe are areas crying out for more honesty.
There are even bigger issues: the role which Lenin played in preparing the ground for Stalin, an objective assessment of Trotsky's contribution, and the feasibility of alternatives to industrialisation at the end of the 1920s.
In many ways literature has run ahead of history.
Professional researchers are still some way behind.
Solzhenitsyn's Gulag Archipelago is published.
August 1914 and its sequels will come out shortly.
If Soviet historians have not had time to enter party and state archives, why not publish authoritative foreigners — Isaac Deutscher, E H Carr and Davies himself?
With luck it may be only a matter of time.
Already we can safely say goodbye to that old Soviet joke about the Stalinist re-writing of history —‘The future is certain: the past is unpredictable’.
Factory life in focus Critics' choice Visual art..
By Mary Clarke
CHRIS KILLIP is one of the best of contemporary descriptive photographers, and this morning he opens a rather special exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum, an account of the way that Pirelli tyres are made, from Malayan rubber, at the factory in Burton-on-Trent.
He spent a month there, and his photographs show that the production of tyres, which are things that we take for granted, depend on individuals, their skills, and a surprising amount of physical effort.
Factory life in the age of automation has never recently been so closely or sensitively examined.
The New Contemporaries exhibition at the ICA has been chosen from London art colleges.
The painting is not nearly as good as the recent Young Contemporaries show in Manchester, where the sculpture was non-existent.
And at the ICA sculpture is lively.
What can this mean?
Has three-dimensional art become the natural expression of the capital?
Or has the show been dominated by a faction from Goldsmith's College?
This has been Eric Gill's year, and 140 of his engravings are at Sally Hunter.
Go before the end of the week.
Also closing is Agnew's Salute To Turner, which ends on Friday evening.
Bids are invited (in aid of the National Trust) for paintings by 50 contemporary artists including Bert Irvin, William Tillyer, Patrick Procktor, David Gentleman and Bernard Dunstan.
The old fogies tend to be the best.
There's an interesting mixed show of American masters at Fabian Carlsson, and the National Gallery puts some trecento painters under the restorers eye in the latest exhibition of the series Art In The Making.
The most interesting show out of London is Miro: Sculpture, which has opened at the Southampton City Art Gallery; 37 bronzes are on show, each one of them made by a Catalan, anarchist, sex-mad Santa Claus
Dance.
By Mary Clarke
CHRISTMAS is upon us.
The Royal Ballet embarks on a run of Ashton's Cinderella on Friday.
Two performances on Boxing Day; assorted casts, full details of ballet casting from 01-240 9815.
Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet at the Wells dance the MacMillan triple bill of Danses Concertantes, Las Hermanas and Solitaire tonight, and from tomorrow until December 28 give David Bintley's character-comedy ballet Hobson's Choice (no performance on Boxing Day).
English National Ballet start their Christmas season at Royal Festival Hall next Tuesday and give The Nutcracker in the Peter Schaufuss staging until January 20.
Twice daily from December 27 to January 6.
Thereafter Saturday matinees on January 13 and 20.
Box office 01-928 8800.
Channel 4 has a variety of dance programmes, namely Maguy Marin's bizarre version of Cinderella on Christmas Eve; An Evening for Armenia, the Covent Garden gala of earlier this year, on Christmas Day; the ubiquitous movie Red Shoes and English National Ballet in Swan Lake (Evelyn Hart and Schaufuss in the leads) on Boxing Day.
Check times with TV Times, see listings for other details In My Generation by Nick Cass of Manchester; New Contem- poraries, ICA Gallery: see Critics' choice Maria Almeida in the title role and Jonathan Cope as the Prince in the Royal Ballet's production of Ashton's Cinderella PHOTOGRAPH: LESLIE E. SPATT A detail from Carel Weight's Turner Goes To Heaven; Agnew's: see Critics' choice.
Moira Shearer and Robert Helpman in Red Shoes, one of Channel 4's Christmas dance offerings: see Critics' choice
Appreciation: Laurie Pavitt.
This was not a matter of political convenience.
I was drawn to Laurie at first meeting, when the local Co-operative Party nominated him as candidate for the 1959 general election.
From the bottom of the list of nominees he climbed to the top.
Laurie had a warmth of personality in all his doings with people and politics.
For me his was pluralist socialism at its best — in the service of the community.
A pacifist, co-operator, Third World volunteer, borough councillor, heartfelt socialist, he served the people of Brent warmly and well for 28 years.
In the Commons he was an independently minded, but loyal member of the Parliamentary Labour Party.
His concern for and knowledge of the NHS was widely recognised — and respected, though he never achieved the sort of ministerial office for which he was well qualified.
We marched together to and from Aldermaston, we worked together for co-operative socialism, we campaigned together for health, welfare, employment, education and housing in our ‘inner city’ constituencies.
We worked for a wider Europe, international peace, development and disarmament.
Always he was an inspiration.
Laurie had a passion and a warmth for people rather than the state.
He represented the British Labour Movement at its best.
He stayed in Parliament despite ill health to ensure the good health of the the Labour party he believed in.
I am so pleased to think that his kind of socialism ‘without the state’ is now coming to the fore again in Labour politics.
We have much to bless and indeed warmly remember him for.
John Heddle.
MP toed the line:.
THE record of John Heddle showed the Conservative MP for Mid-Staffordshire as accident-prone, impulsive and self-promotional rather than self-destructive.
If the archetypal Tory of the 1979 intake was a rent-a-quote property dealer who backed Mrs Thatcher to the death and the death penalty to the hilt, Mr Heddle can be called a sad loss to the Two Nations Tendency.
A chartered surveyor, he talked himself into the chairmanship of the Conservative backbench environment committee and in 1987 he tried to curb gazumping by a system of forfeits.
His most obvious weakness, like his death, was localised in cars.
As a new-boy, he had already been labelled as the MP who found himself driving seven miles the wrong way on the M6 until he was stopped by a patrol and banned for six months.
In April this year, he was arrested in Altea, near Benidorm, during a dispute with a policeman about a parking ticket.
Only three weeks ago, Benidorm's public prosecutor demanded a year's imprisonment and a fine if the MP were to be convicted on a charge of obstructing the police.
Perhaps he remembered all too clearly his 1986 suggestion that ‘Britons guilty of drunken and disreputable behaviour should have their passports endorsed, with automatic confiscation after three endorsements’.
His parliamentary interventions were not confined to property, housing and environmental questions.
He shuddered, for instance, at the prospect of school textbooks containing anything of a ‘salacious, blasphemous or subliminal political nature’.
His vestigial liberalism or compassion persuaded him to resist the introduction of the poll tax for nurses and other deserving persons — but the Whips knew him as a man who would always toe the lobby line with a specious ministerial assurance, such as Nicolas Ridley's promised poll tax rebate of £130 millions.
After all, he had always attacked the rating system, and especially Labour councils which had ‘hoarded and boarded’ inner city land and buildings for years.
And he was young enough to hope for something better than a pat on the head from the Leaderene.
C.P.D. (Bentley) John Heddle, born September 15, 1941; died December 19, 1989.
Knocking in vain on Labour's door If you're not in a union, attempting to join a local branch of the Labour party can be a maddening experience, says Jane Furnival.
FOR SEVERAL years, my husband has been trying to join the Labour Party.
What's the problem?
Is he a Trotskyite or a right-wing mole?
No.
He has no excessive tendencies, apart from a fascination with Eastern European motorbikes.
An advertising writer, he's energetic, articulate and presumably just the sort of person Labour say they want to recruit.
But he's not allowed into the Labour Party because he's not a union member.
He was once in the party while a student at Cambridge.
But he drifted away, disenchanted, when he came to London.
Then ‘sheer revulsion’ at the Government, combined with Neil Kinnock's TV campaign for more members, pricked his conscience.
When a canvasser called during the election run-up, he decided to rejoin.
The man took away the application form and the £12 fee.
A few weeks later, the Streatham area organiser phoned.
‘You haven't filled in the bit about union membership,’ she said.
‘That's because I don't belong to a union: they don't have them in advertising,’ he explained.
‘Anyway, shouldn't union membership be a separate decision from joining a political party?’
The area organiser responded: ‘It's a local rule, and I can tell you now that the committee will reject your application unless you're in a union.’
To prove her point, she offered the phone number of a solicitor who had joined a union just to get in.
Astonished, he asked her to put in his application anyway, to see what would happen.
We pondered our next move.
Kinnock's TV commercial hadn't mentioned union membership.
Should we complain to the Advertising Standards Authority?
Unfortunately, they have no power over political parties, who aren't expected to be legal, decent, honest or truthful.
Instead, I phoned Labour Party headquarters and spoke to Mr Whitty, the person in charge of national membership.
He explained that union membership was an outdated rule.
The idea was to encourage people to join a union — not ban them if they couldn't.
He would sort it out, he said.
Then a rejection letter arrived from Streatham branch — because he wasn't a union member.
However, they graciously added, could they keep his £12 joining fee ‘as a donation to party funds?’
He wrote to Mr Kinnock.
‘I got an indignant reply from a Ms Norris, saying in effect how dare I trouble Mr Kinnock with this low-level stuff,’ he says.
‘They passed it downwards.’
When he heard nothing, he wrote to headquarters again.
Still no response.
By this time, we got the impression that the gulf between Walworth Road and Streatham was so great, it was like trying to control unruly hill tribes beyond Hadrian's Wall.
At the same time, our cleaning lady, an ex-bus conductress and union member, tried to join the same Streatham branch and was turned away because they were ‘too busy’.
Now we have moved to Dulwich, my husband has had another go at joining.
He filled out the form.
Three weeks ago came the ominous phone call.
‘Are you a union member?’
Patiently, he explained that he now ran his own fledgling advertising agency.
‘Oh, a company director?
Let's put you down as self-employed and get round it that way.’
He was assured that he would hear in a few days.
Then — silence.
It looks like the shop door has once more closed in his face.
The hell that is Easterhouse Dominic and his family live in one of Glasgow's worst housing estates.
This-in his words-is his story.
After five years on the dole in Easterhouse, Dr Bob Holman (the estate's campaigning community worker) gave me a job working with him as a neighbourhood worker.
I enjoyed the job and did pretty well.
But my housing conditions were constantly weighing on us.
Our flat is one of the two occupied in the block.
The empty upstairs became the haunt of druggies and our small children would sometimes carry in their needles.
Here is what has happened to me.
April 27, 1989.
Bob sends a letter to Housing Dept supporting my request for a transfer.
June 28.
Door kicked in and rented video stolen.
I have to pay for this.
August 12.
Came home from a week's camp with local youngsters to find that the whole house had been ransacked, windows smashed, kids toys broken, the water boiler ripped out and everything wet.
Schools clothing grant giro, my medical card, fishing rods, my son's snooker cue all stolen.
Books, letters, clothes, scattered everywhere.
Living room and bedrooms totally vandalised.
August 15.
Submitted another letter from Bob to Housing Dept in which he expresses concern about the effects on the children and asking for us to be re-housed in a safer area.
Had interview with housing official who stated that I had to transfer the tenancy from my wife's name to mine and then something would be done within a week.
My wife has left with the two girls saying ‘I canny take any more’.
They are in a flat for the homeless.
August 17.
Housing official signed transfer forms and I was told I would receive notification of anew house within a week.
August 19.
Water boiler in flat above stolen, water pours on to us.
Still no hot water in our flat as council not replaced our boiler.
Kids had bath at Bob's.
September 3.
Door kicked in again.
They stole my two guitars and hi-fi.
September 4.
Door kicked in yet again.
The replacement water tank and copper piping (which the council had brought) stolen along with more of our stuff.
September 5.
Broken into again.
Amplification stolen.
Informed police once more.
September 6.
This was the day when I decided that I'd had enough.
I totally cracked up and got steaming drunk.
Phoned Bob to tell him.
He came.
Suicidal, admitted to hospital.
September 7.
Released from hospital.
Saw psychiatrist and was assured that a bed would be made available at Parkhead hospital as soon as possible.
On sedation.
September 8.
Saw a social worker who listened but was of no real practical help.
By this time I was a nervous wreck and The house in Govan was a shambles.
There was no way I could bring up children there.
the kids were terrified to stay in the house.
I tried to explain about the break-ins, the gangs, the violence but he was adamant.
He went on to say that if I did not return I would be making myself voluntarily homeless and would never be re-housed.
September 11.
Saw police detective sergeant who was very understanding.
Told me that one youth was in custody and another due to appear in court for the break-ins.
But other gang members warned my kids that I was to get slashed for grassing.
Saw another social worker who got on to housing.
The official referred to me to the Homeless Unit.
I made the long trip with my boys but the unit told me I should not be there.
Back to square one.
After a long debate, they finally agreed to put us up for the night.
By this time the kids were as confused as I was.
September 12.
The Homeless Unit took us to the Housing Department.
Waited 2 ½ hours to see the same official.
I now handed in a form explaining that my dad lived alone, is blind and disabled, and would benefit from me moving to his part of Glasgow.
I was told this would take time to go through.
September 13.
The Housing again.
The official told me that the form was not enough and that I needed a letter from my dad saying he lived alone.
He then said that he now had confirmation from the police and that I qualified for a transfer and would receive an offer for Govan (where my dad is) within a week.
September 14.
Got offer for house in Govan.
It was a shambles, gangs openly using drugs in the street, every second house boarded up.
There was no way I could bring up young children there.
The place should be closed down by the Environmental Health Department.
Back to housing, handed in a letter from my doctor which states that the root of my illness is my current housing situation.
September 15.
Housing official too busy to see me.
Handed in letter from my father stating that he had no other relatives in the area and because of his blindness and disability he would benefit from them moving into the area.
Now I've been informed that I have £200 rent arrears.
Filled in a new rent rebate form.
SINCE the start of this saga I've lost my wife, who is currently staying in a homeless flat with two of the children.
My mental health has deteriorated to such an extent that I had to be admitted to hospital and am currently on sedation.
I've resigned from my job because I can't cope.
My three boys are terrified to sleep in their own beds.
I started drinking heavily although the medication has stopped this.
If I could get a home where my kids could grow up with daily fear and where I could also help my father, I could push this hell out of my mind and start afresh with my family.
Is this too much to ask?
Memory loss by the state Erlend Clouston reports on the difficulty people like Debbie Finni have in obtaining treatment for brain disorders like the amnesia she suffered four years ago.
WHOSE job is it to look after people whose bodies are incapacitated, for one reason or another?
Most people assume the government will lay on something.
A few may flourish the 14 pages of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act, 1970; seven inches of section 2 specifies a local authority's obligation to lay on just about everything short of a course in elephant skinning: meals, education, holidays, telephones, and recreation are all there in paragraphs (a) to (h).
It looks moderately cast iron.
But it is not.
Nearly two years ago, this page highlighted the condition of Debbie Finni, a 21-year-old Manchester amnesiac trapped by official indifference in a twilight world of video tapes and puzzle books.
BBC television's Brass Tacks subsequently featured Debbie in a programme exposing the inadequacy of the rehabilitation facilities available to Britons with brain injury.
Yet now, three and a half years after Debbie was discharged from hospital, her mother has written a letter to the authorities, bitterly criticising them for ‘bad planning, no comprehension and dismissive attitudes’.
In January 1986, Debbie suffered a brain haemorrhage.
This left her with a severe form of amnesia that reduced her memory span to 20 minutes or less.
She was incapable of work, bewildered by the sudden inexplicability of situations she found herself in.
She could not walk to the shops as there was no guarantee she would arrive there, let alone walk back.
She became informally imprisoned in the family maisonette, unable to cope with cooking, visitors, or any kind of isolation.
Her mother, Freda, separated from her husband, had to keep a 24-hour vigil.
A personable and pretty girl was locked into a lifestyle (the videos, the soap operas, the Jumbo Colouring Pads, mum's ancient friends) that would have bored a tortoise.
Yet, until very recently, the local health authority made no attempt to provide any kind of rehabilitation for their former patient.
The only official compensation is a weekly £76-worth of invalidity and daytime attendance allowance.
‘If Debbie had lost a leg she would have been given a customised artificial limb and provided with physiotherapy at the hospital and at home,’ says Mrs Finni.
‘I don't see why it should be any different if a person loses a brain function.’
Debbie is not alone in her predicament.
It is estimated ‘If I die, they will have to do something for her.
So why can't they do it now?’. that there are close to 200,000 victims of brain injury in the country.
They wander in an administrative mist, abandoned by the neurologists and orthopaedic surgeons who first treated them, ignored by occupational therapists and social workers to whom brain disorder is juju territory.
‘The crux of the matter,’ says Deborah Wearing of the Amnesia Association, ‘is that the system recognises physical disability, mental handicap and mental injury; those three categories have budgets and departments and care units.
But the system does not, so far, recognise brain injury, despite the enormous advances over the past ten years in the study of cognitive, behavioural and memory problems.’
Debbie and Freda Finni know this to their cost.
Debbie has been referred to a Young Disabled Unit and a psychiatric unit (‘On the second day they found her playing cards in the alcoholics’ ward’).
Six months after the Guardian article appeared, two and a half years after she was waved out of their hospital, South Manchester health authority finally agreed to supply a psychologist for two hours a week.
Ms Barbara Speke helps Debbie develop ‘strategies for coping.’
Mrs Finni is grateful for Ms Speke's ‘wonderful’ work.
‘But how much, realistically, can you achieve in two hours?’
Mrs Finni's parental patience finally snapped this summer.
First, Ms Speke was off ill for three months.
Then an attempted entry to a local authority hairdressing course went embarrassingly wrong; it finished with Mrs Finni having to spell out her daughter's handicap to students and a flustered teacher who eventually refused to accept responsibility for a girl who could never be left alone in the classroom.
‘I was absolutely devastated.
It was back to square one: telly 24 hours a day.
What put the top hat on it was, when we came back, Debbie sat on the sofa and cried ‘Mum, I'm so fed up of being amnesic’.
Compared with four years ago, Debbie is improving.
Her memory can sometimes stretch back one hour or more.
She writes letters; propped up on her dresser is a postcard from Greece, sent by an amnesic pen pal who began to correspond after spying Debbie on the Brass Tacks programme.
Supervision need not be so intense.
‘Debbie could certainly be capable of working for a hairdresser in some capacity,’ says Fergus Stewart, a lecturer at the Central Manchester College of Technology where Mrs Finni had Debbie briefly enrolled this spring after her local branch of the Amnesia Association suggested a visit.
The frustration is almost unbearable for the mother.
‘If I die, they will have to do something for her,’ she says.
‘So why can't they do it now?’
Her letter — her distress call — begged that someone do something quickly.
‘Both Deborah and I are at our wits’ end.’
Three weeks after posting copies to Manchester's social services and education departments, the North-west regional health authority and South Manchester health district, Mrs Finni had had no replies.
So the Guardian made some inquiries.
Social Services: ‘Haven't got any letter; maybe it's at the Wythenshawe office?’
It wasn't.
Education: ‘Obviously there is something extraordinary here.
We are arranging a case conference.
We have a lot of sympathy for the family.’
Regional health authority: ‘We are preparing a response.
The person who is writing it is at a meeting so you can't speak to him.’
South Manchester health district: ‘We have put everything we possibly can into this case.
The psychologist really is the tops.
What Mrs Finni may feel is the answer may not actually be the answer.
If there was any extra request for assistance we would look on it favourably.’
And the impressive promises contained in the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act, 1970?
At the Department of Health they said it was Department of Social Security matter.
At Social Security they said nonsense, it must be Health.
Finally, 24 hours later, Health admitted responsibility.
‘Amnesiacs could be covered by the Act.
It doesn't specify conditions.
Everything depends on the degree of the condition, as determined by social services following medical advice.’
Mrs Finni will apply, without much optimism.
‘They're crafty; very hard to get anything out of.’
Debbie's application for attendance allowance has already been squashed on the grounds that she knows the names of her mother, her sister and the Prime Minister.
The Amnesia Association (01 969 0796) is at St Charles Hospital, Exmoor St., London W10 6DZ.
Debbie Finni…trapped by indifferencePHOTOGRAPH: DON McPHEE
At a time of radical change in Hungary, Nick Dallman relives his experiences at the hands of the secret and often brutal state now being dismantled State of fear.
ARAP on the door.
Nerves tighten.
Nowadays in Hungary, when the dismantling of red stars — from public buildings, from railway engines, and perhaps even from the gravestones of party members — has become a minor industry, nobody worries about ominous knocks on the door.
Ten years ago, however, when memories of nocturnal visitors — coming in twos, but more often in fours, hardly bothering to produce a warrant — were still fresh, the noise made hearts miss a beat.
‘We are expecting nobody,’ I hear someone say, but the silhouette at the door, like an exclamation mark at the end of a command, demands attention.
The silhouette materialises into a colonel in uniform, standing at ease, his face breaking into a tentative smile.
‘Hello, old man, you haven't changed a bit in 35 years,’ says the colonel.
That is a lie for a start, I think, as I submit to the customary kiss on both cheeks.
After an absence of so many years, this kissing among men seems an odd thing, but one ought to be thankful for small mercies: at least it is only two kisses and not three, as is the Russian custom.
I am much less worried by the kisses than by the question of the identity of the officer in front of me.
Who is he, I wonder, as I struggle to superimpose a young face on his middle-aged features.
As his hand reaches out for mine, I recollect that at one point in those early post-war years I had a positive dread of men in uniform, and my terror grew in direct proportion with each extra pip.
My aversion to officers, especially those dressed in the dull green of the Wehrmacht, was already well established when, the war over, I ran into an old schoolmate of mine who was well versed in the ways of the then flourishing black market.
Sensing, or knowing, that my days in my native land were numbered, he asked me if I needed foreign currency.
Undeterred by an evasive reply, he told me he could even provide a reliable guide who would conduct me across the border.
The temption was too great to resist.
I turned up at his apartment at the appointed hour.
A maid — a rarity in those puritan and egalitarian days — opened the door.
‘Can I take your coat?’ she asked sweetly.
Suddenly my eyes opened wide: I saw that my faded garment was being hung in the closet next to four well-tailored officers' overcoats, gold stars shining on pale blue epaulets, the insignia of the AVO, the state security police.
A trap had been set, but they had forgotten to camouflage it.
Before she could announce me, I retrieved the coat, muttered a few feeble excuses, and ran.
Barely six months earlier, however, another trap had been laid and I had fallen into it with a resounding thud.
I was doing my third week as a young crime reporter and had just about finished my second and last story of the day when the phone rang.
The police press officer's secretary was on the line: ‘I'm glad your are still there.
We have a story for you.’
‘Fine,’ said I cheerily, ‘I shall be round in a jiffy.’
‘Don't bother,’ came the reply.
‘The inspector in charge is going your way, just wait for him.’
A few minutes later a car drew up, its brakes screeching in the best SS fashion.
Four men burst into the room.
After the clatter and the slamming of the door…silence.
IWAS looking at them uncomprehendingly; they were eyeing me like a cat watches a captured mouse that might yet try to make a dash for freedom.
Then one barked at me: ‘Hand over your revolver!’
‘My what?’
‘Stop wasting time,’ he said.
I would have smiled at the Kafkaesqueness of the situation, had I not broken out in a cold sweat and had I at that stage not been ignorant of Kafka's existence.
The journey to the State Security offices was short; the stay there much longer.
By way of welcome, I was told to stand facing the wall.
This order was not countermanded until the early hours of the morning.
By that time the room had acquired an axis and was gently girating around it.
I was hungry and dizzy.
‘Sit down,’ said the night worker.
‘I need your signature.’
He shone his desk lamp in my face.
I delved into my rather limited reservoir of defiance.
‘You wanted to confuse me.
You have succeeded.
Now I can't even remember my name.’
At this point his heavy hand came into harsh contact with my face.
Later I saw in the mirror that the shape of his palm and fingers was etched in dark red on my skin.
If I had been able to see a copy of the local Communist party paper, I would have learned that I — with many others — had been unmasked as a conspirator and an enemy of the state.
I was in good company.
The then prime minister — another, now forgotten, Nagy — was also accused of conspiracy.
It was never explained how was it possible to conspire against yourself.
Our official unmasking was yet to come.
One afternoon I was bundled on to an open lorry where about 40 others were already shivering in the late autumn frost.
Destination…
Budapest, Andrassy ut 60, taken over without any qualms by the AVO from its fascist secret police predecessors.
By way of diversion we stopped off at the army's counter-intelligence headquarters.
Forty bunks to a barrack room.
Still shivering, we were made to lie down, men and women in adjoining beds.
Four soldiers with submachine guns patrolled the room, and an officer made his rounds at frequent intervals.
Loo time twice a day.
The loos had no doors.
We were taken out one by one and always a soldier stood behind, the barrel of his gun shoved between the prisoner's shoulder blades.
We could hear the women beg: ‘Can't you please move away?’
This plea was always followed by laughter.
Nobody questioned us, and the soldiers never replied if someone dared to speak to them.
In a desperate attempt at humour someone in a neighbouring bed muttered half out loud: ‘The suspense is killing me.’
A gale of laughter.
‘Shut up, you bloody lot,’ shouted a soldier, and and he and his companions started rushing up and down the room.
The commotion brought in the new duty officer, a tall and muscular young lieutenant with a sad, world-weary face.
‘John!’
I cried out in relief and happiness: I thought I recognised him as a former schoolmate, a boy with whom I used to exchange groans about the maths problems whose solutions so frequently eluded us.
He had left our school in our final year, when his parents moved to another town.
But ‘John’ did not respond.
He looked in my direction briefly, but without a flicker of recognition.
I am hallucinating, I said to myself at first: the strain has affected my mind.
During the next two days, before the dungeons of Andrassy ut 60 finally swallowed us, ‘John’ continued to make his rounds.
My eyes followed his every move.
The question of whether he was or was not John became the most important thing in my constricted universe.
I had to convince myself that my grasp of reality was not slipping away.
If it were, the day would come when the man behind the shining table lamp would toss a fountain pen in my direction and tell me to sign a piece of paper, and I would say, what the hell, why not?
But ‘John’ was no help.
He just looked through me.
I was a non-person in the making.
THIRTY-FIVE years later, as these thoughts of my encounters with men in uniform flashed through my mind, the colonel, who by this time I had succeeded in recognising as another former classmate, said to me: ‘Come and have a coffee!’
He grabbed my arm and guided me towards the road.
The coffee came with Unicum, a bitter spirit so much beloved by Hungarians that it is only available in expensive restaurants and hard-currency shops.
Another coffee and two more Unicums later the colonel asked: ‘Do you remember John, who was in the army with me?’
‘Funny you should mention him…
’ I replied.
He cut me short.
‘John died of leukaemia five years ago.
I saw him in hospital a few days before the end.
He told me there was one thing which had deeply troubled him throughout his life, and that was refusing to acknowledge you when you were in trouble.
He asked me to find you and to offer you his apologies and regrets.
So I have made a point of looking you up.’
This called for another Unicum, without coffee this time, and a bottle of sparkling wine as a chaser.
The colonel and I parted the best of friends.
Don't worry, John, all is forgiven…and almost forgotten.
Just tell me one last thing: as everyone is so busy wiping out the memory of the last 40 odd years, do you still want to keep your military headstone with its red star?
Nick Dallman, now an assistant foreign editor at the Guardian, escaped from Hungary to Austria in 1948.
In a bid to get to France, he joined the Foreign Legion, escaping from that two days later.
A tram driver hid him under a seat in return for two packets of cigarettes and he escaped from the Austrian Soviet zone.
He then came to Britain, where he worked on a farm and in a Blackburn cotton mill.
After taking a degree in economics he joined the Sheffield Telegraph, moving to the Manchester Guardian in 1960.
David Brindle finds a cure for many of the ills dogging the NHS's new contract culture The Welsh way to good national health.
AS ARGUMENT over the Government's health reforms shifts to Parliament, and with line-by-line combat over the National Health Service and Community Care Bill, so attention is focusing on the quality of care we should expect and receive.
Labour will use the bill's committee stage, which began yesterday, to argue that the legislation is silent on how care standards will be measured in the NHS's new contract culture and how the views of patients will be taken into account.
The bill is, in this respect, a cart without a horse.
Because it lacks any tangible goals for the delivery and outcome of health care, it remains vulnerable to accusations of crude cost-curbing.
It needs, as a minimum, some complementary statement of aims of what the NHS should achieve as it moves into the next century.
As it happens, there is one.
Published last month, it sets out a strategic intent and direction for the health service, priorities for progress and practical steps to be taken — in Wales.
Not for the first time, the NHS in Wales seems streets ahead of its big brother in England.
In policy areas ranging from mental illness to community nursing to staff development, the Welsh health service has been taking the plaudits.
It came as no surprise in July when the Commons Public Accounts Committee contrasted a shambles over heart disease prevention in England with a ‘vigorous and businesslike’ Welsh approach.
Now, the NHS in Wales shows every sign of making a half-decent fist of the Government's shake-up, whatever its merits, while England stumbles on blindly and hastily.
The changes — opted-out hospitals, GP budgets, the so-called internal market — apply equally throughout Britain.
But while England and, for that matter, Scotland, are being stampeded into adopting them before the ink on the bill is even dry, there is a definite lack of urgency west of Offa's Dyke.
Thus the Welsh Office says: ‘Hospitals have the option to seek self-governing status, but we are not expecting many applications.’
There are, in fact, no applications; nor are there Welsh GPs queuing up to run their own budgets.
As for England's painfully tight April 1991 deadline for the changes, the Welsh prefer to think in terms of the ‘early 1990s’.
‘It's a question of horses for courses, finding the best route forward and adopting the practices to fit that rather than bulldozing your way through without perhaps realising the wider environment in which this needs to work,’ says John Catford, director of the Health Promotion Authority for Wales and professor of health promotion at the University of Wales.
It is Wales which has produced a health planning strategy.
Ian Grist, the junior Welsh minister responsible for health, says he and Peter Walker, the Welsh Secretary, ‘fully recognise the need for the NHS in Wales to be given a clear steer as to its future direction’.
This steer, in brief, sets out 10 key areas of ‘health gain’, ranging from emotional health to cancers, and determines how these should be addressed by ‘people-centred’ planning and effective use of resources.
While much of it may seem blindingly obvious, one non-NHS member of the team behind the strategy points out: ‘Irrespective of the fact that the approach is well recognised in industry, it's totally innovative in NHS terms.
Wales has stolen a march on England.’
To rub salt into England's wounds, Wales has produced an information technology policy to underpin the budgeting, pricing and payment demands of the coming health market.
A computer strategy for England is promised.
But critics charge that the NHS shake-up has already been damaged by the existing technology free-for-all.
As the Welsh policy says, the internal market can only work on the basis of a high level of integration of technology.
Or as Dr Dani Bevan, general manager of Powys health authority puts it: ‘If we don't get the communications right, we can't talk to each other.’
The reasons for Wales's clarity of thinking are not difficult to see: ministers more interested in practical achievement than ideology; an NHS management team together now for five years; and, above all, a district structure and population the size of just one of England's 14 regions.
Is not the answer, then, to devolve responsibility from Whitehall and, in effect, turn England into 14 Waleses?
While the Government claims its plans are all about decentralisation, the new powers the NHS bill gives the Health Secretary suggest otherwise.