

Revaluation will push business rates higher than expected.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE outcome of the first commercial rating revaluation in England and Wales for 16 years has produced increases higher than the Government predicted, it was disclosed yesterday.
Business leaders believe that the new £8.5 billion national business rate will create political and inflationary problems for the Government when it is introduced next April.
Mr Chris Patten, the Environment Secretary, yesterday moved to mitigate the effects of the Inland Revenue revaluation by announcing that the poundage will be set at 34.8 pence in the pound instead of the provisional figure of 36 pence in the pound announced last month.
Draft rating valuation lists showing the new rateable values for 1.5 million businesses will be available from town halls from January 2.
The Government had predicted that rateable values would rise by about seven times, but the revaluation has produced an eightfold increase.
An early Inland Revenue analysis of the revaluation suggest that 240,000 businesses in England face increases of 100 per cent or more in their annual bills; about 230,000 rises between 50 and 100 per cent and a further 390,000 increases of between five and 50 per cent.
Those businesses facing rises are mainly shops and offices in the South.
Ballot winners choose their bills.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
HOME Office and planning issues dominate the concerns of MPs who won places in the private members' ballot for legislative time in the coming session.
All 20 who won places declared their chosen subjects yesterday.
Labour's Mr Martyn Jones, MP for Clwyd South West, heads the list with a bill to give consumers a statutory guarantee of the quality of the goods they buy.
The top seven, all Tories apart from Mr Jones, have the most chance of success, since business managers have set aside seven Fridays for private members' bills.
Mr Michael Mates, MP for Hampshire East, after considering a bill to improve the position of war widows, has opted to make provision ‘for certain debts to carry interest’.
Mr Michael Colvin, MP for Romsey and Waterside, is to bring in an anti-computer hacking bill.
Sir William Shelton, Streatham, aims to tighten the law against kerb crawling and soliciting, and has taken on board a Home Office proposal to abolish the presumption that a boy aged under 14 is incapable of sexual intercourse.
Mr Edward Leigh, Gainsborough and Horncastle, and Mr John Wilkinson, Ruislip-Northwood, have opted for planning changes.
Mr Leigh wants more protection for footpaths and bridleways.
Mr Wilkinson requires developers to get planning permission before demolishing a single house.
The seventh MP, Mr Graham Bright, Luton South, wants more penalties available to the courts against organisers of unlicensed entertainments such as acid house parties.
Among the remaining 13 private members' bills, whose chances are far more dependent on the amount of controversy they attract, are measures to compensate British nuclear test victims, abolish poll tax warrant sales in Scotland, and lay down car telephones standards.
Job tally queried.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
THE Government was challenged yesterday to overhaul its employment statistics as Labour's front bench employment team accused ministers of ‘statistical sleight of hand’ in claiming a huge expansion of jobs in the eighties.
In a briefing document presented by the employment spokesman, Mr Henry McLeish, at Westminster, Labour challenges Government claims that nearly a million jobs were created in 1979-89.
Discounting 440,000 people with two jobs and 470,000 on training courses such as Employment Training and the Youth Training Scheme, the document puts the net figure for employment growth at only 68,000.
The paper, the Jobs Miracle That Never Was, attacks as barely credible Government claims that the economy has seen a ‘jobs miracle’ since 1983, with a net increase of 2.75 million people in employment.
The paper points out that, apart from the 470,000 trainees included in the statistics, a further 500,000 jobs should be discounted if the European Commission's formula of full-time equivalence is applied to the one million new part-time jobs.
It says that 340,000 people with two jobs are being double counted, and there is a discrepancy of one million between the numbers claimed to be in self-employment and those self-employed people paying national insurance.
Labour also pointed to a significant north-south divide on new jobs, with the north having lost 330,000 jobs since 1979, and the south having gained 1.1 million.
Banks abandon student loans.
Plans to introduce top up loans for students faced collapse last night after all the major banks told the Government they were pulling out.
Page 20.
Greener green bill.
The Environment secretary, Mr Christopher Patten, has presented an Environmental Protection Bill making sweeping changes in the way industrial pollution is controlled.
Page 4. £20m contract row.
A £20 million contract for running a new social security computer centre has been awarded to a non-union, American-based company without any other bids being invited.
Page 3.
Lithuania breaks free.
In an historic decision to break with Moscow, the Lithuanian Communist Party has voted by more than 5-1 to declare itself an independent party.
Page 8.
Ethnic recruitment.
The Metropolitan Police are to adopt MPs' proposals for a big recruitment drive among black and Asian communities in 1990.
Page 2.
Ferry deal blocked.
Plans by Sealink and P&O to operate a joint cross-Channel service to combat the threat of the tunnel link have been blocked by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Page 12.
Spies swap.
East and West Germany have set in motion a big spy swap, involving 28 agents, as a sign of rapidly improving relations.
Page 8.
Inflation warning.
Heavy-handed government attempts to curb inflation could jeopardise Britain's chances of exploiting a barrier-free Europe after 1992, MPs warn, amid further evidence of the economy grinding to a halt.
Page 12
US firm wins £20m dole office deal.
By David Brindle, Social Services Correspondent
ACONTRACT worth up to £20 million for running a new social security computer centre was yesterday awarded to a non-union, American-based company without any other bids being invited.
Mr Tony Newton, the Social Security Secretary, was accused of misleading Parliament when he announced in a written reply that Electronic Data Systems had been given the five-year contract for running the centre at Norcross, Lancashire, ‘following consideration of a tender’.
His department later confirmed that there had been no competitive tendering and that no companies apart from EDS, nor the department itself, had been invited to bid.
The National Union of Civil and Public Servants claimed that Mr Newton had given the impression of a tendering exercise having taken place.
Ms Rosie Eagleson, the union's senior official for social security, said: ‘It's totally misleading.
Although he didn't actually say there had been competition, the implication was very strong.’
Earlier this year EDS, an autonomous subsidiary of General Motors, was awarded a five-year contract worth between £10 million and £15 million to run a social security computer centre at Livingston in Scotland.
Leaked Government documents later appeared to suggest civil servants could have run the centre for £2.5 million less.
One of the documents, an apparent memorandum from Mr John Moore, Mr Newton's predecessor, said the choice of EDS was designed to make the computerised benefits network less vulnerable to industrial action.
Livingston and Norcross are two of four area computer centres which will run the social security and pensions systems.
A third, at Washington, Tyne and Wear, is being run by civil servants and a fourth, at Swindon, will be subject to competitive tendering next year.
The department said it had been decided not to invite competing tenders for Norcross because the contract award, worth between £17 million and £20 million over five years, followed so quickly the tendering exercise for Livingston that competition would have been ‘unlikely to yield any improvement in value for money’.
The Civil Service unions are convinced that EDS will win the Swindon contract.
They said they were warned yesterday that the Washington area centre would also be privatised if there were any problems in its running.
Banks drop student loan scheme.
By Education Staff
PLANS to introduce top up loans for students faced collapse last night after all the leading banks told the Government they were pulling out.
Ministers are now isolated as virtually the only supporters of the scheme which has been condemned by Conservative backbenchers, Opposition MPs and students.
The Royal Bank of Scotland said it had pulled out because it saw no continuing need for its participation.
‘We don't wish to be associated with what is a political act [the scheme].’
The proposal is likely to emerge radically altered when details are set out in regulations after the loans legislation is passed.
Labour and student leaders welcomed the banks' decision as a victory for common sense.
The decision leaves in tatters the Government's original plans for a scheme administered by the private sector, and in effect hands control of higher education funding to the Treasury, a blow to the morale of the Department of Education and Science which wants to expand student numbers.
The Government will now take over the Student Loans Company, the Glasgow-based firm set up to lend and collect repayments on the Treasury-financed loans.
It has only two options for collecting repayments of loans worth up to £460 a year — an income tax surcharge, or increased national insurance contributions — unless it sets up an even more costly mechanism.
Mr John MacGregor, the Education Secretary, said the decision would not alter the principles, objectives or framework of the scheme as outlined in the Education (Student Loans) Bill currently going through Parliament.
He insisted the scheme was not in tatters and the main effect of the banks' decision would be to make applying for a loan less convenient for students.
He left open the possibility that Girobank, recently privatised, could be made responsible for collecting repayments and chasing defaulters, the number of whom could rise significantly above the Government's current estimates.
‘I am informed that the Girobank is not in a position to take a decision about full ownership of the company.’
Dr Keith Hampson, a leading Conservative backbench critic of the scheme, said last night: ‘The possibility of getting a workable scheme that is not in a shambles by September must be in severe doubt.’
He added that the decision marked the first nationalisation under a Thatcher government.
Mr John Quinton, chairman of the Committee of London and Scottish Clearing Banks and of Barclays, told Mr MacGregor yesterday that all clearing banks had decided to withdraw from the scheme.
The banks have been hostile to the plans from the beginning but had been waiting for the right moment to withdraw on commercial rather than political grounds.
It is understood that Lloyds was chosen to withhold its co-operation when 10 banks agreed in November to participate in preparations for the scheme's introduction next autumn.
The move was intended to prove that co-operation could damage business.
Students have launched a protest campaign against the 10, by withdrawing, or threatening to withdraw, individual and student union accounts.
Lloyds, the Bank of Scotland and Clydesdale have benefited as students transferred to them.
This enabled the banks to pull out on the grounds that involvement was not commercially justifiable.
Mr Jack Straw, the shadow Education Secretary, called on the Government to abandon the scheme and withdraw the bill.
‘The scheme is now bankrupt…
To claim, as Mr MacGregor has done, that this changes nothing is obvious nonsense.’
Ms Maeve Sherlock, president of the National Union of Students, said: ‘The Government must now take on running a scheme which the best financial experts in the country want nothing to do with.’
It would have to spend large amounts of public money to save face.
However, Conservative students said the banks had failed them.
‘The top up loans scheme is the only way forward for the finance of student maintenance and ultimately students will recognise the logic and necessity of the scheme.’
War breaks tropical dawn.
By Suzanne Dempsey in Panama City
WHEN war breaks out, you don't get much warning.
We were woken a few minutes before one o'clock in the morning by a phone call from a friend who told us that the insistent thudding we could hear was American artillery fire.
Even though life has been tense in recent months, it's still a strange feeling when the city you live in is transformed into a battlefield.
After a normal day at the Panama Canal Commission's public affairs office in Balboa Heights, I had returned to my home in La Boca, formerly part of the canal zone and now on Panamanian territory.
My husband — an American who also works for the commission — and I went to bed after an uneventful evening.
At 12.49am the telephone rang.
Although there was a loud banging noise, it had been so regular that both of us had incorporated it into our dreams.
Now we knew it was artillery, it sounded terribly close.
Looking out of our window we saw US tanks coming over the Bridge of the Americas, which links the west bank of Panama — where some US bases are located — with the east side, on which the rest of the bases, most commission installations, the Panama Defence Forces (PDF) headquarters and Panama City itself, are situated.
From our patio we saw three streaks of red shoot towards Los Rios — a US civilian area.
As we stood there, watching smoke rising from Panama City, nearby machinegun fire sent us running indoors.
We grabbed the baby from her cot and crouched down in the hall of our house, thankful that it is made of concrete rather than wood.
By this time I was shaking and each new thud seemed louder and more terrifying than the last.
My husband kept vigil by a window, because of spasmodic machinegun fire very close by.
We didn't see a single soldier or vehicle and assumed that the US army was blocking off La Boca from the Panama Defence Force, whose local headquarters is only about 300 yards from our house.
At one point, a flare lit up the night sky.
Planes flew overhead constantly.
The artillery petered out somewhat from 3am to 4am and then started again.
At around 6am we heard heavy machinegun fire from the direction of the Deni, the investigative branch of the PDF, about half a mile from the commission headquarters and dangerously close to US and Panamanian civilian housing.
Several rounds from a sub-machinegun indicated that a lone member of the PDF may have got into the neighbourhood.
It is quite light now, but the delicate pinks and yellows of a tropical sunrise are obscured by a thick, black cloud of smoke.
Every now and then, we hear staccato bursts of gunfire, with the occasional thump of artillery.
For me, the daybreak brings new terrors.
Panama is a small place where everyone knows everyone else, and today I must find out which of my friends — US and Panamanian — are dead, wounded or bereaved.
Ceausescu defiant after massacre.
By Ian Traynor in Budapest
PRESIDENT Nicolae Ceausescu of Romania last night defied international condemnation of the massacre of demonstrators by his security forces at the weekend as reports indicated tens of thousands had again taken to the streets of in Timisoara, escalating the crisis.
A state of emergency was last night declared in the district where the killings took place.
Meetings of more than five people were banned and a night curfew was imposed on the western area of Timis near the Yugoslav and Hungarian borders.
Earlier, about 50,000 protesters were reported to have been chanting anti-government slogans in Timisoara and demanding that the bodies of victims be returned to their families.
Hungarian radio said the bodies were being dumped in mass graves.
The East German news agency ADN reported that up to 4,000 people had been killed.
It quoted Romanians living in East Germany who been in contact with relatives.
The Yugoslav Consul General in Timisoara, Mr Mirko Atamnarkovic, was quoted by the Yugoslav news agency Tanjug as saying tens of thousands were demonstrating in the town.
He said security forces were out in strength but did not intervene.
Tanjug also claimed 36 children were among those killed at the weekend and police fired into the bodies of the wounded.
The Hungarian report said many members of the security forces joined the insurgents, who were acquiring weapons, probably from the army and police.
As the Kremlin issued strong signals to the dictatorship, and the Hungarian Socialist and Yugoslav Communist parties broke links with the Romanian party, President Ceausescu went on national television to blame the violence on ‘hooligans, terrorists and spies’ organised from abroad.
Within hours of his return from a three-day visit to Iran, he said ‘imperialist and revanchist circles and foreign espionage centres’ were behind the actions.
The remarks appeared to be directed principally at Hungary.
Both countries have long been embroiled in a row over the Hungarian minority in northern and western Romania.
As more reports emerged, putting the death toll in Timisoara between several hundred and several thousand, Mr Ceausescu said the security forces had displayed great patience and had fulfilled their duty towards ‘the homeland, people and socialist achievements’.
His address, delivered with the entire government and his wife Elena lined up behind him, did nothing to tackle the problems that have sparked discontent.
The Hungarian Foreign Minister, Mr Gyula Horn, broke his country's silence on the crisis to say that several hundred people had been killed or wounded at the weekend.
He accused the Romanian authorities of behaving brutally and demanded the immediate release of Pastor Laszlo Tokes, the ethnic Hungarian clergyman whose harassment by the authorities
Turn to page 20, col 3.
continued from page one sparked the wave of unrest.
Hungarian radio reported that people arriving from Bucharest said the army had been mobilised and that reservists were called in on Tuesday night.
The Defence Minister, Mr Ferenc Karpati, told the Hungarian parliament that the troops used were not from the regular army but from the Securitate secret police, whose uniforms are similar and who are equipped with tanks and sophisticated weapons.
Mr Zoltan Kiraly, a Hungarian MP, demanded an emergency Warsaw Pact meeting on the crisis.
Meanwhile, Mr Lhea Munteanu, a Soviet MP from Moldavia, reported further demonstrations yesterday in the towns of Iasi and Arad, and elsewhere in the country.
‘These events are occurring now because human rights have been violated for a long time,’ he said.
The strongest signal of Moscow's fury with the intransigent Romanian regime came when Pravda, the Communist Party daily newspaper, reported favourably on the demonstrators in Timisoara, saying that they were looking for rapid reforms in the country.
The whereabouts of Pastor Tokes remained unclear, amid unconfirmed reports that he had been murdered.
A Hungarian source told the Guardian the pastor's family believed he had been taken to a village in north-eastern Transylvania, near the Hungarian border.
A Romanian national table tennis player, Mr Simion Crisan, is reported to have appealed to West Germany for political asylum, according to sports officials.
Clergy take the lead, page 8
Police drive to recruit more blacks.
By John Carvel and David Rose
THE Metropolitan Police are launching a recruitment campaign among blacks and Asians next year following criticism by MPs yesterday of low recruitment figures and a disturbingly high wastage rate among the ethnic minorities.
So far this year 26 black or Asian officers have left while only 35 have been recruited.
London police chiefs are understood, however, already to have been planning an initiative early next year which would lower height requirements.
These are seen as a barrier to many Asians.
The package will also include ‘special access courses’ so that aspiring black recruits without the required educational qualifications can satisfy admissions board standards.
There will be an intensive campaign of advertisements, local authority initiatives, and seminars.
Black personalities are being approached to become ‘father figures’ who would encourage suspicious youths to regard the police service as an acceptable career.
There may also be bursaries and scholarships for black undergraduates — an ethnic version of schemes run in the universities by the armed services.
The report by the all-party Commons home affairs committee yesterday on racial attacks and harassment finds that serious reported offences have declined but that the total of less serious incidents has increased.
‘Most disturbingly…the vulnerability of the Asian community worsened between 1981 and 1987.
‘At present, only about one per cent of police officers in England and Wales and about 1.5 per cent of Metropolitan Police officers are from racial minorities.’
The impetus of ethnic recruitment drives in 1986 and 1987 had been lost.
The committee proposes relaxation of height requirements and an equal opportunities policy ‘based on a genuine commitment to increase the proportion of police officers from the ethnic minorities to match the proportion in the local population.’
Ethnic minority groups account for 3.9 per cent of the economically-active working age population in Britain and about 10 per cent in London.
There are no black or Asian officers in the ranks of chief superintendent or above and only one superintendent, recently appointed in Leicestershire.
There is also very low ethnic recruitment to police civilian jobs.
The MPs also call on the Home Office to investigate the frequency of racial attacks.
Mr Keith Vaz, a Labour member of the committee said: ‘There is still a lack of confidence in the police force among black and Asian people.
The statistics we have on the number of racial incidents are not accurate because there is gross under-reporting.’
The committee concludes: ‘Despite the progress made racism and its most ugly manifestations, racial attacks and harassment, are still frightening realities for many British citizens.’
Mr David Waddington, the Home Secretary, deplored ‘this obnoxious and criminal behaviour.’
Racial attacks and harassment; Home Affairs Committee; HMSO £7.40
Ford faces strike over pay deal.
By Keith Harper Labour Editor
THE Ford Motor Company faces an all-out strike next month following the 4-1 ballot rejection yesterday of a two-year pay deal by its 32,000 hourly paid workers.
They will be pressing for a settlement of more than 10 per cent in what will be the most severe test of the Government's inflation policy.
The two-year deal amounted to 9.5 per cent for the first year and inflation plus 2.5 per cent for the second.
Improvements in certain allowances were made, described as divisive by the unions, but the company has refused to compromise on a reduction in the shorter working week.
Ford dismissed an immediate meeting with the unions but did not rule out talks after Christmas.
It said that a strike would be damaging to the company and to its staff.
Production closed down at Ford last night for the Christmas period.
Plants will open again on January 2.
Staff voted 20,343 in favour of action, with 4,727 against.
The electricians are holding a postal ballot with the results announced after Christmas.
The unions said that they were looking for the second week in January to begin an all-out stoppage.
Mr Jimmy Airlie, secretary of the Ford union side, said: ‘We expected to get a favourable majority.
This exceeded even our expectations.’
Mr Jack Adams, chairman of the union side, said that action would have to take place within a 28-day period from yesterday's anouncement or it would be ruled out of order.
He thought the big strike vote was partly due to Ford's record profits last year of £673 millions.
The company is likely to be affected by a series of unofficial stoppages before any official action begins, as it was in the lead up to negotiations when Ford's final offer was rejected last month.
Patten preserves Foxley Wood.
THE ENVIRONMENT Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, yesterday finally rejected plans to build a new town of 4,800 homes at Foxley Wood, Hampshire, saying the county council should come up with fresh county-wide plans.
Dismissing an apppeal against a planning decision, the minister said he did not believe it was possible to solve Hampshire's housing problems by allowing pockets of development.
But the planning authorities could not resist all new development.
Nor could they turn their backs on the housing needs of the people already living in the county.
‘That is why I want Hampshire county council to come forward quickly with fresh proposals on a county-wide basis which have regard to the current regional guidance housing provision figures.’
It is estimated Hampshire will need 66,500 new homes between 1991 and 2001.
Mr Patten said that his Foxley Wood decision did not imply rejection of the concept of new settlements.
Mr Patten also rejected plans for 2,500 homes at Eversley and 2,000 at Hook, both in Hampshire.
‘Polluter pays’ philosophy underpins bill.
By Paul Brown.
THE central plank of the bill is the curb on the country's biggest industrial polluters by making them use the best available technology to cut discharges.
They will pay for licences to release substances they cannot economically recycle or recover.
More sweeping changes to deal with the threat of global warming will have to wait for the Government's environment white paper under discussion in cabinet committee.
The bill brings a host of new controls and regulations which, if fully implemented, would make polluting the environment an expensive option both for industry and individuals.
The big question mark over it is whether there is the political will in Whitehall to keep Mr Patten's pledge to provide the resources to police the environment.
One of its key provisions is the creation of registers, open to the public, which show details of licences and who pollutes the environment.
The original promise was to allow enough information to be placed on record for the public to know who was breaking the law, and when, so prosecutions could be brought if necessary.
If the Government backs off from this promise and retreats into ‘average’ discharges, avoiding mention of breaches of licences, public confidence in the bill will be undermined.
Pollution Control: A comprehensive plan is introduced for modernising pollution control by looking at discharges from big factories to air, water and land as one big package, requiring one licence.
It obliges industrialists to employ ‘the best available technology not entailing excessive costs’, a European Community concept.
Operators will have a ‘residual duty’ to minimise the impact of their discharges on the environment.
This will apply to around 3,000 of Britain's worst polluting processes, including those that produce the so-called red list substances — heavy metals and chemicals most dangerous to man and the environment.
These will have to be rendered harmless.
The whole scheme will be policed by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, currently seriously understaffed with suitable recruits hard to find.
Industry preparing for the Government legislation is luring inspectors away faster than they can be recruited to enforce it.
Mr Patten has promised enough resources for the inspectorate to solve this problem but it may be years before it is strong enough to effectively enforce its new duties.
Waste: Local authorities already have a key role in waste disposal but the bill creates new duties and involves a form of back-door privatisation.
Existing waste disposal operations will have to be put out to private or arms-length companies so the local authority's policing role cannot be mixed with its disposal role.
Local authorities will be responsible for controlling discharges from smaller factories and license provisions for waste disposal contractors.
New powers to refuse wastes and revoke licences are potentially powerful weapons in controlling the movement and safe disposal of wastes.
Producers of wastes will have a ‘duty of care’ to make sure they are disposed of properly.
This makes them liable to prosecution long after the wastes have left their premises.
Trans-frontier shipments of hazardous wastes also comes under new controls.
There will be moves to tighten up this part of the bill in the Commons to try to stop some of the waste imports from countries which can dispose of them but find it politically expedient to export them.
At the moment, local authorities, which are supposed to police many of the new controls, do not have either the expertise or the money to make them work.
Conservation bodies: Proposals for dismembering the Nature Conservancy Council and the Countryside Commission in favour of three bodies for England, Scotland and Wales, have diverted attention from other parts of the bill.
Threats of a Lords revolt remain, with Mr Patten's attempts to defuse the row having failed.
Conservation groups believe the original decision was a political move to cut the clout of the council which was stopping development, particularly forestry in Scotland.
The resignation of the organisation's chief scientist last week after four months in the post has fuelled these fears.
Genetic Engineering: This is a first attempt to legislate in this area, currently dealt with by voluntary codes of practice, because science has been moving quicker than the law makers.
It involves moral and practical problems which cross political and ethical boundaries.
For example, legally enforceable rules need to be applied to crops such as genetically altered, frost-resistant potatoes.
The change makes the potato a potential weed.
Possibly more troublesome and dangerous are micro-organisms which can be used in agricultural and medical applications but once released cannot be recaptured.
Genetically-engineered organisms mutate and develop their own new lifestyles.
One of the best natural examples of this is the ability of the flu virus to keep cropping up in new forms.
Litter and Recycling: Industry will have to prepare to take recycled waste rather than use raw materials and the legislation may need the boost of tax incentives.
Changing the habits of people used to throwing away litter will need a few highly publicised prosecutions.
Friends of the Earth award ‘Green Con’ to BNF advert.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Corrrespondent
BRITISH Nuclear Fuels, yesterday won the first ‘Green Con Award,’ conceived last September by Friends of the Earth.
Runner-up was Higgs Furs, of Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, for its claim that real furs are more environmentally friendly than fake furs made from polluting synthetic fibres.
The winners were chosen from more than 280 nominations and judges included Mr Ian Hislop, editor of Private Eye, and Julia Hailes, environmental author.
The BNF full-page newspaper advertisement claimed nuclear power stations do not produce carbon dioxide but neglected to address the problem of nuclear discharges and radioactive waste.
Mr Jonathon Porritt, director of FOE, said that a typical nuclear plant created 230,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide each year once construction of the plant and mining and enriching of uranium were taken into account.
A spokesman for BNFL said: ‘We were not playing on fears, just presenting the facts, although we could not address all the issues in one advertisment.’
Mr John Higgs Wilson, a partner in the 101-year-old furs firm said: ‘We don't withdraw one word.
Synthetic furs are made from chemicals which create toxic waste.’
Other winners included: Aerosol makers, for making ozone friendly claims while using methyl chloroform, which damages the ozone layer, as a propellant; Monsanto, for claiming its conventional weedkiller was a ‘green’ product; and Procter & Gamble, for claiming that its Bold liquid detergent in a conventional plastic bottle enjoyed ‘disposable packaging.’
Ignore this: Councils to get wider powers.
By Andrew Culf
THE 120-clause Environmental Protection Bill, which was published yesterday, sets out a series of reforms to key areas of pollution control.
Its main provisions include:
Pollution control: A system of integrated control will be introduced.
It is described as a new approach to the regulation of emissions to air, land and sea from most polluting processes, and will apply the concept of ‘best available techniques not entailing excessive cost’.
Factories will be required to obtain prior authorisation from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution to carry out industrial processes.
The conditions are designed to prevent or minimise the release of the most dangerous polluting substances.
Local authorities will be given new powers over a second tier of less heavily polluting processes, which will only be allowed to take place after councils have imposed stringent operating conditions.
Waste: Tighter controls on dealing with waste are proposed with regulation carefully separated from those involved in waste disposal.
Responsibility for waste will rest on the person who produces it, and everyone who handles it through to the process of disposal or reclamation.
Only ‘fit and proper’ people will be allowed to run waste sites and operators will have to care for their sites until all risks of gas or pollution have passed.
The Government will be able to control international shipments of waste.
Local authorities' waste disposal operations will be set up as ‘competitive arm's length’ companies to be separate from councils' responsibilities for policing environmental standards.
Waste regulation authorities will be more closely scrutinised by the inspectorate and councils will have to plan for recycling, for which they will also be given wider powers.
Nuisances: A streamlining of local authority procedures to make the tackling of noise nuisances simpler is proposed.
Regulations over smoke, grit, dust and fume emissions will also be tightened.
Litter: Stiffer penalities will be introduced for the dropping of litter.
Councils will be given the power to operate fixed penalty schemes like that operated by Westminster city council.
The maximum fine in magistrates' courts will be increased from £400 to £1,000.
Local authorities, educational establishments and other landowners will have to keep their public land clear of litter, and citizens will be able to apply to the courts for a ‘litter abatement order’ to ensure they do so.
District and borough councils will become wholly responsible for cleaning all roads except motorways.
Radioactive waste: Exemptions enjoyed by the UK Atomic Energy Authority and Crown premises over the storage and disposal of radioactive waste will end.
Local authorities will be required to hold public registers of information.
Additional powers will be introduced for the issue of immediate enforcement and prohibition notices where the rules are being broken, or where there is a risk of environmental harm.
Genetically modified organisms: The bill provides for additional safeguards against the import, containment and release of Genetically Modified Organisms.
Those using GMOs will face a new general ‘duty of care’ to prevent significant harm to the environment.
A unified system of administrative control, involving the Department of Environment, the Health and Safety Executive, and other interested parties, will be developed for those proposing to use GMOs.
Nature Conservancy Council: The organisation will be split into three agencies to cover England, Scotland and Wales.
In Wales the responsibilities of the NCC will be combined with those of the Countryside Commission.
A joint committee of the three new agencies will be established to provide scientific standards and advice on wider nature conservation issues affecting the whole of Britain or European commitments.
Mr Chris Patten, the Environment Secretary, said that an independent chairman will be appointed to the new joint committee, and will be named during the bill's parliamentary passage in January.
Hazardous chemicals: New powers over the storage and disposal of hazardous chemicals will be introduced.
Existing powers over importation, use and supply of hazardous chemicals will be extended.
Dumping at sea: New powers governing dumping at sea will give Britain the widest controls in Europe.
Any vessel dumping at sea without a British licence within Britain's waters will face a maximum fine of £50,000, which has been increased from £2,000.
Chemicals: The Government plans further controls later over chemicals to form a legal framework for the systematic evaluation of potentially harmful effects of industrial chemicals on health and the environment.
The information will be used to support British contributions to international programmes on the assessment of hazardous chemicals, including a proposed European Community regulation.
Stubble burning: Straw and stubble burning will be banned from 1992.
150,000 will be tested anonymously for HIV virus.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
ABOUT 120,000 pregnant women and 30,000 people attending sexually-transmitted disease clinics will be tested anonymously for HIV next year, the Department of Health said yesterday.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the Health Minister of State, said the tests would help assess the prevalence of the virus in the population for the purpose of planning health education and the provision of services.
She went on: ‘Information at the moment comes from people who come forward voluntarily for testing, which inevitably is a biased sample.’
The programme, which starts on January 15, will involve 10 ante-natal clinics and five sexually-transmitted disease clinics in several cities in England and Wales.
The names will not be announced until next month.
Later next year patients in general hospitals will be also be tested.
Explanatory leaflets and posters in several languages offer people the option of not allowing their blood to be tested.
Where blood is taken from a patient for another purpose, a small sample of blood may be tested for HIV.
The sample would be stored on a culture plate showing only the patient's age and the location of the laboratory.
At intervals these plates would be sent to central laboratories to be tested.
Mrs Bottomley said that the United States was the only other country carrying out anonymous HIV tests.
‘These have been extremely helpful in determining the shape of the epidemic and not subject to any criticism,’ she said.
Lawyers want more protection for people with stake in homes.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
PEOPLE who help buy the homes they live in but whose names are not on the title deeds should be able to stop the legal owner selling over their heads, the Law Commission for England and Wales recommended yesterday.
At present, they are entitled to a share in the sale proceeds but cannot forestall a sale by staying in the house.
The recommendation would help married or unmarried partners whose homes are held in the other partner's name.
It would cover parents living in a ‘granny flat,’ grown-up children sharing a home with their parents, and families in a business partnership.
The commission suggests that anyone over 18 who has contributed to the cost of the property he or she occupies should have to agree to its sale.
The court would have power to dispense with the non-owner's consent if justified.
The commission referred to a recent case decided by the Law Lords.
A young couple and the wife's parents bought a house together but only the younger couple were registered as owners.
They took out a mortgage without telling the older couple.
When they got into arrears, all four had to go.
The proposed change would have prevented the older couple from being evicted unless they had consented either to the mortgage or the later sale.
Mother wins on L-instructors.
The junior transport minister, Mr Robert Atkins, proposed yesterday that drivers supervising a learner must be at least 21 and have had a full licence for at least three years.
This follows a campaign by Mrs Victoria Stone, of Kingswinford, West Midlands, whose daughter, Kate, aged 17, died in a crash as the L-driver was being supervised by a 17-year-old.
Lecturers claim 27pc.
The council of the Association of University Teachers backed a claim drawn up by the union's executive for a 27 per cent pay rise from next April.
Woman's car found.
The car of shop assistant Miss Ruth Stevens, aged 33, who disappeared eight days ago in Warminster, Wiltshire, was found in Islington, north London.
Speeding fine for MP.
Mr Jack Cunningham, shadow Leader of the House, was fined £150 after admitting driving at 103 mph.
Life for woman's killer.
Donald Mackay, aged 41, was jailed for life at the Old Bailey — and recommended to serve at least 40 years — for the murder of a prostitute, Ann Petherick, and for assaulting another prostitute, Rosemary Saunders.
Wapping claim settled.
The Metropolitan Police settled in the High Court the damages claim of cameraman Mr Anthony Walsh, whose spine was injured during the Wapping dispute.
Terms were not disclosed.
McCarthy advert banned.
The Independent Broadcasting Authority banned a radio advert of the Friends of John McCarthy to mark his fourth Christmas as a hostage because it broke political rules.
Bush invasion of Panama courageous, says PM.
By Hella Pick and Alan Travis
THE Soviet Union yesterday strongly condemned the US invasion of Panama.
But Mrs Thatcher endorsed the US action, saying it was necessary ‘to bring an end to this rule of terror’.
After Mr Bush had told her of the US military action by telephone at 7am, an hour after his troops moved in, Mrs Thatcher told reporters: ‘I believe he was right to do so.
I believe this is what friends are for, to give support at this time.
It was a courageous decision.’
She said the support of other world leaders ‘would give a great morale boost to those soldiers who are fighting — they have to bear the brunt of the battle to uphold democracy.’
But the Soviet Union warned that the invasion had dealt a blow to growing co-operation in US-Soviet relations.
By extension, Mrs Thatcher's quick endorsement is likely to backfire on Britain's standing in Moscow.
The rest of Nato was divided, with Spain ‘deeply lamenting’ the US action, the Netherlands supportive, and France reserving judgment.
None of the allies, however, wants to be directly involved.
On the contrary, the US decision, which was taken without consultation or advance notice, will act as a strong deterrent to accepting a US proposal last week that the Alliance should involve itself in regional issues outside Europe.
In Latin America, the Group of Eight leading countries in Central and South America called an emergency meeting.
Colombia, which is president of the UN Security Council, called an informal session.
Countries across Latin America attacked the US action.
Venezuela, a fierce critic of Gen Noriega, said the invasion should be condemned and rejected.
Brazil called it a step backward in international relations and Mexico called for an immediate cessation of hostilities.
Chile called for an end to the fighting and refused to recognise the new Panamanian leader, Mr Guillermo Endara.
Nicaragua said its army had been placed on ‘a maximum state of alert’ because of the ‘brutal aggression’by the US.
President Alan Gacia of Peru called for a planned summit on February 15 with President Bush to discuss drugs to be ‘deferred’ because of the invasion.
He described the US action as ‘an outrage to Latin America’.
It ‘reproduces the most grotesque practices of imperialism’, he said.
Peru recalled its ambassador to Washington.
Cuba issued a call to arms in support of the people of Panama against ‘imperialist aggression’.
Iran and Libya predictably were vehemently against the action, which Colonel Muammar Gadafy described as ‘state terrorism that made Hitler look like an angel’.
The Soviet Union was ready with its condemnation, almost as fast as Mrs Thatcher was with her welcome.
Mr Vadim Perfilyev, a Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, said it was ‘a violation of the UN Charter.
The US should stop its armed intervention in Panama immediately.’
Tass carried a statement accusing the US of applying ‘the laws of the jungle and gunboat diplomacy’.
US and British officials saw Soviet expressions of displeasure as ritualistic, and the least that Moscow could do for its allies in Nicaragua and Cuba.
But there were indications that Mr Gorbachev feels compromised and personally let down by President Bush after their talks in Malta earlier this month, when both leaders undertook to consult on actions that could undermine international stability.
President Bush and Mrs Thatcher denied yesterday that there was any comparison between Panama and Eastern Europe, and argued that the US action was in defence of democracy.
Labour condemned General Noriega as a corrupt dictator, but Mr Gerald Kaufman, the shadow Foreign Secretary, demanded to know what rationale in international law there was for the invasion.
The author Graham Greene, a passionate defender of Panamanian sovereignty, said Gen Noriega was not ‘half as bad’ as Washington's record in Central America.
Condemning the US action, he said: ‘The US has no business interfering in Panama.’
Battle for Panama, pages 10 and 11; Leader comment, page 18; Still trapped in the jungle, page 19
High Court grants permission for full trial of solicitor accused of negligence over £4m will after six-year wrangle that has tied legal profession in knots Milestone in brother's ‘crusade for justice’.
By Joanna Coles
AFTER six years of tortuous legal battles, Mr Thomas Mathew was yesterday granted permission in the High Court for a full trial in his action against the solicitor who held his brother's will for £4 million.
In the past six years he has represented himself before 34 High Court judges, 25 Masters, 14 Registrars, four stipendary magistrates, two Justices of the Peace, and four Scottish sheriffs Yesterday was his 239th court appearance.
He is suing Jocelyn Timothy Thomas, a solicitor who held his late brother's will at the time of his death, for negligence to the tune of £4 million.
If the High Court decides in his favour he will be a rich man.
If he loses, he says he will begin all over again.
Plump, scarlet-faced through high blood pressure and wheezing with crusading zeal, Mr Mathew is the sort of character Dickens liked to create.
Married to Princess Olga Romanoff, a great niece of the last Czar, he claims to have survived three attempts on his life.
The combined talents of Kafka and Jackie Collins could not have produced his story.
It is a tale of one man's obsession, against his family and against an apparent injustice which has deprived him of more than £1 million.
To prove his point he has taken on the legal profession and, with no legal training whatsoever, tied judges in such knots they have overruled each other.
Mr Mathew's story begins with a death, that of his elder brother, Theobald, in July 1983, who left a will stating that his £1 million estate should be split among his four younger brothers.
That part at least is uncontested, but for various complex legal reasons it took Thomas, an executor of the will, nine months to get probate.
During that time three solicitors were, he alleges, unlawfully granted powers to administer the estate.
The estate turned out to be worth £5 million and among them, Mr Mathew also alleges, the three solicitors disposed of £3.8 million.
The case has pitched brother against brother and mother against son.
In November 1983, a registrar ordered the grant of letters of administration to the three solicitors to be rendered null and void and Thomas thought the case was over.
It was just beginning.
A month later the decision was appealed against and in March 1984, the appeal was allowed although the registrar's order was amended to make the granting of the letters temporary.
The unprecedented judgment was then published in the All England Law Reports but two months later the grant of letters was ruled void by another judge.
Numerous court hearings brought by a combination of the four brothers and their solicitors followed.
In January 1987, yet another judge stated that the March ruling was, in fact, in breach of statute but as it had not been appealed against it had to stand.
In another hearing, the Vice Chancellor, Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson, declared the history of the management of the estate to be ‘disastrous’.
After three years, during which he had to cope with the death of his youngest son, Mr Mathew was denied leave to appeal against the March 1984 judgment.
The judge said he had left it too late, although he agreed the appeal would have been successful.
So the March judgment still stands, in breach of statute, giving temporary administrative powers to parties unnamed by a will.
In order to expose what appears to be a series of monstrous, incomprehensible legal blunders, Mr Mathew gave up work in 1983.
He has not seen his wife or their three children since July since he cannot afford to travel home to Banchory, near Aberdeen.
Unavailable for work, he relies on friends for food, lodgings and money.
His main expense is photocopying thousands of legal documents and he spends his days preparing the next part of his case.
Even his opponents acknowledge his tenacity.
Jocelyn Thomas, the subject of next week's appeal, says ‘his crusade is more moral than financial.
I liked him when I met him and I still like him now.
It's terribly sad, but what the justice or reality is, well, I have lost any contact with that.’
Mr Mathew claims that as long as the temporary grant is allowed to remain — in breach of statute — anyone who makes a will is similarly vulnerable.
‘All I want to do is claim what is rightfully mine and ensure the wishes of my brother are carried out.
That's all I have ever wanted to do.’
And so next February, when the full trial is due to begin, the High Court will be mistily engaged in one of the 10,000 stages of another endless cause.
Just as in Jarndyce vs Jarndyce in Bleak House, Thomas Mathew will watch them ‘tripping one another up on slippery precedents, warding heads against walls of words, until they deliver a verdict’.
Thomas Mathew…239th court appearance yesterday
Hong Kong passports plan divides Commons.
By Michael White and Mark Milner
AFTER months of ministerial indecision, the Government's formula for restoring confidence in Hong Kong emerged last night to a mixed response from a bitterly divided House of Commons — and no more than a guarded welcome from the colony itself.
There were fears that the compromise announced by Mr Douglas Hurd, the Foreign Secretary, which will give full British passports to 50,000 key personnel and their families — 225,000 people — could prove the worst of all worlds.
This falls well short of the target set by Honour Hong Kong, a pressure group drawn from the colony's business community.
A report commissioned by the group identified a total of 315,000 staff which the colony needed to keep.
As the figure does not cover families, yesterday's decision to grant rights of entry to 50,000 households is likely to cover less than 20 per cent of those it targeted.
Mr Simon Murray, leader of Honour Hong Kong, said: ‘I am not saying we are over the moon, but it is progress.’
The Hong Kong Government welcomed the move, saying the package would ‘help to re-establish confidence’.
But in the Commons, the most striking feature of MPs' reaction was a chaotic cross-party divide.
Mr Hurd urged them not to make ‘the last main chapter in the story of this country's Empire’ a shadowy one.
The split saw Mr Norman Tebbit align the Tory Right with the Labour front bench, while Ulster Unionists, the Scottish Nationalists, the SDP, a few Labour leftwingers and the Liberal Democrats signalled grudging support for the Cabinet, which needs every vote it can get to pass the promised bill next spring.
Conservative loyalists rallied, but the rebels were bitter.
‘Now it all depends which way public opinion goes,’ said one.
Ministers believe the public will respond decently.
They were adamant that their scheme, a compromise between the Foreign Office and the harder line sought by Mr David Waddington, the Home Secretary, is the best way to prevent a mass refugee crisis if Hong Kong collapses before 1997.
The Government still has to work out a points system whereby a cross-section of Hong Kong residents, whose skills are needed, will be given full British citizenship rights between 1992 and 1997.
Labour believes a points system will rally its party to oppose the bill.
Unlike existing immigration criteria, wealth will not be a factor, though seniority, British ties and usefulness to Hong Kong will.
Mr Hurd stressed that no citizens of other Commonwealth countries will be allowed in as a result of the bill.
It was designed to persuade people not to come to Britain.
That was the hope — and paradox — of yesterday's strategy.
In his statement, broadcast live to the colony, the Foreign Secretary struggled to balance his ‘desire to be as effective as possible in restoring confidence’ with what he politely called ‘our ability to accept the individuals concerned for settlement in this country — should that ever be necessary’.
It amounted to a coded acknowledgement of the barely-supressed rage of Conservative MPs, mostly on the right, whose concern over a fresh wave of ‘large-scale immigration’ hitting overcrowded facilities in Britain was clothed yesterday in language close to that of Mr Gerald Kaufman, the shadow Foreign Secretary, who called the plan ‘inherently unworkable, invidious and divisive’, and demanded details on how it would work.
Mr Tebbit, a former Tory chairman, told Mr Hurd he disagreed with almost everything he said and agreed with almost everything Mr Kaufman said.
Conservative loyalists said Mr Tebbit had made a blunder, but he showed no sign of backing off from ‘one of the things that brought me into politics — the belief that immigration should be reduced’.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, for the Liberal-Democrats said the numbers ‘fell far short of the necessary minimum’.
Politics, page 5; Offer fails to restore confidence, page 8; Leader comment, page 18
US puts $1m price on Panama strongman's head ‘40 American hostages taken’ Bush overthrows Noriega.
By Martin Walker in Washington
GENERAL Manuel Noriega remained at large and skirmishing continued around Panama last night, as an ugly and protracted guerrilla war and a potential hostage crisis threatened President Bush's hopes of a brisk Christmas victory in America's back yard.
The US announced it will pay a $1 million reward for information leading to the general's capture.
The White House said it would also pay $150 for each Panamanian gun turned in.
Mr Bush said yesterday that ‘key military objectives have been achieved’ by the 24,000 US troops, whose Operation Just Cause invasion replaced the dictatorship of Gen Noriega with a constitutionally-elected civilian government.
Sixteen hours after the first assault, the Pentagon said the invasion force had ended ‘all organised resistance’ by the Panamamian Defence Force, although scattered soldiers were still fighting.
Strongholds of the so-called Dignity Battalions civil militia in Panama City had yet to be reduced, and some tough street fighting lay ahead, Pentagon officials said.
The Pentagon said 250 prisoners had been taken and the forces of two other organised battalions had been scattered.
Four US helicopters had been put out of action.
Noriega loyalists were holding out last night in a key barracks, despite overwhelming US firepower.
US forces used loudhailers to urge them to surrender amid intermittent explosions of gun and cannon fire.
The operation could be ‘mopped up’ in three days, but troops may stay in place to perform a policing function, General Tom Kelly, a Pentagon official, said.
Last night, Gen Noriega's armed militia were still setting up roadblocks in the city's main financial district, while the new civilian government, headed by Mr Guillermo Endara, was kept under guard by the US military, which said it was too risky for it to appear in public.
Mr Endara was elected in the spring, but Gen Noriega annulled the poll.
The Soviet Union swiftly condemned the invasion, saying it was a blow to growing warmth in US-Soviet relations.
But Mrs Thatcher backed the ‘courageous’ US action.
Mr Bush sent a private cable to Mr Gorbachev explaining the reasons for the US military intervention just after the operation began, the Secretary of State, Mr James Baker, said.
But he added there was some evidence suggesting it did not arrive before Moscow issued its condemnation of the US action.
While Democrats in Congress gave support to the President's decision to launch the biggest US military operation since the Vietnam War, Russia expressed ‘deep concern’ for what it dubbed gunboat diplomacy which violated the UN Charter.
Eleven US troops died and 59 were injured in the operation.
Sixty civilians were reported dead and up to 1,000 wounded.
Panamanian military casualties were not known.
The fighting began with US parachute assaults at 1am, and a tank-led assault on the headquarters of the Panama Defence Forces caused widespread damage in the heart of the city.
The headquarters was burnt to the ground.
While all Panamanian military posts were reported secured yesterday, and US electronic warfare teams jammed most Panamanian-controlled TV and radio broadcasts, at least one central radio station remained in the hands of Noriega supporters, rallying the militia to resist the US invasion, and claiming to hold 40 American hostages.
There was no confirmation of the claim, although there was no contact with the CBS and ABC TV correspondents, who were said to be among them.
Twelve hostages, including journalists from Reuters and the New York Times, were seized in the early hours yesterday, before being released by pro-Noriega armed civilians, who urged them to ‘tell the story of the American invasion’.
General Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said: ‘The operation is not over yet.
Mr Noriega is in hiding.
We will chase him and we will find him.
We have decapitated him from the leadership of his country.
He is not running anything.
We own all the bases.
We have cut off the head of that government.’
He acknowledged that ‘having him loose does raise the potential that he might make more mischief, take to the hills and be very hard to find’.
Mr Bush, in a dawn TV address yesterday, said his objectives were to protect American lives, to restore democracy and an elected government to Panama, to bring ‘the indicted drug trafficker’, Gen Noriega to American justice, and ‘to ensure the integrity of the Panama Canal treaties’.
‘I will continue to seek solutions to the problems of this region through dialogue and multilateral diplomacy.’
The President decided upon military intervention on Sunday, after a weekend of harassment of US citizens, and a year of humiliation at Noriega's hands.
The accusations of incompetence after the botched attempt to support the anti-Noriega coup in October had stung the Bush Administration.
According to the Tass news agency, which was in contact with Noriega supporters, the US strike failed to arrest any of his leaders.
The fighting, which had died down during the night, flared again as dawn came, and US Cobra gunships began to fly over Panama City.
Shooting, explosions and mortar bombs were heard intermittently throughout the day, from scattered locations including the inner city, Fort Amador and San Miguelito.
The canal, closed for the first time in its 75-year history, will reopen for daytime operations today.
‘Manuel Noriega, who was yesterday's Panama's maximum leader, is today a hunted fugitive,’ Mr Baker said.
He stressed that the US would abide by the Canal Treaty timetable to hand over the canal to Panamanian rule.
‘Give it a chance.
Democracy will take over in Panama,’ Mr Baker insisted.
Battle for Panama, pages 10 and 11; City Notebook, page 12; Leader comment, page 18; Still trapped in the jungle, page 19; War shatters sunrise, page 20
Fowler falls in line on charter.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent
THE Government will today fall into line with the European Community's proposed Social Charter when the right of workers to belong — as well as not to belong — to a trade union is enshrined in its Employment Bill.
It will mean trade union members refused work by anti-union firms or blacklisted by groups such as the Economic League on grounds of union membership, will be able to get industrial tribunals to direct employers to hire them — or pay compensation of up to £8,900.
National security grounds will still enable ministers to deny union rights to staff at GCHQ in Cheltenham.
Automatic negotiating rights are not guaranteed, but employers are likely to be angry.
The move is part of the Employment Secretary, Mr Norman Fowler's, package designed to outlaw secondary strike action and abolish the pre-entry closed shop.
The bill had been intended to highlight Labour's continued adherence to the closed shop, until Mr Fowler's shadow, Mr Tony Blair, last weekend announced the Opposition's support for the full Social Charter agenda.
Patten speaks of a milestone on the road toward a cleaner Britain and makes key concession on Nature Conservancy Council Green legislation faces bumpy ride.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent
THE Environment Secretary, Mr Christopher Patten, yesterday presented his Environment Protection Bill, which makes sweeping changes in the way industrial pollution is controlled, as a milestone on the road to a greener Britain.
At a press conference he committed himself to a big recruitment drive for Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, and, if necessary, to putting more resources into local authorities in order to make the bill work.
One surprise in the bill was a U-turn in the battle over the future of the Nature Conservancy Council.
Mr Patten has conceded that the council should have an independent chairman who can represent the United Kingdom at home and abroad.
This will go some way to draw the fire of the Government's critics, but he can still expect a rough ride for the bill on the House of Lords.
The central part of the bill is the creation of integrated pollution control.
Around 3,500 of Britain's industrial processes will have to be justified to the inspectorate for the pollution they put into the environment on land, into the air and into water.
Industry will have to pay for the licences they are granted and will have a duty to reduce pollution and render their discharges harmless.
Mr Patten said this would put Britain in front of Europe but acknowledged that it may be some time before it can be implemented.
He disclosed that the crisis in the inspectorate had led to 32 vacancies in a professional staff of 135 in October.
The complement had now been raised to 145 and salaries increased by 28 per cent.
There were 175 applicants for the newly advertised posts and interviews would begin next year.
When this round of appointments was made the situation would be reviewed to see if the inspectorate needed further strengthening.
‘The immediate task is to make sure the HMIP is able to discharge the substantial range of functions in this bill.
I accept that the sophisticated application of integrated pollution control depends crucially on a good and effective inspectorate.’
Another area vital to the success of the bill was public confidence and access to information.
The details to be included in the public registers to be established under the bill had yet to be decided but he personally favoured ‘more information rather than less.’
Details of the registers would be available before the bill reached the committee stage but he wanted them to contain enough detail to be wholly credible in the eyes of the public.
New powers in the bill give Mr Patten vetoes over the import of both toxic and other wastes.
He said he wanted to establish that countries deal with their own waste but he felt it was too early to impose a complete ban on imports.
Some countries did not have the facilities to deal with the wastes themselves and a ban might encourage indiscriminate dumping.
These new powers would sound a warning to a number of companies which run, or are planning to build, new incinerators in Britain, some of which rely on imports to maintain profitability.
Apart from industry paying for pollution controls, he said, reorganisation of waste disposal would extend the polluter pays principle to ordinary waste disposal.
Local authorities will now have to divorce their regulatory arms from the disposal organisation by forming separate companies which would normally be in private hands.
This would encourage realistic pricing for landfill operations.
There would be a specific duty on local authorities to make plans for the recycling of waste which must be high on the list of priorities when formulating policy.
He was entering a study with local authorities on the cost of implementing the measures and was prepared to make appropriate increases in the rate support grant.
Increased fines for dropping litter, and regulations requiring local authorities and landowners keep their premises free from litter would be brought forward.
Mr Patten said the 120-clause bill was only part of the Government's strategy for the environment.
A strategic overview on the issue would be published in an autumn white paper.
Sir William Wilkinson, chairman of the NCC, welcomed the Mr Patten's decision to allow an independent chairman for the organisation after the Government's refusal to do so only three weeks ago.
Mr Chrisopher Patten…
Sounding a warning
PC Peacock and PC Renton: An apology.
ON May 13, 1986, we published an article entitled ‘A force to be reckoned with’ which mentioned factors likely to deter potential black recruits from joining the police force at that time and cited as one example ‘the beating to death of a black Hell's Angel by policemen’.
On March 26, 1986, a jury had returned a verdict of manslaughter by neglect following the inquest into the death of a Hell's Angel, Mr John Mikkelson, while in police custody.
That verdict did not implicate individual police officers.
In our report of the verdict and in other press articles, PC Peacock and PC Renton of Hounslow police station were named as the officers who arrested and detained Mr Mikkelson.
Some readers may therefore have identified them as the police officers referred to in our article of May 13, 1986.
The first inquest verdict was later quashed by the Court of Appeal.
A second inquest in February 1987, returned a verdict of death by misadventure.
Our article of May 13, 1986 was not intended to apportion blame for Mr Mikkelson's death.
We accept that the statement that he was ‘beaten to death’ whilst in police custody was incorrect and went beyond the original inquest verdict of manslaughter.
We apologise unreservedly to PC Peacock and PC Renton for this error and for any misunderstanding which this may have caused.
Home Secretary plans to allow in 250,000 from colony.
Labour says proposal is ‘unworkable and divisive’ Tebbit leads Tory attack on Hurd Hong Kong.
Paul Nettleton.
THE former Cabinet Minister, Mr Norman Tebbit, yesterday led an angry response from the Tory backbenches to Mr Douglas Hurd's announcement in the Commons that up to 250,000 Hong Kong people will be offered full British citizenship in the hope of staunching the ‘haemorrhage of talent’ from the colony.
Mr Tebbit, the ex-party chairman and MP for Chingford, asked Mr Hurd ‘whether the pledge that we have given for the last four general elections, that there would be no further large-scale immigration, still stands or not?’
The Foreign Secretary said: ‘My right honourable friend knows that I have spent quite a lot of time in the last four years as Home Secretary, with his full support, trying to plug loopholes, trying to keep our immigration control strict and fair.
Mr Tebbit repeatedly shouted ‘answer the question’.
Mr Hurd replied: ‘I don't need any education on the importance of a strict immigration control for entry into this country.’
Supposing Mr Tebbit was right in his fears and considerable numbers did come to Britain, what would be the nature of the penalty?
‘We would be paying the penalty of a sizeable but limited number of professional people, selected for their talent and experience, coming from one of the most successful societies which has been created in the 20th century.’
He told Mr Tebbit: ‘You have been chairman of our party — and a very successful one — and you know the traditions of our party.
This is the last main chapter in the story of this country's empire.
I am rather keen, and I'm sure you are rather keen, that it should not end in a shabby way.’
The Foreign Secretary had told the Commons that 42,000 people left the colony this year, and 55,000 are expected to leave next year.
A growing number were people Hong Kong could least afford to lose.
‘We aim to give such people the confidence to remain in Hong Kong so that they can continue to make their contribution to the success and prosperity of the territory.’
To give right of abode to all British Dependent Territories passport holders in Hong Kong ‘could, if that right was exercised, create unacceptable strains here’.
But, ‘if, on the other hand, we kept the scheme too narrow, it would fail in its purpose and…we might be faced with a much more severe problem.’
A points scheme would enable a maxium of 50,000 heads of households, plus their dependants, to be awarded full British citizenship without having to leave Hong Kong.
The decisive criteria ‘will be the value of the individuals’ service to Hong Kong’.
Mr Gerald Kaufman, the shadow foreign secretary, reiterated Labour's opposition to any commitment to offer the right of abode to favoured categories based on status or affluence.
What Mr Hurd had done ‘is not to work out what he believes are essential categories and decide to legislate on those categories.
Instead he has thought of a number.
He has haggled on that number with the Home Secretary and been beaten down…
I believe such a system to be inherently unworkable, invidious and divisive,’ said Mr Kaufman.
An incoming Labour government would examine how the system was working but ‘will not be bound to continue it’.
Mr Hurd replied: ‘We have worked out what we believe to be the most sensible balance between our desire for good race relations and harmony in our cities…and our very strong feeling that we have a continuing…duty of responsibility to people in Hong Kong.’
Sir Peter Blaker (C. Blackpool S) said Mr Hurd's ‘responsible and sensible decision’ would help the prosperity and stability of Hong Kong.
For the Liberal Democrats, Mr David Steel said the scheme would fail to provide the assurances that would enable people to stay in Hong Kong and would ‘involve so many arbitrary choices, where X will be chosen instead of Y’ which would be ‘very unacceptable’.
He predicted ‘deep dismay in Hong Kong, deepened only by the statement of the official Opposition.’
But Mr Tebbit told Mr Hurd: ‘I regret having to say that I disagreed with almost everything he (Mr Hurd) said and agreed with almost everything the Right Hon gentleman said from the Opposition front bench.’
Replying to questioners, Mr Hurd disclosed that Hong Kong Indians and others, thought to total about 1,500 families, would also be included in the scheme.
Mr David Howell, Tory chairman of the Foreign Affairs Select Committee, said the scheme must ‘anchor’ people in the colony because any loss of confidence could lead to an immigration flood exceeding ‘the worst fears’of many of his backbench colleagues.
Mr George Gardiner (C. Reigate) asked how was Mr Hurd going to explain to ethnic minorities already in this country the strict entry controls on their relatives ‘while at the same time amending the law so as to create a preferential class of treatment for the Hong Kong Chinese’?
The SDP leader, Dr David Owen, supporting Mr Hurd said ‘the answer to Mr Tebbit is, after what happened in Tiananmen Square, honour demands that this House needs to do more to sustain the prosperity and security of Hong Kong’.
Labour leader returns from Berlin meetings sensing need for forward options to which he says Thatcher's policies are opposed.
Kinnock seeking strategy to speed reform in East Patrick Wintour sounds out Opposition views on the two Germanys question and Britain's proper response to it..
WHEN Mr Neil Kinnock addressed the German Social Democrats' (SPD) conference in Berlin this week, he did so against a vast photographic backdrop of Europe seen from space, without a cloud in the sky.
Beneath it was a quote from Willy Brandt, elder statesman of European democratic socialism: ‘Now grows together what belongs together.’
Fired with enthusiasm for the new Europe on his return flight over the North Sea, Fuhrer Kinnock, as he is known in the German press, seemed more frustrated than ever at being out of office at such a momentous time.
In an interview with the Guardian, he attacked the Prime Minister for failing to have an urgent strategy to help the reform movements in the East.
Her defence, economic and political policies were out of tune with the spirit of the coming European decade.
A new political convergence was occuring between East and West, from which Mrs Thatcher was excluded by her market liberalism.
If the politics of the eighties has been characterised by Mrs Thatcher's confrontational style, Mr Kinnock believes the politics of the nineties must be about international negotiation and co-operation.
At the same time, he said, it was clear the European Community — another institution from which Mrs Thatcher had ‘absented’ herself — would have to be the chief forum by which the West would help the East.
It was sensible, as Mrs Thatcher had, ‘to counsel caution in the maelstrom, but it all depends on whether you're saying that in order to guide events in a steady fashion or whether you're using it as an alibi to do nothing.
She's wrong because she falls into the latter category.
‘It's partly because she has got herself cornered economically, and partly because deep down she thinks there is a nationalist string she can pluck to her electoral advantage.
I think she's wrong, because there's been a readjustment in British attitudes to Europe.
‘While people are cautious about a lot of developments in Europe, rightly so, and while they are looking for British advantage, rightly so, they realise it cannot be done from the back of the class.
‘On one bank there is the remnant of Stalinism in the form of President Ceausescu, and on the other, at least in terms of ultra-liberal rhetoric, is Mrs Thatcher.
Yet at the same time the broad mainstream is flowing by.
Of course, there is a left and right side to that stream, but I think it is the left side of the stream which is broadening.’
Mr Kinnock, who met opposition fugures in East Berlin last week over a working breakfast, claims the reform movement in Eastern Europe represents a triumph for European social democracy, not Thatcherism.
‘This idea that the flame of freedom in the East was ignited in Conservative Central Office is just poppycock.
‘Obviously, anyone who has been oppressed for 40 years will have among their number people who want to make the complete lunge towards a so-called free market utopia.
But the mainstream know freedom and the free market are not co-terminous.
They know there is another path, which is democratic socialism.
‘What I have been interested to witness over the last year to 18 months is a newly confident Left in the Socialist International saying we have a common formulation about the best way to proceed.
‘Coincidentally, we are now seeing coming out of Eastern Europe that same broad attitude being adopted, not only by the democratic socialists and social democratic parties which are emerging in the East, but also amongst the reform wings of the old Communist parties led by a new generation who realise the command economy Stalinist game is completely up.
‘So there is a new convergence of political thinking between East and West and within the West.’
He sums this up as ‘a general realisation that you need the combination of the market and the socially responsible community, and that the two are not mutually incompatible.’
But he warned that unless the West, meaning primarily the European Community, offered economic aid quickly, ‘there will be disillusionment which will be very destabilising.
We have had stability for 40 years.
It was not a nice stability, but it was there.
Now it's gone.
We have to move very quickly find a new stability.’
In the search for that stability, Britain's role should be to ensure that the European Community becomes the vehicle with which to channel aid into the East in terms of commitment to training, new technology, transport improvements and preferential commercial arrangements.
The East would prefer such a comprehensive approach from the community, rather than a series of bilateral arrangements.
He also echoed Willy Brandt in warning that unless the West was seen to act quickly and in concert, demand for German reunification could become overpowering in both East and West.
In the West, a populist right, linked to neo-fascim, was ‘willing to use racism, as it does already in the northern industrial towns, and the overcrowding which will occur if there is a large influx from East Germany.
They will argue that the only way to deal with this invasion is by reunification.’
In the East, ‘there could be such a lust for reunification for economic reasons, to get access to the prosperity of West Germany, that it will pressurise all the existing political parties into embracing reunification.’
During his visit, Mr Kinnock became the first British political leader to meet Gregor Gysi, the new East German Communist Party leader.
The Communist Party, he told Mr Gysi, would be making a serious error if he went ahead and fought the planned May elections on a manifesto which simply warned reunification would be a victory for the right.
If the issue was not taken head on, he said, and the movement towards unification became precipitate or unorganised, it would not merely be a blot on the landscape, it would ‘rock the continent.’
But ‘I don't think there is anyone at a serious level on either side who wants that.’
Mr Kinnock called on Mrs Thatcher to show her commitment to change in Eastern Europe by launching a public review of Britain's defence policies.
‘The Pentagon is advising the president about troop reductions.
The Germans patently are not going to allow modernisation of short-range weapons.
Nato is discussing the mutual withdrawl of short range weapons in Germany.
‘Again there is a consensus with one exception, Mrs Thatcher.
November 9 [the day that the Wall was opened]provides us with the chance to look for defence savings.
Let's have a defence review so both the military and the industries are prepared for change when it comes.’
Brother of princess alleges tabloid press harassment.
THE Princess of Wales's brother and his wife have accused tabloid newspapers of harassing them and making up stories in the run-up to their wedding in September this year.
They claim a private surveillance team was engaged by one newspaper to follow them, events and quotes attributed to them in stories were made up, and their family and friends were harassed and their privacy invaded.
In an interview on Channel 4's Hard News programme, to be shown tonight, Viscountess Althorp said of her experiences of tabloid journalists: ‘I think they're really totally insensitive, evil people.’
Viscount Althorp said of reporters covering his engagement: ‘They wanted to get back, bring me down, and make Victoria's [his wife's]life a misery.’
‘Everyday people are bruised by the press and they haven't got any recourse.
I am doing this because I think I ought to and am in the position to do so.’
Viscount Althorp claims a national newspaper hired a firm of private detectives to follow them round-the-clock.
His wife criticises a story in the Sunday Mirror which claimed she spent her ‘hen night’ in ‘smooching the night away’with a former boyfriend.
Her husband says he found a photographer hiding in some bushes by his house.
The Sunday Mirror refused to comment.
Environment bill ‘lacks adequate back-up resources’.
By Paul Brown and Andrew Culf
STRONG reservations about whether the Government would provide enough resources to make the Environmental Protection Bill work tempered enthusiasm for its contents yesterday.
Some dubbed it a cosmetic exercise which did not go far enough and said too many concessions had already been made to industry.
Ms Diane Brown, of the Chemical Industries Association, said her members fully supported its intention but were anxious the ‘hotch potch’ of measures should be made to work.
The association's 170 members will have to bear the brunt of new fees for proposed discharge licences and are demanding a strong inspectorate to enforce the legislation.
‘Integrated pollution control is a totally new concept, but there is a difference between a good philosophy and a workable system.
We need a much larger and better resourced inspectorate to enforce it so it is fair and seen to be.’
The association also welcomed the duty of care placed on people who produce waste to make sure it is properly disposed of.
This would cut out the ‘cowboy’ operators who will lose their licences if caught dumping illegally.
During the next three years the industry has committed £1 billion to cleaning up its discharges and recycling wastes which would otherwise be dumped.
This is 15 per cent of all capital investment and double the figure five years ago.
Labour's environment spokesman, Mr Bryan Gould, said the bill was a ‘ragbag’ of measures resulting from various government commitments to vested interests and voluntary groups.
The new system of Integrated Pollution Control designed to curb harmful emissions from factories would be undermined by staff shortages and poor morale.
Proposals to curb litter and waste did not go far enough and would land local authorities with extra bills but no additional resources.
‘I think it is a little premature at this stage to be dreaming of a green Christmas,’ Mr Gould added.
The Green Party said plans to clean up the environment were doomed unless the Government gave an immediate cash injection to the departments responsible for enforcement and introduced a crash training programme for new staff.
Moves to clean up Britain's heavily polluted cities and countryside were welcome, but without resources the proposed measures were merely wishful thinking and would prove a cosmetic exercise.
Mr David Icke, a Green spokesman, said the Government appeared embarrassed that the bill would fail to impress as a careful response to environmental problems.
‘We can see no other reason why the Government should introduce this bill less than 24 hours before the house rises for Christmas and that they are fundamentally ashamed of it.’
Mr Roger Lankester, the party's pollution specialist, said: ‘My biggest criticism is that each part of the bill appears to have a loophole or get-out clause which will render much of it unenforceable.’
He did not believe that ‘this piece of tinkering by the Government will stop Britain becoming the dump of Europe in the 1990s.’
Mr David Gee, director designate of Friends of the Earth, said the bill had already been weakened by giving big concessions to industry, especially over freedom of information to the public and scope and timetable of the new controls over pollution.
‘None of the Government's proposed reforms will be effective without a threefold increase in the number of HMIP pollution inspectors, extra resources for local authority environmental health officers and far more effective monitoring.’
Mr Ian Prestt, director-general of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, said the most contentious part of the bill was the proposal to break up the Nature Conservancy Council.
Sacking threat to ambulance staff.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
THE 15-week ambulance dispute moved into a new area of confrontation yesterday as non-emergency workers in Surrey were threatened with the sack unless they returned to normal working in the new year.
At the same time the non-TUC Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel voted by two to one against acceptance of a revised 9 per cent pay offer over 18 months.
The vote robs Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, of the chance to impose the offer, also rejected by the five TUC unions.
Managers in Surrey sent letters to all their ambulance workers threatening to use outside contractors to carry out non-emergency work and refused to guarantee that they would be withdrawn once deployed.
The letters were in response to a decision by ambulance workers to refuse all calls from controllers for 24 hours on New Year's Eve.
The action was called after a row between ambulance staff and Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the Health Minister of State, at her South-west Surrey constituency last Friday over her refusal to recognise ambulance workers as the third arm of the emergency services giving them a pay formula automatically tied to the police and fire fighters.
Sources at Surrey Ambulance Service confirmed last night that staff, of which about 80 are non-emergency workers, had been told ‘quite bluntly’ of the consequences of the action.
The threat to employ outside contractors is in line with plans for hiving off parts of the ambulance service sketched out by Mr Clarke during the dispute.
Surrey managers said that many elderly day patients who would normally be carried by non-emergency crews have had to be readmitted to hospital in the past three months.
The two sides are due to meet tomorrow.
Ugly Sisters play to packed House Sketch.
By Andrew Rawnsley
ANYBODY casting a pantomime this Christmas might not instantly consider Margaret Thatcher for the role of Cinderella or Douglas Hurd in the part of Buttons.
And Hong Kong is not the sort of story likely to have the traditional happy ending.
But anybody still short of two Ugly Sisters should get in touch at once with Gerald Kaufman and Norman Tebbit and ask them to repeat yesterday's performance in the Commons.
The Foreign Secretary began by outlining, rather well, his package to give British citizenship to up to 50,000 Hong Kong families.
Mr Kaufman, Labour's chief foreign affairs spokesman, sat at his bench shaking his head.
Over the way sat Mr Tebbit, the Tory party's chief foreign affairs spokesman for the rabid Right, shaking his head.
Mr Kaufman spoke first.
‘The Opposition are against the creation of specially-favoured categories based on status or affluence,’ he said, and would vote against Mr Hurd's proposals.
The Hurd scheme was ‘elitist and discriminatory’, not to say ‘unreasonable, unworkable, invidious and divisive’, for Mr Kaufman never uses one adjective where one hundred will do.
‘The system will arouse doubt and uncertainty since no-one will be sure whether he or she can qualify.’
Mr Kaufman did not outline his preferred plan for maintaining confidence and honouring obligations to Hong Kong.
But there is certainly no doubt or uncertainty, elitism or discrimination about Labour's own scheme.
Under the compassionate, egalitarian, principled Kaufman scheme, no one in Hong Kong will be given the right of abode in Britain.
‘How will the 50,001st person in the queue feel?’,
Mr Kaufman demanded of Mr Hurd.
To which the best answer is: a lot better than the first person in any queue organised by Mr Kaufman.
On the other side of the House, Norman Tebbit and the rest of the rabid Right had been nodding along to Mr Kaufman.
The Essex Men had mobilised on the Tory backbenches in strength.
When the Speaker called for questioners, a forest of bodies shot up wanting to speak.
There was Tim Janman, the MP for Thurrock.
When he last spoke, Mr Janman said Britain would take one refugee from Hong Kong ‘over my dead body’.
The Speaker — squeamishly — did not call him, leaving Mr Janman pawing the ground like a rabid ferret.
It was, anyway, Norman Tebbit that everybody was waiting for.
When he spoke, it was from the first Tory bench below the gangway, the place he used as a backbencher before his ministerial days, in his youth as the Chingford Skinhead.
It was almost immediately clear that, though a rather greying skinhead now, Mr Tebbit had returned to his roots.
After attacking the Foreign Secretary, he began shouting at Mr Hurd again and again as Mr Hurd attempted to reply.
‘Would my Right Honourable Friend accept how much I regret,’ Mr Tebbit had begun his snarl at the Foreign Secretary, ‘having to say how much I disagree with nearly everything he said and agree with nearly everything said by the Right Honourable Gentleman for the Opposition.’
‘You must be wrong, Gerald,’ cried a Labour voice.
Well, no doubt Mr Kaufman would argue that there are important differences between him and Mr Tebbit.
But to any of the Hong Kong Chinese watching yesterday, Mr Kaufman and Mr Tebbit must look terribly alike.
PanAm suspect snubs detectives.
By David Sharrock in Uppsala
SCOTTISH police investigating the Lockerbie bombing have been forced to return empty-handed from Sweden after the terrorist suspect Mohammed Abu Talb refused to be interviewed.
A Swedish court is today expected to convict Mr Talb and three others of involvement in terrorist attacks on Israeli and American targets in Copenhagen, Amsterdam, and Stockholm in 1985 and 1986.
Three weeks ago Mr Talb was described in Uppsala District Court as being ‘suspected in Scotland of murder or as an accessory to murder’.
A year to the day since PanAm 103 exploded over Lockerbie, Mr Talb remains the only suspect officially identified.
Two Scottish detectives met Mr Talb on Tuesday, but his lawyer, Mr Sven Eric Sjogren, said Mr Talb refused to talk in front of them.
A Swedish newspaper yesterday added to the mass of circumstantial evidence linking Mr Talb with the Lockerbie bombing.
Kvallposten, an evening newspaper in Malmo, reported that a diary belonging to Mr Talb which was seized during police searches shows December 21 1988 — the day on which PanAm 103 blew up — with a circle around it.
The report, quoting Swedish security sources, claimed it was confirmed that a man using an Egyptian passport in the name of Mohamed Abu Taleb was in Malta at the end of November last year.
Fifteen bags of clothing were taken from Mr Talb's home in Uppsala by Swedish and Scottish police three weeks ago.
Kvallposten claimed that immediately after the search Mr Talb's ex-wife telephoned a Palestinian family in Uppsala and ordered them to ‘get rid of the clothing’.
Police intercepted the call and raided the address.
The seized clothing has been shown to a Maltese shopkeeper who identified items found in the suitcase containing the Pan Am bomb as bought from him.
Killing with racial undertones halts town's minicab service.
By Martin Wainwright pic Joan Russell ‘S.
ORRY love, no taxis today,’ said Mr Mohammed Siddique repeatedly, as the phone at Huddersfield Taxis jangled every couple of minutes.
‘Top Town Cars?
No, they're shut too.
And GT.
And Three Star.
No, I don't think anyone's open today, love.’
The shutdown yesterday by Huddersfield's eight main minicab firms, all Asian-owned and with only a handful of non-Asian staff, followed a fatal stabbing in the most serious incident in an outbreak of violence involving drivers and their customers.
Racial abuse forms a regular part of this, although drivers, as well as police, see the issue as more complex than simple ‘Paki-bashing’.
Taxi proprietors were discussing the problem with senior Huddersfield police early on Tuesday evening when news came through of the stabbing of Mr Andrew Brown, aged 24, of Birds Edge, near Penistone, South Yorkshire, at Three Star Taxis' office in Beast Market.
West Yorkshire police emphasised yesterday that no evidence had emerged to link the killing to any vendetta or previous trouble.
But drivers, meeting behind Three Star's shattered office windows yesterday, said that violence — with a frequent racial element — was a rapidly growing problem.
‘We've been used to fares running off without paying in the past,’ said one.
‘But in the last couple of months we've seen things suddenly boil up — violent attacks, cars damaged, that sort of thing, along with loads of abuse.’
A four-hour protest strike by drivers in August was the first organised reaction.
Last week the eight taxi firms declared a boycott of Golcar, a Pennine village on Hudderfield's fringe.
The move followed stone-throwing by dozens of people after two youths disputed the fare when they were dropped off at a pub.
Four people were arrested.
‘Rushdie?
No, it's nothing to do with that,’ said one of the drivers at the Three Star meeting.
‘Copycats more like it.
The trouble usually comes after the pubs have opened.
I'd say you could put a lot of the abuse down to drink, though anyone with a black face was in trouble in Golcar that Saturday night.’
With almost all the minicab drivers Asian (as in Bradford, Dewsbury, Batley and Keighley, which have similar problems), any general anti-taxi complaint can seem a racial one.
Police were unwilling to comment in detail on the problem yesterday, with inquiries continuing into the Three Star killing and a man being held for questioning.
No-go area…
Violence involving Huddersfield's eight Asian-owned minicab firms and customers has led to drivers boycotting one area of the townPHOTOGRAPH: JOAN RUSSELL
Thatcher, Archer and Stallone lined up for BBC's Wogan shows.
THE Prime Minister, Jeffrey Archer, Sylvester Stallone and Rod Stewart are among those lined up to appear on the Wogan chat show as part of BBC TV's £82 million line-up of programmes for the new year.
Dave Allen heads the comedy bill, which includesBen Elton, French and Saunders and The Comic Strip.
Stars of Hi de Hi and It Ain't Half Hot Mum team up for a new series set below stairs, You Rang M'Lord.
US comedienne Ruby Wax will present her first series for the BBC, Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie are back with A Bit of Fry and Laurie, and Mel Smith returns as a reluctant rail man in Colin's Sandwich.
On the drama front Shoestring star Trevor Eve appears in A Sense of Guilt, by Andrea Newman.
The BBC will go on patrol in Liverpool with the Waterfront Beat, while detectives Bergerac and Campion return.
Lou Grant actor Edward Asner stars in a dramatisation of Jeffrey Archer's novel Not a Penny More, Not a Penny Less.
Screen Two will feature Stephen Fry and Simon Callow in a new Simon Gray comedy, Old Flames.
Edward Fox and Jane Lapotaire star in Nina Bawden's Circles of Deceit, while Jonathan Pryce, Susannah York, and Anna Massey appear in the thriller The Man from the Pru.
Thursday People.
Dennis Barker:.
Well bred in tooth and claw.
‘D.
RESSES like a pin-striped banker but talks like a countryman conservationist,’ was a typical verdict yesterday on the most vociferous fighter against the Government's plans to fragment the power of the Nature Conservancy Council.
He is its chairman, Sir William Wilkinson, who has campaigned courageously despite personal difficulties that would have stopped many more bullish men.
Now 57, Sir William said yesterday that his background was ‘academic through and through.’
His father was a housemaster at Eton, his mother a lecturer in classics at London University.
But the guts he has shown in resisting government plans for the body he has chaired from 1983 are far from academic.
Sir William, who claims that fragmentation will damage Britain's world influence in conservation, is a merchant banker who for two years after joining the NCC combined banking with conservation.
Eventually he took a hefty drop in income by abandoning the lucrative corridors of merchant bank Kleinwort Benson.
A year ago he had a heart by-pass which had to be re-done and for a while totally lost his sight because of a clot in the blood supply to the eyes.
He struggled on and, with less than 50 per cent of his sight restored, took this year's annual meeting of the NCC without betraying his difficulties except when he said when taking questions: ‘I will ask my deputy to point you out for obvious reasons.’
His sight is improving but he has to be helped to cross roads.
‘He makes light of his handicap,’ said an admirer who attended the meeting.
It has been particularly difficult for him because the Government have two of their placemen on the council, but he has managed to keep fighting though the council has this deadweight of government lackeys.’
Sir William said yesterday: ‘My father was a good amateur ornithologist and my mother was a little bit of a botanist.
I felt nature conservancy was something that really mattered.’
Was one of his hobbies, shooting, consistent with that?
‘Yes it is, provided the shooting is carried out in a responsible manner.
I think the huge scale massacre of pheasants is revolting.
It must be a proper sport and conducted as such.
‘It doesn't worry me morally but I have a lot of sympathy with those who don't think it is very attractive.
This is a question of people's personal decisions.
My wife is mildly agaist shooting.’
The self-confidence inspired by his Eton and Trinity background may have helped him in the several differences of opinion he has encountered in his life.
He was one of the eight directors of Lonrho who parted company from it after trying to oust Tiny Rowland in 1973.
Asked whether he is now used to confrontations, he said: ‘I hate them but they seem to come my way.
I find them extremely depressing but I shall go on slogging away until my term as chairman ends in the early summer.’
Sir William: schooled in confrontation PAGE
Sharp rises likely in Tube fares.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
LONDON Tube and bus fares are likely to rise sharply in the coming years as London Regional Transport seeks to price passengers off overcrowded public transport.
It is clear that LRT is planning regular increases above the rate of inflation for at least the next five years.
Fares go up by 10 per cent in February.
LRT said in its corporate plan published yesterday: ‘The level of congestion on the Underground is such that unconstrained further growth in demand cannot safely be accommodated, and real increases in fares would help restrain excessive growth.’
It said further annual real increases were envisaged.
The decision will bring more criticism of the public transport policies being adopted by Mr Cecil Parkinson, the Transport Secretary, who was under fire this week for forcing substantial increases in British Rail fares into the 1990s.
Mrs Joan Ruddock, Labour spokeswoman on London transport, said the Tube fare rises were ‘a cynical attempt to restrain further growth in demand’.
LRT's chairman, Mr Wilfrid Newton, said: ‘Creating successful change in busy, heavily developed greater London will be neither easy nor quick, and it will be very costly.’
The corporate plan says the above-inflation increases and rising productivity on the Underground would allow it to become financially self-sufficient, apart from funding major capital spending programmes.
London buses will also be expected to achieve commercial viability, except for some outlying services.
LRT has warned that passengers cannot be expected to finance the group's entire five-year £3 billion capital spending programme.
‘LRT should be able to fund about one third of this investment from internal resources, leaving the remainder to be funded from grant,’ the corporate plan says.
‘By the end of the five years, however, passengers should be paying for all operating costs and providing about half the investment expenditure.’
The decision to allow passengers to remain in their cars while transporter trains pass through the Channel Tunnel has come under attack.
Mr John Prescott, the shadow transport secretary, will today seek to raise the issue in the Commons, while the Fire Brigades Union and the privately funded British Safety Council have appealed to Mrs Thatcher to overturn the decision by the Anglo-French tunnel safety commission.
Mr Richard Warburton, director general of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, said: ‘If you were looking for the highest standards of safety, then you would be separating people from their vehicles in the tunnel.’
He also criticised the commission for taking the decision in private.
Mr Dave Matthews, the FBU's safety officer, said the tunnel could become the ‘longest crematorium in the world’.
In a joint message to Mrs Thatcher, the FBU and the council said: ‘The vast majority of serving fire and safety experts in the United Kingdom believes that unless passengers are segregated from vehicles in trains, there is a very serious fire risk.’
The high price of Ridley's thoughts.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
WHITEHALL'S most expensive confidential memoranda are written by Mr Nicholas Ridley, the Trade Secretary, and cost £4.86 a time, an official investigation revealed yesterday.
He is followed by Mr John MacGregor, the Education Secretary, whose thoughts cost the taxpayer £4.19 a document.
Details of the costs of Whitehall's bureaucracy are revealed in a National Audit Office investigation.
It found that more than £300million a year is spent on employing staff to type for 600,000 civil servants and 22 cabinet ministers.
This means jobs for 23,400 typists and supervisers whose varying rates of productivity come under fire.
Best value for money are the Ministry of Defence's 22 out-of-town typing pools, which cost 77p a memo, with an output of 110 per typist per day.
Among the worst is the Department of Education's headquarters secretariat — serving ministers and top civil servants — which costs £4.19 a time, but can produce only 29 memos per typist per day.
At least two departments have introduced internal charges to encourage civil servants and ministers to think twice before putting their thoughts on paper.
The Department of Trade and Industry has three levels of charges: £2.16 a memo for routine work outside London; £3.24 for routine work in London; and £4.86 for priority work at headquarters.
Customs and Excise have two charges: £3.60 for routine memos, rising to £5 for urgent memos and letters.
The auditors also found Whitehall slow to adapt to new technology, and that millions was spent on correcting letters by hand instead of on word processors.
Text Processing in the Civil Service.
Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General.
HMSO £5.50