

Baker names research chief.
MR Kenneth Baker, the Conservative Party chairman, yesterday named Mr Andrew Lansley as the new director of the party's research department, writes Alan Travis.
The post has been vacant for months and the lack of suitable candidates puzzled officials as the job proved the starting point for such politicians as Mr Chris Patten, Mr Iain Macleod and Mr Reginald Maudling.
Mr Lansley, who is at present policy director of the Assocication of British Chambers of Commerce, was Mr Norman Tebbit's private secretary when he was party chairman.
Mr Baker also said three MPs would act as campaign co-ordinators in London, Birmingham and Leeds for next May's council elections.
Hungarian budget clears the way for Western aid.
By Ian Traynor in Budapest
THE Hungarian Parliament yesterday endorsed Prime Minister Miklos Nemeth's austerity budget aimed at hastening the transition from a centrally planned to a market economy and clearing the way for economic aid from the West.
The budget had been the topic of fierce argument, but in the end it was passed by a huge majority, satisfying the Prime Minister, who proclaimed himself a happy man after having threatened to resign if he did not get his way.
The package of fiscal policies aimed to cut the budget deficit from its current level of about 50 billion forints (£500 million) to 10 billion forints.
‘The measures are very, very tough,’ said the Finance Minister, Mr Laszlo Bekesi.
But he insisted that there was no alternative if Hungary was to gain the confidence of the international credit institutions and seek to heal the economic crisis.
In order to release $350 million in stand-by credits and clear the way for the injection of $1 billion in European Community funds, the International Monetary Fund originally demanded that the budget deficit be wiped out altogether and that public spending be subjected to even more stringent cuts than are planned.
The result was the compromise accepted yesterday.
Mr Bekesi said that unless the government moved swiftly on economic reform, the outcome would be a flourishing black market, widespread shortages, inflation much higher than its current level of about 20 per cent, and high unemployment.
‘There is no alternative to our programme.
What is at stake is the complete collapse of the economy.’
But the public remains ambivalent about the Prime Minister's free-market policies and there are rumblings of union discontent and sporadic strikes.
As the country seeks to manage the transition from Communist state to parliamentary democracy, complaints are growing that the ‘proletarian dictatorship’ is being replaced by the ‘neo-monetarist dictatorship’.
Parliament yesterday confounded widespread predictions that it would wind itself up ahead of the Warsaw Pact's first free elections scheduled for the spring.
The favourite date for the poll is March 25, but a note of confusion was sown when parliament decided it would continue sitting until March 16.
The timing of the elections is entirely at the discretion of interim president, Mr Matyas Szueros.
He is expected to announce a March poll soon, but the elections could be delayed until June.
Under the current electoral law, parliament could have dissolved itself immediately and carried on until the election in a caretaker role.
However, Mr Jeno Horvath, a member of parliament and legal expert, said parliament had a lot of unfinished business and had decided the public might be confused to see it dissolved but continuing to function.
It will be the first completely free election in East Europe in more than 40 years.
Adamec becomes head of demoralised Czech party.
By Michael Simmons
CZECHOSLOVAKIA'S Communist Party, in its latest round of musical chairs, has appointed Mr Ladislav Adamec, the man who so angrily relinquished the prime ministership two weeks ago, as its new leader.
He replaces Mr Karel Urbanek, the former railway worker, appointed last month and discredited almost before he had started.
Mr Urbanek said the party was ‘in a deep crisis’ and that he himself was partly responsible.
Mr Vasil Mohorita, still in his 30s and the youngest member of the reshuffled politburo, becomes first secretary of the party.
He will have the onerous task of reviving low morale.
Mr Adamec failed to form a consensus government after the November revolution, and conceded after being elected that he did not have an easy task.
‘I cannot be suspected by anyone of seeking prestige,’ he said.
The party appointments came after the leadership had authorised a statement formally apologising to the Czechoslovak people for leading the country into its latest crisis, before they were hustled out of the building because the cleaners wanted to go home.
Television workers refused to broadcast conference proceedings live.
‘The party apologises to the working people, artists, the intelligentsia and young people for its past policies,’ said a statement read on television.
It expressed regret for the violence, presumably approved by the leadership of Mr Milos Jakes, with which riot police suppressed the student demonstrations on November 17.
‘The party wishes to become the joint guarantor of our rights to a free and dignified life and for the fulfilment of your hopes,’ the statement added.
As a signal of its goodwill — reluctantly agreed to by some members, but a signal nevertheless — the party acceded to popular pressure to disband its own private army, the People's Militia.
The decision takes immediate effect and will remove for many workers the threat of reprisal from aggrieved party officials.
The militia was much in evidence last January during a week of demonstrations in the centre of Prague in memory of Jan Palach, the student who had burned himself to death in public protest 20 years before.
The militia also threatened factory workers not to become involved in last month's decisive general strike against Communist rule.
Meanwhile, the new Prime Minister, Mr Marian Calfa, has secured agreement from President Gorbachev to start bilateral talks as soon as possible for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Czechoslovak soil.
Bush comes under pressure to talk terms with Noriega.
By Our Correspondent in Washington
STUNNED by the loyalty General Noriega has been able to inspire among his troops and fearful for the fate of US hostages, the Bush Administration is under growing pressure to reach a deal with the former dictator of Panama.
Although President Bush has been opposed to any such deal, Miami lawyers acting for Gen Noriega and leading US senators have been exploring the possibility of an agreement that could lead to a ceasefire and freedom for the American hostages.
The million-dollar bounty placed on Gen Noriega's head testifies to the growing American frustration at his ability to evade the US's clutches.
Gen Noriega was able to broadcast to the people and organise resistance over the main national radio network, until a special US assault team blew up the transmitters late on Wednesday.
US Intelligence was surprised by the readiness of some Panamanians to fight and die for their leader, forcing the US troops besieging barracks at Fort Amador to bring in 105mm howitzers to blast away pockets of mortar and sniper fire.
There are now fears that unless he is persuaded to surrender with guarantees of safe conduct, Gen Noriega could organise a prolonged resistance, and seek assistance from Nicaragua and Cuba.
Up to 400 Cuban military advisers are reported to be at fortified bases in northern Panama, where they have been training the the militia of the Dignity Battalions, the Washington Times said yesterday.
‘If Noriega gets into the northern redoubts, there are caches of arms and ammunition and he will have access to his bank accounts.
If the Cubans and Nicaraguans become his primary support groups, it will be a very bad situation,’ Mr Andy Messing, a former US Special Forces officer who trained in Panama, said yesterday.
Despite declarations that there would be no deal, officials yesterday grudgingly confirmed a Washington Post account of negotiations between Gen Noriega's lawyers and the State Department, begun before and continued after the abortive coup in October.
Mr Frank Rubino, a Miami lawyer, negotiated with Mr Michael Kozak, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, and with Mr Robert Muller, described as a senior staff adviser in the office of the Attorney-General After demanding that Gen Noriega simply step down, the US officials then relaxed their terms and suggested he relinquish positions of power in return for a US promise not to proceed with attempts to extradite him.
‘They just wanted him out,’ Mr Rubino said yesterday.
‘I told Noriega they were hot for an agreement.’
Another of Gen Noriega's legal team, Mr Raymond Takiff, said that US reports about Gen Noriega's habits and personal life were ‘deeply flawed’.
Senior White House aides and CIA officials have been telling members of the Congressional Intelligence Committees this week that Gen Noriega is drinking heavily, taking drugs, and is so nervous that he moves addresses four and five times a night.
‘I have been 30 hours and more with him this year so far, and I have never seen him take a drink.
Not once.
Noriega does not drink.
He does not take drugs.
The most he ever offered me was an aspirin,’ Mr Takiff said.
The prospect of Gen Noriega being brought to the US to face trial on drugs charges, one purported object of the US invasion, was causing some alarm among US Intelligence officials yesterday, who feared that Gen Noriega's former links with the CIA could prove embarrassing in open court.
‘Do we really want him on trial and talking about his past secret relationships?’
Admiral Stansfield Turner, the former CIA director, asked yesterday.
The charges include accepting bribes from the Colombian cocaine cartel — the legal basis for attempts to freeze Gen Noriega's bank accounts.
But Admiral Turner pointed out that any mention in court of money would enable the dictator to cite in his defence secret payments from the CIA and the Drug Enforcement Agency.
But Gen Noriega's capacity to inspire personal loyalty, as well as the power of his purse, is well known to US Intelligence.
According to the CIA report on the October 3 coup bid, when the dictator was imprisoned in his bedroom, he phoned his mistress, who passed on to loyal troops his message that the uprising could be thwarted.
Food is short but surveillance ample in the frozen domain of Zero One Erlend Clouston explores the nightmare world of Ceausescu's Romania, where even the ashtrays are thought to have ears.
TO ENTER Romania is to sink into a bad dream.
At Brasov the vast potato fields are protected by the binoculars and semi-automatic machine-guns of soldiers perched in 15ft watchtowers.
In Bucharest, gangs of crawling labourers comb weeds from the cobbled forecourts of Socialist ministries.
In Sapinta, three miles south of the Russian border, a chambermaid begs for a packet of ground coffee to meet a doctor's bill; when the doctor arrives, he complains wearily that there is no anaesthetic in the hospitals.
Such indiscretions are rare; Decree 23 stipulates that it is an offence to communicate with foreigners without reporting the conversation to the police.
Romanians queue for hours, sometimes days, for their monthly allowance of 30 litres of petrol.
At the state-run Peco garages, blue-jeaned secret policemen saunter along the lines of Dacias, checking who is playing truant from work.
Motorists are only permitted two Sunday outings a month.
It is not easy to cheat; liberty is licensed by the last figure (odd or even) of your number plate.
The engineers at Dacia, cossetted perhaps by a 99 per cent share of the local market, offer no relief.
Fifteen years ago the Renault 12 lookalike needed just over six litres to cover 60 miles the current model drinks seven.
Crude energy controls cut deep everywhere.
Urban Romanians are burdened with freezing flats and murky streets.
The state does not spare even essential services; it is disconcerting for the Western traveller disembarking at Otopeni international airport to see technicians servicing a Tupolev by torchlight.
The cities are desperately short of food.
Policemen marshall grumbling queues whenever a load of bread or chickens jolts in from the country.
The people vaguely understand that the bulk of their country's agricultural output goes abroad to pay Romania's external bills.
They do not see the antiquated Gloria combine harvesters or the Transylvanian wheat fields bloodshot with poppies: charming to the eye, but evidence of faltering investment in machinery and decent fertilisers.
Agriculture is crippled, too, by the miserable conditions on the collective farms.
A herdsman from Sibiu, just north of the great Carpathian sickle, estimated that he earned half the urban worker's monthly wage of 1,500 lei.
‘So when we can, we go to the factories.’
The factories, in turn, are obliged to dispatch a resentful proletariat to help (clumsily) with the harvest.
Neither group will ever be well-off in Western terms: a video recorder costs 40,000 lei, a Dacia banger 70,000 lei.
Troublemakers higher up the salary structure are brought to heel with an invitation to contribute 500 lei to the national debt.
No receipt from the national debt office, no salary.
Failure to turn out for major party festivals (May 1, August 23) can bring harsher sanctions.
Many Romanians are subsidised by Western currencies brought into the country by relatives on holiday from jobs abroad.
On a back street, just off Bucharest's Bulevardul General Magheru, a spiral stone staircase winds up to the cramped first floor offices of Comturist.
Here, in an aquarium light, men and women crouch in rows of wooden tip-up seats, peering at half a dozen shuttered doorways.
One of these is labelled ‘Iran (Irak)’.
Every ten minutes an austere blouse steps into the gloom and calls a croucher forward to the cashier's hatch.
Credit notes bought with francs, marks and dollars win relatives access to government caches of whisky, butter, chocolate and ground coffee.
Otherwise, rationing restricts Romanians to one kilo of meat a month and half a loaf of bread a day.
Protest is countered abroad by the Departamentul de Informatii Externe, smothered at home by the Securitate.
Ion Pacepa, the defecting boss of Securitate, has claimed (vaingloriously?) that 10 million state microphones are embedded in Romanian walls, television sets and ashtrays, enabling the Great Conductor, alias President Nicholae Ceausescu, to eavesdrop on most of his 21 million subjects.
Surveillance is not entirely electronic.
Pre-printed Romanian envelopes break the citizen's whereabouts down into ten components: Strada, Nr., Blocul, Scara, Etajul, Apart., Sectorul, Judetul, Codul and Localitatea.
The cult of precision reaches its apotheosis in the presidential code name: Zero One.
Up to now Romanians have rationalised their predicament in different ways.
Some have turned to religion, some to aesthetics.
In his comfortable living room a Transylvanian poet scoffed at the idea of protest: ‘On a barricade you burn like a flame in seconds.
It is more important to preserve the culture.’
Some have preferred to close their eyes.
‘Well, you know, the secret police have to hear what is going on,’ shrugged a Bucharest physicist.
‘Maybe some people with political ideas have problems.
Not me.’
But if an informer heard him denouncing the President as an idiot, what then?
‘It would just go on my record that maybe I talked too much.
No prison, no shooting.’
He laughed.
He had just been given permission to take a post in West Germany.
The physicist is lucky.
Few of Zero One's subjects have access to independent information on Western Europe, let alone a passport.
Tanker fire extinguished.
Salvage experts extinguished a fire on an Iranian oil tanker early yesterday and stemmed a leak that had caused a 30-mile oil slick 100 miles off Morocco, a maritime official said.
Mr Fernando Cano of the Spanish Merchant Marine said if the wind changed the oil could reachsouthern Portugal and Spain.
— AP.
Muslim march.
Up to 300,000 Muslims marched on the Algiers Parliament yesterday to demonstrate against ‘threats to Islam’.
Separate columns of men and women converged on the National Assembly at noon.
— Reuter.
Marcos deal mooted.
US prosecutors and lawyers for Imelda Marcos, widow of the late Philippines president, have discussed a possible deal for her to plead guilty and make a full disclosure in a racketeering case in exchange for a suspended sentence, Manila's chief government lawyer said yesterday.
— Reuter.
Condoms to Russia.
Two Japanese companies will build a condom factory for the Soviet Union, which has an acute shortage.
Japan's Mitsui and Company said yesterday that it would join Okamoto Industries to build the plant for the Soviet Ministry of Chemical and Oil Refinery Industries at Serpukhov.
— Reuter.
Hillary remarries.
Sir Edmund Hillary, the first man to climb Mount Everest, has married his longtime companion June Mulgrew, in Auckland, New Zealand.
— Reuter.
Pakistan death toll.
Three bullet-ridden bodies were found in Karachi yesterday, bringing the death toll to seven since the latest outbreak of ethnic violence in Pakistan began on Wednesday.
— Reuter.
Mandela phone link.
South African authorities have for the first time permitted Mr Nelson Mandela to talk by telephone with exiled leaders of the African National Congress from the prison where he is held near Cape Town.
Mr Alfred Nzo, general secretary of the ANC, said yesterday that he spoke to Mr Mandela for the first time in 26 years.
— Reuter.
Free meals offer.
About 850 ‘restaurants of the heart’ opened their doors in French cities yesterday to serve free meals to the poor over Christmas and the winter.
The entertainers behind the charity, Les Restaurants du Coeur, expect to serve 25 million meals before spring.
— Reuter.
Aids ‘cure’ failure.
An unpublished US government study of 16 Aids patients shows that bone marrow transplantation has so far failed as a treatment.
Researchers claimed that transplant, combined with the drug, AZT, might have eliminated the virus in one patient.
— AP.
Bus crash kills 32.
At least 32 people died in Australia's worst bus accident when two coaches collided head-on on the Pacific Highway on the New South Wales coast early today, police said.
The front of the buses appeared welded together and people were still trapped inside.
Police feared the death toll could rise to 35. — Reuter.
Obituary: Herbert Hartwell.
Peace from Prussia:.
HERBERT Hartwell was appointed a judge of the Berlin Kammergericht, the Prussian Supreme Court, at the age of 33, in spite of interrupted legal studies during war service in 1914-18 (including the Iron Cross).
A different kind of courage, coupled with staunch Christianity, marked his opposition to the Nazi regime during the 1930s.
In 1934 he joined the Confessing Church, the wing of the national (Lutheran) Church which refused to compromise with the Hitler government.
The next year he was dismissed under the Nuremberg Regulations.
A friend of Probst, H. Gruber and Pastor Martin Niemoller, Hartwell worked to aid the escape of Jews from Germany.
This brought him into touch with George Bell, then Bishop of Chichester, and with John Marsh, the Congregational theologian, who invited him to Oxford.
In August 1939 he escaped with his family on the last but one ship to leave Hamburg.
He took up the invitation, only to be interned on the outbreak of war.
George Bell secured his early release.
Within months he determined to be ordained, believing that the Congregationalists most closely represented the standpoint and theology of the Confessing Church.
Dr Nathaniel Micklem, who himself had been deeply involved with the Christian opposition in Germany, accepted him for training at Mansfield College, Oxford, for the ministry.
He and his children were always grateful to ‘Nat’(whose successor as Principal was Dr Marsh) for many kindnesses over the years.
At Oxford he took a D.Phil. on Barth, to set alongside his Erlangen law doctorate.
After ordination he worked as a chaplain with German prisoners of war for the YMCA and from 1948 as secretary for German affairs with the British Council of Churches Inter Church Aid and Refugee Service, the forerunner of Christian Aid.
The West German Government honoured him for his notable work in promoting friendship between the two countries.
Robert Courtney Edwin Robertson writes: Whenever I answered the telephone in the fifties and sixties and heard the anxious voice at the other end saying ‘Here is Hartvell’(he never quite managed that English ‘W’), I knew that either my deadline for an article was passed or he had some exciting new book for me to review.
Hartwell devoted his brilliant mind and untiring energy in those years after the second world war to forging links between Christians in his adopted country and that of his birth.
He did this at an intellectual level, and one of his chief instruments was the German-British Fellowship.
Herbert Hartwell born April 20, 1894; died December 11, 1989. above is p23 international PAGE
Legal experts give mixed opinions on Washington's justification of action.
By David Savage in Washington
THE Bush Administration stressed four legal justifications on Wednesday for its invasion of Panama: the protection of American lives, the defence of the Panama Canal, the backing of the country's ‘democratically elected’ officials, and the pursuit of an indicted US drug criminal — namely, General Noriega.
International law experts say the first reason is the strongest and the last the weakest.
‘I think they can make a much more plausible case for this than the invasion of Grenada [in 1983]or the Dominican Republic in the Sixties,’ said an American university law professor, Mr Robert Goldman.
President Bush had reason to use military force to protect Americans because thousands were scattered around Panama and Gen Noriega's troops had shown a willingness to harass and even kill them, Mr Goldman said.
By contrast, the Reagan Administration justified its invasion of Grenada by pointing to the danger faced by a small group of American medical students, a rationale that was rebutted by international law bodies.
Critics noted that the students could have been evacuated without US troops overthrowing Grenada's government.
Under the norms of international law, countries are justified in using military force abroad to defend their citizens from hostile military action.
But the response must be limited to the amount of force necessary to protect them.
The classic example of such a military move, law experts said, was the 1976 Israel raid on Entebbe.
Israeli commandos landed at the Ugandan air base, rescued the hostages and left, without attacking the Ugandan dictator, Idi Amin.
Several law experts, while agreeing on the need to defend American lives in Panama, questioned whether a full-scale invasion was justified under international law.
‘When you have the killing of a Marine and the beating of the navy man, some response was certainly called for,’ said Mr Edwin Smith, a University of Southern California law professor.
‘Whether it rises to the level of a threat to US sovereign interests is another question.’
A Columbia University professor, Mr Oscar Schachter, said US officials must show that the attacks on Americans were more than isolated incidents.
‘I think they need to make a much stronger factual case than they have made so far,’ Professor Schachter said.
‘If you have one man killed, you are not justified in bombing cities or killing lots of others.
But if you can show a pattern of attacks, then you have a much stronger case.
I don't think we know enough at this point to make a judgment.’
Gen Noriega and his few remaining allies would be hard-pressed to argue against the US invasion in an international legal body such as the UN, the experts said, because he declared last weekend that his forces were in ‘a state of war’ with the US.
‘That was his biggest blunder,’ Mr Goldman said.
‘He badly overplayed his hand.’
Department of Justice officials made it clear that they still see the pursuit of Gen Noriega as a criminal case.
Last month, Department of Justice lawyers said that US military personnel could track down and apprehend drug traffickers abroad.
In the past, US law was understood to restrict the military from engaging in criminal law enforcement.
But administration lawyers said that limitation now applied only within the US and not beyond its borders.
International law experts scoffed at that justification for the invasion.
In a February 1988 indictment, Gen Noriega and 16 of his associates were charged with violating the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act and laws barring the manufacture, importation and distribution of cocaine, along with interstate and foreign travel in aid of racketeering activities and conspiracy.
— Los Angeles Times
Mitterrand warns of rapid change.
By Anna Tomforde and Michael Farr
PRESIDENT Franois Mitterrand, the first head of state of the wartime Allies to visit East Germany, said yesterday that the existence of two sovereign German states could not be ‘abolished at a stroke’.
Reflecting French anxiety over German reunification, Mr Mitterrand said the two Germanys were jointly responsible for stability in Europe.
‘German unity depends first of all on the German people…and France will not be against it.
But Germany must be aware that it has to keep the balance in Europe,’ Mr Mitterrand said following talks with Mr Hans Modrow, the East German Prime Minister.
Earlier, he said on East German television that it would be ‘far from good, even dangerous’ if European borders were put into question.
After meeting Mr Modrow, Mr Mitterrand travelled to Leipzig in recognition of its leading role in East Germany's peaceful revolution.
At the Karl-Marx University, the oldest in East Germany, he held an animated and good-humoured discussion with 450 students.
They were interested in learning about the opportunities for French involvement in rebuilding the East German economy, but asked how Mr Mitterrand felt about Germans, as a former prisoner of war.
Mr Mitterrand praised the people of Leipzig for ‘having written the history of Europe and Germany in the last few weeks’.
The speed of change was such that it had become difficult to keep up with developments of which perhaps ‘we have not yet seen the end’.
But he appealed to the students to contain their passion and to show a measure of reason.
‘If you want peace it is important to stay cool.’
Later, he visited the church of St Nicolas, the starting point every Monday evening for the demonstrations which have gripped Leipzig and forced the pace of change.
Mr Mitterrand also had talks with one of the key figures in the reform movement, the conductor, Kurt Masur, who has urged East Germans to pause and reflect before pursuing their revolution further.
In Berlin last night, Mr Mitterrand had what were described as wide ranging talks with Dr Gregor Gysi, the new chairman of East Germany's Communist Party.
Meanwhile, preparations were under way for the opening of two pedestrian passages through the Wall, on either side of the Brandenburg Gate.
The bulldozers were to start work overnight, according to East German police.
The neo-classical Triumphal Arch, erected in 1794, has been sealed off since the Berlin Wall was built in August, 1961.
The formal reopening will be attended today by Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Mr Modrow as well as by the mayors of East and West Berlin.
The two German leaders agreed on the Christmas re-opening in Dresden earlier this week.
US condemns ‘barbaric oppression’.
By Martin Walker in Washington
ROMANIAN security troops opened fire on an unarmed crowd with machine guns just down the street from the US embassy in Bucharest, an appalled State Department spokesman announced yesterday, expressing official condemnation of Romania's ‘barbaric oppression’.
‘A just arrived report from the US embassy, Bucharest, states that 13 young people were killed by automatic weapons fire from government security forces during a major anti-regime demonstration, which continues now in the centre of Bucharest, about two blocks from the embassy.
Other fatalities may have occurred as well,’ Mr Richard Boucher, a State Department spokesman, anounced at yesterday's regular briefing.
The British Foreign Office said events in Bucharest mirrored those in Timisoara at the weekend and called on all countries to condemn ‘in the strongest possible terms’ the actions of Romania's Communist leadership.
Namibia close to constitution.
By Billy Paddock in Windhoek
NAMIBIA'S seven political parties in the Constituent Assembly surprised the country by announcing their agreement on a constitution with ‘only technical and minor amendments’ outstanding.
The Assembly's standing committee has managed to iron out all the main points of contention in less than a month, dispelling the predictions by foreign and local pundits of drawn-out negotiations.
This means Namibia could have a constitution by the end of January, and its independence soon after.
Swapo holds 41 of the Assembly's 72 seats, but observers expected its main opponent, the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) which has 21 seats, to block a Swapo-drafted constitution.
The speed of reaching agreement and the lack of conflict in the standing committee indicates the lack of material dispute among the parties — all accepted Swapo's draft as a working document — and some fine footwork by Swapo behind closed doors.
The main areas of dispute had been an executive president, a second house of parliament, and proportional representation.
Swapo's wish for an executive president was opposed by all except the Namibian National Front, which holds one seat.
Swapo was alone in its opposition to proportional representation and a bi-cameral system.
A Swapo representative, Mr Harmut Ruppel, announced on Wednesday that it had agreed to this, but acknowledged that this was in exchange for an executive president.
The deal makes it almost certain that Mr Sam Nujoma, president of Swapo, will become the country's first president.
The standing committee's choice of legal experts to draw up the constitution, adopted unanimously by the assembly, was surprising.
All three are from South Africa: Mr Arthur Chaskalson, head of the Legal Resources Centre and chairman of the Johannesburg Bar Council; Professor Gerhard Erasmus, professor of international law at Stellenbosch University; and Professor Marius Wiechers, professor of constitutional law at the University of South Africa.
Professor Wiechers was the architect of the controversial Turnhalle constitution a decade ago when South Africa tried to undermine UN Resolution 435.
His appointment is seen as a concession to the DTA.
Mr Chaskalson has long been known as a human-rights lawyer defending people charged under South Africa's apartheid and terrorism laws.
Mr Nujoma proposed a cabinet late yesterday composed of a president and 17 cabinet ministers, including a prime minister.
It would be dominated by Swapo, and two minor deputy cabinet minister posts would be given to small opposition parties.
US hopes for speedy troop withdrawal When the shooting dies down in Panama, the Bush Administration still faces a minefield of perils in Latin America, Tom Redburn reports.
NOW that US forces are firmly established in Panama, what do they do next?
The danger facing American troops, military analysts say, is that the new civilian government headed by President Guillermo Endara may not be strong enough to rule on its own.
That could push the United States, with a pre-invasion force of about 13,000 troops in Panama responsible solely for protecting the canal, into the unwanted role of a long-term army of occupation.
‘The future risks are tremendous,’ said Mr John Roberts, a Panama expert who served as general counsel on the Senate Armed Services Committee when the Panama Canal treaties were ratified in 1978.
‘The worst possible scenario would be for the civilian government to remain in a weak and powerless state, forcing us to maintain a military occupation in the city,’ said Mr Roberts, who is dean of the law school at DePaul University in Chicago.
‘That would be a disaster.’
Although US officials refuse to be pinned down on how long occupying troops will be needed in Panama, they talk in terms of sooner rather than later.
Marine Lieutenant-General Thomas Kelly told reporters that the mopping-up operation is likely to be completed within three days.
Politicians agreed with that prognosis.
‘There've been some fears expressed that we might have an occupation force in Panama,’ said Senate minority leader Mr Bob Dole.
‘I don't foresee that.’
Mr Dole's views were seconded by Senator John W. Warner, of Virginia, the top-ranking Republican on the Armed Services Committee.
Others, however, were less optimistic.
‘The PDF (Panamanian Defence Forces) as an institution is rotten to the core,’ argued Mr Alan Sabrosky, professor of international studies at Rhodes College in Memphis, who taught for more than five years at the Army War College.
‘For the government to survive, we may have to rebuild [the military]from the ground up.’
Mr Les Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, warned that US military police units might be forced to stay in Panama for at least a year to help keep the peace.
He noted that the last MPs did not leave Grenada until 18 months after the 1983 invasion.
Despite fears that the continuing American presence could undermine Panamanian support for the new government, they ‘are going to need a police force’, Mr Aspin said.
‘The whole public safety forces of the country are being decimated.
Who's going to arrest and interrogate the PDF?’
Mr Jeffrey Record, a military analyst at the Hudson Institute and a former aide to the Senate Armed Services Committee chairman, Mr Sam Nunn, said it was likely to take months to rebuild the PDF into a military institution capable of supporting rather than threatening the new civilian government.
‘You're going to have to have a fairly visible presence there for quite a while to put the authoritarian opponents on notice that we mean business.’
Some analysts said President Endara faces a struggle in establishing the legitimacy of his new government.
He carries the burden of having been sworn in just before the US operations began, and he remains in hiding under the protection of the United States.
‘It's not a good sign that the new government doesn't have enough confidence to emerge from protective custody,’ Mr Roberts said.
Several analysts said that it would be far easier to overcome any remaining resistance if Gen Noriega were found.
‘Obviously if Noriega is captured or killed, that would take the stuffing out of his remaining support,’ Mr Record said.
US officials say that Gen Noriega is no longer a threat.
He ‘may take to the hills and be very hard to find’, said Mr John Bushnell, the US charge d'affairs at Fort Clayton outside Panama City.
‘But he wouldn't have a significant force to actually do anything.
The faster US troops can turn over responsibility for keeping the peace to Panamanian forces, officials said, the better the US invasion would look to Latin Americans.
Sources said top administration officials told politicians in a closed briefing on Wednesday that one of their greatest worries was that a long-term American occupation would turn opinion both in Panama and throughout the region against the new government.
— Los Angeles Times.
Diplomats concerned invasion sets precedent for further intervention Latin America fears grow as troops dig in.
By Martin Walker in Washington
LATIN American reaction to the new Bush Administration assertiveness remained unclear yesterday as troops were deployed around the US embassy in Nicaragua, and diplomats warned that the invasion of Panama was a dangerous precedent which could be used to justify further US intervention in the region.
Angry anti-US demonstrations in Cuba and Nicaragua intensified after reports that US troops had surrounded the Panama City embassies of the two leftwing countries.
US conservatives have begun arguing openly that if the Sandinista Government tries to remain in power after the scheduled election in February, the invasion of Panama could be used to justify a new wave of military intervention.
Latin American diplomats have been saying privately in Washington that they are appalled at the jingoistic reaction of Americans.
A Brazilian said it reminded him of London during the Falklands war.
Colombian and other diplomats at the Organisation of American States were furious at the legalistic wranglings the US delegation has been using to buy time at the OAS meetings in Washington.
Trying to fight off calls for a ceasefire or resolutions that could be interpreted as critical, the US used its clout with Caribbean nations to block consideration of Nicaragua's proposal on the grounds that all resolutions should be tabled with 24 hours notice.
This would not normally apply to emergency resolutions.
The Nicaraguan proposal is not inflammatory.
It calls for an end to the fighting, and re-asserts the OAS principles of non-interference in the internal afairs of other states and no military action against a fellow OAS member except in the case of aggression.
The wide US support for the invasion, extending to the liberal media, including the New York Times and the Washington Post, has startled Latin Americans.
But they feel torn between their loathing for General Noriega's drug-based regime, and their alarm at the cavalier flouting of the OAS principle of non-intervention.
The legal cloak given to the US action by the formal request for US assistance by the new government of President Guillerm Endara is not convincing, since the government was sworn in on a US military base with a US general standing by.
Peru angrily cancelled its participation in February's scheduled US-Colombian anti-drugs summit, after denouncing the invasion.
After an initially cautious response, provoked by Gen Noriega's unsavoury reputation, opinion seems to be hardening against the US invasion.
Costa Rica and Venezuela issued cautious statements criticising the use of force, and despite phone calls from Mr Bush and the Secretary of State, Mr James Baker, there were signs Brazil and Argentina were preparing critical statements.
The US maintains that it supports the OAS charter, that it is acting to protect the integrity of the Panama Canal treaties, and that Latin America has no cause to fear that the invasion of Panama will be used as a precedent.
The Noriega government was a special case, and even then the Bush and Reagan administrations showed restraint for years before moving in to protect US lives.
But there is clearly a newly assertive policy being followed in the White House, and the early exuberance of US politicians when the invasion seemed to be going well has provoked fears that President Bush might be tempted to apply military solutions to Nicaragua and to the war on drugs.
US State Department experts on Latin America fear that the longer the military resistance against the US troops continues in Panama, the more the Latin Americans are likely to be driven by their own domestic public opinion to voice protests at the US action.
Britain stands alone in EC for defending invasion.
By John Palmer in Brussels
TWO days after the US invasion of Panama, Britain is still the only member of the European Community to have given public support to the action.
Yesterday, the European Commission and the political secretariat of the EC Council of Ministers continued to refuse to comment officially on President Bush's decision to send forces into Panama to overthrow the Noriega regime.
Not a single other EC government had yesterday come out in support of the American President's decision.
Apart from Mrs Thatcher's unqualified declaration of support, the only other comment on the events in Panama has come from the Spanish Prime Minister, Mr Felipe Gonzalez, who told the Cortes in Madrid that his government ‘condemned outright all foreign intervention’.
None of the other EC members have any sympathy for General Noriega or seriously doubt that the results of last year's general election were in favour of the Panamanian opposition.
But in most EC capitals yesterday there was barely disguised embarrassment at the timing of the American military action, which is seen as diverting attention from the repression by the Ceaucescu regime in Romania.
‘The Commission has nothing to say on this subject; it is something which will have first to be discussed by the member states of the Community in political co-operation,’ a Commission spokesman said yesterday.
However, officials working on EC foreign policy co-operation discouraged any suggestion that either a statement or a special meeting to consider Panama was likely in the near future.
Quite apart from their own reservations about the wisdom of the American action in Panama, most EC governments believe it would be impossible to find the form of words which could be agreed by the British Government and by Spain and other critics of the US intervention.
Privately, however, some European diplomats conceded that a failure to issue any public statement on Panama would weaken the credibility of EC efforts to develop a united foreign policy.
‘Most of us just hope this will be over as quickly as possible and that the Americans go home,’ a diplomat said.
‘The longer they remain, the greater the chances of disaster.
‘What is most worrying about this kind of action is that it could complicate matters if someone else were to decide to intervene, say in Romania.
What could we say then?’
In contrast to its silence over Panama, the Commission confirmed yesterday that it would be ending all contact with Romania, following the bloody repression of protests throughout the country.
It also said that it would cancel a planned meeting with the Bucharest Government to discuss the future of the EC's co-operation agreement with Romania.
But the Community will provide emergency economic aid to refugees from the Ceaucescu regime, notably those who have gone to Hungary.
West Germany seeks UN security council meeting.
By Agencies
WEST Germany has asked the UN Security Council to meet to discuss the situation in Romania.
A Foreign Ministry statement said yesterday that Bonn made the request after the Foreign Minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, telephoned his opposite numbers in the US, Britain, Italy and Hungary.
‘The Federal Government has requested in New York that the United Nations Security Council discuss the worrying developments in Romania,’ the statement said.
European governments yesterday formed a united front to condemn the continued repression, and President Franois Mitterrand said President Nicolae Ceausescu's ‘days are numbered’.
At the end of the current round of the East-West conventional arms talks in Vienna, a diplomat expressed concern that the unrest in Romania might jeopardise negotiations.
‘It is feared that Hungary and Romania will no longer sit on the same side of the negotiation table in Vienna,’ he said.
The Soviet Union officially reacted with caution.
‘If we do receive information on victims among people we will of course be extremely sorry for them,’ said the Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, Mr Vadim Perfiliev.
‘We should emphasise that we do have opinions on what is happening, but in my place as an official representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs I cannot go into comments without having all-inclusive information and orders in that regard.’
In East Berlin, President Mitterrand was more blunt.
‘It is a regime of personal, family power that has no honest reason to remain,’ he told reporters.
‘I think that the days of this regime, in a Europe in full movement, are numbered.
But at what price?’
In Bonn, Chancellor Helmut Kohl was said to be ‘deeply shocked over the brutal repression of the justified and peaceful protests’.
In London, the Foreign Office said that Common Market countries were considering a withdrawal of ambassadors from Romania.
But he stressed that this was only one of a number of options.
Italy announced it had recalled its ambassador to Romania for consultations, as did East Germany, condemning the ‘brutal action of the Romanian state power against peaceful citizens demonstrating to assert their elementary human rights’.
Thousands of East German troops urged their comrades in the Romanian forces not to fire on their fellow citizens peacefully demanding their human rights.
Demonstrators picketing the Romanian embassy in East Berlin urged the people of other East European capitals to hold simultaneous rallies on Saturday afternoon ‘against the bloody terror of the corrupt Romanian dictator’.
Czechoslovakia summoned a senior Romanian diplomat to receive a protest from the Foreign Ministry in Prague.
Street protests demonstrate strength of feeling against the President Romanians launch first opposition body in 25 years.
By Michael Simmons
THE Committee for Socialist Democracy, which has just been formed in riot-torn Timisoara, is the first sign of organised and coherent opposition in Romania since President Ceausescu became Communist Party leader almost 25 years ago.
According to the Yugoslav news agency, Tanjug, which still has one of the few non-Romanian journalists operating out of the country, the committee consists of lawyers, artists, and workers, but there is still no sign of a leader or a programme.
The thousands of Romanians demonstrating in the streets show how widespread is the opposition to the personality and policies of President Ceausescu.
Until now they have represented a mass of public opinion which is noisy rather than articulate, and more remarkable for its courage than its ability to coalesce as an organised force.
There is no national group comparable to East Germany's New Forum waiting in the wings or person, with or without charisma, who seems likely to emerge as a de facto leader in the way that Lech Walesa emerged in Poland or Vaclav Havel did in Czechoslovakia.
Partly because the machinery of repression has been so all-embracing for so long, stifling any messages of opposition before they reached a platform, and partly because Romania has for so long been cut off from the mainstream of European thinking and political change, constructive ideas have been hard to come by.
Strict censorship, and a security service which keeps a register of all privately owned typewriters in the country, means that the source of locally produced printed material can quickly be identified and there is precious little chance of such material being widely circulated.
Any printed material discovered which might be construed as dissent, or likely to encourage dissent, has routinely been seized and those in possession imprisoned.
Vocal opposition, such as it is, has come from people who are retired from public life, who have been purged or pushed to one side by the Ceausescu leadership, or who have been forced to make do with a moral posture on key issues, registering their dissent, but no more.
Most notable in the first category have been six veterans of the Romanian Communist Party who at the beginning of the year addressed an open letter of defiance to President Ceausescu, telling him that ‘the very idea of socialism for which we have fought is discredited by your policies’.
The most distinguished of the signatories was Mr Corneliu Manescu, former Romanian foreign minister and president of the UN General Assembly.
Another was Professor Silviu Brucan, Romanian envoy at the UN and chief editor of the party newspaper, Scinteia.
Two others, Mr Constantin Pirvulescu and Mr Gheorghe Apostol, both held senior positions in the party during the Ceausescu era, which dates from the mid-Sixties.
While their challenge was clearly the most serious to have been presented to President Ceausescu, and was made with the full knowledge of important facts, it was also made by people who have long since left the political scene, mainly having retired, or been retired — prematurely — by Mr Ceausescu.
An individual of note is Mr Ion Iliescu who fell out of favour with the leadership in the early Eighties.
He is seen as a reforming Communist and was, for a while, in charge of the youth section of the party and a provincial Communist Party leader.
His opposition while in office was such that he was ousted — to run a technical publishing house — but he is still in his early fifties and may yet have a political future.
There are dozens of ministers, some highly qualified, who have been purged from the leadership by Mr Ceausescu, usually because they disagreed with him on particular issues or because their superior intelligence made him insecure.
Outside the country one of the most distinguished Romanians is Mr Mihai Botez, professor of mathematics at Stanford University, California.
If ever emigres were to be welcomed back, as is suddenly the case in Czechoslovakia, he could have an important role in economic planning.
Others who have had the courage to stand up and be counted include Miss Doina Cornea, a former professor of French, now on hunger strike in the ethnic Hungarian city of Cluj; Mr Gabriel Andreescu, a geophysicist in Bucharest; and Mr Mirca Dinescu, a poet, also in Bucharest.
Punjab worries ease as Sikh drops plea for homeland Singh's National Front endorsed by acclaim.
By Derek Brown in New Delhi
INDIA'S twenty-day-old minority government easily passed its first big political test yesterday, securing a parliamentary confidence vote by acclaim.
The ruling National Front coalition, with only just over a quarter of the seats in the lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha, was supported by the rightwing Bharatiya Janata Party and the Communist-led Left Front.
When the National Front leader, Mr Vishwanath Pratap Singh, was invited to form a government on December 1, he was told by President Ramaswamy Venkataraman to secure a vote of confidence within 30 days.
Some observers then thought he might not even survive that long.
But in the event, the government's early performance has delighted even its own supporters.
The Congress Party, the biggest single group in the house, but now in opposition for only the second time since independence in 1947, had no option but to sit in silence when the voice-vote was called.
A single, unidentified, MP called out a no vote.
The effortless victory followed an occasionally rowdy five-hour debate in which Congress speakers taunted the new government for its dependence on other parties, and for alleged inability to spell out its policies.
Mr A.R.
Antulay, a senior Congress member, described the administration of the Prime Minister, Mr Vishwanath Pratap Singh, as ‘two headed and three legged’.
It had not been able to clarify its position on vital issues such as Punjab violence and communalism.
The unity of India was imperilled, he said, by a government which was ‘at the mercy of the rightists and the charity of the leftists’ and which held power only by the magnanimity of the Congress leader, Mr Rajiv Gandhi, who did not try to form a government.
He told the Prime Minister: ‘We have handed over to you a united country.
I hope you are not presiding over its liquidation.’
However, the majority mood of the house yesterday was running strongly for Mr V.P. Singh.
In an encouraging sign for his hopes of achieving an early solution to the tangled and bloody problems of Punjab state, even the small group of Akali Dal members supported the confidence motion.
The Akali Dal, or rather the faction of the much splintered Sikh movement which swept the November poll in Punjab, was formerly in the forefront of the campaign for a separate homeland.
But yesterday one of the group's leading members, Mrs Rajender Kaur, stated firmly that Sikhs did not want Khalistan, their own state.
Rather, they wanted justice and honour.
She accused the Congress government of treating the whole Sikh community as extremists, and authorising untold atrocities.
Mr V.P. Singh said his immediate priority was to deal with separatist and secessionist violence in the Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir.
Soviet deputies moderate pace of economic change Ryzhkov takes safe route to reforms.
By Jonathan Steele in Moscow
BORIS Yeltsin chose the best word to describe the economic recovery plan which the Congress of People's Deputies passed this week.
Is this ‘hybrid’ viable? he asked.
The question was well put because the Prime Minister, Mr Nikolai Ryzhkov, is proposing an extraordinary six-year programme, which aims to switch the giant Soviet economy towards market principles only after further tightening of administrative methods.
It is like a leap into the past in order to emerge into the future.
Had this apparently contradictory programme been worked out over a long period, it might have seemed more logical.
But it contains the hallmarks of a last-minute compromise with conservative critics of the market system.
The signs of retreat in the Ryzhkov formula are only too apparent compared with the plan put forward by his deputy, Mr Leonid Abalkin, only a month ago.
The ‘hybrid’ looks less like a controlled experiment than a hasty effort to balance political opposites.
Parliament is united on what is wrong with the Soviet economy.
Growth has been slowing; inflation is up.
The government has been spending beyond its means, with a budget deficit last year of 120 billion roubles (£120 billion at the official rate), or 10 per cent of GNP.
Some form of short-term stabilisation programme is needed to eliminate shortages of goods, and soak up people's cash.
There is also agreement that a switch to market incentives is necessary after that.
The argument centres on what kind of stabilisation plan to introduce, the pace of reforms, and whether the two programmes can be combined.
Can you deal with inflation while bringing in the market, or should you deal with the first problem first?
The government's solution relies on a sharp switch from long-term capital investment and the defence sector towards food and consumer goods production and improving social services.
Many construction projects are already being stopped.
Over the next two to three years, between 89 and 90 per cent of national income will be allocated for current consumption to cut the budget deficit to 92 billion roubles this year, and 60 billion roubles in 1990.
The government has also drafted a set of measures to restrain the growth of individual cash incomes so as to reduce demand for goods.
It also intends to tax enterprises which increase wages by more than 3 per cent.
The Prime Minister told parliament that he was against freezing savings accounts or monetary reform which would devalue the internal rouble and cut the value of individuals' savings.
Mr Yeltsin has supported such reforms while trade unions have suggested that all savings accounts above a certain level should be wiped out.
Mr Ryzhkov also ruled out rationing of food and basic goods with other products available on the free market, saying rationing was a return to centralised administration, and contradicted the notion of reform.
‘It would be difficult to introduce a rationing system but even more difficult to get rid of it.
It would be a major step backwards with great adverse effects,’ Mr Ryzhkov said.
However, his own plans rely on strengthening the central system.
Mr Abalkin, outlined three possible reform variants.
The first, ‘conservative’ option proposes a gradual switch to market principles over an unspecified number of years.
There would be prize freezes, limits on co-operatives, and controls to prevent producers from cutting back on low-priced goods in favour of more profitable lines to control inflation.
The consumer market would be saturated with goods.
Enterprise managers would be free to make their own deals with suppliers, but there would be no change in the basic concept of state ownership of industry.
Mr Abalkin rejected this as too slow; instead of giving the old system time to adjust, it would allow ‘opposing forces time to consolidate’.
His second ‘radical’ option called for far-reaching cuts in state investment and price subsidies, transformation of state-run enterprises into joint-stock companies, co-operatives and private companies.
Mr Abalkin rejected this also, saying that the distortions in the economy are too great to allow it to work properly.
Many companies would go bankrupt and others would prosper unfairly by raising prices rather than output.
Social tension would reach explosion point, making it easier for conservatives to restore administrative methods.
The third and favoured ‘radical-moderate’ option is an eight-point plan calling for a consistent denationalisation of property; reliance on new tax and credit levers to curb excess profits, encourage resource conservation, and direct investment for consumer goods production; a system of fixed, floating, and free prices; and creation of a financial market.
Mr Ryzhkov's plan, which the conservative-dominated parliament has accepted, is striking in its moderation.
Sixty-five per cent of the economy will remain in state hands in six years' time and workers will no longer elect managers.
While the Abalkin plan had tight deadlines for closing down or leasing unprofitable state enterprises,(industry by the beginning of 1991, state and collective farms by 1992), Mr Ryzhkov gave no cut-off date.
Instead, he protected less profitable state farms by writing off their debts and delaying the implementation of a new procurement pricing system.
The Ryzhkov plan is also cautious on foreign loans and investment.
While Mr Abalkin spoke eagerly of bringing the Soviet economy more in line with the international market, Mr Ryzhkov warned that increasing loans could increase economic and political dependence.
Instead, he promised a halving of imports of rolled steel products, chemicals, pipes and paper, which the Soviet Union could produce itself.
It is no surprise that parliament should have approved a conservative plan.
Most of its members represent the old party and management apparatus.
Even if they were willing to see their own power reduced, radical reform is a jump into the unknown.
However bad the situation, the majority is unwilling to risk change.