

No comfort from yachting win.
By Mike Seccombe in Canberra
AUSTRALIA's best-known businessman and yachtsman, Alan Bond, had little time to savour his victory in Australia's premier yacht race, the Sydney to Hobart.
The first Mr Bond knew of the successful move by the National Australia Bank to put his brewery businesses into receivership, was through a radio news bulletin aboard his A$3.5million maxi-yacht, Drumbeat.
On his arrival in Hobart, Mr Bond told journalists he was not finished yet.
‘I have just got it confirmed, but these things take time, and there's a long way to go yet.’
But Mr Bond was vague on details, because the rules of the race are that once a boat has started, it may not make contact except with officials until the event is over.
So while his empire teetered, Mr Bond sailed on for more than three days incom-municado.
Last night an executive director of Bond Corp, Peter Lucas, attacked the NAB move: ‘If that's the way business can expect bankers to behave, God help Australia.’
But Mr Bond has been through it all before.
In 1974 his property and investment group also faced problems brought on by a credit squeeze and downturn in the building market.
Luck was on Mr Bond's side that time, reaping more than $5 million from a decision by the Western Australian Government to pay out $13million to cover land purchases in 1975.
The Federal Government in turn bailed out Western Australia.
Ironically Federal Cabinet approved the payment on September 26, 1983, the day Mr Bond won the America's Cup.
No such intervention is in the offing now.
Downhill Down Under.
By Lisa Buckingham
IT HAS been downhill for the past 13 months at Bond Corporation ever since the Lonrho chief, Tiny Rowland, unleashed his first poisoned arrow.
In mid-November last year after Alan Bond had the temerity to build a stake in Lonrho — later increased beyond 20 per cent— Mr Rowland declared the Australian group nothing more than ‘a A$10 billion bubble of debt.’
Just two weeks later Mr Rowland declared it ‘technically insolvent.’
It is a charge never withdrawn and it is one which stuck.
An Australian Broadcasting Tribunal investigation into Mr Bond's eligibility to own television stations declared him ‘not fit and proper’ and growing stock market unease was accentuated by the disclosure that Mr Bond was trying to sell Van Gogh's Irises, for which he had paid a record $54million but which had been partially funded by the auctioneer.
Mr Bond's business tactics became an increasing focal point and the autumn increased certainty that Mr Bond's corporate days were numbered.
A stock market probe was launched in September and the group's media business, including the prestigious Channel Nine, had slumped into the red.
Deadlines were repeatedly missed for the sale of the brewing businesses.
In October, Mr Bond revealed the much-delayed results from his corporation showing losses of A$1 billion — the largest in Australian corporate history.
Mr Bond has been threatened with receiverships, the loss of boardroom control at his key Bell Resources company, failure to secure sale of the breweries, share suspensions, disclosure that a former employee may have been involved in telephone bugging and the final indignity of a derisory A$53 million bid from rival Kerry Packer for his TV interests.
Home help for first-timers.
IF YOUR New Year resolution is to become a home owner, the Yorkshire Building Society is offering first-time buyers mortgages at two per cent below its standard interest rate of 14.75 per cent for the first six months of the loan.
The society will lend up to 95 per cent of the purchase price or valuation, whichever is lower.
And the Sussex County Building Society will peg the interest rate for first-time buyers at 13.65 per cent for a year.
Meanwhile housebuilder Cala Homes is wooing first-timers by paying the 5 per cent deposit, stamp duty and £500 towards the legal costs.
The builder still has a number of unsold houses at Petersfield, Hampshire, and Billinghurst, Sussex.
Prices start at £62,500.
When the compass is thrown out, then financiers beware Eighties notebook.
By Alex Brummer
WITH the exquisite sense of timing of the champion yachtsman Alan Bond brought the last trading session of a tumultuous decade to a halt.
The shift in winds as the international economy moved from the extravagant eighties to the uncharted nineties has been evident for sometime but only the master helmsman could have kept afloat until now.
In many ways Alan Bond's demise is a parable of the last 10 years.
Mr Bond's business rise would not have been possible without the return of laissez-faire; the emergence of deregulation; the ascent of the mega-merger and the credit boom centred on the Anglo economies of Australia, the United States and Britain.
Conspicuous consumption epitomised by Mr Bond's $53.9million purchase of Van Gogh's Irises was as much a totem of the gilded era as insider trader Ivan Boesky's exaltation to greed.
The political powerhouses behind the era of easy debt and spending were Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.
Their revolutions based on the 18th century economics of Jean-Baptiste Say and Adam Smith, paved the way for the most profligate age since the 1920s.
Once the constraints of monetarism and dirigisism were swept away everything seemed possible.
In the US the historic walls which had been built between the banking system and the savings and loans were breached without attention to the integrity of the financial system.
In the UK, financial deregulation from freeing of the building societies to Big Bang in the City were handled more sensibly.
But the effects were the same: an untrammelled credit explosion.
A sure-footed City scribbler Tim Congdon of Gerrard & National writes: ‘The 1980s will be remembered as a decade of remarkable growth in all forms of credit.’
In 1980 new bank and building society lending was £15.7billion and by 1988 it had reached £82billion.
In the US the picture was similar.
There was an enormous expansion of credit to finance cumulative budget deficits of $1,400billion.
What was worrying about this phenomenon was its accompaniment by financial hooliganism.
As John Kenneth Galbraith writes in the January 1990 issue of The New York Review of Books: ‘Not before in our history have so many strong influences united to produce so large a disaster as in the the current case of the savings and loan disaster: bureaucratic inadequacy and incompetence, perverse ideology, money in large amounts for political protection.’
Another important consequence of deregulation was the availability of finance for mega-mergers.
The funds unlocked by Michael Milken's junk bonds, a form of finance which uses the tax benefits which accrue to corporate debt, meant that the unthinkable takeovers of the past became possible.
Moreover, the insatiable desire of Wall Street, the City and the commercial banks for a share of the action meant that finance was rarely a bar.
In the early 1980s Lord Hanson's £3.5billion successful bid for Consolidated Goldfields would have seemed unlikely and Sir James Goldsmith's audacious £13billion offer for BATs impossible.
But in the eighties the compass was thrown away.
Oil giants such as Getty were stalked by takeover wildcatter T Boone Pickens and swallowed whole by others.
Airlines attracted the attention of corporate buccaneers like Carl Icahn who was to turn his attention to that icon of American might USX (the former United Steel).
The most illustrious names in retailing from the House of Fraser to Macy's and Bloomingdale's were caught up in leveraged and management buyouts.
RJR-Nabisco was consumed by Kohlberg Kravis and there was even a scheme, at one stage, to mount a $40billion plus takeover for General Motors.
The mega-merger brought with it its own lexicon and culture.
Terms like junk bonds and LBOs tripped off the tongue.
Corporate raiders like Mr Bond, Ronald Perelman, Sir James Goldsmith et al bestrode continents like the explorer knights of the 16th century.
There were white knights and poison pills, Pac-Man defences and unbundling.
And all of this was wrapped up culturally by Tom Wolfe in the Bonfire of the Vanities and Oliver Stone in Wall Street.
They were to the 1980s what F Scott Fitzgerald was to the roaring twenties.
The money sloshing around allowed new wave companies to agglomerate, service the raiders and beneficiaries of Big Bang and create demands which people didn't even know they had.
Saatchi & Saatchi was among the hidden persuaders and such niche retailers as Next and the Body Shop made looking and feeling good availiable to all.
The double breasted suit moved from Savile Row to the high street and console jockeys of the financial markets, celebrated in the Thames series Capital City.
This unfortunately is a series caught in a time warp.
The Saatchis are yesterday's men; Next has shed George Davis and its allure and this has been an end of year without bonuses for the City as it seeks to operate within the constraints of a tight credit policy and high interest rates.
While the credit- driven Anglo economies draw in their horns the savings and investment driven economies of Japan and West Germany are reaping their rewards.
Japan's status as an economic superpower will shortly be marked at the International Monetary Fund and its surpluses, built on the voracious consumer, speak for themselves.
Sony's $3.4billion acquisition of Columbia Pictures is a vivid illustration of how even national symbols can fall prey.
Nothing, however, quite prepared us for the momentous last months of this decade.
As the Eastern European economies submitted to the attractions of the market system all the excesses of the eighties somehow look slighter.
The roar of the SuperMark becomes louder by the hour as freedom translates to trading and economic opportunities to the Western economy plumb in the centre of the new Central Europe.
On our own Stock Exchange the shares of Deutsche Bank, with its tentacles in every corner of Euro-business, have doubled this year and climbed more than 10 per cent in one trading day this week.
There could be no more potent proxy for a new economic order in the nineties.
Bond in last-ditch move to save empire.
By Lisa Buckingham
ALAN BOND, the Australian entrepreneur, part of whose business empire was yesterday put into receivership, will today begin last-ditch legal action to keep his organisation afloat.
The 11th-hour courtroom drama follows a year of struggle by the tycoon — owner of Castlemaine XXXX lager — to keep his brewing, property, media and resources corporation alive despite debts of more than A$8billion.
This is not the first time in his career that Mr Bond, condemned for unconventional and perhaps sometimes dubious business tactics, has teetered on the brink of bankruptcy.
But if his empire fails this time it will join the record books as the largest business collapse in the world.
A ‘sunset raid’ yesterday in the Victorian Supreme Court by the National Australian Bank appointed receivers to six of the Bond Corporation's brewery businesses and threatens to topple the entire organisation.
The breweries, which include Tooheys and Swan lager, are the powerhouse of the Corporation, providing by far the majority of cash flow with which to meet mounting debt payments, running at A$4million a day.
A spokesman for Bond Corporation admitted the action could wipe out the entire group.
Its auditors warned recently that difficulties over just one debt could have a domino effect throughout the organisation.
‘In theory, it could trigger the repayment of every other facility we have.
It could bring Bond down,’ he said.
Receivership at the breweries, for instance, could immediately trigger the repayment of most of the group's A$1.65billion convertible loan notes.
Shares in Bond group companies were suspended on the Stock Exchange after the receivership decision but the group said other lenders had said they would not take immediate action.
Describing NAB's decision as ‘outrageous’, Bond Corporation is today applying for a restraining order to prevent the receivers taking any action until a full court hearing on Tuesday.
The corporation, which yesterday announced a A$2billion deal to sell the breweries and some other assets to its 58 per cent owned subsidiary, Bell Resources, said NAB — whose syndicate is owed A$880million — was acting in a ‘quite extraordinary’ way.
The company argued that it was given a stay of execution by other bankers even though it had defaulted on loans connected with its American Heileman brewing operations.
But one banking source involved in the NAB syndicate said: ‘It has been a long-running saga and banks were worried about yet another swing of assets from one part of the Bond organisation to another.’
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, a major lender to Bond but one which cut its exposure to about A$1billion earlier this year, said it would study the implications of the NAB action over the weekend.
Standard Chartered in London, understood to have around £300million on loan to Mr Bond, declined to comment, although it is understood executives are confident of the asset backing for most of the exposure.
News of the receivership proceedings came as Mr Bond won the Sydney to Hobart yacht race and witnesses said he was visibly shaken and ‘distraught’ at the news.
He immediately flew to Perth in an attempt to begin his defence and boost the morale of his remarkably loyal employees, who were yesterday attempting to portray the receivership move as a battle between ‘old money’, represented by the Melbourne banking community, and ‘new money’, in the form of Mr Bond.
Analysts predicted that if the appointment of receivers was followed by the collapse of the whole Bond Corporation the Australian stock markets would suffer a setback.
But it is understood that most of the banks who have lent money to Bond have secured their loans against assets or have made provisions against ultimate default.
‘Bond has been one of the walking wounded for so long that most people have seen this coming and should have provided against it,’ a banking executive said.
‘The major bankers have also been very close to goings on in the Bond Corporation for some time.’
Bond Corporation will seek in court hearings today and on Tuesday to defend its viability.
In a letter to the Australian Stock Exchange, the company said it would ‘vigorously oppose the appointment that has been made and will do everything in its power to have the receivership rescinded.’
It will question NAB's assertion that the value of the brewery operations has fallen to such a level that asset-backed loans are in jeopardy.
The company claims not to have defaulted on the NAB loan and criticised the bank for failing to take account of the ‘extraordinary financial difficulties’ being faced throughout the country's business community because of high interest rates.
The stock market sees out 1989 in fine style.
By Mark Milner
THE stock market rang out 1989 in fine style yesterday but for the pound it was the familiar story of a struggling recovery from a previous hefty fall.
The contrasting fortunes of share prices and sterling were illustrated by the Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 share index closing within a whisker of its best for the year whilst sterling could manage only a marginal improvement from Thursday's all-time low against the German mark.
Better-than-expected trade figures and increasing optimism that UK interest rates may start to fall from their current 15 per cent level, perhaps as early as next spring, helped fuel a 23.9 point rise in the index to 2,422.7 — within four points of the year's high of 2,426 established just before the mini-crash in October and within hailing distance of the all-time high of 2,443.4, established on July 16, 1987.
Though the London market was slow to recover from the great crash in October 1987, it has enjoyed a bumper run in 1989.
Yesterday's close compared with the 1,793.1 at which the FTSE index ended 1988.
The pound's fall from grace has not been quite as marked as the stock market's recovery but, for all the Government's protestations about the need for a firm exchange rate, its decline has been very sharp.
At the end of 1988 the pound stood at $1.79 and DM3.20, putting the effective exchange rate at around 97 per cent of its 1985 value.
But despite the climb in bank base lending rates to 15 per cent and frequent support from the Bank of England sterling's effective index is ending the year a full 11 per cent lower at 86.0.
Against the DM the pound managed to rally a pfennig yesterday to close at DM2.7336 whilst it was little changed against the dollar, at $1.6130.
This year's strong performance by UK share prices closes a decade which, according to the financial information group, Datastream, has seen the UK stock market climb 266 per cent.
But even that performance is only sufficient to put it in the middle ranking of the world's stock markets.
Top position over the decade goes to Japan where the Nikkei Dow average rocketed by 875 per cent in dollar terms, more than double that of its closest rival, Italy.
But the UK market is still a long way ahead of the worst performers in Datastream's league table, Hong Kong and Switzerland.
But even they could show a better return for investors than gold.
Datastream's end of decade calculations show that a £100 investment in the shiny yellow metal made at the beginning of January 1980 would be worth just £78.
Putting the cash in the building society would have yielded just over £300.
The world markets yesterday:
New York: The Dow Jones added 20.91 points to close the year at 2,753.20, just 1 per cent below its all-time high set in October.
Hong Kong: Prices nosedived.
Hang Seng index: 2,836.57 (2,895.43).
Tokyo: Slightly firmer.
Nikkei index: 38,915.87 (38,876.94).
Paris: A late rally helped shares recover.
CAC index: 553.8 (552.0).
.
By Nick Pandya
ONE of the most remarkable features of the Thatcher decade is the continuing rise of consumer credit.
The average home loan is now almost triple the £13,000 at the beginning of the Eighties.
And the outstanding debt which excludes mortgages has seen a three-fold increase to £40 billion.
The most tangible signs of this tendency to borrow more are highlighted in the Central Statistical Office's Social Trends 1989, which showed that household expenditure exceeded income in 1986 and 1987 for the first time since compilation of the information began.
This phenomenal growth in consumer debt is partly explained by the proliferation of credit and charge cards, which the marketing men sell as ‘take the waiting out of wanting.
The number of plastic cards in circulation has risen from less than 10 million 10 years ago to 27 million today, while the total bank lending on cards — which in January 1980 stood at £934 million — currently stands at a massive £6.6 billion.
Another major feature of the past decade has been the advent of in-house credit cards offered by large department stores, which remain popular despite the punitive rates of interest.
Consumers are frequently lured into debt by careful manipulation of the English language.
Retailers have effectively redefined ‘debt’ as ‘credit’— a move which has been dubbed the greatest marketing coup of all time by the National Association of Citzens Advice Bureaux (NACAB).
But, for the over extended borrowers, the chickens have come home to roost.
The NACAB has recorded a rise of 120 per cent in the number of debt related inquiries in the last 10 years.
NACAB increasingly deals with clients who have run up large bills on their credit cards only to find that the repayments crippling.
For such clients raising a second mortgage to pay off the credit card debt often seems the only answer.
A personal triumph for the pension revolution.
By Mihir Bose
PENSIONS underwent an unexpected revolution in the Eighties — sparked by a report in 1982 from the Occupational Pensions Board on the plight of those who move jobs.
A company pension system which rewarded those who stayed with one firm all their working life with a pension equivalent to two thirds of final salary, ‘froze’ the pensions of those who moved jobs.
The debate generated by the report acquired extra bite when a document calling for Portable Pensions was issued by the Centre for Policy Studies.
The document was shrewdly timed.
Within a few months of its publication the government had launched a huge inquiry into pensions which was to produce a series of changes — including the right of employees changing jobs to either take a pension with them, or leave it with the previous employer and have it uprated in line with the retail price index up to a maximum of 5 per cent.
The crowning piece of this legislation was the introduction of personal pensions in 1988, which allowed individuals to opt out of their company plans and start a personal pension.
As Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson considerably modified the tax framework in which life assurance and pensions schemes operated, removing for instance the tax relief on life insurance premiums.
And in his last Budget, in 1989, he capped the salary that can be used to contribute to a pension scheme at £60,000.
The Eighties ended with Mrs Thatcher being forced to concede increased pensions of £40 a week for widows of servicemen killed in the second world war.
Their pensions were substantially lower than the ones enjoyed by widows of servicemen killed in subsequent wars.
Kalms unveils Dixons defence.
Mr Stanley Kalms, chairman of electrical retailer Dixons, yesterday unveiled his company's defence document aimed at beating off a £550million bid from Kingfisher.
The document is full of information about Dixons' market share — reckoned to be around 16 per cent— and efforts to smarten up Dixons and Currys outlets.
But Mr Kalms refuses to give any information about current trading or likely profits.
That will come later, he says.
RI raise Invicta stake.
Radio Investments has taken its stake in Kent-based radio station Invicta Sound to 10.47 per cent through the purchase of another 1.39 per cent.
Panfida sells in US.
Panfida is to sell its US retailing and trading interests to concentrate on its British business, the Martin Retail Group.
MMC deadline extended.
The Trade Secretary, Nicholas Ridley, has extended the January 12, 1990 deadline set for the Monopolies Commission's report on the proposed merger of the Colne Valley, Lee Valley, and Rickmansworth water companies to February 12.
Attwoods expands.
Attwoods, the waste disposal group where Denis Thatcher is a director, is to buy London-based Taskmasters Cleansing Services for £3.7million.
Opec departure.
Opec President Rilwanu Lukman is likely to step down after being switched from the Nigerian oil minister's job in a cabinet reshuffle.
Lukman, now foreign minister, was re-elected OPEC president in November.
Grenfell unconditional.
Deutsche Bank's agreed bid for Morgan Grenfell has gone unconditional after acceptances were received from holders of 59.5 per cent of its shares.
New bid for Carron?.
Carron Phoenix, the Glasgow sink manufacturer which has withdrawn its recommendation for French company Bene's bid, could receive an offer from 6.4 per cent shareholder Franke of Germany.
Cadbury on panel.
Sir Adrian Cadbury, who has just stepped down as chairman of Cadbury Schweppes, has been appointed a member of the Takeover and Mergers Panel.
.
By Jill Papworth
THERE'S little doubt that over the past decade the British public has been moving towards the Tory party's ideal of a nation of home owners.
But the price of home ownership has been an increasing mortgage burden.
Just over 65 per cent of homes are now owned by their occupiers, compared with 55.5 per cent in 1979.
But, in order to buy rather than rent their own homes, Britain's nine million home buyers now have to borrow an average of £37,000 — more than twice the average income — whereas 10 years ago the average loan of £11,800 worked out at 1.7 times income.
This is mainly because salaries have not kept pace with the rise in house prices which, until this year's slump, had more than tripled from an average £19,925 in 1979 to £61,965 by August this year, according to the Building Societies Association's latest figures.
And as the decade comes to a close that mortgage burden is weighing particularly heavy.
After no less than four mortgage rate rises in the past 18 months — which have brought the average home loan rate close to an all-time high of 15 per cent— home buyers have seen their monthly payments go up by more than 50 per cent .
Many first time buyers are seeing more than half their take home pay eaten up by their mortgage payments.
Some can no longer make ends meet.
And although home ownership has proved a profitable investment during most of the decade, with house prices rising by an average of around 12 per cent, it looks far less so now.
Home buyers approach the end of the decade seeing the value of their homes fall by an average of three to four per cent over this year and the prospect of an average fall of 10 per cent next year.
A major change in the 1980s has been the huge increase in both the choice of lenders and the range of products.
In the mid-70s building societies were virtually the only source of house purchase loans.
In 1978 they provided 95.7 per cent of all mortgages.
Two changes since those halcyon days for the societies has put an end to their safe monopoly.
First, the abolition of government restrictions on bank lending in 1980 paved the way for the banks to move forcefully into the mortgage market.
By 1982, they had grabbed 40 per cent.
A second competitive threat has come from insurance companies and specialist mortgage companies such as The Mortgage Corporation and National Home Loans.
The societies' worst point came in 1987 when their market share was reduced to just under 50 per cent; the banks had 34.5 per cent and other finance companies 16.3 per cent .
The societies woke up to the threat and realised that the public was no longer naturally coming to them for mortgages.
The new lenders were offering borrowers more flexible loan arrangements than the traditional 25-year endowment and repayment mortgages on offer from the societies.
Their interest rates also tended to be more attractive.
Both the introduction of new rules on how societies could raise funds for mortgage loans and the 1987 stock market crash — which prompted small investors to get out of equities and put their money into building society saving accounts — made it possible for the societies to get their act together and fight back.
More active marketing, an increasing range of special mortgage products and interest rates currently undercutting those of the banks and new lenders, have allowed the societies to start clawing back their share of the market.
By the first quarter of 1989, the societies had reclaimed a 67.6 per cent share.
Of course, while the wider range of lenders and mortgage products mean that borrowers can end up with a better deal than in the past, it also means spending more time and effort choosing the best mortgage for your particular circumstances.
It has become increasingly important to carefully compare interest rates and terms offered by the various lenders on their myriad of products, particularly while base rates are high and lenders are in fierce competition to attract the relatively few people willing to brave the stagnant property market.
Events of 1989 have done little for Australian image.
By Ben Laurance
WITH admirable understatement, the chief economist of one of Australia's big four banks admitted yesterday that events of 1989 have done little to help his country's international business image.
Australia, said Mr Bob Graham of Westpac, ‘is gaining a bad reputation overseas as a result of the failures.’
The collapse of Mr Bond's empire is particularly spectacular simply because of its size.
But it is not the first case where an Australasian entrepreneur, hailed as a hero when things are going well, has found himself brought to earth with an ignominious bump when the going gets tough.
It is only two months since the American arm of Quintex, the media group put together by Australian Christopher Skase, had to file for protection from its creditors under bankruptcy laws.
And last January saw the collapse of New Zealander Allen Hawkins' Equiticorp after it had bought Britain's GPG, parent of venerable institutions including Guinness Peat and Guinness Mahon.
Other antipodeans have shown greater caution — and greater resilience.
Sir Ron Brierley, who had a tilt at Britain's Ocean Transport & Trading has survived and prospered by sticking to investments with the safe and reassuring backing of secure assets.
Kerry Packer sold most of his stock market investments — some of them to Bond — at the height of the stock market's bull run in 1987.
Robert Holmes a Court, one-time head of the same Bell Group now convulsed in the death-throes of the Bond empire, was happy to take Mr Bond's money and stand back.
Pat Goodman, head of New Zealand's Goodman Fielder Wattie food group, has withdrawn from the fray in Britain after buying a stake in Ranks Hovis McDougall, mounting a bid which was stalled by the Office of Fair Trading then pocketing a profit by selling his shares to Sir James Goldsmith and partners.
And John Spalvins, head of Adelaide Steamship sits astride an apparently financially robust company.
These are the survivors.
But between the caution of a Brierley or a Spalvins and the reckless aggression of Bond, there is a middle group of antipodean entrepreneurs who have borrowed heavily to expand but for whom the expansion has so far paid off.
Most notable are Rupert Murdoch — whose News Corporation has made hugely expensive forays into satellite TV in Britain and virtually every conceivable medium in the US — and Mr John Elliott whose Elders IXL is now controlled by a private company controlled by Mr Elliott and fellow executives.
Both Elders and News Corporation are controlled by private companies.
Both have expanded by borrowing.
No one is yet saying that either company will follow Bond, Hawkins or Skase.
As Mr Graham of Westpac acknowledges, Australia's overseas business image could do with a less exciting 1990.
Now wives and Woopies can look forward to a happy New Year.
By Margaret Hughes
THE past decade has proved just how foolhardy it would be to gaze into the crystal ball and confidently predict what lies ahead in the next 10 years.
But it is possible to make a few predictions for 1990.
Next year will certainly be a time for married women although their husbands will also be able to benefit from the personal tax changes which come into force on April 6.
This is the date which will see the taxman treat a married woman as a person in her own right.
She will be taxed independently of her husband, allowed to complete her own tax return and pay her own tax.
She will also have her own tax allowance, be entitled to her own standard rate band and have her own capital gains tax exemption.
Apart from bestowing long overdue financial independence on married women, the changes also offer couples the chance of substantial tax savings.
Non-working wives with incomes from savings or investment will be among the main beneficiaries as they will be able to receive tax free income or interest equivalent to their personal allowance.
But to get the full benefit of the new tax regime these married women will need to look for investments that pay interest gross.
That will tend to be offshore as banks and building societies in this country have to deduct tax at source.
But as the deadline approaches look out for new products, such as cash unit trusts paying interest gross, as the banks and building societies battle to hang on to those deposits.
This will also be the year when Woopies — well off older people — get a tax break.
For April 6 is also the day when the over 60s will be eligible for tax relief on the premiums they pay for private medical insurance.
Although primarily part of the government's plans for reducing dependence on the National Health Service, the main beneficiaries will be the Woopies since it is they who can afford private health insurance in the first place.
At the other end of the age range employees who have not taken advantage of the incentives to contract out of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) should do so before they dwindle away altogether.
If you're not one of the 3.5 million who have already contracted out you will have lost out on the chance to back date for up to two years the National Insurance Contributions rebate plus the extra 2 per cent‘bribe’.
Meanwhile, 1990 will again be a year when we will have to live with high interest rates.
And that will mean resisting those tempting offers from lenders designed to encourage us to take on more debt by making the initial costs appear cheaper, but which store up trouble for the future.
It will also pay to weed out credit cards which either charge high interest rates or an annual fee, unless combined with an especially low rate of interest.
And if retailers do indeed start charging less for cash purchases than for those bought on credit cards, ensure that this is precisely what they are doing and not merely surcharging credit card users.
On the other hand there will be a greater onus to shop around for the best home for whatever spare cash you may have.
Despite the government's bail-out of investors, the Barlow Clowes scandal should have shown the value of placing funds in safe hands.
Then it will be a matter of finding the best returns, taking advantage of the already fierce competition between banks and building societies.
And as this competition intensifies we should become more demanding so that we actually get the kind of services and products we want.
We should park a little of our funds in those societies either tipped to convert to a public company or ripe for takeover to benefit from any freebies that may be on offer.
The stock market is unlikely to have much allure for the small investor although the start of the electricity privatisation may provide a temporary fillip.
What equity investment there is will be best placed in the regular savings schemes offered by unit trust and investment trust schemes with higher rate tax payers using the tax shelter of PEPs.
And Europe, rather than green, is likely to be the flavour of 1990.
Money Guardian is edited by Personal Finance Editor Margaret Hughes
Daniel John Did you refuse to say yes?
Or perhaps you didn't get the habit?
Maybe you2 didn't even consider being 2late for water?.
If the affirmative was the case in all three, don't feel ashamed.
Contrary to popular myth and the Government's public relations machine, you were among around 30 million people in Britain who have failed to join the crusade of popular capitalism which swept through the 1980s.
Whether in its truest sense — the sale of state-owned assets — or the conversion of ownership from an institution's members to a new breed of shareholders, privatisation has made profiteering a respectable way of life.
Maybe so, though it is still nice to see that principles still count for something, particularly when it comes to refusing to buy something you already own or turning that hand-out of shares over to a deserving charity at the expense of an easy-come, easy-go profit.
That apart, the figures from the 15 largest privatisations since 1981 and the two public sale-like floats — TSB and Abbey National — also tell a different story from the image which the proponents of the programme would like us to believe.
On one level, there is no faulting their conviction that popular capitalism has caught the public's imagination as well as our money.
When the Conservatives swept to power in 1979, just seven per cent of people owned shares.
Now, as we are frequently told, there are more shareholders than trade unionists.
A closer examination of the numbers shows that the most recent development of the concept — widening and deepening share ownership — has yet to catch on.
Just over half of all private investors hold shares in privatisation issues and of these, 56 per cent have stakes in just one of company.
The percentages drop greatly in terms of wider ownership: one in five hold shares in two companies; one in 12 in three and one in six in four.
Figures from the Treasury and the International Stock Exchange also show just how important large issues have been share ownership.
Abbey National's arrival on the stock market handed shares to 5.5 million people, for instance, of which 3.5 million were completely new entrants in the popular capitalism field says the Abbey.
The same could be said of the TSB while if you sell shares at such low prices that they guarantee the buyers an instant and spectatular profit then a lot of people are going to say: ‘Thank you very much indeed’.
The 1990s then will provide the proof of just exactly how long term the effects of privatisation will be.
Certainly, the market crash of ‘87 put the whole matter into perspective and help to propel to prominence the small print in the Government advertisments that investments can go down as well as up.
To be fair, there is no doubt that with luck, commonsense and sensible advice many people have done very well out of privatisation shares.
Witness the 460 per cent rise in the shares of Associated British Ports or the 250 per cent increase in those of Enterprise Oil as just two examples.
But just like the City institutions, there comes the time of the irresistible profit.
The new breed of shareholders has yet to show its skills of actually trading shares for long term appreciation and has tended to sell out at the most lucrative time.
And while such mundane things as fluctating interest rates and ever-increasing gas, electricity, water bills remain on the scene, it's a strong possibility that ‘wider and deeper ownership’ will be hampered by thevery economic policies that spawned it.
* Price Waterhouse: Privatisation The Facts — price £10.
PAGE
Bonus scheme for TVS executives.
By Daniel John
TWENTY key executives at TVS Entertainment have been offered a package of financial incentives aimed at securing their services for the station's battle to retain its lucrative ITV franchise in the South-east.
Details of the bonus scheme for the station's senior management emerged yesterday at a special meeting of shareholders called to approve the departure of Mr Arthur Price, former head of MTM, TVS's loss-making US production arm which it bought 18 months ago for £190million.
So far 17 executives have signed the new terms and the agreement of the other three is just a ‘matter of paperwork’ said Mr James Gatward, TVS's chief executive who was given an 110 per cent annual pay rise only in July.
He now earns £250,000 a year.
The deal does not involve them getting options on TVS shares or any large stake in the company like the package offered to executives at London Weekend Television who stand to become millionaires through a 15 per cent holding.
It is believed the TVS proposals involve straight forward bonus payments, the size of which will depend on whether the contractor retains its franchise, lasting 10 years, in 1992.
Mr Gatward refused to say whether it would involve them receiving a percentage of TVS's future profits but indicated the amount of cash involved was not large enough to require shareholder approval.
Other ITV stations will closely scrutinise the small print when further details are released in a few weeks.
However, the approaches to its main executives only came out under aggressive press questioning of Mr Gatward after yesterday's meeting which a handful of shareholders attended.
Lasting only seven minutes, the meeting approved without any questions the deal which sees MTM president Mr Price, who received £63million for his MTM shares when TVS bought the company, leave without compensation.
Mr Price has also handed back 6.1million shares worth around £10million which TVS is now looking to place with a potential broadcasting partner.
As for MTM (which took its name from US actress Mary Tyler Moore, its founder, and is best known in Britain for Hill Street Blues and Lou Grant) Mr Gatward said it would take between 18 months to two years before the company was turned around.
Having bought it under expectations of strong profits, TVS has since discovered MTM is making losses of £20million.
Mr Gatward said TVS has narrowed down the candidates for the MTM job to two.
He is also in the process of looking for a joint venture production partner who would be interested in taking a 49 per cent stake in MTM.
Bonus scheme for TVS executives.
By Daniel John
TWENTY key executives at TVS Entertainment have been offered a package of financial incentives aimed at securing their services for the station's battle to retain its lucrative ITV franchise in the South-east.
Details of the bonus scheme for the station's senior management emerged yesterday at a special meeting of shareholders called to approve the departure of Mr Arthur Price, former head of MTM, TVS's loss-making US production arm which it bought 18 months ago for £190million.
So far 17 executives have signed the new terms and the agreement of the other three is just a ‘matter of paperwork’ said Mr James Gatward, TVS's chief executive who was given an 110 per cent annual pay rise only in July.
He now earns £250,000 a year.
The deal does not involve them getting options on TVS shares or any large stake in the company like the package offered to executives at London Weekend Television who stand to become millionaires through a 15 per cent holding.
It is believed the TVS proposals involve straight forward bonus payments, the size of which will depend on whether the contractor retains its franchise, lasting 10 years, in 1992.
Mr Gatward refused to say whether it would involve them receiving a percentage of TVS's future profits but indicated the amount of cash involved was not large enough to require shareholder approval.
Other ITV stations will closely scrutinise the small print when further details are released in a few weeks.
However, the approaches to its main executives only came out under aggressive press questioning of Mr Gatward after yesterday's meeting which a handful of shareholders attended.
Lasting only seven minutes, the meeting approved without any questions the deal which sees MTM president Mr Price, who received £63million for his MTM shares when TVS bought the company, leave without compensation.
Mr Price has also handed back 6.1million shares worth around £10million which TVS is now looking to place with a potential broadcasting partner.
As for MTM (which took its name from US actress Mary Tyler Moore, its founder, and is best known in Britain for Hill Street Blues and Lou Grant) Mr Gatward said it would take between 18 months to two years before the company was turned around.
Having bought it under expectations of strong profits, TVS has since discovered MTM is making losses of £20million.
Mr Gatward said TVS has narrowed down the candidates for the MTM job to two.
He is also in the process of looking for a joint venture production partner who would be interested in taking a 49 per cent stake in MTM.
PAGE
Sweetener takes sugar chief's pay to £534,000.
By Daniel John
THE chairman of Tate & Lyle, Neil Shaw, received a massive sweetener to his annual salary this year with a 53 per cent increase, taking the amount to £534,000.
According to the company's 1989 report, Mr Shaw's salary, paid in Canadian dollars and equivalent to C$993,000, rose from £348,000 in 1988.
Tate & Lyle's 1989 profits rose by 67 per cent to £200 million and earnings per share by nearly a third to 31.6p.
The rise is one of the largest percentage rises to be awarded to directors of UK companies in the new round of boardroom wage negotiations.
The salaries of senior directors have been rising by between 20 per cent and 30 per cent over the last year and the trend shows little sign of slowing.
.
By Teresa Hunter
THE 1980s was the decade when the sleeping giants of the High Street banks tried to wake up to customers' needs before competitors stole accounts from under their noses.
At the beginning of the decade, opening a bank account was a privilege rather than a right, and customers organised their financial lives round the inflexible routine of their local branch.
The manager himself seemed like a distant god to be both wondered at and feared.
Barclays director of UK Retail Services Seymour Fortescue predicts that history will mark the late 1980s as the watershed of personal banking.
‘A time of swift, sometimes brutal change when the old established order is all but over,’ he says.
Undeniably there has been change — much of it brought on by technology — and, generally the customer has benefited.
But despite the grand words from Barclays, change in local branches has frequently been slow to take effect.
Branch managers and staff have changed surprisingly little as a breed, for all the brighter uniforms and open plan offices.
Customers still get landed with unexpected bills for bank charges, despite the arrival of the age of free banking.
And the explosion in complaints about new technology, such as direct debits — which transfer money automatically from your account to pay bills — and cash dispensers indicate that the new method of banking could leave the customer less protected than under the old-fashioned paper-based system.
Competition was the driving force which lead banks to develop a more sophisticated range of services.
Never before were they faced with the threat of losing substantial numbers of accounts.
This new competition arose out of a battle between banks and building societies which arose when the banks made their first major inroad into the mortgage market.
New legislation freed the building societies from the constraints of selling only two products, mortgages and savings accounts, and they began to offer current accounts.
The writing was on the wall and the banks began to fight back.
Winning customers became a priority and in the early 1980s banks began tailoring accounts to meet the needs of certain sections of the population.
In 1982, for example, the first children's account was set up.
Looking at banking hours became a priority, as Saturday opening was helping building societies to woo bank customers.
In 1982 Barclays became the first bank to re-open its doors on Saturday mornings, and the other high street banks soon followed suit.
More recently, banks have extended opening hours in certain branches, to either 5pm or to coincide with late night shopping.
However this has not been an across the board extension.
In 1985 free in-credit banking was reintroduced, but to off-set these costs the programme for electronic banking was speeded up.
Although direct debits and cash dispenser machines had been around since the late 1960s, promotion campaigns made them farmore popular during the mid-1980s.
However complaints involving new technology have abunded.
There is general dissatisfaction with direct debits being charged at the wrong time or from the wrong account and so-called ‘phantom withdrawals’ from ATMs.
But the real watershed for banks came in 1987 when the Nationwide Anglia building society launched an interest-bearing current account called FlexAccount, which was soon followed by a similar one from the Abbey National.
It took the banks nearly two years to retaliate with interest bearing accounts of their own in an attempt to stem the flood of accounts deserting to building societies.
One and a half million new accounts were opened in the first year.
Home banking is being taken to its ultimate with the launch of Midland's Firstdirect — the bank without branches.
But the new decade also promises to revolutionise high street bank branches yet again.
Banks wish paper-based administration to be completely electronic releasing back-office staff to become front office ‘sales people.’
General branches offering all services over the one counter will be replaced by cluster branches, containing specialists in different fields.
PAGE
Sock Shop shuts down in the US.
By Ben Laurance
SOCK Shop, the niche retailer created by Sophie Mirman which made its stock market debut in a blaze of publicity two years ago, has closed its 17 loss-making American outlets.
The shops were shut without warning two days ago.
All are in New York.
Sock Shop admitted earlier this year that all was not well with its American outlets.
Shoplifting and robberies forced the company to spend heavily on expensive security measures.
And the outlets had to be revamped to attract more customers.
The company has huge debts relative to its size — the most recent available figures show Sock Shop's gearing was 200 per cent.
Losses from the American business were £670,000 in the 17 months to the end of last February.
It is understood that Sock Shop directors were in the US yesterday trying to find someone who might be prepared to take over the American end of the operation and continue to run it under the Sock Shop name.
Until now, Sock Shop has tried to avoid franchising new outlets, preferring instead to borrow to finance expansion under its own steam.
Any deal to keep the US shops running is likely to involve their being run on a licence or franchise basis.
Sock Shop shares, having hit 325p last year, now stand at a record low of 62p.
In Britain, the company said it was hit by this year's hot summer which meant more women were prepared to go without stockings or tights.
The rail strikes also had an impact: several Sock Shops are on stations and rely for their custom on rail travellers.
Besides the ill-fated expansion into the US, Sock Shop has also opened outlets in France.
There are doing well, the company says.
Analysts believe that at best, Sock Shop will show profits of £1million in the 12 months to next February — less than half the level seen in the previous two years.
Bonus scheme for TVS executives CORRECTION FOR
By Daniel John
DID you refuse to say yes?
Or perhaps you didn't get the habit?
Maybe you2 didn't even consider being 2late for water?
If the affirmative was the case in all three, don't feel ashamed.
Contrary to popular myth and the government's public relations machine, you were among around 30 million people in Britain who have failed to join the crusade of popular capitalism which swept through the 1980s.
The figures from the 15 largest privatisations since 1981 and the two public sale-like floats — TSB and Abbey National — tell a different story from the one which the proponents of the programme would like us to believe.
Trade gap narrows despite cut in invisible earnings.
By Mark Milner
LAST month's improvement in Britain's huge current account deficit was achieved despite a reduction in projections about the size of the country's invisible earnings.
The Central Statistical Office has reduced its guesstimate of the expected monthly surplus from £300million to £100million, though it stresses the figures are subject to‘substantial’ revision.
Britain's invisible earnings, which are made up of a surplus on things like insurance and banking offset by government contributions to the European Community and overseas aid, are now projected to be about £2,670million in 1989, less than half the £6,100million total earned in 1988.
Part of the fall is accounted for by the pattern of transactions between Britain and the EC, but part must also reflect the cost of British borrowing from overseas investors.
Though the invisible trade surplus has been marked down, there was encouraging news for the Government yesterday on the visible trade deficit.
The figures for the three months to the end of November indicate that the policy of high interest rates is beginning to have an impact in slowing down the across-the-board demand for imports which has set Britain on course for a worst ever annual trade deficit.
Imports of passenger cars over the three months rose only two per cent by volume, whilst imports of capital goods were down six per cent.
Imports of other consumer and intermediate goods both fell marginally.
However, imports in all four categories are still running well ahead of the same three-month period in 1988.
In November overall imports actually fell to £9.6billion — 2.5 per cent down on October.
Over the last three months they rose only 0.5 per cent by value on the previous three months, but still some 12 per cent more than the same period in 1988.
On the export side the volume of cars shot up 27 per cent in the three months to November, compared with the previous three months though other consumer, intermediate and capital goods showed much more modest increases of 5.5 per cent, 4 per cent and 9 per cent , respectively.
The overall exports total showed a modest 0.5 per cent increase by value to £8.1billion in November.
However, in volume terms, exports were up seven per cent in the last three months compared with the previous three months and was up 13 per cent on a year ago.
The CSO cautioned it regarded comparisons of the volume figures as distorted by the impact of the dock strike on August and September returns.
By taking a four-month period to flatten out the effect of the usually low total in August and the correspondingly high one for September it calculates the increase on the previous four months was four per cent and the year on year growth at 11 per cent.
However, the full year current account deficit is still likely to be nearer £21billion than the £20billion predicted by Chancellor John Major in his Autumn statement.
Though the trend is one of improvement few City economists are prepared to be more optimistic than Mr Major's own forecast for next year of £15billion.
The nomal revision to which the trade figures are subject has meant that July this year has replaced October 1988 as the month in which Britain ran up its worst ever current account deficit.
Yesterday's CSO figures showed that the July total had been revised up to £2,487million from the previous £2,225 million figure.
.
By Nick Pandya
ONE of the most remarkable features of the Thatcher decade is the continuing rise of consumer credit.
The average home loan is now almost triple the £13,000 at the beginning of the Eighties.
And the outstanding debt which excludes mortgages has seen a three-fold increase to £40 billion.
The most tangible signs of this tendency to borrow more are highlighted in the Central Statistical Office's Social Trends 1989, which showed that household expenditure exceeded income in 1986 and 1987 for the first time since compilation of the information began.
This phenomenal growth in consumer debt is partly explained by the proliferation of credit and charge cards, which the marketing men sell as ‘take the waiting out of wanting.
The number of plastic cards in circulation has risen from less than 10 million 10 years ago to 27 million today, while the total bank lending on cards — which in January 1980 stood at £934 million — currently stands at a massive £6.6 billion.
Another major feature of the past decade has been the advent of in-house credit cards offered by large department stores, which remain popular despite the punitive rates of interest.
Consumers are frequently lured into debt by careful manipulation of the English language.
Retailers have effectively redefined ‘debt’ as ‘credit’— a move which has been dubbed the greatest marketing coup of all time by the National Association of Citzens Advice Bureaux (NACAB).
But, for the over extended borrowers, the chickens have come home to roost.
The NACAB has recorded a rise of 120 per cent in the number of debt related inquiries in the last 10 years.
NACAB increasingly deals with clients who have run up large bills on their credit cards only to find that the repayments crippling.
For such clients raising a second mortgage to pay off the credit card debt often seems the only answer.
Twenty things you didn't know about business in 1989…
1.
In June, Alan Bond said his company ‘had the capacity to do something major’.
In October he unveiled the biggest loss in Australian corporate history and he ended the year with debts of A$8billion.
Yesterday receivers were appointed to the breweries.
2.
DM3.20 to the pound was a critical level to defend.
3.
The American Brooks Brothers chain, bought by Marks & Spencer, is likely to have sales of around £183million — some £50million less than M&S's single largest British store at Marble Arch.
4.
Mitsubishi bought Trex oils and Princes canned foods from Nestle.
5.
‘Every facet of the business improved’, according to Lowndes Queensway.
6.
Church Times was bought by the Canterbury Press.
And the divide between the Catholic and Anglican churches was bridged — at least for investment purposes when the insurance arms of the two churches set up a joint venture, Ecclesiastical Underwriting Management, headed by the aptly named Kevin Cannon.
7.
Samuel Courtauld, the last part of the group trading with the original founder's name, was sold — to the Japanese company Toray Industries 8.
The Pru lost nearly £1million a week on its estate agency business, and parted company with the chain's managing director.
Legal and General paid £12million for a 103-branch chain.
9.
TV Times joined Woman, Womans Own, Farmers Weekly, Family Circle and Country Life when Reed International bought it from the ITV companies.
10.
MK Trafford Holdings failed in a takeover bid for Manchester United, which failed to float on the stock market as well as the pitch.
11.
Phillips' Polygram record company bought the Island label, then floated off as an island of its own.
12.
Ellen Schneider-Lenne became the first woman on the board of Morgan Grenfell in its 151-year history, thanks to its takeover by Deutsche Bank.
13.
Walt Disney bought the Muppets for a rumoured $100million.
14.
Andrew Brownswood of the eponymous greetings card maker was paid £3.6million, modest in absolute terms by some standards but a staggering 31 per cent of the company's sales.
If BP boss Sir Peter Walters had been paid the same proportion of sales he would have received a salary of £8.1billion.
As it was he had to be satisfied with a rise of 48 per cent to £514,558, well below the highest-paid public company boss, Lord Hanson, who received £1.5million for his efforts.
15.
American Airlines became the world's largest airline (not counting Aeroflot) when it overtook (without taking over) United Airlines.
16.
Robert Maxwell reassured shareholders and the world at large that he had turned his giant mind to the greenhouse effect.
He said he was negotiating to publish Eastern Bloc research on the subject and had the world's climate ‘well in mind’.
17.
Braniff Airlines went bust for the third time.
18.
Japan's biggest bank, Dai-ichi Kangyo, just stayed ahead of Sumitomo with revenues of Y3.3billion — roughly £14billion for the year or £60million per working day, equal to the UK's big four banks put together.
19.
Apart from water privatisation, Harry Ramsden's fish and chip restaurant was the most oversubscribed new issue of the year at 2.6 times.
Hay's, which came to the market around Grey Monday, managed to sell just 8 per cent of the shares on issue.
20.
Bass, Britain's biggest brewer, became the world's largest hotelier with the $2billion purchase of America's Holiday Inn.
ROGER COWE