

Body of French charity worker explodes at Khartoum airport.
By Peter Biles in Nairobi
THE body of a French charity worker killed in the shooting down of a Medicins sans Frontieres(MSF) plane in southern Sudan nine days ago exploded at Khartoum airport in what is thought to have been a booby-trap.
The body was being transported to Paris when the incident occurred.
The bodies of the four victims of last week's crash near the government-controlled town of Awiel, 560 miles south-west of Khartoum, arrived in the capital on a plane chartered by the United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef).
They were loaded on to two trucks at the airport, and were being moved across the tarmac when one of the bodies exploded.
Sources said the explosion seemed to have been caused by an incendiary device.
But Dr Roger Vavirie, an MSF programme director in Paris, said it was only ‘a small explosion,’ and could have been the result of decomposition.
It is understood that, because the victims of the Awiel plane crash were badly mutilated, doctors who had packed the bodies before shipment to France had taken extra precautions, and an explosion from decomposition was therefore said to have been unlikely.
There has been speculation that the body was booby-trapped before it left Awiel, and may have been timed to explode in mid-air.
Moldavian election campaign launched.
By John Rettie in Kishinyov, Moldavia
THE crucial elections campaign, in which Moldavian nationalists will challenge the Communist Party for control of the Soviet republic's government in February, is being launched today.
While senior members of the party and government hold a series of meetings around the city, the Stefan the Great Movement for National Revival is holding what it calls a ‘great gathering’ in the main stadium.
The rally has been officially authorised and no violence is expected.
But the movement will make a strong appeal to passionate feelings of renewed nationhood in Moldavia, which have been fanned by events in neighbouring Romania.
The Communist Party cannot match this.
But it has other weapons which it deploys with some skill.
The republic's new party leader, appointed after violent clashes last month between nationalist demonstrators and the security forces, is a good conciliator who has created a favourable impression among many Moldavians.
A native-born Moldavian despite his Russian name, Mr Pyotr Luchinsky, the new first secretary has been going the rounds, talking to people in soothing terms all over the republic.
It seems to have been working — up to a point at least— and even members of the opposition Popular Front agree that he has been accepted by many Moldavians.
He went down extremely well last Sunday, for example, when many people gathered outside the party's central committee building in an unauthorised meeting and called on him to come out and talk to them.
He did so and, according to students who were present, spoke in amiable and conciliatory terms.
But the students, members of the Popular Front through their own organisation, the Students' League, said they were less happy with his performance at a meeting with them last Wednesday.
They said he answered some of their questions sarcastically and spoke in Russian, even though he is bilingual and the questions had been put to him in Moldavian.
However, as yesterday's Moldavian press reported, he spoke encouragingly about abandoning Article Six of the constitution, which guarantees the party's leading role in society — although not just yet.
But, not surprisingly, Mr Luchinsky flatly rejected any suggestion of changing Moldavia's frontiers — an allusion to unity with Romania.
‘Anyone who starts talking about reviewing territorial frontiers is consciously moving towards confrontation, and incidentally, not only with local significance,’ he warned.
Although the students accepted this, and demanded only an open frontier with Romania, across which relatives could easily visit each other, some nationalists are certainly going to raise the issue.
Among the slogans of the Stefan the Great Movement are not only ‘Liberty’, but also ‘Unity’, which means unity with Romania.
The appeal which this call makes to Moldavians cannot be matched by Mr Luchinsky or his party.
No one at this stage is prepared to hazard a guess at the outcome of the poll on February 25.
The Stefan the Great Movement is not part of the Popular Front, which is the main umbrella group co-ordinating the opposition campaign, although many people are members of both.
But if it is not calling for immediate independence, or for unity with Romania, the Popular Front is certainly demanding sovereign autonomy for Moldavia and a renewal of national culture and identity.
While also talking of national renewal, the Communist Party emphasises its ability to concentrate resources on reviving the economy in a way that a Popular Front government could hardly expect to.
However, its record on the economy, housing and social services inspires little respect.
With Romania seething next door, Mr Luchinsky will have his work cut out to capture the spirit of Stefan the Great from those who present themselves as his heirs.
Hungary is hopeful but stays sceptical of better relations.
By Jonathan Eyal in Budapest
THE arrival in Romania of Mr Gyula Horn, the Hungarian Foreign Minister, is a sign of Hungarian hopes for better relations with their neighbour after the popular revolution which overthrew the Ceausescu regime.
But they are also fearful and sceptical about the future of democracy in that country.
At the heart of the dispute is the fate of Romania's roughly two million-strong Hungarian minority, who mostly live in Transylvania — a Hungarian territory until 1918.
Ceausescu singled out this minority for especially severe treatment in order to emphasise his nationalist credentials.
Janos Kadar — Hungary's now detested former Communist leader — preferred to counter this with quiet persuasion which, needless to say, left Ceausescu unmoved.
A treaty between the two states, signed in 1977, guaranteeing special cultural rights to the Hungarian minority was ignored and subsequently practically abrogated by Romania.
The political changes in both states have, if anything, exacerbated the conflict.
For the Hungarian political parties, facing a general election in March, the issue is of great importance, while for the provisional government now in control in Bucharest the question of Romania's sovereignty remains extremely sensitive.
The Hungarian authorities privately point to some recent developments which they find disturbing.
The Romanian revolution started in Timisoara, a racially mixed south-western town, and was initially concerned with defending the rights of the ethnic Hungarian priest, Father Laszlo Tokes.
Yet in the last few days the Romanians have started underplaying the role of Timisoara in sparking off open opposition to Ceausescu, highlighting instead the undoubtedly fearless role of the citizens of Bucharest.
Hungarians understand perfectly well that this may be due to internal Romanian reasons — the Romanian army had played some part in the initial repression in Timisoara, but since it joined the rebellion this fact has been conveniently forgotten.
However, Timisoara remains crucial in Hungarian calculations as it was the best example of co-operation between all ethnic groups and a good omen for the future.
Budapest also remain apprehensive about the nature of Romania's future political parties, and particularly those of the National Christian Peasant Party, which was recently formed with the help of Mrs Doina Cornea, one of Romania's leading former dissidents.
Her party's platform is imbued with religious themes and ethnic Hungarians — different from the majority of the Romanians in religion, language and traditions — have nothing to expect from this religious revival.
Finally, Budapest is closely watching the personalities currently running Romania's affairs.
In its eyes, the appointment of Mr Sergiu Celac as Romania's new foreign minister is hardly crucial.
Much more important is the fact that Mr Constantin Oancea, the man who dealt with Hungarian relations at the Romanian foreign ministry in Ceausescu's time, has not only remained in post but appears to have been promoted.
The recent declaration of the Romanian Front for National Salvation in favour of‘minority rights’ is, at best , imprecise.
The problem is, therefore, one of lack of confidence between the governments of the two states.
The arrival of Mr Horn in Bucharest was intended to dispel some of these suspicions.
Hungary has been effusive in its help to the Romanians — in the first four days after the revolution no fewer than 550 trucks of aid were sent to Romania.
And, while the Nagylak border crossing point continues to be jammed by convoys of aid from all states, the Hungarian armed forces are preparing to airlift food supplies into Romania.
Mr Horn will seek to capitalise on the ensuing good will to convince Bucharest that his country has no hostile designs.
But he wants firmer guarantees on the status of the Hungarian minority, in particular, group rights rather than individual rights for all Romanians.
He hopes the Hungarian minority will be allowed to run its own schools and re-establish its university in Transylvania; that it will be allowed to run its own affairs at municipal level and that it will have ‘economic autonomy’.
Mr Horn may also be able to obtain some assistance in the repatriation of 30,000 Romanian citizens who sought refuge in Hungary during Ceausescu's dictatorship.
However, Romanians remain prisoners of their own history: they continue to fear that Hungary's real intentions are not ethnic minority protection but a revision of frontiers.
As long as these fears persist, Mr Horn could only obtain the diminution, rather than a solution, to the problem of the Hungarian minority in Romania.
US to blockade drug barons.
An air and sea blockade of Colombia is part of a plan approved by President George Bush for possible use in the fight against international drug trafficking, American officials said yesterday.
The officials said the plan, approved by the President last week, has as a central element the use of the US military to intercept drug transactions abroad.
— Reuter.
Drugs haul.
Swazi police said yesterday they had seized illegal drugs worth more than $4.3 million, the biggest haul ever made in this tiny southern African kingdom.
— Reuter.
18 die in clash.
Pro-Indian Tamil guerrillas ambushed and killed 18 members of the rival Tamil Tigers militia in northern Sri Lanka, residents said yesterday.
— AP.
Kuwaitis warned.
The Kuwaiti Government, in an bid to contain growing agitation for the revival of a democratic parliament has warned Kuwaitis against holding unauthorised meetings.
— Reuter.
Saudi beheadings.
Saudi Arabia yesterday publicly beheaded four people — two Saudis and two Indians — convicted of murder, taking the total number of people beheaded this year to 99. — Reuter.
86 held in raid.
The Pakistani army has arrested 86 people, bulldozed 20 houses and seized numerous heavy weapons in a sweep of the frontier arms-trading town of Darra.
The District Magistrate's office said the booty included anti-aircraft guns, artillery, rocket launchers, drugs and counterfeit money.
— AP.
Bofors under review.
The Indian Prime Minister, Mr V.P. Singh yesterday said the government was reviewing the 1986 sale of Swedish artillery to the army amid allegations of kickbacks and bribes.
His statement followed a decison on Tuesday to halt future contracts with Bofors.
— AP.
Turkish relief.
Bulgaria's new Communist authorities yesterday ended key aspects of the official assimilation policy which has forced thousands of ethnic Turks to flee the country.
Muslims will no longer have to assume Bulgarian names.
— Reuter.
Toll put at 10.
Australian rescue workers in Newcastle yesterday recovered another body in the wreckage of a workers' club, bringing to 10 the official death toll in Thursday's earthquake.
— AP.
Swedish theft.
Twenty-four works by Miro and worth up to three billion crowns (£323,000) have been stolen from a Stockholm art gallery.
— Reuter.
Rangoon ban.
Myanma's (formerly Burma) military rulers yesterday barred one of the country's main dissident groups headed by a former prime minister, U Nu, from contesting elections set for next May.
— Reuter.
SA violence.
At least five black men were killed and seven seriously injured in street fighting between rival groups, including the United Democratic Front, near the southern town of Uitenhage, police reported yesterday.
— AP.
Counting the cost.
Israel will have to trim its army because of a £320-million deficit stemming from the Palestinian uprising, a military source said yesterday in Jerusalem.
— AP.
Israel silent as US seizes Noriega aide.
By Ian Black in Jerusalem and Martin Walker in Washington
ISRAEL yesterday maintained an embarrassed official silence on the capture by US troops in Panama of Mike Harari, a former Mossad officer and close aide to the deposed Panamanian leader, General Manuel Noriega.
Harari was in charge of Israel's intelligence networks in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean until his retirement in 1979, after a 25 year career, when he became Panama's commercial attache and honorary consul in Tel Aviv before rejoining Gen Noriega in Panama City two years ago.
He is credited with forcing Gen Noriega to remove a portrait of Adolf Hitler from the wall of his secret bunker, training the dictator's personal bodyguard, setting up his computer networks and complex personal banking system, and establishing a small and private intelligence team to watch over the Panamanian secret police and military intelligence.
The US repeatedly asked Israel to ensure that Harari, aged 62, to leave Panama, but Israel insisted that he was a private citizen, a claim which was treated with considerable scepticism by Washington.
US officials claim the Israeli has been involved not only in security matters in Panama but also in the drug traffic for which Gen Noriega, now hiding in the Vatican embassy, is wanted by Washington.
For all his international notoriety, Harari is barely known in his native country, and the one photograph known to exist of him was reprinted on the front pages of newspapers yesterday accompanying the news of his arrest.
It was taken in 1985 when, as Panama's honorary consul in Israel, he accompanied Gen Noriega on an official visit.
It shows him, impassive in dark glasses, standing behind the saluting general.
Harari spent much of his adult life in Israel's secret world.
Born in Tel Aviv in 1927, he worked as a radio operator in Italy for the pre-state Haganah militia during the campaign to smuggle Jewish Holocaust survivors past the British naval blockade of Palestine.
In the 1950s he joined the Shin Bet internal security service and by the early 1960s was operating secretly in Europe, running agents into Arab countries for Mossad.
Known as a field man par excellence, he led the Israeli assassination teams that hunted down and killed Palestinians involved in the Black September terrorist organisation in the early 1970s.
The Mossad squads were set up after the massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympic games in September, 1972.
But in July, 1973, Harari led a group which accidentally killed an innocent Moroccan waiter in the Norwegian town of Lillehammer.
Harari left Mossad in 1978, and shortly afterwards became a private businessman.
By 1980 he was working in Central America, where he befriended Gen Noriega's predecessor, Omar Torrijos.
He supplied Israeli security personnel to guard the Panamanian leaders and train their own forces, and later became involved in official Israel arms sales to the central American country.
He remains the most notorious of a large group of retired Israeli intelligence and security men whose dubious activities in support of unsavoury regimes have embarrassed their own government.
Former Mossad colleagues have insisted hotly that Harari could not have been involved in the drugs trade, but he is clearly a hard man to defend.
‘The greatest damage to Israel,’ says Meir Amit, a former head of the intelligence agency, ‘is that rather than being known as producers in agriculture, in genetics, or in medicine, our trademark is the security business.’
A second Israeli who acted as a civilian chief of Gen Noriega's personal security team, Eliezer Ben Gaitan, took refuge in the papal mission in Panama City with the deposed dictator, and was detained by US troops on Tuesday.
Well-paid for his services to Gen Noriega, Harari was known in Panama as ‘Mr Sixty Percent,’ according to Panama's former Ambassador to Tel Aviv, Mr Eduadro Herero Hassan, who was flown back to Panama this week by the US to help rebuild a new Panamanian security force.
Tributes greet President Havel.
By Michael Simmons
TO trumpeted fanfares, standing ovations and cheers from the people, and a 20-gun salute, Vaclav Havel, playwright extraordinary and leader of the year's most peaceful revolution against Stalinism, was acclaimed in Prague Castle yesterday as Czechoslovakia's new President.
The ceremony was in the hands of Mr Alexander Dubcek, who came in from the political cold less than 24 hours before, to be elected head of the new-style Federal Assembly.
He it was who ushered in the new head of state to the dais in Prague Castle where the oath was sworn.
Every member of Mr Dubcek's Assembly had voted that Mr Havel should be the country's first non-Communist leader since 1948.
It is a post that Mr Havel did not seek but for which he was the only serious candidate.
Three out of every four of the population, according to a recent poll, supported him.
Now, he says he will keep the post until free elections are held, probably in the first half of the coming year.
As a Central European intellectual, his credentials are impeccable.
Only a few months ago, he was in prison for ‘subversion’ and ‘anti-state activities’; but yesterday, before the day was out, he was being congratulated as a worthy successor to the country's first leader, Tomas Garrigue Masaryk.
Nominating him, the Prime Minister, Mr Marian Calfa, declared: ‘Although he has been forced to live on the fringe of society, he has retained his moral integrity.’
It was a tribute which will mean as much to Mr Havel as any formal honour.
After the vote, which had been taken in the Vladislav Chamber, where the Kings of Bohemia were once crowned, Mr Havel was sworn in.
‘I swear on my honour and conscience, my loyalty to the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,’ he said.
The word ‘Socialist’ in this context could also become an anachronism very soon.
Civic Forum wants just the ‘Czechoslovak Republic’ to be enshrined in the new Constitution; the promise ‘to serve the cause of socialism’was deleted from the presidential oath on Thursday of this week.
On leaving the castle, the dapper-suited President Havel, more at home in sweater and jeans, stood with everyone else for a rendering of the national anthem.
This was the theme tune at last month's revolutionary rallies, where the crowds sang it with great gusto and clapped to the jaunty rhythm of its concluding lines.
Then, having announced to his prime minister that he hoped to be ‘a president of national understanding’, he was called upon to review a military parade, before proceeding to attend a commemorative mass in the great Gothic Cathedral of St Vitus.
After these heavy formalities came the public acclaim.
Tens of thousands of people, many waving the national flag, were gathered in the castle courtyard, chanting ‘Truth will Prevail’(which is the presidential slogan) and ‘Long Live the President’ as the protagonist stood with his wife, Olga, on the famous balcony.
‘I promise,’ he told them, ‘that I shall not fail your trust and that I shall lead the country to free elections.
These elections must take place in a clean and decent way so that our revolution is not tarnished.’
The new President's first state visits next week will be to East and West Germany to meet acting President Manfred Gerlach in East Berlin and President Richard von Weizsacker — and Chancellor Helmut Kohl — in Munich.
Mr Miroslav Stepan, the politburo member who has been accused of setting the riot police on the demonstrators, has been charged.
He could face up to 10 years in prison.
The reluctant president, page 19
‘Semitic hieroglyphs’ found in Peruvian jungle city Orthodox archaeologists are sceptical about a claim that sounds like a Hollywood dream.
Martin Walker reports from Washington.
ONE of the great controversies of archaeology, the possibilty of transatlantic cultural links in ancient times, has been re-opened by an American expedition which claims to have found three large stone tablets inscribed with ancient Semitic hieroglyphs in a 9,000ft high lost city deep in the Peruvian jungle.
To the polite scepticism of orthodox American archaeologists, the expedition's leaders are interpreting some of the hieroglyphs as containing ancient Hebrew letters and symbols which refer to Ophir, or Beth-Horon, the gold source of ancient Palestine in the times of King Solomon.
This combination of lost Peruvian cities and King Solomon's Mines sounds like something dreamed up by Hollywood.
But the expedition's leader and the discoverer of the tablets, Mr Gene Savoy, is a respected figure in the world of archaeology who is credited with the location of 43 previously unknown Inca cities in Peru.
Mr Savoy was decorated by the Peruvian Government last month for his services to archaeology, which include finding the lost Inca city of Vilcabamba in 1964.
‘We invite criticism and discussion by the archaeological professsion to see what this really means.
At this stage I cannot give an explanation for their presence in that Peruvian cave, beyond saying that we have found something that indicates contact with the Old World.
We need the glyphs properly interpreted,’ Mr Savoy told the Guardian yesterday.
Mr Savoy came across the stone tablets in a remote cave as his expedition of 40 men and 70 horses trudged back from discovering Gran Vilaya, his 43rd lost city in Peru this year.
Widely hailed as a major and historic find, this is the largest pre-Columbian metropolis in the Americas and possibly the lost capital of the pre-Inca Chachapoyas civilisation.
‘In a cliff on the edge of the city, about 2,500ft up from the valley floor, we came on an old tomb, full of bones and ceramic pieces.
The bones are carbon-dated to about AD960.
And on the walls, cemented into place, are these three stone tablets, 5ft by 10ft, each a little different, and each in the same style — the first writing found in the ancient civilisations of the Andes,’ Mr Savoy said.
‘We have found something that is going to revolutionise the archaeological interpretations of Peru's ancient civilisations.
This writing is unique to Peru.
‘The elements are Sinaitic and proto-Sinaitic.
That would bring you into Egyptian, old Hebraic and Phoenician.
These people had their own form of writing that encompassed serifs and descending and connecting lines that are common to the Sinai.
How can we explain this?’ he went on.
Mr Savoy, who is based at the Andean Explorers and Ocean Sailing Club in Reno, Nevada, has long suspected that ancient man had far more trans-oceanic contacts than most orthodox historians accept.
He believes that King Solomon's sailors could have made the passage across the Atlantic, up the Amazon and its tributaries, to the Peruvian Andes, where the glyphs were found.
‘The New World may not be the New World at all, it may be the Old World.
We are not sure where civilisation evolved.
‘But I think that people were in contact all over the world, and that that there are hints of contact with Easter Island and with the Indus Valley,’ Mr Savoy continued, warming to his controversial theme in a way which unsettles his academic admirers.
‘Savoy is not an archaeologist but an explorer.
He uses his explorations for business, videos, pictures and stories.
I think it is sophisticated, inspirational — but it is not archaeological research,’ comments the Peruvian expert, Dr Ramiro Matos, of Dumbaton Oaks.
Many passengers switch flight after bomb threat.
By Paul Webster in Paris
MANY passengers on a Northwest Airlines flight from Paris to Detroit, due to leave soon after noon today, cancelled their reservations yesterday after the American airline took the unprecedented step of revealing a bomb threat.
By late afternoon at least 50 passengers had called off their trips on Flight 51, while French airport police stepped up security that had already been tightened a week ago because of a feared terrorist attack.
Northwest's Paris sales manager, Mr Frederic Wuatelet, said a steady stream of passengers had accepted the offer of an alternative flight after the airline's head office in St Paul, Minnesota, revealed that a man with a Middle Eastern accent had telephoned the company and threatened Flight 51.
Normally, airlines and governments keep quiet about terrorist threats, a silence that has been criticised since the Lockerbie disaster a year ago, when secret service information on suspected sabotage was kept back.
A Northwest spokesman in St Paul, Mr Douglas Miller, said that the latest threat was unusual as a specific flight and day had been mentioned by the caller, who warned of reprisals for the jailing of two Palestinians for a series of bombings.
Abu Mohammed Talb, a suspect in the Lockerbie bombing, and Marten Imandi were given life sentences in Sweden.
Among the bombings was an attack on Northwest's Danish office in Copenhagen which killed one person and injured 20 others.
Mr Miller said security around all Northwest's flights had been increased but there was no intention of cancelling Flight 51, a DC-1O due to arrive at Roissy airport from Detroit at 6.40am today.
‘We feel we have all the security measures and precautions in place,’ he said.
‘If we did not feel 100 per cent positive about our ability to fly the plane safely, we would not put it in the air.’
The American Federal Aviation Authority in Washington was alerted and it co-ordinated security with both Northwest and the French authorities.
The deputy chief of France's air and border police, Mr Pierre Quilici, said the warning had been passed on by the Americans several days ago.
‘The plane will be guarded from its arrival in Paris,’ he said.
‘We will reinforce the controls on passengers, hand baggage and hold baggage.’
The measures will be even tighter than those instituted for all flights from French airports a week ago — which include the X-raying of all hold baggage, new controls on hand baggage, and body searches — that have added up to an hour to flight checks-ins.
Earlier in the month, security was stepped up at border crossings, department stores, railway stations and airports after reports that a terrorist commando was planning raids from a base in Spain.
Wave of strikes upsets Yugoslav authorities' austerity drive.
By Barney Petrovic in Belgrade
WORRIED Yugoslav Communist authorities yesterday attempted through the officially-controlled trade unions to halt the wave of mass strikes sweeping across the country.
With an eye on recent developments in neighbouring Romania, trade union leaders appealed to strikers not to stage demonstrations, apparently fearful of a spread of unrest.
Earlier this week police struggled with thousands of workers who attempted to enter the parliament to shouts of ‘give us bread’.
Similar protests were held in other towns, where the party and regional authority's headquarters were besieged by angry demonstrators.
Miners, dockers, industrial workers, teachers and civil servants struck in at least 30 towns, demanding pay rises of between 100 and 200 per cent.
Many calculated their wages not in the national currency, the dinar, but in deutschemarks at the rate of between 400 and 600 marks a month, three times the present average.
At the car plant in Kragujevac, 3,000 workers raised a loaf of bread halfmast on the pole where the national flag is usually flown.
At the military industries factory at Trstenik, 13,000 workers demanded a doubling of their wages and sacked all the management.
The pay rises will jeopardise the new tough austerity programme of the Prime Minister, Mr Ante Markovic, which is due to come into effect on January 1.
It freezes salaries and wages while allowing most prices to rise.
Prices of industrial products doubled this week and rising prices of bread, milk and meat will worsen the already fast-declining living standards of the population, two thirds of whom live on the poverty line or below.
Inflation in December was 59.6 per cent, bringing the annual rate to over 2,500 per cent .
PAGE
Poland sweeps away 40 years.
By Wieslaw Horabik and agencies in Warsaw
THE Polish parliament yesterday approved a set of new rules placing the country firmly on the road towards a free market economy, cancelled the Communist Party's leading political role and dropped constitutional clauses defining the country as a socialist state.
In a series of constitutional amendments sweeping away the formal vestiges of Stalinism, the Sejm (lower house) also restored the pre-war name Republic of Poland and returned the traditional crown to the official Polish emblem, the white eagle.
Deputies stood and sang the national anthem after Communist and Solidarity members united to approve the changes by a vote of 374-1 with 11 abstentions.
The economic reforms came after an eight-day debate, the most heated in the short history of the half democratically-elected Sejm.
Deputies sanctioned 11 decrees which will thoroughly reshape Poland's economy.
The new economic deal, worked out by the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, aims to expand the private sector in trade and industry, reform banking and financial systems and introduce the internal convertibility of the Polish currency, the zloty.
The government plans to beat hyper-inflation by temporarily freezing wages and changing the structure of prices.
Subsidies will be halved and the balancing of the budget is supposed to be achieved by limiting central investments and cutting expenditure on the security forces and the army.
The harsh measures of the transitory period are expected to lower the standard of living for about 20 per cent of the population.
The government wants to set the new system to work from January 1.
Agreements with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, upon which Poland's credit depends, also envisage this starting date.
‘After the autumn of shock caused by tremendous price rises, we are now facing a winter of discontent,’ said one deputy.
Despite the hardships the population has been warned of, the popularity of the Prime Minister, Mr Tadeusz Mazowiecki, stands as firm as ever, with recent polls showing that 95 per cent of the population support his political goals.
Mark Tran in Washington adds: Industrial nations have agreed to provide a $500million bridging loan for Poland as it embarks on its austerity programme, the US Treasury announced yesterday.
Of this, $200million will come from the US, as previously announced by President Bush, to tide Poland over until it receives $710million from the IMF as part of a long-term programme to restructure its economy.
If the Polish Government adheres to the IMF programme, further loans of up to $1.67 billion over the next 18 months will be available from the World Bank.
Vietnam holds firm against tide of reform with new press law.
By Nicholas Cumming-Bruce in Bangkok
VIETNAM'S National Assembly, despite the Socialist bloc move towards glasnost and multi-party government, has passed a press law that local journalists fear will bind newspapers more tightly to the dictates of the Communist Party.
Frightened by events in Eastern Europe, Vietnam's ageing leaders appear to be trying to shore up the authority of the party by cutting down the independence of an already tightly-regulated press.
The law was passed in the face of strong objections from southern deputies, echoing the view of one senior journalist earlier this month, that ‘the law created more difficulties for editors, their rights will be limited and that means journalism in general will be limited.’
Official news reports of the Assembly debate failed to reveal details of the controversial content of the law, especially its much-criticised Article 5.
Party leaders inserted this clause after an August Central Committee meeting at which the General Secretary, Mr Nguyen Van Linh, exposed the leadership's anxiety at developments in China and Eastern Europe with a fierce denunciation of political pluralism and subversive imperialist powers.
The law provides for central government approval in the hiring and firing of editors and says journalists should reveal the source of their information on request to court authorities.
Article 5 of the draft made it an offence to ‘propagandise against the rule and policy of the party, the law of the state or against socialism.’
Letters or articles advocating a switch to political pluralism ‘would be an act against socialism,’ according to Mr Tran Cong Man, Deputy Secretary General of the Journalists' Association.
It would also be an offence to cause suspicion or undermine the confidence of the people.
Catholic church and Brazilian police row over murdered priest.
By Jan Rocha in Sao Paulo
THE body of a 53-year-old French Catholic priest who was murdered in Brazil on Christmas Eve has been flown back to France, amid a row between the church and police over the investigation of his death.
The police say Father Gabriel Maire was the victim of a robbery attempt, but the Archbishop of Vitoria, the south-eastern Brazilian city where he worked in a slum parish, said he was killed because of his pastoral work.
Archbishop Silvestre Scandian said: ‘The state police should be taken off the case, because Father Gabriel made a statement to the Justice and Peace Commission mentioning a police officer as one of those who had made death threats against him.’
The church and the French diplomatic authorities have asked the federal police to take over the investigations, but the state police have already arrested two men and accused them of the crime.
The priest was shot dead as he drove back to his parish after conducting a wedding ceremony, but nothing was stolen.
Father Maire was said to have received death threats because of his work in organising the poor.
Vitoria, capital of Espirito Santo state on Brazil's Atlantic coast, has recently become notorious as the home of a crime syndicate allegedly run by several state policemen, involving drug trafficking and stolen cars.
Emigres return home doubting.
By Nick Dallman in Bucharest
ATRICKLE of returning Romanian dissidents, wearing arm bands and rallying behind the National Salvation Front, have arrived in the capital.
Many of them are acting as interpreters and trying to put a semblance of order into the chaos as the world's press converges on ministries with fresh tenants and uncertain programmes.
But they do not like everything they see.
Bilici Constantin, a cheery film man in his early 40s, hurried back from France after an absence of 10 years and arrived just as Ceausescu fell.
He and a few of his colleagues were inspired by the early struggles of Solidarity in Poland a decade ago.
In Ceausescu's Romania there was no chance of pressing their claim too far.
They just wanted to redress some glaring injustices in their terms of employment.
One of their main demands was compulsory insurance for crewmen who received no compensation if they were injured during filming.
Even such an embryonic independent union met with fierce rejection and as one of Mr Constantin's fellow organisers, named Grlisefski was driving home one day his car was rammed by a military vehicle, killing him.
Mr Constantin believed it was no accident and escaped to France.
Now back in Bucharest he finds the people who stifled his union at birth are still holding important positions in the film industry under the umbrella of the National Salvation Front.
The front is certainly a broad church and those who have rallied to its support, the entire political spectrum.
Perhaps only because Green is the opposite of Red many people said Green when asked what party they would support in the forthcoming elections.
It is too early to test the political waters, nobody even knows for certain if the Communist Party has been dissolved or not.
Among the parties that are soon to come to life the Socialists, National Democrats and the Christian Democrats will figure strongly.
However, there appears little support at this stage for the former king's return from his Swiss exile.
For the moment there are more immediate concerns.
The returning emigres hope for a clean sweep but this has not happened anywhere in Eastern Europe where the price of reconciliation has always been a measure of compromise.
What worries many here is the claim that in the initial stages the surge for the Securitate men has not been pursued with real vigour.
One guest at the Hotel Bucharest, which saw fierce fighting in the initial stages and now stands deserted, has complained that nobody believed him when he pointed out the leader of the Securitate fighters.
The man managed to disappear in the cellar beneath the kitchen.
He was captured days later however, in another action.
Now the snipers keep up the pressure while the new Romania's foundations are being laid.
Many fear the longer the fighting goes on the less the chance of a tolerant democratic system emerging.
Romania's Interior Minister said yesterday there had been a counter-revolutionary plot by pro-Ceausescu forces but the situation was now stable despite sporadic shooting in the capital and other towns.
‘The situation is under control by the population and the army..
The situation is stable,’ Mr Mihai Chitac said on television.
‘There are still isolated shootings in Bucharest..
But these are isolated groups which do not make up a force.’
— Reuter.
No reprieve for the boat people.
By Hella Pick Diplomatic Editor
MANDATORY repatriation of Hong Kong's Vietnamese boat people will resume during the first half of next month, despite the protest action in detention centres and international pressure on Britain and the Hong Kong Government to allow more time for voluntary repatriation.
Britain and Hong Kong have apparently decided against waiting for the Steering Committee of the UN Conference on Indo-Chinese refugees to meet on January 18 before reviewing the situation.
It is likely that a group of fewer than 100 boat people will be sent back just before the arrival in Hong Kong of the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, planned for mid-January.
Fifty-one Vietnamese deported from Hong Kong earlier this month were the first of 3,600 deemed to be illegal economic migrants, after they had failed screening tests by the UN High Commission for Refugees.
A further 40,000 boat people still waiting to be screened will almost certainly be ruled illegal as well.
The Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, has adopted the same position as his predecessors, Sir Geoffrey Howe and Mr John Major, insisting that the deportations are an essential deterrent against a fresh influx of Vietnamese next year.
The US, the most vociferous of Britain's critics, refuses to take any of the boat people, because almost all come from north Vietnam, still considered enemy territory by the US.
Britain points out that the Bush Administration is still using its political weight in the IMF to block financial relief for Vietnam, even though it is widely recognised that the exodus from Vietnam will only stop when living standards improve.
Britain has apparently undertaken to review its own aid to Vietnam once it becomes clear that forced repatriation is working smoothly, and that Hanoi keeps to its side of the bargain, not to punish boat people who are deported from Hong Kong.
Because of this amnesty requirement, Hanoi is insisting that each separate name has to be cleared, to ensure that individuals are not wanted for ordinary offences.
This administrative process is very slow and limits the rate at which people can be sent back from Hong Kong.
Officials say that unless this can be speeded up, it will take up to three years before the detention centres can be emptied of their present populations.
Britain and Hong Kong claim they are eager for international agencies to monitor the resettlement of the illegal migrants, just as is already being done for those boat people who have returned voluntarily.
But the UN High Commission for Refugees and other qualified international bodies have all refused to become involved.
Christmas tree goes to mulch.
By Mark Tran in Washington
THE Christmas tree lying on the side of the pavement and shorn of its decorations is not only a forlorn sight but also symbolic of a gigantic disposal problem as America's landfills rapidly run out of space.
During the coming days Americans will be throwing away some 35 million Christmas trees, creating an urban disposal nightmare.
But an alternative now exists to the crowded landfill — tree cycling.
As a result of grass roots pressure, city halls and private groups are encouraging people to take their 1989 Christmas trees in for recycling into mulch, fuel or erosion barriers.
Many cities run the trees through chippers, paying for the operation by selling the mulch or using it in public parks.
Some, including Portland, Oregon, charge $1 or so to recycle a tree.
The guru behind the Christmas tree cycling movement is Mr John Giedraitis, the city forester in Austin, Texas.
‘You get three clear benefits out of this,’ he explained.
‘You save the cost of picking up old trees and moving them, and you save space in landfills, which is precious now.
Then you get all the mulch for free that your park departments would have to pay for.
And, finally you spread the idea of recycling.’
The 35 million Christmas trees bought this year would have to rot for 30 years before decomposing in dumps that are already overflowing.
One way around this problem is tree-cyling.
A tree that goes in a chipper as a 7ft, 20lb pine comes out as a pile of fragrant mulch that can be carried away in a small box to be used in parks or gardens.
Some cities have found other uses for old Christmas trees.
Several communities in Texas use piles of trees as the base for dunes to fight beach erosion.
In Chicago, an annual chipping ceremony is held to the strains of ‘O Christmas Tree, O Christmas Tree.’