

Creditors' move may preface collapse of Bond empire.
By Lisa Buckingham
RECEIVERS were yesterday appointed to the brewing businesses of the Australian yachting tycoon, Mr Alan Bond, in what may prove to be the first step towards the world's largest corporate collapse.
The action, brought by Australia's third largest bank, comes at the end of a year during which Mr Bond — best known for brewing Castlemaine XXXX lager and his 1985 triumph in the America's Cup yacht challenge — has fought a desperate battle to keep his creditors at bay.
The news was relayed to British-born Mr Bond as his £1.5 million vessel crossed the finishing line to win the three-day Hobart-to-Sydney yachting race.
Clearly upset, the 51-year-old entrepreneur said that his group would not give up the fight.
But a spokesman for Bond Corporation admitted that the receivership could trigger Mr Bond's mountain of debt, making financial collapse almost inevitable.
It is estimated that his corporate empire, whose interests also include Swan lager, a stake in British Satellite Broadcasting and one of Australia's largest television groups, has more than £4 billion worth of debts.
Once one of the most successful corporate raiders in the world, Mr Bond's troubles began just over a year ago when he crossed swords with Mr Tiny Rowland, the head of Britain's Lonrho group.
A loss of confidence by his bankers coupled with some damning judgments on his corporation's business conduct culminated in the action by the National Australian Bank, which heads a syndicate of lenders owed A$880 million by the Bond organisation.
Bankruptcy for Bond Corporation, which employs 21,000 people worldwide, would represent the largest company failure in world business records.
Last-ditch bid, page 7
Schools bank on parents to maintain books stock.
By David Ward, Northern Education Correspondent
PRIMARY schools are increasingly relying on money from parents for a decent stock of books, according to government inspectors.
The finding follows a study by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of reading among children aged five to 14 made just before the introduction of the national curriculum last September.
Inspectors visited 17 schools and in some of the seven primaries found that parental contributions could double the capitation allowance given by a local education authority.
Schools in ‘advantaged’ catchment areas with affluent families did well; inner city schools generally fared badly.
‘In some schools teachers brought their own books from home to augment classroom stocks.’
Top-up funds from parents had little impact, however, in secondary schools where capitation levels ranged from £1.30 to £2.73 a pupil — money which usually had also to cover stationery and printing costs.
‘These sums compared unconfortably with the current average book price of £5.42 for textbooks, children's books and fiction.’
Shortage of funds was often matched by literary poverty.
Book stocks in secondaries were ‘moderate’ in quality and the range limited ‘with a heavy emphasis on contemporary novels written for young people.’
Few classes had access to an extensive range of poetry or play texts and little use was made of pre-20th century literature.
‘Much of the poetry studied was contemporary or near-contemporary, although many classes had encountered at least one poem by a first world war poet.’
The range in primary schools was similarly limited.
The inspectors conclude that reading policies in schools are not underpinned by clear, coherent, and comprehensive policies linked to practice in the classroom.
‘The implementation of the national curriculum will require the drafting of much clearer objectives.’
Large class sizes were also a problem.
The inspectors add that initial reading has been generally well taught and that primary teachers often read aloud to pupils —‘frequently very well.’
But fluent readers were sometimes under-challenged and support for poor readers not always adequate.
Progress needed to be more closely monitored.
New links with schools in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe will be forged as a result of an increase in the 1990/1991 government grant to the Central Bureau for Educational Visits and Exchanges to £1.18 million from the current £657,000.
The money will be used for international teacher schemes, cooperation on educational projects, and inter-school visits.
Last year the bureau set up 69 teacher exchanges in Europe and 129 in the US, and established 127 new school links with foreign countries.
Youths held after fracas.
Eight people were arrested yesterday after police with riot shields were attacked by about 30 teenagers as they moved a family to safety from a council house at Southmead, Bristol.
Firemen needed police support as they tackled a car in the driveway which had been set on fire.
They were later called away to deal with a house which was ablaze.
Animal rights attack.
The Animal Liberation Front yesterday claimed to have planted an incendiary device which was removed by police from the Duke Street, London, office of Sears plc — Selfridges' parent company.
Gasmen's warning.
British Gas North-Western workers are sticking the skull and crossbones symbol on appliances fitted by unqualified workmen in non-English speaking homes after three people in the area died in accidents caused by fumes last winter.
Woman prisoner dies.
An internal police inquiry was started yesterday after Ms Marie Priestman, aged 48, was found dead in a cell in Cleethorpes, Humberside.
Patient missing.
Police were yesterday searching for Mr Eric Cooke, aged 44, who walked out of Bradford Royal Infirmary, West Yorkshire, on December 23 in pyjamas and a black leather jacket after brain surgery.
Dog fetches grenade.
A dog caused the evacuation of six houses in Birkenhead, Merseyside, late on Thursday after bringing home an old unexploded grenade.
A bomb disposal team made the grenade safe.
Ulster bomb alert.
Several families were evacuated from their homes in Ulster last night after a bomb alert.
Police said a number of suspect devices were found inside a vehicle at a checkpoint in Coalisland, Co Tyrone, and a number of arrests were made.
Spa town taps the public's taste for spies Maev Kennedy on a cloak and dagger plot to boost tourism in downtown Cheltenham.
PETER ROLLINS sent off polite letters to GCHQ, MI5, and the CIA, saying he was very interested in spying.
He provoked only slightly more suspicion with phone calls in his broad Belfast accent, asking for any old intelligence information, codes, ciphers, bugs, they might happen to have lying around.
MI5 never replied, GCHQ expressed polite and emphatically arm's length interest, and the CIA offered help, exhibits and the information that the only other museum of spying they know of is in Havana.
They have not contributed artefacts, though they figure in many.
Cheltenham has tea shops, terraces, pump rooms, a nice floral clock, and the racecourse, all a bit lost on children.
The tourism people felt they needed a ‘family visitor attraction.’
Mr Rollins, the assistant tourism director, asked everyone he met what they associated with Cheltenham: horses and educated ladies came second by a length to spies.
He then went to look at some property left to the council by a benefactor, an old grain warehouse.
Behind the stripey brick facade, on a run-down street behind the market, there was an interesting building, one room wide but 100 yards deep, deserted except for the odd work of art.
Mr Rollins loved it immediately, cobbled yard, rusty milling machinery and all.
It had served as a community arts centre which ended in a dreadful financial muddle, with an unsavoury reputation among the town's staider citizens, and a very popular bar which managed to lose money.
As he squeezed past the giant black lobster blocking the third floor corridor, inspiration struck Peter Rollins.
The Chandleresque tones on the promotional tape take up the tale: ‘…downtown Cheltenham, gee, what a place.’
Turning up its coat collar in a hard-boiled way, the voice is briefed on its mission —‘leather couches, portraits of the Queen…this must be MI6’— passes a dingy border checkpoint getting its forged passport stamped, studies a spy plane view of Cheltenham, cracks a cipher or two, and spots a glamorous female spy from the window of the Orient Express to Istanbul.
And so on to the shop —‘hey…they're selling stuff here!’— and the cafe, the Casablanca Club, where a second voice murmurs, as it may well have done in arts centre days but certainly won't when the family visitor attraction becomes reality, ‘a cup of coffee?…pastry?…hashish?’
The council isn't building the nuclear submarine or the underground cavern itself.
It has leased the building to Living Images, a Middlesex firm specialising in talking heads, which made the floating Lawrence Olivier head for the musical Time, and also the Crusades Experience at Winchester.
The basement of Living Image's boathouse studio on the Thames is full of magic.
A two-foot high figure of Isambard Kingdom Brunel talks and smiles in his glass case.
Sir Christopher Wren sits behind his desk, large as life and at least as natural, until a cloth is draped over the leather bound book concealing the projector, and his head is revealed as a white splodge which takes 80 hours of modelling.
Checkpoint Cheltenham is only one of a mound of proposals on marketing director Brian Larcher's desk, of which perhaps one in eight will get built.
There's the Coventry Blitz, which was to have been the Ramsgate Blitz until problems with planning permission.
There's a proposal for The Thames Story, with tourists on Tudor barges sailing down a river in a rebuilt railway station at the gates of Hampton Court Palace.
There's a proposal for the Bounty to land at a vast shopping centre planned at Thurrock.
And there's one which perhaps gives Mr Larcher the most quiet pleasure, for another shopping centre in Hull.
This will have Vikings, and a long boat, and visitors met by a floating Nordic goddess.
The pleasure comes from the fact that, as Mr Larcher pointed out sweetly, Hull is where the Vikings landed before going on to found Jorvik [York].
Checkpoint Cheltenham is still a demilitarised zone, but if Mr Yves d'Ans wants his white masks from the first floor galleries back he should move quickly before the Iron Curtain descends.
The Orient Express is due to pull in in May.
Mr Rollins will be offering half price entry to GCHQ staff, the most cunningly cheap special offer in the history of marketing: staff at the Government's intelligence gathering centre are not permitted to identify themselves.
Mean streets…
Peter Rollins outside the warehouse earmarked for Checkpoint CheltenhamPHOTOGRAPH: DAVID SILLITOE
Riot police storm boat people camp.
By Stephen Vines in Hong Kong
FOUR hundred riot police firing tear-gas stormed into one of Hong Kong's detention centres holding Vietnamese boat people after meeting resistance to what was officially described as a routine weapons search.
Dozens of people were injured during the police operation, including three Vietnamese who were taken to hospital.
Twenty-seven people were arrested when the police finally got the camp back under control in the early evening.
The confrontation took place at the Chi Ma Wan island detention centre, which houses those believed to be next in line for deportation.
The first group was sent home in a widely criticised night operation two weeks ago.
Fears about the threat of more deportations in the near future are believed to be behind the resistance to the police action.
A police spokesman said that people in the camp were in a ‘very emotional’ state.
Chi Ma Wan inmates have been threatening violent resistance should moves be made to deport them.
At 8am police officers, accompanying prison staff, tried to enter the centre but were met by a hail of stones.
The officers withdrew and an attempt was made to resolve the problem with the mediation of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and aid workers in the camp.
The mediation attempt failed and at 3.30pm 400 riot police forced their way into one half of the camp and seized more than 700 weapons such as iron bars and home-made knives.
An hour later they used the same tactics to gain entry to the other half of the camp.
Mr Geoffrey Barnes, Hong Kong's secretary for security, said the action had been taken only after ‘repeated efforts to obtain the co-operation of boat people and warnings that the search would have to be carried out regardless of their objections’.
He said: ‘The boat people, in order to make the operation more difficult, pushed their women and children to the front.’
Tear-gas was used ‘to reduce the possibility of serious injuries’.
Reporters have not been allowed access to Chi Ma Wan or any of the other detention centres.
All information on the incident has come from government sources.
A further group of 111 Vietnamese has left the colony, bringing the number of those who have returned under the voluntary repatriation programme this year to 874.
This month, for the first time during the year, more boat people left than arrived in Hong Kong.
Reports circulating in Hong Kong suggest that Britain will authorise the next group deportation under the mandatory programme before the next meeting of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees' Indo-China committee on January 18.
Britain and Hong Kong want to show they are determined to press on with this way of dealing with those not considered genuine refugees.
Tension remains high in the other detention centres.
On Thursday night, Mr To Quan Dat, a 25-year-old Vietnamese, was killed in a dispute at the centre on the Sek Kong military airfield.
Many other inmates were injured during the fighting, which involved about 200 people.
The trouble apparently followed disagreements over food distribution.
No reprieve, page 6
Whitehall denies common curbs aimed at protesters Ministry threatens Greenham rights.
By David Fairhall Defence Correspondent
THE Ministry of Defence is threatening to abolish all commoners' centuries-old grazing rights on the Greenham Common nuclear cruise missile base, unless restrictions on the rights are agreed within the next few days.
The ministry says it will take this action under the 1854 Defence Act if the commoners — local residents — cannot agree to relinquish rights which affect military installations.
Three of the 64 Berkshire commoners are refusing to accept a deal under which they would be paid about £750 each to forfeit rights over the built-up part of the US Air Force base and agree not to exercise them in other areas.
Their decision could also be crucial to the outcome of a long legal battle between the ministry and women peace protesters who have been at Greenham for eight years.
The women claim that the existence of commoners' rights invalidates the defence bylaws under which thousands have been fined or imprisoned for trespassing inside the base.
This view was upheld in a lower court, was rejected on appeal, and will shortly be tested in the House of Lords.
If the Lords rule in favour of the two women who have brought the test case, hundreds of other cases that are pending in Newbury magistrates' court will have to be dropped and thousands of earlier prosecutions might become subject to compensation claims.
The Ministry of Defence's legal department therefore has a powerful incentive to abolish commoners' rights at Greenham as quickly and comprehensively as possible.
But officials deny that this is their aim.
They say they are prepared to extinguish only those rights of common — attached to local property and covering things like grazing cattle and collecting firewood — which apply to land on which hangars, missile shelters, nuclear bomb stores and other military installations have already been built.
They would leave rights over the base's grassland in existence, provided they were not exercised.
If agreement cannot be reached on this compromise before next week's deadline, the ministry will use the Defence Act of 1854 to abolish all rights of common.
Under the act, they claim, they cannot extinguish just some of the rights.
The commoners' representative, Dr Roy Swayne, believes it would be advantageous to accept the compromise deal, with its cash offer, because if the ministry ever were to sell the airfield when the Americans had gone, the 64 households concerned would still have some say in what happened.
The alternative, if three of the commoners continued to hold out, would be for them all to claim compensation for lost rights from the Lands Tribunal.
The cause of recovering Greenham Common for the people has been taken up by the author of Watership Down, Mr Richard Adams, who knew the area before it was requisitioned during the second world war.
‘I don't see why this splendid open space should not be restored just because it's 50 years since it was taken in a national emergency,’ he said.
Mr Tony Benn, the Labour MP for Chesterfield, is concerned with the effect abolishing rights of common would have on the Greenham women's protest.
He has put down a Commons motion condemning the Defence Secretary for ‘the arbitrary action which he is taking to extinguish the ancient rights of common […]for political reasons to prevent the women's peace camp from continuing their peaceful demonstrations’.
He said: ‘If you have any rights in Britain they abolish them.
Why shouldn't the women of Greenham be treated like the heroines fighting for freedom in Romania?’
Jobless total may exclude ‘dossers’.
By Keith Harper Labour Editor
DRUG addicts and ‘dossers’ are being considered by the Government among groups who should no longer be counted as unemployed.
A confidential review of long-term unemployment is being carried out as part of the Department of Employment's examination of the Government's £1.3billion Employment Training programme.
The review's suggestion that drug addicts, ‘dossers’ and some people with mental health problems should not be counted as unemployed is partly based on the department's evidence that a ‘significant and relatively high proportion’of mental patients have been returned to society as part of the Government's ‘care in the community’policy.
Mr Simon Montgomery, administrator of the Brighton Unemployment Centre, which obtained a copy of the review, said yesterday: ‘We are establishing a new category of people who may have to be outside the welfare net — people with mental health problems who form part of the new underclass.’
The Government forecasts that the number of people out of work for more than two years will fall from 550,000 in April 1989 to 325,000 by April 1991.
The ‘major constraints’ of the housing market means there is no viable case for encouraging people to move home to find work, the review says.
But the long-term unemployed could be given travel assistance, particularly as 40 per cent live in heavily populated areas.
The report suggests that free bus passes could also be offered to ‘certain disadvantaged groups’ in their first weeks of employment.
The review proposes a national insurance contribution ‘holiday’ to employers who recruit the long-term unemployed, although it admits that the Treasury would probably veto the plan.
A more simple option would be a cash subsidy to employers who hired the long-term unemployed.
Companies could receive up to £4,000 if they offered a one-year job contract.
The review argues that Restart courses, under which the long-term unemployed are interviewed about their efforts to find a job, should be subject to benefit sanctions to widen take-up, ‘especially among those too demotivated to volunteer’.
Maxwell editor offered buy-out.
By Ben Laurance *
MR Richard Stott, editor of the Daily Mirror, is to take charge of the People and will be given the opportunity to lead a management buy-out of the Sunday paper, its publisher, Mr Robert Maxwell said yesterday.
Mr Stott replaces Ms Wendy Henry, who was sacked last month after publishing photographs of Prince William urinating in a London park.
Mr Stott would restore the People ‘to its role as an entertaining, investigative, and informative newspaper,’ Mr Maxwell said yesterday.
It is hoped that within two years Mr Stott will lead a management buy-out of the People, making it independent of the other Mirror titles.
‘I am giving him the chance to be his own publisher,’ said Mr Maxwell.
‘I do not think any publisher has given any journalist that chance before in the United Kingdom.’
After the planned buy-out, Mirror Group will keep a minority stake in the People.
When the printing operation of Mr Maxwell's quoted company Maxwell Communications was taken over by its management this year, 24 per cent was retained by the former parent.
The proportion of the People retained by Mirror Group is likely to be similar — and the paper will continue to be printed on Mirror presses.
The Mirror Group — controlled by Mr Maxwell's private companies — was to have been floated on the Stock Exchange next year.
But that has now been put back to 1991.
The company makes profits of about £1 million a week.
Mr Maxwell said that the postponement was agreed in the last few weeks, following a decision to spend heavily next year on unspecified initiatives to increase Mirror Group's market share.
Mr Stott has been editor of the Daily Mirror since 1985.
He will be replaced by Mr Roy Greenslade, aged 42, associate editor of the Sunday Times.
Revellers urged to avoid square.
By Susan Tirbutt
HEALTH unions yesterday urged people to stay away from London's Trafalgar Square celebrations on New Year's Eve because of fears for their safety during the ambulance dispute.
Scotland Yard announced that people obviously drunk or carrying alcohol or aerosol sprays would be turned away and that this policy would also apply to Parliament Square.
Mr Chris Humphreys, of the National Union of Public Employees, said that Trafalgar Square, where often 60,000 congregate, could be a dangerous place.
‘If the celebrations are not cancelled the public will be well advised to stay away,’ he said.
New Year's Eve is the busiest period of the year for emergency services, with up to 300 calls an hour.
The London Ambulance Service usually deploys 110 vehicles.
Because of the dispute only 54 army ambulances will be available to cover London, in addition to police and St John's Ambulance.
In Scotland 100,000 have applied for free tickets to a Hogmanay party in George Square, Glasgow, which will also celebrate the city's year as Cultural Capital of Europe.
But only 15,000 will be admitted.
Organisers of an Essex acid house party say they will go ahead, despite warnings from police that they will close it down.
Up to 10,000 are expected at the 12-hour party scheduled to begin at 8pm tomorrow on a private estate.
Promoters World Wide Productions said it was likely to be the last party of its kind before new legislation comes into effect.
The company has sent an invitation to Mr Graham Bright, the Tory MP for Luton South, whose bill seeks to ban all-night parties.
‘We want him to see what the reality is, compared with the tabloid myth,’ said a party organiser.
British Rail will be running Sunday services on New Year Day.
Alliance formed to fight NHS plans.
By Paul Keel
PATIENTS, consultants, and family doctors yesterday formed a united front, called the NHS Support Federation, to fight proposed changes in the National Health Service.
Patients' groups, including Hospital Alert and the Birmingham Committee for the Rescue of the NHS, joined with the NHS Consultants' Association and the NHS Support Party, which intends to field GPs as parliamentary candidates in Tory marginals.
Professor Harry Kean, of Guy's Hospital, a co-ordinator of yesterday's meeting in London, was elected chairman of the federation.
He said the white paper on which the National Health Service and Community Care Bill is based had been devised without consultation with professional people or the public.
‘I think there is a real prospect of getting major changes to this bill,’ he added.
The new alliance of pressure groups would aim to ‘secure democracy in the NHS, exclude commercialisation of health care from the service and achieve a real health service review in which the people who work in the NHS are consulted.’
The NHS needed reform but not the government changes.
On the issue of hospitals taking more control over their affairs, Professor Kean said: ‘Hospitals to a very large extent can have that without turning the health service into a sort of supermarket.’
He added: ‘I qualified in 1948 and came in with the health service.
I am not prepared to let it die.’
Professor Kean, a specialist in diabetes, is also spearheading a move in the High Court on January 31.
He and five senior consultants will seek through judicial review a declaration that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, used taxpayers' money unlawfully in implementing white paper directives.
Road-block salvo shatters Bucharest's fragile silence.
By Ed Vulliamy in Bucharest
IT IS the early hours of Friday morning.
I am walking back to my hotel after dinner with a Bucharest novelist and his family and being graciously escorted by him and his wife through the still evidently dangerous, silent streets.
The deadline for the surrender of the Securitate secret police was only a few hours ago.
On the Bulevard Republicii there are a number of road- blocks, formerly manned by militias and now by troops.
Our company is exchanging greetings with the young soldiers when suddenly a white car refuses to stop at the next checkpoint up the street — braking only slightly and seeking to swerve past the two soldiers.
In the darkness there is an almighty salvo of machine gun fire, like a cacophony of cracking whips.
Instinctively everyone falls flat in the dirty slush.
The car reels and swerves up on to the pavement, crashing into a shopfront and shattering itself and the window panes.
Silence.
Then two isolated shots.
Then another.
Then a speedy convergence of vehicles from nowhere, one of them a taxi converted into an ambulance.
Soldiers quickly reinforce the road-blocks to stop the emerging onlookers from reviewing the scene.
People are ushered into the supposed safety of an archway.
Men huddle round the car, removing what look like dark, limp sacks of potatoes from within it.
Everything is now relaxed.
People get back to their feet.
The novelist and his wife cross themselves and apologise incongruously for the ‘terrorists in our country’.
Eventually the by now substantial crowds are ushered along the walls towards the square by the barely adolescent soldiers, some of whom ask for cigarettes as they do so.
Young lads gather round the car which looks as if it had been dead for days or weeks.
An armoured car obligingly shines its headlamps to facilitate a brief inspection by 20 people or so, soon cut short on the instructions of an officer.
The car has been raked with bullets leaving silvery steel pockmarks that shine through the paintwork.
Apart from that it could have been any accident on an urban road.
The soldiers announce: three Securitate agents shot dead and two badly injured.
Some say the men were armed, others not.
A debate even begins about whether the army is not getting a little trigger-happy in its nervous and no doubt terrified tension.
Reports earlier in the evening said over 2,000 Securitate are still at large across the country.
‘If you do not stop at the road-block, you are dead,’ says a soldier with a grimace.
The crowd is told to go back home, and does so with some relief.
There is a much appreciated personal escort for the 100 yards to the hotel, for the price of a handful of Marlboro.
The novelist and his wife cross themselves again and turn back into the night.
Within an hour, Bucharest is buried under a blanket of virgin snow.
Food critic quits advisory post.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Correspondent
THE Government's most outspoken food safety critic, Professor Richard Lacey, has resigned from his only Whitehall post claiming it is being ‘neutered’ to protect the food and drug industry.
The Veterinary Products Committee, where he served for four years, gives advice on food and animal drug issues to the Minister of Agriculture.
It was Dr Lacey, professor of microbiology at Leeds University, who explained the transmission of salmonella in eggs and defended assertions by Mrs Edwina Currie, the sacked junior health minister, that the infection had spread throughout the British laying flock.
He was first to find frequent listeria contamination of cook-chill foods and demonstrated the failure of microwaves always to kill the bacteria which can be fatal to foetuses, newborns, and the elderly.
News of the professor's departure was a single sentence at the bottom of a footnote in a holiday-period ministry press release.
Professor Lacey said yesterday: ‘I have seen the membership of the committee refined over the years to suit the interests of the large food and pharmaceutical companies.
‘There has also been a deliberate policy to exclude the committee from important decisions to license new veterinary drugs.’
The ministry said: ‘We cannot support any of these allegations.
Professor Lacey left of his own accord and was thanked for his valuable contribution.
The committee continues to have ample microbiological expertise.’
Much of its work will be transferred after 1992 to a European Commission panel.
The EC has already imposed a two-year ban on BST, the genetically-engineered milk yield booster which the Government supports.
Professor Lacey expressed his concerns about BST last October.
Haughey flaunts Europe mantle.
By David Hearst in Belfast.
AS the Irish Prime Minister, Mr Charles Haughey, prepares to take over the presidency of the European Economic Community on Monday, promoting his country is high on the agenda.
A £500,000 budget has been set aside to create a press office to represent him in Brussels, in addition to Dublin's existing one.
Dublin Castle, the venue for the main event, the European Council of Ministers meeting on June 25 and 26, has been refurbished at a cost of £22 million and equipped with a new conference centre.
Even the carpet in the state rooms — a fault in whose weave is said to depict a wounded leader of the 1916 uprising, James Connolly who was later executed — has been lifted.
No effort is being spared to ensure that the 1,400 journalists and hundreds of European officials who are expected to invade the capital for the June summit depart with a good impression of Irish hospitality.
Ireland, in its fourth EC presidency, is espousing the European ideal as a model for Irish unity.
The advent of the single market in 1992 has been used by Mr Haughey as a pretext for renewing his offer of direct talks with Northern Ireland Unionists.
He offered to talk to the three Ulster MEPs, one of whom was Mr Ian Paisley, the Democratic Unionists' leader.
The offer was rejected but behind it lay the assumption that a new relationship will have to develop between north and the south in a wider European context.
Since 1973, Ireland has received around £9 billion in EC funds — five times more than it has contributed to the community.
The £6 billion received in farm subsidies has put Ireland very much on the side of the French and West Germans when it comes to defending the Common Agricultural Policy.
Travelling less than hopefully puts blight on holidays abroad.
By Angella Johnson
TRAVELLING to holidays abroad is becoming more stressful, according to a survey by Gallup yesterday.
More than three in four of the 828 adults interviewed were upset by dirty toilets at departure points while 74 per cent complained about lack of information when travel delays occurred.
Having nowhere to sit while waiting also came high on the list.
More than three in five complained about noisy and drunk passengers and just over half were upset by having to travel with smokers.
‘A lesson to airlines is that when delays occur, communicating is the best way to avoid passenger distress,’ said Mr Tony Farrell of North Sea Ferries UK, which commissioned the survey.
Sue Keane, a consumer psychologist, who designed the survey, said: ‘People have to work harder, often for longer hours, in the entrepreneurial 1980s and deserve a restful journey.’
The top 10 complaints were: dirty and untidy toilets; insufficient information about delays; cramped conditions; nowhere to sit while waiting; long delays at departure points; uncomfortable seating on board; noisy or drunk fellow passengers; long queues at check-ins; overheated travelling environment; and rude staff at departure points.
Police to bridge ambulance gap.
By Michael Morris
POLICE were last night standing by to answer emergency calls as ambulance crews in Greater Manchester planned to ban the use of radios while on the road.
Greater Manchester Police said that if a local health authority asked the police for assistance the force would respond.
The chief ambulance officer, Mr Jim Barkley, said he had asked for police help on behalf of the 12 district health authorities because it was ‘a very serious escalation — the worst that has hit us’.
He said that the police had a statutory obligation for public safety.
It would be up to control officers to decide at what stage to ask for police help, which would include the use of police vans, stretchers, and blankets.
A meeting of shop stewards from the National Union of Public Employees approved the intensification of action in the four-month-old dispute.
It voted to cease all transfers of patients between hospitals from midnight.
Mr David Owen, Nupe's area officer, said the decision not to use ambulance radios meant that crews would only answer emergency calls at stations.
The action, he said, was being stepped up as a result of Thursday's suspensions of ambulance staff in London, threatened disciplinary action against ambulance staff in the Midlands, and Bury health authority's use of private ambulances.
The shop stewards also decided that all accident and emergency cases would be taken to the nearest accident and emergency department.
North Manchester health authority was making emergency plans last night to use voluntary agencies to transfer patients between hospitals.
Twenty-eight ambulance control officers in the London area were suspended without pay yesterday for refusing to cover for colleagues taking industrial action.
They were suspended for not complying with an instruction to be transferred from their normal centres to handle emergency calls at the Waterloo control centre, said the London Ambulance Service.
A spokesman said staff at two divisional centres, New Malden and Bromley, agreed to the instruction but seven at Ilford and 21 at Kenton were suspended.
He went on: ‘They are normally engaged in planning non-emergency journeys but since there have not been any it was felt that they have just been sitting around socialising when others are working long hours.
This was considered unfair and they were stood down.’
Five weeks ago, 35 control staff based at Waterloo were suspended for refusing to put calls through to Scotland Yard.
Sir John Hunt, the Tory MP for Ravensbourne, has written to Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, calling for a ‘positive proposal’ to break the impasse.
Brussels brings cold comfort to sheep farmers.
By Michael Morris
THE European Commission is a greater threat to the Lake District's native hill sheep, the Herdwick, than a cruel winter on the high fells ever could be, according to farmers in the area.
A new directive to reduce EC support to Herdwick farmers by 10 per cent could end centuries of resilience.
The farmers are already on narrow profit margins.
One of the biggest producers, Mr Tyson Hartley, whose flock winters on 3,000-ft fells in the Duddon Valley, said: ‘No other breed will survive there.
That is the problem.’
Herdwicks start lambing a year after other breeds because they need to grow enough to stand the harsh climate.
Normally, ewes have to be pregnant, or have a lamb, to qualify for payments under the European Community sheep meat regime.
In 1986, the Government won a concession for Herdwicks to receive 70 per cent of the premium before lambing.
But it is now to be cut.
Making a living is hard at any time for Herdwick farmers.
But the move has come after a series of blows, including poor livestock sales and lower wool prices.
Mr Hartley fears cutting the concession could be the last straw for some 80 farmers who keep 75,000 Herdwicks in the Lake District.
He has about 3,000 sheep at Seathwaite, where shepherd's pie, rather than ploughman's, is served at the pub and Herdwick sheep postcards are sold, captioned, ‘there you go, posing again’.
While his dog, Nell, rounded up 300 sheep, he said: ‘They go back up there, on Dow Crag and Coniston Old Man, for the winter because that is their home.
They are the only sheep that can stand it.
They are bred for the purpose.’
There is enough grass on the high hills for the white-faced, hairy-legged sheep to last the winter.
Mr Hartley and his two sons, Christopher and Andrew, only feed them in very severe weather.
‘Those people in warm offices in Brussels just don't understand what the climate is like here.
It can blow and snow for six weeks,’ he said.
Sometimes, the Hartleys have to rely on their 10 dogs to find sheep covered over by snow blown off sheltering walls and rocks.
‘The 10 per cent reduction in subsidy on the shearling (two-year-old) and the ewe takes 10 per cent off our living.
It is a big slice in one go.
They think we should breed lambs off them and we don't do that because they are too young to stand the environment,’ Mr Hartley said.
The National Trust is supporting MEPs, MPs, and the National Farmers' Union in fighting the directive.
The trust owns about one third of the total Herdwick flock.
Mr Nigel Sale, a trust spokesman, is worried about over-grazing if farmers increased flocks to overcome EC cuts.
Mr Rodney Bacon, NFU policy adviser, sees the directive as a heavy blow for traditional Lake District sheep farming.
‘There has been a whole series of events in the last year going against the hill sheep farmer, and this could be one of the final straws.’
Herded into oblivion…
The Lake District's Herdwick sheep are threatened by the reduction of an EC subsidy concession allowing for late lambing in the cold climatePHOTOGRAPHS: DON McPHEE Tyson Hartley…
‘People in warm offices in Brussels don't understand that it can blow and snow for six weeks here’
Last hours of murdered lovers' lane couple could yield clue.
By Angella Johnson
POLICE were reconstructing yesterday the movements of the couple murdered in a ‘lovers’ lane’in Epping Forest, Essex, in the hope of jogging the memory of someone who could help find the killer.
Mr Terry Gooderham, aged 39, an accountant, and his girlfriend Mrs Maxine Arnold, were shot in the back of the head while sitting in their F-registered dark grey Mercedes.
A small quantity of substances in the car was sent for analysis but Scotland Yard said there was ‘no evidence whatsoever’ of drugs dealing.
It has been claimed that Mr Gooderham may have had financial problems.
A close friend, who said he was too frightened to reveal his name, has told the drinks trade newspaper, the Morning Advertiser: ‘My life could be in danger if I say too much but I have my own idea what the murder is all about.
It is nothing to do with his love life or his own business but a lot of money is involved.’
The reconstruction retraced the couple's movements from 7pm when they are thought to have set off from Mrs Arnold's flat in Shernhall Road, Walthamstow, east London.
Mrs Vi MacNamara, mother of Mrs Arnold, said the couple seemed to have left in a hurry.
When she arrived for a pre-arranged drink the lights were on.
Earlier, their telephone had been engaged.
Sport and culture lead New Year's Honours list.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent
STARS from both sporting and artistic worlds — including golfer Tony Jacklin, actress Maggie Smith, and Frank Bruno, the heavyweight boxer — rub shoulders with 22 heroes of the Lockerbie disaster in the first New Year's Honours of the 1990s, published this morning.
A superior brand of knighthood, the KBE, goes to the former Liberal leader, Mr David Steel, while Sir John Fieldhouse, ex-chief of the Defence Staff and First Sea Lord during the Falklands War, becomes one of three new life peers.
The sole new Companion of Honour is Mr David Lange, the former Prime Minister of New Zealand.
Sport and culture pack a bigger punch than politics this time — as does industry — although Sebastian Coe's OBE represents a foot in both camps.
The runner is now a Tory candidate.
Bryan Robson, captain of Manchester United and England, gets a CBE alongside Finlay Calder, the captain of the British Lions' rugby team.
The sprinter Linford Christie joins Frank Bruno in the ranks of MBEs.
The novelist, V.S. Naipaul, becomes one of 30 new knights, and Maggie Smith emerges as the theatre's latest Dame.
There are CBEs for A.S.
Byatt, the writer, Professor Brian Cox of educational ‘black paper’ fame and Michael Gambon, the actor.
John Drummond, head of Radio 3, gets a CBE, as does the conductor, John Eliot Gardiner.
Anthony Thwaite, the poet, becomes an OBE.
Tony Jacklin gets his OBE upgraded to a CBE ‘for services to golf’.
The knighthood for Colonel David Stirling, founder of the SAS, who helped to try and set up a strike-breaking organisation called GB75 in the 1970s, may prove controversial.
The most conspicuous group to emerge from the 947 names on the Prime Minister's list — about 30 more than usual — are key figures in the traumatic aftermath to the terrorist bombing of Pan-Am's Flight 103 over Lockerbie last December.
They include CBEs for Mr John Boyd and Mr Neil McIntosh, who headed the local police and regional council during the tragedy, a sprinkling of MBEs to voluntary workers like Dr Alastair Cameron, director of Dumfriesshire's Red Cross, and a British Empire Medal for Mr George Johnstone, the keeper at Lockerbie town hall where the dead were taken.
Today's peers include Miss Daphne Park, retired principal of Somerville College, Oxford — Mrs Thatcher's alma mater— and Sir Frank Tombs, chairman of Rolls-Royce and Turner & Newall, a pillar of the industrial wing of the British Establishment.
Mr Michael Angus, chairman of Unilever, Mr Harold de Ville, chairman of Meyer International, Mr Derek Hornby of Rank Xerox UK (‘for services to exports’), Mr George Turnbull, chief executive of Inchcape plc, and Mr Frank Lampl of Bovis Construction, are among industry's new knights in the year of a record trade gap.
They are joined by Mr John Quinton, chairman of Barclays Bank, while a CBE goes to the monetarist pundit, Mr Gordon Pepper of Midland Montague.
In the academic world, new knights include Professor Eric Ash, rector of Imperial College, London, and Professor James Holt, the distinguished medieval historian and authority on the Magna Carta.
The three new Privy Counsellors are Sir Nicholas Lyell, the Solicitor-General, and two high-flyers of the class of ‘79 who are still stuck as ministers of state: Mr William Waldegrave of the Foreign Office and the Home Office's John Patten.
Only the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats made nominations for political services and, apart from Sir David Steel, there are just three backbench knighthoods.
They are Mr Charles Irving (Cheltenham); Mr John Wheeler (Paddington) and Dr Alan Glyn, the 71-year-old MP for Windsor.
It is a tacit acknowledgement that neither office nor a peerage awaits them.
But Mr Christopher Prout, MEP, leader of the Tories’ Euro-group, which took the brunt of Mrs Thatcher's Gaullism in the European elections, becomes a knight.
Sir David Steel, as he is now, last night spoke for them all when he promised: ‘I don't think it's going to alter me or Judy greatly.’
Full list, page 4
Tear gas used on boat people.
Riot police used tear gas at a Hong Kong detention centre for Vietnamese boat people after meeting resistance during a ‘routine weapons search’.
Page 20.
Police ‘racism’ claim.
The Commission for Racial Equality is pressing the Police Complaints Authority to investigate allegations of racial discrimination by members of the now-disbanded West Midlands serious crimes squad.
Page 3.
Ambulance escalation.
Police were last night standing by to answer emergency calls as ambulance crews in Greater Manchester planned to ban the use of radios while on the road.
Page 3.
Greenham threat.
The Ministry of Defence is threatening to abolish commoners' centuries-old grazing rights on the Greenham Common cruise missile base.
Page 2.
Food critic resigns.
Outspoken food safety critic, Professor Richard Lacey, has resigned from his only Whitehall post.
Page 2.
Parents pay.
Schools are increasingly relying on money from parents to provide decent stocks of books, government inspectors report today.
Page 2.
People power.
Mr Richard Stott, editor of the Daily Mirror, is to take charge of the People and will be given the opportunity to lead a management buy-out of the Sunday paper.
Page 3
Romania sweeps away socialist system.
By Ed Vulliamy and Ian Traynor in Bucharest
THE provisonal government of Romania made itself very much less provisional yesterday by decreeing significant constitutional changes, including the fact that the country is no longer a socialist republic.
Copies of what amounts to a new constitution were seized eagerly by people on the streets.
The document proclaims the obliteration of the old Ceausescu order and of the entrenched position of the Communist Party.
It promises sweeping freedoms, a new economic order, a commitment to a united Europe and the separation of the executive and judiciary.
Romania is to stay a republic, suggesting the country's new rulers see little future for the former King Michael.
A military member of the National Salvation Front also disclosed yesterday that ex-President Ceaucescu was captured at a roadblock north of Bucharest while trying to flee.
He was handed over to local army units and then driven around in an armoured car for three days to prevent Securitate units discovering his whereabouts.
Mr Silviu Brucan, a leading member of the front, was reported as saying yesterday that the Communist Party was now finished and had played no part in the revolution — despite increasing complaints, particularly from students at the centre of the uprising, that most of those moving into power were party members.
‘All communist parties are politically discredited for elevating criminals and psychopaths to highest office, such as Ceausescu, Pol Pot, Mao and Stalin,’ said Mr Brucan.
But despite its claims to instigate a pluralist society, the new constitution places substantial powers in the hands of the Council of National Salvation and is accompanied by the appointment of military personnel to key political positions.
Published simultaneously were lists of military promotions, creating a top-heavy army that enjoys the apparently unqualified goodwill of the political authorities.
Although for the moment the army is the darling of the people, its closeness to the now constitutionally-entrenched council will afford the military great authority.
Among yesterday's appointments were General Atanasie Stanculescu, a former deputy defence minister, as Minister of Economics, and General Mihai Ghitac as Interior Minister.
The Defence Minister, General Nicolae Militaru, issued a final appeal for the surrender of ‘terrorist forces’ still loyal to Ceausescu.
One of the country's vice-presidents, Mr Casimir Ionescu, said thousands of Securitate members waging a guerrilla campaign had given up, while hundreds remained at large.
Sporadic shooting continued yesterday in Bucharest and other cities.
There were repeated television appeals that acts of revenge should cease.
The new constitution said the ruling council represented ‘the joining of all of us — the army and the patriotic forces for the democracy of our country’.
The principles of the constitution are: 1.
The end of the one-party system.
2.
The promise of free elections in April 1990.
3.
The ‘restructuring of the economic system and the national economy having as its aim efficiency and free enterprise and the elimination of bureaucratic methods of planning’.
4.
The restructuring of agriculture and the ‘supporting of the small holdings of the peasants and their produce and the end of the destruction of rural communities and villages’.
5.
The complete restructuring of the ministry of education.
6.
To proceed towards a humanist and democratic ideology and government in the name of human values.
7.
The respect of ‘the rights and liberty of our national minorities’.
8.
Full freedom of worship.
9.
The reorganisation of the ‘whole system of commerce, starting with the demand of the people and its satisfaction’.
10.
‘The reorganisation of ecological balances which will eliminate subsidies to any goods or process bad for the earth and the environment.’
11.
Foreign policy based on ‘peace, good relations with our neighbours and integrating into the process of a whole united Europe’.
Romania will recognise both the Warsaw Pact and the Helsinki Agreement.
The Bank of England is understood to have told the Romanian authorities they will have to apply to the British courts to have bank accounts belonging to the former dictator Nicolae Ceausescu frozen, writes Mark Milner.
Last week the new Romanian authorities asked the Bank of England and other major central banks to freeze assets said to belong to the Ceausescu family.
But the bank is believed to have replied that it did not have the power to do so.
Intellectual revolution, page 5
Police inquiry urged to look into racism.
By David Rose Crime Correspondent
THE Commission for Racial Equality is pressing the Police Complaints Authority to investigate allegations of systematic racial discrimination by members of the now-disbanded West Midlands serious crimes squad.
The authority is presently supervising an inquiry by West Yorkshire Police into the squad's activities.
It is understood there is prima facie evidence of racial bias in several cases which the inquiry, under Mr Donald Shaw, the assistant chief constable, and a team of more than 30 detectives, is looking into.
It is the biggest investigation in the history of the complaints authority, and into policing since the Operation Countryman inquiry into the Metropolitan Police in the 1970s.
Many of the 55 defendants arrested or convicted by the squad since 1986 who have made formal complaints to the inquiry team are black.
It is understood there may also be evidence of discrimination against Irish suspects.
At least four of the 55 members of the squad suspended pending the investigation, took part in the inquiry which led to the conviction of the Birmingham Six.
If allegations of discrimination against Irish suspects were sustained, the pressure on the Government to re-open the Birmingham Six case would be intensified.
The question of racial discri mination was first raised in correspondence between Mr Michael Day, the chairman of the commission, and Mr Francis Petre, his counterpart at the complaints authority.
The commission believes that the possibility of racial discrimination in the West Midlands' affair must be investigated as a matter of priority, and that the authority should, in any event, consider possible racial overtones in all cases.
But Mr Day's approaches have so far, according to sources within the authority, been stonewalled.
It is thought that members of the authority are divided on the issue.
A meeting between Mr Petre and Mr Day is likely early next month.
But if no progress is made towards full ethnic monitoring of the West Midlands case, the commission is understood to be prepared to raise the matter with Mr David Waddington, the Home Secretary, who is responsible for both the commission and the authority.
According to commission sources, investigating the possible racial aspects of the serious crime squad scandal would be in the interests of both the police force and the authority, which has been criticised since its formation under the 1984 Police and Criminal Evidence Act as being ineffective and slow to act, particularly in cases of alleged assault or ill-treatment of black suspects.
Sir Peter Imbert, the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, said in an interview in the Police Review this month that the complaints procedures had become almost unworkable, and failed to command public confidence — and particularly of ethnic minorities.
He found it hard to believe that the 3 per cent of allegations of racial discrimination sustained by the authority could reflect the true picture, and he supported an independent investigatory agency to handle all aspects of complaints against the police.
It is understood that the commission has also raised the issue of discrimination with Mr Geoffrey Dear, the West Midlands Chief Constable.
UN deplores invasion as ‘violation of international law’ US defied by Vatican on Noriega..
By Martin Walker in Washington
THE discovery of two kidnapped and executed American civilians sharply increased the tension of the siege of the Papal mission in Panama yesterday, as the Vatican refused to hand over General Manuel Noriega to ‘the occupying power’ of the US.
The UN General Assembly last night adopted a resolution deploring the US military intervention in Panama as a flagrant violation of international law.
By 75 votes to 20, with 40 abstentions, the assembly endorsed a document similar to the one vetoed by the US, Britain and France in the Security Council on Saturday.
The Soviet Ambassador to the UN, Mr Alexander Belonogov called the intervention ‘international terror against a small and in essence defenceless state’.
While not seeking to whitewash General Noriega, he asked: ‘Where is the guarantee that under some trumped up pretext…the US would not send [forces elsewhere]to justify their arguments are right?’
The bodies of Richard Paul, aged 20, and his uncle Raymond Dragseth, aged 47, a professor of computer science at Panama Canal College, were found shot through the back of the head in a building near the Vatican Embassy in Panama yesterday.
Mr Dragseth had been taken from his home at gunpoint by pro-Noriega supporters on the day after the invasion.
General Noriega had been asked to leave the Papal mission but would not be forced to leave, Vatican spokesmen insisted.
The US countered that the discovery of the civilian bodies was ‘tragic new evidence’ that General Noriega was ‘a criminal fugitive from justice who does not deserve diplomatic sanctuary’.
The US continued to soften its previously aggressive tone towards the Vatican.
The White House spokesman, Mr Marlin Fitzwater, said the talks with the Papal diplomats would ‘continue in a positive vein,’ and there was no deadline on the talks.
Clearly rattled at the prospect of a confrontation with the spiritual father of 52 million US voters, the White House said yesterday that the Church ‘is playing a very serious and constructive role’.
The Vatican spokesman, Mr Joacquin Novarro-Vallas, in Rome yesterday denounced the US siege tactics, and said ‘an occupying power cannot interfere with the work of a diplomatic mission or demand that a person who is seeking asylum there be handed over to it’.
‘I think the Vatican is doing a fine job,’ Mr Fitzwater told reporters in Texas, where President Bush is taking a quail-hunting holiday.
But Mr Fitzwater refused to go into details on the various compromises being suggested to winkle Noriega from his refuge.
‘We just don't think it is helpful to talk about a lot of these things while we are in this process,’ he said.
There has been intense speculation that a third country might take Noriega, with Cuba and India being mentioned.
But the US has said that the prospect of General Noriega at large with access to secret funds and free to organise revenge or counter-coups or de-stabilisation in Panama was simply unacceptable.
The alternatives would seem to be handing General Noriega to the US forces to face trial on drug-trafficking charges, which the Vatican has said it will not do, or giving him up to the new Panamanian Government, which has already declared it ‘has enough on him to put Noriega away for life’.
In a heart-rending telephone call to a US television station, Mrs Dragseth said the US embassy was of no help, and it seemed incompetent even to register the fact of his abduction.
‘I feel the efforts of the US embassy have been very inadequate,’ his daughter Caroline said by telephone from Panama yesterday.
The discovery of the two bodies yesterday has started a new check on the 30,000 US civilians in Panama.
US military sweeps through the countryside found no resistance, and rounded up hundreds more former members of the Panamanian Defence Forces, as life returned to normal in the capital.
But as the military confrontations evaporated, the diplomatic stand-off at the Papal mission escalated yesterday, with new Vatican protests at the searching of priests and the frisking of the Papal Nunciate.
The decibel-diplomacy outside the Papal embassy continued yesterday with more top-volume rock music in spite of Vatican protests.
The most-played tunes so far are Beat It by Michael Jackson, You're No Good by Linda Ronstadt, and I Fought the Law and the Law Won by the Bobby Fuller Four.
The US army spokesman in Panama insisted that the rock music assault was simply ‘a way of introducing ambient sound to ensure the security of military communications’.
Meanwhile, the White House announced that the Deputy Secretary of State, Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, would lead an economic reconstruction team to Panama next week.
Ex-Mossad man seized, page 6
Trade deficit at eight-month low.
By Mark Milner
BRITAIN remains on course for its biggest annual balance of payments deficit despite a better-than-expected trading performance last month.
Figures released by the Central Statistical Office yesterday showed that the current account was £1.4billion in the red in November, some £300million less than the revised deficit for October and the lowest since March.
It takes the shortfall for the year to date to £19.3billion and the annual total will easily top the £20billion forecast by the Chancellor, Mr John Major, in his autumn expenditure statement.
But there was some comfort in the figures for the Government and for an already hard-pressed pound, which could have faced another battering if the deficit had been worse than the expected £1.5billion.
Yesterday's figures showed the value of imports falling by 2.5 per cent to £9.6billion in November while exports rose by 0.5 per cent to £8.1billion, giving the lowest visible trade deficit since September last year.
Invisible earnings for the month are projected to have been £100million, while their contribution in October has been revised down from £300million to the same level.
Overall the statistics provided some evidence to support the view of Mr Major and his predecessor, Mr Nigel Lawson, that high interest rates would slow the economy, helping to choke off the boom in imports and putting pressure on industry to boost exports.
The volume of exports in the four months to November was up 4 per cent on the previous four months, while imports rose 1 per cent.
The Central Statistical Office said the figures showed ‘the underlying level of non-oil import volume may now be flat whilst non-oil export growth still seems to be rising strongly’.
Yesterday's trade figures were well received in the City.
The stock market climbed 23.9 points to 2,422.7, within a fraction of its highest level this year.
On the foreign exchanges the pound managed a modest recovery from Thursday's slump when it hit an all-time low against the German mark.
Sterling's effective index ended up 0.5 at 86 per cent of its 1985 value.
However, City economists expect Britain's trade deficit to improve, but with few expecting next year's trade gap to be better than the £15 billion figure forecast by Mr Major in his autumn statement.
‘The figures should help sterling in the short term, but given the size of the deficit, the pound remains vulnerable,’ said one economist.
Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow Trade and Industry Secretary, said the figures meant ‘Britain enters the 1990s with the highest interest rates, the worst inflation and the biggest trade gap of all our European competitors’.
Trade gap narrows, page 9
DPP appeals in Wapping police case.
By Owen Bowcott
THE Director of Public Prosecutions is to appeal against the High Court's decision to halt criminal proceedings against seven police officers charged following clashes outside Mr Rupert Murdoch's News International plant at Wapping in 1987.
Just before Christmas the DPP, Mr Allan Green, QC, failed in his attempt to have the cases against the seven officers reinstated.
They had been quashed by Bow Street magistrates court earlier this year on the grounds of delay.
The DPP must now seek leave from the Divisional Court to take the appeal to the House of Lords.
Six officers were originally charged with conspiracy to pervert the course of justice and the seventh with unlawful wounding.
The clashes in January 1987 followed the sacking of print workers by Mr Murdoch's newspaper group when it moved to its new print plant at Wapping, east London.