

What kind of holiday can you get in 1990 for £1,000 — the average amount spent by any one family?
The market place can be confusing but Trader Horn picks his way through the mire Going for the grand tour.
Discounting a discount war
First steps in the making of a Good Agency Guide
Agencies.
A GRAND is the average amount that a British family pays out when booking its annual holiday package.
This at least is the figure assumed by the market leaders, Thomson Holidays, and the other majors do not differ greatly.
There is a statistical rider which puts even greater emphasis on that sum: it does not matter whether the family unit is made up of two, three or four people — the £1,000 booking is near enough a constant — though what people spend when they get there is harder to establish.
In a confused and confusing holiday price structure, it may be useful to translate these figures into pictures, do a Jack Horner on the holiday pie and pluck out some typical plums, pinpoint what the 1990 market offers for £250 per head.
Vigorous thumb work produces these nearly perfect (arithmetically speaking) examples: A fortnight with B&B accommodation in Alanya in Turkey is offered by Intasun (0274 736403) at £251pp, though they can also do Alanya self catering at £199.
A week in a one-star hotel in Madrid can be set up by Time Off (01-235 8070) for £227pp, with an optional day tour to Toledo for £26 or to Avila and Segovia for £33.
For four people sharing, Global Villas (01-466 4625) have a 2-bedroom villa with pool a kilometre from the beach at Carvoeira in Portugal, at £252pp for a week.
(The price includes flights).
Grecian (01-444 3333) offer B&B in a ‘traditional style A-class’ hotel in Thassos Town from £249pp for 14 nights.
In the south of France, Euroexpress (01-748 2607) can arrange six nights in a 2-star hotel in Juan Les Pins for £251pp — extra nights £24.
Italian Escapades (01-748 2661), with Pilgrim Air have a design-your-own-holiday programme which for £204 charter flight (or £264 scheduled service) allows you 5 nights in Rome at a 4-star hotel near the Trevi and Spanish Steps.
Among the cheaper European destinations is Bulgaria, where Balkan Holidays (01-493 8612) offer a 7-night fly/drive with set itinerary and B&B at hotels from £239, the route to include Golden Sands, the Borgas area, Plovdiv, Sofia and Veliko Turnovo in the Yantra Gorge.
A new destination in the Greek islands for Manos (01-630 1161) is Samos, where 14 nights in a self-catering apartment with flights sells at £912 for four people.
Thomson themselves (01 435 8431) offer 14 nights half-board at a 4-T hotel (Thomson's own classification) in Palma Nova in Mallorca for two adults and two children at £842, or a self-catering deal in Santa Ponsa at a similar class apartment for £508.
To embroider the sampler, we turned to some multiple agencies and asked them for their recommendations of good value on a £1,000 booking for four people.
Their choices follow: Lunn Poly's marketing director Peter Rothwell observed that as a rule the staff in their 505 shops base their selling on the answers given by the customer in a questionnaire, to prevent mismatches between customers and the holidays they took, but he nevertheless felt safe in saying that two young couples, a bit adventurous, would do well if they invested in an ILG Drive Europe holiday along the west coast of France to Biarritz, good countryside and a nice old town, accommodation at the Mer et Golf apartments, two weeks in all with ferry and accommodation included for £255 each.
Pickfords marketing man Andrew Jones drew attention to the company's discounting policy, operating until the end of February, and put forward three options.
Two adults and two children staying 10 nights at the Hotel Cavanna in La Manga in Spain in June would work out, with the discount, at £907.
A Crystal premier villa-with-pool and ferry 14-night package to the south of France, insurance in and discount applied would add up to £1032.
Or, for half the time but twice the luxury, they could go in June with Airtours for seven nights to the Hotel Magaluf near Palma in Mallorca, via Stansted, for £976.
Spain evidently filled the screen for Hogg Robinson's Holborn manager Phil Feak.
He'd have liked to plump for the Algarve but, he said wistfully, you do go over the £1,000.
So he would go instead for Mallorca in June, 14 nights half board for £239 in Alcudia, or the Hotel America in Calas de Mallorca.
Sales talk.
IN THE AFTERMATH of Christmas such multiple agencies as Thomas Cook, Pickfords and Lunn Poly have been holding sales, knocking off £50, £70 and £100 off many holidays.
Everyone knows that 1990 will be a tough year, with bookings something like 40 per cent down, the public playing a lament in J. Major, the tour operators bent on improving profit margins instead of competing by price for market share, with heavily reduced capacity particularly at the cheaper end of the range.
As an earnest of their firm intentions they have been consolidating flights in December, which is unprecedented.
With this in view the consensus among the agencies is that there will be some discounting, because nobody can ever get it exactly right, but nothing like what has been available in recent years.
If the attempt to entice custom from people who only take a foreign holiday when it is ultra-cheap has been abandoned, they will be glad.
But if the operators are set against discounting it will not prevent the agencies from doing some on their own account.
In fact this shift has been visible for some time and seems at present to be increasing.
This is only one of several tactics which has the incidental effect of squeezing the ‘Mum and Dad’ agencies.
The start-up costs of a travel agency have been relatively small.
While business was buoyant there was a living in it for many small shops that are liable to succumb in a climate where 40 per cent of the country are wanting independent deals, and the remainder are demanding much improved advice and service.
Thomas Cook, investing £18m to redesign their 300 retail outlets in four-section specialist subdivisions, predict that the 6,500 Abta-bonded agencies will decrease by 1,000 in 1990.
Nobody can know the world, not even the parts of it on offer to tourists, but they can know how to look them up, and the training for too long has been exiguous.
There is no use in telling a customer wanting to go to San Marino (as I have been in three central London agencies) that it doesn't exist, that he really means San Remo.
But this is what happens when agencies are staffed by school leavers on pathetic salaries like £5,000 a year.
But the scene is changing.
It is not necessary to go to the lengths of the British Airways new Four Corners shops, where the travel element can hardly be distinguished through an Ali Baba's cave of irrelevant merchandise, but only to set up efficient systems run by people who know what they're talking about and who can make time to understand what their travellers want, like Trailfinders with their honest bucket-shop approach, or the STA chain with its expertise in student travel.
David Radcliffe, marketing director for Hogg Robinson's 206 shops, for which they produced this week the latest edition of a four-volume in-house resort hotel guide to 1750 establishments, points out that his chain is already ‘segmented on tailor-made, seat-only and bed-only markets’.
He felt that Cook's were right in the direction they were taking and correct in their prediction of 1,000 failures among agencies.
The image of counter staff did need some polishing, in fact they had just put all their 1,300 people through a course teaching them ‘how not to behave like Sharons and Traceys.’
IT WAS difficult for small independents to offer services like their Holiday Care system, which offered immediate help to holidaymakers, whatever the problem, like lost baggage or loans to cope with legal problems over cars in Spain, for which customers were given access to a phone numnber until 15 days after coming home.
Bruce Shepherd, marketing director of the Scottish-based A.T.Mays chain (nearly 300 shops, 60 per cent in England) thinks I am too severe in my view of agency service.
Ninety per cent of their demand is for ‘pretty ordinary’ packages, and his staff know how to pick their way through the brochures.
But the A.T.
in A.T.Mays stands for ‘All Travel’
It was true that the chains' capacity for negotiating good deals made it hard for the family-run business to keep going, and they had many letters offering businesses for sale, and the price of shops was coming down all the time.
On the other hand specialists could thrive.
Although it would be a tough year for sure, revenue was not dropping anything like as much as the bookings percentage.
There were marvellous areas of growth, like Caribbean cruising with the fantastic prices and quality incidental to the impact of all the extra tonnage, and the ferries were doing so well that it would be a good idea to discourage people from turning up in hordes at Dover unticketed.
Agency guide.
AS A PIONEERING venture towards the making of a Good Agency Guide, we've assembled a dossier across the country with whom we would not hesitate to deal.
It is not meant to be an exclusive list, and nothing would please us more than to hear from readers about others — or their shortcomings, if the case deserved it.
ABERDEEN Bell Travel, 127, Rosemount Place, AB2 4YH; tel 0224 633038.
The ability to seek out travel services for the customer even when they do not appear on brochure racks has brought the company a strong following in the town but also, according to manager Sandra Chisholm, from as far as Glasgow.
‘Knowing the local community is important.
If a customer wants to spend time deciding on a holiday we are prepared to spend that time.
However, we can work fast when people are in a rush.’
BELFAST Menary Travel, 30 Howard Street, BT1 6PF; tel 0232 320881.
The agency has been in business for 20 years.
Proprietor Geoffrey Menary says that more than three quarters of its clientele are repeat customers.
BIRMINGHAM Courier Travel, 131 High Street, Harbourne B17 9NP; tel 021 4275181.
This company specialises in upmarket holidays.
‘People spend a lot of their hard-earned money on holidays,’ observes sales director Ray Wilkins, ‘and they need professional service and advice.
As a small independent we try to appreciate the client's requirements.’
BOLTON W.H.Smith Travel, 14 Newport Street BL1 1NB; tel 0204 392226.
‘Buying travel is a bit like going to the hairdresser,’ says manager Christine Power.
‘People have their favourite person.
Travel is a very personal matter and our staff build up their own clientele.’
The agency is part of a nationwide chain, but ‘We do not have counters.
We find customers prefer to sit down at individual desks and discuss their requirements.’
BRISTOL Bakers Dolphin, 16 Clifton Down Road, BS8 4AD, tel 0272 7433221.
The company specialises in long haul holidays with off-the-beaten-track itineraries.
Most of our local people do not want to be tied into packages,’ says assistant manager Tracey Johnson.
‘We try to offer extra services, such as providing free transport to the airport.’
Customers are also invited to travel evenings where films, lectures or perhaps foreign cookery lessons are staged.
‘Our staff are experienced travellers — we all regularly go on long haul trips.’
CARDIFF Gwalia Travel, 98 Cowbridge Road East, Canton Cardiff CF5 1DX; tel 0222 238888.
A family-run company that puts a strong emphasis on product knowledge.
Managing director Vincent Rey says, ‘I have been in the tour operating business since 1965, so my knowledge of both sides of the business is greater than that of many people running retail outlets.’
DUNDEE A.T.Mays, 22 Chrichton Street, DD1 3AR; tel 0382 26222.
In the view of general manager Alan Sinclair, most agents in Britain lean too heavily towards the mass marketing of packages rather than providing a proper travel service.
‘We try to provide a full range.
Customers can buy insurance, foreign exchange, a coach or rail ticket along with package holidays, hotel or flight bookings.’
EDINBURGH Sibbalds Travel, 10 Queensferry Street, EH2 4QX; tel 031 2251402.
Founded 1947 by the late Robert Sibbald.
The company is firmly opposed to discounting on the grounds that it undermines standards.
‘We have shied away from the rigours of the discount war,’ says director Dennis Hart.
‘As a rule of thumb, we have not found it necessary.
There are people prepared to pay for quality.’
The company preferred to invest in well trained staff rather than cut overheads to the bone, and many have been 20 years in the trade.
‘There is good competition, but also too many cowboys,’ he says.
LEEDS Keith Prowse Travel, 22 New Market Street, LS1 6DG; tel 0532 431102.
Branch manager Kevin Rainey says, ‘I used to work in a multiple agency where we averaged one booking every 22 minutes.
Here we do not push customers out of the door as soon as we have made a sale.’
The company believed trading volume sales got customer loyalty and was good for business.
Profits were boosted by selling traditional short breaks to local businesses as sales incentives.
LIVERPOOL Wise Travel, 66 Allerton Road, L18 1NA; tel 051 7331476.
The agency's own Concorde charters swooping over the Grand National, and personal gifts such as bouquets of flowers for customers have earned it an enthusiastic local following.
Clients tend to book long haul holidays and cruises rather than two weeks in the Spanish sun.
LONDON (north) Chapter Travel, 102 St Johns Wood Terrace, NW8 6LP; tel 01 5869451.
One of the first companies to realise travellers need more than a ticket.
It runs a travel book and map shop within its premises.
Staff are hired more on the basis of travel experience than button pushing.
Founder Edward Marquis despises ‘tacky stickers and cheap office rubbish’ but goes for plants and table lamps and interesting displays.
They handle mostly independent travel, selling farmhouse holidays and the like.
LONDON (south) The Travel Business, 94 Dulwich Village, SE21 7AQ; tel 01 693 5224.
‘Our customers expect a high level of knowledge.
They do not necessarily have a lot of money but they do expect good value and a broad service.
It would be no good us offering just tour operator packages.
We have our own tour products, such a villa holidays but most people want to be independent.’
They also sell guides and maps.
LONDON (east) Greenwood Travel, 94a Chingford Mount Road, Chingford E4 9AA; tel 01 5272648.
Independent agencies are in a better position to offer personal service than are those tied to big chains, believes managing director Daphne Armstrong.
‘Many of our enquiries come through word-of-mouth recommendations.’
LONDON (west) Weider Travel, Charing Cross Station Concourse, The Strand, WC2N 4HZ; tel 01 836 6363.
The only retail travel agency in Britain specialising in passenger journeys on board cargo ships.
The firm represents a large number of cargo shipping lines.
But, says ocean voyages manager John Alton, it also sells an extensive range of mainstream travel services.
MAIDSTONE Kent Exchange Travel, 4 Gabriels Hill, ME15 6JG, tel 0622 691400.
Providing conscientious service sometimes means persuading a customer the holiday of their choice is unsuitable, remarks branch manager Barbara Muir.
‘It is vital you offer correct information to ensure this year's customer returns the next.
We sell a great many long haul holidays, often breaking apart the packages then putting them together again at lower cost.’
NEWCASTLE Callers Pegasus Travel Service, 11 Saville Row, NE1 8TA; tel 091 2610381.
‘It doesn't matter whether the customer wants to buy a bus ticket or round the world cruise,’ says managing director William Shaw, ‘we offer a complete service to all and don't just concentrate on packages.’
The company was originally part of a furnishing business and applied general retailing techniques when it entered the travel trade in 1963.
If a complaint arises, it declines to pass the buck to tour operators, hotels or airlines.
‘We take the matter up on the client's behalf.’
NOTTINGHAM Neilson Travel, 11 Ashfield Precinct, Kirkby-in-Ashfield, NG17 7BQ; tel 0603 755441.
One of the few agencies in the survey to use discount schemes that include the acceptance of low deposits and the offer of free travel insurance.
It reports a noticeable growth in the sale of long haul holidays, especially to the USA, and in demand for unpackaged travel.
SOUTHEND Lipscombe Travel, 22 Queens Road, SS1 1LX; tel 0702 351111.
The agency's move into local tour operating has brought in new bookings at a time when agents generally are feeling the pinch of high mortage rates.
Ot has introduced short breaks to Paris using scheduled flights from nearby Southend Airport.
The company notices strong growth in the sale of short breaks, at the expense of longer package holidays.
Briefcase.
Dan-Air has an easy direct flight Gatwick-Lourdes, 20 minutes by car from Pau.
It leaves every Saturday at 14.15, eta 16.55, returning Saturday 17.50, eta Gatwick 18.30.
Scheduled Apex return fare £127, 14 days advance booking, maximum stay three months, full economy fare £163.
Danair reservations, tel: 0345-100200, or write Dan-Air Services, Newman House, 45 Vcitoria Rd, Horley RH6 7QG.
An alternative is the consolidated rate of £110, no changes nor refunds once booked, valid for one month, obtainable from Davies Newman, Norway House, 21-24 Cockspur St, London SW1; tel: 01-839 1192.
A more leisurely route is by Brittany Ferries (tel: 0705 827701) to Santander — foot passenger return £58, April/June £62, then £66 — and a drive through the mountains.
When DIY comes under the psychologist's scrutiny The good, bad and the mucky Do It Yourself.
By Gareth Parry AS THIS column is just over a year old, I thought I'd give you all a bit of a break, and write about the psychology of DIY.
It's a previously unexplored area, but W.H.Smith/Do It All commissioned a media psychologist, Jane Firbank, to investigate what it is that motivates a phenomenally, perhaps weirdly, growing pastime.
The study, using data supplied by a nationwide survey of 1,000 people, shows that more and more people are tackling increasingly advanced jobs as the area becomes demystified.
It identified women, the supposedly better-off Southerners, and AB social groupings as becoming the most enthusiastic practitioners, and that regionally the keenest DIYers come from the South-west and the least keen from Lancashire.
It found that women often felt fairly unsure of their ability in DIY matters, but once they had breached the confidence barrier many regularly tackled demanding jobs and felt that their results were as good or better than those achieved by the professional.
More and more women are tackling advanced jobs like rewiring and installing heating.
The report says that part of the reason for this, apparently, is the instruction sheets provided in Do It All and other stores.
I'm sure that's true, but many of the letters I receive indicate that women are doing things because they, generally, have to live with leaking taps, bubbling pipes, cold radiators and all the other annoyances.
One of the great attractions of DIY for many householders is that it avoids the notoriously difficult relationship between householder and the professional builder or decorator.
All this makes doing it yourself liberating and morale boosting.
It extends the householder's feeling of control over his or her domain, and gives a direct outlet for the natural desire to improve it.
Because of this, even those who could afford professional labour will often prefer to do it themselves.
The richer ABs spend more time shopping for DIY products, and buy more, than members of any other social group.
So which of the six major types of DIYers are you?
Just over one in ten (11 per cent) fall into the elite ‘Captain’ category; nearly threequarters (72 per cent ) are male and often Southerners.
Captains regularly tackle the most difficult jobs with calm confidence.
They think they can produce a better result than the professionals and they are right.
They are not into bodging or compromise.
They must be hell to live with; they demand discipline and achievement from their co-workers and family and may lack emotional understanding and sensitivity.
These decisive, goal-oriented, often authoritarian, intolerant people find DIY satisfying and challenging, something of an end in itself, says Ms Firbank.
Having finished a job, they don't sit around enjoying the results — it's on to the next.
And when one house is improved to the limit, it's on to the next there too.
A fifth of all DIYers fall into the ‘Hobbyist’ category.
Forty per cent of them are women, and many are Northerners.
They enjoy DIY for its own sake — not just the product, but the process of creating it.
They generally have a (half-completed) job on the go, but don't rush it.
Sometimes they risk being over-conscientious, or over-involved in particular aspects of the project and losing sight of the overall goal.
A recent divorce petition cited the fact that just about every wall, fitment and piece of furniture in the home was in a half-dismantled or half-done state and had been for years.
The husband was continually starting projects, and leaving them unfinished.
About a fifth of us fall into the ‘Get It Over With’ category.
They're mostly Northerners, and they don't want to muck about.
If they could afford to pay someone else, they would.
They'll often put up with dripping taps and wobbly shelves for quite some time before being motivated to fix them.
He or she is not house-proud or much concerned with appearances.
Their houses are described as ‘patchy’— areas of chaos, or purely functional ‘make-do’ items, amid cared-for bits representing special interests.
Not much in the way of frills and colour co-ordination either.
They've not much time for things that aren't either pleasurable or functional.
But it's probably the sort of house where visitors feel sufficiently at ease to put their feet up on the sofa.
Get It Over Withs prefer watching TV.
Fifty six per cent of the ‘Look At Me’ category are women.
They tend to be inspired by many of the ideas for home projects they see, but they lack confidence.
They avoid the more complicated jobs, but within their limitations they are more able than they think and usually can be sure of being pleasantly surprised by the result of their efforts.
They're proud of their DIY achievements, which they often find better — and a lot more satisfying — than if a professional had done it for them.
Their exploratory ‘have-a-go’ mentality makes them fun to be with.
They may need a little time to think about it, but they'll try most things once.
All Thumbs will do only essential mending, and even that tends to be unpleasant, since the poor results just confirm their feeling that the whole area is a minefield.
Drill-holes never end up in the right place, screws don't go in straight, and no matter how carefully they measure, nothing ever quite fits.
Practice might improve things, but with this weight of negative experience, practice is the last thing they want.
The Procrastinators hate DIY.
Often they really are too busy: prominent in this group are Midlands housewives in car-less D-E families.
They'd rather live for ages with sagging shelves and peeling paint.
For one thing they've got better things to do with their time.
They are sure they are no good at such things, and they're right.
They never even daydream about undertaking projects.
Some are almost proud of their practical incompetence.
This group is probably responsible for most of the DIY nagging.
Women in this category nag their partners to get on with it; men in this category get nagged.
Both are more likely to escape than do anything.
They will have areas of life where they feel competent, happy and in control.
His allotment, her sewing; the pub or a Mills & Boon.
Nagged to fix a shelf, the male Procrastinator is more likely to go and polish his prize onions than fetch a hammer.
However, Ms Firbank points to an American study which showed an inverse correlation between house-proudness and sexiness.
These women may not be house-proud, but they should be responsive lovers.
If they are not too tired.
Finding myself at wit's end of an era Bad Housekeeping.
By Dulcie Domum MUMMY, says Harriet anxiously, was Mrs Thatcher real?
Much speculation recently about the existential status of Santa Claus, Jesus, etc.
Reply yes, though retain private doubts as to whether Mrs T is fully biodegradable.
Harriet turns pale at the news that the PM is not just another terrifying old witch from a fairy tale.
Cannot bear to think about festivities.
Still, Spouse is taking the children to Kirkwhinnie for Hogmanay where they can wallow in Aunt Elspeth's Home Made everything whilst I…but do not permit myself to imagine naughty idyll at Porritt Gardens.
Must check present list first.
At least confident that Spouse will enjoy, and probably pick up a few tips from, biography of Hitler.
Admire the Liberty shawl for Aunt Elspeth, and wonder if she might be delighted enough to leave it to me in her will.
Though Spouse says Elspeth defies the idea that You Can't Take It With You and will join her ancestors wearing her best tweed and Celtic silver and clutching the two cut-glass decanters he has always coveted.
The Nefertiti of Kirkwhinnie.
Am gloomy about presents for the children.
Not sure that tasteful ceramic nativity set will console Harriet for non-appearance of Sindy Doll.
As for Henry, nothing short of Middle Eastern arms shipment would satisfy him and unlikely that Acid Rain Testing Kit will divert him for more than five seconds.
Still, at least Santa can soak up the blame.
Haunted by a fear that I have forgotten to stock up on one of the essentials of life but cannot think what it is.
The thought of shops shut for days brings on deep depression.
SPOUSE to London for some dinner or other.
Take kids for last shopping trip but still cannot remember which essential of life we have run out of.
Arrive home, carry first boxful in, go out again to car where Henry and Harriet are engaged in the first barney of Xmas, and to my horror hear front door slam behind me.
Keys are on kitchen table.
Remember that I had always intended to leave spare key with the Twills next door but never got round to it.
Thoughts fly to Tom — he could probably break in through plumbing outlet or shin gracefully up drainpipe.
But cannot phone him from Twills as Mr Twill would insist on shinning up drainpipe himself and break femur.
Children excited by crisis and run round the back whilst I vacillate on the pavement.
Decide to ring doorbell of house opposite into which rather smart-looking couple, Marc and Elaine, have recently moved.
Elaine, wearing kimono and looking wan, answers door.
Ask to use phone but Tom is out.
Explain situation to Elaine, who though clearly suffering from flu, offers hospitality, tea, TV for kids, etc.
Marc is apparently in Madrid or he would be up my drainpipe like a shot.
Feel that Mr Twill may be called upon to lay down his femur after all.
Back in street, behold Henry and Harriet waving at me from our upstairs window.
‘The back door was wide open, Mummee!’ they cry.
Hope Elaine did not hear this, and carry more boxes of shopping up path.
Half an hour before the shops close forever, realise it is bog paper that we need.
Race to Green Light wholefood shop and buy several rolls of recycled.
Wonder if it was newspaper before and wonder which.
Christmas falls upon us.
Harriet quite likes Nativity set but informs me it is not Baby Jesus but Princess Lucinda.
Feel I may be witnessing end of Christian and dawn of Lucindian era.
Henry contrives guided missiles from acid rain test kit and launches attack on manger.
Two shepherds badly chipped.
Security Council resolution passed declaring stable a No-Go Area.
Wonder if Henry was Herod in previous existence.
Have nasty moment in bathroom before I realise that recycled bog paper is full of eccentric imperfections.
Essential I survive intact until New Year.
Though in my case, intact is Emeritus.
One way to get around America is through the multitude of car delivery companies.
David James Smith reports Auto motive
Fly-drive.
WE WERE broke, flying into Miami.
Seattle was 3,500 miles away, and we couldn't afford the air fare.
The train was booked solid for weeks, and there was the Greyhound…‘that's your cheapest option,’ said our friends in Seattle, ‘but you might be sitting with child molesters.’
They knew nothing about the drive-away alternative, neither did we but it wasn't hard to find out.
We sat on a phone at Miami airport with a pile of quarters and a copy of the local Yellow Pages: ‘Automobiles — Delivery and Drive-Away,’ a couple of sheets of box ads and a user-friendly voice on the line.
‘Hi, I'm Karen, how can I help you?’
There was a saloon going to Chicago but there was a sports car to Los Angeles.
‘A 1988 Corvette, just come in.
It's a repossession.’
What's a Corvette?
‘Why don't you come down to our office and have a look?’
It was quite a car and who hasn't dreamed of being a repo man?
A-1 Auto Movers have an office in Miami Beach and branches in every major US city.
They deliver cars.
Whether Americans have more money than sense or are just plain lazy is hard to tell, but they pay A-1 and others like them up to $1,000 a time to take their automobiles from A to B.
It's big business, and the drive-away companies use up tankfuls of drivers on a casual basis.
Anyone can do it so long as they are not criminals or kids, and promise to play by the rules.
There is no fee for the driver, and unless the owner offers a fuel allowance, the driver pays for gas.
But there's no hire charge of course.
And no child molesters.
A-1 put the fear of God into us about the Corvette.
It was brand, spanking new, not a dent nor scratch on its sleek body.
We had to pay a $300 cash deposit, refundable on delivery, or entirely lost if there was so much as a cigarette burn in the carpet.
The form left nothing out.
Diagrams, charts, lists, detailing every damageable inch of the car.
The rules: don't pick up hitchers, don't drink in the car, don't exceed the speed limit, don't drive after 10 at night, and don't miss the delivery date unless you want to go to jail.
This car must be in LA in seven days, now sign here please, and go.
It was 2,700 miles.
We asked for an extra day, and that was fine.
We had no map: ‘Don't worry about it, just pick up Interstate 10 and it's straight all the way.’
THE Corvette could practically drive itself.
It was a $35,000 car — no wonder the owners hadn't made the repayments — with computerised dash, booming hi-fi, and cruise control which meant the car would keep a fixed speed without a foot on the accelerator.
It was fun, and we were getting cocky by New Orleans.
People stared at the car, and we tried hard to look like the owners, not just the delivery team.
The elevated highways over the Louisiana swamplands were needle straight, and we started to snap the speed limit, just a little.
By Texas we were out of control, doing 96 mph on the flat when the flashing light in the rear mirror pulled us over.
He wore a big hat and reflector shades, and was not best pleased.
‘I've been chasing you for eight miles.
I could whip you straight into jail.’
We were very English and terribly sorry, and he let us go without a ticket.
An hour later a rear tyre blew.
We were keeping within the limit, and it was OK.
At 96 we would have lost our deposit.
The Interstate speed limit in the States is a strictly enforced 65 mph.
There are few tearaways.
We left Miami on a Tuesday afternoon and were in A-1's Los Angeles' office by midday on Saturday.
We were in a hurry, and didn't even stop at a motel on the Friday night, driving 1,400 miles at a stretch.
The LA office was laid back to horizontal.
They did not care about the burst tyre — all 14 inches and $400 of it — and could hardly be bothered to check the rest of the car.
They had another waiting to go to Seattle.
Nothing fancy now, only an Old Plymouth with Alaska plates, heading back to the Yukon.
We signed another form, paid another, smaller deposit, and checked right into a motel in Santa Barbara for a long rest.
In the end we virtually circumnavigated America, taking a third car — a tiny Chevette — across from Seattle to Washington DC, to fly home.
It was that simple, and at a more leisurely pace would have been less of a caper and more a proper holiday.
Whatever else there is to say about the States, it exists to be driven in; a road runner's playground littered with the seductive comforts of the drive-in-drive-out lifestyle.
Motels were never hard to find.
We paid $35-$40 a night for a double room.
When was the last time you actually wanted to have friends round?
There is a conspiracy of silence about what is happening, says Christina Hardyment That's entertainment.
Home Front.
AT THE risk of being shouted down by millions of mulled-wine swilling, mince-pie munching merrymakers, I'd like to raise the issue of hospitality — or rather, its decline.
Christmas time, when party-giving is on the whole overdone, may make the social aridity of the rest of the year seem almost attractive, but this exhausting seasonal overswill also points up the ordinary isolation that obtains for most of us nowadays.
There is a conspiracy of silence about what is happening.
Nobody likes to admit that they entertain very little, or that they rarely enjoy it when they do.
I tried declaring my own sense of dissatisfaction to a few friends and found I'd caught a tiger by the tail.
‘I thought it was only us,’ was the most common reaction.
‘All that work beforehand — I'm exhausted by the time we sit down to eat.
Then there's clearing up after they've gone.’
‘It's absurd — I look on Margaret as my best friend, but I've only seen her once in the last six months — I do feel guilty about it.’
And again and again: ‘We'd rather sit down in front of the TV, or get a video.’
The casualness which governs who we see and when is unnerving.
The rigid rules for turn and turn about social calls are no longer observed.
An uneasy feeling that we should wait to be asked back before we repeat an invitation, coupled with the rarity with which we have the energy to entertain, can reduce social intercourse to an annual gesture rather than a matter of maturing friendships.
Today's crowded world militates against a sense of community.
We lead more private lives today than ever before, a defence perhaps against the masses who press against us in the tubes, in the office, at school.
Professional agencies look to our problems, be they medical, psychological, or moral.
None of us needs any particular other any more, so acquaintance is a whim, flowering or dying with the moment.
Chance now rules social intercourse, not the old realities of good neighbours.
In The last Country Houses, a book which documents the death of the old tradition of hospitality, Clive Aslett records the response of a nouveau riche lady when told that some pleasant people lived near the rural seat her husband had just acquired.
‘Pleasant or not, it matters little to us,’ she retorted.
‘We shall get our friends down from London with the fish.’
Traditional entertainment was rooted in local interdependence — it was a form of community cement.
At its best, it extended the family circle and brought in new blood; it relayed vital personal information (too often dismissed as gossip) and offered an informal moot for exchanging opinions and information.
In different forms it could provide marriage market (21st birthday party or coming-out-ball), gynaecological information service (women withdrew from male company at some point during the evening), a seasonal celebration of community spirit (harvest home, yuletide) or a mark of respect to a human life (funeral, wake).
COMMUNITY cooperation always ended in a party, be it a barn-raising, as in Seven Brides for Seven Brothers, or the annual distribution of porcine largesse at pigkilling time described by Flora Thomson in Lark Rise to Candleford.
Above all, it was continuum, a regular habit.
Even when industrialisation took most men out of the home, women ensured that the old neighbourly traditions lived on.
Meetings were necessary for social contact, apart from anything else.
Sewing and apple-paring bees, and quilt-making sessions were ways of combining hospitality with practical usefulness.
What has affected the recent decline of entertaining more than anything else, of course, has been the change in the position of women.
Hospitality was one of the first duties of any bride; at certain social levels it was a woman's raison d'etre.
But now we are all individuals with our own self-fulfilment to worry about.
Wedding bells are merely an incidental punctuation in a life which will already be committed to career, aerobic class and the occasional night with the lasses.
With pregnancy things change.
Being at home with small babies is an instant culture shock to the young woman of the world.
There will be a flurry of cordon bleu cookbooks, a splurge of flowers and pools of candlelight to drown the everyday realities of bottles and babygrows.
What then?
The cast is assembled, but more often than not it has nothing to say.
The men are too tired, the women too remote from the issues of the day, to offer more than a commentary on the quiche or a flirtatious skirmish.
The whole pointless exercise, the sense of being marginalised, can be what sends a mother back to work, although the declared reason will be the need to boost the family income.
Then the real juggling act begins — job, children, house and husband.
As the children get older, evenings become valuable family time; as we get older, early nights become increasingly attractive.
The TV provides everything we could ask for and more.
Entertaining, in this context, seems an unnecessary luxury.
Does it matter?
We don't on the whole mind the isolation until something happens to rock the applecart — a death, a loss, a crisis.
When a marriage breaks down, there will be an urgent need for support, both intimate, and social.
At this point the failure, the essential selfishness, of our social network becomes extraordinarily evident.
Depending on our social class we will turn to tranquillisers, professional counsellors or gin.
But there is also a more insidious danger to our deeply private modern lives.
The psychological, physical and sexual abuse of weaker members of the family by the stronger is more possible when there are no casual droppers-in, no family friends to turn to, no habit of exchanging confidences.
We may scoff at the sort of community action that was represented by ducking-stools and pillories, by ‘sending to Coventry’ and by, in its extremest form, lynch law.
But in a world where observing the social decencies passes unnoticed, how much incentive is there to be ordinarily good?
THERE are signs that we are beginning to acknowledge our need for community support, encouraged, ironically, by a welfare state that can no longer pretend to provide a substitute for friendship.
There are neighbourhood watch schemes and informal baby-minding groups.
A surge of participation in evening classes and sports is as much about a search for companionship as mental and physical fitness.
Franker discussion about the nature and value of conventional entertaining could improve matters even more.
Four-course meals that last four hours are marathons for everyone concerned.
It would be easier all round to suggest coming to eat and just to eat — leaving as pudding is cleared away (or better, after you've helped to wash it up).
As for that video, what could be more relaxing and companionable than sitting down with Marks&Spencer meals on our knees and watching it in company?
In the context of hospitality and friendship, little and often is worth more than the grandest of annual social jamborees.
The wrong policy could cost you more than a pocketful of dreams.
Jill Papworth reports Travel light with a cover.
Insurance.
OF THE estimated 12 million holidaymakers who took out travel insurance policies last year, one in 15 made a claim.
Half were for cancellation, a quarter for medical expenses and most of the remainder for loss or theft of belongings.
Given the high expenses you could suffer should disaster strike just before or while on holiday, and the relatively low cost of buying adequate cover, only a fool would book travel arrangements without taking insurance.
It is worth shopping around before choosing as the scope of cover, sums insured and premium costs vary considerably.
Most good travel agents require you be insured if booking a package holiday, but will nowadays be able to offer you the choice of the tour operator's policy or their own.
Ask for a specimen policy and read the small print to be sure you will not be affected by exclusions and that the cover is appropriate for your particular travel arangements.
The Association of British Insurers points out an increasing trend among major insurers to offer selective cover for people who already have some elements of cover under existing household and life policies, or free with their credit and charge cards (NatWest's Gold card offers the only truly standalone, comprehensive travel cover).
In any policy, medical and repatriation cover should be up to £250,000 when holidaying in Europe, unlimited for the USA and £500,000 for the rest of the world.
The Barclays Bank policy, one of the cheapest, is rare in offering unlimited medical cover worldwide.
Cover should include all reasonable medical treatment, extra hotel and travel expenses related to sickness or injury, and daily hospital benefit averaging £10 to £15.
Few policies cover pre-existing conditions, self-inflicted injury or pregnancy-related claims.
Many insurers have a link with an emergency assistance organisation such as Mondial, GESA or Europ Assistance and will give you a local 24-hour phone number to call should you need sudden medical or repatriation help.
Cover for cancellation of your arrangements due to an accident or illness affecting you or your family should be £1,000 to £3,000.
Some policies will also include eventualities like job loss or having to stay home to care for a sick relative.
Curtailment cover should be included to compensate for days lost if you have to cut short your holiday and return early because of illness or death in the family.
PERSONAL liability of £250,000 to £1 million is advisable to cover you for the legal liability of injuring someone or damaging their property, particularly as insurers report an increase in such claims.
Some insurers, such as Perrysurance and Pickfords, have also introduced cover for legal expenses if you want to pursue a third party.
Cover of around £1,000 is normally given for loss, damage or theft of belongings, with a limit of £150 — £250 for any one item and £200-£300 for lost money.
There should also be some cover for buying basics like toothbrush and undies if your luggage is delayed.
You will need to take out extra cover or extend your house contents policy if you take valuables such as a video camera or precious jewellery.
To discourage petty claims, most insurers make you liable for the first £25.
Most policies pay out a measly amount for expenses on delayed departures.
On average you get a maximum of £60 — £100, paid in instalments after the first 12 hours' delay.
Extrasure is this year one of the first insurers to reduce the qualifying period to eight hours.
Anyone with special needs should beware.
Those aged 70 and over are often charged double or three times the standard premium, though providing you are fit and healthy, Barclays, Thomas Cook and Pickfords charge the standard rate.
If you plan to take part in a risky sport like skin-diving or hang-gliding, don't expect automatic cover.
Contact the related UK sports organisation.
Comparing adult premiums for two weeks in Europe and worldwide on a selection of major policies and some smaller insurers, recommended for their low rates in last year's Which? magazine survey, produces the following examples.
ABTA's Travelguard, offered mainly by independent and smaller travel agents, charges £12.70 and £31.50 respectively; Thomas Cook £19.45 (£39.95); Barclays £14.55 (£39.55); United Friendly £17 (£34); Extrasure £17 (£41); Perrysurance £13.20 (£26.20/US £33.30); Pickfords £18 (£38).
MOST give free cover to children under two; United Friendly, Perrysurance, Pickfords give substantial discounts for older children.
Families get a good deal with Extrasure which offers every insured person free cover for a child aged 11 or under, and with ABTA's special policy rates of £33.50 (£79) for a couple and all dependent children under 16.
For further information, contact local branches for Thomas Cook, Barclays and Pickfords; United Friendly (branch or tel: 01-928 5644); Extrasure (01-480 6871); Perrysurance (01-879 1255).
Reflections on The Decade Letters.
By YOU MAY feel that Julie Burchill's advocacy of the drug culture (December 16 issue), replete with ‘Thatcherite values’, amusing.
I found it a rather disgusting product of a self-admitted drug damaged brain.
I'm surprised that such hedonistic, empty headed opinions should find a place in what I have always regarded as a serious, intelligent newspaper.
Further on, Richard Gordon reviewed disease in the Eighties — such as Aids and M.E.
As for his opinions on M.E., I must assume that he would also condemn the support groups for MS, cancer and heart disease as ‘self-commiserative’ societies.
‘Yuppie Flu’ is a term invented by the gutter press — the same people who dismiss Aids as a ‘Gay Plague’.
P. Edisbury Solihull.
POOR old Jeffrey Bernard, so terrified of women, shaking in his frail, alcoholically reinforced misogynists shoes — cynical and brittle, propping up the bar and amusing his (male) audience by spilling his wit and intelligence in bar-room bons mots.
From that dissolute, pleasurable and wasted place, no wonder he's threatened by people who decide to use their intelligence differently, and especially by women who don't fit a stereotype that bolsters the ludicrous notion that He is a Superior Being.
Sad really, but I'd rather the impotent ramblings appeared in the Spectator and left the Guardian to those of us who enjoy reading it.
A. Tunnicliffe Llangadod, Dyfed.
YET MORE articles attack the softest of soft targets, the heritage industry.
But never mind the trash shops and the coach lamps.
Why is the past such big business nowadays?
Vintage pop, vintage Hollywood, vintage beer bottles — you name it, somebody's collecting it, researching it, producing a surprisingly expensive book about it.
There is a profound streak of anti-modernism running through the Thatcherite Kingdom of the Bland: no one seems to want the future any more, apart from Martin Pawley.
This trend did not start in the Eighties either: the old puffer and old motor movement were well under way when Prince Charles was a lad.
So, come on you literary types; stop fretting about Orwell and start getting under our skins.
There is a massive sub-culture there, looking backwards and it's getting more insidious all the time.
A. Townley Manchester, 25.
CAN YOU tell me why you found it necessary to print such an offensive cartoon (Lagerland, page 40)?
Do you assume you have no Christian believers among your readers or are you deliberately seeking to insult and estrange them?
John Tester Edinburgh YOUR Decade supplement was most entertaining, but you missed The Guardian off the ‘Born Again' list.
Patrick Thorne Kiltarlity, Inverness-shire.
I WAS shocked and disturbed by the full-page advertisment for The Sport and Sunday Sport.
The rest of the edition was completely spoilt for me.
Please try harder.
Rowena Dawson Kegworth, nr Derby I READ The Empress Without Clothes (page 6) with interest.
The text was interrupted successively by some text running sideways, a graph depicting escalating mineral water sales, the number ‘6’ and a table of five useless gadgets.
The article was terminated by a line of words beginning with B. The empty reproduction of information (a contagion of the Eighties) does not contribute to rational knowledge and reasoned thought.
Antony Knight Waltham Abbey, Essex.
Looking for tourist highlights in Montepulciano can prove difficult.
But when, says Juliet Clough, you do find them, the sights can prove both beautiful and satisfying The icing on the cake
Tuscany.
IN Montepulciano's Museo Civico, a painted St Agnes proffers a model of her city with the proprietorial air of a waitress with a tea tray.
Such an ambitious Tuscan confection surely deserves a cakestand, assembled as it is on a noble pedestal of rock, its buildings (mixed plain and fancy) composed of that porous tufa which looks much like sponge cake and which comes in all the golds, pinks, browns and mauves of the best Battenberg.
It is fruitless as well as greedy, however, to try and pick Montepulciano over for cherries.
This is a city very much all of a piece, its chief delight for visitors lying in its completeness, in the hands-off self containment of its torpid, shuttered streets.
Looking for tourist highlights in Montepulciano is, to change a crumbling analogy, rather like looking for elephants in the African bush.
It is only when you stop scanning the horizon for monumental shapes that you realise they have been looming unnoticed in the foreground all along.
Wandering with pleasure along the Corso, the knobbly spine of the town, we eventually open the guide book, to find we have failed to focus on seven modest palaces.
These, however, do not include that of the 18th-century antiquarian Pietro Bucelli, who decorated the base of his mansion with unmissable eclat, using bits of Etruscan cinerary urns.
The montage of winged heads, flowers and cryptic inscriptions shares, in effect, something of the ephemerality of Oggi, Bella and Donna Moderna, lined up outside the next-door newsagency.
Much more entertaining than any guide is the dyspeptic company of Maurice Hewlett's, The Road In Tuscany (1906) which finds in Montepulciano ‘much to make the judicious grieve…the Piazza a barrack square, the belfry a maimed stump’ and so on.
While unable to sympathise with Hewlett's aesthetic sufferings, I find it impossible not to admire the iron nerve with which he chronicles them.
This is a person who sees nothing to recommend the Duomo at Siena (‘it seems to have been got by outlining’), nor Sienese painting in general: ‘evidence of love; but not of art…
Mercifully for us they had gold leaf in plenty’.
Perhaps he was looking for a drink by the time he had climbed as far as the Piazza where three renaissance palaces, a town hall and cathedral confront each other across an open space of such lively dignity and harmony as to make the lack of tourist cafes completely forgivable.
Certainly you would have to be in pretty desperate case to dismiss the eloquent Michelozzo figures on the cenotaph frieze in the Duomo as ‘wriggling in lines like leeches in a bottle’.
The best places for bottles in Montepulciano are the cool brick cantine like that of the Contucci Palace, cellars furred with black fungus where Vino Nobile has been produced for a thousand years.
Domestic vines and orchards, in patches of garden overgrown with poppies and clover, straggle as far up as the fortress.
Beyond the grey-blotched roofs and television ariels of the outer town lie more vineyards and cornfields, olive groves and forests; beyond them again Lake Trasimene.
Stuck with posters advertising the return of a group called Sttonehenge (sic), ‘Il Coraggio di Essere Giovani’, apricot coloured walls give off a lazy warmth.
It might indeed take courage to be young in Montepulciano.
What could anyone under 50 do in a place so prosperously becalmed in its tangible past and agricultural present?
We go in search of the Editori del Grifo, a young team of publishers said to have moved from Rome back home to Montepulciano as a vote of confidence in the old place; they have moved again, however, and we have run out of the steam needed to look for their new office.
THE faint pall of dust hanging over Montepulciano's precipitous lanes presumably heralds the approaching festival of the arts, directed every July by the composer Hans Werner Henze.
Cobbles are being relaid, the Jesuit church facelifted; S Agostino smells of varnish as well as incense.
Fronting the tiers of frivolously gilded boxes, just discernible in the gloom of the Teatro Poliziano, the stage appears to be brilliantly lit, set with an all-purpose lyric opera backdrop.
Montepulciano not only looks but behaves like a stage set, patronising barbers' shops and swirly baroque cafe; its hours are numbered by a forbidding clock-tower Pulcinella; it goes to church, outside the walls, in the most theatrical building of all.
‘A sepulchre of windy shams’ says Hewlett, squaring up in excellent form to the classical urbanity of San Biagio.
The church, a copybook model of renaissance perfection, imposes most beautifully, if rather donnishly upon the pastoral scene.
Hewlett, predictably, has ‘never seen a worse church’.
The road between San Biagio and Montepulciano is the one down which the Montepulcianesi came to welcome Iris Origo and the troupe of refugee children whom she walked to safety across a battlefield in June 1944, caught between the German army of occupation and the advancing Allies.
‘War in Val d'Orcia’ is her dispassionate account of attempts to keep life on a local estate balanced between bellicose German troops, jumpy partisans, exhausted refugees, escaping British prisoners and the local Fascisti, during the appalling interlude following the fall of Mussolini.
Recently read, the Marchesa's diary, however unembittered, makes the sound of German tourist voices reverberate uneasily in these streets.
It has taken more than 40 years, we are told, as well as improved autostradas, for the first ‘Zimmern’ signs to appear in Montepulciano.
A cake plate so temptingly situated is bound to be fought over.
That the lion's share fell to Florence rather than Siena, after a century and a half of medieval snatch and grab between the two republics is proclaimed by the splendid lions on the well and on the Marzocco column.
Briefcase: Juliet Clough went to Italy fly/drive, London to Pisa, with an Alitalia scheduled flight and hiring an Avis car.
The journey was arranged with the help of Italiatour!, 21 Fleet Street, London EC4 1AA; tel 01-353 9686.
Prices starts at £216pp (based on two people staying 7 nights and hired a Grade A car).
Among several tour operagors with accommodation in Tuscany, Italiatour! offer, for example, a self-catering apartment in a castle about 25km from Montepulciano at £260pp for four people staying seven days,(including flight, car hire and apartment).
Alternatively, staying in 4-star country style hotel in the Chinati region would cost £384pp for seven days, including flight, car hire and B&B.
For self-tailored holidays, Italiatour! organise Alitalia bookings and accommodation in almost any Italian town.
Further information from Ufficio Turistico Comunale, Via Ricci 9, 53045 Montepulciano (Siena); tel: 0578-757442.
In Britain: Italian State Tourist Office, 1 Princes Street, London W1; tel: 01-408 1254.
Alastair Ayres chooses some hardy annuals All-weather favourites.
Gardening.
WHAT will the weather have in store for us in 1990?
Another mild spring and long, hot summer?
Or late frosts, and drizzle throughout August?
Although British summers are likely to become hotter and drier as a result of the greenhouse effect, scientists don't foresee major changes taking place for about 40 years.
The Met Office regards last summer as one of those exceptions from the norm which go to make up the typical British weather rather than some trend for the future.
Predicting the weather is a risky business, but you can take out insurance by choosing seeds and plants to cope with both drought and downpour.
Among the flowers that did really well in last year's hot summer were alyssum, geraniums and petunias.
Alyssum flourishes, whatever the weather, and breeding advances in recent years have made this plant a lot more versatile.
The new varieties Snow Crystals and Creamery have a compact habit and much larger flowers than the traditional varieties.
They would be ideal for edging mixed borders or bedding schemes.
There are also now a lot of good coloured alyssum mixtures.
Three that have done particularly well in Gardening from Which? trials are Magic Circle, Magic Carpet and Morning Mist.
All three are quite similar with a pastel range of pink and purple flowers as well as white and cream.
The heights of the plants vary from about eight to 20cm, so they won't make as neat an edging as the single-coloured varieties — but they are attractive gap fillers or ground cover.
Oriental Night is a rich plum-coloured alyssum with a fairly even habit and would make a good, easy-to-grow substitute for lobelias.
Geraniums are one of the best flowers for containers.
They will survive without water for up to two weeks (providing you don't forget to water too often) and love hot weather.
However, if you choose the right varieties, they will also brighten up your garden in a cool, dull summer.
Buy the F1 varieties like the Century, Gala, and Pulsar series, which all come in a range of colours.
The F1 hybrids produce twice as many flowers and have a much bushier habit than the older varieties.
Avoid geraniums with double or semi-double flowers as, unlike the single varieties they don't drop their petals as they fade, and the blooms are prone to rot in wet weather.
You'll find lots of geraniums in the seed catalogues.
But, when you consider that seeds of F1 geraniums cost 20-30p each and they need to be sown in a heated greenhouse in January or early February, plants are a better buy.
If you look for strips of young geraniums at the garden centre, you should be able to get F1 hybrids for around 60p or so a plant.
Virtually all petunias did well last summer, but this is not always the case.
In poorer summers, the taller varieties and the grandiflora types (with larger flowers) are often ruined by wind and rain.
Double-flowered petunias are also prone to rotting in wet summers.
The safest bets are the F1 multi flora varieties with single flowers.
Although they may get flattened by a rainstorm, they quickly recover once the sun comes out.
In Gardening From Which? trials in 1985, which was a fairly wet summer, petunia Resisto Mixed did particularly well and provided a colourful display until late September.
In trials last summer, two newer varieties — Carpet Mixed and Joy Mixed — formed more even plants with a good mixture of colours.
They look well worth trying.
In the vegetable garden, both sweetcorn and outdoor tomatoes were an amazing success in many parts of the country last year due to the hot summer.
If you are planning to try them again this year, take the precaution of choosing quick-maturing varieties in case this summer doesn't turn out to be as sunny.
Good sweetcorn varieties are Candle (one of the new super-sweet types), Kelvedon Sweetheart and Sunrise.
The tomatoes Red Alert and Tornado should give reasonable crops outdoors in a dull summer — at least in the southern half of the country.
IF THE summer turns out to be hot, it will be a lot less work if you plant outdoor tomatoes in the ground rather than in growing bags.
Where you are short of garden space, try the dwarf varieties Pixie (large fruit) or Tiny Tim (small fruit) in tubs.
Most traditional vegetables do best in a cool, wet summer, so incorporate as much organic matter as possible and consider using strips of black polythene between rows to reduce the need for watering in a good summer.
If you can't water your vegetable plot, beetroot, leeks, onions, root crops, and maincrop potatoes should all give reasonable yields, even in a hot, dry summer.
Extremes in the weather are nothing new for the British garden and one fairly safe prediction for 1990 is that the weather will be as unpredictable as ever.
Shopping list for seeds: Alyssum: Creamery (Mr Fother gill); Magic Carpet (Carters); Magic Circle (Dobies, Suttons); Morning Mist (Suttons); Oriental Night (Browns, Suttons, Thompson & Morgan); Snow Crystals (Browns, Dobies, Mr Fothergill's, Unwins).
Petunias: Carpet Series Mixed (Browns, Mr Fothergill's); Joy Mixed (Marshalls); Resisto Mixed (widely available).
Tomatoes: Pixie (Johnsons); Red Alert (widely available); Tornado (Marshalls, Mr Fothergill's, Suttons); Tiny Tim (Mr Fothergill's, Suttons).
Sweetcorn: Candle (Suttons); Kelvedon Sweetheart (Hursts, Marshalls); Sunrise (Carters, Dobies, Marshalls, Thompson & Morgan).
Seedsmen: Browns: Station Road, Poulton-le-Fylde, Blackpool, Lancs FY6 7HX.
Mail order only.
Carters: Shops and garden centres only.
Dobies: Broomhill Way, Torquay, Devon, TQ2 7QW.
Mail order only.
Johnsons: London Road, Boston, Lincs, PE21 8AD.
Shops and garden centres only.
Marshalls: Wisbech, Cambs, PE13 2RF.
Mail order only.
Mr Fothergill's: Gazeley Road, Kentford, Newmarket, Suffolk, CB8 7QB.
Mail order, shops and garden centres.
Suttons: Hele Road, Torquay, Devon TQ2 7QJ.
Mail order, shops and garden centres.
Thompson & Morgan: London Road, Ipswich, Suffolk IP2 0BA.
Mail order, shops and garden centres.
Unwins: Histon, Cambs, CB4 4LE.
Mail order, shops and garden centres.
Alastair Ayres is the new editor of Gardening From Which? published by the Consumers' Association, 2 Marylebone Road, London NW1.
Peter Black relishes the solid comfort of a French town steeped in history In a class all of its own.
Pau.
AS OFTEN happens near mountains in spring, the temperature fell 10 degrees overnight.
I awoke back in winter.
It was really too cold for the clothes I had brought, so I fell back on a recommended resource.
I put my pyjamas on underneath my clothes and thus protected went for a walk round Pau.
It was Sunday and the streets were empty.
The gentle recorded feminine voice that admonished pedestrians —‘Attendez, pietons!’ and then, in encouraging tone, ‘Pietons!
Traversez!’ echoed rather sadly off the walls.
It grew colder and began to rain, as the iron bells of churches rolled of a French Sunday over the town.
In the morning, spring had returned.
The magnificent view to the south, from the Boulevard des Pyrenees, built along the bluff above the fast-running Gave de Pau, displayed an inspiring panorama, thousands of miles of rich valley climbing towards the snowcapped Pyrenees.
This was the view that Wellington's army saw when they broke into France in 1814, so beginning an extraordinary chapter in the town's history.
After the Peninsular campaigns unravaged southern France must have seemed like Arcady.
The living was cheap and easy, the Bearnais were grateful, there was hunting all year round.
With peace, some returned to Pau, to build the villas in the big gardens that give the town its green and spacious air.
By 1840 there were enough to start the Pau hunt.
Some of its relics are scrupulously cared for in the English Circle headquarters; they showed me a pair of jockey scales, caricatures of riders clambering redfaced out of ditches, group paintings of the hunt moving off.
It used to release captured foxes, give them up to nine minutes start, and chase them through areas designed Old England, Leicestershire, Hill District, Home Circuit.
Except for a few extremely rich Americans (Gordon Bennett was one) and a sprig of French nobility they were British and Irish aristos, and landed gentry and army officers.
They were extremely dashing riders, if we may believe the Vicomte de Vaufreland.
He reckoned to be airborne for 15 minutes in every 50 of the average run.
In 1856 three Scots army officers and an archdeacon founded Pau Golf Club on land running along the river.
I approached it as a pilgrim, though today of course it looks like any other golf club; the members are indigenous and they are Japanese.
(The club's brochure includes advice on etiquette which as always sounds surrealistic in French.
‘Ne vous lamentez pas a haute voix sur vos mauvais coups.’)
In the clubhouse, though, are relics as evocative as cave drawings.
A photograph of the Duke of Hamilton and Brandon, Major Pontifex and Archdeacon Sapte, faces frozen stiff by the camera.
Tauchnitz English editions of Victorian novels; volumes of The Queen —‘The Lady's Newspaper’; leather-gripped hickory shafted clubs of strange shapes, fashioned like painters' brushes for special purposes.
(One was for hitting a ball out of a cart rut; its head was no bigger than a soup spoon.)
By 1892 there were 340 members and not a foreigner among them (Americans didn't count).
A group painting by Alan Sealey in 1893 shows members watching a player drive off.
The men wear wide moustaches, deerstalkers, and caps, with red jackets and loose tweeds, breeches and gaiters.
The women stand on one side, in straw hats, skirts and parasols.
Sealey has caught the player in a fine action pose.
He is clearly a very good golfer, though his flying right elbow looks odd now.
Nobody is identified, but I would bet he is Horace Hutchinson, son of the Colonel Hutchinson who was among the founders.
Despite that elbow, Horace was the finest amateur of his day.
He also created a profession; he was the first outstanding golfer to write about the game.
Looking into those calm, assured faces in this odd setting I felt a stab of the futile longing to communicate that Alan Moorehead described on meeting a family of gorillas.
Everybody had money, not distastefully earned.
Like called confidently to like.
There were picnics, parties, theatricals —‘a perfect storm of unending pleasure’ wrote Count Henry Russell.
So the years rolled by until the day the Archduke Ferdinand's carriage was accidentally halted in a street in Serajevo.
Then they went home to the battlefields of the Great War.
AFTERWARDS the typical expatriate had less money, and liked Pau because it went further; and the servants still came when you pressed the bell.
The best known of them was Dornford Yates, author of the now unreadable but once hugely read Berry and Co stories.
He lived in Pau for 17 years, as a fugitive from a Britain given over, as he saw it, to socialist malcontents.
Pau retains a circle of Anglophiles who cherish the British connection and speak of it with affectionate admiration — not the most widespread of French responses to us.
I think the dashing strain in these emigres appealed to the countrymen of Henri IV, Bernadotte, Foch (and our own Fieldmarshal Alanbrooke), and Dumas's d'Artagnan.
And Pau is not in the mass tourist market.
Its British visitors are discriminating people who relish the solid comfort of a prosperous southern French town, where regional bourgeois cooking exists as a living celebration going back into antiquity.
I am not such a fathead as to attempt to describe the pleasure of eating, but I would draw your attention to the vegetable soup cooked with a hambone (le garbure), to the river trout braised in Henri IV's favourite Juranon wine, the grilled breast of duck.
Observe too the presentation of the vegetables.
The French beans are wrapped in a strip of bacon.
Simon Rae Counting out the Eighties.
Oh God, another 10 years down the drain; More damage for the mirror to explain: Those whisps of grey, new veins across the nose, The growing paunch that half obscures the toes…
Outside the bathroom door the long dead news Is served again in dozens of reviews; The colour sups dementedly parade Pictorial pickings from the past decade: A cast of horribly familiar faces, The winners of a hundred one-horse races, The media icons of a 10 year binge When loads of money was society's hinge — Money for an image or a slogan; Money — lots and lots — for Terry Wogan, And other stars who live the live of Riley: Madonna, Joan (and Jackie) Collins, Kylie…
Beyond the tabloid visions wars galore, Catastrophies disasters by the score, Plagues and famines — countless thousands died.
The Third World's poor stayed poor, and multiplied.
But Berlin has outlived its shameful war And last week saw the vile Ceausescus' fall As long as Gorbachev still gets his way, The Stalinists at last have had their day.
While here at home the Liederene ploughs on, Though many punters think the magic's gone.
The Eighties, clearly, were the Thatcher years, But Nanny's reign looks set to end in tears.
Pyrgic Puzzles.
By Christopher Maslanka
1.
According to a shamefaced Treasurer of the India Club: ‘One night last week I attended three parties one after the other.
The attendances of these three parties, leaving me out of the reckoning altogether, summed to 49.
Furthermore, at each of the three parties an identical cake was served: same size and same shape.
On each occasion the cake was divided exactly and equally among all those present (this time including me) and there was none left over.
When I arrived home very late that night (What a dog I felt!)
I realised, to my embarrassment, that I had eaten the equivalent of exactly half a cake.
‘Given that there were many at the first party, fewer at the second and fewest at the last, how many people were there at each of the three parties, not including me?’
ILLUSTRATION: IAN ANDERSON
2.
To direct questions such as‘How old are you?’
Lady Belladonna answers truthfully, though often indirectly.
Thus it was that a caddish cub reporter from the Cricklewood Cricket drew the following response: ‘A quarter of my age in years multiplied by a fifth of my age in years multiplied by a forty-fifth of my age in years gives my age in years.’
The reporter was ungentlemanly enough not only to do the calculation and obtain the correct answer but also to print it in the society column.
How old is the lady?
Nameless Lives.
By Aubrey Anon HE WAS a friend of Byron at Harrow, and later a better friend of the Met, of working people in need of‘abundant and untaxed food’ and of Roman Catholics, whom he had governed in Ireland under the longest Conservative administration anyone hopes to see.
A braver man than most of his successors, he challenged the Gerry Adams of the day to a duel and crossed to Ostend to meet his enemy, but the project fell through with the arrest of his opponent.
As a backbencher, his mind changed: ‘Do you not think that the tone of England is more liberal than the policy of the government?
Public opinion is growing too large for the channels that it has been accustomed to run through.’
He even managed to reform the British judiciary.
Solutions.
1.
Had the attendance of the third party been only two, the Treasurer would have eaten his half-cake at that party alone.
Assume the fewest possible, namely three.
Then he ate one-third of a cake, leaving one-sixth unaccounted for.
Arguing in a similar way, there could have been seven at the second party, leaving one-forty second of a cake unaccounted for, and hence an attendance of 42 at the last party.
Not counting the Treasurer, then, this gives attendances of 41, six and two, which do indeed sum to 49.
These attendances not only fit the facts but are the only set which does.
2.
Lady Belladonna's utterance is tantamount to saying her age multiplied by her age multiplied by her age is the same as multiplying her age by four and then by five and finally by 45.
This in turn means that multiplying her age by her age equals 900.
So her age in years is 30.
Nameless Lives: Sir Robert Peel (1788-1850), who became Chief Secretary for Ireland in 1812 after Spencer Perceval was assassinated and Lord Liverpool became Prime Minister for what must have felt for ever.
The creator of the Metropolitan police force (Peelers), he changed sides over Catholic emancipation and the repeal of the corn laws, and carried his (Tory) party on both reforms by his eloquence and stature.
His duel opponent was Daniel O'Connell.
That queasy feeling behind Christmas Diary.
By Claire Rayner
A QUEASY week.
It's not excess of turkey and plum pudding that has been indigestible; it's the surfeit of news.
I've been reared on Christmasses and New Years that deserve the label ‘silly season’, when news editors scrabble among the Christmas morning swimmers and the New Year's Eve drink statistics to cobble up a headline, but this sudden toppling of Evil Empires and establishment of Free Democracies (poor souls!
They think this will make tham a lot better off; a little perhaps, but a lot?) is enough to give anyone a sick headache.
Perhaps my problem is the way I perceived the first news of the crumbling of the old Europe; sitting in hospital and festooned in drip feeds and stoned out of my mind on pethidine as I came round from an anaesthetic, I muzzily watched the news on the TV in the corner of my room and truly believed I was hallucinating as I saw kitchen choppers taking down the Berlin Wall; after such a beginning to the thaw, how can I believe that as well as East Germany's arrival in the West, Czechoslovakia is almost herself again.
Ceausescu is dead, Lithuania stirs and Bulgaria stretches ready for its own emergence.
Let alone the news from Panama — I'm entitled to be queasy.
All this and ‘Donald, Where's yer troosers?’
It's more than mortal woman can stand.
THIS SEASON of violent contrasts started for me on TV-am where, as part of the Christmassy Victorianisation of After Nine, I sat on the sofa in bustle and bare bosom (well, upper bosom anyway) and suitably black-lace-becapped to be a Fin de Siecle(nineteenth variety) agony aunt.
I started reading out some of the advertisements from a magazine of 1890 or so: ‘Ladies’ Safe Remedy: Apioline.
A safe and Personal Remedy for Functional Troubles, Delay, Pain and Irregularities…’;
‘Appiol and Steel Pills: A French Remedy for all irregularities’; ‘Ottey's Strong Female Pills.
Quickly and certainly Remove all Obstructions arising from any Cause Whatever where Steel and Pennyroyal fails.’
If the anti-abortion campaigners have their way advertisements like these, and for similar dangerous products, will no doubt reappear.
If the choice facing us were legal, clean, decently performed abortion or none at all, no doubt many of us would be hard put to it to vote for the former; but in fact the choice is between the legal, clean sort and backstreet self-induced efforts of the Ottey's Pills variety.
And if the anti-abortionists succeed in 1990, I and others of my ilk will once again be begged, somehow, to help the unwillingly pregnant.
Well that's what Christmas is all about, isn't it?
Keeping up the good old traditions.
BOXING Day and we launch ourselves on our own family tradition — a visit to the theatre.
We've done it since the oldest was five, so why stop it now, a mere 20 odd years later?
Now we have to accommodate the tastes of partners of immediate family as well as our own offspring, so choice is careful indeed.
We opt for The Baker's Wife at the Phoenix and all vote it a definite winner, and I wonder again at the jaundiced palate of critics who gave it a fair old drubbing when it first trotted out.
A mind stretcher it wasn't but an agreeable evening in the theatre it undoubtedly was, and harmed us not at all.
Which is more than can be said, perhaps, for some of the offerings labelled Panto that are currently mopping up a lot of customers.
The year's resurgence of interest in travesties of middle-aged women, all ugly, strident and terminally randy, boucing around alongside girls in doublets and hose or whatever, intent on making respectful love to sugary heroines in lacy crinolines, has always seemed to me extraordinary.
How can a country which is so deeply intolerant of sexual differences in real life offer so raucous a welcome to such creatures?
God help the feller who turns up at the factory to work in silk knickers under his overalls, but at Christmas, of course, on a stage, of course , it's all perfectly all right .
Of course.
Mind you, I feared the worst for this year's crop of pantomimes.
One management even offered me the role of Fairy Godmother in Cinderella.
Even my highly regrettable tendency to react positively whenever the fridge door is opened was proof against that.
Can you imagine it?
No, don't.
It'll strain you badly.
Not that I wasn't able to do a bit of Godmother, Fairy, problems-for-the-solving-of act this year.
It became urgently necessary on Christmas Eve afternoon to get a comforting present sent from London to a sad lady in Wordsley near Wolverhampton.
Interflora on Christmas Eve?
Forget it.
This was a Sunday.
Any shops open anywhere in Birmingham who could help?
Who knows?
In our North London fastness we are as ignorant as snowflakes of such matters.
Enter stage right disc jockey Jimmy Franks of BRMB, local independent radio in Birmingham, the only chap who happens to be around when I phone to see if anyone there could help me out.
He arranged within an hour for the delivery of a bottle of something bubbly, by taxi, to sad friend in Wordsley who is, we fondly imagine, instantly magicked into happy lady.
Jimmy Franks is one hell of a Christmas Fairy.
He not only transforms sad friend, but maintains my reputation for being a resourceful problem solver.
Phew.
That was a close one.
FOR ME, reared in a tough Puritan tradition, a traditional Christmas ends the day after Boxing Day with a return to stern work.
So, I write, as well as this diary, some of my new novel (a killer, this one, dealing as it does with post-Holocaust survivors' guilt; why do I set myself these agonies?) and start pinch-hitting for Gloria Hunniford on Radio Two.
My first interview is with Barbara Cartland.
As I say, life is full of contrasts.
Especially this Christmas.
Claire Rayner is a novelist, broadcaster and agony aunt.
Miles better in 1990 Weekend attractions..
By Chris Riley G.
GLASGOW hardly needs the encouragement, but on Sunday night it follows in the civic steps of Athens, Florence, Amsterdam, West Berlin and Paris as Cultural Capital of Europe — Glasgow 1990.
While Paris's tenure saw events swallowed up by the huge bicentenary celebrations, West Berlin's year stimulated an extraordinary range of artistic events, concentrated in the summer months.
Glasgow, already the host for many of the UK's most innovative arts events, hopes to go one better in 1990, combining commercial and publicly-funded activity in a year-long cultural feast.
Appropriately it kicks off on the stroke of midnight tomorrow with a pyrotechnic extravaganza likely to distract even the most serious Hogmanay party-goers.
Six fireworks displays will simultaneously usher in the New Year.
In the city centre there's a massive Hogmanay Party at George Square for those lucky enough to hold tickets.
Starting at 10pm, it features the River Detectives, Urban Sax, Tommy Smith, Hue and Cry, Robbie Coltrane, Runrig, Aly Bain, Lulu and many others.
Although a number of the year's major events are still being finalised, much of the menu for 1990 has been announced.
It is full of theatre, dance, opera and other performing and visual arts, showcasing some of Scotland's finest talents together with artists and companies from around the world.
Two of the opera world's leading stars give concerts — Luciano Pavarotti in May, Jessye Norman in November — while the Bolshoi Opera visit the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre in July and August with productions of Boris Godunov, Prince Igor and The Maid Of Orleans.
Choral and early music are strongly represented with festivals in June and August respectively, while Scotland's orchestras, including the SNO and SCO, have full programmes throughout the year.
The SNO's new home, the Glasgow International Concert Hall, opens in October, and a number of visiting orchestras, including the Berlin Philharmonic, help celebrate with concerts there.
Among the next few months' highlights are Borderline's production of Dario Fo's Mistero Buffo at the King's Theatre with that man Robbie Coltrane again (Feb); The Art of Print, a survey of European Print Masters at the Hunterian Art Gallery (Jan-Apr); a new production of Pirandello's Enrico Four at the Citizens Theatre (Feb); Steven Campbell's first one-man show in Glasgow at the Third Eye Centre (Mar) and Freaks by the Companie Genevieve de Kermabon at Tramway (Mar).
Brochures available from Glasgow 1990, PO Box 88, Glasgow.
Luciano Pavarotti is one of the stars visiting Glasgow during 1990, as it celebrates its year as cultural capital of Europe CAPTION FOR TABLOID PAGE34 The Dinosaur Roadshow is on display at Newcastle: see Events
Defector in a safe hostel On a wet weekend, Michael Woods keeps his assignment with the mole-hunting major.
Theme Breaks.
I NEVER did find Mr Wright although, following the instructions I received at my briefing, I spent some time looking for him.
I did, however, locate Mr Wrong — for that is how our small team of spycatchers finally code-named him.
We had staked out the war memorial where the secret meeting was destined to occur.
One of us read a newspaper on a nearby bench, another casually admired the view while the third, myself, studied with infinite curiosity a nearby noticeboard.
I know every word of it by heart.
At precisely the right moment, a heavily-built fellow with a black beard arrived and paced about, staring this way and that as if waiting impatiently for another to arrive.
A girl from one of the other teams — for all of us had assembled by now— asked him for the time and briefly discussed the weather with him and when, after about 15 minutes, he struck off purposefully around a nearby playing field, he had a tail of 14 people — the entire membership of all four spy teams — determined not to lose their quarry.
After a considerable amount of doubling back, hiding in bushes and around buildings and mingling with crowds, the poor fellow finally gave us the slip and disappeared.
Only next day did we discover that he had no part whatever in the plot — to Mr Wrong of Colchester, our apologies!
I suppose it is an inevitable reaction of those who look at the world with questioning eyes, to regard everyone with suspicion and, after a whole day tracking spies on this spycatcher weekend, our senses were certainly finely tuned.
When the ‘real’ spies did turn up (one carried the Guardian as a signal) they acted with such obvious shadiness that they were instantly recognisable.
The clue we recovered from their dead letterbox, however, only served to confuse us further.
Oh, where was George Smiley now?
The weekend had begun with a briefing from the Major and from a purported Russian spy seeking to defect to the west and who, meanwhile, was staying in a safe house.
All fairly straightforward though the coded letter we recovered from his baggage took a long time to crack, while his shaving kit will never be the same again after each piece was stripped to its component parts by one participant.
The following morning our team of John, a theology student from a Jesuit College who talked like Derek Nimmo in All Gas and Gaiters, James, a British Telecom engineer (useful) and I, set off to follow a long and complicated trail across Colchester.
For one group the trail went cold.
They had to retrace their steps to pick it up again, while a second team discovered that neither a policeman nor the Council knew where the Local Authority parcels office was.
We returned to the safe house for dinner with most of our theories shattered.
Only interviews with the prime suspects could enlighten us now but, instead, they served to confuse still further.
In the nature of spying, none of their stories agreed and, indeed, some were completely contradictory.
The result was that, although all four teams put their heads together in the pub, there were almost as many theories as there were people.
To find out who was correct, we had to wait until the following morning and our debriefing with the major.
Team A — a group of students and a civil servant — probably came closest although, as in all things, there appears to be no correct answer, just a selection of possibilities.
My own suggestion that we were dealing with a whole nest of Mata Haris was declared plausible but incorrect while Team C, consisting of two middle-aged couples, produced two theories, the second of which named me as a potential mole!
If this has blown my cover, you may not hear from me again.
(Apart from Colchester, the names of people and the locations of the events mentioned in this article have been changed in order to protect the integrity of the Service.)
Spycatcher Weekends are run by the Youth Hostels Association at their Colchester Hostel and the next three such weekends are scheduled to take place on the weekends of January 26, February 9, and February 23, 1990.
They last from Friday evening to Sunday lunchtime and cost less than £60 (fully inclusive, with overnight passes for the hostel).
You need not be a member, nor be a youth: Youth Hostels are open to anyone and provide a countrywide network of cheap accommodation which is warm and comfortable.
How to survive the sun war John Illman on the slip, slop, slap method of enjoying sunshine while avoiding the killer rays.
Health.
WE WERE sailing from the Queensland port of Cairns to go diving on the Great Barrier Reef.
I was sitting on the deck, my back exposed to the sun.
I hadn't been there for more than a minute when the skipper bellowed: ‘This is melanoma country, mate.
Get inside.’
Melanoma is a sun-linked form of skin cancer.
Queensland is where it occurs most.
But melanoma country is any hot spot.
In the heat of last summer it was even possible to run up ‘minus points’ on the melanoma scale.
In a tragic testimony to the commercial success of the package holiday business over the last 30 years, melanoma now ranks as Britain's fastest growing cancer.
Within two decades the number of cases reported each year has more than doubled to at least 3,000.
Small wonder that doctors are calling for the return of the parasol and pith helmet.
The disease is nearly twice as common among women than men.
There is increasing evidence that the age range 10 to 19 may be the crucial age for exposure, though younger children may also be at increased risk.
The key message is that kids cook quick — which is not to say that they immediately contract the disease.
There may be a latent period of 30 years before it actually erupts.
Specialists are worried by a recent survey showing that most Britons are still totally unaware of the disease, never mind its life-threatening potential.
Of 1,250 people quizzed, three quarters had not even heard of it.
Of those who had, only six per cent knew that it was dangerous.
Characteristically, Australia has been fighting the sun war with a slogan, Slip, Slop, Slap: slip on a shirt, slop on some cream and slap on a hat.
Even so the disease is still striking 3,300 Australians a year and killing a thousand of them.
The emphasis there is not on staying indoors, but on learning how to enjoy a sunny, beautiful country and survive.
This involves avoiding the midday sun.
Staying out of the sun between 11am and 3pm can reduce exposure by 60 per cent.
As another Australian slogan advises: slip under a tree between eleven and three.
Exactly what is melanoma?
It is linked with melanin, the dark brown pigment of the hair, skin and eyes which is present in varying amounts in people of all races.
Melanin producing cells in our bodies are activated by ultraviolet light from the sun and can have a protective effect.
The disease, however, may be triggered in moles containing unusually high concentrations of melanin.
Consult a doctor immediately if a mole causes irritation, itching, soreness, inflammation, or bleeding or changes in size or colour.
A new mole around an existing one can also mean trouble.
WRITING in the Lancet this year, a Glasgow team led by Professor Rona MacKie, identified four key ‘risk factors’:
Having more than 20 moles;
A tendency to freckle;
Having three or more moles greater than five millimetres in diameter (ones you cannot cover with the blunt end of a pencil);
Three or more exposures to severe sunburn.
There is a lot of controversy over which SPF (sun protection factor) creams are best for particular countries.
Caution is the key word.
With that in mind stick with 15.
And remember too, despite what we've been brought up to believe, a suntan is not a symbol of health and fitness.
It's the body's response to a threat.
Michael Levy hot on the trail of the finest plastic junk in the world from Niagara to Bangkok The attack of the tack culture.
Ephemera.
TRAVELLING these days, especially on a low budget, is supposedly aided by the plethora of guidebooks, travel companions and survival kits.
They give us information on the medieval pottery museum, birthplace of local legends and the address of the youth-hostel-cum-doss-house.
Once the experience of local life and culture has been assimilated, the traveller moves on, a more complete person.
This approach ignores the delights of ‘tack travelling.’
Time spent in the tack emporiums of any town or city gives a greater insight into the ways and customs of a place, then trudging around dolls museums and marine parks, or even witnessing displays of traditional, tourist-orientated dancing.
What is tack?
It can't be defined, it just exists.
It jumps out of the shop window, attacks your aesthetic sense and begs to be admired.
Mass-produced ephemera is a regular feature of the times.
Each place has its own particular style of tack.
China's ‘four modernisations’ ignores a fifth one — mass development of silly objects.
Pictures of cats made out of synthetic material and stuck on to plastic plates are available in virtually every store.
Why visit the gardens or the pagodas of Suzhou, when much more can be gained by attempting to buy a 1950s style mannequin.
A day spent finding China's Number One sea shell carving factory, brought forth the awesome sight of the Great Wall made entirely of shells.
Every visitor to Toronto is told to visit the CN tower.
A fatal mistake.
One then may miss the Ukrainian religious tack store — Pope plates.
3-D Jesus key rings.
Then there is Honest Ed's a five-storey Aladdin's cave of the cheap and gaudy.
The beauties of the Buddhist temples of Thailand are no match for the plastic clocks, surrounded by the Thai royal family, readily available.
Forget the Berlin Wall itself, there are some lovely kiosks selling cold war kitsch.
Perhaps the most wonderful place on earth (though I am told on good authority that the souvenir shop at Graceland takes some beating) has to be Niagara falls.
Shop after shop filled full of plastic ‘snow and shakes’ of the falls, cushions proclaiming one's love for the falls, key rings, tea sets, T-shirts ad infinitum.
The true tack traveller would spend his/her honeymoon in a motel, on a heart-shaped water bed.
(The true story of Niagara is that when the European settlers first arrived they were so impressed by the tack stores, that they decided to build the falls).
What are the parameters of the tacky way?
It is essentially a non-authoritarian mode of travel.
There is no point booking a package holiday — this contains the essentially free spirit of the tack traveller.
However, ‘macho travelling’ is to be avoided — one need not travel eight days in the toilet of a train to sample ‘real life.’
Find a fairly comfortable base, a place to spread out the newly-acquired tack.
An early rise is not necessary, as tack is always there.
NB: When in Socialist countries, if something exquisite comes up, snap it up immediately, as centrally-planned economies can play havoc with the supply of tack.
Avoid ‘healthy’ outdoor pursuits which involve the use of your own legs.
Waiting around markets is the correct function of a tack traveller's legs, not clambering through the foothills of the Himalayas (where there is a distinct lack of plastic ephemera).
The tack traveller must be bold, prepared to go where no tourist dares to step with the tack antennae on constant alert.
A medical supplies shop in the back streets of Shanghai is not the average travellers idea of an attraction, but for the tack traveller it contains hidden treasures.
Here is a test: if you were in Warsaw, faced with an hour to fill before catching a train, would you go up the tallest building in the city to experience a panoramic view, or rush to the bookstore/poster shop in order to buy a massive Telly Savalas poster?
A true tack traveller doesn't even have to think.
Judy Rumbold on the tell-tale trim and trappings of the tourist.
Montage by Graham Rawle Button up a package deal THE SEASONED traveller can be identified at check-in by a conspicuous absence of specially designed leisure clothes festooned with pockets, zips and velcro.
There is no superfluous gadgetry or foldaway, stowaway gimmickry.
The rest, and this is what (snobbishly) differentiates intrepid wanderers from tourists, travel considerably less lightly.
Unfamiliar locations invite panicky packing that will cover all eventualities, and casualwear manufacturers encourage normally chaotic tourists to be minutely organised.
Everything must perform a specific function — from myriad pouches on a holdall to passport holders and water bottles to sling around the neck.
Ludicrously over-equipped tourists might recognise themselves from this checklist:
Track or leisure suit.
Must be bulky, ill-fitting and very obviously new looking.
Sickly pastel colours are the most popular — pale lemon, pink, green or blue — punctuated by unattractive logos and go-faster stripes in tones that jar hideously with the original colour scheme.
Leisure suits effectively soften the line of the body and look like adult-size romper-suits.
They lend to an airport lounge the look of a grotesque, sprawling creche peopled by monster babies.
A tracksuit's unfamiliarity forces compromise; its wearers are often loath to forgo elaborate hairdos, makeup, heels, jewellery and medallions just because the sportiness of the outfit implies reckless, leisurely abandon.
Holdalls.
Usually the fifth, runtish item in a five-piece Samsonite luggage set.
Probably won as fifth prize in a quiz show.
Made from nasty leatherette with myriad pockets and a different strap for carrying it every way humanly possible.
Redundant handles scrape along the ground like entrails and get tangled up in pushchair wheels and unsuspecting dogs' legs.
There are pockets within pockets ad infinitum— a Russian doll of a bag — so compartmentalised do tourists' possessions become that they completely lose track of where everything is.
Otherwise, the bag is a big, nylon pastel effort that expands to the size of a small marquee and then folds away to postage stamp size (except that, like a map, once unfurled it's hellish folding it back again).
Pockets.
No tourist should be without at least 10 times as many pockets as they'll ever find use for.
They should be all over the place — especially where least expected — halfway down a leg, on a collar, cuff or elbow for instance.
Particularly ridiculous are see-through plastic map-pouches on the outsides of sleeves.
It is important that pockets render completely unaerodynamic any garment they come into contact with.
Leisure wear manufacturers embraced the superfluous pocket with great enthusiasm; here was a way of disguising less than pristine workmanship with countless compartments in the shape of long pointed things and small squat ones — nothing sensible enough to accommodate anything that people really own.
They are also fond of pushing the idea that the more pockets there are, the more covetable the garment.
Pockets, they think, make people feel important — like explorers, war reporters or Anneka Rice.
Jackets.
Should be lightweight and preferably reversible.
A popular aberration has a light yellow exterior with towelling striped innards.
The important thing to remember is that it doesn't matter in the slightest what this garment looks like, as long as it boasts practicality and water-resistant qualitites.
Worn by four-strong cereal-packet families who once favoured kagools or train-spotterish anoraks.
Zipup compartment behind collar for redundant hood.
Also popular for travelling are quilted, overblown pseudo-ski jackets in pink or blue that look like duvets rampant.
Safari jackets are still favourites with more mature male travellers.
Often worn with pale, open-necked sports shirts and dodgy cravats.
Very Alan Whicker.
Velcro.
The leisurewear industry would come apart at the seams, literally, without this indispensable fastening.
Aeroplanes resound to the deafening rasp of anorak pen-pockets when passengers are told to fill in their landing cards.
Velcro also in evidence all over training shoes, holdalls and generally where it is least needed.
Disadvantages of the stuff are that it attracts fluff, hair and biscuit crumbs.
Loses its powers of adhesion.
Sensible shoes.
Broadcast their newness around airport lounges by squeaking and creaking but never, ever slipping (God forbid that those hi-grip soles should fail you) around the polished floor.
Popular styles include pristine trainers bought especially for the trip, squashy leather K shoes with side zips, and the trusty Jesus sandal.
Foldaway slippers for the flight are tucked away in a holdall with disposable nappies and sick tablets.
Shoes always turn out to be wrong for the climate.
Tourists inevitably end up having to buy either wellies or flip-flops when the weather does something perverse.
Trousers.
Quilted or ostentatiously functional — the Swiss army penknife of the trouser kingdom — with a thousand pockets, clips, keyrings and a thing for getting stuff out of horses hooves all attached to the waistband.
Usually worn by those smug bastards who fidget relentlessly on planes and insist on getting up and walking round the whole time, demonstratively taking photos out of windows and asking for guided tours of the cockpit.
Pretend to know a lot about everything and are patronising to air hostesses.
Women tourists are fond of white cotton trousers with dark knickers underneath.
Money belts.
Circumnavigate the area approximating the waist.
Usually screamingly conspicuous because they're such a new, unfamiliar concept for most tourists.
They might as well have a badge on them saying Steal Me in big black letters.
Denim.
Not such a great idea on long flights as it tends to cut off circulation in several different places.
But lots of people travel in the snow-washed variety — especially cocky skiers who say they wear denim on the slopes because they never fall over.
These are usually the people you see on the return flight with both legs in plaster.
Accessories.
It's important for the foreign traveller to accumulate lots of useless gadgetry and ephemera that they'd never dream of buying normally, and which makes the whole process of travelling so much more cumbersome and awkward for others.
Blow up kidney-shaped cushion for the neck; clip-on sunshades, tubular money holders to hang around the neck, haircuts as pristine and new as thatched cottages; too many magazines, trashy paperbacks, a whole arsenal of cameras, video equipment and binoculars.
Watches that tell the time in 18 different languages, make toast and have so many knobs and dials that the clock face is completely obscured.
PAGE
To hell and back via Bank Breakdowns, queues, filth, cancellations — even the escalators don't work.
Why is London's Underground so dreadful?.
Tom Hibbert reports from the innards of the capital Photographs by David Modell.
Wednesday, 8.05 pm, District Line.
IN THE tunnel between Gloucester Road and Earls Court, the train-supposedly bound for Richmond-has come to a halt: 25 minutes pass, a hot, cross silence broken only by the coughs and tuts and groans and rattling Evening Standards of disgruntled passengers (sorry, ‘customers’; London Underground now wishes to refer to the sad user of the subterranean network as a ‘customer,’ dictionary definition: n. one who buys).
The lucky ones are sitting in relative comfort and mute fury beneath cardboard advertisements for Wardour pickles, Stolichnaya Vodka, the National Army Museum and the Corby Trouser Press.
The less fortunate have to stand on aching pins as the carriage, unventilated (it is impossible to fit air conditioning to tube trains as the tunnels are too small to acccommodate such devices), grows hot and foetid; even the lines of Shirley Lim's Modern Secrets up there amongst the ads- ‘Last night I dreamt in Chinese/Eating Yankee Shredded Wheat’ -brought to us by ‘Poems On The Underground,’a ruse to make tube travel a little less stressful, cannot alleviate the strap-hangers' gloom and frustration.
‘Bloody, bloody typical,’ mutters a smart, young City-type, rolling back his eyes and snapping shut his briefcase in wrath.
Why are we waiting?
We are not allowed to know just yet, for the London Underground rule book tells drivers to wait for 30 minutes before making an announcement, unless they've received a message to the contrary from their controllers or there is some ‘immediate threat to safety.’
But, finally, the answer to our unspoken query comes crackling over the train's less than clear public address system.
‘I am sorry about this,’ begins the driver's voice.
‘There's a train stopped in front of us.
The driver's left it and no one knows where he's gone.
And we can't move till someone finds him.’
This excuse is met by a low moan crawling through the carriages.
‘I'm sorry!’ goes the disembodied voice; ‘I'm as pissed off about this as you are.
I want to get home too.’
The driver sounds so genuinely distressed, it seems churlish to complain (not that that would do much good).
Thursday, 8.45 am, Parsons Green, Eastbound platform.
A cheery bing-bong-a new addition, the kind of chime you hear in airports-peals out over the PA system.
Followed by the voice of ‘your District Line information service at Earls Court.’
The message the voice has to impart is well-known to the users of this service: ‘Good morning, ladies and gentlemen inaudible earlier defective train leading to inaudible cancellations inaudible delays to all destinations.’
Thursday, 9.20 am, Earls Court.
A woman pulls a boy child by his little hand toward the escalator leading down to the Piccadilly Line.
‘I bet the moving staircase doesn't work, Mummy,’ pipes the lad, evidently a seasoned tube traveller.
‘Don't be silly!’ snaps the woman, tugging her offspring through the throng.
More haste, less speed, Madam!
The child is right, this escalator, like so many on the London Underground network, has not been in operation for months.
40 escalators out of service over the 270 stations, but fret not; it's estimated that all will have been repaired by 1996.
The woman steps aboard the unfunctioning device and, taken by surprise by its lack of motion, trips and tumbles.
The boy bursts into tears.
The commotion is ignored by all others bustling down into the Earls Court bowels.
IF ONLY the woman had paused for a moment to inspect the hastily scrawled felt tip notice at the top of the stairs: ‘I am sorry for any inconvenience caused to all our customers during the period that the down escalator has been out of service.
This fault is due to a shortage of an electrical part.
I cannot give any estimate of its arrival.
Please accept my apologies, Peter J. Saunders, Group Station Manager.’
Thursday, 9.45 am, Piccadilly Line.
With no explanation or apology the Piccadilly line train shoots through Leicester Square station without stopping and dumps a grumpy load at Covent Garden.
Only one of the brand-new lifts is working, or so a smudged note scrawled in chalk on a blackboard attempts to tell us: ‘Due to a defect, certain lift operations suspended.’
There's nothing for it but to clamber, wheezing and bursting of heart, up the steep steps (300 and more) of one of the deepest shafts of the Underground to air and freedom.
Friday, 7.50 am, Edgware Road, Bakerloo line.
I have little to report here for the station is closed.
Due to staff shortages.
And entirely in the interest of the travelling public, you understand.
Since the King's Cross fire of 1987, London Underground has been forced to adopt certain stringent safety measures.
These include calling in the fire brigade at the first sign of what they quaintly call ‘smouldering in senile machinery’ and ejecting all the customers forthwith, and not opening stations if the required number of staff (two on the smaller stations) have failed to turn up.
Thus at least six stations are shut every morning.
‘Our levels of absenteeism are not untypical of the London area,’ says Dennis Tunnicliffe, the managing director of London Underground; ‘And that's enough to cause some noise in the system.’
The only noise one hears at Edgware Road this morning is that of embittered commuters stomping away from locked gates and cursing as they plan alternative routes.
Friday, 3.20 pm, Central Line.
THE EASTBOUND train, for once uncrowded, stops at Marble Arch.
Aboard steps a busker in a perky kiss-me-quick hat with lucky heather stuck in the band, accompanied by a face-painted consort.
They are less welcome than a troop of ticket inspectors.
The man with the acoustic guitar and stupid headgear launches into an awful rendition of Dire Straits' Sultan Of Swing, out-of-key hummings taking the place of the Knopfler guitar solo, while his florid chum scampers down the aisle embarrassing travellers to such an extent that they all toss loose change into the jumbo jamjar.
This is mugging, with discomfiture, rather than fists or knives, as the threatening weapon.
The unwanted jongleurs even proffer tourist information: apparently if we disembark at Oxford Street we'll be in one of the finest shopping centres in the world, so why don't we ‘all fuck off there and buy yer wives a mink?
We'd like to say it's been a pleasure serving you, but we'd be lying, you miserable tight-arses!’
They alight at Bond Street to hold another innocent train to ransom with abuse and ghastly tunes.
Friday, 4.00 pm, Tottenham Court Road Station.
There's a gruesome ringing in my ears-an unpleasant melody, Feelings perhaps, possibly played by hectic dervishes on microwave mouth organs and paraffin stoves.
The sound is very horrible indeed.
This is the sound of Muzak brought to you courtesy, and for absolutely free, by London Underground.
This music, something like they serve up in supermarkets and American elevators, is an ‘experiment,’ and Tottenham Court Road is the first station to feel the ‘benefits’of a new system that ‘customers’can actually hear and, according to London Underground, the racket is intended to ‘calm people awaiting their train.
It might even deter muggers from mugging people.’
But-when you're stuck halfway down the steps to the Central Line platform, unable to proceed as the platform is so packed, unable to retreat as there's a crush of bodies behind you-the bizarre rendition of Tie A Yellow Ribbon Round The Old Oak Tree adds to your dread as it echoes around the halls.
‘We think that music is a good thing,’ says Tunnicliffe; ‘If you look at our everyday lives, many of us live in a music-filled environment so there is a reasonable chance that it will be a positive thing.
Tottenham Court Road was the trial station of upgrading our public address system and so we thought, well, just plug the music in and see what happens.’
MUZAK also helps to deter buskers.
‘We have the dilemma of buskers.
Our public are, when we polled them, down the middle, half liking them and half hating them, so on balance we'd rather not have the buskers.
It is essentially illegal.’
Indeed, London Underground's own byelaw 22 states that ‘No person while upon the railway shall to the annoyance of any other person sing, perform on any musical instrument or use any gramophone record player or tape recorder or portable wireless apparatus.’
260 troubadours, tap-dancers and persons with flutes, sheet music and accompanying ghetto-blasters fall foul of this law every year-though no one has as yet been prosecuted for playing an irksome Walkman-zzzsssss zzzsssss-on a train, and, evidently, the ruling does not apply to the operators of the Underground themselves.
Friday, 8.30pm, Waterloo, Northern Line.
The ‘misery line’ as it is called-stations from Kennington to Morden dim and cheerless dungeons, trains cancelled with appalling regularity (there's a shortage of drivers on the Northern Line, because it is the last to embrace OPO-one person operation-and so the pay is lower than on other lines).
In 1988, customers, so cheesed off with the Line's service, staged the famous so-called ‘battle of Finchley Central,’ occupying a train after an all-too-common announcement that it was to be diverted to Mill Hill East instead of‘speeding’to its original destination of High Barnet.
‘I've had enough!’ cried the ringleader, the Spartacus of the Northern Line, ‘I'm staying put!
If we all do it they'll have to take the train on!’ and 60 fellow travellers rebelled in agreement, using seat cushions to prevent the doors from being closed.
‘Selfish and irresponsible,’ London Underground called the action.
‘The Tube is not a personal taxi service.’
Indeed it is not.
One could never accuse it of that.
I am puzzling over the dot matrix display board that's trying to tell me what trains are coming my way.
1: Edgware 5 minutes, 2: High Barnet 8 minutes, 3: Edgware 15 minutes.
(And ‘No smoking on the Underground,’ says the display at every available opportunity.)
Eighteen minutes pass and having failed to meet their appointments, the promised trains disappear from the board.
A young man of shaven pate, E-X-P-L-O-I-T-E-D tattooed on his forehead, approaches me brandishing a splashing can of Carlsberg Special Brew and asking me the time.
It is ten to nine, I inform him, but and my uncontroversial and accurate reply seems to enrage him.
‘Fucking Prince Charles!’ he snarls, swaying dangerously and lowering his head towards me.
‘Who do you fucking think you are?
Got any pound coins for me?’
ISWALLOW hard, suspecting that I am about to become another statistic in the rising tide of Tube violence, 380 reported assaults a year and mounting, 16,000 other crimes.
But, no, my ‘assailant’ proves incapable of doing any GBH unto me.
The worse for drink, he lurches away, staggering to a litter bin where he is sick.
Sadly, however, his delicate tidiness is wasted-the bin is a bottomless shell and the liquid vomit showers over the wall, on to his trousers.
All alone in the big city…there are 380 reported assaults a year on the Tube, and 16,000 other crimes Saturday, 12.10 pm, Piccadilly Circus.
Here is the very subway corridor in which, in 1980, Lord Home, Sir Alec as was, became the most celebrated personage ever to be mugged on the Underground system.
And here is a platform littered with persons waiting anxiously for that last train home.
Tourist backpackers chattering in high tones; theatre-/supper-goers gazing nervously at the cluster of dishevelled, ruby-faced lads who wave their cans and bawl out the rallying cry of ‘'Ere we go, ‘ere we go!’ at alarming volume; a comatose figure lying on the bucket seats and crying out an important but indecipherable message about some quite obvious connection betwixt Jesus and Aids; in the corner a girl with dishevelled hair and a soiled James Dean T-shirt sprawled on the concrete and a man with bloodied chin mouthing profanities as he urinates against the wall.
There's a scuffle taking place on the adjacent platform: you hear the yells and the fists.
To think that during the Blitz, families, stout-hearted folk, were down in these caverns holding hands beneath blankets and whistling the stirring refrains of Dame Vera Lynn.
‘Get a ticket, not a criminal record,’ the ads urge you; but this is easier said than done.
The booking office is closed (staff shortages).
I stand in the queue for one of the new-fangled ticket machines clutching my one pound coin, but when it's my turn, the dot matrix display has changed suddenly from CHANGE GIVEN to EXACT MONEY ONLY.
Insert your ticket, if you are fortunate enough to have one, into one of the newly-installed electronic barriers designed to reduce fraud (handy tip for cheapskates: exit barriers are happy to accept a cheap children's ticket regardless of age).
Also presumably designed to confuse tourists.
Y OU will, more likely than not, find your entry barred and spy a sign flashing SEEK ASSISTANCE.
From whom, pray?
Many consider these new gates something of a menace.
Last year one Christopher Sutton found himself stuck in a mass of bodies at Oxford Circus because all but two of the barriers were not working.
Result: human club sandwich wall-to-gate.
‘You'll have another King's Cross disaster on your hands!’ shouted Sutton-who was immediately taken aside by station manager Henry Feathers and arrested by the police for being a nuisance.
Once on the platform, if you are lucky enough to get there, you will be met, eventually, with logic-free announcements to explain why you are going to be ridiculously late for work or that important appointment.
‘Ladies and gentlemen, this is your inaudible because of problems, your journey may take longer than usual.’
‘Ladies and gentlemen, London Underground apologies for the late running of trains, which is due to an earlier signal failure in the Wimbledon area.’
‘There will be no further Eastbound trains until a defective train is removed from the stretch between Victoria and Sloane Square.’
‘London Underground wishes to apologise for intervals between trains, this is due to earlier intervals.’
‘There are no trains Eastbound on the Central Line until further notice, this is due to inaudible inaudible London Underground would like to apologise for any inconvenience.
Further to this notice inaudible.’
And then, of course, there is the ever-handy standby ‘person under train’ -person under train guaranteed to shut your route right down.
One hundred persons per year under train.
The figure growing.
‘Person under train.’
A not-so-good euphemism for someone who has tried to do him/herself in by hurling him/herself beneath a moving tube train, or someone who has been jostled from a congested platform on to the track, or some kicky kid indulging in Tube surfing-travelling outside the train and hanging on, and falling off, like John Koporo, age 11, who in 1987 at Kilburn became the sport's first victim.
London Underground is spending £100,000 on research to find out why so many of us like to toss ourselves on the rails.
Perhaps the torment of Tube travel itself has something to do with it.
The old and needed services for customers are becoming non-existent on the Tube.
Once upon a time, if you were caught short, there would be a convenience at your disposal.
No more.
The toilets at Piccadilly Circus closed down years ago.
They've gone at Finchley and almost everywhere else.
‘Rather sadly it is a comment on modern society that keeping public loos clean and not vandalised is an uphill battle,’ says Dennis Tunnicliffe.
‘We are looking at what you might loosely call superloos.
We're going to experiment with one or two of those to see if they survive better.
And then we may retro-fit to places like Finchley.’
No loos, and Ellie's Sandwich Bar on Piccadilly Circus is long gone too, and, if you fancy a refreshing beverage while you're waiting (endlessly) at Sloane Square, tough luck-that platform pub has gone too, a victim of No Smoking restrictions.
Never fear, you can still buy an attractive neck-tie at King's Cross's Tie Rack emporium.
No services, no decipherable announcements, nothing one actually wants or needs.
Station refurbishment seems a mere insult when the trains don't run on time.
At Baker Street, tiles showing a profile with a deerstalker hat and a curvaceous pipe: Sherlock Holmes, who lived in Baker Street.
At Leicester Square, reels of film-there are many cinemas showing films on the streets above us.
At Finsbury Park a great big hot air balloon: er, a bit of a poser, this one, unless you know that Finsbury Park was the site of the first hot air balloon flight.
Tottenham Court Road, dots and squiggles.
Designed by Eduardo Paolozzi.
A mystery.
But supposed, to evoke the inner workings of the electrical goods sold by so many shops in the road up there.
No refurbishment at all at Oval on the grim, dank Northern Line.
Not a tiled cricket bat or a profile of Surrey's fast-bowling demon of yesteryear, Geoff Arnold, to be seen.
Stuck on a Northern Line train between Tooting Beck and Balham, a gaggle of lads running amok and jeering with lighted fags.
Do you tell them that smoking is banned on the Underground?
Do you remind them of Angela Williams, the first person to be prosecuted for smoking on the tube or of Paul Deiring, the first person to be jailed for smoking on the tube (he couldn't pay his £25 fine) or do you make like Eric Butler, the Bernard Goetz of the Victoria Line, who, in 1987, mocked and taunted by drunken youths, retaliated with a sword-stick and was punished in the courts for his efforts.
No, of course you don't.
You keep your peace.
A ND you resist all eye contact, remembering the words of barrister Caradog Morgan who earlier this year, in defending one Victoria Carrington, freelance insurance consultant accused of assaulting two fellow passengers because they had joggled her newspaper and dared to look at her right in the face, said, ‘There is a convention on the Underground that people do not look each other in the eye.’
Jammed down here between Tooting Bec and Balham on a train that's going nowhere, with no reason given why, one can dread all sorts of things.
One thinks of the Moorgate crash in 1975 which killed 42 people and seriously injured 75; one thinks of the Goodge Street fire of 1981 and, inevitably, King's Cross.
One thinks of the stories of child muggers bearing sharp knives, driven below by a greater police presence upstairs, of the Underground ‘acid fiend’ who squirts hydrochloric acid on people's legs before making his escape, of steamers, hip-hop-styled persons perpetrating economy-sized thefts.
Whatever happened to the Guardian Angels?
One thinks of the religious maniac who gripped one's hand too firmly, hours earlier, on the Metropolitan Line and asked one, sincerely, to ‘repent,’ of the strange fellow who took umbrage at the book one was reading-The Boss; J. Edgar Hoover And The Great American Inquisition-and accused one, for some unaccountable reason, of being no better than Norman Tebbit.
One looks up at the cheery advertisement that reads ‘Lonely?
Afraid?
Need Hope?
Call The Helpline (0442 69123/4/5)’ and rather wishes they had telephones aboard these rumbling cars.
One thinks, oh, God, I might die down here.
A victim of the ‘smouldering’ that closes stations daily (between October 1 and November 12 this year, ‘smouldering’-a fire or smoke alert on the Underground- caused the closure of King's Cross on no less than 14 occasions.
Oh, God, I might die down here.
Please let me be remembered by something more adequate, less apologetic than the plaque, brown, one foot by two, up there on the wall by the Euston Road exit at King's Cross: ‘In Memory Of/The Thirty One People/Who Lost Their Lives/In The King's Cross/Underground Fire Of/18th November 1987.’
Alongside is a garish sticker saying KEEP THESE PREMISES TIDY.
It is old, this Underground.
Engineer Peter William Barlow sank the first hole in the ground on Tower Hill in 1869. 130 years on we've got creaking trains that have been in service for 30 years and more.
The tunnels, given to us by Victorians and Edwardians, are slim, with no twin-tracking-that's why we can't have an all-night service like New York's; the tracks have to be walked for maintenance and defluffing nightly.
It has long been mismanaged, this Underground, and lacking in public subsidies.
No subway system in the world (save Hong Kong's) makes a profit; in Rome, 82 per cent of public transport operating costs are met by public subsidy, in Paris, 52 per cent.
In London it's 30 per cent and falling.
In London they are determined to break even without outside assistance-even if this means raising fares to ease congestion.
‘What we would like to do,’ says Dennis Tunnicliffe, ‘is slow down the rate of growth because my system is full.
We actually close it every morning at up to six stations and deny people entry.
To be safe it has to be rationed.
It is either going to be physically rationed or price rationed…prices are too low anyway, since we still have to have an operating subsidy, and that is not in line with the long-term political trend…’
So, a yearly 10 per cent rise in fares for the next five years.
A CRUMBLING network the size of Belgium; 2.7 million passengers a day; the average Londoner's travelling time to work 52 minutes and rising by several seconds each week.
Margaret Thatcher advises us to walk to our offices.
Margaret Thatcher might possibly be right.
But then we might miss out on Dennis Carthy, the fellow who used to take to the Tube dressed in a bra, a blouse and fishnet stockings and entertain customers on the Bakerloo Line with tricks that involved a teddy bear, a pistol and a six-foot python.
The busker who plays Chariots Of Fire on a Casio organ at Bank would leave it in a trice if only he could think of some other way of turning a penny.
It's not the police-who move him on regularly, arrest him occasionally- that he loathes so much: it is the public.
Last night his hourly wage, about £8 in loose change was nicked from under his nose by scavenging ragamuffins.
The night before, a well-dressed elderly woman reeled towards him clutching a half-eaten burger and threw up all over his instrument.
Took him hours to clean it up and, since then, the pitch and tone have been all askew.
‘Some of them are okay,’ he says of his audience.
‘Most of them stink.’
‘Have you ever taken part in a fire drill,’ I ask a ticket collector at a station on the Jubilee Line (which was supposed to be called the Fleet Line until the GLC's Horace Cutler decided to change it in deference to the Queen at a cost of £50,000).
‘Why?
Are you on fire?
Ha ha!’ he replies; ‘I'll spit on you, if you like!
‘I hate the public because they're so rude.
I hate the management.
I'd like to be on the lovely buses.
By the way, the fare from West Kensington is 90p, not 60p.
You owe me 30p.’
I cough up and march towards the escalator.
A sign: ‘We're sorry that this escalator has been out of use for so long…’
The average Tube-goer's travelling time to work is 52 minutes and rising by several seconds every week.
Margaret Thatcher advises us to walk to our offices.
Margaret Thatcher might possibly be right.
PAGE t2