

Elena Ceausescu At the end of my work, there is nothing but dust.
Samuel Beckett We want him in a nice jail where we can keep an eye on him.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater on General Noriega That's what friends are for.
Mrs T on why she supported Bush Death from Above.
Motto of 82 US Airborne Divison
In the backwoods of southwest Virginia there's a little noticed struggle going on-complete with camouflage, weaponry and mercenaries-between the mine owners and the local communities.
Billy Bragg reports from Camp Solidarity Big rock union mountain.
GERRY JOHNSON is driving me along the winding roads of south-western Virginia.
‘When I was a boy in Harlan County we were real poor and every morning I used to wake up and look out of my bedroom window at this mountain called Gray's Knob.
I once saw a painted picture of something like it in the Rockefeller Centre — must have been worth a million dollars or more — but we never had anything like that, so that mountain was my art, something beautiful and eternal.
‘Then I went up to Chicago and Detroit to work and, when I came home again years later, my mountain was gone.
They'd strip-mined it!
But I went back there just the other day and I noticed the ground is starting to hump up again.’
The Appalachian Mountains pass through this far corner of the Commonwealth of Virginia on their long journey from Maine down to Alabama.
In the 18th century, these densely wooded peaks were the original border of the United States.
These are The Backwoods, one of the most beautiful and inaccessible regions of the US.
This is also coal-mining country.
Since April, the United Mine Workers of America have been on strike here against the Pittston Company: 1,700 miners have been out for seven months and, despite intimidation, no one has gone back to work.
Pittston has drafted in ‘scab’ labour to get the coal out, but the roads in these mountains are narrow and winding so the strikers drive their vehicles ahead of the coal trucks as slowly as possible.
Hundreds of people have been arrested on contempt charges and Virginia Hills have been declared a ‘federally secured area’.
The genesis of this strike was Pittston's decision to leave the Bituminous Coal Operators of America with whom the UMWA had signed an industry-wide contract.
Once it had withdrawn from the BCOA, Pittston rejected the union contract and cut off health benefits to 1,500 widows, disabled miners, and pensioners.
The UMWA members worked in good faith within a contract for 14 months while negotiations went on.
Pittston finally provoked a strike by demanding mandatory overtime and Sunday working, the right to contract non-union labour at union operations, and 24 hours' advance notice before the union brings safety experts or union officials to the mines for inspections.
Pittston also demanded an end to the full health-care plan, and sought cuts in health and pension benefits for retired miners.
To all Americans, the fear of facing illness and expensive hospital bills is a constant nightmare; in these tightly-knit mining communities, Pittston's decision reaches into every family.
Taking a day off between shows in Chapel Hill and Charlotte, North Carolina, we head towards the UMWA District 28 office ‘just behind the Pizza Hut’ in Castlewood, Virginia.
We cross the Blue Ridge Parkway and, just beyond the town of Abingdon, find ourselves travelling on the Trail of the Lonesome Pine itself, which was named not after a Laurel and Hardy song but after the ‘underground railway’ route which helped escaping slaves escape before and during the Civil War.
Such is the radical tradition of the area.
The UMWA itself sprang out of these hills to found the Congress of Industrial Organisations, an industrial rival to the craft-based and racist American Federation of Labour.
The two eventually merged to form the AFL-CIO, the American TUC.
Just over the mountain in Kentucky is Harlan County, where in 1973 the miners fought a long and bitter strike.
They lost, but during the struggle the rank-and-file movement gained control of the UMWA.
These workers have traditionally been the toughest and most radical, and employers all over America are aware that if Pittston can break the ‘mother union’, then the attempts to gain the ground lost in the Reagan years will be stillborn.
At Castlewood we meet Gene Carroll, a UMWA spokesman.
We follow his car as it winds through the hollows and around the hills until we reach the Moss No.3 Preparation Plant where the Pittston Company cleans and grades its coal before moving it out to power stations or abroad.
This summer it was the scene of the first mass occupation of a plant by strikers in the USA since the 1930s, and has been the focus of much of the non-violent direct action during the seven-month strike.
THE gates of Moss No.3 were the scene of mass demonstrations during the summer as strikers attempted to stop the coal trucks getting into the plant.
They sat down in the road and, when the state police dragged them away, they threw jackrocks under the wheels of the ‘scab’ trucks (a jackrock is a couple of sharpened nails welded together so that no matter which way they land, they always have a point sticking up in the air).
For these acts and for occasional bouts of stone-throwing, the UMWA has been fined more than $30 million by the courts.
‘When seven miners were killed in an accident at their McClure No.1 mine in 1983, Pittston was fined $47,500,’ Gene tells us, ‘and they fine us $30 million for demonstrating peacefully in defence of our communities.’
UMWA president Richard Trumka says the company and the courts are mistaken if they think the union is dependent on money.
The union, he says, ‘is an idea that lives on in the minds of our workers and their children’.
Things are quiet on the picket line on this Sunday afternoon.
Three union members sit outside their hut, whittling redwood and drinking coffee while their comrades attend a local rally for Doug Wilder, the Democratic Party candidate in Virginia's forthcoming gubernatorial elections.
I ask one of the pickets if he supports the Democrats.
‘Most of the time,’ he replies drily.
Does he think the Democrats support the strike?
‘Most of the time,’ is his reply.
Has the strike shaken his faith in the American Way?
‘Well, it's shocked me that President Bush has gone out and ballyhooed the unions in Poland and yet he's turned his back on us.’
A car passes and sounds its horn in solidarity.
Across the road in a secure compound are the buildings that house the mostly out-of-state blacklegs.
From behind the wire fencing, a uniformed guard eyes us with binoculars.
This area is physically remote from the rest of the USA and, without sympathetic media support, it's hard to get the news out.
Things happen in these hills that don't make it on to the evening bulletins.
‘I saw state policemen drag strikers across the road and make them kneel in the ditch there while they held shotguns in their backs.
You just know the camera crews won't turn up until we respond to their provocations,’ says Gene.
‘This strike is not about higher wages or shorter hours,’ Gene explains.
‘
It's not as if Pittston is heading for bankruptcy.
The mining division makes huge profits and it also owns the Brinks security firm and Burlington Northern Air Freight.’
Estimates put the cost of hiring private security men during the strike at about $20 million.
Vance International, the firm hired to protect the drafted-in new workers is owned by the son-in-law of former President Gerald Ford.
The company is reported to have hired former mercenaries from Rhodesia, Central America and the Middle East who are equipped with assault rifles or shotguns, gasmasks, tear-gas munitions, counter-sniper equipment, intrusion detection devices, armoured vehicles, and K-9 teams.
IT'S not surprising that the miners have chosen camouflage as their symbol of solidarity.
Everybody is wearing it.
Not just the miners themselves, but their families, wives and teenage children, babies, and grandmothers wear camouflage hats, T-shirts, trousers.
Besuited union officials wear camouflage ties.
They have been criticised for the choice of colours associated with warfare, but up here in these hills surrounded by an army of uniformed police, US marshalls and private security guards all bristling with weapons, it is war: UMWA vice-president Cecil Roberts has said as much.
‘Welcome to class warfare in south-western Virginia,’ he told a rally this summer.
UMWA women recently held a birthday party for Roberts and presented him with a plaque engraved with his now famous quote.
As in the NUM strike of 1984, the women have been the backbone of this struggle: dressed in camouflage and calling themselves the Daughters of Mother Jones, after the legendary union organiser from the turn of the century, they have walked the picket lines, sat in front of coal trucks, and been arrested.
There are women miners here who were among the first to be laid off when Pittston sacked 4,000 of its 6,000 unionised miners in the early Eighties.
They sing the songs of Florence Reece, who wrote Which Side Are You On, and of Sarah Ogen Gunning, author of such great songs as I Hate the Capitalist System.
Some of them wear solidarity earrings in the shape of a miniature jackrock.
We drive over to Russell County past Carbo Power Station, its cooling towers belching out steam in the valley like a giant fog generator.
We are looking for a couple of acres owned by the UMWA member which has become the focus of the strike: Camp Solidarity.
Since the spring, 40,000 people have visited this spot, pitching tents and sleeping rough, bringing money and food and leaving their banners and messages of solidarity.
We sit and chat with the miners in their newly-finished bunkhouse, drinking coffee beneath a sign inscribed by, among others, our own National Union of Railwaymen and Amalgamated Engineering Union.
AS THE talk develops, the strikers reveal their belief that there is more at stake than just their rights.
‘These big international companies recognise borders only when they want to use them to set one workforce against another,’ says one.
Multinational unions are the only way to deal with multinational corporations, it is suggested.
I ask if they have heard that in Bolivia the government, spurred on by the IMF, made thousands of miners redundant to make their economy ‘viable’.
Bolivian miners marched on La Paz to protest and, when the government refused to meet them, 29 miners had themselves ‘crucified’ for 24 hours at the university.
The pressure in Latin America to keep wages low, in the name of ‘sound finance’, is particularly strong in Mexico, where starvation wages undercut labour costs in the non-unionised southern and western states of the USA.
This in turn puts pressure on the wages of organised labour in the north.
If the workforce doesn't keep in line, their jobs begin to move south.
You can look across the Rio Grande river in Texas and see American-owned factories, deregulated and non-unionised, on the Mexican side.
When the working people in this country — whose only national newspaper, USA Today, reduces all its non-cold war international news to an eighth-of-a-page column called ‘Elsewhere in the world’— begin to discuss the issues of international capitalist exploitation, it's not surprising that the media portray the strike as some petty industrial dispute in the backwoods of the Appalachians.
Slowly, though, word is seeping out.
There have been mass demonstrations in some American cities with striking Eastern Airlines employees and telephone workers joining the UMWA to express their solidarity.
A friend of mine who took part in such a march in Greenwich, Connecticut, headquarters of the Pittston Group, said that first came the airline pilots in their dark blue uniforms and gold braided hats; then the telephone workers all dressed in red shirts; and then the miners covered from head to toe in camouflage.
The fact that everyone was waving tiny American flags made this spectacle of labour all the more bizarre.
It seems that union members have learned their lesson after they allowed Ronald Reagan to break the air traffic controllers in the early Eighties.
Not only are they marching in common cause with other unions, but the UMWA is also forging links with groups fighting against conservative forces in American society.
Environmentalists have supported the miners against Pittston strip-mining and long-wall techniques, and I was given a badge which proclaimed ‘I'm Pro-Union and Pro-Choice’, linking the strike with the most inflammable issue in US politics today, abortion rights.
With all this, and the union vice-president talking in terms unheard of since the heyday of the Industrial Workers of the World, you begin to understand why it is imperative for capitalism that Pittston succeeds in its attempt to break the UMWA.
THE days following our visit to Camp Solidarity bring encouraging news.
Doug Wilder is elected governor of Virginia with the media noting that ‘South-western coal counties helped to fuel his victory.’
Wilder will be the first black governor in American history and the union endorsed him believing that he will ensure fairer treatment at the hands of state officials.
In the coal counties themselves, Jack Stump, the president of the local District 28 of UMWA, overwhelmingly defeated the incumbent Democrat to win a seat in the Virginia House of Delegates.
This is unprecedented for a ‘write-in’ candidate not supported by any party machine.
And the victory is even sweeter as his opponent, Don McGloghlin Snr, is father of the judge responsible for the bulk of the $30 million fines levied against the union.
The next day we sit amazed watching people dancing on top of the Berlin Wall.
The world is changing fast before our eyes, while the Bush Administration stands transfixed, unable or unwilling to respond to Gorbachev's reforms.
This is not the much-touted ‘end of history’ that we are witnessing; it is merely the end of the American ability to control events around the world.
It must now face the imperial impotence that Britain has found it so difficult to adapt to.
American capitalism has always relied on international rivalry and the occasional war to create an artificial community of interest between the rich and the poor.
If the Soviet Union refuses to play that game any more, how long will it be before the poor of this great country realise that the genuine community of interest exists among themselves?
Already they have stopped voting along purely racial lines.
I eventually saw a report about striking miners on American TV.
It was the third story in an evening bulletin, and the tone of the commentary implied the legitimacy of their struggle.
The report came from the Soviet Union where miners within the Arctic Circle are seeking better conditions.
I hope they don't ask me to come and do a benefit concert up there.
At least not until the spring.
Cafe.
Europe in turmoil.
MUCH of the breeding ground for Czechoslovakia's revolution lay in the baroque atmosphere of Prague's elegant cafes.
These imposing buildings from another era were the meeting point for elements that the establishment wanted to keep apart.
Through the country's long years of repression, artists, intellectuals and students met each other in the cafes, to swap ideas and information and to give each other solidarity.
To Western eyes, this may not seem extraordinary.
But Jaroslav Rona, a member of a group of prominent artists, says: ‘If intellectual groups had not met in the cafes, nothing would have happened.
If the authorities had had any sense, they would have closed the cafes.’
Prague's cafes have been the centre of cultural activity since the days of the Austro-Hungarian empire.
So potent is the tradition of Czech cafe society, that most cafes were shut down after the Communist takeover in 1948.
To prevent opposition forces coalescing, the authorities went to great length to separate the various strands of artistic and intellectual thought.
Separate organisations were created for, among others, officially approved painters, writers and architects, with each group being allocated an official meeting place.
Contact between the different groups was actively discouraged.
Students were not even given their own campus cafe or union bar to meet in.
The only place where artists, intellectuals and the students could meet regularly were the cafes.
But whenever the system was threatened, even the cafes became no-go areas.
After 1968, no new artistic movements were permitted, and groups of artists or intellectuals meeting in cafes became the subject of suspicion.
After Charter 77 was launched, even the cafes had too many secret police sipping tea.
People began to meet in their homes.
BUT when the system loosened up slightly under pressure from Gorbachev's reforms, some groups started to return to the cafes.
One was The Tvrdohlavi, loosely translated as hard or tough heads, a group of leading Czech artists who formed their original group in the cafe Obecni Dum, the building where Thomas Masayrek proclaimed the formation of Czechoslovakia in 1918.
The Tvdohlavi took their name from the Tvrdosijni (strong backbone), a group of painters from 1920s cafe society who had met to explore the new artistic style of Cubism.
The Tvrdohlavi, just eight strong, wanted to be free to explore artistic avenues and to meet other creative people away from state influence.
‘By forming groups such as ours,’ says Rona, ‘it became possible for people who would never otherwise have met, to compare ideas.’
Gradually, what began as isolated pockets of thought, became a vibrant movement.
Students were the final element to join the new cafe society.
The most important cafe was The Slavia.
Built in the 1860s as the last privately built palace in Prague, and later partially converted to a cafe, The Slavia's significance came from its location.
On the floor above was the faculty of film making.
In the same road was the school of journalism.
Directly opposite, lay the National Theatre.
THERE is no name on the door of The Slavia.
Some of its grand design was lost in a Sixties refit.
But its pull remains powerful.
Throughout the dark years, some of the artists and intellectuals, who were given manual jobs for producing unacceptable works of art, met in The Slavia.
In the months leading up to the Prague autumn, The Slavia played elegant host to a more accurate cross-section of Czech society — punks, housewives, artists, students, writers, weary shoppers — than probably existed anywhere in the country until the rallies in Wenceslas Square.
When the distinguished writer Pavel Kohout recently returned from exile he went directly to The Slavia.
When the revolution came, artists and students continued their association, with artists designing many of the posters that students plastered across the city.
Little wonder then that when the students launched a magazine to spread information between their disparate groups, they called it Kavane, meaning Cafe.
society USE THIS ONE PATCH FOR PAGE ELEVEN TAB.
Blue Ridge base…on a small patch of land owned by a member of the miners' union, 40,000 people have called to offer their solidarity since last spring.
PAGE
Fresh hope for the homeless Property.
By David Lawson THE ESTATE agent was gut-wrenchingly honest about putting cash before humanity.
‘There is no reason why I couldn't unlock 45 flats for homeless people for nine or 10 months.
[But]I don't want an agreement where I have to apply to court to get them out.
It costs £1,500 minimum to stage a court case.’
Scattered among the hundreds of central London houses he manages are at least 100 empty properties.
Some have been unoccupied for more than four years, and most for at least six months.
Meanwhile more than 30,000 people will see in the new year squeezed into bed-and-breakfast accommodation.
And as the charity shelters close, many more will be put back in their cardboard boxes.
The agent has an answer, but not the one buried in a torrent of new laws introduced this year.
Short- hold and assured tenancies aimed at enticing owners to let empty homes are looked on with suspicion and disdain.
Freedom to charge higher rents will reopen some doors but the court orders still necessary to remove tenants could block real advances.
Owners don't want property to stay empty, says the agent.
But they want to be sure it is empty at the time they might need to sell or redevelop.
He promised to release the empty flats in his row of Chelsea houses tomorrow if guaranteed repossession within 48 hours by some sort of contract.
In fact all his empties could be let at low rents for perhaps three years.
It was a startling promise, stimulated perhaps by the fact that he did not have to reveal his name and live up to his words.
Anonymity was guaranteed by investigators from Social and Community Planning Research who were looking into reasons why landlords refuse to let empty property.
But landlords are desperate to offload homes, particularly in the South-east where the depression is deepest.
They are queueing up to offer properties to local authorities, according to Hal Pawson of the London Research Centre.
Not a single borough in the capital was having difficulty finding enough flats and houses.
This is creating a vital staging post between expensive hotels and permanent rehousing for the homeless.
‘The use of bed and breakfast is still hovering close to record levels,’ says Pawson, ‘It is only through the boom in short-term leasing that boroughs have been able to avoid further increases in hotel placements.’
Around 40,000 people could be housed this way by next April, more than double the number last spring.
Private Sector Leasing in London is available from the London Research Centre, 81 Black Prince Road, London SE1.
Price £15.
Empty Dwellings, by Helen Finch, Alice Lovell and Kit Ward from any HMSO.
Price £14.
The rule of truth Yesterday Vaclav Havel became president of Czechoslovakia.
WL Webb and Michael Billington profile the president and playwright, chosen above all for his reputation as a man whose word is to be trusted.
Europe in turmoil.
CULTURE, or art, said a young playwright in an interview in Prague in Spring, 1968, ‘is concerned with truth, it tries to show reality as it is.
Politics wishes to change reality, it requires power, and thus it is primarily in the service of power…
It is an open question whether intellectuals can ever play an active role in political life without becoming unfaithful to their main goal, which is truth.’
In 21 maturing years since then, Vaclav Havel has learned much more about power and how a citizen-intellectual may have to deal with it, or even assume it.
Some of these lessons were very practical.
In 1975 he wrote his open letter to President Husak about the price that would have to be paid for delivering their country into the hands of an ‘entropic’ regime which depended ‘solely on the ruling minority's instinct of self-preservation and on the fear of the ruled majority’, a regime which positively required the suppression of truth and history for its surival.
After that he learned first to carry with him everywhere his own survival kit of razor, toothpaste and cigarettes against the likelihood of arrest, and then to survive years in prison surrounded by gaolers like characters out of his own plays, who lived by the laws of the regime's own absurdist, reality-denying logic.
You can read about how he survived in the letters he wrote to his wife, published here by Faber as Letters To Olga.
The years of his longest sentence, from 1979 to 1983 (incurred for setting up, in admiring imitation of the Polish KOR, a Czech Committee to Defend the Unjustly Prosecuted) were punctuated by other, sometimes painfully absurd episodes: for example the day the Interior Ministry's men relented sufficiently to allow him to attend his father's funeral, and then inadvertently let him be surrounded by a tight scrum of friends who brought him up to date with all the latest political news.
The other half of his proposition about culture and politics was onlydeepened by the experiences of the last two decades.
When the philosopher and historian Thomas Garrigue Masaryk became the first President of the new republic of Czechoslovakia between the wars, there flew above his residence in Prague Castle a flag bearing the words Truth Prevails, and it's hardly a coincidence that the central theme of Havel's political writings has been ‘To live in truth’.
The worst thing the old politburocracy did to the Czechs and Slovaks was to require them to ‘live lies’ because the truth didn't fit the pseudo-history which was supposed to legitimize Brezhnev's satraps.
It was this more than anything that impelled Havel into active opposition, and there's little doubt that it's his reputation as a truth-teller, a man whose word is to be trusted, that most commends him to a nation recovering from constitutional mendacity.
That may be his paramount qualification for ‘going to the Castle’, but some of the others seem hardly less important.
Again and again, people told me in Prague earlier this month how the Forum had been held together at difficult moments by his irrestistible decency and gentle authority.
The deep Kissinger-bass issuing from that mild and amiable countenance seems somehow to incarnate that balance.
He really is a good man.
‘The only man I know’, wrote Karel Kyncl earlier this year, ‘who blushes when confronted with something deplorable.’
Then, by birth and by upbringing, he offers in his own person a connection between the Czechoslovakia now beginning to resume its history after 20 years in the deep freeze and both the pre-war Republic and the experiment in state socialism that followed liberation from the Nazis.
His grand-father was a diplomat, briefly a cabinet minister and ‘a bit of a writer’.
In the 1920s, an uncle founded the Barrandov film studios that were to have their finest hour with the Czech New Wave of the Sixties, and his father was responsible for and owned, among other buildings, the Lucerna block in the heart of the city which has been part of the life of most Pragers, with its remarkable collection of art-deco restaurants, bars, cinemas and concert hall.
Havel's friend and co-resister Ludvik Vaculik describes a birthday party for ‘our own particular Wenceslas’(Vaclav is the Czech version) in one of its restaurants a few years ago, on one of those occasions when they were wrily living ‘as if ’ in freedom; all those present remember some high or low point of their lives happening somewhere in the Lucerna Palace.
He remembers the onset of class guilt and embarrassment during the war when as a small, spoiled, fat model child, he was taken to school by a governess in the Moravian village where they were evacuated.
After February 1947, when he was 12, he and his family became ‘the objects of class war’.
As a scion of the haute bourgeoisie, he wasn't allowed to have higher education.
He wanted to read philosophy but the university refused him; so did the cinema school and the drama faculty (though to the amused admiration of his friends in the theatre, he did eventually attend, as a student, after the successful opening of The Garden Party, and when he had already completed his best play, The Memorandum (which remains probaby his most effective play).
So he experienced society from the bottom up, before talent and determination made room at the top for him: ‘That was a most valuable bit of education for which I shall always be grateful both to my bourgeois ancestry as well as to the regime,’ he was to say later.
‘I didn't have the slightest desire to see the restitution of my father's property,’ he added in that 1968 interview, and ‘I was always in favour of socialism in the sense of nationalisation of major means of production.’
His other great asset has been his sense of the way minds changed in the generations of the late Sixties and after.
Reflecting in 1968 on the difference between him and Communists of the older generation, he said: ‘They seem to approach reality by way of certain abstract categories, which seem to them to have a lot of meaning and to reflect concrete experience…;[whereas]members of my generation tend to use as a starting point reality as it exists at the moment, they form general concepts on the basis of this reality and they disregard categories which seem to have lost their relevance and to function more as incantations than as concepts.’
People younger than him, he noted, ‘not only reject all a priori ideological filters, just as I do, but…refuse to have anything to do with people who use such filters.
Their attraction to concrete reality is very much more radical.’
Havel's recent writings and statements show how he has gone forward into the politics implicit in such a view of society.
Like the new politics all over Europe, they are passionately ecological, inevitably in a region where the dragon's breath of unchecked industrialisation has scorched great tracts of lately rural land, sickening trees and children indiscriminately.
Havel's later prison letters are intense meditations on the alienation from Being revealed in man's destructive, monkey-clever exploitation of the natural world and his fellow men.
With that goes a rejection of the corrupted language and thought of the old politics.
In his country, he wrote a year ago, formally accepting a West German peace prize, ‘socialism…was transformed long ago into just an ordinary truncheon used by certain cynical, parvenu bureaucrats to bludgeon their liberal-minded fellow-citizens from morning till night, labelling them ‘enemies of socialism’ and ‘anti-socialist forces’'.
The efforts — and prison sentences — of the unofficial peace movement had redeemed the similarly contaminated word peace, but ‘in my country, for ages now, socialism has been no more than an incantation that should be avoided if one does not wish to appear suspect.’
Shortly after reading that I was fascinated to come across Hugh Seton-Watson's account, in a book written 44 years ago, of how in Eastern Europe between the wars the word ‘Communist’ had become popular with the poor subjects of largely dictatorial regimes because their rulers used it as a term of abuse against ‘ordinary men and women who have asked for reforms, protested against bureaucratic abuse, or resisted the gendarmerie in the execution of some wanton brutality.’
I'm not sure whether 40 years later, the same mechanism made the word ‘capitalism’ popular among the people; the Leipzig demonstrations suggest that in Saxony, at least, it may have done.
WHAT I do know is that people like Havel have been getting a little impatient with those relishing pieces appearing lately in the American press that say, roughly: ‘Right, you guys over there have had your romantic Ruritanian fun and games with revolution and dancing in the streets.
Now get down to the business of making a country fit for business to operate in, with plenty of unemployment and real inequality.’
Exchanging one kind of social and economic brutalism for another is not what Havel and his kind have in mind, nor do such prescriptions fit the democratic habit of the Czech temperament, formed long before communism's arrival to power.
Most of the Habsburg successor states, as the Czech historian Zbynek Zeman reminded us in his vivid modern history of the region (Pursued By A Bear: Chatto), were invented to serve the interests of the Western allies after the first world war, as a hedge against German expansion eastwards and a firebreak against the spread of revolution west from Russia.
Left to their own devices, with intractable economic and ethnic problems, most of them, though not Czechoslovakia, were military or royal dictatorships by the mid-Thirties.
What a fine piece of historical irony it would be if from the heart of this wounded part of Europe there were to emerge a politics that would begin to show us how to be at home in the world, decently balancing the requirements of social justice and economic sufficiency, of finite nature and what we call human nature.
W. L. Webb t Eating words
Food.
Britain's food was, is, and will continue to be among the best and safest in the world.
John MacGregor, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food I have no doubt that there is indeed a serious public health problem associated with salmonella enteridis phase 4 in eggs in this country.
Sir Donald Acheson, Chief Medical officer Production at Dairy Crest's creamery in Cambourne, Cornwall, has been suspended until the completion of a company investigation into how mercury got into a tub of Sainsbury's butter.
Daily Telegraph The supermarkets adopt bully-boy tactics.
They are aggressively self-interested.
They get away with murder because of their buying power.
Gerry Harding, Chairman of the Organic Growers, West Wales Germs…a damn sight less dangerous than politicians.
Ms T. Gorman, MP Two Archers actors to sue the BBC over party illness.
Daily Telegraph Dog food is subject to stricter controls than human food.
Professor Richard Lacey More choice for your doggies & moggies.
Marks & Spencer press release Eat your own pet ad criticised.
Daily Telegraph We've moved beyond grazing into gulping Al Rosenfeld, publisher of Frozen Food Age A Czech store manager has been jailed for 12 years for stealing-and eating-nearly £60,000 worth of food.
A Prague newspaper said yesterday that he weighed 36 stone.
Reuters Between chimes of Jingle Bells, the Holly and the Ivy and other festive tunes, we Brits nibble our way through the equivalent of nearly half a billion 50g packets of nuts from October until the New Year.
KP press release Micro-organisms in general are pretty clever beasts.
Dr Paul Gibbs, Leatherhead Food Research Association We are giving sensible and balanced advice to consumers based on the best available advice of the Chief Medical Officer.
John MacGregor, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food I am advised that hard cheese processes suppress and kill off pathogens.
It may be more difficult with soft cheeses and we will be examining this very carefully.
John MacGregor, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food There is no proposal to ban unpasteurised soft cheese.
John MacGregor, Minister of Food, Fisheries and Agriculture What John (MacGregor) has said is he's thinking about the possibility of banning cheese (made) from non-pasteurised milk, but it hasn't got beyond that.
Kenneth Clarke, Minister of Health This is a decidedly unfriendly act.
A French spokesman.
The reason the Government seems to be directing its big guns at unpasteurised milk producers has more to do with the big dairy industry's concerns at the erosion of their share of the market.
Humphrey Errington, milk & cheese producer The squabbling between the Department of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture shows that, far from getting their act together, they are in a total shambles.
Professor Richard Lacey (It) would probably find its way into the press and make a stink.
Dr Anne Dawson, senior official in the Department of Health and Social Security on the possible consequences if the Department warned the NHS about the dangers of salmonella We have known that there was salmonella in 60 percent of chickens' guts for many years.
Senior Public Health Officer There has been no cover-up, no conspiracy with the industry, and no complacency…but regular and prompt action based on a wide range of scientific advice.
John MacGregor, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Here is a guy going to prosecute me.
He said ‘I would like to bring my wife for lunch or dinner.’
I told him lunch was £19.50 and it was a good bargain.
Would he do that if my kitchen was filthy?
It was a tranquilliser to my heart.
Albert Roux, chef/proprietor of Le Gavroche restaurant The flies and the pigeons do not belong to me.
They are not on my payroll.
Albert Roux In the Jewish religion…a fly in one's soup is grounds for divorce.
Dr Nicholas Burridge Cooking isn't an art, it's chemistry.
To be a good cook you have to do a lot of things precisely, but it requires no understanding.
Albert Raymond These men are alchemists, but I'm still a humble cook.
Marco-Pierre White, chef/proprietor of Harveys I think the time is fast approaching when the lady must be given no choice.
She must be told to appear before the Committee or be forced to take the consequences.
Paul Marchand MP on Edwina Currie No one has bought my silence; no one ever could.
Mrs Edwina Currie MP Tuna have feelings.
Linda McCartney If people swallowed tomato seeds (of a genetically engineered wrinkle-free tomato) the plants could end up growing in a sewage farm somewhere, and this would be an unauthorised release of a genetically engineered organism.
Simon Best, Business Development Manager of ICI Seeds There is nothing unusual about ministries being responsible for both industry and the consumer.
John MacGregor, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
It is increasingly felt by members of the public that large-scale soil erosion, the destruction of wildlife habitat and the excessive use of chemicals and unnatural substances are unacceptable, and cannot continue unabated without ruining the countryside for future generations and probably causing long term health hazards.
HRH Prince Charles in a message to the sixth National Conference of Organic Food Production What is worrying farmers most is that nature has a nasty habit of having a sting in the tail.
Mr Bob Wright, National Farmers Union Midland and Northwest spokesman commenting on the good weather We don't want to turn our cows into drug addicts.
Barnaby Hannam, farmer Bacon and pork will be the next infected-food scandal.
Sir Richard Body, MP Hirohito, shy god who liked bacon & eggs.
Daily Telegraph If you did not put aluminium in you would have water that was cloudy.
Spokesman for Department of Environment Speaking personally, it has long been my view that these matters of food safety should be in the hands of a Minister of Consumer Affairs.
Mrs Sally Oppenheim-Barnes, Chair of the National Consumer Council We also hope to discover how important gravity is to mushrooms.
We hope to see what happens when you try to grow mushrooms without gravity but with light.
Dr David Moore of Manchester University on the decision to allow the British astronaut to take 24 quails' eggs and 24 mushrooms on the Soviet Juno space mission People are standing in front of the toaster saying ‘Faster, faster’.
Joel Weiner, marketing executive of Kraft General Foods It is precisely because we are not complacent about this issue that the Government have been preparing a major Food Bill since October 1987.
Richard Ryder, Parliamentary Under-Secretary at the Ministry of Food, Fisheries and Agriculture Shopping in a place called a health food shop doesn't mean you can assume everything it sells is safe or healthy.
Which?
Can it really be in the consumer interest that the Government stops this work (food research and development) being carried out, particularly when we face an epidemic of food poisoning and growing public concern abou the quality and wholesomeness of food?
Dr David Clark, Labour Agriculture spokesman I am convinced one reason you used a cucumber was for self-preservation.
If you were caught you could point to the cucumber and deny responsibility.
Mr Justice Jowitt commenting at the trial of Ernest Coveley, accused of carrying out a series of robberies with a cucumber The escargot laying season is between June and September.
Escargots lay an average of one hundred eggs a year, giving a total weight of about 3.5 grammes.
By comparison the sturgeon produces between 8,000 and 20,000 grammes, depending on the species, at one time: in other words, 4,000 times more!
But as everyone knows, Lady Nature only provides the exceptional with parsimony.
An advertisement for Brut d'Escargot snails' eggs I will take a tough line on food safety in terms of banning things that are dangerous.
John Selwyn Gummer, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food There is no point in producing a list of microwave ovens without giving the detailed instructions so that those using them can improve their performance.
John Selwyn Gummer, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food When Mr Gummer took over the Ministry of Agriculture, he promised he would put the consumer first.
His chance to do this has come with the microwave report, but he has decided to put the interests of microwave manufacturers first.
John Beishon, director of the Consumers' Association You could argue that food difficulties proceed and contribute to the development of sexual problems…
The final irony and, to me, the bitter one, is that women, the sex that eats in an irregular, disordered and joyless fashion, have a greater capacity to enjoy food than men.
Again, an analogy with women's potential for more intense and prolonged sexual pleasures suggests itself.
For both capacities-though feared by men-are largely unrealised.
Dr Germaine Greer I'm no puritan.
John Selwyn Gummer, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food The results suggest that the addition of a moderate amount of MSG to new foods can facilitate the acquisition of a preference for the foods and, over time, stimulate intake of those foods.
Monosodium and the acquisition of food preference in a European context, by France Bellisle, Alain Tournier and Jeanine Louis-Sylvestre Food today is more of a maintenance function than a pleasurable experience.
Richard Nelson, Director of Market Research Services at Campbell Soups All consumers want is to be told what is happening to their food, how safe it is and what is its quality…
After all, we're not asking much.
Just to be told what's going on, what's in the packet, what the future holds for us in the food game.
Derek Cooper, presenter of The Food Programme Drink.
Beaujolais should not be a civilized society lady; it is the one-night-stand of wines.
Kermit Lynch, Adventures on the Wine Route How can a rare bottle of wine fetch the price of the great work of art?
Can it, however perfect, smell more beautiful than a rose?
No must surely be the honest answer.
But what if, deep in the flushing velvet of its petals, the rose contained the power to banish care?
Hugh Johnson, The Story of Wine When Jesus Christ turned water into wine, he didn't hand out a warning label.
Brother Timothy of Christian Brothers on new American legislation requiring wine to carry health warnings The liquids appear in wine bottles.
They have labels like wine bottles.
And they look like wine.
The one thing they don't do is taste like wine.
And if something doesn't taste like wine, I for one don't want to waste my time trying to pretend it does.
Oz Clarke on low alcohol wines The effect that the Group Areas Act, the Population Registration Act and the Separate Amenities Act have on black vineyard workers is deplorable and, in my opinion, morally indefensible.
Tim Hamilton-Russell, South African wine producer and founder signatory of The Winelands Commitment I'm sick of people asking if organic wine is made from rhubarb.
Charlotte Mitchell, author of The Organic Wine Guide Marques de Alella Seco: made with the varieties of Macabeo, Pansa Blanca and Chenin Blanc.
Of fruty (sic) flavour, a fresh wine-sort, clear and shining.
The Chenin Blanc conferes (sic) this wine a touch of sofistication (sic), combining a sour taste and fruty (sic again) flavour.
Manglish Award for the handout of 1989.
Any pub is a good pub if you have enough to drink.
A Dublin drinker As two Gulf newspapers were banned for 24 hours for advertising a Beaujolais wine festival, the United Arab Emirates used bulldozers to crush 9,000 bottles of confiscated whisky and 1,500 cans of beer into the desert sands.
Reuters Our request was an act of humility.
We must lay off the booze even during Holy Communion.
A priest in Friuli, commenting on the Vatican's decision to allow non-alcoholic wine at Mass to help priests with an alcohol problem 