

ADKIN ESTABLISHED 1793 Moving in Oxfordshire
ADKIN SELLING
HOW ADKIN WILL SELL YOUR PROPERTY IN 3 EASY STAGES
STAGE 1.
THE FREE VALUATION
Our advice is based on nearly 200 years' experience in the Oxfordshire property market.
Through our experience and knowledge derived from sales in the area we are able to ensure that you have the greatest chance of selling at the highest figure.
The valuation is important: if you put too high a price on the property the market will reject it and you will not sell.
Price it too low and you will lose money.
We are constantly watching the property market and are alert to every factor which affects it, so you can be confident of getting the soundest marketing advice available.
So if you want results that count simply call your local Adkin office  and we'll make an appointment to suit you.
STAGE 2.
THE INSTRUCTION
Once you are happy that a marketing price has been reached then you simply instruct us to sell.
At this stage no money is required  —everything is free.
We work on a ‘no sale no fee’ basis.
(Expenses are sometimes charged for auctions etc. but these will always be agreed in writing beforehand.)
Once the instruction is given, you will be impressed by the speed and enthusiasm shown by our sales staff who are so vital to the success of Adkin.
We are very prominent estate agents in Oxfordshire and the efficiency of our network of offices, our massive mailing registers, our eye catching ‘For Sale’ boards and our unrivalled advertising exposure, all combine to get you fast results.
STAGE 3.
THE SALE
You are kept constantly informed of progress and as soon as a purchaser has been introduced we will negotiate to obtain the best price.
Their purchasing position will be clarified and the solicitors notified.
Naturally the final decision is yours but we will keep a close check on the progress of the sale.
Vital at this stage are the mortgage arrangements and our Mortgage Department is there to advise you or your purchaser on the most effective sources of finance.
Our expertise will help guide the sale through smoothly.
We are only too aware of the frustrations and annoyance of a sale which collapses and we will do everything in our power to ensure that your sale is completed to your total satisfaction and with a minimum of fuss.
SELLING THROUGH ADKIN GIVES YOU DISTINCT ADVANTAGES
We have nearly 200 years experience of selling in the area.
We have over 15 offices in Oxfordshire, all prominently located.
Most offices are open seven days a week — until 6 p.m. weekdays — to see more buyers.
We advertise extensively, so your property is seen by more people.
Our ‘For Sale’ boards could not be more catching and are promoting your property 24 hours a day.
ADKIN SURVEYS
What do Adkin Chartered Surveyors offer the House Buyer?
It is extraordinary that many more people have an inspection when buying a second-hand car than they do when purchasing a house.
A home is the single largest capital investment  to make in our entire life, and yet only some ten to fifteen percent of purchasers will commission a detailed report.
Of course, if you are financing the purchase through a Bank or Building Society, a valuation report will be commissioned and you receive a courtesy copy in most instances.
The purchaser who relies solely on this mortgage report takes on the risk of unexpected building defects.
A mortgage valuation may be considered sufficient for a lending institution able to spread the risk across many loans, and which also has the benefit of the security of each borrower's income as well as the property.
However, that property could have defects which could only be identified and reported by a more detailed survey.
The Chartered Surveyor is specially trained to identify building defects and to evaluate their significance and how therefore the property's value is affected.
You may only have seen the property once, and for all sorts of  emotive reasons, may have fallen in love with the place.
You will find your Surveyor will not have such emotive issues on his mind when he inspects!
Yes — he will obviously see and know of the good points, but it is his job to find the faults and problems.
If few or no defects are found, then at least you have the peace of mind in knowing your new home has been expertly checked.
Beyond the mortgage report, there are two options:
(a)
A Structural Survey.
(b)
An RICS House or Flat Buyers Report and Valuation.
THE STRUCTURAL SURVEY
A full inspection is conducted, detailing all visible AND potential faults.
The services are not tested but a visual inspection is made and advice is offered if further specialists' tests are needed.
Following the on-site inspection, the findings are analysed and the Surveyor prepares his written report, giving the purchaser a clear picture of the property's condition and information  of the important defects which will need immediate attention and those which may be required in the medium to long term.
For the purchaser moving into a new area, invaluable comments can be made on the property's location and any unfavourable matters which may adversely affect the value now or in the future.
THE RICS HOUSE OR FLAT BUYERS REPORTS AND VALUATION
A few years ago, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors introduced and published this report particularly to assist those buyers who felt they could not afford the fees of a full Structural Survey.
The inspection is similar to that carried out for the Structural Survey, however because the report is in a standard format, the information conveyed is more concise and limited in order to identify the more important defects, bearing in mind the property's type and age.
The report is more suited to houses of less than 200ft 2 , and built after 1900.
Whatever you do, before you are committed to purchase, safeguard yourself by talking to the professionals.
Don't leave your decision to the last moment — you should not expect your surveyor to hurry a report which can potentially save you thousands of pounds — talk to him as soon as you have chosen your purchase.
Can you afford the risk?— NO.
ADKIN BUYING YOUR NEW HOME
IF YOU ARE BUYING…
BUY THROUGH ADKIN
Our friendly efficient staff will take care to understand your every need.
When you register with Adkin you will be assured that…
You will have access to what is probably the largest choice of homes available.
You will be telephoned, if you are agreeable, with details of properties just received onto the market.
Most offices are open 7 days a week — until 6 p.m. on weekdays for your convenience with caring conscientious staff.
We offer free and expert guidance on all the finance aspects of home purchase.
We have the independence to approach a variety of mortgage companies, and we have ‘lowest rate’ mortgage funds available.
We will give you written quotations.
We carry out consistent weekly mailings, and we have modern technology to assist in the matching process.
We have the experience and knowledge to provide an  unrivalled service.
WHY NOT CALL IN OR TELEPHONE NOW.
STEP BY STEP GUIDE TO BUYING YOUR NEW HOME
Q. It's quite an involved business, buying a property, isn't it?
YES, but with the right professional help to smooth your path it need not present you with any problems.
At Adkin we pride ourselves on giving you that help every step of the way.
Q. Where do I start?
A. Call into any Adkin office.
Our sales staff are friendly, experienced people who are there to give you helpful advice.
They will listen to your ideas, find out how much you can comfortably afford to spend and point you in the right direction of the right properties, in the right location, at the right prices.
Q. What about a mortgage?
How much will it cost?
A. Our own independent Mortgage Consultants are on hand to give you free and impartial advice.
Building Societies, Banks and other lenders all vary in what they charge and why.
Our people are there to make an arrangement which suits you.
They will be able to tell you whether you will be able to get a mortgage and exactly how much your repayments are going to be.
Q. That sounds good.
But won't I need a Solicitor?
A. YES.
There are complex legal matters involved which need the experienced guiding hand of a good solicitor who will do a thorough job and we are able to recommend excellent local ones experienced in the area.
Q. Will I need a survey?
A. We recommend it, and our surveyors are on hand to help.
If we are selling the property we are able to recommend other surveyors to you.
Fees vary according to the price of your property and the type of survey involved — we'll give you plenty of advice.
See feature on page 10
Q. Will anything else cost me money?
A. Stamp duty is payable (currently at 1%) on any property purchased at over £30,000.
Our sales negotiators will tell you exactly what costs are involved.
Q. Fine.
Now I want to look at some properties.
This is the part I'm looking forward to!
A. We like this part too.
You will get clear, concise particulars of properties in your range — choose the ones which interest you most and we'll make arrangements for you to see them.
Q. What do I have to do when I find a house I like?
A. Just let Adkin know as soon as possible.
If you like the house the chances are that other people will like it too, so speed is of the essence.
Our negotiator will take the necessary details from you, forward your intention to purchase to the vendor and tie up all the details.
Q. Surely there are all sorts of problems that can happen?
A. There are, but we've been in this business for nearly 200 years and pride ourselves  in the fact that we have probably dealt with every known problem that has ever arisen.
But remember, if you have any query, no matter how trivial, please ask us — we're here to help you.
HAPPY HOUSE HUNTING
CONVEYANCING
With the introduction of the new conveyancing scheme the legal process of acquiring a home should be made  a lot easier.
It was the solicitor's function to investigate the draft contract and to examine very closely the issues which may be raised by it which were often incomprehensible to the layman.
Now homemoving legalities have hopefully been completely revolutionised by the new scheme.
On 21st March 1990 a new conveyancing scheme was launched, which aims to make buying and selling homes straightforward and comprehensible.
It is called TransAction .
TransAction clients will be provided with an organisational file and a guide to home-moving to inform them of what exactly is being done on their behalf at every stage.
All TransAction documentation has been approved by Clarity (The lawyers' campaign for the use of plain English) and words like ‘vendor’ and ‘purchaser’are replaced by ‘seller’and ‘buyer’.
TransAction introduces important procedural changes for the home-moving consumer.
Firstly, the local authority search and all standard information about the property will now be obtained by the seller's solicitor at the beginning of the process, so that when it comes to buying a property all the initial legal information will be available and in place.
TransAction should, therefore, reduce delays and make it easier for the consumer to understand the process in partnership with their solicitors.
Secondly,TransAction introduces a clearer approach to fixtures and fittings in order that both parties know exactly what is to be bought and sold.
TransAction has been enthusiastically received by the Consumers' Association, the Lord Chancellors and the Land Registry.
Their comments were as follows:
The Consumers' Association gives three cheers for the new house buying and selling system —TransAction .
This will bring in reforms of the kind which the Consumers' Association have been campaigning for over many a long year.
We think it is going to achieve two key improvements in the house transfer process: It will speed things up and will improve the standards of service to the customer.
The Lord Chancellor said that the new conveyancing scheme, ‘seems to me to show what the Law Society can do by way of setting appropriate standards of service to the public.
I hope that solicitors will be quick to adopt the new system in the interests of their existing and potential clients’.
Mr. E.J. Pryer, The Chief Land  Register at the Land Registry commented: ‘TransAction ’ together with the steady improvements being effected by the Registry, should produce a speedier conveyancing service for the public.’
DAMP PROOFING YOUR HOME
THE WHY & HOW OF DAMP PROOFING YOUR HOME
If you are buying a house more than thirty years old, you would be well advised to instruct a specialist company to inspect the property for timber defects and/or rising damp.
Nowadays, there are many such service companies to choose from but it is essential that you s elect a company that is a member of the British Wood Preserving Association (B.W.P.A.) and British Chemical Dampcourse Association (B.C.D.A.).
These bodies insist that their members work to the highest standards set out in the relevant Codes of Practice and strongly recommend that their surveyors are qualified by becoming a Certified Timber Infestation Surveyor (CTIS) and Certificated Remedial Damp-proofing Surveyor (CRDS).
PASS & Co. carry out without cost or obligation a detailed survey for TIMBER INFESTATION and RISING DAMP; a comprehensive report coupled together with estimated cost of eradication will be sent, in most cases, within 24 hours of notification.
On completion of timber treatment or chemical damp coursing the contractor will normally issue a long-term guarantee, but the number of unqualified contractors offering these guarantees for timber treatment and dampcoursing has increased rapidly and this section of the building industry is high on the list of Company failures.
PASS & CO. have over thirty years experience in prevention and preservation work in houses and are a member of the Professional Associations that control and regulate this work.
Our professional surveyors reports are accepted by Building Societies and Banks as is our remedial work, and this work is covered by a 30 year PASS & CO.
Guarantee.
This guarantee is further supported by a 30 year Guarantee from Remtox Chemicals Ltd.
ADKIN PROPERTY AUCTIONS
Adkin have sold properties by auction since the firm was established in 1793 and today our Property Auction Department is able to offer the specialist skills and advice required to value, market and dispose of assets by auction.
We presently organise regular collective auctions comprising of a wide variety of properties located throughout Oxfordshire and recent sales have included:
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES FOR REDEVELOPMENT
BUILDING PLOT
DEVELOPMENT LAND
BARNS FOR CONVERSION
FARMS AND FARM LAND
COUNTRY HOUSES
PROPERTIES FOR CONVERSION TO FLATS
PROPERTIES SOLD ON BEHALF OF TRUSTEES & EXECUTORS
Our services include the preparation of detailed particulars, plans and photographs, site surveys, liaison with our clients solicitors, comprehensive advertising, viewings and provision of auction room facilities.
Sales of individual properties can always be arranged if required.
For further information please contact the head of our Property Auction Department Mr. J.A.
Sayers ARICS, FAAV on (0235) 26080.
ADKIN PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
Sometime in the future you may wish to let your home whilst you are away for six months or more.
We appreciate your concern in allowing ‘strangers’ to live in your home but it is better to have your home cared for rather than leaving it empty.
We are able to offer you a comprehensive letting and management service which was created to suit all needs.
ADKIN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
Adkin Residential Property Management is a specialist department dealing with the Letting and Management of a large number of properties throughout Oxfordshire.
It is a comprehensive professional service based at our computer-linked offices in Oxford, Abingdon and Harwell.
WHY PROFESSIONAL MANAGEMENT?
Your home is probably your most valuable possession and, as such, should be entrusted to the care and supervision of a reputable Company who will, at all times, be responsible directly to you — the owner.
We are happy to visit you to discuss individual requirements and advise on all aspects of letting, including:
The rental value of the property
Preparing the property for letting
The correct form of Tenancy Agreement to protect your interests
Details of our comprehensive and caring Management services
Like all other departments we have been established a very long time and therefore have the experience and the knowledge in dealing with lettings.
You will no doubt appreciate that letting property today is very complex and governed by so much legislation that it is essential you enjoy a competent Managing Agent.
As part of our service we attend to all the legalities therefore ensuring the return of your property to you.
Our management services have one common factor and that is CARE .
We take care in our selection of tenants and we take care of your home in every respect.
CARE in the selection of tenants
CARE in the preparation of the Inventory
CARE in the drawing up the Agreements and Rent Act Notices
CARE in all aspects of our administration and management.
THE FIRST STEP
Whether you are moving to another part of the country or going abroad let us know as soon as possible so that we can publicise details of your property to maximum effect.
Once ADKIN has been instructed our full Management Services will apply and we would
Add details of your property to our property and mailing lists.
We also advertise in the leading Oxon newspapers and the lists can be obtained at all ADKIN offices
Introduce and carefully screen suitable tenants
Collect rents, deal with arrears, maintain and render quarterly or monthly accounts
Deal with your routine property expenses such as Rates, Insurance Premiums etc.
Arrange repairs if and when necessary
Carry out regular inspections
Adkin Residential Property Management is a specialist department dealing with the Letting and Management of a large number of properties throughout Oxfordshire.
It is a comprehensive professional service based at our computer-linked offices in Oxford, Abingdon and Harwell.
WHAT WILL IT COST?
Professional fees for our Management Services are moderate — taking into account the peace of mind and sense of security engendered.
We are pleased to offer a choice of four Services to match the varying personal requirements of Landlords.
Letting Service — aimed at Landlords who wish to manage the properties themselves Equivalent to 4 weeks' rent
One Star Management 12.5% commission of the gross rent charged
Two Star Management 15% commission of the gross rent charged
Three Star Management 17.5% commission of the gross rent charged
Our staff are fully experienced in all aspects of letting and they will be more than pleased to answer any queries which you may have.
In the event of you wishing to let your property please do not hesitate to contact us by telephone for further details of our services, at any of the undermentioned offices:
We never stop caring!
Kitchens in their true colours
Formed in September 1987 by Harvey Wilson, Martin Glick and Alan Sheldon — three of the most knowledgeable people in the kitchen manufacturing industry with 50 years experience between them — Wilson & Glick Kitchens promise to be one of the most striking success stories of the 1990's.
Higher quality at lower prices’ is the reassuring promise made in their advertisements and a ten year guarantee — as opposed to the normal one year  guarantee — is what Wilson & Glick are committed to.
As Harvey Wilson, says, ‘Nobody puts their name to a business they're not proud of and, by the same token, it gives the customer confidence to know that somebody is accountable at the end of the day…that they are dealing with a company that is owned and run by the people whose names appear on the top of letterhead.’
By identifying these two fundamental factors and offering a realistic proposition (higher quality at lower prices), rather than a ‘free’ this or a ‘free’that, Wilson & Glick have already gained the confidence of hundreds of satisfied customers for whom value for money and quality at an affordable price are the main criteria.
There are thirteen ranges, each manufactured to the highest standard, available.
Deliberately setting out to offer higher quality at lower prices, Wilson & Glick kitchens include many features normally found only in the most expensive European kitchens.
Solid beech lined drawers that run on easy glide telescopic roller slides, thick (18mm) easy-to-maintain side panels and base shelves, 40mm thick work surfaces, spring loaded hinges which close at a touch, and cabinets that stand on their own (individually adjustable) four feet to ensure absolute stability on even the most uneven floors, are just some of the standard features that make Wilson & Glick Kitchens one of the most successful companies in the UK since its formation in 1987.
PIONEERS OF A NEW PROCESS
Hand dragged furniture had been around since the 18th century.
It demands considerable skills to achieve the delicate balance required between the painted finish and the natural grain of the timber.
And as a consequence, it has always been prohibitively expensive.
But this situation is about to change, thanks to a pioneering new process, now made available to you by Wilson & Glick.
The wood used goes through eight different stages, before it's hand-finished and sealed.
 The result has all the colourful character of other hand dragged kitchens, but with a very real and visible bonus.
Instead of being largely obscured, as it is in the conventional process, the beautiful grain of the timber is highlighted to stunning effect.
Each one  is custom built and fitted by our own appointed craftsmen.
Beneath their beautiful, colourful finish, the high standards applied in selecting the timber are immediately apparent.
And as in all their kitchens, they're made from extra thick, heavy-weight materials.
Features like these are characteristic of their commitment to higher quality, at lower prices.
WILSON & GLICK AND BRITISH GAS
Even Better ‘The Second Time Around’
Following the tremendous success of Wilson & Glick kitchens on the British Gas stand at the 1989 Ideal Home Exhibition, Wilson & Glick once again played a major role on the British Gash stand at this year's exhibition.
With two brand new kitchens on view; ‘Westminster’, which is available in three colourways — nearly-black anthracite, pearlised white and rich cream with a metallic lustre — as well as‘Chippenham’, providing limed oak luxury, Wilson & Glick now have 13 kitchens in their range, 7 of which were on show to the public.
By adhering to their policy of providing ‘higher quality at lower prices’, coupled with a total design and installation service with delivery within a week to ten days, Wilson & Glick have maintained a continuous growth in sales since the company was formed in 1987, despite the current down turn in the market generally.
Many features distinguish Wilson & Glick kitchens from others in a similar price bracket, making them exceptionally good value for money, as could be seen at the Ideal Home Exhibition which was even more successful ‘the second time around’.
WILSON & GLICK FACTS
SIDE PANELS and base shelves are constructed from 18mm (¾″) thick high density particle board.
WORK SURFACES are 40mm thick.
CABINETS are all available in either white or woodgrain finish to co-ordinate with the front door finish.
EDGES, including rear and underneath, are protected with matching melamine, ensuring protection against moisture  absorption .
BACK PANELS are in matching melamine faced hardboard.
PLINTHS, manufactured in melamine faced particle board, are edged all round, and supplied in continuous lengths of up to 3000mm.
DRAWERS are manufactured from solid beech hardwood and are mounted on easy glide telescopic roller slides
BASE CABINETS AND TALL UNITS have adjustable legs, which ensure absolute stability on even the most uneven of floors
SPRING LOADED HINGES made from solid metal open the doors to any angle (up to 90 degrees) and will close automatically at a touch
WALL UNITS have 2 fully adjustable internal shelves, extra deep carcases of 320mm deep and a fully adjustable wall hanging bracket which ensures perfect alignment of cupboard and ease of installation.
DRAWER packs have 3 drawers plus 1 extra deep pan drawer.
A FULL 10 YEAR GUARANTEE is automatically provided.
SERVICES: planning (including home visits) and installation
DELIVERY: 1 week–10 days
PURPOSE GROWN TIMBERS from North America, Scandinavia and Italy are used for the wooden kitchen ranges
THE WOODLAND TRUST is actively supported by Wilson & Glick
The latest range from Wilson & Glick with the looks and quality of its European counterpart.
Called ‘Westminster’, it is available in three finishes including anthracite — a very-nearly black silky grey, as shown, with sleek easy-to-hold silver handles.
Chrome accessories include fashionable bar rails, 2-tier vegetable baskets on roller runners, a bottle rack, a cup rack and a 3-tier spice rack.
And ‘kiddie’ catches’which lock base unit doors as if by magic (but with a magnet) can also be fitted.
Wilson and Glick have now added this most luxurious of timbers to their range of kitchens.
And the glamorous good looks of the ‘Chippenham’ kitchen ensure that it will be equally at home in the town as in the country.
One of two new ranges to be introduced this summer, both ‘Chippenham’ and ‘Melrose’(dark and handsome in solid oak) carry the Wilson & Glick ten year guarantee.
Giving added sophistication to a range of kitchens where the emphasis is on quality, the turned wood spindles, galleried shelves, a dresser with bevelled glass doors, and the intricate touch of fretwork that can be seen in the photograph, are all features that make these two ranges very special indeed.
The glamour of limed oak — creating an atmosphere that seems to belong entirely in the country.
The very best in kitchen technology — details showing the Westminster range fashioned with finest ash-grained laminated.
ADKIN AGRICULTURAL
Adkin have been involved in handling all aspects of agricultural property and chattels since the firm was established in 1793.
As the  agricultural industry has changed so have we.
With our specialist team based at Abingdon we offer a full range of services including:
SALES & VALUATION OF LAND, FARM & OTHER RURAL PROPERTY.
VALUATIONS FOR PROBATE & TAXATION PURPOSES.
ADVICE, PLANS AND APPRAISALS FOR LEISURE SCHEMES.
PLANNING FOR BUILDING CONVERSION & ALTERNATIVE USES.
SCHEMES FOR POLLUTION CONTROL AND FARM IMPROVEMENTS.
COMPENSATION CLAIMS FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENTS & PIPELINE SCHEMES.
SALES AND APPORTIONMENT OF MILK QUOTA.
RENT REVIEW NEGOTIATIONS.
SALES OF HAY, STRAW & GRASS KEEP.
LAND, BUILDING & SITE SURVEYS.
INSOLVENCY SALES.
ADKIN FINANCIAL SERVICES
Adkin Financial Services offers comprehensive financial advice and support to clients of Adkin based on the extensive experience and know-how of its professional staff.
Each of our advisors is registered with Fimbra, the Financial Intermediaries Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association and as such has to meet high standards of knowledge, experience and professional competence.
In short, our status as Independent Financial Advisors means we must always give you the best possible advice regarding your options in the financial marketplace.
If you are looking for a mortgage we can recommend the cheapest, the largest or the most flexible without you needing to take up valuable time researching the market yourself.
If you are looking for a pension or other financial advice we can similarly give you information and guidance to make the right decision.
The whole service is designed to save you both time and money in arriving at the correct long term decision.
What do we charge for this service?— generally nothing, as our costs are normally covered by commissions payable on business that we introduce but we provide you with a full statement of our Terms of Business before any transaction takes place.
HOME SECURITY
BY THAMES VALLEY POLICE
Don't wait until you are burgled before you do something to make your home more secure.
You've  bought your new home, and no doubt that has meant new carpets or new curtains or maybe a new fitted kitchen because you want your home to be comfortable.
So imagine how you would feel if someone breaks into your new home and destroys or steals the very things you are proud of, the things you have worked hard to buy.
The chances are you've not yet considered the security of your home, not a lot of people do — it's at the bottom of a long list of priorities.
Basic security need not cost a fortune but will be effective against opportunist burglars.
DOOR LOCKS
A cheap lock is  child's play for a thief.
Invest in a good deadlock (up to British Standard — look for the Kitemark!) for your front door.
Good locks aren't cheap…unless you compare them with the sort of loss and distress even a minor burglary can cause.
Now the front door is secure — don't let them in at the back!
Put strong bolts at the top and bottom of all outside doors, the Mortice Security bolt is one of the best type available and can not be opened from the outside of the door.
Don't forget patio doors either.
The fitting of additional security locks top and bottom is essential for all round protection.
Finally when moving into a new house it pays to replace door locks — you don't know who has previously had a key!!
WINDOWS
Fasten your windows when you leave the house?
Of course you do.
But simple latches are no problems to a thief — if you lock yourself out you will soon see why.
Window locks are an essential deterrent to the opportunist, while they will be prepared to break a small area of glass and reach in to open the catch, they will think twice about smashing a whole pane — as  it's very noisy and dangerous.
There's a lock for every kind of window, not forgetting upstairs, bathroom windows for instance, are often near drain pipes.
BEWARE OF STRANGE CALLERS
Everyone should have a chain fixed to the front door.
You should fasten it before opening the door to check the identity of callers.
Most officials  carry  an ID card, so ask to see it, genuine callers will understand.
A door viewer is useful as well, you can see who's outside without opening the door.
If you see a stranger acting suspiciously outside your home or your neighbours (especially if they are  away on holiday) call the police.
They won't mind if  it's a false alarm, and you could prevent a burglary.
DON'T HELP THE THIEF
Keep garages and sheds locked.
A thief would find a ladder and tools very useful to break into your house.
If you can't keep your ladder in a shed or garage, padlock it to something secure and never leave a key ‘hidden’ outside.
The thief knows where to find it.
If you want free advice on how to make your home secure, contact the Crime Prevention Officer at your local Police Station.
CHECK LIST
1.
Are you careful not to leave spare cash in the house?
(It's safest in the bank, post office or building society.)
2.
Could you describe your property if it was stolen?
(Keep note of serial numbers on TVs etc.
Photograph valuable jewellery or antiques.)
3.
Have you marked all your property with your postcode and house number?
(Use a security marker pen containing invisible ink and detectable only under ultra-violet light.
Available from most good stationers.)
4.
When you go out in the evening do you always draw the curtains and leave a light on?
(In a room, not the hall.)
5.
Do you remember to cancel all deliveries when you go on holiday?
(A build-up of milk or papers is a real give-away.)
6.
Does a neighbour keep an  eye on your house while you are away?
(Try to leave an address and telephone number.)
7.
Are you a good neighbour?
Would you ring the police if you saw something suspicious?
(The police prefer false alarms to thefts.)
ADKIN NEW HOMES
Adkin New Homes Department has been established for twenty years, servicing a wide selection of large and small developments throughout Oxfordshire on behalf of our builder clients.
The Head Office is based at Abingdon with a further three branches operating from Didcot, Wallingford and Witney.
Adkin New Homes is able to offer a comprehensive service to Developers in conjunction with its allied Land, Planning and Financial Services departments.
In the current market, availability of funds presents no problem for house purchase; many fixed rate mortgages are on offer from a wide range of lending institutions enabling prospective purchasers to stabilise their out-goings for the next one to two years.
Large developments by Beazer, Wimpey, Berkeley, Crest, Durkan, Prowting, Trencherwood, Salthorp and Penta have been successfully sold or are currently being marketed by Adkin New Homes branches spread over Oxfordshire.
There are also many smaller select developments currently under construction by a wide range of local builder clients.
The recently completed and award winning St Mary's Field development in Wallingford by Salthorp attracted a great amount of attention during its construction.
An imaginative mix of 1, 2 and 4 bedroomed units incorporating great flair in their design proved to be a winning formula for everyone involved.
This year saw the completion of 45 quality 2 and 3 bedroomed homes in picturesque Bampton on the fringe of the Cotswolds by Stanley Hugh Leach.
A steady demand was maintained during the building programme with prospective purchasers queuing on occasions to avoid disappointment.
Prestige developments, particularly Abingdon Marina, which is now well advanced into its 5th phase offers a comprehensive choice of quality waterside homes set in idyllic tranquil surroundings.
Ranging from 2 bedroomed apartments at around £130,000 to £145,000 to varying styles of 3, 4 and 5 bedroomed detached houses most residents will have direct water frontage or moorings in the Marina.
Six spacious executive homes by Berkeley at Brightwell near Wallingford have also been well received by early visitors to the site.
Similarly Crest Homes Colegrove Down development of 21 luxury 4 and 5 bedroomed residences on Cumnor Hill Oxford has recently commenced and is also impressing the public with its exceptional elevated location and high standard of finish.
We are pleased to be the appointed agents for several interesting sites countywide currently on offer by Trencherwood.
Ranging from 1 bedroomed starter units through to 4 bedroomed family homes there is always a wide choice available to suit most purchasers.
The sales of several prestigious sheltered housing and retirement schemes have recently featured prominently through Adkin New Homes.
The highly acclaimed Herringcote development at  Dorchester-on-Thames by Beechcroft, together with a similar select retirement scheme which is now under construction at Woodstock by the same company.
The picturesque Sweetbriar development by Manordock comprising 27 cottages and flats with resident Manager in the sought after village of Marcham is also well advanced.
We have recently completed the sale of 54 cottages, bungalows and flats in central Didcot, built by Secure Retirement, the development being the first of its kind in the Town.
Several new interesting development projects are scheduled for the forthcoming year notably sixty-nine 1, 2 and 3 bedroomed houses and flats by Salthorp at Milton Heights near Abingdon, Forty-four 1–4 bedroomed units by Ideal Homes at Crowmarsh, Gifford and several further phases of larger sites currently under construction.
Eight 1 bedroomed flats close to the town centre at Wallingford by J Smallbone and Sons together with many other individual and small prestige developments for local client developers throughout the County of Oxfordshire are also planned for the near future.
About Oxfordshire
WOODSTOCK, WITNEY, KIDLINGTON & BICESTER
Lying just North and East of the city of Oxford is the fertile agricultural country of the Cherwell and Windrush river valleys.
This area is rich in historic houses, such as the magnificent Blenheim Palace, and honey-coloured stone cottages clustered in scenic Cotswold villages.
Situated between the Oxford canal, a 90 mile waterway (built in the 1780's) that links the Midlands to Oxford, and the River Cherwell lies the town of Kidlington.
Only 5 miles north of Oxford, Kidlington belies its modern appearance for it once was an ancient settlement, and in some quiet corners, it still retains vestiges of a village past.
Ancient landmarks, that remind the inhabitants of its past are the church, which is part thirteenth century and which is primarily noted for its soaring spire.
Also, both the vicarage and Rectory farm can trace their origins back to the 1500's.
Although there is some commercial and industrial development, modern Kidlington is now primarily more a residential area and serves Oxford as a dormitory with its own shopping and leisure centres.
Bisecting Oxford and Bicester is the M40, due to be completed in Spring 1991, and though only about thirteen miles away Bicester has obviously evolved into its own entity.
From sixth century beginnings Bicester gradually grew into a focus for an area separate from Oxford, and during the Middle Ages it was granted various licenses for markets and fairs.
By the 1700s, there were no less than seven annual fairs which mainly reflected the specialized industries that had developed.
There are a number of surviving features from that Old Bicester, mostly found near the Market Place, including half-timbered sixteenth and seventeenth century houses, two coaching inns — The Kings Arms and the Swan — and, above all, St. Edburg's church with its proud pinnacled tower.
Although dating from the 1400s, it incorporates elements from earlier times; mainly a Saxon arch.
Bicester is also a well known hunting centre with a hunt dating back to the late 1700s.
The Army established its ordnance depot in Bicester in 1941, and as a result the town is the second largest population centre in the Cherwell district, yet, despite that expansion the town essentially remains a market town serving its rich agricultural hinterland.
Sited ten miles west of Oxford is the small market town of Witney.
Its heritage goes back to when ‘The Witan’, or the council of the Saxon kings, established the significance of Witney when they chose the then village as a meeting place in the  10th. and  11th. centuries.
Later, in the Middle Ages, the main London to Gloucester road passed through Witney, which was a further contribution to its economic prosperity.
The town has been producing wool, cloth, and blankets since the  13th. century and much of its prosperity today is still founded on those industries.
The town centre, west of the Windrush river, was first laid out by the Bishop of Winchester in the early  13th. century, and is considered to be a fine example of medieval town planning.
The Market Square, which lies at the junction of the two main streets, contains the Butter Cross, a medieval meeting place which has a steeply gabled roof surmounted by a clock turret from 1683.
Opposite from the Butter Cross, the  18th. century Town Hall is built above a piazza.
Market Square widens into Church Green, which is dominated by the tower and spire of the  13th. century Church of St. Mary.
Pollarded lime trees and Georgian houses surround the green.
In the High Street is the  18th. century Blanket hall, which was built by the Witney Blanket Weavers Company for weighing and measuring the locally made blankets.
On the road to Woodstock and Bicester lies Woodgreen, an  18th. century residential suburb.
This area contains some of the best designed and well-kept Georgian houses in the town, as well as a  19th. century blanket warehouse which has been converted into flats, all grouped round a small green.
Eight miles North-west from Oxford on the southern edge of the  Cotswolds is Woodstock.
It is a charming and prosperous town renowned for its unspoilt, 18th. century buildings.
The town was believed to have been founded in 1163 though most of the surviving old buildings date from the  16th. and  17th. centuries.
Its present appearance today owes a great deal to the Duke of Marlborough who in 1704 remodelled the town.
The main streets offer dignified Georgian facades whilst the narrow lanes behind abound with charming old cottages.
These cottages were once the abodes of the workers in the famous glove-making industry on which the town first prospered, yet it is probably tourism that is the town's major attraction now.
In Woodstock town centre is situated the famous Oxfordshire County Museum, which vividly displays the Oxfordshire landscape and how the lives of its inhabitants have changed over the centuries.
It is an intriguing picture of how local industries have developed, and how that has affected the people who worked within it.
A similar type of museum is Cogges Manor Farm Museum near Witney which provides a working window on the landscape, buildings and people of Oxfordshire.
Cogges was recorded as a flourishing hamlet in the Domesday Book.
The Manor House itself dates from the  13th. century but it has now been restored to portray how this ancient building was the centre of a thriving farm at the turn of the century.
The area abounds in historical reminders, perhaps none more  important  than Islip, where the rivers Ray and Cherwell meet.
It is a site of a Roman villa and a Saxon palace; it is the birthplace of Edward the Confessor, and was the site of a Royalist garrison during the Civil War.
There have been two battles at Islip during the English Civil War, in 1644 and 1645, which both resulted in Royalist defeats.
Ot Moor just a couple of miles east of Islip is a low-lying wilderness area of 6 square miles, mainly of wet marshlands, which proves to be a great attraction to naturalists.
Though, the jewel in the crown for the whole of the area must be Blenheim Palace.
It was built for John Churchill, the First Duke of Marlborough in recognition of his great victory over the French at the battle of Blenheim in 1704.
The Palace was designed by Sir John Vanbrugh, took 18 years to build and covers an area of 7 acres.
The Long Library, almost 200 ft. long is considered to be the room of the most outstanding beauty for it contains over 10,000 books plus various paintings by Van Dyck and Reynolds.
The grounds, 2000 acres of parkland, was designed by the famous Capability Brown which contains a large man-made lake crossed by the Grand Bridge designed by Vanbrugh and is reputed to be the finest bridge in Europe.
Oxford itself, the ‘city of dreaming spires’ as  John Betjeman eulogised  it is only a few miles away with all its many and varied attractions.
This area is rich indeed.
The GRAND BRIDGE (BLENHEIM PALACE)— Photograph supplied courtesy of Wolf Lithographs on behalf of Blenheim Palace.
BLENHEIM PALACE — photographs supplied courtesy of Blenheim Palace.
IMPROVING YOUR NEW HOME
Investing in quality home improvements is not difficult, but there are guidelines which you should take care to follow.
Hopefully the new home which you are now considering as a prospective purchase will be suitable for your needs in every way, but it may well be that a need for some renovation or refurbishment is indicated from the surveyor's report or that you will wish to make improvements or alterations of your own.
Unless you have a fair experience of building handicrafts and a lot of time on your hands, you will probably need to hire a builder, and you should take as much care over this as possible since the quality of building work varies very substantially indeed, and two different firms of builders, next to each other in the ‘Yellow Pages’ may reflect totally different standards and attitudes.
The most important thing to obtain is a recommendation.
If a friend has had work done by a particular building firm and found them reliable, honest and efficient it is likely that you will too.
If you are new in the area your estate agent will be pleased to recommend a firm whom they know to be reputable.
All the suppliers of building services represented in this brochure have been selected from amongst those recommended by established local opinion as being reliable and reasonable.
When you have decided exactly what work needs to be done, you should obtain several quotations for the job.
Remember that quotations and estimates are not the same thing, and that a low estimate can very easily turn into a high bill.
It is worth your while to obtain detailed quotations at the outset and to insist upon a further quotation for any work which may be added to the schedule as you go along.
Don't necessarily accept the lowest quotation: you are likely to pay more for professionalism and thoroughness.
There is no need to pay in advance for the work even if you are asked to do so; you may be in an awkward position if the firm ceases to trade without having completed the job.
If the company you have hired cannot obtain materials from a builder's merchant without any advance payment there is something wrong.
If it is a very large contract then it may be reasonable for the builder to ask for interim payments as the work progresses, and you can discuss this with him at the outset.
You are, of course, protected by law.
Builders must finish the job in a proper and workmanlike fashion and must use suitable materials — you have a claim if these principles are not adhered to, and if you can establish shoddy or negligent work it is possible that the courts will award damages for inconvenience caused in addition to the cost of rectifying the initial problem.
This should be a last resort however, as legal action may be costly and, more importantly, time-consuming, particularly if the case is contested.
If you follow the principles laid down at the beginning of this feature then you should have no problem.
Remember that if you hire a builder with a large stetson hat and a six shooter you might very easily reach a situation where, ‘The house ain't big enough for both of you.’
CALL IN THE EXPERTS
Most who drive cars would agree that does not make us expert mechanics.
 People's view of building is often somewhat different, and many feel savings can be made by not expending money on  architect's fees.
Architects may in fact save you money.
The case of the two-storey extension, that as a result of an Architects advice, became a single storey extension with internal rearrangements at 60% of the budgeted cost illustrating the point.
Imagination saved money and easily covered the fee.
The point you want to arrive at, is getting what you want at the price you can afford.
To get there via the complexity of legislation, contractual pitfalls, constructional problems and costing complexities let aside evaluating design possibilities needs skill, knowledge and commitment, certainly it can take a considerable amount of time.
The role of the Architect is to provide such a service.
The title Architect is protected by law and can only be used by those appropriately qualified and registered.
It implies a duty to provide expert advice.
Those who provide architectural services are however often not Architects.
Architects will provide partial services to advise you on the condition of a property you are interested in.
The service provided, and fee are matters to discuss initially with an Architect, ranging in cost from a few pounds upwards.
Purchase of property is a major expenditure for everyone.
Even with an Architect, problems may arise and it is then many people have found out how pleased they were to have an Architect at hand to turn to.
Living Space
DUVETS & FURNISHINGS
A co-ordinated lifestyle that enhances & enriches your living space, providing that individual stamp of luxury.
Since the introduction of the duvet to this country in the early 1970's, the duvet has become the most popular form of bedwear.
Perhaps, the most appealing factor of a duvet is its apparent lightness which also retains a great deal of warmth.
Long gone are those piles of suffocating heavy blankets needed to keep warm in bed at the height of winter coldness and the arduous task of bedmaking.
Lightweight and snug, simple yet practical, the duvet epitomises the continental style of sleeping.
Duvet warmth is measured in ‘togs’ ranging in scale from 4.5 tog to 13.5 tog.
The higher the tog value of your duvet the warmer it will be.
You can purchase two kinds of  duvet, polyester filled or natural.
Most polyester duvets contain the most technically advanced non-allergenic filling which have the advantage of being machine washable.
Natural filled duvets are more expensive and those filled with duck down, are considered the ultimate in luxury duvets.
All duvets need covers to keep them clean and as a result designers have had virtual carte blanche in producing happy and aesthetic designs for the covers.
They are produced in a multiple of shades which allow the greatest scope for individual expression.
There are the traditional floral designs of an English classical style that evoke associations with days of yore.
Or, in great contrast, there are the more modern abstract designs that might not look out of place displayed on a wall.
Dorma is one of the leading home furnishing companies that produce duvet covers.
Their ‘Croscill’ and ‘Jenny Wren’ranges epitomise the traditional style; pink roses gaily festooned in abundance, and Victorian memories to the fore.
The ‘Directions’ range is a bold step towards the future; stripes and motifs providing dramatic effects.
The ‘Jay Yang’ range takes its inspiration from the Far East with traditional floral designs with striking background colours creating the drama of the Eastern world.
The ‘Fine Arts’ range are more subdued designs; more feminine in their appeal, the colours muted.
From the independent design house of Munro & Tutty come the designs, with their primary colours, that attempt to recreate the effects of  lazy hot summers, and an adjunct, ‘Country Diary’ wish to echo those long hot days and bountiful harvests.
And, as a matter of course, all duvet covers are matched with similarly designed pillowcases.
You can give the bedroom its total co-ordinated look by flat, fitted and valance sheets, cushions and bolsters, choosing from the wide range of bed dressings available, the superb selection of window dressings, wall-coverings and light fittings.
With such a wide range of bed dressings available today it is possible to choose a sleeping system most suitable for your personal requirements and allows you to experiment with new looks and styles in the bedroom.
Embellished duvets have become popular recently.
These are lightweight, throw-over designs with permanent covers.
They are quilted in different patterns and trimmed with frills.
They can be used in summer on their own over a top sheet and in winter over a quilt or blanket.
Dorma have carefully endeavoured to provide a discriminating range of duvet covers and bedwear that will reflect every mood and enhance every possible bedroom style.
But, Dorma have taken a very important step in helping you, the customer, to design your own unique bedroom environment.
You can now buy matching coordinates in most of the ranges that can give the room a total individual look.
These products span from the wallpaper itself, through to curtains, pelmets, friezes, blinds, windows and a new range of lighting styles.
Fabric in ‘Harriet’ and ‘Victoria’from the Jenny Wren Collection by Dorma
‘Wallace’ from the Munro & Tutty Collections by Dorma.
Frilled quilt covers are priced from £36.99; frilled pillowcases at £10.99 each; fitted valance sheets from £28.99; curtains from £35.99 a pair (54″ drop); and a wallborder frieze at £4.99 a roll.
‘Harriet’ from the Jenny Wren Collection by Dorma, available as a lace-frilled decot duvet from £99.99, lace-frilled pillow shams at £24.99 each, a lace frilled flat sheet from £29.99, a fitted sheet from £19.99 and a valance from £27.99.
At the window are luxurious Satin Finesse curtains from £43.99 a pair, tie-backs at £15.99 a pair, and a festoon pelmet at £29.99.
These are complemented by a festoon blind available from Swish.
‘Harriet’ also comes as wall-covering at £6.99 a roll, a 10-inch deep wallpaper frieze at £6.50 a roll, square, round and bolster lace-frilled cushion covers at £11.99, and a mushroom pleated lampshade (not shown) at £16.99.
‘Isadora’ from the Munro & Tutty Collection by Dorma.
Embellished quilt covers are priced from £29.99; embellished pillowcases at £7.99 each, fitted valance sheets from £28.99; and curtains from £35.99 (54 ″ drop).
Polyester-filled duvet by Dorma.
Available in three weights, lightweight 6 tog priced from £23.99, 13.5 tog priced from £33.99 and 12.0 tog priced from £29.99.
Pillows at £6.99 each.
Bedwear in ‘Tabriz’(pastel), ‘Isadora’(deep), and ‘Wallace’(deep) from the Munro & Tutty Collection by Dorma.
The Right School?
To find the right school in your area The ‘Education Year Book’ stocked by your nearest reference library lists every local education authority (LEA) in the country.
It gives head office phone numbers.
Phone the LEA office and ask them to send you school prospectuses by post.
A detailed prospectus is one of the signs of a good school.
Try to visit some of the primary schools in your area around morning or afternoon break of going-home time.
You can find out a lot by seeing if there is bedlam in the playground or if there are lots of crisp packets and chocolate papers scattered about — this will give you clues to how the school is managed.
Try to talk to parents with children at the proposed school, or to the local newsagent.
Find out as much as you can about the school.
THE PRE-SCHOOL CHILD
If you've just moved to a new area a good way to break the ice for you and your child is a parent and toddler group.
These are usually for the under 3's, and are found in Church Halls or private houses.
The next stage is a pre-school playgroup at 3 or 3½.
They generally stimulate and acclimatise your child to playing with other children.
You could start your own playgroup so if you want any help or advice contact the Pre-School Playgroup Association (address opposite).
PRIMARY SCHOOLS
When you have shortlisted the primary school for your child remember to visit the school first.
Ask questions: listen, too, not only to the answers but the Head's tone of voice —is he courteous and do you get the impression that he will be approachable in the future if your child has a problem which need to be discussed?
Your child's pre-school days and infant and junior school years are vital in his future development.
Be careful how you choose — your child won't learn to his maximum potential in an environment where he or she is not happy.
Primary education covers infant schooling from the ages of 5–7 or 8, then junior schooling concluding at the ages of 10 or 11.
Moreover, you may live in area where children go to middle schools from the ages of 8 or 9 until 12 or 14.
SECONDARY EDUCATION
Choosing a secondary school for your child will be much the same procedure as when you were choosing your child's primary school.
Spotting a good school will depend on using information and common sense.
However, parents have one big advantage and that is that they now have access to the GCSE and A-level exam results of all pupils — that is the biggest giveaway!
All state secondary schools are required by law to publish their results once a year and so now you can write or phone individual school secretaries or the LEA and ask for a copy of the exam results, ideally asking for the previous 2 or 3 years.
This can be so useful to anyone looking for a secondary school, especially for the young couple with a growing child who are looking for a new area to move into.
LIFE AFTER GCSE
After GCSE the next step for many young people is to take A-levels.
Traditional sixth form education may still exist in some comprehensive schools — the 11–18 range — but you may have to find a place for your child in a FE (Further Education) establishment.
The FE colleges have developed mainly for providing vocational opportunities to young people beyond the age of 16.
Sixth form colleges offer a half-way house providing a link between school and higher education or work.
INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS
More and more parents every year are opting for independent schooling for their children: it is no longer seen as exclusively the preserve of a privileged class.
ISIS (The Independent Schools Information Service) may be of most use if you wish to explore this option, and they will send you detailed lists of schools in your area with contact names and addresses.
Again, send off for the school prospectus and find out the school's aims and objectives.
Make sure you're clear about what you are paying for, as there may be hidden extras.
A booklet which is issued by ISIS, called ‘Questions to Ask When You Visit a School’, may be of immense value to you.
Whatever type of school you are looking for, it is worth taking time to find the right one — where your children's education is concerned, no compromise is acceptable.
an A–Z of useful addresses
This instant reference guide includes useful addresses and phone numbers you may need.
b
BRITISH RAIL London-Reading-Didcot-Bristol or South Wales:
Generally hourly Inter-City express service; about 45 minutes Didcot to London.
There are also local services along the above routes and also from Oxford to Charlbury, Evesham, Worcester, Malvern and Hereford; from Banbury to Bicester, High Wycombe and London (Marylebone); from Henley to Twyford (for Paddington) and a recently restored service from Oxford to Bicester.
c
COACHES AND BUSES
South Midland operate a network of local services in and around Didcot, Wantage, Abingdon, Witney, Carterton, Bicester and Chipping Norton.
Telephone numbers for enquiries: South Midland Tel: Witney 76679 
e
ELECTRICITY
The County is mostly served by the Southern Electricity Board.
f
FIRE
In emergency, dial 999.
For advice on fire prevention and protection, and other matters,Tel: Banbury 62852 for Bampton, Banbury, Bicester, Burford, Charlbury, Chipping Norton, Deddington, Eynsham, Hook Norton, Kidlington, Witney and Woodstock areas.
g
GAS
The county is in the Southern Gas Board area, who have showrooms at:
h
HEALTH
Hospitals
Addresses and numbers are listed in the telephone directory.
l
LEISURE
Whether your idea of leisure is fishing in the Thames, hitting a ball or watching a film you will be able to do it in Oxfordshire.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
County Council
Oxfordshire County Council's headquarters are at County Hall, New Road.
m
MISCELLANY
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Opening times of the offices vary widely and a check should be made before a visit.
w
WATER
Almost all the area is served by Thames Water.
For telephone numbers for emergencies and general enquiries in respect of water supply, land drainage, pollution control, navigation and boat registration, sewerage and sewage treatment, see telephone directory under ‘WATER’.
The Carpet Guide
A short guide to the bewildering choice of carpets.
Here are some ground rules on how to choose your carpet, and its upkeep.
Carpets are perhaps one of the biggest and most important furnishing investments in any home.
Because of this expense a carpet is not an item one changes every year as the fancy takes you.
As a result, you will spend many years with your new carpet, and so it is worth taking a little while making the right choice of carpet.
Ideally your carpets should be the first major purchase in your new home, for it is around this essential item of furnishing that the rest of your interiors should be planned.
The right  choice of carpet can transform any room, for it can make a small room appear more spacious, a large room seem cosier, and a cool room warmer.
Another consideration that should be taken into account when choosing a carpet is to select the correct quality of carpet for the area concerned.
For example, when choosing a carpet for the bedroom which is obviously a light wearing area, bright colours or pastel shades are idea.
In areas of the home where there is heavy wear, such as the stairs or the kitchen, rich colours and patterns will help hide soiling and staining.
Again, if your living space if restricted, then a light-coloured or a plain carpet will make the room appear roomier.
In small modern homes or flats a single colour scheme in different types of carpets can create a sense of space and continuity through the home.
More neutral tones are advised in the more modern home as that will allow the widest choice of complementary furnishings and decoration.
Something else to take into consideration when choosing a carpet is which way does the room face.
North facing rooms receive less light so a carpet with rich colours will make the room feel warmer.
South facing rooms which already appear to be warmer due to the extra light can more easily  accommodate cooler shades such as pale blue.
Because of that initial expense you will want your carpet to keep its good looks for many years to come.
Although it is rare to see a carpet  that's been worn right down to its backing they can often look worn.
This is when there has been such heavy use that the pile eventually flattens or there is excessive ‘tracking’ in a doorway.
Such an obvious change in appearance of one section of a carpet can cause dissatisfaction with the whole thing.
The actual construction of a carpet goes a long way to determining how long it will keep its original appearance.
Woven carpets, such as Axminster and Wilton, are still second to none in design and quality, and these are still produced by having the backing and the pile both woven at the same time.
Tufted carpets are much more economic to produce in that the pile is needled into a pre-woven backing.
What the carpet is made of is also an important consideration when buying a new carpet.
Wool is a well tried and tested material in that its natural crimp enables the fibres to resist pressure from heavy furniture.
It also has a good reputation for retaining its good appearance over along period of time.
Man-made fibres are also hard wearing, have an improved resilience to hard wear and are now anti-static.
A good quality under-felt is essential to prolong the life of your carpet and make it more comfortable to walk on.
Some carpets have an integral foam backing as part of the underlay.
If you choose one of these kinds of carpets they should be laid on the paper to stop them sticking to the floor.