

Climate change and agriculture: and a Soviet dissent
Russia's history can be read as a long battle with geography and climate.
General Winter may have repelled invaders from Napoleon to Hitler, but he is a domestic tyrant from whom successive regimes have sought to escape by pushing south to more friendly climes and warm-water ports.
Summer has never been a sufficient compensation for his excesses.
It is a fickle, too-short season and for much of this century the Soviet Union's granaries have never been quite full enough for domestic and political comfort.
This is despite the fact that its acreage of farmland is about the same as that of the United States, a nation that has become the world's greatest grain exporter.
Tsarist Russia before the First World War held that position, earning a third of its foreign exchange from grain sales.
Famine at home did not deter the Tsars from exporting grain; Stalin took a similarly hard-nosed approach, rationed consumption at home and sold abroad for the sake of political influence and foreign exchange.
The Soviet Union managed to remain a net exporter until the beginning of the 1970s.
From then on the contrast with the United States becomes stark.
American production soared, largely to meet overseas demand, and the Soviet Union, despite some impressive gains in production, became for the first time a large importer.
Lack of incentives, bureaucratic mismanagement and other well-publicized ills of the Soviet economy may bear much of the responsibility for the disparity between the superpowers, but Robert Paarlberg's Food Trade and Foreign Policy confirms that climate has been the chief factor:
More than half the arable land in the United States receives annually at least 700 mm of precipitation; only 1 per cent of the arable land in the Soviet Union receives as much moisture.
In those regions where rainfall is adequate, the soil tends to be poor, or the weather too cold.
Plentiful moisture in the extreme northern latitudes, for example, is rendered useless by severe winter frost and an abbreviated growing season.
The warmer regions south and east of the Ukraine are unfortunately the driest.
Light and irregular rainfall during the summer growing season here is often accompanied by high temperature, scorching wind, and devastating dust storms.
Because the inadequate moisture levels are also highly changeable, year-to-year variation in Soviet farm output is typically three times greater than in the United States.
Grain has always been important as an indicator of national well-being and prosperity, with bulging granaries more important to security in the long term than the missile silos which often share the same farmlands.
The 1988 drought — the third of the decade — was arguably more of a blow to the American sense of security than the discovery of an alleged missile gap in the 1950s.
Domestic consumption of grain overtook production for the first time.
There are no recurrent natural events so mindlessly implacable and dispiriting as droughts and, regardless of the argument about the true cause of 1988s, the televised scenes of dying maize and despairing farmers became the hinge of a turn in the Western world's chief preoccupation, from the threat of nuclear annihilation to climate change.
A new era had announced itself.
By contrast, the Soviet Union had, of course, always co-existed with a climate which could never be taken for granted.
In the post-war period Moscow directed much effort towards overcoming its agricultural inferiority vis-à-vis the West, especially the United States.
Stalin's successor Khruschev, in the mid-1950s, made overtaking US meat production (which entailed rapid increases in the production of feed-grains) the measure of success or failure of his attempt to improve the Soviet diet.
He envisaged a Soviet return to the position of leading exporter of grain as something that would make ‘Messrs Imperialists’ sit up and take notice.
In fact, Soviet production did rise until 1978, after which a run of six bad harvests and the inconsistencies of the Soviet economy produced stagnation.
Given the poor publicity generated by the Soviet Union's agricultural failings, it comes as something of a surprise to look at the statistics and see that the Soviet Union is still the world's largest wheat producer, greater than the European Community (which also made agricultural self-sufficiency a goal in its early years) by about 10 million tons in 1989, outstripping the United States and Canada, the world's ‘breadbasket’, by almost the same amount.
Where the Soviet Union falls down is in the production of what are called coarse grains — maize (corn) principally, but including barley, oats, rye, sorghum and other grains apart from rice.
It was the maize crop which was the chief victim of the 1988 American drought.
But even in a bad year like that one, US production was nearly eight times greater than the Soviet Union's.
In a reasonably good year like 1989 it was between 12 and 13 times greater, fortunately, perhaps, since the Soviet Union was obliged to purchase 40 million tonnes of grain from abroad.
During the early 1970s, when the sort of thinking exemplified by Limits to Growth permeated official forecasts of imminent shortages of strategic commodities, the CIA toyed with the idea that ‘The United States’ near-monopoly position as a food exporter…could give [it]a measure of power it never had before.’
Food would become the weapon with which the United States would counter the Arab world's use of an oil embargo in its fight against Israel.
It was an idea that persisted.
Food had become power, a ‘valuable instrument of foreign policy’, as Alexander Haig, Secretary of State under President Reagan, noted in 1981.
President Carter had applied it in the form of an embargo on grain sales to the Soviet Union after the Christmas 1979 invasion of Afghanistan; and it was to prove as ineffective as the Arab oil embargo.
The grain trade was — and is — of immense importance to the United States, and to its relation with the Soviet Union.
It has entered into long-term bilateral grain agreements (LBGAs) with only two countries, the Soviet Union (three times) and China (once).
During five years of the second LBGA (1983–8) with the Soviet Union, the United States sold its rival grain worth $7 billion and during two of those years — 1986 and 1987 — subsidized the sales to the tune of $450 million.
In the peak years of 1979–80 the United States' share of the world trade was 51 per cent of wheat and 73 per cent of coarse grains.
It was a trade worth, in 1980, $27.1 billion.
By contrast, the Soviet Union had become the world's biggest importer, taking almost a quarter of all internationally traded grain, a third of it from the United States.
The Soviet Union is making strenuous efforts to reduce its dependence on imports, boosting its use of fertilizers to levels above those anywhere else, but its enlistment of poor, fragile land in the battle for self-sufficiency in the early 1970s has meant a loss of land through abandonment in the 1980s, perhaps as much as 13 per cent of the peak grain area.
Food may not have become a weapon, but the failure of Soviet agriculture to meet its peoples' demands was a wound that contributed to the collapse of Soviet power in the second half of the 1980s.
Climate change could put both superpowers in the same boat.
There are those who see the drying out of the continental interiors as a more significant consequence of climate change than sea-level rises.
Environmental politics on the global scale will be dominated increasingly by the need to feed people, so any climate shift adversely affecting the American grain-belt will be a serious matter.
Other areas may, of course, be able to produce more.
Agricultural adaptation is possible, too.
The Israelis have grown fruit and nuts successfully in temperatures of 46 ° C and new strains of drought and heat-resistant crops will no doubt be developed.
How quickly, though, and whether there will be sufficient incentive to produce in bulk for countries which are unable to pay are different matters.
Countries like Ethiopia have been fed out of surpluses at little cost, but even there thousands have died before the food reached them.
In much of the West where productivity has been high and population increases relatively small — in some countries zero — the problem confronting agriculture has been how to control expensive surpluses.
Butter mountains loom above lakes of olive oil.
Milk quotas have been introduced to limit the output of over-productive herds.
Set-aside schemes have taken land out of production in the United States as well as in the European Community.
The United States, for instance, idled 15 per cent of its total crop acreage in 1987 and 1988 in line with the Administration's policy of reducing stocks, raising prices and conserving land at risk from erosion.
One of the consequences of the 1988 drought was a sharp reduction in the set-aside programme.
Lester Brown, the head of the Worldwatch Institute in Washington, DC, calls the food mountains of the 1980s a ‘temporary aberration’ which will soon run out.
The 1980s, he notes, were the first decade in history in which there was no increase in the area of land farmed and — also for the first time — a fall in the amount of fresh water used per capita.
Shortages and rising prices could mean the world was heading for ‘the grain shock of 1992’, a crisis for which it was unprepared.
Towards a brave new modified climate
Mikhail Budyko, the most revered figure of Soviet climatology, has never been noted as a cold war warrior, but he has always been aware of the limitations imposed on the Soviet Union by its climate.
He is not a sceptic about the reality of global warming — he can claim to have been the first man to notice it — but he does not believe it is necessarily harmful.
He accepts the evidence that there has been a drying-out in the continental interiors affecting both the United States and the Soviet Union and then qualifies his acceptance by suggesting that it will be remedied in the next century by greater precipitation.
He uses a study of past periods of warming stretching back over several millions of years to confirm his view that more carbon dioxide to nourish plants, more warmth, more rainfall, more arable land as the frontiers of ice are pushed back will mean bigger harvests.
His thinking, with its faith in science and brave new worlds, is very old-style ‘Soviet’, at its core a belief that climate can be modified beneficially on the grand scale.
He recommends more research, with ‘the aim of creating a global system of biospheric regulation in the interest of human society’.
In Climate and Life he recalls the work of his collaborator O.A. Drozdov on ‘Changing the Climate in Connection with the Plan for Transforming Nature in the Drought Regions of the USSR’; and studies by others on the feasibility of melting the polar ice with nuclear energy and by damming the Behring Straits and pumping water from the Behring Sea into the Arctic.
It is by no means evident, he admits, that the results would be beneficial; more study is required.
He is more convinced by a scheme prepared by another collaborator, M.I. Iudin, for changing the intensity of low-level cyclones by employing a system of vertical air jets in the area where they form.
Laying down broad belts of asphalt might, by developing thermal convention, lead to increased precipitation.
He writes in the last paragraph, ‘It should be borne in mind that for the creation of a climatic regime managed by man, further progress of science and engineering is necessary which would permit a considerable increase in the present production of energy.
It is beyond doubt that with peaceful development of human society, such progress will be realised in the near future.’
‘Budyko thinks climate change is the best thing since sliced bread,’ said a US scientist at the World Meteorological Organization in Geneva in 1989 in a conversation with the author.
‘He is greatly respected, but I don't think the Soviet-led ‘impacts’ group (of the IPCC) will reflect his views.’
Others echoed his opinion, with differing degrees of confidence.
The belief in a scientifically-controlled world runs deep in Soviet society.
If you can't escape your climate, change it.
If you don't think your rivers are running in the right place, divert them.
The ecological disaster created by the diversion of water from the Aral Sea for the sake of a better cotton crop has given that sort of thinking a severe knock.
The Aral has lost 40 per cent of its surface as well as its fish and the fishing fleets that netted them.
Salt-laden winds howl round its desiccated and still shrinking perimeter.
But in a world where nature left to its own devices is as grim as it is in much of the Soviet Union, the belief that you can bend it on the heroic scale is unlikely to go away.
Climate change through the man-made modification of greenhouse gases might be disastrous, but it might equally be deliverance.
There might even be, one day, warm water ports in the Arctic.
Soviet hesitations were evident when Budyko told a climate change conference in Hamburg in November 1988 that it might be better to increase carbon dioxide emissions to encourage warming.
The cost of restricting emissions in a country struggling with inefficient smokestack industries may not have been in Budyko's mind, but it is an obvious factor in the Soviet attitude, as it is elsewhere.
Obviously, there is always a temptation to think nationally rather than globally.
If India's government is persuaded that warming will produce better and more reliable monsoons, then it might decide that the interests of its burgeoning population would be better served by global warming than by attempts to hold it in check.
Even Canada, a leader in environmental matters, must have interest in a situation which could extend its growing season and allow it to push its arable lands further north.
But the trouble with climate modification of the sort imposed by the greenhouse effect is that it does not move naturally to a new, warmer status quo which will remain undisturbed for the next thousand years or so.
It continues to change, and probably very rapidly, so any gains might well prove to be short-lived.
In large nations and groupings of nations, such as Western Europe, advantage in one area might be accompanied by misfortune in another, as, for example, if Northern Europe experienced a more favourable climate while the Mediterranean dried out.
The decade of the 1980s had its upturns as well as downturns in food production, but the overall pattern was disquieting.
The three drought years sapped North American output.
From the middle of the decade onwards the two largest Third World countries, China and India, failed to increase their grain production.
It was clear from the records of yields per hectare that the era of ‘miracle’ grains was over.
India, which prided itself on the self-sufficiency achieved by its green revolution, was obliged to buy wheat in 1988–9; China's imports of wheat reached record levels in the last years of the decade, a reflection, no doubt, not just of two years of drought but of a situation where peasants received certificates instead of cash for their crops.
Poland, a developed country, joined the ranks of supplicants for food aid, a category usually limited, under the Food Aid Convention, to developing nations.
Despite a 6 per cent increase in the global cereal harvest in 1989, the year was the third in succession in which production failed to meet demand.
Food stocks fell to their lowest level since the food crisis of the early 1970s.
How accurate such figures are is always open to question, though.
Local farmers and regional government often hold large emergency stocks which are not counted, but it is nevertheless accepted that they represent a trend.
The figures for food sent by the 22 Food Aid Convention countries reveal once again the importance of the US grain belt.
It provides more than half the aid, 75 per cent of which is wheat.
So a cut of 30 per cent in the US contribution of wheat is immediately reflected in a similar cut in the total amount available.
The effect of that in 1988–9 was not starvation in developing countries but higher food bills.
Whereas in 1987–8 some 14 per cent of their wheat imports came as aid, in 1988–9 the percentage was down to 11 per cent.
1989–90 looked like being much worse, with the percentage falling to 8 per cent.
As the International Wheat Council noted in its October 1989 market report, the implications for countries struggling with foreign debts, higher commercial grain prices and tougher credit terms were ‘especially serious’.
On the other hand — and there is invariably an ‘other hand’ in these environmental and quasi-environmental matters — aid tends to depress local markets and discourage farmers from producing more.
Reduce aid and they will grow more, goes the argument.
That may apply to some African countries, but it is hard to imagine the two biggest aid recipients, Egypt and Bangladesh, doing a great deal more to feed themselves.
No more ‘miracles’
Abundance often lies less than half a day's jet flight from starvation.
Distribution problems have probably caused more deaths from starvation in recent years than an actual shortage of food.
The West could certainly produce more than it does, but equally certainly not enough to deal with the huge population increases projected for the developing world in the coming century.
At the June 1988 Toronto conference three members of the Indian Agricultural Research Centre, in New Delhi, provided some figures which demonstrated the size of the problem.
In 1986, 1942 million tonnes of food grains were produced to feed a world population of nearly 5 billion.
To maintain the same level of per capita consumption in 2025, with an expected population of 8.2 billion, grain production would have to increase to 3050 million tonnes.
To take a few regional examples, Africa would have to increase grain production by almost fivefold and Latin America by almost threefold.
Apart from Africa, there is not a great deal of potential arable land left, so, using an across-the-board figure, it would be necessary to devote approximately 66 per cent of all farmed lands to cereals.
Even so, the bulk of the increase would have to come from improved yields, as it has in the past three decades.
At that point, two factors slide into the picture.
The first is the energy, most of it from fossil fuels, required by modern agriculture and the system which delivers its produce to the customers; the other, the peaking of the ‘miracle grain’ revolution.
New and more productive cereal cultivars have contributed their share to improved yields, but the biggest share in developed countries like the United States has come from increased use of fertilizers — 55 per cent between 1965 and 1976, according to the New Delhi paper quoting an FAO estimate.
Modern agriculture requires not only more fertilizer but more mechanization, too:
This in effect led to a situation where the commercial energy input became about equal to the equivalent energy output of edible grains.
If the energy input to the whole agricultural system was estimated, from land preparation to canned provisions in supermarkets, then the commercial energy expended was greater than the solar energy harvested by the crops.
Thus it would be virtually true to say that ultimately fossil fuels serve as food in developed countries.
The State of the World 1989 put the same case in a different form:
In per capita terms, world fertilizer use quintupled between 1950 and 1984, going from 5 kilograms to 26 and offsetting a one-third decline in grain area per person.
As land becomes scarce, farmers rely more on additional fertilizer to expand output, in effect substituting energy in the form of fertilizer for land in the production process.
Farmers in developing countries use fertilizers on their lands, too, of course, but more of the routine work is done manually.
The New Delhi paper estimated that 0.038 of a ton of oil was burnt to produce a ton of grain in India; in the United States the figure was 0.110.
More fertilizer might mean more grain (and more carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide to add to the greenhouse effect), but there obviously comes a point where more fertilizer does not mean a bigger yield or perhaps is not justified on cost grounds, particularly when grain prices are low, as they were for part of the 1980s.
The miracle grains introduced in the 1960s have played their part in the agricultural revolution but there is no sign that new strains are on their way.
According to the New Delhi paper's authors, the peak yields in both wheat and rice were obtained during experimental trials in the 1960s and have not been repeated since.
So any increase in output will have to come from better farming methods, particularly in countries like India, whose rice farmers lag well behind Japan's in productivity.
The growth of the deserts
Human ingenuity has often confounded the pessimists.
Malthus was wrong about the effects of unchecked population growth, as the optimists constantly remind those who look too bleakly into the future.
The law of diminishing returns has not applied to food production in the countries which have undergone the industrial revolution, although there have been periodic crises, such as the Irish famine of 1845–6, to remind us that Malthus was not completely wrong.
About one-third of the Irish population emigrated to wrest a living from new lands in North America and Australia.
Mass emigration of that sort is not an option these days.
Leaving out the debatable new lands opened up by clearing tropical forests, the amount of land available for agriculture, even of the most limited, nomadic sort, seems to be diminishing.
According to UNEP's figures, desertification is taking as much land out of agricultural use as exploiters of one kind or another are clearing in the rainforests:
UNEP and others have estimated that it would cost approximately $4,500 million a year over the next 20 years to slow and stop desertification, and to begin to reclaim the land that we have already lost.
That money and other needed support just hasn't been forthcoming, and because of that the deserts continue to advance.
Pilot projects don't get catalyzed; know-how isn't spread among the very poorest countries; outside development assistance continues to be poorly co-ordinated — sometimes even pulling in opposite directions.
Desertification comes in several guises: as encroaching sand, degrading croplands and grazing, waterlogging and salinization of irrigated land, destruction of trees and shrubs, erosion and deterioration in water supplies.
It is above all largely caused by people, with nature in the accomplice role.
Under threat are the world's drylands, which are said to constitute about 35 per cent of the world's land area and support some 850 million people.
Tolba accuses the international community of neglecting problems which will grow worse with time: ‘The real obstacle is the lack of political will.’
There are others, though, who say that UNEP's Plan of Action is largely irrelevant to the attempts to stabilize the drylands.
Most aid is being given in the form of bilateral projects.
And by what method of assessment (ask the critics) did it arrive at its figure of $90 billion for a twenty-year programme?
The truth is that such huge figures have a hypnotizing effect on the victims and arouse a defensive incredulity among those supposed to provide the money.
The victims are unlikely to believe that they can do much from their own resources if action is dependent on billions of dollars, and the developed nations can hardly man every environmental barricade from Ethiopia to the Amazonian rainforest.
There may be, too, a sotto voce challenge to the received wisdom that it is people who cause desertification.
Deserts are the result of a lack of water and if there is a prolonged, fluctuating drought (like the one that began on the northern fringe of sub-Saharan Africa at the end of the 1960s) vast sums of money are not going to stop desertification.
Where desertification poses its greatest threat to the lives and livelihoods of people is in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa.
It is not a region where costly Plans of Action are going to work.
‘There isn't much point in trying to grow a belt of trees across the desert,’ Camilla Toulmin, the head of IIED's Drylands Programme, told the author.
‘I would make two points: the first is that a lot of very small-scale activity does achieve results.
And the second is the need to get people involved locally.
I wouldn't say the desert is being contained, but there are diagnoses and solutions.’
The solutions in the end come down to not over-grazing, managing the water supplies and choosing appropriate crops.
But sustainability in such arid circumstances depends on sustainable populations which do not exceed the resources.
And in Africa that must mean people moving from the rural areas into the overcrowded towns, which at least offer subsistence.
They also offer political instability.
As is frequently pointed out, every government in the Sahel fell after the droughts of the early 1970s.
Poor, vulnerable government makes every problem worse, particularly in a continent where so many factors contributed to increasing poverty and very few to wealth.
As a World Bank report noted grimly, ‘Never in human history has population grown so fast.’
The half-billion people in sub-Saharan Africa will become one billion by 2010, a growth rate which, now or later, has disaster as its terminus.
Political will in such situations is a low explosive, blasting along the lines of least resistance.
Alas, there is no profitable course of least resistance in Africa.
If one takes everything into account — the shifts in climate which might well remove the United States from its place as the leading ‘food power’ and affect the Soviet Union as well, the limited prospects for increased yields, desertification and the steady increase in the global population — it is clear that in the next century large sections of the world's population will have a very narrow margin between them and starvation.
In an increasing number of cases, no margin at all, as has been the case in the past and is so today in parts of Africa.
There are cushions like the World Food Programme and the stocks held by the major grain producers, but emergencies and poor harvests could run them down very quickly.
But there are no easy solutions; it is hard, for example, to imagine the EC countries deciding overnight to forget their searing battles over agricultural policy and return to the old days of costly subsidies and surpluses in order to build up buffer stocks to higher levels.
It is equally hard to imagine countries capable of producing surpluses stonily refusing to do so in the face of an evident need.
At the moment, though, understanding of the regional impacts of climate change really is not good enough to persuade countries to rush into costly agreements on strengthening food stocks.
Countries can think about widespread famine and the international organization needed to deal with it, but it is not easy to make detailed plans years in advance of the crisis.
The 1992 UN conference on the environment could be the right place for an analytical look at what the world needs to do to ensure that it can feed its vulnerable populations in the next country.
Eco-politics: The greening of the greys
The Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie near the Porte de la Villette in Paris is one of those technological markers the French like to put down to show that architecture in their capital is not all ormulu and Belle Epoque .
There is also concrete, steel tubing and glass to think about, materials judged more suited to framing the aspirations of modern man.
As the venue for the fifth international conference of the European Greens, the Cité, with its predications on a science-led industrialized society, seemed about as sympathetic a choice as the Chicago stockyards for a vegetarian convention.
The Greens had planned to hold their 1989 rally in the Sorbonne, but at the last minute they were told they would have to go elsewhere and the only venue available at short notice was the Cité.
The hand of President François Mitterrand was detected.
Euro-elections were pending and, it was rumoured, he was doing his best to make life miserable for an organization which challenged his claim to the green constituency.
‘Give the meek a good deal— join the Greens,’ announced a poster on a publicity stand in the foyer of the conference hall.
The 1000 or so members of the meek class who presented themselves at the conference, were, suitably enough, unruffled by having been shunted from the Sorbonne to the techno-chic sidings at Porte de la Villette.
Inheriting the earth, or what's left of it by the time the non-meek have realized the folly of their ways, is a process which takes much fortitude and patience.
It is, in fact, the absence of pushiness which makes the Greens a surprising lot, essentially more religious (in the very broadest sense) than political; more activist Quaker than Marxist.
The British Greens, for example, allow time for ‘attunement’ before their meetings start, reminiscent in its way of the reflective silence that can prevail at meetings of the Society of Friends.
The representatives from seventeen national parties at the Paris conference were quite plainly non-attenders in the established church of politics.
No priests, merely a shifting scene of spokespeople and co-chairs, and no franchise held by anyone on the pulpit.
The Greens are officially leaderless.
When the light descends on the individual and the voice within speaks it has an equal right to be heard.
It is the individual and the change of heart which prompts him to participate which matters.
Only the Germans, with their endless internal quarrels (and who are perhaps more faction-ridden Buddhist than Quaker in their attitudes), challenge the rules of green decorum.
They come from the alternative left originally, a sector which at its extremes is tinged with violence.
But one can go on almost endlessly tinker-tailoring the sources of greenness: Nordic nature-loving fascist, Quaker, Zen Buddhist, Taoist, Social Creditist, Marxist, socialist, pacifist, quietist, 1930s Green Shirt.
John Hargrave, the Quaker founder of the Kibbo Kift Kin, came nearest to bringing it all together when he began his book on the Kin with a quotation from the Taoist Lao-Tzu: ‘production without possession, action without self-assertion, development without domination.’
The fact that no one is given command in the green movements does not mean that no one stands out among the ruck.
There are spokespeople (or speakers) and individuals whose characters and strong views shape the movement: Sara Parkin, who lives in Lyons and is co-secretary of the co-ordinating body which links the European parties; the Swiss Daniel Brélaz who, in 1979, became the first Green to be elected to a national parliament; Petra Kelly, the uncompromising driving force in the Fundi (fundamentalist) faction of Die Grünen, whose pragmatic factions, the Realos (realistic reformers) and Superrealos, seek to establish working relationships with the mainstream Left; and a number, not very large number, of others.
The Greens are, of course, tributary left, at times in spate, at other times the merest trickle, all according to the refreshments offered by fickle public opinion.
Their course is so far short: the first national Green Party founded in New Zealand as the Value Party in 1972, the next in the United Kingdom in the following year and then a long gap until Ecolo in Belgium in 1980 heralded a rush either to set up or amalgamate existing groups into parties in the early and mid-1980s.
Seen and heard en masse those at the Paris conference were recognizable as the middle class's awkward squad: idealistic non-makers of money, profoundly suspicious of governments and the works of capitalism, individualistic and a touch anarchistic, decent in a stubborn, purposeful way and kindly.
They are the sort of people (and very often the same people) that in Britain you meet in CND and in scores of cluttered offices dedicated to under-regarded and under-rewarded causes.
A look later at a partial list of the Green Party's candidates for the 1989 British Euro-elections confirmed the general impression: it was full of teachers, lecturers, organic small-holders, social workers and adult students, with here and there the stray doctor, engineer and journalist.
A husband and wife duo of lawyers-turned-smallholders may have founded the British Green Party, but there were no lawyers on the list, or surgeons, or stockbrokers; or, for that matter, plumbers or shop stewards.
They are not a noticeably intellectual lot, the Greens, and anyone who goes to one of their conferences expecting deeply researched papers on the carbon tax issue or the structure of the future Green confederation of Europe will come away disappointed.
It is feelings, the heart not the mind, which are at the core of the Green polity.
As so often with essentially good people who act from feelings, they are broadly right.
What is wrong with the Greens is that they do not acknowledge the profound economic difficulties, and all their attendant national and international jealousies and suspicions, which obstruct the path to an environmentally safer world.
They suffer, in short, from that most unforgivable of political sins, unworldliness.
The Euro-elections were something of a test for the Greens.
They were fighting for seats in a body — the Strasbourg parliament — which is the assembly of the European Community, of which they strongly disapprove. 1992 and the European Single Market would be ‘disastrous, catastrophic’, an ‘ideological bluff’ devised by deceitful politicians, declared a German MEP at the Paris conference.
‘The new material culture will mean McDonalds from Sicily to Scotland.’
On the same theme, the UK party made plain in a pre-European election statement why it did not like the Community.
The European Community consists of nation-states united by their desire to create greater economic wealth for themselves.
This is incompatible with the constraints of a finite world and we are therefore opposed to the EC as presently constituted.
The reference to a finite world carried echoes from Blueprint for Survival , the founding document of the British party in the early 1970s.
The party's formal manifesto (with a foreword by Petra Kelly) was no less dismissive, predicting failure for the ‘European superstore’.
It is not just the EC's free market consumerism which the Greens detest; they are opposed, too, to its political structure based on capitalist nation-states.
The Greens believe (said the British manifesto) in a decentralized ‘Europe of the Regions’ which would develop into a Agalevn all-embracing confederation ‘from Lappland to Armenia’.
How that would work out in practice is unclear.
In Britain, there are Scottish Greens and Welsh Greens, but no English Greens.
All managed somehow to merge their identities to produce a Euro-election manifesto in the name of the Green Party, which is the generic name under which the party appears on the voting slips.
Diminutive Belgium is more precise: its Greens are divided between Flemish-spe and French-speaking Ecolo.
Greens are against multinationals, naturally, and even against the ending of monetary barriers within the EC because ‘wealth will migrate even more quickly to those areas which are already wealthy, while the ‘peripheral areas’ will continue to be fed grudgingly with money for inappropriate projects like wall-to-wall holiday apartments and nuclear waste dumps.’
(The leisure industry was denounced during the Paris conference as ‘prostitution’.)
The Greens want regional self-reliance, in agriculture as well as in other things; a land tax applied so that‘in general terms, the nearer the land is to its natural state, the lower the land tax would be’; energy efficiency; population reduction through encouragement and education (with 15–20 million the target for Britain); and a sharing of ‘the abundance which nature can provide for us all if the greedy do not take more than their fair share’.
It was easy to make fun of, and it was no wonder that Conservative Central Office had a field day, distributing a compilation of green policy statements, including the unrealistic ones on replacing the EC with a ‘loose federation of ecological countries’ and disengaging Britain from the international money market.
The Conservatives handed out the Greens' fairly innocuous version of the 1989 Queen's Speech gratis, too, in the belief that it was time the public had their eyes opened to what the party was really about.
The conflict between abhorrence of the institution and the political expediency which obliges Greens to seek seats in it leads to a rather antiphonal quality in much of what the Greens have to say on Europe and the devolution of power to the regions.
Their belief in ‘maximum self-reliance’ with regional parliaments retaining ‘most legislative powers’did not prevent the British manifesto from declaring that a Green government would use the European courts to speed up UK compliance with EC environmental directives.
Equally, there would be a ‘coherent, integrated, efficient European transport system based primarily on waterways and railways’, but no Channel Tunnel.
That presumably would remain the English ‘region's’ position on environmental grounds even though the French ‘region’on the other side of the Channel might favour the tunnel in the interests of an integrated railway system.
Even presented in outline like that, it is reasonably clear that under green regimes Europeans would, by any conventional standards, become a great deal poorer than they are at the moment.
The Greens admitted that implicitly in the 1984 Joint Declaration of the European Green Parties in which they rejected an ‘economy based primarily on productivity (and)…on the creation of artificial needs’.
A better way of life need not depend on a higher standard of living and they were out to stop those whose pursuit of continued economic and industrial growth undermined the basis of life itself.
‘We wish to break totally from the liberal capitalism of the West and the state capitalism of the East, and want a third path which is compatible with an ecological society.’
Deep within such essentially non-economic thinking is an image of a bucolic arcadia where demands and ambitions are simple and limited, the Amish of Pennsylvania on an international scale, but with railways and EC directives on pollution.
The unfortunate reality is that Europe is heavily urbanized and densely populated and there is no prospect, short of disaster, of changing that in the foreseeable future.
The Greens may be the wise visionaries of Europe, but in a ‘serious’ election dealing with economic issues their manifestos would be quickly torn to shreds.
No one votes for poverty — at least, not yet.
So why did the British Greens (to take the national party which won the highest percentage of the vote) do so well in the 1989 Euro-elections?
First, because Euro-elections do not have the blood-letting ferocity of a general election.
What happens in Strasbourg is not going to have much effect on the mortgage rate or inflation.
The election coincided with a precipitous slide in the popularity of a Conservative government struggling with a severe balance of payments deficit.
It was a great opportunity for registering resentment.
Taking a gamble, the British Greens contested all 78 mainland seats and took nearly 15 per cent of the vote (but no seats because of the first-past-the-post rule of British elections; i.e. there was not a single constituency in which the Greens had a majority).
In the 1984 Euro-election, when they contested only seventeen seats, they took 0.2 per cent.
So it was a remarkable jump into the headlines and popular acceptance, even if it was of a rather limited nature.
It was true that the turnout was a meagre 37 per cent of the electorate, by far the lowest in Europe, where the average was 59 per cent, but it was still two million people.
The heaviest green voting was in the Tory south, lending weight to the belief that many voters were disenchanted Tories casting a vote against an unpopular government.
It was a view supported later by the fading away of Green support to between 3 and 5 per cent in polls held at the end of the year.
The voters were by then more hostile to Mrs Thatcher and her government, but they were switching their support to Labour, not to the third parties.
The hard core of support seemed to have risen slightly during the year, but voting Green in the Euro-elections had not for most of the voters signified a new allegiance.
Relatively few had bothered to examine Green Party policy in detail, and most were unaware that the party was hostile to the EC and proposed reducing consumption in the interests of conservation.
The protest vote theory, though valid, was not sufficient to explain why 2 million adults took the trouble to vote for organic smallholders and kindred green souls who had hitherto made little impression on the political scene.
The vote was overwhelmingly urban, as it must be in a densely populated country like Britain, and almost certainly middle-class.
In similar circumstances in previous elections the dissatisfied Tories would have given the Liberals and the Social Democrats the benefit of their protest.
So their switch to the Greens indicated something more positive in their choice than mere protest.
Put at its simplest, they were voting for the countryside.
The fact that the Greens' ‘Europe of the Regions’ is little more than a nostalgic fantasy and their economic policies might rapidly place even organic small-holders in the same income bracket as Third World peasants was not important.
The Green voters were supporting clean air, unpolluted rivers, a peaceful countryside unblemished by motorways and new estates, in short for ‘quality of life’.
They voted for a restoration of a betrayed heritage of wild flowers and healthy trees.
It might be as much a shimmering dream as ‘Europe of the Regions’ but that does not diminish its power.
A Gallup poll conducted for the Daily Telegraph two months after the Euro-elections found that an ‘overwhelming’ majority of the electorate, including three-quarters of those who voted Tory in the 1987 general election, believed the government was not doing enough to protect the countryside.
More people than ever wanted to live there rather than in towns and 79 per cent took the view that the countryside was in danger.
Reviewing the situation at the end of the year, Lindsay Cooke, one of the Greens' 1989 spokespeople, thought despondently that the movement's share of the poll had shrunk because of a lack of publicity.
There were no MPs in Strasbourg or in Westminster for the media to focus on.
‘The media have decided that there has been a return to two-party politics and everyone else has been marginalized,’ she told the author.
‘Our views are not sought and when we do make our views known, they are not interested in reporting them.’
The number of local Green parties had risen to nearly 270 by the end of the year and the membership had almost doubled from 9000 at the beginning of the year to 17,000 by the end.
Support for the Greens may have shrunk but it was still at the same level as the Liberal Democrats’, the third party in Parliament, so perhaps Ms Cooke was unduly downcast.
But despite those substantial gains, bold statements about fighting every seat in the next general election were no longer heard.
The party was short of funds; and it was still being run from a tiny office with just four paid staff.
A third of the Membership claimed to be unemployed and their reduced subscriptions of £6 did not cover even mailing costs.
The press officer, Barbara Bloomfield, complained at a meeting of the Greens' council in January 1990 that if she wanted to step out of the office she had to get a volunteer to take her place, possibly an overseas student who knew next to nothing about the press or the party.
Friends of the Earth, by comparison, had ninety paid staff.
‘We cannot continue to run a serious party like this.’
Chain-stores and industries may take full-page advertisements in newspapers to proclaim their greenness, but no millionaire had come forward to offer a share of his eco-sound profits.
If a potential philanthropist did exist, he might have found it a deterrent that there was no established leadership to whom he could talk.
The Greens were still arguing over whether the time had come to loosen principle a little and elect a leader, a public face, perhaps Sara Parkin, the International Liaison Secretary of the UK Greens as well as the European Greens' co-ordination co-secretary.
‘We believe in leadership with , not leadership over the party,’ said Lindsay Cooke.
‘As a problem, it's a media invention, and, as it happened, the media chose a leader for us — Sara Parkin.
I am not decrying Sara in any way when I say it might have been more sensible for us to choose the leader.’
Two million votes and no seats.
The British electoral system presents practically insuperable obstacles for small parties to overcome.
Under proportional representation — the rule of all other EC member states — the British Greens would have been the largest national group in the Strasbourg Green firmament, where the number of those who regarded themselves as in some way Green had risen from 11 to 43.
That position was occupied by the French (whose vote had also risen steeply) with nine seats, followed by the West Germans with eight and the Italians with seven.
There were in the parliament at the end of 1989 twenty-nine European Greens and fourteen members (including two defectors from the Greens) of their old partnership, the Rainbow Group, a ‘technical’ gathering of green-tinged communists, nationalists and anti-EC Danes.
Even after this hiving-off the European Greens were not exactly monolithic, since, apart from the ideological differences within Die Grünen, they had taken under their wing an Italian who wanted the legalization of drugs and several small, otherwise homeless parties.
The most dynamic Green party in Europe is undoubtedly Die Grünen, which took 8.3 per cent of the vote in the 1987 West German federal elections and won 42 seats, only four fewer than the ruling Christian Democrats' coalition partners, the Free Democrats.
Here, if anywhere, one would imagine, was the making of the Red-Green coalition with the mainstream left-centre that the Realos seek.
Such coalitions exist at the municipal level in West Berlin and Frankfurt.
Informal talks were held with the Social Democrats in June 1989 with the 1990 elections in mind, a recognition in itself that the Green pragmatists were in the ascendant and the Marxist regionalists on the wane.
And then the Greens' past caught up with them — or, more accurately, was put on display by the government parties — and the Social Democrats retreated rapidly in case the electorate took fright at the thought of a pact with such a dubious, anarchic bunch.
Die Grünen has been described by Petra Kelly as an ‘anti-party party’, and getting into bed with them might be a guarantee of ending up on the floor.
They are the ‘watermelon party’, green on the outside and red on the inside, part of the ‘alternative’ subculture, the libertarian siblings of a rich society, not unlike at their extreme end the American drop-out society of the 1960s and 1970s.
The communist Greens insist that Die Grünen's posture in the Bundestag must be one of ‘irreconcilable opposition to and critique of existing conditions’.
And there was more than a smack of sympathy for terrorism in a call by a leading Fundi for a ‘broad show of unity’ with a group which shot dead two policemen during a demonstration at Frankfurt airport.
Given the extremes within the party it is not surprising that there is a continuing feud between those willing to make political deals and those so utterly opposed to the system that they will make no concessions.
Die Grünen is generally regarded as the most turbulent and self-destructive of the Green parties, but its internal quarrels are, says Sara Parkin in her guide to the European Greens, ‘only a more flagrant example’ of what goes on in all the parties.
The Greens may have acted as catalysts in the green revolution, and their success in the Euro-election undoubtedly awoke the mainstream parties to the extent of the stirrings in the electoral loam, but they no more held a patent on green ideas than feminists did on equal rights for women.
Their ideas could be expropriated as freely and easily as blackberries from a hedge in summer.
For Labour, accommodation to the changing mood meant adopting the essentially green idea of assessing the environmental costs of growth and working them into the balance sheets (which the Tories are also adopting), but it did not mean following the Greens in calling for a halt to growth.
To do that in the way the Greens proposed would require a ‘virtually totalitarian state’, Bryan Gould (at the time Shadow Trade Secretary) told the shadow cabinet in July 1989.
He admitted, though, that Labour was seen as too producer-oriented: ‘We should be able to give a value to unpolluted air, clean water, a safe environment, as the end-products of economic activity.’
A great many green ideas were produced by Labour that summer; a ‘green bill’ to show up the deficiencies in Tory legislation; making the quality of life the central theme in the 1990 local elections; the mobilization of public opinion through the development of a network of environmental, countryside and energy organizations.
The Trades Union Congress weighed in with a Green Charter, which included the right to hold ‘green strikes’ over issues like the importation of toxic wastes.
But by the end of the year the ‘green bill’ had been quietly dropped and the environmental ‘network’had vanished into a general belief in the need for good, informal relations with Friends of the Earth and other environmental organizations.
It was no longer necessary to upstage the Green Party; and it was becoming harder, too, to find a straightforward, easily defined green issue on which to challenge the Tories.
Mrs Thatcher had established her environmentalist credentials in several speeches and had replaced the true-blue but ungreen Nicholas Ridley with the practically viridescent Chris Patten as Environment Secretary.
Labour was obliged to match Patten with Bryan Gould: ‘I would agree that Thatcher and Patten understand global warming,’ said Gould's environmental researcher and adviser, Nigel Stanley.
‘Thatcher's speech to the UN (8 November 1989) was very effective.
But I wouldn't agree that there is very little difference between the parties on green issues.
The Tories may talk green but they act dirty.’
‘Dirty’ in this context means trying to apply free market ideas to the prevention of pollution, to continuing to dump sewage in the sea, to not doing enough to curb road traffic and improve public transport.
Under the heading ‘A better quality of life’, Labour's policy review for the 1990s declared that the future of the planet depended on keeping it at the top of the agenda:
People want tougher environmental regulation — nationally and internationally.
Industry, agriculture, local authorities and commercial developers must all have a clear framework within which to plan and invest.
It is hard to define precisely what constitutes quality of life.
You know it when you experience it, but it is not the same thing as standards of living or GNP; it is not quantifiable and not necessarily ‘environmental’.
For some it is cows in flowering meadows, for others, cars and cheap central heating; and for the great majority, both.
The quality of life issues around which so much of the green argument revolves are not trivial, but they are secondary.
It is always possible to be kinder to the earth, but it is not saving clumps of trees from the bulldozers which will matter in the next century.
The primary issues are industrial rather than country matters and concerned with survival rather than the quality of life.
But if you strip away the embroidery from the Labour statement, there is agreement that the issue is survival.
That at least seemed to be bipartisan.
‘It is life itself we must battle to preserve,’ said Mrs Thatcher in her speech to the United Nations in New York.
‘The evidence is there.
The damage is being done.’
The head of government of any industrialized state, of whatever persuasion, could have echoed that fervently in 1989.
The campaigners
Margaret Thatcher is a rarity among national leaders in that she has a science background.
While the greening of the electorate was rapidly taken aboard and she was impressed by the fact that acid rain could damage international relations as surely as it did stonework and trees, what caught her imagination were the profound implications of what was happening to the chemistry of the deeper atmosphere.
Between the glimpses of the apocalypse when she spoke to the UN General Assembly in November 1989 on the unprecedented dangers of its own making which faced mankind was an appeal:
it is no good squabbling over who is responsible or who should pay.
Whole areas of our planet could be subject to drought and starvation if the pattern of rains and monsoons were to change as a result of the destruction of forests and the accumulation of greenhouse gases.
We have to look forward, not backward.
We shall only succeed in dealing with the problems through a vast international cooperative effort.
The challenge for the negotiators was as great as for any disarmament treaty.
Time was too short to allow diversion into fruitless and divisive argument.
There was a general acceptance within the green community that the speech was a good one, although it was grudging in some cases: ‘Full of poetry and passion but…short on policy,’ wrote Tom Burke, Director of the Green Alliance.
What was needed was a lead not a lecture.
By the end of the year, Mrs Thatcher was in the chair of a new cabinet committee, Misc. 141, which had been given the task of preparing for the fast-approaching day when limits would be set on greenhouse gas emissions.
The new policies which would emerge for discussion in an autumn 1990 white paper would take matter well beyond the December 1989 Green Bill, which does not include carbon dioxide among the gases for which standards are to be set.
Cutting its emissions would go to the quick of industry, affecting road transport and energy output and involving potentially huge expenditures which the Treasury had, simultaneously with Misc. 141, set up its own committee to study.
Both committees were the result of Chris Patten's desire to see more forward-thinking and more co-operation between departments.
It was a measure of how much the green political arena had changed that in December 1989 Jonathan Porritt, then Director of Friends of the Earth, was invited for talks at 10 Downing Street.
Environmentalists were no longer‘the enemy within’, as Mrs Thatcher had described them only three years earlier.
The former eco-terrorists, feared for their readiness to ambush government whenever it marched into the green province, had suddenly become people worth informing and consulting at the highest level.
They were almost — but not quite — on the same side.
It could be argued, too, that they were beneficiaries of the heightened public awareness created by the increasing emphasis by government on the perils facing the environment.
Many waverers must have reached for their chequebooks and signed on with a green campaign organization after hearing the latest pronouncement assuring them that there really was something to worry about.
There are dangers in becoming officially accepted.
Complacency and a tendency to mute criticism of governments are among them.
Becoming fashionable is another.
The cutting-edge can become blunted.
The campaign groups should ideally be voices calling from the wilderness on behalf of the wilderness.
But then, of course, the wilderness grows less, or is saved (or perhaps tamed).
The romantic days which have seen the bold David McTaggart striding the Pacific main in the Greenpeace ketch Vega to challenge the French bomb testers at Moruroa atoll may be passing simply because, in that particular case, the military reasons for testing are passing.
The mood and issues of the 1990s are bound to be different from those of the 1980s.
Climate change is already more important than acid rain, genetic engineering a more topical issue than saving whales.
Changed issues do not necessarily throw organizations into an anxious state of transition; if they are any good, they are always in transition.
That certainly applies to the three biggest international green campaign organizations: Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
They continue to grow in size and influence and they appear to be still some way from peaking.
As they grow larger, they grow richer, they spend more on research and become more authoritative.
Greenpeace was accused of scientific sloppiness, so it appointed a director of science and two people to work with him, a recognition in its way that zipping over the waves in pursuit of whalers was not enough to keep it in the forefront in these intellectually demanding days of climate change.
But if you begin to get more solid and reliable — and perhaps institutional — do you also begin to get ‘soft’?
The authors of Greenpeace's official history,The Greenpeace Story , go out of their way to refute the slur in their introduction:
Direct action remains the central theme of Greenpeace operations.
This needs to be stated clearly because there is a current media cliché that Greenpeace is turning its back on such tactics and is becoming a more bureaucratic, softer version of its earlier radical self.
This is demonstrably untrue; the number of direct actions continues in an upwards spiral.
What is true is that, in recent years, such actions have been backed up by sophisticated political lobbying and scientific enquiry that have added strength to the organization's dramatic calls for change.
Greenpeace's continued insistence on non-violent tactics, even when faced with violence, reflects both its cultural origins and its links with the other great movements for social change in the twentieth century.
Peter Melchett, Greenpeace's Executive Director in London, looked at the ‘softness’ issue from the aspect of whether being tough reduced influence.
‘People come to us and say, ‘Tone down the message and we'll talk to you’, but we don't accept that.
I don't think our direct actions are a problem reducing our effectiveness.
Politicians may not talk to us publicly, but they do privately.’
The choice of heads for the campaigning organizations says a great deal about their memberships: solidly white middle-class.
Lord Melchett, educated at Eton, former Labour Minister of State for Northern Ireland, became head of Greenpeace at the beginning of 1989, near the beginning of the membership boom.
At Friends of the Earth there is (or was until mid-1990, when David Gee took over) his friend, the Hon.
Jonathan Porritt, Old Etonian, son of Lord Porritt, former Governor of New Zealand.
WWF's International President is the Duke of Edinburgh and its UK President is Princess Alexandra.
The Duke has an old-fashioned huntin', shootin' and fishin' greenness which is a bit at odds with the panda-loving, badger-saving attitudes of most WWF members, but he is outspoken in his condemnation of ‘the ruthless pursuit of economic development’.
It is very English, of course, to fight for good causes under the cover of titled office-holders.
Neither Melchett nor Porritt fits the usual patterns of lordship, but their presence is reassuring to members who like to see guarantees of moderation and respectability flown at the masthead.
A ‘moral initiative’ for nature
As the guardians and voice of nature the green pressure groups are more effective than any political party.
The largest of them, Greenpeace, has, in the space of two decades, enlisted 3.5 million members worldwide and become rich enough to maintain a small fleet of boats and a research station in Antarctica.
Its activities have led to one boat being badly damaged by a French warship, another rammed by the US Navy while trying to interrupt a missile test, and one sunk in harbour by French agents.
In contrast to the other big pressure groups, Greenpeace does not accept funding from governments or firms.
It has had, since its inception, an adversarial relationship with governments and its activists are not the sort of people with whom Conservative governments easily make friends, particularly when they block the outflow pipe of nuclear processing plants such as the one at Sellafield in Cumbria.
Greenpeace's cultural origins are Quaker.
It was founded in 1970 by two American Quaker couples in Vancouver, British Colombia, who fell out with the Sierra Club, the long-established American conservationist organization, over its cautious stand on nuclear power and its refusal to become involved in big international issues.
They recalled that in 1958 Quakers had made an unsuccessful attempt to interrupt atmospheric testing of H-bombs at Bikini atoll in the Pacific.
The approaching US nuclear test at Amchitka in the Aleutians offered the chance of making a similar sea-borne protest.
Confrontation with the United States was followed by the more dramatic confrontations with the French at Moruroa atoll where the goaded French beat up Greenpeace's skipper, McTaggart, rammed a protest boat and eventually murdered a photographer who went down with the sabotaged Rainbow Warrior in Auckland harbour in July 1985.
The Pacific — and the oceans generally — became the main theatre of the movement's direct actions, although it has challenged French airfield builders in Antarctica and climbed towering chimney-stacks to plant banners condemning acid rain.
Scenes of activists risking their lives to challenge lumbering factory ships generate publicity — and money — for causes of which the majority of people in Western countries approve.
In a sense Greenpeace volunteers are doing a lot of dirty work for the rest of us.
How else would we have known about the slaughter of whales or seal cubs?
How else could we have appreciated the dangers of ocean pollution, the extraordinary risks that are being taken with nuclear waste?
The politicians will not tell us of what is happening to the environment.
The vested interests of large corporations will not come clean unless we force them.
That is why Greenpeace have had to take the moral initiative…
‘Moral initiative…a great movement for social change’(to quote The Greenpeace Story again)?
One does not really think of saving dolphins as connected with social change, but essentially Greenpeace's claim is not exaggerated.
In the West at least people have identified with a threatened world and the pressure groups have been the first instruments of that identification.
Whales have been saved, so have seals, and nuclear power has had the question-mark over it enlarged.
Greenpeace's international HQ produces an amazing amount of campaign literature: sea turtle fact sheets,Everyone's Guide to Toxics in the Home , five major arguments against kangaroo farming, ocean incineration of toxic waste, driftnets, the destruction of red coral, campaign to end nuclear weapon testing, save Antarctica, let's save the Mediterranean, and a great deal more.
Friends of the Earth comes from the same womb as Greenpeace, the Sierra Club.
The period in which both were founded — 1969 in the case of the Friends, and 1970 in Greenpeace's — marked a transition from old-fashioned conservationism to a much more political and active defence of nature.
The founder-president of FoE, David Brower, had resigned as executive director of the Sierra Club in 1969 after seventeen years in the post.
His parting was a traumatic event which borough conservative lovers of scenic beauty and wide-open spaces into direct conflict with the new breed of activists, internationalist in their outlook.
The Club had to decide, said Brower, whether to continue as a society of companions on the trail or take the position that ‘the entire environment is the proper province of conservationists’.
In a ballot, the Club membership decided to stay with the trails and Brower's suspension by the Board for ‘dictatorial methods, disobedience and fiscal irresponsibility’ was upheld.
In 1989, the membership of FoE in the United Kingdom leapt from 60,000 to 150,000, its income from £1,012,000 to £2,144,000 and its expenditures from £914,000 to £1,996,000.
Its advice was sought by all the parliamentary select committees involved in any way with the environment and it had a place on several of the government's consultative bodies.
Internationally, it had observer status with the Food and Agriculture Organization, the International Maritime Organization, the London Dumping Convention, the International Whaling Commission, the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands and the International Tropical Timber Organization.
There were branches in thirty-three countries.
Despite its international image, FoE International's secretariat — currently in London — consists of one person.
The work is done by the national branches.
The British branch employs a fund raising team of eleven and an information staff of the same size.
There are nineteen more employed on running campaigns ranging from tropical rainforests to air pollution and London's roads.
It is difficult to imagine the World Wide Fund for Nature encouraging activists to clamber up chimneystacks or challenge French warships.
It raises funds for conservation and its concerns are with earth-bound pandas (it has helped set up ten panda reserves in China) rather than ocean-going whales.
There is a note of disapproval in the response of an official to a question about relations with the other big campaigners: ‘We work quite often with Friends of the Earth, less often with Greenpeace.’
Royalty is in the van and the British headquarters are in Panda House, Weyside Park, Godalming, Surrey.
The late Sir Peter Scott was the founder, in 1961 (WWF is the only one of the Big Three which has British origins), and international headquarters are in Gland, Switzerland, in the same building as the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), with which it has close relations (and which, in turn, is close to UNEP).
It bills itself as ‘the largest private conservation organization in the world’, with offices in twenty-three countries and more than one million members.
In addition to the giant panda (its logo) it has ‘reprieved’(WWF's word) the Indian tiger and the polar bear, the latter by persuading the five Arctic nations to restrict hunting.
The African elephant was a notable beneficiary of WWF's activities in 1989, with two British lawyers working on its behalf during the negotiations on the Cites agreement on ivory.
A change of priorities
The world's great mammals have, however, been edged away from centre-stage recently.
Since WWF's change to its present name from World Wildlife Fund it has, to quote a staffer in a rival pressure group, ‘been trying to get away from its cuddly animal image’.
WWF says the change was made ‘to reflect more accurately the conservation work it does’.
Nowadays, less than 10 per cent of its worldwide expenditure on conservation is directed solely on species protection.
The priority has become saving habitats and solving environmental problems.
One of the projects by which it sets most store is the Plants Conservation Programme, run jointly with the IUCN.
WWF found that finding a cuddly plant equivalent of the panda was difficult, so instead it focused on the value of plants to mankind, particularly medicinal plants.
And at that point, of course, it swings into the issue of bio-diversity and the threat that destruction of the tropical rainforests, with their genetic richness, will mean more and more plants being lost for good .
In Britain, too, there have been changes of emphasis.
Until 1985 the bulk of its allocations to projects went on purchases of land for reserves.
By 1989 reserves had slipped well down the list and education and public awareness had risen.
The most significant change, though, was the appointment of a greenhouse gases and transport campaigner.
Like the other campaign organizations, WWF had realized that the natural world can no longer be divided into isolated sectors of activity.
All are united by the threat of climate change.
Saving elephants, tigers and terms in the twentieth century will be a small gain if their habitats are ruined or destroyed along with man's in the twenty-first.
1989 was a marvellous year for the pressure groups.
Even at its end the members were still rolling-in in their thousands — 4000–5000 a week in Greenpeace's case.
Given the cycles in enthusiasm for green issues, maintaining the momentum may be a problem, but the example of West Germany is encouraging.
Its population is approximately the same as Britain's but its Greenpeace has 600,000 members, double the British membership.
Looked at collectively, the green movements in Britain are already numerically impressive.
To coincide with World Environment Day on 5 June 1989,The Times published a survey which showed that the membership of fifteen green organizations was climbing towards parity with the membership of unions affiliated to the TUC.
If the current growth rates continued, it would be close to 6 million by 1992, with the TUC at 8.8 million and declining.
It was an unfair comparison, of course.
Most of the 2 million who belong to the National Trust (one of the fifteen) do so for the sake of visiting the houses it preserves, not because it is green.
All the same, the growth rate of this group, all broadly linked by an interest in the countryside and the environment, was evidence of the power building up behind the green movement in the 1980s and 1990s.
There is an obvious danger of excessive duplication when broadly similar organizations conduct broadly similar campaigns.
The rainforests are an obvious example.
As fund-raisers they are unparalleled.
The urban middle-class heart goes out to jaguars, exotic Indians and magnificent trees with a generosity that is not evident in the cases of kangaroos and red coral.
FoE is heavily involved in the rainforests; WWF considers them its ‘major international priority’; Greenpeace started its rainforest campaign in 1989 and pondered the possibility of seaborne harassment of ships carrying timber exports.
‘We are in competition, and I think that is good, but there is a lot of information-sharing,’ said Peter Melchett.
‘There are informal networks through which we let one another know what we are doing and we meet and talk.
For instance, Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth had ten people each at a meeting recently (towards the end of 1989) to talk about the Green Bill and other issues.’
Ad hoc alliances of green organizations take place from time to time, and at the end of 1988 Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth and the World Wide Fund for Nature jointly threw down a ‘green gauntlet’ to the government, urging it to turn propaganda about the environment into action.
A list of thirty measures ranging from recycling resources to doubling overseas aid were proposed.
It made very little impact.
They appeared to be of one mind again when they appeared jointly to give evidence before the Commons' Energy Committee on the greenhouse effect's implications for energy policy.
This time, though, there was an interesting addition to their ranks, the Association for the Conservation of Energy, a combination of think-tank and pressure group mainly financed by manufacturers of equipment for conserving heat and energy.
‘We will have to tackle the major issues,’ Peter Melchett had said, a shade regretfully, when asked how Greenpeace, with its policy of high-profile direct actions, would deal with the nebulous elements of climate warming.
They sent along their air pollution campaigner to the energy committee hearing.
But here was the future.
The grey enigmatic god carbon dioxide was taking over from Pan.
The uncertain politics of carbon dioxide
There is indeed something godlike about carbon, its omni-presence in all things living and dead, the grand cycles of time that move it in its vehicular form carbon dioxide between land, sea and air, the fertility it provides and its release by fire.
It manifests itself in diamonds as well as in coal, and it has more compounds than any other element.
A branch of science, organic chemistry, is witness to their complexity.
In combination with oxygen it forms the gas carbon dioxide.
A colourless gas with a faint tang, it can produce narcosis and even (after a lengthy exposure at a concentration of 5 per cent or more) unconsciousness and death, but it is as a greenhouse gas emitted in the course of producing man-made energy that it has become central to our end-of-century concerns.
That sort of centrality does not automatically make it an easy issue for national politicians, though.
All profess greenness nowadays, of course, but climate change has not yet become part of their instinctual combat kit with its codes telling them instantly what to do when action is joined over, for example , trade union legislation and welfare payments.
The first Commons debate on world climate change came only two days after the prime minister's theme-setting UN speech on the environment in November 1989, yet at no stage in its five-hour course was it attended by more than fourteen MPs.
The debate was opened by David Trippier, Minister of State for the Environment, who said the House could debate no issue of more immediate importance…and then announced that he would have to leave early to present the Young Environmentalist of the Year award at a lunch.
Attitudes on an issue which hardly ever figures in the popular press and does not fit into a ready-made political rut are bound to change slowly.
The warning signs were, in any case, hoisted slowly and cautiously by the scientists.
Early in 1980, Whitehall's newly-created Interdepartmental Group on Climate Change published a report on the implications of its subject for the United Kingdom.
The Thatcher administration was still new to the power it was to hold for the rest of the decade and a reader might reasonably expect to find something seminal in the report.
But its reluctant, even remote, tone is that of bureaucrats anxious to distance themselves from what might prove to be no more than fashionable scientific nonsense.
‘Some people’ had argued that increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide had serious implications for the climate, but the committee had not come to any conclusions on that.
Recent extremes of weather had given ‘speculations’ credibility with the public, but the Meteorological Office scientists took the view that the variations in weather were compatible with established climate patterns.
The scientists were being cautious and so were the civil servants; this meant that British politicians could happily continue to struggle over familiar issues until 1988 when a devastating drought enabled scientists in the USA to get the ear of the Senate and pour into it a story sufficiently sensational to alarm the rest of the Western world.
The scientists who man the climatological observation posts are less cautious than they used to be now that the general theory of climate change has become common property; government servants are more confident and outspoken; and, while scepticism remains, no cabinet minister is likely to denounce the theory and the accompanying evidence as hysterical.
In 1978–9 the British government spent a modest £250,000 on research, including the development of climate models.
By 1989–90 the budget was £15.54 million (0.53 per cent of the total government expenditure on civil science and technology research and development), with an additional £760,000 over two years for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and £5 million pledged to fund the new centre for the prediction of climate change announced by Mrs Thatcher in her UN speech on the environment.
The valedictory thoughts of Sir Ian
The moving spirit behind the November 1989 Commons debate was Sir Ian Lloyd, who delivered a grand and gloomy swan song as chairman of the Commons' Energy Committee.
He was, he said, one of that small group of political eccentrics who browsed around the dustbins of policy hoping occasionally to come across the word ‘science’:
I make a more general criticism.
It is not so much a failure of one or other particular party, it is a failure of our culture to recognize the significance and importance of science and to elevate it within the nation more continuously and more substantially than governments of either party have chosen to do during the past 25 years.
Sir Ian is a former president of the Cambridge Union, whose career has been woven out of a mixture of Conservative politics, economics and technology.
He has tried unsuccessfully to persuade government that it should devote a fixed proportion of either GDP or the defence budget (which has some logic as an idea, since the Meteorological Office is funded through the Ministry of Defence) to research into global warming; and failure in that respect has reinforced his view that governments across the world find inexpensive words preferable to expensive actions.
He continued:
Although the political will has been expressed in vigorous, interesting and dramatic terms at international conferences, in my judgement the political will to follow through that policy right across the globe to a degree that will be effective does not exist.
That political will does not exist because public opinion has not yet begun to be aware of the scale of possible changes that governments will ask their publics to accept.
(And even if the political will did exist, he doubted whether the institutions which would have to translate it into collective action were strong enough to do so.)
Our international institutions are frail, fragile and tend to be powerless.
We are moving into an era when frailty, fragility and powerlessness are simply not enough.
The proper institutions must be created.
What sort of ‘proper institutions’ did he mean?
‘I was thinking of a general problem,’ he said later,
which is how far parliaments should surrender part or the whole of their responsibilities.
It is my belief that the nature and scale of the change needed is unprecedented.
I just don't believe that a conglomeration of nation-states will be able to deal with it.
We are facing a situation where the human race will have to govern itself.
No existing institution has the power to encapsulate and carry out policies, so we will need new ones.
At the moment the world is too fragmented to deal with the crises that will emerge.
International conventions were all very well, but they were far too easy to breach.
War as the ultimate sanction was not a credible solution.
Every instinct and all the forces in political democracy were against the surrender of sovereignty, but we had to move down the road towards accepting it.
Governments would face the prospect of catastrophic events and massive expenditures.
They would have to make political judgements on how far to reduce standards of living.
Sir Ian thinks further ahead than most governments care to go.
Surrendering sovereignty to a UN body or its equivalent is not on even the sketchiest draft agenda for the future.
‘Ian Lloyd is terribly pessimistic,’ a lobbyist in the energy field told the author.
‘He doesn't think the world will be able to agree on what should be done on global warming.
He may be right.
There are too many vested interests.’
Vested interests in sovereignty, in industry, in national wealth, in political power.
Whichever way you turn in trying to halt the elements of global warming, the costs mount; and as they mount, so do taxes and the perils of inflation.
The Conservative government in Britain in 1990 still gave priority to fighting inflation, which was rising more steeply than in its commercial competitors.
The promises to cut taxes had been brushed to one side, but it was unlikely that the government would wish to fight the next election against a background of undertakings that would entail their actually being increased.
The government's position is that the major decisions on countering global warming will have to wait on international agreement at the 1992 UN conference on the environment, which would project them beyond the present government.
Unilateral action is out, since its cost would reduce industry's competitiveness in international markets.
So no gestures.
It remains, too, the official conviction of the government that market forces rather than regulation will create the necessary responses to global warming.
Limiting carbon dioxide emissions depended not on regulation but on the aggregate decisions of millions of individuals remote from government, John Wakeham, the British Energy Secretary, told the World Energy Conference in Montreal in September 1989.
There were major drawbacks in concentrating solely on a ‘regulatory route’.
By contrast, there were clear advantages if people were motivated by their own self-interest to restrain greenhouse emissions.
A tax or taxes on energy generally were possible approaches.
Moreover, countries should price fuels to reflect their full costs, including environmental costs.
They needed to develop market mechanisms which would take account of the cost of environmental effects, and to develop the principle of the ‘polluter pays’.
‘Market forces’ is regarded by some as a doctrinal slogan as nebulous as carbon dioxide itself.
‘The cost of polluting the environment is not recognized by the market mechanism,’ the Institution of Electrical Engineers remarked drily in its written evidence to the House Energy Committee hearings on the greenhouse effect and its implications for energy policy.
There was no way at present of costing one environmental ‘pollutant’ against another.
‘How many times worse than 200 unsightly windmills is the radioactive product of a nuclear power or the CO 2 emissions of one coal-fired station?‘ask Energy Committee in its report of the hearings.
Counting the cost of carbon
It is estimated that every year more than 200 billion tonnes of carbon are exchanged between the atmosphere, living things and the ocean in a natural cycle.
To that, humanity adds about 5.6 billion tonnes from burning fossil fuels, of which the developed nations are responsible for 70–75 per cent, with power stations the worst offenders.
In the last two decades world production of electricity has roughly doubled, with the developing nations pulling towards overtaking the developed.
The best guess prediction is that by 2030 the concentration of greenhouse gases of all kinds will be equivalent to a doubling of carbon dioxide (if CO 2 was the only gas, the doubling would not take place until 2080).
The consensus is that stabilizing the climate (i.e. halting the warming) will require a 50 per cent cut in carbon dioxide emissions.
The Brundtland Commission sketched two scenarios of energy consumption in Our Common Future , one high, the other low.
It took as a starting point a figure of about 10 Terrawatts (one Terrawatt equals one billion kilowatts) for global energy consumption in 1980.
If per capita consumption remained static, an increased world population would still need 40 per cent more energy by 2025.
But if energy consumption became uniform, with people in the developing world using as much per capita as those in the industrial world, global consumption would rise to 55 Terrawatts (TW).
Even if that were scaled down to 35 TW, the world in 2030 would still require 1.6 times as much oil as in 1980, 3.4 times as much natural gas and nearly 6 times as much coal, and nuclear capacity would have to be 30 times greater than in 1980.
The low 11.2 TW scenario would require the industrialized nations to halve their energy consumption by 2020, while the developing world would more than double theirs.
One can, of course, go on writing scenarios and juggling the figures almost indefinitely; the only sure thing that emerges is that stabilizing the climate by halving CO 2 emissions is going to demand a very great — and expensive — effort by the industrialized nations.
It may well prove to be an impossible task.
Costings of domestic expenditures in industrial countries on reducing emissions tend to brush away the minor irrelevancies of the millions and concentrate on refining estimates to the nearest billion.
The Electricity Council told the Energy Committee that it would be possible to meet the Toronto Conference target of a 20 per cent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by 2005.
The biggest item would be thermal insulation — £5 billion.
Other measures would involve more combined heat and power (CHP) stations, which, instead of discharging into the atmosphere the 60–70 per cent of the primary energy input which ends up as waste heat, would use it to provide hot water and heating in homes and commercial and industrial buildings; and, of course, a switch from coal — which produces more carbon dioxide per ton than any other fuel — to nuclear, gas, oil and ‘renewables’ such as  windfalls and tidal barrages.
The council was doubtful whether the public would want to pay for the changes.
The Central Electricity Generating Board estimated that achieving a 20 per cent cut through switching from coal to nuclear, gas and oil would require an additional capital expenditure of £12 billion.
The effect on electricity prices would be ‘very severe’.
Dr Ken Currie, the head of the government's Energy Technology Support Unit, had similar reservations when he told the Cabinet at a seminar on climate change in April 1989 that technically it was possible to halve carbon dioxide emissions (the longer-term Toronto objective).
On the other hand, there were ‘practical obstacles and controversial issues’ to be overcome.
‘To put the economic aspect into perspective, it would need at least a doubling of the price of energy to make some of the supply options attractive to investors.’
There are broadly three ways of reducing mankind's output of carbon dioxide.
Power stations can be made cleaner and more efficient, so that they use less fossil fuel, particularly high carbon coal; energy can be used more economically by the consumer; and there is nuclear energy (the subject of the following chapter), which whatever else it is capable of doing, does not produce carbon dioxide.
To take more efficient power stations first; there are advanced technologies using fossil fuels (gas turbines, in particular; natural gas produces less carbon dioxide than coal and oil) which are considerably more efficient and produce less carbon dioxide.
Under the heading of ‘renewables’ are windmills, tidal barrages, wave power, solar energy and the ‘hot dry rocks’of geothermal power.
Windmills and tidal barrages (and perhaps wave power) are regarded as having promise even if the former do spoil landscapes and the latter ruin the mudflats on which ducks and wading birds feed.
However, estimates of the space needed for a battery of windmills capable of producing the same amount of electricity as a normal power station, fossil fuel or nuclear, range from 100 to 200 square miles.
Sunlight converted into useable energy by photovoltaic cells is of economic value only in countries with a lot of sunshine.
Geothermal ‘hot dry rocks’ are not strictly ‘renewable’since the rocks, deep within the earth's crust, lose their heat when it is tapped.
Their potential is considerable, though, and the Department of Energy estimated that they could provide 10 per cent of Britain's annual energy requirements over 100 years.
Methane gas from rubbish tips is another potentially valuable source of energy.
Just as you can remove sulphur from power station emissions so you can do the same with carbon dioxide.
Theoretically that is.
Studies carried out by the Brookhaven National Laboratory in the United States suggested that 88 per cent of the carbon dioxide could be removed by an absorption-stripping system.
However, carbon produces more then 3.5 times its own weight in carbon dioxide so there is a problem in disposing of it.
The most feasible means is to pump it as a gas or liquid through a pipeline to the ocean, where at 500 metres, most of it would stay out of contact with the atmosphere for many years, since liquid carbon dioxide has a density greater than seawater.
Even safer — but more costly — is to pump it to a depth of 3000 metres.
However, nothing is known about the long-term environmental consequences — or even effectiveness — of using the ocean beds as dumps.
Other possible places for disposal are abandoned oil and gas reservoirs and aquifers.
Equipping a plant to cope with carbon dioxide is likely to double its cost.
Add to that the 17–20 per cent of the power output consumed in stripping the carbon dioxide and the outcome is probably a doubling in the cost of the electricity produced.
It is a sign of the times that despite the cost research is continuing.
Leaving out nuclear power and the renewables, the most favoured low carbon dioxide fuel is natural gas (which is largely methane, another greenhouse gas).
Emissions from a gas-fired plant are about half those from a coal-fired one.
However, there is a snag.
Natural gas supplies will begin running down in the twenty-first century.
The United Kingdom's reserves are likely to be empty in forty years even at the current rate of consumption.
Worldwide gas, and oil, prices are expected to start rising early in the next century.
Moreover, the use of gas is not likely to have much impact globally.
The Energy Committee's own calculation was that it would require a 90 per cent increase in gas consumption worldwide to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 10 per cent.
The double-glazed future
One comes back to what most people are agreed on: in the short term the simplest, cheapest, quickest and most effective means of reducing carbon dioxide emissions is to use energy more efficiently, in both homes and factories.
Most developed countries are doing so already — and in fact have been doing so for the past sixty years.
Energy saving does not date from the first oil crisis.
Britain is not in the first rank of energy-efficient nations, but, taking 1975 as 100, the energy requirements backing each unit of GDP fell from 115 in 1970 to 81 in 1987.
That was better than the OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) European average of 106 falling to 89 over the same period.
Britain's annual energy needs were almost unchanged between the beginning and end of that period, but real GDP rose by 42 per cent.
It was Japan, the most energy-intensive country in the world, though, that showed what can be done.
Between 1973 and 1985 GDP there rose by 46 per cent while energy use fell by 6 per cent, and that, according to the Association for the Conservation of Energy, put the United States ‘at a $200 billion disadvantage to Japan as a result of a poorer energy efficiency performance’.
Look at the figures for electricity generated (and that is where most of the carbon dioxide comes from), however, and a rather different picture emerges.
While the direct use of fuels for purposes other than electricity generation has gone down, the output of electricity has gone up.
In fact, it almost doubled in the OECD between 1970 and 1987 and the trend remains upward.
Coal-fired power stations were responsible for more than 41 per cent of the electricity in 1987, with nuclear power second with 22 per cent and gas third at 9 per cent.
So it is possible to have more efficient use of energy but an increase in output from the sector which produces the most carbon dioxide.
The Department of Energy sprang a surprise in the autumn of 1989 when the paper it produced for the ‘responses’ group of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change suggested that, with more efficient use of energy, Britain could cut its consumption (and hence carbon dioxide) by 60 per cent by 2005 or 2020.
A more realistic figure, it admitted, was 20 per cent.
The government acknowledged the need for a target in May 1990 by undertaking to stabilize carbon dioxide emissions at the 1990 level by 2005.
Coincidentally with the DoE report, Friends of the Earth produced a non-nuclear package of measures which, it claimed, would produce a 46.5 per cent reduction in emissions in all sectors other than transport, which it excluded.
What is striking in any analysis of this sort is how much carbon dioxide is attributable to consumption of energy by the domestic sector: 29.1 per cent in 1987 as a result of all those central heating systems, television sets and cooking stoves.
Industry was only slightly ahead at 29.5 per cent, and the transport sector — the fastest growing source of carbon dioxide — was third with 23.5 per cent .
FoE made a number of recommendations on taxes, incentives and greater spending on research (including the government's Energy Efficiency Office, which, remarkably, given the nature of the times, saw its budget restricted to £15 million a year for two years in succession — a loss in real terms).
The emphasis generally is on the carrot of incentive rather than the stick of taxes and sharply raised prices.
The latter were ‘a blunt instrument’, said Stewart Boyle, of the Association for the Conservation of Energy, in his address December 1989 to Chatham House's Fourth International Energy Conference.
‘Very high increases could lead to a recession as happened in the late 1970s and early 80s due to the oil price hikes.
This would tend to slow down capital turnover of old, inefficient equipment, exactly the opposite effect that is required.’
He quoted a study of all fuels by the Henley Forecasting Centre which concluded that doubling the fuel costs over five years would simply keep energy consumption level through the 1990s.
As for cars, a study of twenty-five countries concluded that a 10 per cent fuel price increase produced only a 3 per cent improvement in fuel economy.
Price rises were ineffective unless they were so swingeing as to be ruinous.
A rule of thumb is that investment in energy efficiency is expected to pay for itself in two years.
If investments have already been made in recent years, the average investor will not bother to make further improvements until energy prices begin to hurt.
A visitor to ACE's premises noticed that the windows in the director's office were not double-glazed.
The director, Andrew Warren, admitted that even in that citadel of energy conservation he had come to the conclusion that the savings would not justify the cost.
Mr Warren's equivalent in Japan would almost certainly have had his windows double-glazed.
Japan has few energy resources of its own and it has learnt to be frugal: energy prices are approximately twice those in Britain.
It is also the world's most dynamic and successful economy.
Measured on the carbon dioxide scale, it emitted 2.109 metric tons per capita in 1986 from fossil fuels and cement production; Britain in the same year emitted 2.938 metric tons per capita from the same resources; the United States 5.005; France (which relies on nuclear power for 70 per cent of its electricity generation) 1.794, and India 0.187.
‘Energy demand is shifting, from production to pleasure,’ declared Lee Schipper and Andrea Ketoff, at the December 1989 Chatham House conference.
They were talking of the developed countries, of course, perhaps with North America mainly in mind.
Consumers had always wanted bigger cars, holidays in places that were further away from home, bigger refrigerators, larger homes and well-lit amusement parks.
They could realize those ambitions because: ‘Low fuel and electricity prices make these goals that much easier for consumers, who are not worrying about the energy implications of their choices: the colour of the refrigerator becomes more important than its energy use.’
Since 1972 (the run-up to the Middle East oil crisis), the amount of heated space per capita in homes in most OECD countries had grown by 25 per cent.
The number of cars and total miles driven was at least 25 per cent higher in most large countries.
Air travel was growing rapidly, while the role of mass transit on the ground was shrinking almost everywhere.
A combination of cars and aircraft provided over 80 per cent of passenger transport in Western Europe and over 95 per cent in the United States.
Between 1972 and 1985 there had been significant energy savings in OECD countries.
The extent to which the momentum towards more efficient use of energy for heat had slackened since 1985 had surprised them.
Much the same applied to new refrigerators and electrical appliances.
Consumers were not choosing efficiency and manufacturers were not improving efficiency as much as they had in the past.
The results suggested a plateau of energy efficiency had been reached.
Manufacturers of energy-using equipment for aircraft engines to cars were aware of consumer indifference.
Low energy prices were a problem.
‘Since most experts seem to preclude a major upturn in energy prices before the end of the century, we may have to develop a combination of policies and taxes to stimulate the market for improvements in efficiency now as insurance against disruptions from climate change later .’
The developed North worries about how to make luxury more responsible with better light bulbs, the impoverished South struggles to put light bulbs into its shanty towns.
Efficiency plateaux are still a long way from becoming a feature of Southern energy economics.
The scale of the divide between North and South was sketched in a paper read at the December 1989 Chatham House conference by Rajendra Pachauri, Director of the Tata Energy Research Institute in New Delhi.
The North's share of the world's energy consumption was expected to decrease from around 70 per cent to 60 per cent by 2020, but in that time the proportion of the global population living in the South would have grown from 75 per cent to 80 per cent.
Even with an allowance for higher economic growth rates in the South than in the North, the gap in per capita consumption levels was likely to grow.
Improved standards of living in the South would depend on increases in consumption of energy, but there was small prospect of its being consumed as efficiently as in the North.
At best, efficiency improvements in the near future would shave off two or three percentage points in the rate of growth in energy demand.
It was unlikely that countries like Brazil, China and India, which would be the largest consumers of energy in the future, would succumb to international treaties or conventions limiting energy use at the cost of economic development.
The question needs to be asked, whether such limitations would be valid on moral, ethical or social grounds given the disparities that exist in living standards…
The cost of limiting emissions of greenhouse gases has to be borne by those societies which are responsible for the cumulative increase in their concentration levels.
The North can argue, of course, that in a world of finite fossil fuel resources inefficiency in itself is immoral.
Carbon dioxide emissions per head of population may be low in the developing countries, but they are high when measured against units of GDP.
But the paraphernalia of better light bulbs, lean-burn engines and cavity-wall insulation with which the North supports its arguments are likely to be dismissed as irrelevant in parts of the world which for the most part have no need for cavity walls.
The South's case is that for the sake of the ever-improving standards of life which the North's electorates demand, it squanders resources, poisons the atmosphere and then, to stem the environmental degradation it has caused, demands that the impoverished South forgo equality with the North in the name of salvation!
Shares in the greenhouse
By the end of the 1980s all the major governments in the West were carrying out reviews and costing of environmental policies.
It is a virtual certainty that the developed world will have to set standards for itself, probably through commitments within the ECE or OECD framework, before attempting the infinitely difficult problem of persuading the South to join it in global agreements.
One means of persuasion which has been suggested is the creation of ‘greenhouse gas shares’, a virtual currency consisting of marketable carbon emission permits.
Something similar in principle has been tried in the United States, with the issue of tradable acid pollution permits.
It sounds at first a morally dubious proposition, but Michael Grubb argues in The Greenhouse Effect that it is more promising, and fairer, that any other scheme for international control.
The principle which would have to be established first of all is that each person in the world (all those aged 21 or over, suggests Dr Grubb) would have an equal share in man-made carbon dioxide emissions, regardless of whether he lived in a rich developed country or a poor one which produced hardly any carbon dioxide at all.
The next step would be the international negotiation of a target for worldwide emissions over a set period, perhaps a decade or two.
The permits would then be allocated by an international agency to governments.
Countries whose emissions exceeded their allocations would be obliged to buy (or perhaps lease) permits from countries whose output of carbon dioxide fell below their allowance.
The permits could be traded for what the seller wanted — technology, energy-efficiency equipment, development programmes, and so on.
In that way, the rich polluters would be obliged to pay for their excesses through a transfer of technology and wealth to the poor, who in time would come under pressure themselves not to allow their emissions to reach levels which would force them to buy permits.
A market-based scheme of that sort has its attractions; and it has its problems, too.
What would be the value of the ‘currency’?
If the value was fixed by bidding, would it mean that the richest nations cornered what they needed and left the not-so-rich scrabbling for the left-overs?
Would big but impoverished polluters like the Soviet Union and the East European countries accept it?
How would it be monitored and regulated to ensure that those who cheated were penalized?
But even if it is not exactly this scheme, it is certain that any global agreement will have to be supported by a mechanism which allows the developing countries to pollute more while they catch up with developed countries which are simultaneously reducing their emissions.
Rich countries are not going to accept proposals from India and the Group of 77 countries for an environmental aid fund which would be administered by the developing nations, but transfers of technology and financial aid will be part of the eventual package.
Rajiv Gandhi's call when still India's prime minister at the September 1989 Non-Aligned summit for an $18 million fund based on contributions equivalent to 0.1 per cent of GDP by UN members has the support in principle of the influential Mrs Gro Brundtland of Norway.
The argument will be harsh, and if the threat of disaster is vivid enough to bring about agreement, it may be that nations will find that, in the interest of common purpose, they are little by little surrendering the sovereignty of which Sir Ian Lloyd spoke.
Nuclear power: carbon-free but costly and feared
It was mid-January 1990 and the members of the Commons' Energy Committee were plodding towards the ever-receding horizons that contained the answer to their question: was it worth continuing to fund the fast breeder reactor (FBR)?
The representatives of the UK Atomic Energy Authority who had been summoned to attend the session were zealously optimistic about the reactor's prospects, but defending the future of the nuclear industry at the beginning of the 1990s was no easy task.
Uranium prices had slumped.
New reactor orders were virtually non-existent.
Only resource-starved, energy efficient Japan, the first and so far only victim of nuclear warfare, carried the torch of nuclear power with undiminished enthusiasm.
In Britain, two months earlier, the government had decided in a last-minute about-turn that its nuclear power stations, once the shining lamps that would light the way to the sustainably developed future, were unsaleable and so would be withdrawn from privatization of the electricity industry.
Was it the death knell of the nuclear industry or merely curfew time?
Whichever bell was tolling, the question-and-answer on the specific issue of the FBR revealed that the committee was dealing with a legendary creature indifferent to the usual processes of judgement, time and fate.
Never before has a machine been allowed such a long and cosseted lead-time.
Untold billions have been poured into research and building working reactors in return for a relative few penn'orths of electricity.
Research on the fast breeder reactor started in the United States in 1945 and the answers extracted by the committee indicated that the product was unlikely to be needed until practically the middle of the twenty-first century, by which time uranium resources would be running low and prices accordingly high.
Or so it was speculated.
A grand dismissal of the niggling demands of penny-pinchers who wanted results tomorrow came from the chief witness, John Collier, Chairman of the UKAEA and head of the newly-formed Nuclear Electric utility.
When pondering the future of the FBR one needed time-frames of 100–200 years, he declared.
No, it was not possible to say when a commercially viable FBR would be built.
The expensive (and dangerous) charm of the FBR derives from its ability to breed fissile plutonium 239 for use as its fuel from uranium's most common isotope, non-fissionable U238.
This is over 100 times more abundant than the fissile U235 which fuels conventional thermal reactors like the pressurized water reactor (PWR).
However, some breeding takes place in thermal reactors, so the actual gain is that a fast reactor can generate about sixty times as much electricity as a thermal reactor from each tonne of uranium.
Since fast reactors can breed from the depleted uranium in the spent fuel from thermal reactors, it can be calculated that in FBR terms British stocks of depleted uranium are comparable to the country's coal reserves.
On a global scale, the same calculation doubles world fuel resources.
No one loves plutonium, but equally a tamed carbon-free and virtually inexhaustible fuel has its attractions in a world in which increasing demands are made on finite energy resources.
Electricity generation would no longer be the major contributor to the greenhouse effect and its fuel would be ‘sustainable’.
In the late 1940s and 1950s the fast reactor was held in such esteem that other forms of nuclear power generation were seen as filling in time until the FBRs were ready to go on stream.
The experimental model at Dounreay, in Scotland, was the first in the world, in 1959, to become operational.
In the same year it was considered likely that a commercial FBR would be ready in 1965.
That forecast later slipped back to 1970.
In 1967, Sir William Penney, then chairman of UKAEA, thought the first commercial reactor would be in operation in 1979.
In 1975 Dr (later Lord) William Marshall, the country's leading champion of nuclear power, lamented before a House of Lords' committee that at the current rate of progress there might be only two fast reactors on line by 2000.
And so it has gone on, although by the end of the 1980s it was evident that the patience of even a government as dedicated to the eventual triumph of nuclear power as Mrs Thatcher's was showing signs of severe strain.
After a review of the state of research, the government decided, in 1988, that it could not justify continued expenditure of £100 million a year on a project with such an elusive prospect of commercial return.
The prototype fast reactor at Dounreay would be funded until 1994 and its reprocessing plant for a further three years to allow it to deal with spent fuel.
From 1990 there would be a core research and development programme costing £10 million a year, just enough, in the government's view, to allow continued collaboration with the French and Germans on the European Fast Reactor (EFR).
The agreements on EFR had been signed in early 1989 and in October of the same year outline permission was given for the building of a £300 million ‘demonstration’ reprocessing plant at Dounreay to recycle EFR's spent plutonium fuel.
The money was as shadowily outlined as the permission, but, like the EFR agreement itself, it revealed the government's unwillingness to relinquish once and for all its place in the search for inexhaustible energy.
But what is enough in the voracious world of nuclear finances?
Not what the government was offering, said the UKAEA in its written testimony to the Commons' Energy Committee.
The British commitment to EFR was being undermined and Britain placed in a ‘weak position’ relative to its partners.
‘Outstanding progress’ had been made with EFR's design and it was planned to start construction in 1997 and have it ready for operation in 2005.
After a minimum five years' operating experience it would be time to think about taking a few orders for commercial stations, the first of which should come on stream about 2020 — always provided, of course, that the cost and dwindling resources of uranium made it commercially worthwhile:
The strategic need for diversity and ultimately for the replacement of fossil fuels has been the driving force for the development of nuclear power in the U.K. In turn — since uranium reserves are finite — the efficient exploitation of nuclear power itself ultimately depends on the fast reactor.
Since the 1950s this has been the nub of the strategic and commercial argument for developing fast reactors, and it has not changed.
Recently, however, it has been given added emphasis and urgency by the growing appreciation that the damage being done to the environment by the use of fossil fuels may require drastic restrictions on their use.
We therefore believe that greater reliance on the fast reactor is a necessary consequence of such restrictions and that the timescale for the large scale introduction of fast reactors may need to be brought forward.
That is the classic case for the FBR.
The EC Commission said much the same in its submission to the Energy Committee: ‘At the present time the FBR is the only reactor type which could, if introduced early enough, extend the lifetime of our uranium resources to the end of the next century — and beyond.’
Strategic needs do not, however, dominate human (or even commercial) reactions.
No branch of nuclear technology is more detested and feared by the anti-nuclear and green lobbies than fast breeders.
Opposition to fast breeders in Europe has been vigorous.
One man died in the 1977 protest at the Creys-Malville FBR site in France: the Kalkar fast reactor in West Germany is mothballed (at a reputed cost of £30 million a year) largely as a result of green agitation.
In a memorandum written for the Commons' Energy Committee, Andrew Holmes, the editor of Power in Europe , wrote, ‘In the course of my work as a journalist, I have met a few environmentalists who can envisage some kind of long-term accommodation with the nuclear power industry, If waste disposal and other problems are satisfactorily solved; I have never met an environmentalist who was not wholly and implacably opposed to the FBR.’
FBRs mean plutonium and plutonium means warheads and, potentially, nuclear holocausts.
If fast breeders proliferate how can the spread of plutonium to countries which would have no scruples about making their own nuclear weapons be checked?
One measure of how the dangers of plutonium are assessed is the Japanese plan to build an £88 million coastguard vessel to escort shipments of plutonium oxide from the Sellafield reprocessing plant in Cumbria for use in its prototype fast reactor at Monju.
Air transport was ruled out because of the danger of crashes on land, which in this case, because of the route, might turn out to be US soil in Alaska.
Sending it by sea, on the other hand, would run the risk of hijackings by terrorists or even governments.
A ship would have to be guarded by a warship, the Americans, who supplied the original plutonium, insisted.
As for commercial reactions, they can be judged by the fact that the capital cost of a first FBR is estimated by the British nuclear industry at between 20 and 30 per cent greater than that of a PWR, and generating costs 20 per cent more.
Even the cost of generating electricity from the technically successful French Superphénix is twice that of a PWR.
Unloved and out in the cold
If uranium prices are going to swing in favour of fast reactors, they have a long way to go.
At the beginning of the 1990s the spot price for uranium stood at under $10/lb, the lowest real price since it became a commodity and $20 below the official floor price for contract sales.
The uranium industry in South Africa, the world's biggest exporter, was reported to be on the ‘brink of collapse’ as electricity generating companies ran down stocks and cut purchases.
It was not surprising that the amount spent on exploration sank from $760 million in the still relatively fat year of 1979 to between $120 and $150 million at the end of the 1980s and the size of known reserves remained static over a period of at least four years.
In the United States it remained the case that no new nuclear generators had been ordered since 1978.
The situation was slightly better than in the first half of the 1980s, when more power stations were cancelled than entered service, but those under construction all dated from orders placed at the beginning of the 1970s.
In Britain, three of four planned PWRs were cancelled at the end of 1989.
In the rest of Europe the story was much the same, in some ways worse, as a glance within the hopefully green cover of the 1989 status report of the Forum Atomique Européen (Foratom) confirmed:
Austria : operations at the country's first nuclear power plant, at Zwentendorf, cancelled following a national referendum.
Belgium : the government rejected as ‘inappropriate at present’ proposals for a new power station.
West Germany : ‘the nuclear construction programme of the German utilities has practically come to an end for the time being.’
Finland : decisions deferred post-Chernobyl.
France : new orders dried up as the long run of 63 reactors either built or under construction came to an end and the country grappled with the problem of an over-supply of electricity.
Italy : no nuclear plants operating following a November 1987 referendum.
Netherlands : no nuclear power stations under construction or planned.
Spain : five uncompleted nuclear power stations under a moratorium.
Sweden :(where nuclear power provides 46 per cent of the electricity): parliament decides to begin phasing out nuclear power in 1995–6 (but parliament's restrictions on new hydro-electric power stations and the imposition of a ceiling on carbon dioxide emissions have led to a retreat from the goal of becoming, in 2010, the first country to terminate nuclear power generation).
Switzerland : parliament endorsed the cancellation of the planned Kaiseraugst power station near Basel.
The nuclear industry's current predicament is usually placed in the context of the near melt-down at Three Mile Island in 1979 and the fatal disaster at Chernobyl, the radioactive fall-out from which was still affecting places as far away as the uplands of Wales and Scotland four years later.
The opposition of the activists to all forms of nuclear power, civil as well as military, had, in the view of many, been vindicated.
Nuclear explosives might not have killed anyone since Nagasaki in 1945, but the use of nuclear fuel in a civil reactor had.
Newspapers were full of stories of leukaemia clusters near nuclear establishments and of the long-term victims of Chernobyl and minor releases, people picked off at random within the pattern of statistical formulations.
For most people in Britain, the Medical Research Council's study, published in February 1990, revealing the strong possibility that fathers who worked in the Sellafield reprocessing plant in Cumbria had passed leukaemia to their children in their sperm, moved speculation out of the realms of the circumstantial into that of the confirmed.
It was a curious irony that the insidious dangers of civil nuclear power should achieve such prominence just as the superpowers were moving towards agreement on cutting their armouries and reducing the threat of nuclear war caused by suspicion or accident.
If Three Mile Island and, above all, Chernobyl, had not happened, the image of civil nuclear power would (or should) have assumed a more friendly warmth as the superpowers' diminishing stocks of warheads dwindled towards a largely symbolic status.
It would no longer be damaged by the two-facedness of its fuel.
Supposing we had grown to know and love nuclear power (as the French seem to), would we now be seeing it expanding rapidly from what the International Atomic Energy Agency claims is its present provision of 16 per cent of the world's electricity to 25 per cent or more?
It's doubtful.
The expansion of the early 1970s was largely the result of the oil crisis, a strategic decision made in the face of economic blackmail by the Arab members of OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) during the Yom Kippur War.
Given the long lead-time between ordering a nuclear plant and its commercial operation, the high cost of construction, the equally awful cost of eventually decommissioning it, the margin for safety, the time-consuming process of obtaining approval (the enquiry into all aspects of the British PWR Sizewell B took two-and-a-quarter years and cost £20 million) the commitment has to be strong and ‘strategic’ enough — as in France — to counter the lack of resolve as the bills mount.
By the second half of the 1980s oil was cheap once again, thanks to the spur the crises had given to non-OPEC developments like the Alaska North Slope and North Sea oil fields.
Strategic reasons declined.
The humiliating ‘commercial’ figures the British industry — the pioneer of civil nuclear energy — was obliged to produce in advance of privatization in 1989 practically trebled the previously estimated cost per kilowatt hour.
Electricity generated by the one remaining PWR was expected to cost 8p (possibly 10p, according to one report) a kilowatt hour against 3p for power from a modern coal-fired power station and about 2.5p from one of the advanced gas turbine power stations.
But these estimates were, of course, based on the short-term, very non-strategic demands of investors who wanted to be assured of a good return on their money if they bought shares in the industry.
It was impossible for the nuclear power stations to match those demands.
Only the French seemed able to meet challenges of that kind, and how they did it was a mystery to most outside experts.
Greater commitment, no doubt; better technology and a higher level of efficiency in construction, perhaps; and quite certainly the use of a combination of secrecy and ‘creative’ accountancy to maintain the image of technological triumph.
In fact, Electricité de France, had a deficit of £400 million in 1989 thanks to a mixture of reactor problems and drought.
The latter reduced hydro-electric power and caused the shutting down of several nuclear power stations when river levels dropped and the water in any case became too warm for effective cooling.
The industry's image was further dented by the leaking of a secret report which criticized overcapacity and questioned whether its export prices would be economic if all costs were included.
An added embarrassment was a report (also leaked) by the chief inspector for nuclear safety who warned against complacency and came up with an estimate that there was a ‘several per cent’ chance of a serious accident in the next twenty years.
An accident in France would no have to be as serious as Chernobyl to imperil life and health over a wide area in France and its heavily populated neighbours.
In Britain, commercial realpolitik had won the day.
A government committed to the disciplines of the market had had a salutary lesson: the market did not care a damn for the long term, or strategic thinking into the middle of the next century, or, quite possibly, sustainable development.
The latter, in fact, was somewhere in all this a casualty.
Plutonium and enriched weapons-grade uranium aside (and admittedly it is a big aside), nuclear power in its advanced manifestations is as close to the pure spirit of sustainable development as anyone is likely to get, short of covering the landscape with batteries of windmills.
The fact that it is costly merely underlines the fact that sustainable development is costly.
But in the space of less than eighteen months the government had curtailed the nuclear programme and sent the FBR into a dormancy hard to distinguish from a death coma.
Anyone who wanders into the fissured terrain of energy economics will before long encounter Keepin and Kats, from the Rocky Mountain Institute in Colorado.
They are names which, mentioned favourably, are guaranteed to cause narrowed eyes and a suspicion of froth at the mouth corners in senior members of the nuclear establishment.
Keepin and Kats were responsible for a calculation which has been taken up and treated with biblical reverence by the anti-nuclear lobby: for nuclear power to displace coal from the energy mix in a high energy scenario 8000 large reactors would have to be brought on line worldwide at the rate of one every one-and-a-half days.
Even then, carbon dioxide emissions could still increase 65 per cent by 2030.
The scenario for medium energy growth was little better: a reactor every three days.
Not only was nuclear power slower and considerably more expensive than energy efficiency as a means of cutting carbon dioxide emissions, but its overall potential was much smaller.
‘A ridiculous cockshy to put up and then knock down,’ was Collier's reaction to the Keepin and Kats paper.
No one had suggested nuclear power could make the dominant contribution.
It had to be balanced with other sources of energy, perhaps gas.
An entanglement of questions
There is never any one answer to any major problem and Keepin and Kats' calculations are to that extent a cockshy.
It would, after all, be a lunatic commander-in-chief who relied solely on nuclear missiles for his country's defence and dispensed with infantry, tanks, aircraft and submarines.
Energy efficiency may be the quickest way to abate emissions of carbon dioxide but it is hard to imagine it being applied effectively in Third World countries, whose output of the gas is likely to overtake the developed world's in the second or third decade of the next century.
It may not be quite as easy as some assume in the developed world, either.
Natural gas as a replacement for coal is important, too, but coal is cheap and plentiful and likely to remain the principal fuel of China, potentially the world's biggest producer of carbon dioxide (and other pollutants, too).
John Wakeham, the British Energy Secretary, had put a new twist on the need for nuclear power at the September 1989 World Energy Conference in Montreal by suggesting that the developed countries might have to turn increasingly to nuclear power to ‘make room’ for more use of fossil fuels by developing countries.
Nuclear power is undoubtedly a big ‘saver’ of carbon dioxide.
The South of Scotland Electricity Board generated 30 per cent of its electricity from nuclear reactors in 1980–1 and 64 per cent in 1990–1.
It estimates that in that time it cut its carbon dioxide emissions by more than 20 per cent.
The only other countries in Western Europe which were able to achieve reductions of the same magnitude were those where the nuclear share of electricity were 50 per cent or more.
A comparison of Britain and West Germany on the one hand, and France on the other, makes the point clearly.
Coal is the main fuel used for electricity generation in Britain and Germany.
In 1986 Britain's power stations were estimated to have produced 166.3 million tonnes of carbon dioxide, Germany 187.2 million tonnes.
France, which generated 70 per cent of its power from nuclear reactors and 18 per cent from hydro-electric and geothermal sources, produced 30.2 million tonnes of carbon dioxide.
Since electricity generation is the world's largest source of man-made carbon dioxide, it is quite clear that nuclear power can and does make a very significant contribution to its reduction.
In the end one plunges out of a thicket of statistics into an entanglement of questions.
Which is rated as most dangerous, carbon dioxide or nuclear power?
Can energy efficiency and a greater dependence on natural gas cut carbon emissions sufficiently on their own?
Will low-cost uranium reserves be so depleted early in the next century that prices will begin to rise sharply?
What emerges from an attempt to answer the last question is that the known low-cost reserves will have been significantly run down by 2025, but total reserves are large, sufficient to last for more than 400 years at present rates of consumption, according to one estimate.
(Other estimates put the span at 75–175 years.)
Because of the exhaustion of the low-cost reserves, uranium prices seem bound to rise in the course of the first half of the next century (assuming the uranium mining industry is to remain in business), but by how much is anyone's guess.
Until there is a substantial increase — indicating scarcity and demand — the fast reactor seems set to remain in one of the more exclusive suburbs of El Dorado.
The British study for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change indicates that regardless of how fuel prices, whether uranium or fossil, change, nuclear power has a declining role in British energy production up to at least 2020.
Gas could be the winner if prices are low, ousting coal.
However, if one turns to the report's tables, based on a growth in energy demand of between 1 and 2 per cent a year, it makes little difference whether gas or coal is the main fuel used to produce electricity.
The difference in the context of carbon dioxide emissions from all sources in the economy is estimated at between 234 million tonnes if gas is the main fuel and 250 if it is coal.
As for energy saving, the study points out that the oil shocks of 1973 and 1979 cut consumption by only 12 per cent.
The ‘realistic scope’ for saving in 2005 and 2020 is put at ‘20 per cent of the energy bill of the day for investments with short payback periods’.
But that, the report emphasizes, is not a forecast of what will happen.
The net result is that, however one mixes the energy cake, carbon dioxide emissions go on increasing.
Putting the government's abandonment of the PWRs in the context of the study, the conclusion must be that it decided that, under market force rules, carbon dioxide had to be allowed to win the day over nuclear power.
Nuclear power may be in eclipse, but it is hard to believe that it — and the fast reactor — will not return to favour as carbon dioxide increases and the greenhouse effect's regime becomes more severe.
Market forces will not rule in those circumstances.
The health and safety hazards associated with nuclear energy will have to be overcome.
Officials concerned with environmental policy predict that a day of reckoning will come when the issue has to be faced again.
A combination of the ideology of the market-place, public hostility to nuclear power and fears of high energy prices adding to the problems of an uncompetitive manufacturing industry may have resulted in a setback for nuclear power in Britain, but fossil fuels would no longer seem such overwhelmingly good value, according to Chris Patten, if their wider environmental costs were allocated and more fully reflected in prices.
These would have to be raised to pay for the damage they caused in acid rain and global warming.
As that happened, nuclear power would become more economically attractive despite the environmental costs of decommissioning redundant reactors and disposing of radioactive wastes.
The trouble with nuclear power is that its ‘costs’ always have the potential to go well beyond the point where they can be factored into an environmental bill.
Enriched uranium or plutonium in the wrong hands could be infinitely more dangerous than an oil-rig fire or a coal mine disaster.
Acid rain seems a minor hazard compared with the fall-out from a reactor fire.
The danger of contamination from radioactive wastes persisting into ages which exist only as figures beyond the range of human imaginations belongs to an order different from that of oil spills and coal slurries.
But if you accept that carbon dioxide is a much More insidious threat and nuclear power is the one major supplier of energy that does not produce it, the issue begins to turn not so much on the dangerous unacceptibility of reactors but on how you regulate and make them safe and ensure that their fuel is not diverted for military purposes.
Chernobyl had one good result.
It led to the creation in Moscow in May 1989 of the World Association of Nuclear Operators.
The signing of its charter by representatives of 144 electric utilities with working nuclear power stations was a recognition that the time had come to take the secrecy out of nuclear power and prove that there was a worldwide interest in co-operation and information exchange.
Only by ensuring that safety and reliability were maintained could public confidence be restored.
WANO has regional offices in Atlanta, Moscow, Paris and Tokyo and a co-ordinating centre in London.
Its chairman is Lord Marshall, who resigned as chairman of the Central Electricity Generating Board at the end of 1989 in protest against the government's decision to abandon the British PWR programme.
The IAEA and safeguards
Before a combination of Chernobyl, glasnost and the easing of East-West military tensions lifted the blanket of secrecy covering civil reactors in the Soviet Union WANO would not have been possible.
It complements in a modest way the safety programmes and the ‘safeguards’ monitoring carried out by the International Atomic Energy Agency from its headquarters in Vienna.
The IAEA's role in policing the 1970 Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons treaty through its safeguards provisions is unique among UN agencies.
Its international inspectorate patrols the borderline between the civil use of nuclear establishments and fuels and the threat of their diversion to make nuclear weapons.
With on-site inspections, seals, analysis of materials, electronic surveillance and satellite links they cover some 95 per cent of the world's nuclear installations outside the five nuclear weapon states — Britain, France, the Soviet Union and the United States, which all allow safeguards monitoring in a few of their civil installations, and China, which has signed a safeguards agreement but has not yet had a single inspection.
The non-proliferation treaty has not prevented countries like Israel, India and South Africa from secretly developing nuclear weapons, but at least they have not gone public with them and no country has officially added itself to the nuclear weapons states.
Iraq, a signatory to the non-proliferation treaty, appears to have managed to divert nuclear materials to bomb-making despite regular safeguard inspections, but the treaty has been a success on the whole — as indeed has been the complex structure of hot-line, surveillance and negotiation which has ensured that the East-West ‘balance of terror’ never tipped over into nuclear war:
It is clear that the present system, perhaps indeed any system that could be devised, is not foolproof, says the IAEA.
It is equally clear, however, that it is a remarkable phenomenon and that the chances of its leading to the detection of a diversion that has already taken place, or is in the course of taking place, are reasonably good and are improving as the Agency's technology in this area develops…
A top-level decision to embark on a nuclear weapons programme…might well involve falsification of records and a good deal of covering up.
It would then be necessary for the government concerned to face the consequences of violating its Treaty obligations in such a flagrant manner — consequences which could be serious indeed.
Probably no system can ever be foolproof, particularly when developing technologies continually present new problems for the monitors.
Even with the ending of East-West confrontations and the prospect of nuclear armouries being run down rapidly, it is hard to imagine a world in which civil reactors are widely regarded as safe and the problems of acceptable disposal of nuclear wastes are overcome.
But internationally agreed carbon taxes, permits and rising global temperatures may push the world along the road towards accepting the unacceptable.
Energy efficiency, natural gas and the limited contribution to electricity supplies from renewable resources will not be enough to contain increases in carbon dioxide and provide for the needs of a fast-expanding world population.
Even if nuclear power does not become the ‘sustainable’ energy source of the future, the IAEA and its administration of the Non-Proliferation Treaty's safeguards regime remains of great relevance to the monitoring and application of atmospheric agreements.
There will be a need at some stage for an international agency large, influential and well staffed enough to oversee and monitor measures to reduce green-house gases and perhaps administer aid funds.
The IAEA, in its offices on the far side of the Danube beyond the Prater's great Ferris wheel, provides a prototype.
The pioneering Netherlands: Cows, cars and the Western World's age of mobility
The bald facts about the Netherlands suggest an environmental disaster, the country a combination of sink and sewer for the air- and river-borne poisons and wastes of Europe, including its own.
The densities per square kilometre of its human and livestock populations are greater than anywhere else in the continent.
Its 12 million pigs and 5 million cows (considerably more, when added together, than the human population) burden the land, and the water supply, with some 100 million tonnes of dung every year.
It has more cars per square kilometre than anywhere else in the world.
More than 80 per cent of the country would revert to lagoons and salt marsh if the sea defeated the country's vigilant engineers.
The sea is remorseless and patient.
Nature is on its side.
Its level rises slowly and the land behind the dykes sinks, but even more slowly.
No wonder that Queen Beatrix's 1988 Christmas message to her subjects was notable for an unfestive concentration on doom.
The earth is slowly dying.
We human beings ourselves have become a threat to our planet.
Those who no longer wish to disregard the insidious pollution and degradation of the environment are driven to despair.
Strong words which no one would contradict with confidence, even if despair was regarded as an emotion which should never be admitted.
But the visitor travelling through the Dutch landscape is struck by the contrast between the royal gloom and the pleasant world all around.
A heron makes a measured flight across the setting sun towards a heronry, no doubt protected by the nation's countless defenders of the natural world.
The fields are a fresh dark green, the occasional unyarded cattle as majestic as any painted by Cuyp long before the greenhouse era.
The cities with their canals and punctual trams are among the most pleasant and orderly in the world.
The Dutch have fought hard for their environment and more than any other nation they are aware of how unremitting the battle is.
Weaken, turn your back for a moment and it could be lost for good.
Which helps to explain why the Netherlands' National Environmental Policy Plan is a pioneering work, a model which other nations study.
It is entitled To Choose or to Lose and it proclaims a strategy ‘developed against the background of the desire to solve or gain control of environmental problems within the duration of one generation’.
The plan is not a blueprint for the future, it stresses, merely the starting signal for a process in which dialogue and choices made by individuals, private industry and government will shape the environmental programmes: ‘What we want to do, in the realization that we do not understand all the relationships, is to indicate the conditions under which an environmental quality can be attained that will provide future generations with as many options as possible.’
Reading the plan it is hard to see it as the centrepiece of what was billed as the world's first green election, in September 1989.
Controlling ammonia emissions and ending tax-breaks for commuters who drive their cars to work are not usually the kind of issues which sends voters raging into the polling booths.
Yet, it was an argument over how to pay for cleaning up pollution which in May 1989 collapsed the Christian Democrat-Liberal coalition.
Liberal pique over what they felt was inadequate consultation and personal rivalry between the leaders of the parties were seen by some as the most potent causes of the rift, but the official reason which the Liberals, the junior partners in the coalition, gave was their objection to the ending of tax deductions for car commuters and the raising of taxes on petrol and diesel fuel.
They supported the plan, but insisted that the money for implementing it must come from economic growth and cuts in spending on welfare and education.
The voters decided otherwise and Ruud Lubbers was returned in the September 1989 election with more seats for his Christian Democrats and new coalition partners, the Labour Party.
By that time the state of the economy had eclipsed the environment as the main issue.
‘Ecology remains subordinate to the evolution of the economy,’ commented Aad van den Biggelaar, of the environmental group Nature and Environment .
The plan estimates the costs of implementation in some detail — about 3 per cent of national income up to 1994, settling down to about 2 per cent by 2010.
By that year, energy consumption should be down 30 per cent and emissions of pollutants by 70 per cent.
Total investment would be about £45 billion.
The biggest shares of the cost would go to cleaning up and limiting acidification (to which Dutch soils are among the most vulnerable in Europe) and disposing of wastes.
Industry and agriculture would pay about half the bill, the government the other half.
The farmers see a danger that their products will become uncompetitive; the road freight carriers have similar fears about what will happen if 1992 and the advent of the European single market exposes them to competition from foreign firms unfettered by the restrictions and burdens imposed on the Dutch.
The food and drink industry and trade generally also see problems.
Fears expressed by these sectors of the economy led to the plan's drafters and the Central Planning Bureau carrying out two impact studies: one based on unilateral action, the other assessing what would happen if other EC countries adopted similar measures.
The figures are relative to a middle-of-the-road estimate of the course of the economy during the next twenty years.
Without similar action abroad, there is a modest decline in employment and production.
Agriculture would be the biggest loser, with the volume of production cut by 10.7 per cent and employment reduced because of a drop in the number of livestock.
The energy sector is the next biggest loser, hit by the decreased demand brought about by improvements in energy efficiency.
Transport does well because of investment in public transport as the plan's measures to persuade people to leave their cars at home take effect.
Other consequences would be worsening of the already large budget deficit and a fall in tax revenues.
Most people would be worse off financially but not by a great deal.
If, however, other countries take similar measures to cut pollution, the situation obviously improves.
Tax revenues increase and the impact on personal spending power is less.
Generally speaking, the impact seems small either way.
The plan claims that the reduction in expected economic growth would be between 0.25 and 0.50 per cent a year if no other countries followed the Dutch route.
That would mean the growth rate in employment would be down by between 1000 and 5000 jobs a year.
On the other hand, if other countries adopted the same measures, the effect on the economy would be mildly beneficial.
But trying to measure what will happen over a span of two decades is a hazardous task and the Central Planning Bureau admits to uncertainty.
Dutch policies applied generally might have a damaging influence on the world economy, it says, ‘How great such influence might be and to what extent it might be worse that that resulting from the worldwide deterioration in the quality of the environment is not known.’
And that, in the age of sustainable development, is a fairly big caveat.
Cross-currents in the age of mobility
A bold plan of this sort directs its followers into unknown country where the statistical projections may be profoundly untrustworthy.
An economic recession could throw it right off course.
The loss of competitive edge might open up demands for protective measures against countries which have imposed no limitations on their own industries.
But there was no sign of backing down, rather the reverse.
By early 1990 an ‘NEPP-plus’ containing additional measures was being prepared by the Cabinet for submission to the Second Chamber.
Paul de Jongh, the plan's project leader, tends to dismiss industry's worries about uncompetitiveness: ‘These are partly ritual dances,’ he said.
‘It is the first round.
Private industry recognizes the virtue of the Plan because they know where they stand.
I think the big businesses are prepared to adopt the policies.’
He had found that even in Britain, where officials tended to be dismissive of the idea of a plan, people from private industry were receptive when he explained the Netherlands' plan at a meeting: ‘They said, ‘Yes, we should like such a plan because it reduces our uncertainty.
We like the idea of stability of policy and time to work on the reduction of pollution at our own pace’.’
There are not as many cars as pigs in the Netherlands, but the country nevertheless has the greatest density of cars anywhere in the world — 128/km; Britain, by contrast has 59, Japan 47 and France a mere 28.
The Dutch may hate the congestion, the fumes and the wasted time brought by cars, but ownership is nevertheless as essential to their perception of what constitutes the quality of life as a bathroom and central heating.
The ownership and use of cars in the Netherlands has doubled in the past fifteen years.
Only 11 per cent of commuters used public transport in 1985 and the trend is downwards.
Bicycles are popular, but they have their limitations on a wet and windy day.
As matters stand, the number of vehicles is expected to grow from five million in 1985 to almost 8 million in 2010.
The number of kilometres they cover collectively will, it is predicted, increase by 65 per cent.
Goods traffic on the roads will show a similar upward trend.
Roads are already crammed with traffic despite an intensive road-building programme, so presumably more of the precious Dutch countryside will be concreted over.
Although passenger cars are expected to be 80–90 per cent‘cleaner’(and lorries 75 — per cent ) under the plan, there obviously comes a point where, unless there is an endless expansion of the road system, so many vehicles will defeat their purpose, mobility, and still be, however ‘clean’, a pollution problem.
De Jongh admitted the dilemmas.
There is a consensus among the public that cars should not be used to go to work.
But they still want them for pleasure and social purposes.
There has been such an enormous increase in mobility in work and recreation.
The trains are full and the roads are full.
There are so many interconnections between industries and businesses and government departments.
For instance, there were 400 people who were consulted in the drafting of the Plan.
How did one consult them?
One went to see them.
(By taxi, usually, in de Jongh's case.)
The Dutch are innovators.
Given their historic contest with the sea, perhaps they have to be.
But what strikes one about their situation and the way they are tackling it is how vary narrowly they are ahead.
Every industrialized country faces similar problems and is either considering similar solutions or has already implemented some of them.
In a way national plans in Western Europe are an anomaly.
They can succeed only if they fit in with similar international plans; in the Netherlands' case, with the standards agreed by the European Community to which it belongs, and that applies particularly to vehicles.
Wherever one goes, whatever statistical projection is used in an attempt to bring the future into focus, one is aware of a rising sea of people and their vehicles which defeats frontiers.
It is the mark of the age, the constant fretful cross-currents and surge of tidal movements between offices and homes and shops and conferences and holidays.
Little more than a century ago most people, even in industrialized countries, rarely travelled more than a few miles from their birthplace.
Only wars and emigration shifted them.
Vagrants were returned under the Poor Laws to where they were deemed to belong.
Today's vagrants, squatting under railway arches and in shop doorways, are not regarded as having strayed from anywhere.
They are the only fixed residents in the shifting scene.
Once academics and scientists kept in touch by letter and ‘corresponding members’ of learned societies were for the most part never seen.
Today they spend much of their time flying to conferences, of which there are an unending supply, particularly those associated with the environment.
In business and government there are countless committees and consultations and yet more conferences.
Even drawing up proposals for recycling waste materials in Britain requires ten sub-committees.
Faxes and telephones add to the flow of communication but do little to reduce the flow of people.
Transport is cheap.
Commuters regularly spend three hours travelling to and from work.
Those who live close enough to walk to work make a point of mentioning it, rather as if they were keeping alive a forgotten folkway.
‘We want to say ‘no’ to all development which causes more mobility,’said de Jongh.
‘It will mean very strict planning — no more supermarkets and hypermarkets, no new industrial development sites.’
One idea which is to be given a test run in 1993 is road pricing.
Cars will be fitted with equipment which will register them when they pass through electronic gates.
It will be possible to bill the owners for their mileage.
De Jongh sounded doubtful about the prospects for the idea's success.
‘To be honest, I think it's a lot of fun for the engineers.’
Every planning projection of vehicle numbers and mileage has, in Britain at least and no doubt in many other countries, too, been proved wrong.
The figures have soared above the modest estimates of the planners.
People want cars above all else.
They will wince at the idea of paying for their children's school books or having their gallstones removed, but think nothing of spending half a year's income on a car.
Companies throw them in as enticing make-weights in their employees' pay packets.
People may not like what cars do to their environment, but they are reluctant to give them up.
If your household has two cars and you get rid of one of them you may be helping the environment, but are certainly worse off.
Only the elderly make that sort of sacrifice as incapacity or reduced income takes its toll.
And as the individual thinks, so, in more general terms, does the larger community: the decline of Britain's automobile industry to the point where imports exceeded exports became the measure of the country's fall from a place in the industrial front rank.
Yet even in its present state it accounted in 1987, directly or indirectly, for 600,000 jobs and 2 per cent of gross domestic product.
An almost unstoppable momentum
Transport generally, and cars in particular, is such a huge business that it is hard to see its growth being checked without serious economic consequences.
Since the Second World War the motor industry has gone on and on growing, undeterred even by two oil shocks which sent the price of petrol soaring.
In 1950 there were an estimated 50 million cars in the world; in 1986, 386 million.
Even if there were a willingness to reduce production, it would be hard, in the European Community, to resist the sheer momentum created by opening the frontiers of the new internal market after 1992.
It is estimated that its completion alone will increase lorry traffic across frontiers by between 30 and 50 per cent.
To growth of that nature can be added the prospect of a fall in car prices, making them even more affordable than they are already.
The Task Force on ‘the environmental dimension’ of the internal market described itself as ‘much concerned’with the transport sector, which it thought would have a greater impact on the environment than any other sector.
The growth in road transport presents government with dilemmas and almost irresistible temptations.
They could be seen very clearly in Britain in 1989.
In the first place, everyone travels by car and therefore everyone has first-hand knowledge of how awful the roads are.
The great majority would like to see better and wider roads which would be less congested and safer.
An Observer/Harris poll in 1989 revealed the strength of the British voters attachment to their cars: ‘Voters overwhelmingly backed the continued, untrammelled use of private cars, with 62 per cent disagreeing with further restrictions on their use and a similar number (63 per cent) in favour of a heavy programme of road building.’
A government which allowed itself to be perceived as anti-car would clearly be running a risk.
The moral to be drawn from polls of that sort is that spending money on roads is going to win votes.
The ministers concerned must have congratulated themselves that politically at least they had done the right thing by ignoring the environmental bodies and promising eight-lane motorways and an expenditure of £12.4 billion to ensure that 1992 does not leave Britain stuck in a permanent traffic jam.
The government's white paper on the subject was entitled Roads to Prosperity and the then Transport Secretary, Paul Channon, proclaimed, ‘I will not allow Britain's first-rate businesses to be disadvantaged by a second-rate road network.
Far from being the enemy of the environment, the expanded road programme will improve the quality of life for thousands of people.’
Roads to Ruin , responded the Green Alliance, which estimates that parking alone for all the new cars expected to be on the road in 2025 would require an area larger than Berkshire.
The Confederation of British Industry stepped forward with a plan that practically doubled the sum to be spent by the government: £21 billion to rewrite the nation's economic geography and save it from catastrophe.
Britain's transport network pointed towards the colonial past, the CBI declared: it had to be redirected to face the European future.
Anyone who has driven down the Dover Road to catch a ferry might agree.
With Japanese car manufacturers investing heavily in Britain to ensure they are inside the walls if the internal market turns into Fortress Europe, there is a possibility that Britain will become a net car exporter once again, a development which, more than any other, would help put the manufacturing balance of payments back in the black.
No government is likely to say at this juncture that it regards cars as an environmental menace and intends to reduce their numbers by so many per cent a year.
It is the governments of countries which do not manufacture them — The Netherlands and Denmark, for instance— which press hardest for action.
The Dutch went ahead on their own in 1989 by approving tax incentives favouring cars fitted with catalytic converters (emission filters costing between £300 and £600).
The European Commission's protest that they were distorting competition by acting unilaterally was successfully beaten in the European Court.
Moves of that sort, though, are marginal to the general trend towards strict emission controls which will make catalytic converters compulsory in the EC.
The Americans have had rigorous standards since 1983, and Australia, Japan, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland have applied similar measures.
The EC reached agreement on large cars in 1987 and, after a hard-fought battle, it was agreed in June 1989 that emission standards would be applied to all new small cars from 1992.
Agreement on medium-sized cars was expected in 1990.
The British front in this battle has not been one of the easiest.
Motor manufacturers have been sceptical about the efficiency of catalysts.
They need high temperatures to be effective; stop-start driving of the sort prevailing in European cities does not suit them; the planned three-way catalysts are ‘poisoned’ if leaded petrol is used; they add 10 per cent to fuel consumption.
It is an attitude which may go part of the way to explaining why the House of Commons Environment Committee was ‘appalled’ by the standard of evidence offered by the car manufacturing companies at its hearings on air pollution.
They showed ‘an almost total lack of awareness’ of the roles of nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons in producing ground-level ozone.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders made no mention of ozone at all and two of the manufacturers largely ignored it.
Vehicles are the main source of man-made nitrogen oxides, one of which, nitrous oxide, is a greenhouse gas.
They are an important ingredient of acid rain and combine with hydrocarbons to form smog.
Vehicle exhausts are also probably the biggest producers of man-made carbon monoxide, which destroys hydroxyl, an atmospheric ‘cleansing agent’ which gets rid of methane, another greenhouse gas.
Catalysts are expected to cut nitrogen oxide emissions from cars to about 10 per cent by 1989 levels by the year 2006.
Carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons will be less dramatically reduced, possibly by considerably less than half, while carbon dioxide emissions will increase because catalysts lead to heavier fuel consumption (only lean-burn engines which use less fuel would cut CO 2 emissions, but progress on them is slow).
For all vehicles, including heavy goods lorries, the types of emissions covered by catalysts are expected to fall by 2006 to a minimum of about 70 per cent of 1989's output.
To what extent is that really good news?
A report commissioned by the World Wide Fund for Nature from Earth Resources Research points to a lack of progress in cleaning up nitrogen oxide emissions from heavy lorries as the weak spot in the programme.
As the increasing number of cars will mean that, collectively, their emissions will remain substantial, it seems unlikely that a dramatic reduction in nitrogen oxide emissions can be expected.
‘On the contrary, with high levels of transport growth the emissions of nitrogen oxides from road vehicles may be higher in 2020 than at present.’
As for carbon dioxide emissions, they could more than double by 2020.
Even assuming a 1 per cent a year improvement in fuel efficiency from the early 1990s on and combining it with the government's lowest traffic forecast, carbon dioxide emissions could increase by 20 per cent by 2020.
If energy saving is applied rigorously in homes and industry and the power stations clean up their act by switching from coal to other fuels or otherwise cutting their carbon emissions, transport seems set to take over as the biggest emitter of carbon dioxide in Western industrialized countries.
The environmental issue of the decade
Logic would seem to point to car numbers never reaching the astronomic figures produced by the analysts.
The predicted 140 per cent increase in traffic in Britain by the end of the first quarter of the next century was an ‘unacceptable option’, said Chris Patten.
‘I think it's a moral issue as well as an issue of economics.
It's about the future of our planet and that's something worth fighting for…the real challenge for politicians is to convince people that being keen on the environment is not a cost-free option.’
Fitting catalysts is expected to cost British motorists £800 million a year.
During the 1980s, the British tended to buy bigger, high fuel-consumption cars, so increased taxes on petrol (favoured by Patten) would be an obvious way of driving them towards smaller, more economical cars with fewer noxious emissions.
The Transport (formerly Energy) Secretary Cecil Parkinson took the view that cars were not going to go away and discouraging ownership would be ‘very, very unpopular’.
Doubling rail traffic would cut carbon dioxide emissions by only about 3 per cent.
The same cut could be achieved with a 100 cc reduction in the size of engines.
We have looked at the attachment of motorists for their cars, the increasing use of heavy lorries, and the reasons why governments are reluctant to impose taxes which push up inflation and weaken an important manufacturing industry.
But, despite the attractions of mobility, attitudes can be changed, or at least modified.
The EC's environmental taskforce ‘1992’ report contains the result of a poll comparing national attitudes within the Community on the importance of environmental protection.
The poll is not analysed, but it is striking that countries where pollution from cars has become a major problem have the highest percentages of people who believe that the state of the environment requires urgent action: 85 per cent in Italy (at the top of the list), where Milan, one of the world's smoggiest cities, now has car-free days and the capital Rome also suffers severely from vehicle congestion and pollution; 84 per cent in Greece, where restrictions on cars in Athens are imposed to save the citizens' lungs and their ancient monuments; 80 per cent in the most vehicle emission-conscious country in Europe, West Germany, whose dead trees have become the symbol of pollution.
In the United States, the strict new Clean Air Bill passed by the senate in April 1990 would cut carbon monoxide emissions by 70 per cent and a number of other gases by 22 per cent.
Apart from catalysts, more efficient engines and reduction in mileage, the only other way of tackling emissions is to change the fuel.
Southern California is moving towards replacing petrol with methanol, and — an important first — limiting the number of cars a family may own; even insisting on radial tyres because they produce less dust.
Hydrogen is another fuel receiving international attention.
Manufacturing it requires a prohibitive amount of electricity, unless the electricity comes from cheap renewable sources, like photo-voltaic cells in the Sahara, where the sunlight is guaranteed even if the water to make the hydrogen is not.
Fuels made from biomass, like ethanol, from sugar cane, are used in Brazil and a few other countries, but are subject to shortages, sometimes because of drought.
And then, of course, there is the alternative of public transport, provided it is ground transport (aircraft are major polluters).
The popularity of road transport has meant that railways have either had short shrift, as in Britain, where investment per kilometre is about one-third that in France, or have had to be heavily subsidized, as in France and Germany.
How you view public transport depends very much on where you live.
In contrast to the nationwide Observer/Harris poll of voters referred to earlier, 75 per cent of the Londoners questioned by Gallup on behalf of five London boroughs preferred curbs on cars and better public transport to more city roads.
Restraining the use of private cars would carry no disadvantages, in the view of 53 per cent, and only 4 per cent thought that discouraging people from using cars represented a loss of liberty.
Basically, there is no alternative to better public transport if big cities like London are to survive.
Better trains, improved underground systems, even the large trams used in some continental cities will play their part in the future.
High-speed trains in France already compete successfully with the airlines (and cars) over relatively short distances, as, for example, Paris-Lyons.
In Britain, the InterCity trains have syphoned off people who would otherwise use cars, and British Rail expects to double passenger mileage between 1988 and 2020.
What makes one pause when considering the role of public transport is the dispersed nature of modern society around the big cities.
The car has made it that way and it would be almost impossible for public transport to knit it together in the way that the railways did in the nineteenth century.
And given the general increase in mobility, would even a massive increase in investment in railways make much difference to road traffic?
Chris Patten is among the sceptics: ‘Even if it (investment) were to be successful and encourage a 40 or 50 per cent increase in the use of rail, it would make damn-all difference to the growth in road traffic — it would just take a few percentage points off the top.’
The Dutch plan envisages people living closer to their workplace and without that happening it is hard to see how they will be persuaded to leave their cars at home.
But how do you get them to live within walking, cycling or tram-ride distance of work?
Does the work move to them, or are cars made so expensive that people are obliged to live close to their work, as they were for much of this century?
Democratic rights of use and ownership, a way of life and a key industry are involved.
It is a highly political issue with international ramifications which we are only just beginning to tackle and which will increasingly burden the agendas of the European Community's new environmental agency.
Cleaning up Eastern Europe
Is there in Eastern Europe a hideous environmental prototype of what is about to happen in the developing world?
There are so many similarities: poverty and governments more concerned (until very recently) with the statistics of production than with the producers; a lack of accountability among governments and officials; an absence of standards maintained through efficient inspectorates; a lack of that motivated middle class which in the West has made its strength felt in politics; a lack of effective protest by the victims, for the most part people who have come to accept pollution and filth as part of their everyday condition.
Of course, the Third World has already had — and has — some considerable environmental disasters.
There is Bhopal, for example, with 2500 dead from an escape of poisonous chemicals from a Union Carbide plant, and the appalling smogs and pollution of Mexico City.
And in the West, too, there is a roll-call of man-made horrors, among them the explosion at the Flixborough chemical works on Humberside and the dioxin release at Seveso (Italy), which caused the poisoning of thousands of acres of farmland and the deaths of many more thousands of cattle.
But Eastern Europe is different in the sustained and omnipresent nature of its pollution.
It is as if governments, having been given the gifts of technology, set them loose without an idea of how or even a wish to restrain them.
Production was a good in itself and therefore not to be held accountable for industry's wastes or the ill-health of workers and their families.
Assuming any records were kept, pollution was as much a state secret as the artillery's ammunition stocks.
Protest was silenced and it was only the new mood of glasnost in the second half of the 1980s which revealed the full extent of what had happened.
East Germany, where the lingering Protestant work ethic marched shoulder to shoulder with Leninist concepts of electrification as the vitalizing force that would change society, has the world's highest per capita emissions of sulphur dioxide and carbon dioxide.
If ever there was a place waiting for the missionary preachings of the energy efficiency industry it must be there.
Somehow the country has managed to consume more energy per capita than anywhere else other than rich (and notoriously thriftless) Canada and the United States and at the same time plunge into a state close to bankruptcy.
The Social Democrat parties on both sides of the inner-German border agreed in early January 1990 that £72 billion would be needed to replace the brown coal generators which provide 70 per cent of East Germany's energy and clean up the water and sewage systems.
A figure of that sort, roughly twice the value of East Germany's 1986 exports and imports combined, is bound to cause incredulity, but even if the figure were halved, it would still be a remarkable indication of what has happened to a country which in the first half of the 1980s claimed to have established itself among the top ten industrial nations.
The coal-fired power stations may be unhealthy, but the nuclear ones are potentially lethal, as Klaus Töpfer, the West German environment minister, heard when he visited some of them.
There have been scores of potentially dangerous incidents, some of them in a generator little more than a mile from the border with West Germany.
One incident, in the reactor at Greifswald, nearly caused a meltdown in 1976, an accident that, occurring close to densely populated parts of Western and Central Europe, would have been a disaster of much greater magnitude than Chernobyl.
One can go on and on listing East Germany's morbid shortcomings.
It requires little research to do so, largely because West German specialists and journalists rushed across the frontier and came back gasping out tales of air pollution four times worse than West Germany's, of mercury levels in the Elbe that were 250 times EC limits, of forests where 40 per cent of the trees are sick.
East Germany was the first country in which fears over the state of the environment played a leading part in the overthrow of a system of government.
West Germans who had not been to the East had no difficulty in believing them.
They had seen the clouds of exhaust fumes spewed by the Trabants and Wartburgs which had brought escaping East Germans to the West.
And it was well known, too — and there was an element of guilt here — that East Germany was West Germany's dustbin for toxic and other wastes and plain rubbish.
Of the 6.6 million tonnes shipped from West Germany and West Berlin in 1989 some 700,000 tonnes were poisonous.
There is another way in which Eastern Europe can be seen as the prototype of things to come — the flow of refugees from East Germany and the German minorities in other countries to their rich brother.
In January 1990 alone there were 63,000 from East Germany and 38,000 from other East European countries; 100,000 in 1989 from the Soviet Union's 2 million-strong ethnic German population.
Most were economic refugees, but there were many who claimed to be environmental refugees leaving for the sake of their health.
The domestic political stress caused in West Germany by such an influx (which also of course, further undermined the East German economy, since many were skilled and professional people) was one very good reason why Bonn was prepared to pour aid into its neighbour.
Only by propping it up, and cleaning it up (and in the process uniting with it), was there any chance of stability.
West Germany has a constitutional obligation to accept East Germans, so the parallel with Third World economic and environmental refugees is not exact.
But under the general principle of rich nations having to pay poor ones to build their economies and stem their pollution it fits well enough.
The debit side of ‘progress’
East Germany's environmental plight may have had more publicity than that of any other East European country, but its neighbours Poland and Czechoslovakia are almost equally high in the pollution league.
The flame-belching fires and smoke of the great Nova Huta steelworks at Krakow in Poland have become a stock shot of television coverage of Eastern Europe's environmental crisis, a begrimed image of what was once an icon of progress.
Pollution in such places is claimed to be ten times worse than in the West and the tonnage of sulphur dioxide said to fall every year on the average square kilometre sounds like the equivalent of a heavy snowfall.
Ten per cent of Krakow's children suffer from chronic bronchitis.
Nevertheless, Krakow is not as polluted as Katowice.
There, the chance of dying in one's forties is twice that of an inhabitant of relatively salubrious Krakow.
To all that can be added the fact that Poland's economic crisis and its indebtedness (at $39 billion) is worse than East Germany's.
Poland, too, is going to require tens of billions of dollars to rebuild its economy.
Czechoslovakia is better off than the other East European nations and has committed 2 per cent of its investment to environmental projects, but there once again are to be found the same dreary environmental statistics of rivers poisoned, sewage untreated, sulphur dioxide deposited and trees dying, even if the figures are not quite so bad as elsewhere.
Basically any report on Eastern Europe's problems comes down to much the same things: a heavy reliance on smokestack industries burning brown coal (also known as lignite) and pouring out uncontrolled noxious fumes, factories tipping their chemical wastes straight into rivers, and untreated sewage.
Only the dimensions of the statistics vary; in the case of the Soviet Union, fairly dramatically.
The Soviet Union is said to contain more than 1000 towns where its own permissible levels of atmospheric pollution are exceeded five-fold or more and 20 per cent of the population live in what the head of the Academy of Sciences' biology institute calls ‘ecological disaster zones’.
One city of a million people, Ufa, 700 miles east of Moscow, was described in Pravda in 1987 as having become unfit for human habitation.
It is doubtful if its situation has improved since then.
The heavy use of pesticides and chemicals in agriculture in Azerbaijan and the Central Asian republics is blamed for the high incidence of leukaemia, some of the worst infant mortality rates in the world, and liver disorders and cancer of the oesophagus.
Nearly one-third of the citizens of Leningrad are said to suffer from diseases the upper respiratory tract as a result of atmospheric pollution.
On the credit side, it should be said that there is now an acute awareness in the Soviet Union and the East European countries that pollution is a social and political issue and not just something that can be categorized vaguely as an environmental problem and shoved to the debit side of ‘progress’.
Miners have struck in the Soviet Union over pollution (in combination with other matters) and scores of green organizations have sprung up.
The largest in the Soviet Union, the Social-Ecological Union, has 200 branches and is avowedly political in its approach.
Poverty rather than indifference is the reason for Moscow's inaction, it seems: it was Mikhail Gorbachev who in his autumn 1988 UN speech in New York proposed that the UN should set up an emergency centre for the environment.
His foreign minister, Edouard Shevardnadze, by coincidence chose the day Mrs Thatcher's greening was declared in a speech to the Royal Society (27 September 1988) to call for more co-operation in ‘ecological security’.
One British reaction at the time to the greening of the Kremlin shows quite starkly how much political perceptions have changed in the short space since the autumn of 1988.
Michael Heseltine, the former British Defence Secretary, warned the Royal Institute of International Affairs on 23 November that the Soviet Union had identified environmental anxieties in Western Europe and the United States as offering an opportunity for mischief-making.
They were attempting to use the green movement to undermine NATO's efforts to modernize short-range nuclear weapons in Europe.
‘What we are seeing here is a well thought-out, carefully crafted attempt to hijack the environmental agenda for ulterior purposes,’ he declared.
By the winter of 1989–90 the talk was all of troop cuts and disarmament and democratization, and the rapid moves towards German reunification had made talk of modernizing short-range nuclear weapons to be fired from West Germany at targets mainly in East Germany more plainly than ever the nonsense it had always been.
President Gorbachev's green fifth column could be returned to the fantasy-land it came from.
At this point it is worth taking a step back from the scene and recalling that the Soviet Union and all the East European states are signatories to the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution.
With the exception of Poland and Romania, they are pledged under the 1985 Protocol on Sulphur Emissions to reduce their sulphur emissions by 30 per cent by 1993.
It is unlikely that when they signed they could ever have had the slightest hope of achieving such a reduction.
There have been improvements here and there in the East European countries, but generally speaking they distribute sulphur dioxide to their own fields and cities and to the countries downwind of them as liberally as they ever did.
An injured party can complain against its neighbour under the convention, but it has no teeth.
What can have teeth, of course, even if it is concealed by a friendly smile, is aid.
By early 1990 the European Commission was co-ordinating aid to Poland and Hungary, the two East European countries regarded as having satisfactory democratic credentials.
The packages were worth £600 million each.
The Japanese were quick to promise similar sums.
Under consideration was extension of the EC aid programmes to Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Romania and Bulgaria.
The Soviet Union was too big a problem even to begin thinking about seriously at that stage; a military superpower still, even if its economy was falling apart and its politics were in uncertain flux from one-party dictatorship towards a multi-party democracy.
The proposal by the President of the Commission, Jacques Delors, in Strasbourg on 17 January 1990 that the EC should treat the six East European countries as if they were backward regions of the Community and extend structural support to them brought gasps of disbelief from every government except West Germany's.
What Delors had in mind was aid worth £10 billion a year for ten years.
Only two years earlier the Twelve had battled at epic length over increasing the EC budget for the years to 1992 from 0.7 per cent of each member state's gross national product to nearly 1.2 per cent, with the ceiling fixed at over £30 billion.
Delors' proposals were clearly out of all proportion to that figure, and he was soon obliged to retreat with a lame explanation that he had been ‘arguing from the absurd to show what it would cost to achieve such a goal’.
Nevertheless, it is clear that very large sums of money will have to be spent to put Eastern Europe on its feet and ensure that it stays democratic.
In the course of doing so money will have to be spent on cleaning up the Six (and, no doubt, eventually, the Soviet Union, too) to ensure that they make respectable cohabitants of the new Europe which various leaders from Gorbachev to Delors to François Mitterrand have envisaged.
Two EC countries (The Netherlands and Denmark) already examine the possible environmental impact of aid to Eastern Europe before approving projects.
Britain's Overseas Development Administration has its Manual of Environmental Appraisal which will presumably apply as much to East Europe as it does to the Third World.
The EC itself has not attached environmental conditions in the cases of Poland and Hungary, but Carlo Ripa di Meana, the EC Environment Commissioner, has insisted that a sum (still to be agreed) must be set aside to bring the East's environment up to scratch and there are proposals for training environmental managers.
The new Bank of European Reconstruction and Development will obviously have an important role in deciding policy when its opens its doors for business.
Aid: East Europe vs. the South?
While the EC was debating its approach to the problems of Eastern Europe the president-elect of another distressed part of the world was nearing the end of a pre-inaugural tour which took him to all the major capitals.
The message Fernando Collor de Mello brought with him was that Brazil, where he would take over from President Sarney in mid-March, no longer wanted to be tagged as a Third World nation.
It wanted to be seen as an honorary member of the developed world experiencing the sort of hard times you might expect in a country with the world's biggest foreign debt, $115 billion.
Under Collor's guidance, it would modernize itself.
As host of the 1992 UN Conference on the Environment and Development, he hoped to see the ‘depoliticization’ of what he called (in London, in February 1990) the unfolding ‘ecological drama’:
I will endeavour to combat the political, ideological and even electoral exploitation of the issue.
This is a serious issue which must be dealt with on a rational basis.
Hence the need to avoid mutual recriminations, facile accusations and scapegoats.
Let us not be simplistic about things that concern the survival of mankind.
Even allowing for a desire to please his audience, sentiments of that sort sound better news than warnings of confrontation.
An aspirant to membership of the developed club is likely to be accommodating about rainforests, the welfare of Amazonian Indians, the ozone layer and a climate convention.
Collor has spoken favourably of the idea of an international carbon tax.
But assuming Collor's Brazil makes it into the ranks of the developed world, it will do so at the lowest level of eligibility, on a par with the East European countries.
The country's population is over 140 million; the total population of the East European Six is rather more than 110 million.
Brazil had 83 cars and 84 telephones for every 1000 people in 1985; East Germany had 238 and 218 and Poland 119 and 113, respectively.
The ratios may have changed, but probably not by all that much, and there are no doubt more sophisticated and precise ways of measuring relative wealth.
But it is reasonable to assume that Eastern Europe is still considerably better off than Brazil, which in early 1990 was reported to be $6 billion in arrears on its $115 billion debt and facing the prospect of 2200 per cent inflation during the year.
In 1989 Brazil repaid nearly $800 million more to the World Bank than it received from it.
So it was not really surprising that despite his upwardly mobile outlook, Collor attended the paupers' summit in June 1990 at which fifteen debtor nations from the underdeveloped South discussed their predicament.
That predicament has undoubtedly been accentuated by events in Eastern Europe.
The attention of all the principal aid donors is concentrated there.
If Eastern Europe gets massive assistance it is logical to assume that the South will get less.
Poland's gain may turn out to be India's loss.
It may be essentially racist, but rich Europeans are likely to put the needs of poor Europeans ahead of those of poor Asians.
The West has a great political interest in seeing democratic systems based on market economies develop in Eastern Europe, since a collapse into worse poverty and anarchy would be a disaster, a tragic first chapter to the new peace between East and West.
Apart from that, the prospect of investment and increased trade with countries with long traditions of industry and commerce is a stimulating one.
The return on money spent or lent in Eastern Europe can be expected to be better, politically and commercially, than those from similar outflows into the gurgling sink of Latin America and other parts of the South.
It was no wonder that some politicians promoted the idea of a ‘Marshall Plan’ for Eastern Europe.
Senator Robert Dole, the Republican leader in the US Senate, went further than most by calling for aid to be diverted to East Europe at the expense of long-standing recipients such as Egypt.
As expenditures on arms decline with the ending of the cold war, there may be more money available for aid, but democratic politics being what they are, few would care to bet on it; certainly not on any percentage saved being set aside for the developing nations.
Even if it were, its benefits would be quickly swallowed by the rapid increase in the South's requirements as its populations grow; and the experiences of the 1970s and 1980s in which aid and loans failed to reverse economic decline are not encouraging.
Disillusionment and the heavy losses sustained by Western banks are reflected in the fact that the total net resource flows from the European Community and the eighteen member states of the OECD's Development Assistance Committee (the world's richest countries) dropped from $128 billion in 1980 to $103 billion in 1988.
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union could be equally disillusioning, of course, and when the Governor of the Bank of England, Robin Leigh Pemberton, spoke to the Overseas Bankers' Club in February 1990 on lending to East Europe, he put his call for caution in the context of the losses sustained in the South.
Don't get stung again, was his basic message.
‘Green conditionality’
The bankers will take the risk of getting stung again, of course, because that is the way of the banking world.
They will be under political pressure to lend and there will be inducements to do so.
So it is fairly safe to assume that assistance from Western sources, official and private, will flow to the East in a crusade against the poverty and pollution caused by seventy years of ideological perversity.
The parts of the world — the Third World — which may suffer a loss, real or relative, as a result are generally estimated to have a debt of $1300 billion.
Loans and aid of all kinds to the Third World actually dropped slightly in real terms in 1988, from $96.9 billion in 1987 to $96 billion adjusted to 1987 prices and exchange rates.
Among the seventeen heavily indebted nations (mostly Latin American and including Brazil) per capita income in 1988 dropped by 0.6 per cent.
Sub-Saharan Africa continued its decline in per capita income, too, for the same reason as the heavily indebted countries — population increases continued to outstrip modest rates of economic growth.
In fact, the World Bank believes that aid to black Africa (now running at about £10 billion a year, the same figure as that which caused Community jaws to drop when suggested by Jacques Delors for Eastern Europe) needs to increase by nearly 50 per cent by the end of the century.
The horror stories of Eastern Europe can be more than matched from the Third World.
One in three Peruvian children is stunted by malnutrition, said the Worldwatch Institute of Washington in a 1989 report,Poverty and the Environment:Reversing the Downward Spiral.
Infant mortality doubled in Zambia during the first half of the 1980s.
Life expectancy fell in nine African countries.
Almost a quarter of the world's population — 1.2 billion people — were reckoned to be too poor to meet their most basic needs for food, clothing and shelter.
It is not a uniform picture.
The two biggest Third World countries, China and India, were, by contrast with Brazil, doing well so far as growth rates are concerned.
They are low-income countries and India has more desperately poor people than anywhere else in the world, but in 1988 China's growth rate was 11 per cent and India's 8 per cent, well ahead of their population increases.
China's growth is fuelled largely by coal and so is India's, some of it in the latter case thanks to World Bank funding.
And burning coal, of course, produces, carbon dioxide as well as sulphur dioxide.
The World Bank was last year reported to be in the throes of an anguished debate between its environmental unit and its energy department over the best way of enlisting Third World support for curbing greenhouse gases.
Can you really tell countries like India and China that they should switch from coal to some other, more expensive fuel or spend heavily on cleaning up emissions?
The Bank stuck to a policy of recommending that subsidies should be ended, which would have the effect of increasing electricity prices and encouraging energy efficiency.
Proposals for a worldwide carbon tax and the phasing out of coal-burning generators appear to have been ruled out.
The subtraction from ‘traditional’ aid flows implied by Western Europe's impassioned concern for East Europe has worried the Third World, as its diplomats make clear every time they find a receptive ear.
Even before the upheavals in Europe they were warning against attempts to subtract environmental aid from development aid.
Western politicians like Lynda Chalker, the British aid minister, have tried to reassure them: ‘Britain will continue to respond to the needs of the developing world,’ she said in mid-January 1990.
‘The very substantial funds which we are making available for Eastern Europe…are separate from and additional to our regular aid programme.’
But statements are unlikely to prevent a heightening of suspicions which are always fairly strong even at the best of times, and that could make it harder for the North to get the global climate convention it is seeking.
The South does not, for a start, like the idea of ‘green conditionality’ being attached to aid agreements.
Such conditions were a ruse by the North to make the South pay an unfair share of the cost of protecting the environment, said Bernard Chidzero, the Zimbabwe finance minister, at the September 1989 Commonwealth finance ministers' meeting in Jamaica.
The final communiqué recorded the ministers' view that aid totals would have to include ‘any additional burden on developing countries arising from action to protect the environment’.
That general attitude of the South's is said to have been the most striking impression retained by Ripa di Meana, the EC environment commissioner, from talks during his first year in office (1989) with Third World ministers and officials.
The agreements on protecting the ozone layer are often pushed forward as pioneering achievements which will ease the way to an atmospheric convention and protocols dealing with carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.
They are indeed considerable achievements, but what they show most clearly is how hard it will be to get the major Third World countries to agree on any protocol which could slow down or affect industrial growth.
Aid and technology transfers are their price.
Poverty is a more pressing problem for them than the greenhouse effect.
That came across very strongly at a UNEP conference in Nairobi in 1989 on phasing out CFCs.
Buying out CFCs in the Third World is within the West's means, but buying out carbon dioxide in China, India, Brazil and the lesser parts of the Third World is certain to prove beyond anyone's means.
If persuasion does not work, ‘green conditionality’ might be the answer in some cases, unpopular though it would be; and for the really hard cases, sanctions, provided there is sufficient of a consensus to back them and the industrial world has not sunk into a mood of profound fatalism about the impossibility of stemming the greenhouse gases.
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union are object lessons about the dangers of letting industry befoul the environment in the name of economic growth.
There is still time for much of the Third World to be held back from taking the same course.
1992 and beyond
When it comes to handling the environmental crisis there is undoubted strength but also a flaw in the Western democratic system which has triumphed so dramatically, both ideologically and materially, at the end of the twentieth century: its political and economic well-being depends on growth and the prospect of ever-increasing wealth and improved standards of living.
Governments which wish to survive have to maintain growth.
Since governments with a death wish are rare, growth which enriches the individual is sacred.
Nothing is allowed to impede it.
The health of democracy depends on it.
Depressions are death.
It is a way of thinking which means that in great emergencies such as war, sacrifices are usually made late and reluctantly.
There is no reason to believe that the environmental crisis will be treated any differently.
Raising the sums which will be required in the name of global environmental security during the next 50–60 years (which is about as far as anyone can reasonably try to foresee) will create severe political and economic stresses.
What they will add up to is anyone's guess at the moment; inflation, uncertainty about the pace and impact of climate change, and the political factors which govern priorities make any attempt at assessment a futile exercise.
It is enough to say they will be counted in trillions (millions of millions) of dollars.
Some recent estimates of the cost nationally in the United States give an idea of the probable scale: curbing carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels could absorb between 1 and 2 per cent of GNP, with the sums rising into the trillions in the next century.
There is not a US coastal state which is not considering measures to preserve its coastal regions and the Environmental Protection Agency has put the cost of protecting cities against a one metre sea-level rise at between $73 and $111 trillion.
Other vulnerable countries face heavy expenditures, cancelling out any savings made in defence budgets — around one trillion dollars a year globally — following the end of the cold war and perhaps rising to the levels of expenditures experienced in a war.
The temptation for the rich nations will be to avoid or limit them by deferring expenditures on pre-emptive measures which will add up at home to taxes, higher energy costs and technology transfers to poor countries striving to compete with the donors.
There is a taste of the difficulties ahead in the ordering of priorities in the advanced industrial countries: first place goes to economic growth and second place to environmental security.
Unless there is growth, it is argued, the rich will not be able to provide the money and technological resources needed to counter climate change globally.
Thus, the ozone layer can be saved only if there are substitutes for CFCs which enable manufacturers to continue making refrigerators.
The fashionable creed of sustainable development panders to that sort of thinking.
It tells electorates that there can be continual growth and no one need worry that the cost of environmental security will hit spending power or reduce standards of living.
Governments point to just how wrong the environmentalists were in the 1970s when they claimed that the ‘squandering’ of resources would impose limits on growth.
The 1970s and 1980s have been decades of unparalleled growth.
But that is an increasingly irrelevant justification for present attitudes.
The argument in the 1990s is not about resource depletion but about changes in climate which will concern life and health as well as, ultimately, wealth.
Every qualified projection of climate change and population growth indicates a crisis which will grow in seriousness through the first half of the twenty-first century.
Concern with growth is not a Western/developed world monopoly.
Growth is a desperate necessity for China and India, which between them account for a third of the global population, and other developing nations.
The idea of diverting even one per cent of GNP to curtailing carbon dioxide emissions would seem to most of them too frivolous to be seriously entertained, unless, of course, someone else was willing to pay.
And which countries, one wonders, would be willing to finance the replacement of China's abundant coal as the fuel for its power stations with less polluting natural gas, or underwrite double-glazing in Chinese homes as a major contribution to energy efficiency?
Perhaps they will one day, but at the moment it seems some way off.
Taxing the air
There is no doubt in the mind of Mostafa Tolba, UNEP's executive director, that ‘financing solutions to the global environment crisis will be the major issue of this decade’.
Tolba belongs to a political species that will become more common as the decade rolls on towards the next century.
He is an environmental statesman.
When he speaks he is listened to with well-earned respect, particularly in these preparatory years before the 1992 UN conference on the environment which will mark the culmination of his career.
The environmental crisis will, he says, require an increase in the flow of resources to the Third World, debt relief, fair pricing of commodities, land reform and help for Third World food producers in the form of a phasing-out of subsidies to agriculture in the developed nations.
A genuine global partnership must be struck between rich and poor in which all contribute and all have an equal say in the allocation of resources.
‘The worst mistake that could be made is for the rich to apply conditionality to new aid and loans.’
Saving the world will not be cheap, but, then, security never has been cheap.
The alternative to North-South co-operation based on aid will be conflict and the prospect of ‘21st century eco-wars’.
Could Egypt, he asks, allow nations sharing the watershed of the Nile to disrupt the river's flow, the lifeblood of its economy?
How would Niger and Nigeria react to the plans of upstream nations for barrages and irrigation schemes which might dry up the Niger?
These are not isolated issues.
Some 40 per cent of the world's population depends for drinking water, irrigation and hydro-electric power on 214 river systems shared by two or more countries.
‘The threat from a nuclear war forced us in the post-war period to think in terms of war destroying the whole planet.
Human economic activity forces us to think of the environment in the same terms.’
The message is a forceful one, strengthened by the fact that resource wars are not exactly new.
The search for better grazing prompted many of the great nomadic outpourings from Central Asia, and as recently as the early 1960s a civil war was fought in what is now Zaire over the control of Katanga's copper mines.
However, one can accept the message and still wonder how Tolba proposes raising the money to buy peace.
He agrees that ‘practical and innovative thinking’ is required, and he clearly likes an idea inspired by the sustainable developer's manual, users' fees.
This, he says, is an ‘attractive option’.
It would mean pricing and paying for air and other environmental resources.
Fees would be collected by national governments and a proportion of them paid into an ‘international fund to save the earth’.
The idea of taxing what most people regard as their birthright, fresh air, is startling, but perhaps Tolba is right: we should not take it for granted.
After all, we pay for piped, chlorinated water, why not for cleaned-up air?
However, acceptance of the idea would still leave open the question of how air is to be priced.
If, for lack of a formula, British ministries (and no doubt ministries elsewhere) are unable to price the amenity value of landscapes threatened by development, how on earth would any government — or, more probably a conference of governments — be able to arrive at a system for pricing the air?
How much more would the rich Swiss pay than the impoverished Vietnamese?
Or would it be like the British poll tax, with rich and poor paying the same subject to a complicated system of rebates?
If payments were partly based on per capita emissions of greenhouse gases, would methane from paddy fields be given the same price as carbon dioxide from power stations, cars and burning tropical forests?
Suppose, though, that Western countries agreed to the idea of users' fees based on notional valuations of the atmosphere and other resources.
Suppose, too, that they managed to sell the idea to their tax-payers, who, after all, would have to find the money.
They would then be required to hand over the proceeds, without any strings attached, to a fund in which, under the Tolba plan, ‘all countries would have an equal say in resource allocation.’
Listening to Tolba produces an uneasy feeling that perhaps Nairobi, where UNEP has its headquarters, is a bit isolated, too far away from the ‘real world’ of money and carbon dioxide and hard-nosed political deals.
The case for placing UNEP in the Third World is plain enough — influence, providing a sense of shaping the decisions — but where can the pay-off be seen in Africa, a hapless continent which does nothing to strengthen UNEP's authority?
If UNEP is to play the key role in shaping and managing the new environmental conventions Brazil would be a better centre (and Geneva an even better one).
Realistically, though, there is no chance of extracting UNEP from Nairobi.
The politics of the United Nations will ensure that it stays there.
Tolba's ideas carry echoes of the argument in the 1970s over the New International Economic Order in which the Third World lined up to demand compensation in the form of aid and technology transfers for the ‘looting’ of their resources by Western imperialism.
The huge Third World debt incurred as the Arab oil producers' profits from the oil boom were recycled by Western banks was the outcome.
This time, the Third World has a lever of sorts in its willingness, or unwillingness, to co-operate, but one of limited value since co-operation in drawing up a climate convention is ultimately as much in the interests of the poor nations as it is in those of the rich.
It is certainly not strong enough to extract unconditional aid from the developed nations, habitually suspicious of what happens to their money once it reaches Third World administrations.
Donors will obviously need to be sure that environmental aid is administered efficiently and spent according to agreed priorities.
An end-of-century shibboleth
The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development will be a test of the world's commitment to take action to protect itself.
A climate convention (with or without protocols) should be ready by then to form the agenda's centrepiece, and possibly there will be a convention on bio-diversity which would cover the protection of the rainforests and the multiplicity of species which they harbour.
Carbon dioxide will be the supreme test of commitment and anti-pollution technology, but, as has been noted before, it is so omnipresent, its natural cycle so great and its sources and sinks so difficult to determine accurately (one assessment in early 1990 downgraded the amount mopped up by the oceans by 50 per cent but came to no firm conclusion about where the unaccounted for remainder went), so closely linked with economic growth and its man-made sources so hard and expensive to restrain that it is difficult to imagine a protocol which will be globally effective.
Methane, which contributes 18 per cent of the greenhouse effect, presents even greater problems.
Curbs on ownership of water buffaloes and other ruminant emitters do not seem likely, nor would it be possible to cover up rice paddies and melting permafrost in the tundra.
But even if by some miracle effective protocols are agreed, the momentum of climate change means that whatever action is taken to reduce greenhouse gases will be of more value to generations beyond the mid-century than to those which come before it.
Mitigating the causes of the crisis has to continue, of course, but the dominant issue may turn out to be crisis management within the triple-P of problems caused by poverty, pollution and population.
The philosophy or, perhaps more accurately, the frame of thinking which will guide governments and international institutions in the 1990s and beyond is still in its formative stages.
The Brundtland Commission may have made sustainable development the end-of-century watchword, defining it as ‘development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’, but even Tolba has wondered aloud whether it amounts to much more than a shibboleth.
Richard Saunher of the Organization of American States' Department of Regional Development informed the April 1987 Sustainable Development Conference, in London, that ‘a concern for sustainable development certainly does not consciously guide our work.
Indeed, we make an effort not to use the phrase for a number of reasons, one of which is that we have been unable to figure out what it means’.
More importantly, it was regarded as a distraction from the real issues of environment and development.
Timothy O'Riordan, of the University of East Anglia, thinks sustainability might be accepted as the ‘mediating term’ between developers and environmentalists, although he leans to the view that it will eventually languish as a ‘good idea’which cannot sensibly be put into practice.
The arch-priest of the British sustainable developers, Professor David Pearce of the London Environmental Economics Centre, connects it with the ‘quality of life’ and people's expectations.
‘Sustainable development involves devising a social and economic system which ensures that these goals are sustained, i.e. that real incomes rise, that educational standards increase, that the health of the nation improves, that the general quality of life is advanced.’
In both the Brundtland and Pearce reports the principle is established that present development must not jeopardize the future.
Pearce encapsulates it as each generation ensuring that it passes on to the next an undiminished stock of assets, including environmental as well as man-made capital.
That might just be possible in countries with zero-growth populations, but in the fecund Third World the result would be the equivalent of the ancient Saxon custom of gavelkind, in which the inheritance was divided equally among all the sons.
Everyone tended to get poorer as the lots grew smaller and smaller.
Without being too sophisticated about its finer points, sustainable development has an obvious, sensible meaning when expressed in terms of a traditional farmer recycling dung and compost to maintain the fertility of his land.
Like the farmer, humanity should try to live within its means.
If energy can be obtained from tides, waves and windmills that is better than energy obtained from fossil fuels, which are non-renewable.
However, the world's preponderance of very poor people want to get richer as quickly as they can and are probably not too concerned if they do so at the expense of the environment.
Not only that, but the number of people in that category is rising very rapidly.
Between 1985 and 2025 the population of the developing world is expected to increase from 3.7 billion to 6.8 billion, of whom well over half will live in those hotbeds of aspiration and discontent, the cities.
Sustainability in those circumstances would seem virtually impossible.
One of Pearce's main points is that we need to be able to apply monetary values to environmental gains and losses.
An improvement in environmental quality is also an economic improvement if it increases social satisfaction or welfare.
We must learn to recognize that environmental capital is just as much capital as man-made capital.
Environmental capital includes not just the stock of oil and gas, coal and minerals.
It also includes the ozone layer, the protective functions of forests and wetlands, the waste-assimilating functions of rivers and oceans, and the store of biological diversity.
To ensure sustainable development, we must ‘maintain the capital stock’.
Dr Pearce is the special adviser on environmental economics to Chris Patten.
Patten believes that people have to recognize that environmental quality is not a cost-free option and that the way in which energy and transport policies will have to be modified to take account of environmental factors will become an important subject of public debate.
So let us look at an English case which exemplifies some of the practical problems confronting the theorists of sustainable development: Twyford Down (near Winchester) and the route of the M3 motorway in March 1990.
Twyford Down is a much-loved, fiercely defended ‘environment’ close to a city which values its green spaces.
It is designated as an area of outstanding natural beauty, the exquisite chalk-hill blue butterfly has made its home there and there are Celtic fields and an Iron Age fort.
Here, clearly, was a marvellous opportunity to give Pearce's principles free rein and see what costings they produced.
What had to be decided was whether 2.63 miles of the extended six-lane M3 would be tunnelled through the downland chalk or just cut straight through in a deep, wide trench which would obviously make an irreparable mess of the down.
Tunnelling was estimated to cost £128 million; cutting a trench £36 million.
The £92 million difference between the was plain enough, but how much was the unspoiled beauty of Twyford Down worth, not just to present-day citizens of Winchester but to future generations?
The authors of Blueprint for a Green Economy express the belief that it is possible to put a money value on the benefit of preserving the rare Californian condor, so why not on chalk-hill blue butterflies?
On harebells, primroses, rabbits and just the sheer pleasure people get from walking on such familiar, ancient places, too.
£10, £20, £50 million?
It is sad to report that neither the Transport Department nor the Environment Department (they made a joint decision in favour of the trench on the grounds of cost) made any attempt to value Twyford Down, its inhabitants and the enjoyment gained now and in the future from them.
‘At the moment there are no formulae for costing environmental matters of that sort,’ a spokesman for the Department of Transport informed the author.
It would, of course, be very difficult to create a formula.
A lepidopterist might be able to quote a going price for a preserved chalk-hill blue in good condition, wild rabbits have a price when shot and skinned, but the market price of Twyford Down itself would be low if sold with legal constraints which kept it as an open, public space and high if sold with planning permission for houses or industry (or even a road).
If it is so difficult to value a small piece of the environment like Twyford Down, how will it ever be possible to cost the ozone layer?
The answer must be that trying to give values to the environment is an irrelevance.
Perhaps one can produce figures for the amount knocked off property prices by aircraft noise and excessive pollution (as Blueprint suggests, with the backing of figures from American cities), but even here there is room for doubt.
Some of the highest property prices anywhere are in fume-ridden Manhattan and in cleaner but nevertheless congested central Tokyo.
Airports attract hotels and businesses; they employ large numbers of well-paid staff who like to live near their work.
House and land prices tend on the whole to go up rather than down.
There is another problem when it comes to applying market prices to environmental capital: the pieces of green environment that are most treasured by most people are their gardens.
Thousands of millions of dollars, marks, francs, pounds and every other currency of substance must be spent every year on plants and equipment for them.
But they are man-made capital rather than environmental capital.
In the end environmental issues come down to political decisions on what people want.
The Green Belt around London has been preserved not because someone put a price on it but because voters in the Home Counties wanted to stop the city sprawling outwards seemingly for ever.
They wanted planning and an attempt at a balance between the traditional English landscape and the demands of housing (and gardens) and roads, quite simple concepts, really.
There was another way of tackling the issue of Twyford Down.
The Departments of Environment and Transport could have agreed that in principle it was better not to encourage more cars onto the roads by building better motorways.
What was needed was a much improved rail link to Southampton, backed by a tax policy that would penalize motor vehicles and favour the railways.
But, again, no one seems to have considered that as an option; and if they had, it would have been highly unpopular and, if implemented, its effects slow and perhaps ultimately unsatisfactory.
‘We are not going to do without a great car economy,’ declared Margaret Thatcher in March 1990 in the course of dismissing ‘airy-fairy’green ideas about a return to village life.
‘Much of our economy would collapse if we did without that.’
What sustainable development really represents, one suspects, is a dilemma.
Essentially it comes down to the age-old question which has tormented the rich as much as the fate of their souls: how do you have your cake and eat it?
Growth at almost any cost has always been the answer.
Industrial society has managed to bake bigger and richer cakes for most of the past two centuries, suffering the occasional bouts of indigestion, but getting fatter most of the time.
In the West we have bigger, warmer homes, more amusement, more communications; we travel more and further for work and pleasure than every before.
Compared with our ancestors plodding six days a week between plough furrow and hearth and, taking mileage as a measurement of space, we must occupy a thousand, perhaps several thousand times as much space.
Sustainable development consoles us with the idea that we can go on having more provided we are more hygienic and respect nature.
We have to be vaguely provident, but no real sacrifices are demanded.
Common sense may tell us something different: that there are limits to growth (or more accurately, perhaps, to real disposable income), imposed not so much by the depletion of fossil fuels and mineral which worried the Club of Rome, but by numbers of people and the cost of a worldwide defence of the environment.
Technology and resource transfers to help and persuade Third World countries to combat the effects of global climate change potentially could impose enormous charges on the developed nations in addition to what they have to spend nationally and regionally.
If, for example, lean-burn engines are developed by Western manufacturers as the best way of cutting carbon dioxide emissions by the world's rapidly increasing stock of vehicles, is the technology passed on free of charge to developing countries beginning a build-up to mass production from their own motor industries?
Patents and the rights of private industry are not matters which can be brushed aside cheaply in order to enlist Third World support, as the difficult negotiations on the technology for manufacturing CFC substitutes have shown.
If the developed world wants to save the destruction of tropical forests by fuel-wood gatherers does it help the countries concerned to provide alternative energy from power stations using shrinking supplies of relatively clean natural gas while it switches to nuclear power, despite its expense and dangers?
Building the security regime
Sustainable development will have value if it provides politicians with a non-threatening idea to hang on to while they sort out their approach to the problems created by climate change.
They know what they have to avoid , another Law of the Sea marathon.
What they have to do initially is agree a climate convention.
If it is to be more than a symbolic marker of the moment when North and South decided in principle to work together for mutual survival, a number of decisions on how to administer it will have to be made.
Some of the grander ideas have envisaged an all-embracing law of the environment, an entirely new international environmental protection agency and even a special environmental security council.
Those who argue that creating such a structure would take years and waste valuable time are probably right.
The UN Charter would have to be amended to provide for a special security council which would not, presumably, include the rights of veto held by the five permanent members of the existing security council.
What is best in this case is undoubtedly what will be quickest and simplest.
The Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change, which links the World Meteorological Organization and UNEP and has its secretariat in UNEP's offices in the UN's second city, Geneva, could be institutionalized and strengthened under the aegis of UNEP to provide the focal point for investigation, the monitoring of the impact of climate change, and ideas.
UNEP, it is worth recalling, was born out of the 1972 Stockholm conference; the 1992 anniversary conference will be the time to consider turning it into a full-blown UN agency with more funds at its disposal.
Conversion into an agency would introduce a need for detailed thought about its functions and its future role.
Monitoring the climate convention and the impact of climate change would require a mandate and an establishment at least equivalent to that of the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, which polices the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The Nairobi headquarters could stay where they are, but the climate side of its activities would need to remain in Geneva, close to the WMO and in an international hub-city.
The environment is already a hazy area which overlaps into a great many administrative realms.
It will become even less distinct as environmental issues become more and more merged with problems caused by rapidly expanding populations, poverty and the visibly harsh strictures of climate change.
If one had to make a guess, it is that within another ten years or so ‘environment’ will have become a somewhat passé term, rather as ‘ecological’has, simply because of its insufficiency as a generic description; a term which links the preservation of rural landscapes in Europe to the fate of millions in Bangladesh obviously has problems of definition.
Under the cover-all of climate change, the issues will tend to become more sectorized, too big to be handled monolithically.
International organizations like the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees are already involved in issues and situations which are either directly or indirectly ‘environmental’ and their workload will increase.
It would be virtually impossible to bring them under the control of one super-agency.
The World Bank has already put forward proposals for a global environment fund with which UNEP and the UN Development Programme would be associated.
Its mandate would include technology transfers and the encouragement of investment in projects which would enhance or safeguard the environment.
Rather than establish a separate organization to administer the fund, it would probably be better to leave aid of that nature to the World Bank and bilateral and regional agreements, the more so since an issue like controlling carbon dioxide emissions may come to depend not so much on targets and dates agreed under a protocol to the climate convention as on the speed with which programmes to introduce cleaner forms of energy (possibly including internationally supervised nuclear energy) can be funded and implemented.
Even if no super-agency is established to deal with the environmental crisis, it will still be necessary to create a regime which can monitor and police compliance with agreements.
It should be possible to take breaches of agreements before the International Court of Justice or, when they amount to a threat to peace, before the Security Council.
Obtaining compliance will be as difficult as it always has been, but an international community which has used sanctions to encourage change in southern Africa should be able to tackle the much more serious issues of enforcement associated with climate change and international security.
Warnings of eco-wars and the flight of hundreds of millions of refugees cannot be dismissed as fantasies: they are probabilities in situations which become more and more apparent as the century nears its end.
Man is a god in ruins, thought Emerson, and perhaps at the end of the twentieth century much the same could be said of his world, a still beautiful but ravaged paradise which, regardless of the tenets of sustainable development will not be passed on to the next century in better or even the same condition, in fact, almost certainly in worse condition as a result of meeting the needs of another billion or so people.
But in this pivotal period when cold war recedes and environmental crisis takes its place there are several hopeful factors.
The first is that there is in the developed world a new culture of environmental awareness.
The electorates are being greened.
They may not be unduly apprehensive about climate change, but they know about the greenhouse effect and how the state of the world and their own localities impinges on their lives.
The other factors are the ending of the cold war and the building of a largely successful international security apparatus in the post-war era.
The common instinct for survival has shown itself more powerful than the urge to take risks on behalf of national interest.
It has proved possible to reach agreements that eventually ended atmospheric pollution caused by nuclear tests, that prohibited environmental modification and kept Antarctica free of nuclear weapons and military establishments.
Governments have not been as irrational and totally careless of life as the experience of the Second World War led many to believe.
These are factors which provide the basis on which the new environmental security regime can be built, although, sadly, it will probably take more than one catastrophe to shake the world into acceptance of the sacrifices of sovereignty and treasure which will be needed to make it effective.
For the post-war generations in the developed nations reared on the statistics of economic and social improvement, it will not be easy to accept that the twenty-first century threatens humanity with hard times and lowered standards of living.
Acknowledgement of humanity's common predicament should shape the moral stance, since the goal will be mutual survival.
Explanatory Notes
This book is not primarily about climatology or science (although, obviously, both are very much involved) and it does not attempt detailed scientific explanations of the greenhouse effect and the problems of the ozone layer.
Many readers will be familiar with both, but I have included the following for those for whom brief easy-to-find summaries will be useful.
The Greenhouse Effect
The greenhouse gases are not (apart from man-made CFCs and halons) newcomers to the atmospheric scene.
They are essential atmospheric cladding which prevents the earth from becoming a frozen planet.
The current problems are the result of the cladding becoming too dense and warm, largely (it is generally assumed) because of human activities.
The image of cladding, although apt, exaggerates the volume of the gases.
They are a very small part of the atmosphere, of which nitrogen and oxygen constitute 99 per cent by volume.
Neither has much effect on the earth's heat balance.
The greenhouse gases allow the sun's short-wave radiation to pass through them, but absorb much of the long-wave radiation which the earth throws back towards space (which is what a greenhouse does).
Until the beginning of the industrial revolution, there was a rough balance which kept the earth's temperature more or less the same from one year to the next.
The Gases
A ‘natural’ greenhouse effect raises surface temperature to an average of 15 ° C. Without it, the world would be 35 ° C colder than it is.
The two most important greenhouse gases are water vapour, which constitutes less than 4 per cent of the atmosphere's volume, and carbon dioxide.
Water vapour is a key gas since it forms in clouds, and clouds are the most effective barrier to the escape of heat.
However, the role of clouds is one of the big conundrums of climatology.
They also bounce back, absorb and scatter incoming sunlight to an unknown extent.
No one is quite sure whether there will be more or less of them in a warmer global climate.
Carbon dioxide is thought to have contributed 50 per cent of the greenhouse effect in the 1980s.
Annual emissions from man-made sources have increased by between three and four times since 1950.
Because of its close connection with the fossil fuels (particularly coal) used in electricity generation, controlling its emission globally presents acute problems.
Man-made carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels, about 5.6 billion tonnes a year, should be seen in the context of the natural carbon cycle of 200 billion tonnes exchanged every year between the atmosphere, the land and living things and the oceans.
It is not yet clear how constant that cycle is.
However, the rise in carbon dioxide does parallel the growth of industry.
Its atmospheric concentration was between 270 and 280 parts per million in 1850.
The Mauna Loa observatory in Hawaii measured it in 1958 at 315 ppm.
By the end of the 1980s it was about 350 ppm.
Annual increase in concentrations is 0.5 per cent.
A doubling of the 1850s concentration would, at that rate of increase, take place around 2080.
However, if increases in the other greenhouse gases are taken into account, the equivalent of that doubling will take place in or about 2030.
The other greenhouse gases are:Methane It contributes 18 per cent of the current greenhouse effect.
Belching cows, paddy fields, melting permafrost, leaking natural gas pipelines — all can contribute to methane as greenhouse gas.
Its presence in the atmosphere has more than doubled since pre-industrial (mid-eighteenth century) times.
The annual growth in concentration in the 1980s was 0.5 per cent.
CFCs and halons CFCs are the well-known ozone destroying coolant gases in aerosols and refrigerators.
Halons are used in fire extinguishers.
They contribute 14 per cent of the greenhouse effect and are increasing at the rate of 6 per cent a year.
They can last for up to 110 years (some CFCs for 20,000 years) and are the most pernicious greenhouse gases.
Molecule for molecule, they are 10,000 times more potent than carbon dioxide and it has been estimated that if production is not checked they will rival carbon dioxide as the main greenhouse gas in the twenty-first century.
Nitrous oxide Six per cent of the current greenhouse effect.
From fertilizers, vehicle emissions and the burning of fossil fuels and vegetable matter.
Annual rate of increase in the 1980s: 0.25 per cent.
Tropospheric (surface) ozone Short-lived but increasing at about 2 per cent a year; 12 per cent of the current greenhouse effect.
Caused by the photochemical reaction of sunlight with carbon monoxide (much of it from cars) and nitrogen oxides, most of them man-made.
Its annual increase in the 1980s was 1 per cent.
Temperatures and Sea Levels
Temperatures The generally accepted estimate is that the world warmed by 0.3–0.6 ° C during the last 100 years.
The IPCC scientific assessment group predicts that without any measures to check greenhouse gas emissions the increase in the mean global temperature will be about 0.3 ° C per decade — greater than anything seen in the 10,000 years of the interglacial.
This would mean the world being 1 ° C warmer than it is today by 2025 and 3 ° C warmer by the end of the century.
Under other scenarios in which controls of varying severity are introduced the increases would be from 0.1 ° C to 0.2 ° C each decade.
By comparison, the mean global temperature during the last ice age is estimated to have been 4 ° C colder than it is today.
Sea-Level Rises The subject is extremely complicated and the increases to be expected undergo constant revision.
The top 2.5 metres of the oceans have been described as being the equivalent in terms of heat capacity of the entire atmosphere.
Different currents move at different depths and with great variations in temperature.
So it is difficult to estimate thermal expansion as a result of surface warming.
It is equally difficult to work out what will happen to the ice sheets at the poles.
A simultaneous thinning and shrinking of the sea ice lessens its albedo, or reflectivity, thereby allowing the oceans to absorb more heat from the sun.
On the other hand, global warming is likely to produce more precipitation over the icecaps, notably Antarctica's, which would mean that water was being taken out of the oceans and stored as ice.
Latest estimates are that sea levels could rise by about 20 cm by 2030 and by 65 cm by the end of the 21st century.
There will be significant regional variations.
(Sources : Association for the Conservation of Energy; report of Commonwealth group of experts on climate change; paper by Dr F. Kenneth Hare at 1988 Toronto conference on climate change; report of IPCC Scientific Assessment Group; paper by Dr J.T. Houghton of the Meteorological Office; and Dr Pier Vellinga, Director of the National Climate Change Programme, The Hague.)
The Ozone Layer
The ozone layer is in the stratosphere, the upper atmosphere, between 9 and 30 miles above the earth's surface.
It is formed when the sun's ultraviolet radiation breaks up the two atoms of oxygen molecules into single atoms.
These then combine with other oxygen molecules to form three-atom ozone molecules, resistant to ultraviolet radiation and able to absorb it.
Ultraviolet can cause skin cancers and cataracts (and probably other ailments) in humans and it is damaging to plants and marine life.
In ‘natural’ circumstances (before the introduction of CFCs and halons) the ozone layer was kept in balance through natural processes, including destructive gases released at ground level.
The production of harmful man-made gases tipped the balance against ozone.
Most ozone is generated above the equator, where the sun's radiation is strongest, and then carried by stratospheric winds around the earth towards the poles.
The depletion of the ozone layer was first noted over the Antarctic, and, more recently, over the Arctic.
Every year the world's industries have been producing more than one million tonnes of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and halons for use as refrigerator coolants, in the manufacture of foams, aerosol can propellants, solvents and fire extinguishers.
CFCs — the main problem — have been with us since the 1930s, a valued invention because they are non-toxic, non-flammable and cheaper to make than any known substitute.
Released, they rise very slowly (they can remain in the troposphere, or lower atmosphere, for 100 years) and intact to the stratosphere.
Once there, they are broken up by ultraviolet radiation, releasing chlorine atoms which destroy ozone, CFCs are also an important greenhouse gas (see above).
CFCs and Halons 
The main CFC gases are:CFC-12 .
This is responsible for nearly half the ozone depletion.
It is used in refrigeration, air conditioning, aerosols and foams.
CFC-11 .
Foams, aerosols and refrigeration.
CFC-113 .
Solvents.
International co-operation on protecting the ozone layer has been good.
The Vienna Convention on its protection was negotiated in 1985 and followed in 1987 by the Montreal Protocol, which provides for the control of CFCs and halons.
The London conference in June 1990 agreed to tighten up the protocol and phase out production and consumption of CFCs by not later than the year 2000.
(Source : Introduction to the ozone layer issue, Saving the Ozone Layer Conference, London, March 1989.)