

LETTERS
Helping Saddam
You're right: the world owes a lot to ‘clear American leadership’ for keeping the peace in Europe and Asia (‘All over bar the shooting’, December 15th).
Curiously, you fail to ascribe Iraq's invasion of Kuwait to an absence of that same clear leadership in the Middle East.
There, by supporting Israel's occupation of various Arab slivers, America has done neither itself nor Israel a service.
Those whom it has encouraged are the likes of Saddam Hussein, who are fundamentally correct in claiming a link between the two occupations — hardly a flattering analogy but one for which many people may be about to pay for America's 30 years of pusillanimity in the Middle East.
Sydney RORY MCGUIRE
Don't malign Colombia
You betray an ironic and unfair image of a decent country which is facing difficult times when you refer (December 1st) to Colombia's ‘worn out political system’; to its ‘corrupt and self-serving political elite’; to assassination as ‘the usual fate of Colombian reformers’; and to drug traffickers ‘who will get lighter terms in Colombia's porous prisons in return for squealing on their colleagues.’
Narcotic drugs were introduced into Colombia by foreigners, and its illegal trafficking is sustained by an ever-increasing demand in developed countries that seem to lack the political will to combat abuse.
Many of the problems that you refer to in such a light-hearted manner are the result of this situation, which Colombia has been fighting, with a certain success.
Colombia continues to be democratic in every way, run by civilians, not generals, who have their own part to play.
It is a country in which drug traffickers, be they Colombians or of another nationality, are finding it very difficult to operate today.
Pully, Switzerland D. GARCES-GIRALDO
Barclays in Japan
Your article on the problems of foreign-owned stockbrokers in Tokyo (‘Gaijin, gaijin, gone’, December 22nd) has caused considerable offence within Barclays and has quite unfairly and incorrectly singled out for attack one of our middle managers, Michael Tomalin.
You blame him for saddling Barclays de Zoete Wedd with high overhead costs in putting our brokerage firm and our banking operations together in one building, a building which houses a number of our competitors, as you also point out.
Irrespective of the success of this integration, your claim was a travesty of the facts.
The decision was discussed and agreed at board level, including the amount of space taken.
To put the implementation entirely at the door of Mr Tomalin, who has since left Tokyo to take a key position in our head office, is nonsense.
London JOHN QUINTON Chairman Barclays Bank
Mail model
In your report on the Post Office (December 15th) you claim that the principle of setting price according to costs led Rowland Hill to favour a national stamp price.
What he really wanted was a two-tier price structure, with inaccessible places of ‘secondary importance’ facing a surcharge.
Hill was eventually persuaded to drop this proposal to gain acceptance for what he regarded as the greater reform: that price should be independent of distance.
It is also noteworthy that Hill was vehemently opposed to the statutory monopoly.
He advocated repeal of the legislation on the grounds that ‘it implies the removal of an offence from our statute book and the probable rise of a wholesome competition’.
Exeter DAVID DE MEZA
Basque terrorism
Your estimate of 707 people killed by the Basque terrorist group, ETA, in 1968–90 is too high by at least 100 (December 1st).
My data, gathered painstakingly from the local Basque press over the past 15 years, suggest the number should be closer to 600.
Second, the Algerian negotiations between ETA and the Spanish government broke down over the government's unwillingness to accept in principle the Basques' right of self-determination.
ETA was not adamant in its claim to represent the Basque people.
As for your acceptance of the Spanish government's line that ETA is planning some sort of violence during the Olympics, the discovered documents do not prove anything.
ETA has had operatives in Barcelona for years, and the documents could reflect simply the continuation of these operations.
ETA has never engaged in attacks that might endanger such large numbers of bystanders, especially foreigners, even when presented with attractive targets.
Burke, Virginia ROBERT CLARK
Leaders' bazaar
Who ever heard of a pope born in the Vatican City (December 1st)?
Since that state has existed only since 1929, such an event would have been truly prodigious.
Even at the last conclave, in 1978, this hypothetical cardinal could at most have been only 49 years old.
The last time anyone so young was elected to the throne of St Peter was Clement VII in 1523.
In fact, the first pope elected after the creation of the Vatican City was its citizen, though by virtue of office rather than birth.
As secretary of state, Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli was resident in the Vatican when he was elected pope.
Indeed, had he been some eight years older, he would have been born a subject of the pope — but the Piedmontese put an end to that possibility when they invaded Rome in 1870.
Most of his 19th-century predecessors were: all except one pope was born a papal subject.
Taynuilt, Argyll GERARD MCKAY
I couldn't help but notice that you could not find an appropriate country for Brian Mulroney, Canada's prime minister.
As a Canadian who left the country because of the lack of adequate money for basic scientific research, neither can I. 
Berne, Switzerland WILLIAM SHOTYK
Hard times again?
IN THEIR rather cheerful new outlook for the world economy, published late last month, forecasters at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development were careful to point out that the risks of error were ‘on the downside’.
Yes, indeed.
The question is, how far is down?
During the coming weeks economic policy-makers may have to deal with an exceptionally difficult series of hazards.
Rarely does a year start by offering so many opportunities for governments to make ruinous mistakes.
Or with so many echoes of the world's previous case study in economic and political error, the 1930s (see pages 17–22).
The OECD says that the American economy will grow by only a shade less than 1% in 1991, while Japan will manage nearly 4% and Germany (despite the difficulties of unification) 3%.
Most private forecasters now expect no growth in America this year, and lately each of their succeeding revisions has been down.
But even the gloomier numbers do not portray the scope for disaster.
For lack of any way to quantify the economic risks, they give no weight at all to some far-from-negligible probabilities.
Take a deep breath
In the past two weeks America and its allies have moved closer to war with Iraq.
A war might go well and be over quickly.
In that event, after a brief panic, the price of oil would fall sharply and stockmarkets would celebrate; the floor for the world economy would move up and into view.
But if a war went badly and looked likely to drag on, that would be a calamity not just in its own right.
The price of oil would probably rise to more than $50 a barrel and dig in for a stay of some months.
This would confront governments and central banks with the last thing they need: a two-part shock of slower growth and faster inflation.
Confidence would falter, stockmarkets would take a hammering, talk of a meek and mild recession in America would stop.
At the same time the prospects for political and economic stability in the Soviet Union continue to fade.
Russia's new threat to withhold tax revenues from the union's government is, in effect, a declaration of economic independence.
A violent struggle for economic and political control cannot be ruled out.
Another horror in its own right — but one which would also have wider economic implications.
Stockmarkets fell before Christmas on news of Edward Shevardnadze's resignation as foreign minister.
A bloodily turbulent Soviet Union would cast an economic shadow over Germany especially, but would damage business and consumer confidence more widely, at a time when it might already be extremely fragile.
Confidence is hard to measure, so worries about it are easy to dismiss — but when it goes you can generally tell by counting the dole queues.
Even without these dramas in the Gulf and the Soviet Union, America would be facing big economic risks in 1991.
The collapse of its junk-bond market and the fiasco of its thrifts have drawn attention to broader worries about the soundness of its financial system.
By historical standards, companies and consumers look badly over-borrowed and ill-prepared for a downturn.
The banks themselves are under stress, and so are the public institutions that would have to deal with any banking breakdown.
The Federal Reserve is struggling to allay fears of a ‘credit crunch’— when banks are reluctant to lend except to the most creditworthy borrowers.
That is a monetary tightening of the most threatening sort, because central banks can do little about it.
They may lower interest rates, which increases the latent demand for credit.
But they must still rely on the banks satisfying that demand by lending more — and the banks may not oblige.
Another reminder of the 1930s is the recent breakdown of trade talks.
Exports are one way for America to soften the impact of sluggish demand at home; the undervalued dollar makes it all the easier, in effect, to import some vitality from Germany and Japan.
So this is an odd time to let the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade wither, or to be thinking of dismantling the post-1945 multilateral trading system in favour of a slide to managed trade and protection.
Of all the risks that face the world economy over the next few months, the most easily avoidable is this threat of trade war.
The European Community and America need to resume the GATT talks at once, patch up their quarrel over farm trade, and conclude the agreements on services and other issues that had seemed within reach when the talks were suspended.
Then, equally important, George Bush must sell that deal to Congress with far more enthusiasm than his officials have lately shown for the multilateral approach to trade reform.
For the rest, the best advice for economic policy-makers is to recall two principles of sound central banking — one forgotten in the 1930s and the other in the 1970s.
Stand ready to provide liquidity to a banking system in distress, but take care not to accommodate, with an increase in the money supply, an inflationary shock that hits the economy as a whole.
Easier to say than do?
Obviously.
That is why a third principle will also count for a lot in 1991.
Be lucky.
LEADERS
Towards the next Rushdie
Free speech has lost, and should not have done
THE cracking of Salman Rushdie is the saddest outcome of his two years in hiding: an apparently forced recantation, and nothing to show for it.
Mr Rushdie has agreed that there should be no paperback version of ‘The Satanic Verses’ and no more translations into foreign languages ‘while any risk of further offence exists’.
But because he has not disowned his book, himself applying the match and hoisting it aloft on a stick, his gestures have done him no good.
Britain's Muslim leaders dismiss them.
The ayatollahs' death sentence stands.
Genuine conversions have sometimes been forced; St Paul's was hardly gentle.
Mr Rushdie's recommitment to the Islam of his birth leaves more room for doubt.
In all his writings from hiding he had increasingly found a brave and defiant secular voice: one that recognised a ‘God-shaped hole’ in life, but did not doubt that it could be filled by art, literature and imagination.
Imaginative writing, sacred in itself, could hold its own beside any religion.
It is a long way from that to his limp affirmation of the central tenets of Islam.
Before he cracked, Mr Rushdie had stumbled on a truth: that if free speech and free writing are to be defended in an age of increasing religious fervour, they must be defended with a zealot's passion.
Laws on slander and incitement aside, freedom of expression must be safeguarded as fiercely as is the honour of the Prophet by those Mr Rushdie has offended; pick at it, or suggest compromises, and the whole principle is threatened.
Mr Rushdie's opponents understand that.
Those who should have been his supporters never did.
The British government gave him protection, but backed the principle of free speech only as vigorously as was diplomatically comfortable.
Other western democracies did no better.
His publishers fell into panic, most bookshops caved in.
Everyone pleaded for compromise.
Yet religious belief has something to teach the rational secular world; some principles should be defended without recourse to a blurry halfway house.
The law should be the answer.
When the next Rushdie has his book put to the torch, incitement to violence over a book, whether for or against it, should be treated as a criminal offence.
Incitement to murder, by people living nominally under a country's law, should automatically lead to arrest.
Western governments should be prepared to protect not only writers, but publishers and bookshops; and Britain should get rid of its own unnecessary curbs on free speech, the laws against blaspheming Christianity.
A free-speech amendment to a bill of rights has had a certain success that might be emulated.
Like religious practice, the practice of free speech is often neither grand nor edifying.
It can turn the stomach.
Many who professed to revere the principle found it hard to like the example they were faced with in Mr Rushdie's case: the book unreadable and the writer a pain in the neck.
The next book may also be unreadable, and its author prickly, but maybe not: it could be a great work of literature, or politics, or science — or religion.
If free speech is to mean anything as a principle upon which democracy is based, it must be invoked regardless.
Wholeheartedly, this time, not piecemeal; and without giving up.
The caftan currency
How to get British interest rates down — and how not to
IT HAS been all too typically British.
A remedy for economic ills is suggested.
Its merits are exaggerated, its difficulties downplayed.
Belatedly, the government adopts the remedy.
Almost at once, those who had most favoured the change start squealing.
It hurts, you see.
Thus has been the pattern with sterling's entry into the exchange-rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
The loudest complaints are coming from those who think that, through the use of too-high interest rates, the pound is being kept too high.
The Confederation of British Industry wants lower interest rates.
So does the Labour party.
A few Tory MPs echo the call in public; in private most do.
All these groans are based on confusion.
Worse, they are achieving the opposite of what they intend.
Because the economy is in recession, it is widely assumed that the government will and should cut interest rates.
That, after all, has been the stock response in previous slowdowns.
But the old rules have been changed by EMS membership, changed utterly.
Monetary policy is now geared to the exchange rate, not to domestic demand.
Interest rates will be cut only if sterling is persistently strong within the EMS.
Since it has been weak for the past two months, calling for cheaper money is as irrelevant as wanting trees to blossom in an Arctic winter.
The conditions do not exist, period.
A premium for uncertainty
The CBI and Labour are not in power, so why does their confusion matter?
Because their complaints are delaying the interest-rate cut they so desire.
The mere fact that the British are debating the pound's place in the EMS is enough to worry holders of sterling: perhaps the debate will end with the pound being devalued.
To compensate for that possibility, sterling-holders need higher interest rates than they would if they believed the pound would never be devalued.
That is what happened with, eg, the French franc.
In the early 1980s, when the French government was periodically devaluing the franc within the EMS, French short-term interest rates were seven to eight percentage points higher than German ones.
Today, the difference is less than one point.
The gap has narrowed because the French have long since accepted EMS disciplines, and cheaper money (as well as lower inflation) is their prize.
That same prize will elude the British for as long as they yearn for it publicly.
Careless talk costs jobs.
Ah, say the critics, so you admit that interest rates are being kept damagingly high.
The honest response is, yes, that may well be the case.
Just as the recession of 1980–81 was made worse by holding rates up in pursuit of a money-supply target, so today's recession could be intensified by the pursuit of an exchange-rate target.
The damage can be limited not just by a vow of silence from the government's critics, but also by intelligent fiscal action from the government itself.
This last point is awkward, because recent Tory chancellors have denied that fiscal policy has a role to play in managing demand.
Yet full EMS membership should cause the new chancellor, Norman Lamont, to rethink.
He would surely agree that the right aim is to have nominal GDP growing at around 5% a year.
But, since monetary policy is now geared to the exchange rate, that 5% cannot be achieved by manipulating interest rates.
To steer demand, the government must use its own spending, taxing and borrowing.
This points to a big difference between now and ten years ago.
In the midst of recession, the 1981 budget deliberately tightened fiscal policy.
The Treasury calculated that this would allow interest rates to tumble, which would revive demand.
It was right.
Today, though, there is no easy trade-off between fiscal and monetary policy.
No matter how tight the budget, rates may not be able to fall if sterling stays weak.
Since nominal GDP growth is probably decelerating fast, the budget may need to be loose — which risks being misinterpreted by the headline-writers and the markets as the Tories going soft.
Mr Lamont needs to start explaining that, via his budget in March, he will be seeking to manage demand.
There is one other thing for the government to do.
As soon as possible it should narrow sterling's EMS band, from its current 6% on either side of the central rate to the 2.25% that is standard for other EMS members.
Those who complain about dear money and strong sterling would doubtless see this as an even worse regime.
To them, the pound is already in a straitjacket.
Actually, it is more like a caftan.
The 6% band does little to reassure holders of sterling that the currency is safe from devaluation.
In its short life the EMS pound has fallen from a peak of DM3.03 to as low as DM2.86.
The narrow band would reduce the scope for incidental devaluation.
It would also allow Mr Lamont to show he does not contemplate any deliberate devaluation of sterling.
Both those changes would help the cause of cheaper money.
Without them, the pound will remain the European oddball — floundering, argued over, and therefore unloved.
Don't ban the bomb tests
There are safer ways to a safer world
AFTER four decades of nuclear build-up, the 1990s began as a disarmer's dream come true.
Thousands of Europe's tanks and guns are trundling to the scrap heap.
Next month the superpowers are expected to agree to cut their long-range nuclear arsenals by a third.
Next week in New York talks begin on something even more ambitious: the conversion of the Partial Test-Ban Treaty (which bans nuclear testing in the atmosphere, in space and underwater) into a comprehensive test ban (ending underground testing too).
From Nevada to Kazakhstan, from Xinjiang to the South Pacific, a test ban would delight the protesting locals.
It would, say its boosters, do a lot more besides.
Halt the nuclear arms race, for one thing; stop the spread of nuclear weapons, for another.
Nice, if it were true.
Unfortunately, it isn't.
Enthusiasm for a total test ban is strongest among those who want no nuclear weapons at all.
Their old argument was that, by unilaterally renouncing nuclear weapons, the West could somehow avoid the dangers of the nuclear age.
It could not.
Nuclear technology cannot be uninvented.
Deterrence — the knowledge that a strike by one side would provoke a devastating retaliatory strike by the other — was and still is the surest way to keep the peace in a dangerous world.
Cuts in the numbers of nuclear weapons have come because of carefully negotiated agreements that the superpowers have confidence in.
There can be more and deeper cuts.
But stability is the real problem, not numbers.
A test ban would destabilise the nuclear balance because neither side could be sure what effect it was having on the other.
Neither would a test ban stop the spread of nuclear weapons.
There is a mistaken notion that if the five declared nuclear powers (America, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China) gave up testing weapons, other countries now trying to acquire them would stop.
Of the seven or eight countries that secretly have nuclear weapons, or are close to having them, only one (India) started building a bomb because it was worried about one of the big five (China).
The rest want the bomb because it is the biggest bang that money can buy and because they mistrust their neighbours.
Only three are suspected of having conducted a test.
Step by step
It is true that, without a test, a country like Iraq could not be sure that its bomb would go off.
But neither could its enemies be sure that it wouldn't.
Last year Mexico blocked agreement to tighten up the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which polices world trade in nuclear fuel, because others refused to commit themselves to a test ban.
That was a pity.
A test ban is the least of the proliferators' worries.
So what is the next step towards reducing nuclear danger?
Nuclear disarmers are right in saying that a test ban would stop weapons builders trying out new and fancier designs.
But an end to new designs would also bring an end to more reliable and safer weapons.
And since those countries that have nuclear weapons are not disposed to get rid of them, some testing is needed to make sure that those they keep still work.
Yet, as military budgets come under increasing pressure and the pace of weapons development slows, the number of tests each year is declining.
A cue, perhaps, to talk about fixing a lowish number by treaty.
Nuclear tests are now limited to 150 kilotons.
There is nothing sacrosanct about the size of that bang.
Size is a trade-off between cleanness and accuracy: the lower the limits, the lower the risk of fall-out, but the greater the uncertainty that the test can accurately predict what a bigger explosion would do.
And although fall-out from tests has declined dramatically in recent years, a bit more uncertainty about predictions is a price worth paying in order win an agreement setting lower limits.
Any explosion of around 20 kilotons or more is fairly straightforward to check on.
Go much below that and the monitoring problems are vastly complicated by natural upsets, like earthquakes and even man-made chemical explosions (which would also make a comprehensive test ban pretty difficult to be sure of).
One advantage of this approach is that it allows time to test the technologies that build the confidence on which sensible arms control rests.
The other is that it makes it easier to encourage prickly China and France to join in.
To get down even to this level among the nuclear five, some pretty intrusive inspection (including challenges on site) would be needed.
To be confident that the technology of evasion was not outstripping the technology of verification, better radiation monitoring and satellite inspection would be needed.
Getting agreement to all of this among five powers would be hard enough.
Doing it worldwide would be a nightmare.
In a nuclear world the sensible aim is a less fragile, more stable nuclear balance at the lowest level of armaments on all sides.
That could in future go hand in hand with fewer, and smaller, nuclear tests.
The multi-storey car perk
Britain should kick the company-car habit
OH BLISS!
Oh poop-poop!
Oh my!
Oh my!’
This cry, uttered in 1908 by a property magnate called Toad, marked the beginnings of the British disease of autophilia — an uncontrollable obsession with the motor car.
It is now epidemic.
Any foreign manager arriving in Britain is amazed to find that the permutations of Ford Sierra, Vauxhall Cavalier and the like that he must offer his staff now define the pecking order in British society.
He ignores them at his peril.
The epidemic took hold during the 1970s, when high rates of income tax and an attempt by successive governments to control pay made the company-owned car a good way of rewarding people surreptitiously.
Today over half the new cars registered in Britain each year are bought by employers, and 2m of Britain's income-tax payers admit to the Inland Revenue that they have a company car.
This is a pattern of car ownership without parallel in the world.
The company car is such a feature of modern British business that in teaching the noble art of firing people, the London Business School reminds trainee firers to demand the car keys from a dismissed employee promptly — not because these are today's equivalent of Dreyfus's epaulettes (which they are), but because the car, stuck immovably in the company car-park, may depress other executives.
Like that other British obsession, houses, the disease is sponsored by the state.
The Conservative government has made a half-hearted attempt to tax company cars — half-hearted because it fears upsetting natural Tory voters.
Despite rising ten-fold over the past decade, the tax on company cars is still just a fraction of the true value of the perk (see page 27).
But the taxman's generosity is only part of the problem: more pernicious is the way he imputes a set amount of taxable income according to the size of a car's engine.
As the tax burden is fixed, an employee offered a company car opts for the most potent and gadget-laden model, at a given engine-capacity, that his status entitles him to.
The average level of equipment of new cars sold in Britain is the highest in Europe.
Millions of British motorists are driving cars more plush than they would ever choose to own were they handed the extra money and told to spend it themselves.
There is mounting suspicion, too, that Britain's market in cars, car parts and servicing has been poisoned by this system.
Private car-owners have become second-class citizens.
They are offered smaller discounts than the purchasing moguls of companies, and are viewed with distaste in garages because of their tendency to quibble over bills or wonder whether they really need new tyres.
The company-car phenomenon is part of the reason why prices in the British car business stay stubbornly above those on the continent.
The parallel is with health insurance in America, where companies insure their staff — and medical bills are out of control.
The British habit is hard to break because cars are central to much of modern business.
It is difficult to draw a line between a company car that is a pure perk and one used constantly on the job by a salesman or service engineer.
Nor is there any reason why the state should tell firms how to attract and keep good staff in a country where qualified labour can be hard to find.
If company cars, company fitted-kitchens or company hi-fi seem to do the trick, sad but fine.
Devilish-sounding fixes, such as a rule that all company cars must carry the corporate logo in letters two feet high, would involve more government snooping than the problem is worth.
Don't snoop, but don't subsidise
What the state can and should do is make sure that tax does not distort the choices involved.
The present crude banding system on cars is a distortion and should be scrapped.
The taxman ought to require companies to reveal at the end of each tax year how much each company car insured for private use has cost them in depreciation, insurance, servicing and fuel.
It should then tax all of that as personal income, less the proportion of the car's annual mileage demonstrably clocked up on company business — commuting excluded.
The British sales rep might do even better out of this system than the current one — and grandees would do worse.
But whatever the proportion agreed with the taxman, the cost of superfluous luxury, of expensive servicing and of trading-in a fully-depreciated old faithful for a new machine would once again mean something to the wallet of Mr Toad's great-grandson.
‘Oh despair!
Oh misery!
Oh poop-poop!’
Linking the unlinkable
Israel won't and shouldn't pay for the freedom of Kuwait
GEORGE BUSH and Saddam Hussein may not scare each other, but they are terrifying just about everybody else.
Unless Iraq's dictator sounds the retreat in the next few days, he will soon be unable to meet the January 15th deadline set by the United Nations for the complete removal of his army from Kuwait.
Mr Bush will then have the UN's authority for war.
Because the American-Iraqi meetings that were supposed to offer a last chance for peace may not happen, nervous intermediaries, notably the European Community, are striving to keep diplomacy alive.
Diplomacy is better than war.
If another lot of talks can make Iraq obey the demands of the UN Security Council, then the chance to avoid further bloodshed should be gratefully seized.
But it is five months since Mr Hussein swallowed his neighbour and was instructed by the Security Council to disgorge it.
He has had ample time to understand what the world wants him to do.
That is why, no matter what the last-minute mediators may say, there is a danger that their aim will be interpreted not as an effort to secure Mr Hussein's compliance with demands that have somehow escaped his attention, but as an attempt to offer him an easy way out.
The beguiling way out is ‘linkage’— Saddamspeak for disguising defeat in Kuwait as victory in Palestine.
It is hard to compromise on the need for Iraq to leave the whole of Kuwait: the Security Council has insisted, in stark black and white, that the withdrawal has to be complete and unconditional.
This demand has been reaffirmed, too many times to disown, by the United States, the Soviet Union and the European Community.
Linkage, though, is a vaguer notion, the sort of thing diplomats can really sink their gums into.
The whole world (except a few hardliners) would welcome a breakthrough in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
If part of the credit for a breakthrough could be claimed by Mr Hussein, and so induce him to pull his army out of Kuwait, why not solve two problems in a single bloodless stroke?
It sounds impossibly neat, and it is.
Linkage may get Mr Hussein out of Kuwait, but recovering Kuwait, though welcome in itself, is only part of what the world needs to achieve in the Gulf.
It has also to keep the Gulf safe in the future, and protect the world's access to oil.
That means keeping the chief local predator at bay.
If the chief local predator leaves Kuwait unbloody and unbowed, his over-mighty war machine will continue to menace his neighbours.
They can form alliances to contain him — buttressed, perhaps, by a residual force of Americans.
But it would be desperately hard, in the Arab world, to stand up to a man who could portray himself as a (literally) world-defying champion of Palestinian rights.
By definition, that is exactly what Mr Hussein would look like if linkage worked.
Clever western diplomacy could try to make him appear less heroic, by keeping the linkage vague, but then — unless he has belatedly realised the hopelessness of his position — he would see no benefit in it.
Having made Kuwait his 19th province and sworn never to leave it, he needs ringing international declarations on Palestine, not just hints and mumbles, to blot out the shame of retreat.
Indeed, the vaguer the linkage, the greater would be his need, after withdrawal, to show that he had achieved something real.
So linkage would not only turn Saddam into the colossus of the Gulf.
It could also tie his status as colossus to his subsequent performance in the Arab confrontation with Israel.
Many Arabs accuse the West of double standards in the Middle East.
Iraq is told to obey Security Council Resolution 660 and leave Kuwait at the point of American guns.
Israel stays unpunished in the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan Heights nearly 23 years after Resolution 242 called on it to get out.
It sounds unfair — to a visitor just arrived from Mars.
A Martian who had read the resolutions would know better.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was simple theft, for which Resolution 660 sets out a simple remedy: complete withdrawal, without conditions.
Israel's occupation arose from a pre-emptive war against neighbours who had massed on its borders and wanted it to disappear.
That is why Resolution 242 contains no condemnation of Israel.
It calls instead for a negotiated settlement based on two principles.
One is Israeli withdrawal from ‘territories [not, deliberately,the territories]occupied in the recent conflict’.
The other principle is the right of every state in the area to live in peace within secure and recognised borders.
Both sides are to blame for failing to put this land-for-peace formula into practice.
So are America and the Soviet Union, to the extent that they wasted too much energy signing up local partners for the cold war instead of organising a local peace.
But it is no surprise that one of the men who has done least to promote peace is Mr Hussein.
Lacking a land border with the Jewish state, he has little incentive to end the conflict with Israel and much to gain by posing, from a safe distance, as its uncompromising foe.
Palestine next
It would be a tragic error to buy this man out of Kuwait by awarding him the starring role in Arab dealings with Israel.
It is not impossible, if he fails in the Gulf, to make progress on Palestine, where the Arab uprising of the past three years has made it clear that Israel can no longer maintain a decent stewardship of the occupied territories.
The ending of the cold war has made Mr Bush's administration far readier than its predecessors to shake Israel's Likud government out of its self-destructive policy of permanent occupation.
The Palestine Liberation Organisation, until its recent flirtation with Saddamery, had seemed genuinely willing to make peace with Israel in exchange for a Palestine in the West Bank and Gaza.
This is a rare, potentially fruitful, combination of pressures and opportunities.
But Israel, a Kuwait-sized country, will make no concessions to an Arab world led by a victorious Saddam Hussein.
And the world, if it flunks its own test in the Gulf, will have no right to ask it to.
Murdoch on the brink
News Corporation may well survive, but imitators are unlikely to
FICTION has done its best to depict the megalomania of the media industry, throwing up characters like Lord Copper, Citizen Kane and Lord Gnome.
But the biographies of real moguls are often more extraordinary — the lives of Lord Northcliffe, Lord Beaverbrook, Bill Paley, Louis B. Mayer and William Hearst were mini-series in their own right.
By these extravagant standards, their natural successor, Rupert Murdoch, whose News Corporation owns a host of British and Australian papers, as well as Harper Collins and 20th Century Fox, seems rather boring.
Unlike other newspaper barons, he has no desire to see his face on the front of his newspapers; unlike other Hollywood moguls, he does not make the pages of the National Enquirer.
Instead, all Mr Murdoch's extravagance has gone into business.
He has built an empire through a series of gambles that often succeeded because rivals at first nearly died laughing — buying the Sydney Daily Mirror, starting the Australian, moving his British papers out of Fleet Street, launching the Fox television network.
In the 1980s he became the industry's pied piper, leading the way to the international conglomerate, crossing frontiers and combining different media.
However, Mr Murdoch has come dangerously close to an edge over which other debt-happy Australian entrepreneurs have already tumbled.
To place his bets he took on $8 billion in debt — which, because of dearer money and recession, he can no longer service.
News Corp is trying to persuade its 150 banks to agree to reschedule that debt with higher interest charges but later repayments.
There is talk of asset sales worth $2 billion, spread over three years.
It will be tough, but the odds are on Mr Murdoch coming through.
What can other businessmen learn from his predicament?
Mr Murdoch made two bad moves.
He paid $2.8 billion — $1 billion too much — for Triangle, an American publisher; and his latest gamble, satellite television in Britain, is taking longer to come good than he hoped.
Yet blaming Mr Murdoch's problems on two deals is like saying that the only sin of David Gower, England's most gifted cricketer, is flashing at balls outside the off-stump.
Mr Murdoch, like Mr Gower, has a way of playing that was bound to run into trouble.
Mr Murdoch's vice is debt.
He prefers to borrow rather than raise outside equity capital and thus dilute control.
Nothing wrong with that, in principle: a company that depended more on equity might not have the nerve to do things like founding Fox Television.
And many of the world's most stable firms are heavily in debt.
But their source of stability is usually a close link to a main bank which, especially in Germany and Japan, monitors management and, in effect, underwrites other banks' loans.
Careful as he is to cultivate bankers, Mr Murdoch borrows to avoid being controlled.
That gives him the space to make long-term bets, but also deprives him of advice against short-sightedness: borrowing sums that he can service only so long as the good times roll.
In need of the Hanson touch
Mr Murdoch's accounting does not help.
Australia's generous rules allow him to revalue intangible assets like newspaper mastheads, without saying specifically how much each asset is worth.
To get anywhere near an understanding of News Corporation's accounts, you usually have to wait for the figures it is obliged to file with America's Securities and Exchange Commission.
Even then, much mystery remains.
When times are good, ever-optimistic bankers still lend; in hard times, mysterious accounts add to creditors' suspicions.
These are general lessons.
What of the particular ones in the media?
Other conglomerates, particularly those looking for synergy, should be depressed by their mentor's plight.
There is no evidence that his empire makes sense — beyond engaging his own considerable talents.
The best parts run as separate units: the Fox network, for instance, shows only a handful of 20th Century Fox shows.
News Corp may well be worth more in pieces than together.
If Mr Murdoch had copied new conglomerates, like Britain's Hanson — which sells its successful turnarounds if a high bid comes along — he would be safe.
In other words, he should have treated the media business as being just like any other.
Failure to do that will always put a limit on even the most ambitious media barons.
BOOKS AND ARTS
Chinese politics
Understanding Mr Deng
DENG XIAOPING.
By David Goodman.
Sphere Books; 172 pages; £4.99
THE story of Deng Xiaoping is the story of China's 20th-century revolutions.
His predecessor as leader of China's billion people, Mao Zedong, may have been the maker of many of those revolutions, but Mr Deng was the one who often cleaned up the debris and put China back on its feet.
More important, Mr Deng gave China a new revolutionary vision in the decade of reform from 1978; and, despite the fact that he now has no official position, he still holds the fate of China in his hands.
Although Mao has been the subject of countless biographies, David Goodman has written the first fitting biography of Mr Deng.
He covers his conversion from croissants to communism while in France in the 1920s, but reserves the bulk of his pithy and precise political biography for the events since 1949.
The unifying theme is that Mr Deng shaped an alternative political vision to Mao, in large part because he was in charge of a very different area during the Chinese civil war of the 1930s and 1940s.
While Mao controlled barely 1m people in Yan'an, Mr Deng had five times that number in Taihang, a far more economically successful region.
Mr Deng's experience in Taihang, as opposed to Mao's in Yan'an, shaped at least three distinctive features of his political strategy.
First, Mr Deng was more committed to the power of the Communist Party and to party discipline, although he also understood that as long as basic stability and prosperity were ensured, the party should guide but not govern.
Second, Mr Deng was less an idealist than a sensible moderniser and nationalist.
He understood far better than Mao that socialism had to be built gradually and on the basis of ‘capitalist production’.
In demonstrating this point, Mr Goodman destroys the all-too-common misperception of Mr Deng as a pragmatist; the socialist vision is unwavering.
The Taihang experience is also used by Mr Goodman to explain one poorly understood basis of Mr Deng's power: his vast personal networks.
Indeed, as many of China's top leaders after 1949 worked in the Taihang region as in Yan'an.
By virtue of his connections, Mr Deng was able to re-emerge twice from political disgrace and is now able to rule China without formal power.
But service with Mr Deng in Taihang does not necessarily provide protection from purge; it did not help Zhao Ziyang, the former prime minister and party leader.
Mr Zhao was one prominent victim of the upheavals of 1989; the other was Mr Deng's reputation.
Yet as the ‘butcher of Beijing’ who called in the troops to restore order, Mr Deng was merely remaining true to his political vision and concern for party power.
Historians are fickle, and the eternally optimistic Mr Deng might take comfort from the fact that Mao's reputation survived the deaths of millions.
William Casey
Millionaire and spymaster
CASEY.
By Joseph Persico.
Viking; 601 pages; $24.95
IF RAGS to riches is still the American dream, William Casey lived his own version of it.
He did not quite begin in rags; he was the great-grandson of an Irish immigrant to New York, where his father worked in the cleaning department of the borough of Queens.
He went to a Jesuit school, served as an altar boy (as did his future enemies the Snowman and the Falcon, both now doing time for espionage against the United States), and read law at Fordham.
He began law practice, which was interrupted by the second world war.
In that war — as a young  lieutenant , junior grade, in the Navy — Casey found himself in charge of the intelligence operations in north-west Europe of the Office of Strategic Services; and spy-running, like venture capitalism, was in his blood from then on.
He made a large personal fortune, partly from fees, partly from shrewd investments.
His private life centred on a happy marriage, ‘steady as an ocean liner’ in his biographer's phrase, to a childhood friend; it produced one daughter.
Not for him the acrobatics that fiction attributes to the American rich.
 Latish in his life he decided to go into politics, but his chances seemed slight.
He was a large, shambling man, with a strong New York accent and a tendency to slur his speech; his powers as an orator were slim, and his prose style was unadorned.
As he once put it wryly to a friend, ‘the guys who have the brains can't get elected, and the guys who get elected don't always have the brains’.
He came into politics sideways, as campaign manager for his friend Ronald Reagan; and his reward was an unprecedented appointment to the directorship of the CIA combined with a seat in the cabinet.
Between Casey and the news media there was a profound mutual distrust, equalled only by the mistrust between him and the intelligence committees of Congress.
As he put it, ‘I have to deal with guys on those committees who couldn't get a security clearance for a job in a post office’.
He thought Congress irretrievably leaky; Congress thought him irretrievably unreliable.
He believed nothing should stand in the way of the security of the United States, and was less choosy than Congress about what means he took to preserve it.
He was also aware that he was clever, and rather enjoyed trying to bamboozle journalists who thought they might score off him.
Joseph Persico, in a telling biography based on a full understanding both of the man and of the processes through which he was trying to work, makes hay of Bob Woodward's pretensions to understand either, and displays Casey as a patriot — for good, bad and both together.
Eastern Europe's writers
Heroes?
What heroes?
BREATHING UNDER WATER AND OTHER EUROPEAN ESSAYS.
By Stanislaw Baranczak.
Harvard University Press; 258 pages; $22.50 and £17.95
PERVERSE as it sounds, western writers and intellectuals have often looked on the persecution of their East European counterparts with something like longing.
While literature in the West concerns itself with little more than sex and other people's books, there on the farther shore writers matter.
They suffer; and they wrestle with the big themes of good and evil, heroism and betrayal, man and God.
True enough.
But, as Stanislaw Baranczak points out in his introduction to this collection of unfailingly graceful, learned and thoughtful essays, ‘the simplest definition of a dissident writer is a writer who wants to practise his profession in a normal way’.
The desire for a normal life of love, work and friendship runs through these essays, cutting against the grain of the totalitarian state.
Mr Baranczak himself left Poland several years ago and now teaches literature at Harvard.
Although writers and writing are the subjects of most of these essays, the themes they present are essential to understanding both the extraordinary political changes that have swept through Eastern Europe, and the human condition under communism.
The common tenor of these writers and their works is resolutely anti-heroic.
Mr Baranczak finds in them a galaxy of individualists, an anti-universe to the communist state.
After all, he writes, ‘it was the revolution itself…that first exempted the individual from moral responsibility.’
Thus Witold Gombrowicz's apparently anti-political call for ‘an elusive man who is a play of contradictions’ is really a fierce rebuke to the totalitarian preference for deathly form over vital chaos; and the absurdist satire on display in Yuz Aleshkovsky's ‘Kangaroo’, whose protagonist eventually comes to believe the KGB's charge that he sodomised a marsupial in the Moscow Zoo ‘on a night between July 14th 1789, and January 9th 1905’(note the dates), is ‘the only way for a free mind to cope…an abuse of official language that will overpower it and thus defeat it.’
These writers stubbornly rebel against all straitjackets, even those offered with the best intentions.
Czeslaw Milosz, a great poet and the author of one of the classics of anti-totalitarian literature, ‘The Captive Mind’, openly rebels at the heroic image in which he and his peers are cast by their western admirers.
‘Perhaps,’ he has written, ‘some western writers are longing for subjects provided by violent historical change, but I can assure [them$ that we, ie, natives of hazy Eastern regions, perceive history as a curse and prefer to restore to literature its autonomy, dignity and independence from social pressures.’
To Mr Milosz, literature's dignity resides not in politics but in a frankly metaphysical attempt to bridge awe and horror, to name the sorrow of mankind.
Whether such brave ideas can thrive in the rough tide of freedom alongside economic want and nationalist fervour remains to be seen.
But from these men and women there is much to be learnt.
The museum at Auschwitz
Preserving horror
AUSCHWITZ AND BIRKENAU
AS A symbol of Nazi war crimes, the Auschwitz concentration camp automatically inspires violent criticism and opinions.
But the site itself, now a museum and memorial in southern Poland, has had an equally stormy history.
In the past, Jewish, gypsy and other groups have complained about the museum exhibitions and disputed research into the camp's history; they have called the Polish curators biased.
An international commission composed of Poles, Jews, gypsies and others, including several Auschwitz survivors, has now been created to sort matters out.
The task will not be easy.
The Auschwitz museum was set up in 1955, when most visitors were Poles with immediate memories of Nazi occupation.
Now most of the camp's 700,000 yearly visitors, coming from Israel, Germany, America and elsewhere, think of the second world war as the distant past.
Curators think the exhibits should no longer deal with the camp alone, but should describe the historical circumstances: occupied Poland, Nazi Germany, the Drang Nach Osten and the Final Solution.
How did people live in the camps, how did some survive, how did some defend themselves?
Simply to show photographs of inmates, and to display the grisly collections of 3,500 suitcases, 29,000 toothbrushes and yards of human hair is no longer enough.
At the same time, exhibits must be low-key enough not to distract visitors from their own thoughts: Auschwitz is also a cemetery.
Most of the museum's present exhibits date from the era of Polish Stalinism, when communist historiographers called the Holocaust the ‘culmination of capitalism’ rather than a crime against all humanity, and a special crime against the Jews.
Some of the exhibits at the camp, particularly the small national exhibits designed by former communist countries, tend to reflect this view, emphasising communist resistance movements to Hitler, for example, over others.
Jewish groups and Jewish visitors to the camp find such omissions offensive.
Curators feel that much harm has been done by the museum's failure to articulate two indisputable facts.
Auschwitz was first created to liquidate the Polish intelligentsia, 270,000 of whom died there.
Later in the war, Auschwitz, together with the much larger Birkenau, was dedicated to the mass murder of Jews.
The failure of both Poles and Jews to understand that the camp is also a symbol of martyrdom for the other group has led to many controversies, most recently over the convent of Carmelite nuns which borders the camp.
(The story of that dispute is excellently told by Wladyslaw Bartoszewski in ‘The Convent at Auschwitz’, published by Bowerdean Press.)
Failures of understanding aside, the history of the camp is still being revised, and each revision is painful.
Historians recently decided to lower the estimated number of Auschwitz victims, from 4m — a figure chosen by Soviet soldiers who liberated the camp in 1945 — to between 1m and 2m, an estimate based on transport documents which have only recently come to light.
Changing this number also meant changing the inscriptions on some of the camps' memorial plaques; some Jewish groups did not like the wording of the new inscriptions.
After several sessions the international commission resolved the problem.
Others are bound to arise; not least because, as the Soviet Union cracks apart, documents and material taken there after the war may drift back into the hands of historians.
In Gaudi's shadow
BARCELONA
A MILD, retiring man, Josep Maria Subirachs lives and works in a modest studio on the 108-year-old building site of Barcelona's Sagrada Familia cathedral.
The cathedral's architect, Antonio Gaudi, did the same until his death in 1926.
Yet Mr Subirachs's sculptures for the cathedral have placed him at the centre of a storm.
For this building, in which everything is done in the grandest and strangest way, Mr Subirachs is making 75 pieces that trace the Passion of Christ.
High up on the west face, his Christ defies the law of gravity.
The cross projects horizontally from the facade instead of rising vertically against it, so that the long emaciated body curves out at 90 degrees over the parvis, ‘as if about to plunge down on us,’ to quote the sculptor.
He has given one apostle Gaudi's face, and his robot-like Roman soldiers are copies of chimney-pots the architect designed.
Overall, however, his work is in austere counterpoint to Gaudi's luxuriant stone tableau of the Nativity on the cathedral's east face.
Mr Subirachs's angular and intense figures are both full of contemporary mal de vivre and reminiscent of Catalan Romanesque art.
Even so, an anti-Subirachs cabal has sprung up, calling for his work at the Sagrada Familia to be stopped for artistic and ideological reasons.
The artistic reason is that he is old-hat; Catalans prefer to be known for the airy constructions that are going up for the Olympic Games.
The ideological reason is that Mr Subirachs's works take further towards completion a cathedral Gaudi conceived as a bulwark against subversive new dogmas such as Marxism and anarchism.
One of Gaudi's sculptures, after all, shows an anarchist about to toss a grenade at a statue of the Virgin Mary.
Anti-clerical Catalans have long favoured leaving the Sagrada Familia as it is and landscaping the site.
Yet the anti-Subirachs lobby also includes Catholic traditionalists who have been so shocked by his naked Christ that they hold monthly prayer vigils.
The Socialist mayor of Barcelona, Mr Pasqual Maragall, refuses to take sides.
His grandfather, a respected poet, was a friend of Gaudi, whose nascent cathedral he compared to ‘a marvellous, budding flower’; his uncle is a member of the Foundation that finances the building of the cathedral from donations and the sale of tickets to visitors.
Only restorations of Gaudi's own work are officially sponsored; but as long as people keep on giving, Mr Subirachs can keep working.
If he outwits his critics, he reckons his project might be finished by 2005.
Close, but no nightingale
THE CONQUEST OF PARADISE: CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS AND THE COLUMBIAN LEGACY.
By Kirkpatrick Sale.
Knopf; 453 pages; $24.95.
To be published in England by John Curtis
ON MAY 1st 1893 President Grover Cleveland gave a speech to 300,000 people on a stretch of parkland beside Lake Michigan.
At noon, he pressed a gold and ivory button and the fun began:
At one and the same instant the audience burst into a thundering shout; the orchestra pealed forth the strains of the Hallelujah Chorus; the wheels of the great Ellis engine in Machinery Hall commenced to revolve; the electric fountains in the lagoon threw their torrents towards the sky; a flood of water gushed from the McMonnies Lake and rolled back again into the basin; the thunder of artillery came from the vessels in the lake; the chimes in Manufacturers Hall and on the German building rang out a merry peal, and overhead, the flags at the top of the poles in front of the platform fell apart and revealed the gilded models of the ships in which Columbus first sailed to American shores.
That contemporary account did not think to mention the 160 exhibition buildings connected by canals which were plied by gondolas and steam boats.
The  quatrocentennial Columbus exhibition cost a staggering $30m: it drew more visitors than any previous event in history.
In 1893 America was ready to see Columbus as the great discoverer, the man who laid the foundations for a nation of bold entrepreneurs.
He had gone in search of gold and glory and they thought the better of him for it; even the composer of the ‘New World Symphony’ was careful to sound the horns of triumph.
(Dvorak devotees can count their blessings for his stubborn spirit; the composer's American patron had requested an opera about Hiawatha for the great occasion.)
How much has been learnt since then?
What is lined up for the quincentennial in 1992?
Not much, it seems.
$4m will be going into the Columbian world fair at Seville; the Dominican Republic is hoping to build a 390-foot lighthouse for $10m; 12 full-size replica ships will be setting sail for America (presumably from their commissioning countries), and the fifth Genovese Columbian conference will be exhibiting every plant of the New World.
This last project is an embarrassingly inappropriate tribute to a man who could not identify any plants, trees or birds that he saw on his journeys except by such vapid statements as ‘big and little birds of all sorts’, ‘trees very green’, and ‘many trees very different from ours.’
When Columbus spotted the crop that was to become the chief source of Virginia's prosperity, tobacco, he dismissed it as a worthless weed; he did, on the other hand, find time to remark on the beauty of the nightingales in a country where none exists.
Columbus, more properly Admiral Cristobal Colon, is shown in Kirkpatrick Sale's forceful and wide-ranging book as a typical 15th-century profiteer.
He was not courageous.
He was frequently deceitful, as in his deliberate misrepresentations to his crew of the speed of their daily voyage.
He manufactured stories about the cannibalistic Caribs he never met: without the Admiral's inventive mind, Shakespeare's audience might never have encountered Caliban on Prospero's island.
He threatened his crew with having their tongues cut out if they would not swear that they had sailed along the coast of the Indies (they had, in fact, been sailing past Cuba).
As governor of the island of Española, Colon ordered the hands to be struck off any native who failed to render up a quarterly tribute of gold or 25 pounds of spun cotton.
And this on an island where there appeared to be next to no gold and a few sparse cotton plants.
Mr Sale carefully provides the reader with this last piece of information 30 pages away from the news that Colon's determination to find gold on the island was rewarded.
In 1496 he was able to tell his royal employers that he had found a goldfield of El Doradan proportions, capable of producing up to 3 tons of gold a year, enough to justify the cost of his four expeditions.
Mr Sale speaks in the tongue of the times.
There is nobody now who does not feel uncomfortable about the way colonialism began.
The fascination of this book is in its clear-sighted debunking of the myths which many have fondly mistaken for historical truth: that Columbus was really aiming for Asia, that he and his sailors thought the world was flat, that Queen Isabella pawned her jewels to finance his trips and came down with her husband to wave him off from the docks, or even (a fondly-cherished delusion) that these were journeys of discovery rather than intentional acquisition and expansion of the Spanish empire.
On this aspect of the story Mr Sale is an invaluable guide and teacher, but he goes well over the top in his determination to present Columbus as the representative of a devilish western world driven only by the desire to rape, grab and despoil a land of innocence.
His is an uncompromising view, but the breadth of his scholarship and the skilful mix of historical fact, conviction and style make this an absorbing book.
Making films in Latin America
They kill horses, don't they?
A MAN has to be either rich or crazy to make films in Latin America these days.
It was not always so.
In the 1960s state money encouraged the growth of national film industries in many Latin American countries.
The glossy conventions of Hollywood were spurned in favour of a rough-hewn cinematic style more suited to the reality at hand.
These were heady days.
People spoke of a ‘Third Cinema’, an ‘Imperfect Cinema’ and the ‘Aesthetic of Hunger’.
In recent years, however, the film industry has become an extra that Latin American states can ill afford.
Debt, hyperinflation, currency devaluation and dwindling box-office have combined to make a high-risk business riskier still.
The golden days of state money are over, and joint ventures — co-finance and co-productions with European TV networks or private companies — are not always happy.
One Latin American director at the latest London Film Festival was desperately seeking ways of writing yet another French actor into his latest script: ‘It's a burden trying to be universal,’ he groaned.
Another director made it sound like a Faustian pact with the devil: ‘You have to be careful not to lose your soul’, he whispered.
‘Some co-productions turn out like badly-mixed cocktails.’
Co-ventures of this kind certainly do little to change the stereotyped European image of Latin America.
They tend to be lush period pieces set in Amazonia with Spanish, Italian, French, British or even American actors in the lead roles.
These films, with their ‘touristic’ inventory of cockfights, hot mulattas, haciendas, rubber plantations and the odd dumb Indian, do nothing to temper what one Venezuelan director described as ‘European ignorance’about Latin America.
‘For most people, Venezuela is oil, Argentina the pampa and Colombia, drugs,’ he complained.
There are exceptions.
A new film from Argentina, Maria Luisa Bemberg's version of Octavio Paz's life of Sor Juana, a 17th-century Mexican nun and poetess, proves how successfully foreign actors can be integrated with a national cast: a French actress and a Spanish star play the leads.
And glamour does not always have to be imported.
The London Film Festival included a feature film from Ecuador, only the second the country has ever produced.
This ravishingly homespun film, played by an all-Ecuadorian cast, tells the story of ‘La Tigra’, a mythical female version of the Latin American macho.
The Tigress's favourite trick consists of awakening her lovers with a rifle-butt and watching with delight as they hurl themselves naked from her window into a dungheap.
But the film's British audience had its mind on other matters.
‘Was the horse killed for real?’ they wanted to know after one scene.
A shame-faced Camilo Luzuriaga, the film's director, had to admit that he and his crew lacked the technical know-how to fake a death.
Despite economic pressure to do otherwise, a handful of recent films capture raw and contemporary images of Latin America.
Some were shot on location in shanty towns or marginal neighbourhoods.
One Colombian film, which used non-professional actors to portray the lives of Medellin street kids, was so faithful to local speech patterns that one Argentine cinema-goer confessed he had understood a mere 10% of the dialogue.
The general mood of these films is sombre.
‘What do we do now?’ asks a mother in present-day Argentina with her life in tatters around her.
‘If you've got dough, there's no punishment,’ declares her young son, languishing in prison without an austral.
‘Everything's more difficult these days,’ grumbles a bed-ridden pensioner in a Chilean film; and although, as it happens, he is referring to that day's crossword, the comment itself speaks volumes.
These films do not make for easy viewing.
Fat on a diet of ‘Robocop’ and ‘Rambo’, Latin Americans may not jump at the chance to see them.
Accounting for the flop of his latest film, ‘Last Images of the Shipwreck’, on the home market, an Argentine director said simply: ‘The shipwrecked don't want to see the shipwreck.’
AMERICAN SURVEY
Trade
The other brinkmanship
WASHINGTON, DC
FRETTING about the Gulf, Americans are paying little attention to another arcane game of bluff, deadlines and possible disaster.
The Uruguay round of trade negotiations broke up rancorously in Brussels in December after the European Community refused even to discuss a compromise text on agriculture.
Arthur Dunkel, GATT's director-general, is shuttling between capitals searching for a basis on which to resume talks.
As with the Gulf, a deadline looms: March 1st, the date by which a deal must be submitted to Congress if a ‘fast-track’ authority is to protect it from amendment.
Could this be a prelude to a trade war even more destructive of world prosperity than a military war?
Optimists say not.
Trade negotiations always look as if they were about to break down just before they succeed.
December's meeting showed conclusively that the Uruguay round cannot be completed without a deal on agriculture.
Behind the scenes both the Americans and the Europeans are working towards an agreement.
Another straw the optimists grasp is that two trade disputes between the EC and the United States have been headed off.
The $420m a year that America has been getting to compensate it for the loss in sales of farm products to Spain and Portugal after they joined the Community was due to run out in 1990.
Under threat of trade retaliation, the EC has extended it.
And both sides are being cautious in their reaction to import bans imposed for health reasons.
The EC is blocking pork and beef imports because it claims that American slaughterhouses are unsanitary; the Americans are blocking some wine imports because they have not tested a drug used in its production.
Rather than retaliate, though, the two are talking.
Even so, trade pessimists probably have the stronger case.
There are huge gaps to bridge in the Uruguay round in less than two months, in areas such as services and textiles as well as agriculture.
American negotiators say that they are not even talking the same language as the Community on farm support.
The Japanese are not helping: they sided with the EC in Brussels because they are not ready to permit any rice imports.
Nor is South Korea, where the Americans detect an official campaign to discourage imports.
But the biggest worry is America's disenchantment with free trade.
Many industries, fearful of foreign competition, have been lukewarm about the Uruguay round from the start.
A stream of trade complaints is ready to burst on the administration the day the round ends.
Hostility to foreign investment is another telling sign.
There is talk of extending ‘voluntary’ quotas on car imports to transplanted Japanese factories in America.
Manuel Lujan, the interior secretary, has grumbled loudly about a Japanese firm taking over a company operating under a government concession in Yosemite National Park.
As usual Congress reflects the mood.
Max Baucus, chairman of the Senate's international trade subcommittee, talks of ending the Uruguay round and protecting national interests with bilateral agreements, farm subsidies and use of section 301 of America's trade act to force other countries to open their markets by threatening to close America's.
Everybody accepts that there is no chance of an agreement to extend the fast-track deadline beyond the beginning of March.
Yet the alternatives advocated by GATT-bashers are unappealing.
A free-trade area for North and South America would take years to negotiate.
It would link countries that are almost all big international debtors — and so need to increase exports to third countries, not to each other.
The use of threats is at best an uncertain course leading to managed trade — and at worst a dangerous one leading to higher tariffs.
The administration has admitted that the American economy is in recession, which will make hard-pressed industries more vociferous in their demands for protection from ‘unfair competition’.
A clear free-trade lead from George Bush to revive the Uruguay round is sorely needed.
Drugs in Tacoma
Needle delivery
SEATTLE
A SMOKY industrial Sparta to the high-tech Athens of Seattle, Tacoma often provides the punch-line for local jokes.
Yet it is Tacoma that is ahead of its time in its pioneering attempts to help drug addicts (rather a lot of them among its 160,000 inhabitants) from becoming AIDS sufferers as well.
From this month on, junkies need make only a telephone call to exchange their used, possibly-AIDS bearing, needles for new clean ones, delivered free of charge.
Tacoma's needle-exchange programmes are already thought to be showing results.
As many as half the New Yorkers who inject themselves with intravenous drugs may carry the AIDS virus; in the Tacoma and Seattle area only about 10% of the addicts are infected.
The virus is easily transmitted via needles — and addicts tend to have dirty habits.
One needle may serve a dozen or more customers.
The odds are that at least one of them carries the virus.
About 1m Americans are infected.
Tacoma's push for clean needles was started by Dave Purchase, a local drug counsellor.
In 1988 Mr Purchase set up his exchange operation in a street where there were a lot of junkies.
He bought used needles from drug takers, passed out new ones, and dispensed advice on how to sterilise needles with household bleach.
A year ago the Tacoma and Pierce County health authorities formalised the programme by offering to pay for it, creating the first publicly financed needle-exchange programme in America.
The new twist is that addicts (the programme serves 300–500 people a week) will be given a telephone number they can call to request new needles, which will then be delivered to a pre-arranged meeting point.
Their own addresses will tactfully neither be used nor asked for.
Based on the Tacoma model, needle-exchange programmes have been established in Seattle and several other American cities.
In October Tacoma was host to the first North American conference on needle exchanges; the participants studied European programmes, including one in Wales where the chemist's department of a supermarket serves as a needle-exchange centre.
Though hard evidence linking any such programme to decreased AIDS transmission is difficult to pin down, Tacoma's health officials believe that their system has cut ‘unsafe’ injections by half.
Opponents of the whole idea say that it subsidises drug abuse.
The moral issues are difficult.
William Bennett, a former drug tsar, was a vociferous foe, as is Louis Sullivan, the health secretary.
In New York a fledgling needle-exchange programme was scrapped last February.
Tacoma's own programme had to survive a court challenge at around the same time.
Even in San Francisco, perhaps the most AIDS-acclimatised city in the world, needle-exchange programmes lack official sanction.
However, the San Franciscan police usually look the other way when drug workers swap needles, sometimes by putting clean syringes in a pram and inviting junkies to step up and feed ‘the baby’.
Texan banks
Throwing away the key
DALLAS
FEDERAL prosecutors have dealt a one-two punch to the savings-and-loan crooks,’ boasted Dick Thornburgh, the attorney-general.
A Texan jury on December 20th convicted Don ‘Big Daddy’ Dixon for using his bank as a personal piggy-bank; the next day prosecutors announced that they had squeezed a guilty plea from Edwin ‘Fast Eddie’McBirney, who admitted to artful manipulation of deposits at Sunbelt Savings Association, the largest S&L ever to fail in Texas.
Mr Dixon and Mr McBirney were two prime targets of federal efforts to uncover the rampant savings and loan fraud in the state.
The public's resentment of thrift operators and their accomplices is showing itself.
Juries are becoming more likely to return guilty verdicts in tough-to-prove cases — and judges more likely to slap on longer sentences.
Paul Coggins, a Dallas criminal lawyer who represents Mr McBirney, complains that the trials can be compared to drug-dealing trials in the 1960s when winning a conviction was as easy as dropping the dope on the courtroom table,.
The government had plenty of dope on Mr Dixon, who drew attention to himself with his lavish style of life, including a fleet of fancy jets and fast cars, and a two-week tour of fine French restaurants.
The flamboyant past owner of the now defunct Vernon Savings and Loan Association was charged with conspiracy to finance a $1m beach house in southern California by diverting a loan made to a developer buddy in Texas.
Prosecutors held the jury's attention by spicing the six-week trial with sex.
A former brothel owner testified that she provided girls to romp in a hot tub with Vernon board members at the beach house.
The jury found him guilty on 23 charges in a 38-count indictment.
After prosecutors presented evidence that he had money stashed away in overseas accounts, it was ruled that Mr Dixon must stay in jail until the judge sentences him in February.
Not even a plea from his six-year-old granddaughter to let Big Daddy go could free him.
His conviction ends the 3.5-year investigation into Vernon Savings, one of the first by the federal bank-fraud taskforce.
The taskforce has so far charged 544 defendants and won 385 convictions.
In Dallas 72 of the 94 defendants charged have been convicted.
And where sentences of three or five years were once common, judges are now giving ten years or more.
Mr Dixon's closest accomplice at Vernon, Woody Lemons, was sentenced to 30 years last year.
The public will have to be satisfied with vengeance rather than restitution.
The trial was streamlined: Mr Dixon's own lawyer points out that in a $1.3 billion S$L failure, the government came up with charges involving only $600,000.
Mr Dixon, who could theoretically be imprisoned for 120 years, faces maximum fines of only $5.75m.
Where cops are killers
SAN DIEGO
SIX YEARS ago San Diego's police were being killed at a higher rate than the police in any other big American city.
The tables have now been turned.
These days it is the San Diego cops who are doing the shooting, killing more people, proportionately, than any other police force in America.
It is a dramatic change, and not one that recommends itself to the city's residents.
Starting from 1986, policemen were given bullet-proof waistcoats and greater discretion in deciding when to use ‘deadly force’ against criminals.
Scarcely a voice was raised in protest.
Since then, only one officer has died in the line of duty.
But the police have killed 46 people in the past five years, including 12 last year.
And loud protests are suddenly heard.
The job of quietening them has fallen to Bob Burgreen, the chief of police.
The city now has the highest per-head rate of fatal police shootings in the country: double that of New York and nearly triple that of Chicago.
Such numbers, and the controversial circumstances of several of the shootings, have sent Mr Burgreen scrambling to give the impression that his department is not completely out of control.
The trouble started in May, when an unarmed navy man who had backed his pick-up truck into a sheriff's squad car was shot in the head by a deputy.
Three days later commuters inching along a motorway during the rush-hour watched as police chased and killed a Mexican man brandishing a garden trowel.
Other incidents include the shooting of a 12-year-old boy (armed with a handful of stones) and of an 80-year-old man in a wheelchair.
Led by a local chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, a coalition of pressure groups demanded the reform of police procedures.
In response, Mr Burgreen undertook what he says is the most extensive study ever of the use of force by policemen.
The result was a $600,000 plan, announced on December 21st, to reduce the number of fatal shootings by a combination of extra training, electric stun-guns, rubber bullets and police dogs.
The stress was on making police behaviour less deadly, not on changing it.
Mr Burgreen was not able to offer his department's critics the reform they wanted above all others: improvement of San Diego's unusually weak system of investigating police shootings.
In virtually every other big city, detectives from a special ‘internal affairs’ division or the local district attorney's office conduct an independent investigation.
Not so in San Diego.
There, shootings are investigated first by colleagues of the shooter.
A report is sent to the district attorney, who then decides whether to pursue his own inquiry.
In the past five years that has happened in fewer than 15% of the cases; not a single officer has been found criminally liable.
Often the police were vindicated before autopsies were completed.
To have pursued the cases more vigorously, says Edwin Miller, the district attorney, would have been ‘a waste of time’.
Criminologists disagree.
So does Mr Burgreen, who asked Mr Miller's office to start conducting independent investigations into all future police shootings.
Mr Miller refused.
So Mr Burgreen, doing all that he could, said he would add a civilian to his internal review board.
Nobody will be impressed.
New York's infrastructure
Time to make do and mend
NEW YORK
BRIDGES creak, roads subside, buildings collapse, fires rage in the subway: sure signs that New York's infrastructure is crumbling.
New Yorkers have always shown a greater genius for putting up new buildings than for repairing old ones.
But recent events have shown that they need to learn to make do and mend.
They build on a grand scale.
New York was long known as the imperial city — the place that drilled tunnels and threw majestic bridges across the East and Hudson rivers, whose railway stations celebrated beaux-arts architecture, and where rich visionaries went to town with such mighty groups of buildings as the Rockefeller Centre.
When a part of the city, such as the South Bronx, was worn out, the better-off people decamped to the suburbs.
They left behind solid homes for vandals and arsonists to destroy.
They also abandoned thousands of miles of electric cables and water pipes to rot in the ground.
An inquest by New York newspapers into a subway fire in Brooklyn that killed two people at the turn of the year is making plain the consequences of all this neglect.
The Emergency Medical Rescue Units that the city maintains to deal with such accidents were unavoidably delayed in getting to the scene.
Four out of five of their rescue vehicles were out of commission for repairs or oil changes.
Workers could not clear the tunnels of smoke while waiting for the rescue teams to arrive.
The fans that were supposed to force fresh air into this section of the subway and to draw stale air out had been stored in a warehouse in Ohio since 1977, awaiting installation.
Some of the 842 bridges that the city maintains are, it seems, in even worse condition than the subway.
City engineers have leaked to the press their previously private warnings to the city of hundreds of signs of hazardous corrosion on four big bridges that span the East river: the Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queensboro and Williamsburg bridges.
The engineers blame neglect by cent-wise-dollar-foolish politicians for the rusting girders.
The bridges, they say, have not been painted regularly and this penny-pinching has exposed their steelwork to the corroding effects of salt, pollution, water and debris.
New York's mayor, David Dinkins, has been in office for only a year, so is obviously not responsible for these decades of neglect.
He is nonetheless being held responsible for putting things right.
The timing of this challenge could hardly be worse.
Social problems are crowding in on a city where the body-count for murders rose from a record 1,905 in 1989 to a new record of more than 2,200 in 1990.
When the streets of New York begin to recall the Wild West, it is hard to find money for boring old repairs to bridges, roads, tunnels and subways.
Macho potatoes on the couch
GEORGE ALLEN, a football coach who died on new year's eve, deserves a footnote in political history.
From 1971 to 1977 he was the head coach of the Washington Redskins professional football team, and turned what had been a lacklustre bunch into a city's obsession.
(When two Washingtonians meet, anywhere in the world, one will quickly say: ‘How 'bout them 'Skins?’.
It is a bit like a Masonic handshake.)
Feisty, secretive, determined to win, it was not surprising that one of Allen's fervent admirers was Richard Nixon, who, Washington legend has it, would call the coach during the dark hours of Watergate to discuss Redskin strategy and — who knows?— to get some tips on how to handle his own presidency.
Mr Nixon and his gang liked football terminology — gameplans, moving the ball downfield, playing tough defence and the like.
Now everybody talks like this: if you cannot understand the language of sport, you probably cannot follow American politics.
America's passion for watching and talking about sport (and, those ubiquitous joggers notwithstanding, the true passion is for watching not playing) deserves attention.
There is, for a start, so much of it to watch and talk about.
A determined armchair athlete on the east coast could have spent 11 consecutive hours watching college football on new year's day, and millions no doubt did.
The National Football League play-offs are about to begin, and the orgiastic blow-out of the Super Bowl comes at the end of the month.
Few Americans are revered in quite the way that sports stars are.
After reading Sports Illustrated's latest paean to Joe Montana, the quarterback of the San Francisco 49ers (‘An 11-year-old named Matthew Hart had a brain tumour…
The meeting lasted 45 minutes…
Joe left.
Matt's crisis passed’), all that is left to hear about the great man are the details of his virgin birth.
But the real point, argued Thomas Boswell of the Washington Post in an article last year, is that sport ‘has become central to what remains of our American sense of identity’.
A television (or two, or three) in every home, the collapse of moral certitudes, the debasement of politics — all this, suggested Mr Boswell, means that sport has become ‘the meeting ground where we discuss our values’.
Mr Boswell is not alone.
George Will, a political commentator of rarefied taste, is another who thinks that sport should be taken seriously.
He argues that if other Americans were as good at their job as baseball players are at theirs, the country's trade difficulties would be a thing of the past.
What should be made of all this?
Start with an obvious point, but one that is often forgotten.
Saying that Americans are obsessed with spectator sport is a bit like saying that life in Japan is bliss: something that is more true for men than for women.
A political life that is constantly framed in sporting terms, and which celebrates successes with high-fives and backslapping, is unlikely to be one that many women find congenial.
Add the fact that the dominating sport, American football, venerates the combination of meticulous planning with the sudden application of brute force, and you may have an explanation for the macho tone of much of American policy-making.
One reason, perhaps, why so few women choose a life in politics?
Then there is the living lie of ‘college sports’.
Thousands of black students are exploited by being lured to college on the promise that their sporting skills will lead to a professional career — and then left ill-educated and forgotten (although the colleges are enriched by the television networks) when the career does not materialise.
Cities spend an enormous amount of money on building stadiums and bidding competitively for sports franchises; they predicate their enthusiasm on the assumption (for which there is no empirical basis) that a professional sports team enhances a local economy.
When the various negatives are put together, a case can begin to be made that sport is a destructive influence on American public life.
But not, at least in one way, an interfering influence.
For all the strength of its grip on American affections, the industry has not yet done a Hollywood: sporting stars, unlike some film stars, do not pretend that they know everything there is to know about matters from a nuclear winter to farm policies and demand to be listened to on them all.
Guess what?
Many Americans regret the fact that they now discuss sport with the passion that 200 years ago they brought to everyday debates on theories of representative government (and, as historians of the revolution have made plain, there really were such debates).
Perhaps the blame for this lies with the politicians.
For the great joy of American sport is its unpredictability.
Who would have thought, for example, that the University of Colorado, where the students wear tie-dye and ask in hushed tones if you would like more salad, would become the national college football champion?
Who would have thought that the Oakland As, celebrated by Mr Will and thought to be a collection of giants, would have been blown away in the World Series by a bunch of journeymen from Cincinnati?
National politics, by contrast, has become all too predictable: the Republicans win the White House; the Democrats hold Congress.
So what Richard Nixon should really have discussed with George Allen was how to set about reforming the wretched business of campaign finance.
Yes, no, maybe
WASHINGTON, DC
BACK to business after the break, policy-makers in the administration and on Capitol Hill (the new Congress met on January 3rd) are a nervous lot.
Nervous about the prospect of a war, naturally.
But they are also nervous that the calculations they make in the next two weeks may determine who will win and lose the political battles of the next two years.
The Founding Fathers, in Article I, Section 8 of the constitution, decreed that ‘The Congress shall have the power…to declare war’.
In any democracy, a government can commit its people to certain bloodshed only if it believes it has their support.
In America that principle of democratic statecraft is made formal.
It does not make life easy for George Bush, but neither does it make it easier for Congress.
Congressmen know that the stakes in the Gulf are of the highest.
They know that a mistake on their part could send a signal almost as disastrous as the one that Chamberlain sent Hitler at Munich in 1938.
And the Democrats among them also know that if they went on record against a war that turned out to be a great victory, President Bush would be even harder to beat in 1992.
Democrats are hence navigating, as one of them put it, between the Scylla of not wishing to undercut Mr Bush's diplomacy and the Charybdis of not wishing to give him a blank cheque.
They remember, acutely, the blank cheque that Lyndon Johnson got from Congress in the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution that allowed him to fight in Vietnam.
Congressional leaders were set to meet the president on January 3rd, perhaps to find a course on which all could agree.
But any deal done between the leaders and the White House may be subject to full congressional approval.
And members have their own ideas.
On December 27th 110 of the 267 Democratic members of the House of Representatives signed a letter written by George Miller, a Californian Democrat who came into Congress in 1974 as part of the post-Vietnam wave of liberals.
His letter says that: ‘So long as neither the lives of American citizens nor our troops are subjected to immediate danger and the international economic embargo continues to exert substantial pressure against Iraq…offensive military action by the United States unwisely risks massive loss of life.’
The Miller letter shows that, at present, there is little chance of a resolution being put to Congress that simply mimics the language of the UN Security Council resolution of November 29th.
This was one that said that member states might use ‘all necessary means’(meaning force) to restore peace and security in the Gulf.
Mr Bush would dearly like a congressional resolution of this sort, passed by a big margin after a short debate.
But Mr Miller's letter explicitly reminds the president that the United Nations ‘does not commit, or authorise, the use of United States armed forces.’
The number of signatories to the letter — and up to 50 other House Democrats might agree with its terms, as well as perhaps 25–30 of the 56 Democratic senators — means that a ‘UN’ resolution could pass Congress only with a majority small enough to be politically unacceptable, and might well fail.
That is uncomfortable for the president.
He can take no more pleasure from a second initiative that is making its rounds on the Hill.
Joe Kennedy, a Democratic member of the House, is crafting a resolution that would commit America to exhaust sanctions before it used force in the Gulf — and suggests that sanctions should run for at least six months from the passing of the resolution.
If such a measure were to be carried (and a similar one is likely to be introduced in the Senate), Mr Bush could use force only at the risk of a domestic, and indeed a constitutional, crisis.
In public the White House maintains that the president does not need a congressional resolution at all to use force.
Mr Bush, like other presidents before him, bases this on Article II, Section 2, of the constitution which says that ‘The president shall be commander in chief’.
He points out that of some 200 applications of force by the United States, only five have been ‘solemnified’(his word) by a declaration of war.
But this cuts little ice on the Hill, and not just with Mr Miller's men.
On December 29th Richard Gephardt, majority leader in the House, said that if the president waged war without a congressional resolution, ‘Congress has to reach for the only tool left to it, which is to cut off the funding of the war.’
The day after those comments, Robert Dole, the Republican leader in the Senate, branded them as ‘incredible’.
But in the same interview Mr Dole, as is his way, was a little less than helpful to the president.
He had a ‘gut feeling’, he said, that the American people were not yet committed to war, and so he urged Mr Bush to pursue a meeting in Baghdad between James Baker, the secretary of state, and Saddam Hussein — as well as finding a date on which Iraq's foreign minister could come to Washington.
Perhaps in response to this call for negotiations (though that is something that the administration would not admit), Mr Baker is set to make another tour of allied capitals in Europe and the Middle East, during which he would, at the very least, be available for a meeting in Baghdad.
All this begs the question about the reliability of Mr Dole's gut.
In two careful analyses of the survey evidence over the past four months, the Washington Post and the American Political Report, an influential newsletter, have come to broadly similar conclusions.
Though the initial approval ratings for Mr Bush's handling of the Gulf (which were above 75%) have not been sustained, he has consistently maintained the support of about 60% of Americans for his general policy.
As to the use of force, there, too, a clear majority (one December poll by NBC and the Wall Street Journal shows 54–34% support) backs war if Iraq does not withdraw from Kuwait by January 15th.
There are two catches.
The first is that initial support of 60% is not high if the policy turns sour — if, for example, a war lasted more than the few days or weeks that Mr Bush seems to think it will take.
The second caveat is that even this amount of support is reduced when hypothetical compromises are put to the public.
In a Los Angeles Times poll in mid-December people were asked what policy they would support if Iraq pulled out of most of Kuwait but held on to an oilfield and some other land.
Given choices, 17% voted to remove American troops; 46% voted to leave the troops in place and enforce the embargo; and only 29% supported military action.
Publicly Mr Bush remains as determined as ever to force Iraq out of Kuwait, with no concessions.
He remains prepared to use force to do that.
He continues to speak of the possibility of using the Gulf operation to craft a new world order for the resolution of disputes.
But he must now know that an Iraqi démarche around January 15th — perhaps a partial withdrawal from Kuwait — would make the use of force bitterly controversial at home.
And he must know that if there is a war, his political future depends on it being short and decisive.
Can the River of Grass flow again?
MIAMI
Men, with their engineering skills, ruined Florida's Everglades.
Now, with high-tech skills, they are trying to put things back as they were
IN THE heart of North America's largest freshwater marsh a rare female woodstork prepares to nest.
She will lay her eggs only if conditions there match an instinctive code programmed into her over thousands of years.
A computer, similarly programmed, is trying, at long last, to get things right for her.
And in a Miami courtroom, an hour's drive away, a federal prosecutor is assembling documents to try to prove a case of human neglect.
The survival of the Everglades, a watery and delicate expanse designated a world treasure by the United Nations, is now Florida's consuming passion.
Each season the evidence mounts that the national park is being driven towards ecological collapse.
The culprit is greedy man.
For decades he has ditched, diked and drained the edges of the Everglades until all that is left is a barely viable core.
What used to be swamp and marsh on the park's fringes are now the suburbs of Miami, Fort Lauderdale and Palm Beach.
These three cities form a single megalopolis occupying a sliver of coastline 20 miles (30km) wide.
Each of its 3.5m people pulls 200 gallons (750 litres) of water a day from the Everglades or its aquifer.
What is not consumed on bathing, watering lawns or irrigating golf courses goes on the sugar-cane plantations and tomato farms carved from the swamp.
A century ago, when the region was inhabited by Indians and rough pioneers, the Everglades — or ‘grassy waters’ to the Indians — encompassed a 250-mile-long system of lakes, marshes and rivers.
Its headwaters began in the swamps south of what is now Orlando and flowed into Lake Okeechobee at the centre of the system.
During each summer's rainy season, the lake's waters would spill over its southern rim and slide down towards Florida Bay.
Although rarely deep enough to cover the protruding blades of sawgrass, the glistening sheet of water (called the River of Grass by Marjory Douglas in her classic book on the region) would spread 60 miles wide, drenching 4m acres.
Land speculators, politicians and farmers saw profit in these wetlands.
The first efforts to drain them began in the 1880s, but the main push came after a hurricane in 1947 drove floodwaters over Lake Okeechobee's southern edge, drowning more than 2,000 people.
Congress ordered the Army Corps of Engineers to harness the natural system in an operation rivalled only in Holland.
The Everglades was carved into sections by an intricate network of canals and levees — 1,400 miles in all.
North of Lake Okeechobee, the meandering, 98-mile Kissimee river was  corralled into a deep-water canal that ran dead straight into the lake; this changed the marsh into a prairie that became the state's main cattle and dairy-farming region.
A 25-mile strip of rich muckland south of the lake was designated for sugar-cane plantations, to be drained and flooded by huge pumps.
To provide water for farmers and city dwellers, three sections of the marsh were surrounded with dikes and set aside from development, each one a kind of captured remnant of Everglades, but wholly for man's use.
Nature was given its due, but only at the southern tip of the marsh.
Almost one-third of the original 4m-acre expanse was left in a natural state as the Everglades National Park.
But this area, too, was wholly dependent on engineers for its existence.
By the time the network was completed in the mid-1960s, it resembled a vast plumbing system with 18 huge pumps, each one big enough to suck in a car, driving 1 billion gallons of water through it each day.
The age-old cycle of wet and dry seasons had become irrelevant.
And the engineering marvel turned out to be a slow-motion natural disaster.
Wading birds, the barometer of any marsh's health, have been devastated.
Where once they flew in such flocks that they threw shadows over the earth, they now survive in a few straggling colonies.
A 1937 count found 300,000 wading birds in the Everglades; by 1988 the number had dropped to 15,000.
Only 500 woodstorks remain.
Lake Okeechobee is so full of nutrients, most of them traced to cow manure, that algae have all but suffocated it.
The sawgrass, which served as a vital part in the food chain, is being pushed back by cattails, a dense plant that thrives on the phosphate-rich water.
The alarm went out and environmentalists began to try to halt, if not reverse, the destruction of the remaining park.
But, unlike any other nature preserve, the Everglades today exists like a patient on life-support, completely dependent on the outside efforts of others to survive.
The challenge is to restore the flow of clean, fresh water and to recreate the seasons of wet and dry, flood and fire.
In 1989 a Miami lawyer, Dexter Lehtinen, filed a surprise lawsuit against the state and its water managers.
He accused the bureaucrats of civil neglect in not providing the park with the clean water it needs.
His suit, still pending, elicited howls from farmers and sugar-cane growers.
Environmentalists, including Mrs Douglas, now 100 years old, back the suit as part of their demand that the plantations be shut down despite the cost.
A compromise proposed by the state would force the farmers to carve artificial marshlands from their fields to serve as natural filters, cleansing the water before it is sent southward.
The main question is who will pay for the clean-up: farmers or all the state's taxpayers?
But something is already happening.
Beginning this year the water-flow into the park will try to mimic nature.
The water managers will push water in or hold water out according to a computer programmed with decades of data about rainfall and drought.
Or so it is hoped.
Check in the spring with the woodstorks.
ASIA
China
Two voices
FROM OUR CHINA CORRESPONDENT
GREETINGS for the new year to the Chinese readers of the People's Daily:
It is imperative to persist in the four cardinal principles [adherence to socialism, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the leadership of the Communist Party, and Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong thought], oppose bourgeois liberalisation, smash the ‘peaceful evolution’ schemes of antagonistic international forces and inspire patriotism and socialist consciousness.
Greetings, too, from President Yang Shangkun to the foreign listeners of Radio Beijing:
China continues to open its door wide to the entire world, and friends from around the world are welcome to visit China.
Over the next ten years, China will become economically more liberal, internationally more friendly:
The leadership is guiding the Chinese people to implement firmly the reform and open policy put forward by Deng Xiaoping.
Since ‘bourgeois liberalisation’ is code for western, capitalist influences, and since ‘peaceful evolution’is code for the capitalist subversion of communism, perhaps Mr Yang forgot to read his newspaper.
More likely, China is still trying to reconcile the irreconcilable: Marxism with a market economy, central control with the reality of powerful politicians in the provinces.
The People's Daily tells the Chinese what they are supposed to believe; Mr Yang tells foreigners what he would like them to believe.
How long this muddle can last is anyone's guess.
It was supposed to be resolved at the long-awaited, and delayed, meeting in Beijing of the party's Central Committee on December 25th-30th.
Some 171 full members and 107 alternate members (with 300 other sundry officials looking on) met to agree on the new ‘proposals for the ten-year programme (1991–2000) and eighth five-year plan (1991–95)’.
In practice, they agreed only to more muddle.
The communiqué offered plenty of jargon.
‘The responsibility system with the household contract linking output to payment as the main form is in keeping with the present level of the productive forces in China's rural areas and must be maintained as a basic system for a long time to come…
Further efforts should be made to enhance the vitality of the enterprises, especially the large and medium-sized state-run enterprises…
It is necessary to handle properly the relations between the central and the local authorities.’
The simple translation is, first, that the 750m people in the countryside, including 90m who work in what amount to private factories, cannot be sent back to the commune, however much China's old-guard ideologues might wish.
They must be allowed to make profits in a free market that co-exists with the planned economy.
Second, the state will continue to prop up inefficient state enterprises.
This may mean forcing the worst of them to merge with the best; it will certainly mean a widening of China's budget deficit.
Third, the state will attempt to squeeze more tax revenue from provinces intent on keeping as much money as possible for themselves.
The less simple translation is that the battle continues between economic reformists and those hardliners, led politically by the prime minister, Li Peng, and ideologically by the 86-year-old Chen Yun, who believe that quick reform leads only too quickly to bourgeois liberalisation and peaceful evolution — witness the student democrats in 1989 in Beijing's Tiananmen Square and the collapse of communism in the countries of Eastern Europe.
In which case, who is winning?
It is tempting to pick the reformers.
The seventh five-year plan just ended may have had its ups and downs, producing high growth in the first half of the plan's period, followed by inflation and then austerity in the second half, but overall it was a success: the economy grew by 7.5% a year, incomes for city-dwellers almost doubled and last year's grain harvest was the biggest ever.
The southern province of Guangdong, the five, low-tax special economic zones and the 14 ‘open cities’ are proof of the plan's promise to bring prosperity through economic liberalism.
Last month Shanghai even launched a computerised stock exchange.
But if the reformers are in the ascendant, why did their fragile 86-year-old leader, Deng Xiaoping, find it necessary to make an appearance on December 26th at a local election?
Given that Chinese elections have no element of uncertainty and that Mr Deng had not appeared in public for almost six months, perhaps he felt the reformers on the Central Committee were in urgent need of help.
Mr Li has made it plain that there will be no more special economic zones in the next ten years, and the praise in the communiqué for the Dengist reforms smacks of insincere ritual.
The most likely surmise is that the hardliners are now more powerful than the reformers, but are unable to press home their advantage.
The reason they are more powerful is that economic liberalism did, indeed, help cause the tumult of 1989, by inspiring a dangerous mix — an overheated economy, rampant corruption and rejection of the party.
Equally to the hardliners' point, Mr Gorbachev's Soviet Union is a discouraging example of what happens when the party loosens its control of the economy and the people.
But the reason they cannot press on to victory is transparent: the central planning dear to people like Mr Li and Mr Chen stands no chance of coping with 20m or more urban unemployed, a labour force that will grow by 95m in the next five years and rising expectations of wealth.
The Central Committee reaffirmed an old pledge by Mr Deng: China's GNP will quadruple between 1980 and the end of the century.
So far, China is more or less on course.
But to remain so, it will have to give the market its freedom: no more fixed prices, no more production quotas, no more refusal to let bad enterprises go bust.
Until then the eighth plan, due to be rubber-stamped in March by the National People's Congress, will be planning only muddle.
Honestly, Kaifu triumphs again
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
THINGS were looking bleak for Toshiki Kaifu.
Japan's prime minister, whose chief asset is his reputation for honesty, was under pressure to bring into his cabinet politicians who had been tainted with scandal.
But Mr Kaifu gets his share of luck.
In the last days of 1990 a new scandal broke.
A former cabinet minister, Toshiyuki Inamura, was charged with evading ¥1.7 billion ($12.6m) of taxes on some ¥2.8 billion of ill-gotten gains that he made in a shares racket.
Suddenly the pressure was off Mr Kaifu to take back the tainted men.
Mr Kaifu has been prime minister since August 1989.
He was originally seen as a stopgap, chosen almost solely for his respectability after two previous prime ministers had been forced to resign in quick succession.
Noboru Takeshita had to go because he received undeclared sums of money from the Recruit publishing-to-property conglomerate.
His replacement, Sosuke Uno, was forced out of office after only two months because of a sex scandal.
Despite pressure from the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, Mr Kaifu managed to keep his first two cabinets free of politicians who had been implicated in either the Recruit scandal or the earlier Lockheed bribery case.
Lately Mr Kaifu has been under pressure to hand out minor cabinet posts to some young stars within the party who had been tainted by the Recruit affair.
By doing so, reasoned the party's elderly barons, the way would be clear for a baron to take over as prime minister come the party's annual meeting in October (four of the party's five factional bosses were caught taking payoffs from Recruit).
Mr Inamura's misfortune has changed all that.
Mr Kaifu has agreed to reshaping his cabinet, but has insisted on keeping it clean.
Well, almost.
He has had to accept Kazuo Aichi, the new environment minister, who took money from the Recruit company before the famous shares-for-favours scandal broke.
Mr Aichi had had to withdraw his candidature for the governorship of Miyagi prefecture when it was revealed that he had been on the take.
For harmony's sake, Mr Aichi's sins are now deemed to be minor.
The ¥7.5m ($55,000) that he received was peanuts alongside the sums that Recruit doled out to many of the ruling party's bigger names.
Besides, Mr Aichi made a clean breast of it, and he returned the money to Recruit.
Otherwise, Mr Kaifu has won a small but notable victory.
Barring mishaps, he can expect to see out the remainder of his two-year term as prime minister.
Plenty of problems lie ahead.
Delicate negotiations must be held with the North Koreans.
Uncertainty surrounds President Gorbachev's planned visit to Japan in April.
America seems critical of just about everything Japanese: its persistent trade surplus, its reluctance to liberalise rice imports, its failure so far to provide even a token force in the Gulf.
If Mr Kaifu fails to revive the parliamentary bill designed to support the anti-Iraq forces in the Gulf, the Americans are likely to ask for a lot more than the $4 billion Japan has so far promised to contribute towards the growing expenses there.
To get him though the difficult months ahead, Mr Kaifu has insisted on retaining Taro Nakayama as foreign minister and Ryutaro Hashimoto as finance minister.
Both have been in the cabinet since Mr Kaifu came to office.
The faction led by the former party secretary-general, Shintaro Abe, had demanded that Mr Nakayama (one of the faction's own men) must stand down to give another of the group some cabinet experience.
Although Mr Nakayama has been slowly winning respect abroad, his performance in the Diet (parliament) has been abysmal.
But with the Gulf and other problems pressing, Mr Kaifu argued that there was no time to break in a new foreign minister.
To keep Mr Nakayama, Mr Kaifu bought off the Abe faction by surrendering one of the two cabinet posts normally held by the small Komoto faction to which he himself belongs.
The valuable Ichiro Ozawa stays as secretary-general of the party.
Though not strictly a member of the cabinet, Mr Ozawa has given the prime minister considerable support and has in effect run the government's day-to-day business.
More important, he has the backing of the godfather of Japanese politics, Shin Kanemaru.
The cabinet that was announced on December 29th is like most other Japanese cabinets in which posts are distributed among the main factions according to their size.
Six ministers come from the Takeshita faction, five (previously four) from the Abe faction, four each from the factions led by Kiichi Miyazawa and Michio Watanabe, and now just one (apart from the prime minister) from the tiny faction headed by Toshio Komoto.
Among the grey or greying men in the government is one woman, Akiko Santo, a former actress, who will look after science and technology.
With an average age of 60 years, the new cabinet is a couple of years more spritely than its predecessor, a useful gain given the problems that lie ahead.
At least the Americans should be pleased with Japan's new budget.
Throughout the year-long ‘structural impediments initiative’ talks that ended last June, the Americans pressed the Japanese government to abandon its single-minded support of businessmen, farmers and other interest groups and do something instead about providing better amenities for its people.
Japan eventually agreed to spend ¥455 trillion ($3.4 billion) on its infrastructure over the coming decade (see box, previous page).
The ¥70.3 trillion ($520 billion) budget approved during a late-night cabinet meeting on December 24th is the first in post-war years to put priority on seeking a better way of life for the Japanese rather than achieving higher economic growth or increased exports.
The Japanese economy is expected to grow by only 3.8% during fiscal 1991 compared with this year's 5.2%.
Even so, the government has approved a 6.2% increase in total spending.
After being held more or less fixed for years, spending on public works is to rise by 5%.
The Americans should also be heartened that Japan's overseas aid will increase by 8%, and that defence spending is due to rise by 5.5% — only slightly less than usual.
Much defence equipment comes directly or indirectly from America.
Overall, Mr Hashimoto claims that the budget is economically neutral.
That, too, should mollify the Americans — at least, for the time being .
You won't know it in 2000
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
JUST when they thought the good times were coming to an end, Japanese building firms are being given a batch of orders for huge infrastructure projects.
The budget for 1991 allocates the first tranche of the ¥455 trillion ($3.4 trillion) that the government has agreed to spend on roads, railways, airports, housing, drains and other public works over the coming decade.
The amount represents a 73% increase over the ¥263 trillion spent on public works during the previous decade.
As it happens, the Americans are partly responsible for the building firms' good fortune.
Last June, at the end of the year-long ‘structural impediments initiative’ talks, American trade negotiators argued that Japan should spend more money on improving the country's infrastructure.
The more resources that Japan devoted to its basic comforts, reasoned the Americans, the less it would have for featherbedding its export industries — and thus, just possibly, Japan's trade surplus with America might fall.
Though it was not admitting it, the Japanese government had been ready to do so all along.
The ruling Liberal Democratic Party had been looking for an excuse to reward its friends in the building industry for their financial support.
With local elections due in April 1991, the party knew that its candidates would be clamouring for lots of vote-winning enticements.
Promises of a new bullet train here, a relief road there, let alone an airport or large tourist attraction, are clearly likely to favour the ruling party in dozens of marginal constituencies.
The government is also aware that during the next ten years Japan has its last chance to provide more of the amenities that most westerners take for granted.
In the next century public money will be needed increasingly to provide pensions and better medical care for Japan's rapidly ageing population.
Finance officials have at last seen the logic of sprucing up Japan now.
Previously they have kept a vice-like grip on the national purse, pointing out that the government's debt of ¥165 trillion ($1.2 trillion) is bigger than the combined debt of all the world's poor countries together.
As things stand, there is now one car for every 4.7 metres (5.1 yards) of road in Japan — a sixth of the space in America or France.
Worse, only 65% of Japan's roads are paved, compared with almost all of Britain's and Germany's.
No more than 41% of Japan's population is served by mains drains, compared with 95% in Britain and 73% in America.
Almost 40% of Japanese still do not have access to a flushing toilet.
Only 20% of electric cables are buried beneath the streets in Tokyo, compared with 100% in London and Paris.
One project that has captured the public imagination is the Trans-Tokyo Bay Highway.
It will have a bridge 5km (3.1 miles) long linking Kawasaki on the Tokyo side to Chiba on the eastern shore.
Another is the New Kansai International Airport being built on a man-made island in Osaka Bay.
The futuristic ‘mag-lev’ bullet train is expected to be whisking passengers between Tokyo and Osaka at 500kph within a decade.
Tokyo is to have a new underground line.
Road builders will benefit most from the government's largesse.
Japan's 4,000km expressway system is to be lengthened to 11,500km over the next ten years.
A 450km strip of road linking Tokyo, Nagoya and Kobe is alone expected to cost up to ¥5 trillion, more than twice the cost of the Channel tunnel between Britain and France.
Because of the astronomical costs of urban and farm land the new expressways will take cheaper routes through mountainous regions where possible, relying extensively on bridges and tunnels.
There are plans for 11 new airports and ten airport expansions.
Tokyo will have a third airport.
Ports are to get longer piers to accommodate all the containers bringing in imports.
Will foreign firms get a piece of the action?
American and European firms are unlikely to get much of a look in.
Nine of the 25 foreign building firms granted licences to tender for contracts in Japan are South Korean.
Japanese contractors, hard pressed to find workers and keep costs down, prefer to do business with their neighbours.
The South Koreans offer cheaper materials and are willing to do more of the grunt work than Americans or Europeans are.
Throwing punches in Punjab
FROM OUR INDIA CORRESPONDENT
THE state is withering away in a very unMarxist fashion in Punjab.
In December Sikh terrorists called for a ban on radio broadcasts in Hindi, and to press home their point shot dead the station director of All India Radio at Chandigarh.
The radio staff promptly stopped all Hindi broadcasts.
The terrorists also said that all government work should be done in Punjabi, not English.
Frightened civil servants made the switch at once.
The terrorists also declared a code of conduct for all journalists in Punjab, including the representatives of national newspapers.
Under it, no journalist should use the expression ‘terrorist’— the correct term is militant, freedom fighter or mujaheddin; no journalist should say that the Panthic Committee, a confederation of terrorist outfits, is based in Pakistan.
Journalists breaking the code will be sentenced to death, but they can appeal against the sentence to the Panthic Committee.
Every newspaper in Punjab and many outside have fallen in line with the code of conduct.
This is unsurprising: the terrorists — or militants or mujaheddin — have over the years killed 17 journalists.
Once they have pasted a few posters in a Punjabi town, the instruction on them becomes law.
Jeans and skirts have been banned in universities.
By killing two engineers working on a canal being dug to take water out of Punjab into the neighbouring state of Haryana, the terrorists have killed the project; nobody dares dig any further.
Their decrees are not all immoral.
They have forbidden cheating in exams, as a result of which all the students in some schools have failed.
They have frowned on the extraction of dowries from the parents of brides.
In the western parts of Punjab the terrorists have become the state.
They dispense justice, settle land disputes, give orders to civil servants (which are carried out with an alacrity unknown earlier).
They levy an income tax, but not very seriously: they get cash more easily by looting banks and demanding protection money from businesses.
The death toll in Punjab was almost 4,500 in 1990, the highest for any year.
Not all killings should be blamed on the terrorists or police.
With the breakdown of the administration, crime syndicates have come up in a big way.
Family feuds have given Punjab a tradition of violence dating back centuries, and in today's permissive atmosphere people use guns, not lawyers, to settle disputes.
The police are demoralised.
They unofficially pay bounties to armed freelances willing to take on the terrorists.
Officially, any youngster willing to wield a gun can join a police team for 30 rupees ($1.70) a day.
Unfortunately, many youngsters disappear with their guns, and some have joined the militants.
Politicians in Delhi keep talking of a political solution.
Many militants have been released, and some policemen think it a mug's game to act tough.
If an election is held in Punjab in May as promised, it seems certain that the militants will win, and that could mean the end of the careers (and perhaps lives) of tough cops.
The prime minister, Chandra Shekhar, has said repeatedly that he wants a political solution.
He says he is willing to amend the Indian constitution to give Punjab more autonomy, but not independence.
The militants say talks should be held under United Nations auspices in Geneva, on the basis of self-determination.
This would be unacceptable to other political parties, notably the Congress Party, which props up India's very minority government.
Death sentence
FROM OUR MANILA CORRESPONDENT
ONE of the most hated organisations in the Philippines, the Constabulary, was disbanded on December 31st.
This was the group, formally under army control, that operated as a death squad during the rule of Ferdinand Marcos.
While ostensibly chasing communists, it tortured and murdered Marcos's political opponents.
Members of the Constabulary practised robbery, extortion and kidnapping.
Their criminal ways continued even after Marcos was deposed.
Despite the Constabulary's evil reputation, it has taken three years to get a law though Congress that abolished the organisation.
The army fiercely resisted the move.
It fears it is losing power.
Most people in the Philippines, fed up with attempted military coups, hope that its fears are well founded.
INTERNATIONAL
Countdown
NOT since last August's invasion of Kuwait has an American-led war against Saddam Hussein looked so likely, or its human costs so high.
After January 15th Resolution 678 of the United Nations Security Council allows any country, at the request of Kuwait, to remove the Iraqis forcibly.
The American forces in and around the Arabian peninsula are now close to full fighting strength, with about 1,500 tanks and 1,300 aircraft already in place.
British and American troops are being hurriedly vaccinated against anthrax, after reports that Iraq has added biological weapons to its arsenal of missiles and chemicals.
If George Bush or Saddam Hussein is secretly preparing to climb down, neither gives any sign of it.
The Iraqi president spent new year's eve stirring stew for his soldiers in Kuwait.
He told them that Iraq had 60 divisions ready for war, compared with his enemies' 18, and would therefore win any battle for Kuwait, which was part of Iraq's ‘body and soul’.
Mr Bush continues to say that Iraq must fulfil to the letter the UN's demand for an immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal.
In December word was leaked to American newspapers that the president had resolved to fight, if war was necessary, even if it meant destroying his chances of re-election.
This unflinching march to the brink does not make it inevitable that war will begin the moment the deadline expires.
The Americans and their allies have always made it plain that January 15th was merely the point after which war would become authorised, not necessarily the date for attack.
Not all the American forces destined for the Gulf will have arrived there in time.
Even so, striking on or soon after January 15th would help Mr Bush underline, for the benefit of critics at home and abroad, the clear legal authority the UN has given him for military action.
Barring some abrupt turn in the diplomacy, the chances of fighting having begun in the next few weeks are high.
What has made the approach of the deadline even more worrying is the apparent still-birth of Mr Bush's proposal at the end of November to meet Iraq's foreign minister, Tariq Aziz, in Washington, and to send his own secretary of state, James Baker, to Baghdad.
Iraq accepted the proposal, but it seemed to evaporate, ostensibly because of an argument about dates.
On January 3rd, under pressure from members of Congress, Mr Bush offered a new idea: a meeting between Mr Baker and Mr Aziz, in Switzerland, between January 7th and January 9th.
The diplomatic impasse between Iraq and America has concentrated minds elsewhere.
In December, when a meeting between Mr Baker and Mr Hussein still looked possible, the European Community decided against starting talks of its own with the Iraqi leadership.
Separate talks, it was felt, would encourage Mr Hussein to detect a rift between the Europeans and Americans, and so draw the sting of the approaching deadline.
This week the Community had second thoughts.
Jacques Poos, the foreign minister of Luxembourg (which has just taken over the Community's rotating presidency), expressed the hope that he would be authorised to visit Baghdad on its behalf.
It is hard to imagine the countdown to war continuing without an intensification of diplomacy.
Yet getting talks started — whether between the Europeans and Iraq or, better still, the Americans and Iraq — is not the same thing as avoiding war.
What makes war likely is not that America and Iraq are not talking.
It is that they are not talking because they see no way to settle their differences.
Indeed, even before the argument over the date of Mr Baker's trip to Baghdad, the Americans said that he would not be negotiating, only warning Mr Hussein of the need to submit.
In any game of brinkmanship, it is possible that one side will collapse suddenly.
If Mr Hussein has decided to do so — by ordering a full or partial withdrawal from Kuwait before January 15th — he will find it less humiliating to say so to the European Community, or to Arab mediators, than to Mr Baker.
He can also be expected to make the most of whatever face-savers the mediators feel they can offer him.
Mr Poos hints that one such face-saver could be a promise of talks on Palestine.
Since August 12th Mr Hussein has repeated like a gramophone the refrain that he will not budge from Kuwait until Israel gives up the West Bank and Gaza.
But, in its Venice Declaration of 1980, the Community has already accepted the right of the Palestinians to self-determination.
With American acquiescence, the UN has recently endorsed the principle that an international peace conference on Palestine might be useful at an appropriate time.
Little more can be offered without handing Mr Hussein the propaganda victory the Americans and Europeans say they insist on denying him.
Besides, there is no solid reason to assume that Mr Hussein's will is going to be the first to break.
Over the past five months, despite everything that has gone wrong with his adventure in Kuwait, he has calmly refused to bow to pressure, whether political, economic or military.
On January 2nd NATO agreed to send 42 fighter aircraft to defend Turkey.
On the same day Mr Hussein raised the pay of his soldiers and promised a glorious future.
Perhaps he really believes that he can win a war in the Gulf.
Perhaps he will strike first.
Somalia
Mayor's end?
IT COULD be Liberia again.
On January 1st the rebels of the United Somali Congress claimed to have driven President Siad Barre into a bunker in the military airport, where he is defended by his favourite tanks.
The next day the rebels rejected the idea of peace talks, insisting that he should leave the country.
As in Liberia, there is no certainty that the president's removal would end the civil war.
The Congress is in shaky alliance with four other rebel movements.
This fight could be followed by another between rival claimants to the throne.
Somalia is mostly desert, and three-quarters of its 6m people are nomads, living from a mixture of camels' milk and fierce raids on other clans.
Mr Barre has stayed in power since 1969 by inviting various combinations of clans into his government, and silencing dissidents by prison or worse.
Many of Somalia's people have fled.
Mr Barre's brutality has made him plenty of enemies, and recently he has lost his knack for balancing the clans.
He is now backed mainly by the Marehan people.
If the president falls, they too may suffer.
The Hawiye clan, which dominates the rebel group currently threatening Mr Barre, is not thought to be vengeful.
But the numerous and well-educated Isaak people of the north, some 50,000 of whom have been killed by the government, are the type to settle scores.
Some observers are more optimistic.
Somalia, they say, has anyway been without effective government over the past year.
Mr Barre's writ is so limited that he is disparagingly known as the mayor of Mogadishu.
Besides, Somalia is sparsely populated.
Liberia's tribal bloodbath was especially awful in the cities' crowded slums.
Perhaps Somalia has more in common with Chad, another desert full of warlords, where the toppling of one gang by another caused no more than a bit of looting last month.
Outsiders prefer not to take chances.
Western governments are getting ready to evacuate the 500 foreigners, most of them Italian, who live in Somalia.
Italian and French frigates have set sail for Mogadishu.
The Italians have also announced that they want to send in transport aircraft.
The Somalis object to interference.
‘Mogadishu is as peaceful as any European capital,’ the Somali embassy in Rome has explained.
An alternative to Saddam
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN BEIRUT
IRAQ'S splintered opposition may at last have found its voice.
Representatives of 21 factions met in Beirut over Christmas to issue a joint call for Mr Saddam Hussein's overthrow in order to forestall war in the Gulf.
Ranging from Shia clerics to communists to Kurdish guerrilla chieftains to retired diplomats, the exiled leaders condemned both the invasion of Kuwait and the build-up of foreign forces in the region.
Fears that a war could ravage their country and force Iraqis to close ranks behind the regime pushed the bickering parties together.
General Hassan al-Nakib, formerly deputy chief of staff in the Iraqi army, argued there would be no need for any war if Mr Hussein were removed from power.
‘It is not just for a blow to be struck against Iraq when Saddam's main victim has been innocent Iraqi people,’ he said.
The Iraqi opposition put on a credible show of unity in Beirut.
Confirmed secularists joked with Islamic fundamentalists at a high-security press conference called to mark the signing of a 12-point unity charter outlining a transition to democracy.
Leaders representing religious parties, Kurds, communists and pro-Syrian Baathists made up a steering committee which graciously answered reporters' questions.
By agreeing to the charter, apparently clinched by granting veto powers to all five members of the steering committee, the Iraqi opposition has ended years of factional wrangling.
Their differences are henceforth to take second place to the fight against Mr Hussein's regime.
The newly unified front has little influence inside Iraq, but members say its mere existence will refresh the embers of anti-Saddam feeling at home.
At this stage, says General al-Nakib, ‘It is important for the Iraqi people to feel there is an alternative leadership.’
Jalal Talabani, secretary-general of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, believes that the creation of an opposition coalition should open the way to outside help.
If Mr Hussein falls, he says, the coalition will stay united long enough to hold elections in a ‘liberated’ Iraq.
Syria, Egypt and several Gulf states have recently given the coalition use of broadcasting equipment for a Radio Free Iraq.
Ayatollah Taqi al-Mudarrisi, spiritual leader of the radical Islamic Works Movement which claims to have organised three assassination attempts on the Iraqi president, says internal change in Iraq, without war, would be the best outcome for the whole region.
But, ‘by war or by peace, Saddam will be finished, and he knows this.’
Suriname
Putting in the Bouterse
THE Dutch government is not fond of Lieut-Colonel Desi Bouterse, who runs the army and scares politicians in Suriname, the Latin American country which used to be Dutch Guiana.
On Christmas day they stopped sending aid to the country, because he had taken over its government yet again.
The Dutch had done the same in 1982, after a horrible massacre at the main army barracks in Paramaribo, the capital.
They cautiously resumed aid (at $58m a year) in 1987 after Mr Bouterse allowed a free election in which his own party fared badly; and were upset again last August when the chief police inspector was found with a bullet in his head near Mr Bouterse's office.
Mr Bouterse asked the Dutch for a visitor's visa in December.
They turned him down on ‘security grounds’; a lot of the Surinamese living in Holland make it plain that they do not like him at all.
Three times in December he stopped over at Amsterdam airport, bound for Ghana and Switzerland and back to Paramaribo.
He was not allowed into the transit lounge or anywhere else on Dutch soil.
Suriname's president, Ramsewak Shankar, who was travelling with the colonel, was given a Dutch visa and protested at his countryman's exclusion.
But Mr Bouterse said Mr Shankar had not complained loudly enough, then claimed to be appalled when a Dutch newspaper photographed the president waiting forlornly in the rain for a meeting with the Dutch prime minister, Ruud Lubbers.
Mr Bouterse felt Suriname had been insulted.
Returning home on December 22nd, Mr Bouterse described Mr Shankar as a ‘joker’ and said he would resign.
Next day he had a better idea, and sent word to Mr Shankar that he would have to go instead.
The following day the army announced that the government had indeed been sent home.
The Dutch stopped their aid.
Mr Shankar and his prime minister, Henck Arron, duly resigned.
Two days later a figurehead president, Mr Johan Kraag, was sworn in with, as prime minister, Jules Wijdenbosch, leader of Mr Bouterse's party (which has only three seats in the 51-seat national assembly).
He promised free elections in 100 days.
Nobody believed him.
With only 400,000 people and lots of bauxite, there is no good reason why Suriname should not be as democratic as and rather better off than most of the little states of the Caribbean.
While Mr Bouterse stays in charge, that looks unlikely.
Syria and Egypt
Against Iraq
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT
CAIRO AND DAMASCUS
AT FIRST it looked like tokenism.
Now the Arab contribution to the military alliance against Saddam Hussein is showing teeth.
If war starts in the Gulf, Saudi Arabia will be able to throw a big force — including about 500 tanks — into the fray.
And these troops have already been reinforced by some 45,000 Syrians and Egyptians, including three armoured divisions.
The Egyptian expeditionary force in Saudi Arabia was expected to reach its full strength this week.
It consists of Egypt's 3rd and 4th Armoured Divisions, plus the 145th Commando Regiment.
The total number of Egyptian fighting men in Saudi Arabia is put at about 27,000, with another 5,000 or so based in the United Arab Emirates.
These units are among the best trained and equipped in the Egyptian army.
Prince Khalid Bin Sultan, the Saudi general in command of the Arab and Islamic forces facing Iraq, is said to have turned pale when Egyptian commandos devoured live chickens and rabbits in a show of bravado.
Apart from sending troops, Egypt is helping in other ways.
It has waived the rules that used to bar nuclear-powered ships from using the Suez Canal, and seems to have given landing rights to American military transport aircraft.
Years of close military co-operation, including joint work in missile development, have given Egypt valuable information about its former Iraqi ally, which has presumably been passed on to the Americans.
Egyptian officials, including a former minister of defence, Muhammad Abu Ghazala, argue that Iraq's military strength has been overrated.
Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, a former air-force pilot, talks like a reluctant warrior.
He appealed this week for last-minute talks to avert a horrific war, and his officials have implied that, if it came to a fight, Egyptian forces would not penetrate Iraq itself.
But the emphasis of officially inspired newspaper articles has switched from the need to defend the Saudi holy places to the need to liberate Kuwait.
Visitors to the Egyptian force in Saudi Arabia come away with the impression that it will not hesitate to join an attack if ordered to do so.
An Egyptian flanking manoeuvre through Iraqi territory north-east of Kuwait is possible.
The Syrian expeditionary forces have been slower to arrive, and their behaviour in the event of war is harder to predict.
But Syria's original token force of 3,200 men in Saudi Arabia and 600 in the United Arab Emirates has now been augmented by the arrival of a nearly-complete armoured division with Soviet-made tanks.
Up to 15,000 Syrian soldiers are now deployed in the Arabian peninsula.
Syrian officials are cagey about the mission of these troops.
At one point the official line was that they were there to restrain the Americans.
Like the Egyptians, Syria's men come under direct Saudi command, and the Saudis express confidence that they will obey whatever orders are given.
In Damascus some western diplomats argue that the Syrian army will keep out of any fighting, having achieved President Hafez Assad's political aim of putting him in alliance with Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
But Syria's press and television have lately adopted a more belligerent anti-Saddam tone.
Syria is unlikely to block an attack on Iraq, even if it does not join it.
Egypt and Syria already have strategic gains to show for their decision to rally round the Saudis.
Mr Mubarak has had his military debt to America forgiven, and hopes for further rewards if Egypt emerges as the saviour of the Gulf Arabs and their oil.
Egyptian public opinion ran strongly against Iraq after it invaded Kuwait.
Anger is now tempered by anxiety about the outcome of a war, but serious opposition to Mr Mubarak's policy has not, so far, emerged.
The gains for Mr Assad have also been large.
He has used the distraction of the Gulf to strengthen his hold on Lebanon and — to Israeli annoyance — improve relations with America and Britain.
In the Arab world Syria has atoned for its support of Iran during the previous Gulf war, and forged a lucrative friendship with Saudi Arabia.
Syria sponsored the recent reconciliation between Iraq's external opposition groups (see box on previous page), which might give Mr Assad useful influence with a post-war government in Iraq.
The greatest prize of all, after the successful removal of Mr Hussein, would be American help to recover the Golan Heights, which Israel conquered when Mr Assad was defence minister in 1967.
Ecuador
On the line
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN QUITO
TRANQUILLITY reigns, more or less.
The drug war is a skirmish, the leftist gangs an irritant.
In those matters Ecuador refuses to imitate its turbulent neighbours.
It keeps its distance, too, from the latest Andean trend, for free-market economic reform.
If it does not follow that fashion, many observers fear the country will not sustain its usual calm.
The country's last president, a man of the centre-right, began by trying to liberalise things, but gave up.
After his election in 1984, Leon Febres Cordero lowered import barriers and subsidies, and ran a tight fiscal policy.
But in 1987 a huge earthquake smashed the trans-Andean oil pipeline which furnishes about half of Ecuador's exports.
Before it could be repaired foreign exchange ran short, and so did government income.
The president was more concerned about the loss of jobs.
He began a public-works binge, to keep people busy.
The public-sector deficit swelled to 10% of GDP.
Inflation soared.
In 1988 Rodrigo Borja, of the Democratic Left party, campaigned for and won the presidency with promises to help the poor.
By that he meant fighting inflation and running a tight fiscal policy.
The government deficit fell to 2.2% of GDP.
Inflation dropped from 86% in 1988 to 50% in 1989.
The highest protective tariffs were lowered, and the tax system was somewhat reformed.
These reforms, like Mr Borja's predecessor's, proved unpopular.
At the elections in June 1990, Mr Borja lost much of his congressional support, to fresh members who vie among themselves in opposition to the president.
Many are on the far left, others on the rabble-rousing populist right.
Serious economic reform seems blocked, at least until the next presidential election, due in 1992.
Politics, blocked, has turned macabre.
One day last October, as a Conservative politician, Alberto Dahik, rose to speak in Congress, a rival congressman launched a heavy glass ashtray across the chamber and hit him on the head.
A brawl ensued.
Several congressmen went home with black eyes and serious neck injuries.
In disarray, Congress elected as its president Averroes Bucaram, whose cousin Abdala, a right-wing populist, wants to be the country's next president.
(Abdala Bucaram spent much of 1990 in exile on charges, since dropped, of corruption as mayor of Guayaquil; his sister is mayor now.)
Soon after, Averroes Bucaram was voted out of his parliamentary post, but refused to leave quietly.
The police mounted an early-morning assault on his office, and Mr Bucaram came running out with his hands up.
Congressmen have been less pugnacious since then, and in exchange Mr Borja has stopped trying to reform things much.
He says he does not want to privatise loss-making state industries, or change the labour laws that make it virtually impossible for an employer to fire any employee.
He refuses to raise the real price of Ecuador's hugely subsidised petrol, even though the beneficiaries include Peruvian smugglers who sell the fuel across the border for ten times the Ecuadorean price.
Saddam Hussein has blundered to the rescue.
The country will get a windfall of about $250m this year from higher oil prices; that will raise government revenue by 13%.
GDP growth could top 2% in 1990, up from 0.2% in 1989.
President Borja may spend the windfall, or try to stock a ‘war chest’ for renegotiating Ecuador's $12 billion foreign debt.
Many businessmen think he should first try to help diversify exports.
Oil exports are expected to increase this year, but will soon fall back; domestic consumption is soaring (because the stuff is so cheap), and few new wells are being drilled in the forests.
One obstacle to new drilling is resistance by Indians, backed by Californian environmentalists.
After centuries of neglect, the indigenous people are waking up.
At the June elections, for the first time ever, they got together to block roads and occupy sites, demanding more land, and money for bilingual education.
Some indigenous activists say Ecuador's government had better pay attention, or face a guerrilla uprising like that in next-door Peru.
Meanwhile government workers have been striking for a share of the oil windfall.
Other Andean countries, spotting new opportunities in free trade, have agreed to get rid of most trade barriers by 1992.
Mr Borja, hounded by industrialists eager to protect domestic monopolies, is stalling.
The other Andeans say they will go on with free trade without Ecuador, if need be.
Ecuador could find itself very lonely indeed.
Argentina
Letting them out
FROM OUR ARGENTINA CORRESPONDENT
HE CRUSHED a military rising, then granted the army's long-standing demand that he should release its jailed generals.
By releasing five senior officers imprisoned for crimes committed while they ran the country, from 1976 to 1983, President Carlos Menem may have hoped to eliminate much of the discontent that lay behind three rebellions against his predecessor, Raul Alfonsin, and one against himself on December 3rd.
But the perpetual unrest in Argentina's armed forces may not be disposed of so fast.
The elderly men released by Mr Menem were the chiefs of the ‘dirty war’ against subversion, in which at least 9,000 civilians, unconvicted of any crime, died or disappeared.
The president has not exonerated the officers, nor declared them innocent.
He has merely set them free, while also freeing some of those whose acts they claimed as justification for their own misdeeds.
On his release General Jorge Videla, who unleashed both the military coup in 1976 and the campaign of repression that followed, promptly demanded vindication of the campaign, and was echoed privately by several serving officers.
The decision has incensed many civilians, and prompted demonstrations.
Yet it may not be enough to satisfy the many officers who refuse to admit that the army was guilty.
It is still less likely to placate the soldiers who backed the failed uprising of December 3rd.
The leaders of that mutiny included Colonel Mohammed Ali Seineldin, a notorious trouble-maker and veteran of uprisings against ex-President Alfonsin.
But, of the 600 men arrested after the failure of the latest rising, only six others had been in similar trouble before.
This latest coup was attempted not by officers anxious to vindicate the army's honour, but by disgruntled sergeants and corporals, most of them too young to have taken part in the dirty war.
The arrested 600 included 33 officers and 540 non-commissioned officers, the vast majority of them aged 33 or less.
They have plenty to be angry about.
Argentine sergeants, who these days can usually read and write, are seldom promoted to be officers.
Their pay and conditions are miserable and there are far more of them than the army can usefully employ.
Since the early 1980s the army's strength and budget have been cut in half.
The average number of conscripts in training has fallen from 80,000 to about 15,000.
The command structure has not been cut to match.
For every 250 soldiers there is a general, for every three soldiers an officer.
Sergeants and corporals outnumber private soldiers.
They have too few people to boss about, but no shortage of guns and grievances.
Mr Menem's show of leniency towards a few elderly officers may not keep them quiet for long.
African famines
Yet again
While the world watches the Gulf, hunger stalks Africa.
Our correspondents report from Khartoum and Maputo
THE rich world would love to forget Africa, but its miseries are too awful to ignore.
The United Nations' World Food Programme says that more than 20m Africans will depend on food aid this year — more, by far, than during the horrors in the Horn of Africa six years ago.
The Horn is the worst of Africa's endangered regions.
This is its third famine warning in four years, and the direst so far.
The UN reckons it will need to get 2.2m tonnes of food from outside this year, and wants another 1.6m for the rest of black Africa (see chart on next page).
That makes a total of 3.8m tonnes for all black Africa, the highest estimate the UN has ever made.
It dwarfs the 1.4m tonnes the UN called for, on average, in each of the three years 1987–89.
The previous warnings in the Horn were, like the present one, prompted by severe drought.
But disaster, when it came, was less severe than had been foretold.
The UN's predictions of famine owe more to art than science.
Aid workers use many methods.
They measure rainfall.
They watch markets.
When grain prices rise, a seasonal shortage is developing; if the rise carries through a harvest season, serious trouble is likely.
A fall in the price of meat suggests that there is no grain to feed livestock — but by the time this happens the famine is about to begin.
Satellite photographs offer earlier warning.
They show where vegetation is growing, but not what kind.
To determine whether the dark patches on the computer map mean weeds, trees or crops, aid workers have to visit the spot.
That is not always possible.
Predictions about Ethiopia's chronically drought-afflicted highlands are particularly sketchy, because civil war makes them hard to reach.
In Sudan, by contrast, forecasters claim to have visited all areas badly affected by 1990's drought.
In fact, little is known about drought's most likely victims, who often live beyond the reach of the aid workers' vehicles.
Nobody is sure how many people live in each region or how much they normally eat.
And peasants in areas prone to drought are good at surviving.
They collect seeds and wild berries, and dig up secret hoards of grain.
One bad year is rarely enough to produce famine.
Donors delivered a bit less than two-thirds of what was thought necessary after Ethiopia's 1989 crop failure.
It seems to have been enough, as was the amount delivered by the big but war-disrupted relief programme that followed the 1987 drought.
Both the 1987 and 1989 crop failures followed good years.
Partly because of anguish that they failed to anticipate Ethiopia's 1984–85 famine, and partly to cajole rich countries into giving lots of food, aid workers do tend to err on the side of exaggeration.
Yet complacency now would be wrong.
For Ethiopia and Sudan, it is the second bad year in a row (and the third bad year in four).
Reserves are known to be low in Sudan, and thought to be low in Ethiopia.
The UN says the two together need more than 2m tonnes of emergency food, and smaller agencies agree.
Even if only half that much were needed, a 20-tonne lorry would have to be loaded somewhere every eight minutes, day and night, for nine months.
No relief effort will work if war and politics get in the way.
In Sudan President Omar el Bashir's government has refused to admit to the famine, declaring only a ‘temporary food gap’ of 75,000 tonnes.
It has expelled aid workers who said more was needed.
Peasants in Western Sudan have already exhausted their berries and grain caches, and are starting to leave their villages in search of food.
If they settle in relief camps around the big cities, they will die of cholera and other epidemics.
Worse, the president promised on new year's eve to implement Islamic sharia law, which will probably aggravate his war against the non-Muslim rebels of Sudan's south.
Ethiopia is more hopeful, despite its civil wars.
The government has allowed food to arrive at the port of Assab, which it controls, and to be moved into the rebel-held province of Tigre.
Last month another group of rebels, the Eritrean People's Liberation Front, promised to be equally generous with the port of Massawa: it said it would allow food to be moved from there to the government-held town of Asmara.
Yet the Eritreans have shelled Asmara's airport.
Angola's Marxist government used to be as inhospitable to aid workers as Sudan.
But the ruling party's congress last month promised to establish a multi-party democracy.
The past year's thaw has made it possible for at least 35 non-governmental organisations to open up offices.
They have lost no time in sounding the alarm about an impending famine, which they say threatens 1.9m people.
Western diplomats in Luanda scoff at that figure, though they admit that many do need help.
The UN has organised ‘peace corridors’ to get food across the battle lines that divide the government and the UNITA rebels.
They have not been respected.
On December 20th the official news agency reported that rebels had destroyed a bridge in Huila province, across which 25 tonnes of relief supplies were supposed to have moved to two isolated garrison towns.
The next day the Angolan government said it would allow no more food into rebel-held areas, and the UN suspended its operation.
Mozambique also wrestles with the effects of civil war.
The 1m Mozambicans who have fled to Malawi are easily reachable.
Inside Mozambique it is hard to deliver anything safely.
In December a conference of donors pledged more than $1 billion in aid for 1991, including relief supplies for the central province of Zambezia, where at least 250,000 people were forced off their land last year by rebel or government attacks.
In December the Red Cross persuaded both sides to allow it to cross their battle lines.
The UN hopes to follow this up with ceasefires in Zambezia and the north-western province of Tete.
But much food aid is stolen as it is unloaded at the ports; and army-escorted convoys manage to lose up to a third of their cargoes on the way.
Mozambique produces only 15% of the food it needs to keep its markets stocked; theft is rife.
If a peace treaty brought those 1m refugees home from Malawi, the competition for food would get even fiercer.
The pardoners' tale
WHEN military dictators fall, the democrats who follow them must try to restore the rule of law, as well as rule by the majority.
They may therefore hope to arrange trials for criminals who served the dictator.
But trying military wrongdoers may annoy the armed forces, and provoke a fresh coup.
Over the new year holidays, the elected governments of Argentina (see previous page) and of Greece got tangled in the consequences.
Argentina's military dictatorship collapsed in 1983, its ruling generals discredited because they launched and lost the Falklands war.
The soldiers who ran Greece until 1974 were similarly discredited, because one result of their folly was the occupation by Turkey of northern Cyprus.
In both countries the democrats put the failed generals in jail — disgraced, but not forgotten by their fellow-officers.
Keeping old men in prison is a waste.
Letting them out can be damaging.
In Argentina President Carlos Menem looks even weaker since he released the generals.
The Greek prime minister, Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, looks downright incompetent: at first he said he would pardon the guilty men, then took that back and said he would merely release them.
There are better routes from dictatorship to democracy.
The transition is easiest when the dictators themselves take the initiative.
Turkey (until 1983) and Brazil (until 1985) were ruled by relatively law-abiding military juntas which, in the end, decided to hand over power.
They chose their own successors, had them elected, and watched while their protégés acquired both democratic respectability and democratic unpopularity.
There was no chance that the ex-dictators would stand trial, and no real need for them to do so.
In Uruguay a junta that fought subversion almost as brutally as Argentina's collapsed under its own disagreements in 1984.
Genuine elections followed, but the democratic rulers did not dare put their military predecessors on trial.
When, at last, they were compelled to call a referendum on whether to do so, a solid majority voted not to try officers for crimes committed while they held power.
Chile's more recent difficulty is similar.
The old dictator, General Augusto Pinochet, called a referendum that he hoped would confirm him in power, and was baffled when he lost it.
Before stepping unrepentantly down (in 1989), he entrenched himself as commander of the army for six further years, intending thus to protect the criminals who had done the dirty work while he was president.
His successor, President Patricio Aylwin, has coped with that legacy not by trying soldiers for military murders, but by waiting for General Pinochet to discredit himself, as he is rapidly doing.
Chile's political soldiers are keeping quiet.
Democrats must respect the rule of law.
But the transition to democracy goes smoothest when military murderers are left unpunished — and unpardoned.
EUROPE
Supertsar without superpolicy
IF Gorbachev the Great is looking more and more like Mixed-up Mikhail, it is not just because he has an impossible job.
He has made several big mistakes.
One was his failure to hold a direct election for the presidency last year.
Mr Gorbachev might well have won such a vote, and added to his formal powers the authority he now lacks.
Then there was his failure to embrace the Shatalin plan for market reforms, which, for all its faults, would have meant a clear break with the centrally planned past.
And Mr Gorbachev was far too late in proposing a new deal to the various republics.
His current offer would have seemed attractive to them a couple of years back, but not now.
With luck, Mr Gorbachev may also have left it too late to make a fourth big mistake: returning his country to dictatorship.
Optimists reckon that reform has already gone too far to allow that.
But the pessimists include Edward Shevardnadze, whose sudden resignation as foreign minister set the tone at the meeting from December 17th to 27th of the Congress of People's Deputies, the Soviet super-parliament.
Mr Shevardnadze, worn out by the struggle for reform, used his resignation speech to the Congress to give warning that a new dictatorship was in preparation.
A hardline tirade by General Vladimir Kryuchkov, the head of the KGB, strengthened the impression that conservative forces were on the rise.
So did Mr Gorbachev's nomination of Gennady Yanaev, a Communist apparatchik, for the new post of vice-president (a fine choice, said that figurehead of Soviet conservatism, Yegor Ligachev).
The Congress approved most of the new powers Mr Gorbachev had requested, including direct control over the government and over a new security council.
These are powers which, if abused, could quickly turn him into a dictator.
What has brought about the change in Mr Gorbachev?
Perhaps, in a sense, there has been no change.
Nearly six years since Mr Gorbachev came to power, it is still unclear what sort of future he has in mind for the Soviet Union.
Suppose for a moment that Mr Gorbachev himself does not know what he has in mind; assume that he is just a moderniser with no clear idea where modernising leads.
The one certainty is that he has consistently sought to secure his own position, mostly by presenting himself as a sensible centrist between the extremes to his right and left.
He has continued to cling to the middle ground, but that ground has been shifting.
So long as radicals were on the rampage, staying in the centre meant leaning ever farther towards liberal reform.
Now that a reaction is setting in, Mr Gorbachev is leaning back towards the conservatives to keep his balance.
And he is still on his feet.
At last month's meeting of the Congress he showed again how he can play on the mutual fears of reformers and conservatives to get his own way.
He won few friends, but he won the votes that mattered to him.
The Congress approved in principal his draft Union Treaty (though the vote was taken in the absence of deputies from some of the most independent-minded republics, who boycotted the Congress).
It accepted Mr Yanaev as vice-president (but only after an embarrassing failure in the first vote and some heavyweight intervention by Mr Gorbachev).
And it granted Mr Gorbachev most of the new powers he had requested (though it rejected his clumsy proposal for a system of local inspectors to help enforce presidential decrees).
Now that he has these powers, what will he do with them?
People are unlikely to pay much more attention to his decisions just because there has been some fiddling with the constitution.
And enforcing his policies is only part of the problem.
The other part is having coherent policies in the first place.
Mr Gorbachev still lacks them in the two areas that matter most.
One is the economy.
Mr Gorbachev has again postponed a decision on what sort of economic system he is aiming for by referring the question of private land ownership to a referendum; when this will take place and exactly what it will ask are not yet decided.
Meanwhile, he enters 1991 without an economic plan or budget (so everyone is having to improvise with last year's targets), and without a prime minister to blame for mismanagement (Nikolai Ryzhkov, who for months had been under pressure to resign and was about to be sidelined anyway, had a heart attack on December 25th).
Most ominously, Mr Gorbachev faces a drastic loss of revenue to the central budget from the rebellious republics.
The three Baltic states are refusing to pay anything.
But the biggest loss will come if the giant Russian republic carries out its decision, taken last week, to cut its contribution to the central budget by more than four-fifths.
Unless Mr Gorbachev can persuade — or force — Russia and others to back down, he will either have to print roubles even more furiously than before (result: hyperinflation), or else he will be unable to pay for the huge central bureaucracy and, more seriously, for the army.
Of all the challenges thrown at Mr Gorbachev by Boris Yeltsin, the president of the Russian republic, this is easily the greatest.
Thus the muddle over the economy is inseparable from Mr Gorbachev's other main policy muddle: the relationship between the centre and the 15 Soviet republics.
‘Preserving the union’ has become the president's first priority: a ‘sacred cause’, he called it in his new year's message.
His strategy for achieving this by persuasion is not convincing.
The Federation Council, upgraded as part of his constitutional changes approved by the Congress, is meant to give the republics a share of central power and responsibility.
But it promises to be an unwieldy body, including the heads of 20 ‘autonomous republics’ as well as those presidents of the 15 fully fledged republics who agree to turn up to its meetings.
Mr Gorbachev's proposed Union Treaty is, like the matter of land ownership, to go to a referendum.
But that will not settle the trickiest question: whether those republics which are determined not to be part of the Soviet Union will be allowed their independence, or whether they will be kept in by force.
Fears of a crackdown have been strongest in the Baltic republics and Moldavia.
The Moldavians, given an ultimatum by Mr Gorbachev to settle their ethnic conflicts by the year's end, decided to compromise rather than test the president's readiness to resort to force.
Several bombs have gone off in Latvia; the locals think these were planted to give the army a possible excuse to move in.
On December 29th, in response to‘provocations and threats made by the Soviet military leadership’, the foreign ministers of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania issued a statement calling on the Soviet Union to renounce the use of ‘further military force’ against the Baltic countries.
For now Mr Gorbachev is just managing to continue what he does best: keeping his show on the road.
The trouble is that nobody knows where the road leads.
And the show threatens at any moment to turn ugly.
The latest French revolution
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
THE French feel passionately about their native tongue.
In the absence of a monarchy, it has come to symbolise their national identity.
Clemenceau described it as ‘the genius of our race…the perfect vehicle for thought.’
Anatole France, more effusive, likened it to a woman who ‘is so beautiful, so proud, so modest, so tough, so touching, so voluptuous, so chaste, so noble, so familiar, so crazy, and so good that one loves her with all one's soul, and one is never tempted to be unfaithful to her.’
Yet it looks as if that most precious of ladies may be about to be raped — and what is more, by the very group of her countrymen set up to defend her honour and purity.
The French government has just approved a whole range of radical spelling changes, proposed by the government-appointed Conseil Supérieur de la Langue Française, which will deform some of the most familiar French words, obfuscate their etymological origins and massacre many an adopted foreign word.
In the name of a claimed desire to simplify current spelling and remove anomalies and contradictions, it is now decreed, for example, that plurals of all foreign words will henceforth take an s , as in French.
Thus le rugbyman (as the French call a rugby player) becomes les rugbymans and they will play in matchs , not matches .
A singer of German songs will sing Lieds rather than Lieder ; Bavaria will be spoken of as one of the German Lands rather than Länder .
Média and graffiti (both already plural nouns) will become médias and graffitis .
On the other hand, foreign words that already end in s ,x or z — all legitimate plural endings in French — are now to remain invariable.
Thus a secretary will work for many boss (not bosses ).
Words of English and other foreign origin will also become more difficult to recognise by the decision to remove the hyphen from many compound words.
Le fair-play (which already takes a hyphen in French) becomes le fairplay , and le blue-jean (which has already lost its s ) becomes le bluejean .
The Latin a priori becomes the odd-looking apriori , and that useful little vade-mecum becomes the much more cumbersome vadémécum (complete with accents which are now to be added, where appropriate, to all borrowed Latin and foreign words, as in mémorandum ,allégretto ,édelweiss ,pédigrée ).
Many compound French words will also lose their hyphens.
Some fusions seem sensible enough and in line with current usage, as in croquemonsieur .
But others seem designed to confuse, such as the curious vanupied — formerly va-nu-pieds , meaning ragamuffin.
Other expressions, however, are to gain hyphens, as will all numbers over 100 (lesser numbers already have them); so 1,482 will now be written as mille-quatre-cents-quatre-vingts-deux .
In an attempt to get Frenchmen to pronounce borrowed words ‘properly’(ie, with a French accent), all English words ending in er are now to be written eur ; so le leader and le speaker become le leadeur and le speakeur .
But, bafflingly for foreigners, when the er is pronounced (in French) like mer (sea), the word will keep its er ending, as in docker ,révolver ,starter .
In the interest of supposed consistency, circumflex accents are to be summarily abolished on all i and u vowels, despite their frequent help in indicating a missing s from a word's Latin root.
So if you want to invite the schoolmaster to taste some expensive oysters in August, you will henceforth have to invite the rather naked-looking maitre à gouter des huitres couteuses en aout .
The only exceptions to this rule will be where the circumflex indicates a change of meaning as in jeûne (fast) as opposed to jeune (young), or in mûr (ripe) as opposed to mur (wall).
The circumflex will stay on other vowels in order, you are told, to indicate (usually) an elongation of the vowel sound as in mâle ,hôtel and être .
Other oddities creep in with the attempt to harmonise plurals of French compound words.
All compound words will henceforth take an s (or x , as appropriate) in the plural.
Thus the previously invariable après-midi (afternoon) and abat-jour (lampshade) become après-midis and abat-jours in the plural.
Fine.
But exceptions have had to be made for words like prie-Dieu (prayer-stool), which will remain without an x in the plural so as to avoid blasphemous implications.
And in order to accommodate the general rule it has been deemed necessary to deprive certain compound words, like sèche-cheveux , of their plural endings when used in the singular.
So if you want to use just one dryer for your hair, you will now have to use the curiously inefficient-sounding sèche-cheveu , as if you had only one hair to dry.
Many of the new rules seem as arbitrary as the old familiar ones.
In the name, once more, of consistency, all verbs ending in eler or eter will henceforth follow the pattern of the verbs peler and acheter , always taking an accent as they decline, instead of sometimes doubling their last consonant.
Thus ruisseler (to flow) becomes il ruissèle in the third person singular instead of the prettier il ruisselle .
However, an exception is to be made for appeler n and jeter (and their derivatives), which are to be allowed to continue to double their last consonant on the ground that these verbs are ‘more fixed in common usage’.
More helpful, perhaps, for both native and foreign speakers of French is the decision to make accents correspond to the way words should be pronounced.
Thus événement becomes évènement and crémerie becomes crèmerie .
The correction of certain anomalies also seems to make sense.
Boursoufler (to swell, puff up) will take a double ff as in souffler , and désiller (to open the eyes of, undeceive) becomes déciller to show its link with cil (eyelash).
But changes in (to foreigners) more familiar words look all wrong, whatever their linguistic justification.
Oignon (onion) becomes ognon on the ground that this is how it is pronounced (what would happen to Inglish if it were spelled phonetically?).
And your favourite relais (inn) as you drive through France becomes a mere relai .
The French are interventionist by nature.
They are constantly seeking to impose changes from above on their language, rather than allowing it to live, breathe and evolve in a more natural way.
In 1740, for example, the Académie Française decreed spelling changes in one word in four.
In 1835 the oi diphthong was systematically changed to ai in accordance with modern pronunciation in words like françois .
More recently there has been the (largely ineffective) battle to stop the spread of franglais , involving the introduction of a law in 1975 and two subsequent government decrees banning the use of all American and English words and expressions in advertisements, official documents and on radio and television, whenever a French alternative was possible.
This time there is to be no law or sanctions.
The old spelling is to continue to be ‘tolerated’ until the new version has come into general use.
The government has nevertheless seen fit to give the new rules an official stamp by publishing them in its Journal Officiel , through which all new laws and decrees are promulgated.
All primary schools will be required to teach the new rules from this autumn.
New books and dictionaries are expected to contain the new spellings, while Proust, Racine and the rest will gradually be re-edited so as to make them conform.
A resistance movement is already emerging.
Twenty-four of France's better-known writers have decided to mark the new year by launching a national petition against the reforms.
They have set up a grand-sounding association dedicated to resisting the spelling changes.
Support is said to be flooding in.
The hole afair wood be a jôke if it wer not so seerius.
Italy
Rebellion in the ranks
FROM OUR ROME CORRESPONDENT
THE grand old men of Italy's Christian Democratic Party may be in for a shock.
Politics as they know it — the system that has kept them in power for the past 45 years — is being challenged by two younger men from their own party.
Mario Segni, a professor of law and Sardinian member of parliament, is the chief promoter of three referendums on electoral reform that are intended to reshape Italian politics.
Even the threat of these reforms may be enough to bring the government down.
The Christian Democratic prime minister, Giulio Andreotti, is afraid that his Socialist coalition partners will walk out on him if the referendums look like going ahead this year; by provoking a general election, the Socialists would automatically put off the referendums for at least 12 months.
The other rebel is Leoluca Orlando, a popular former mayor of Palermo who made his name fighting the Mafia.
He has promised to launch his own broad-based party before the next general election.
Like Mr Segni, Mr Orlando says electoral reform is essential if Italy is to escape from its ‘political quagmire’.
The old system, both men argue, spawns weak governments and corrupt parties.
Whereas Mr Orlando has long been a troublesome hero for his party, Mr Segni does not look like a troublemaker.
A shy man from a conservative Catholic family (his father, ex-President Antonio Segni, belonged to the right wing of the Christian Democrats), he has rallied a wide range of supporters to his reform campaign: free-thinking radicals, communists, a Catholic bishop, trade unionists, the influential Rome daily La Repubblica and the top ranks of Confindustria, Italy's employers' association, as well as Mr Orlando himself.
Mr Segni's acolytes have collected more than 600,000 signatures in favour of his three referendums.
So long as these are approved by Italy's constitutional court, they must be put to the vote by mid-June.
Both Mr Segni, who is 50, and Mr Orlando, who is 43, reproach their party for its inability to bring in new blood and fresh ideas.
The party's ageing faction leaders, says Mr Segni, have turned into pure power brokers.
Mr Orlando, who last month took a deep breath and announced his intention of leaving the Christian Democrats to lead his own party, is the more bitter of the two.
After municipal elections last June, Mr Andreotti and the Christian Democrats' party secretary, Arnaldo Forlani, vetoed Mr Orlando's attempt to renew a coalition with the Communists and the Greens with which he had ruled for three of his five years as mayor of Palermo.
Mr Orlando was forced to step down as mayor despite his popularity with the voters.
Mr Orlando's departure from the party will be greeted with a sigh of relief by some.
But Mr Segni says it could be a mistake to underestimate the electoral force of la rete, the ‘network’ Mr Orlando wants to turn into a political party.
Mr Orlando, who says honesty is the sole credential for membership of his new party, could win votes both from disillusioned Christian Democrats and from former Communists disoriented by their party's recent change of name.
He has the tacit support of religious leaders in Italy's crime-ridden south.
Even the pope recently reproached local politicians on a visit to Naples for their self-interest and neglect of their constituents.
Mr Segni's proposed referendums on electoral reform are hotly opposed by Bettino Craxi's Socialist Party.
Mr Craxi thinks the new rules would penalise smaller parties such as his own; hence the speculation that he would rather bring down the government than allow the referendums to happen.
If it came to constitutional change, he would prefer it to involve the introduction of direct presidential elections — no doubt hoping that the first directly elected president would be none other than himself.
Mr Andreotti, inveterate beneficiary of the existing system, is hostile to Mr Segni's proposals, but has surprised his own party by expressing interest in Mr Craxi's idea.
Mr Segni says he resorted to referendums after more than ten years of fruitless debate within the party on institutional reform.
The referendums would, if approved, overhaul Italy's current system of pure proportional representation.
Referendums cannot be used to make significant changes in the voting system for the lower house of parliament.
So Mr Segni's targets are the Senate, Italy's upper house, and municipal assemblies.
Under his scheme they would be elected by something close to Britain's first-past-the-post system.
Small parties would be the losers; senators would have to pay more attention to their constituents and would be less beholden to their party machines.
The aim would be to produce clearer majorities and more responsive governments.
For Italy, it would be a mini-revolution.
Yugoslavia
Waiting for Slobo
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN YUGOSLAVIA
IT IS an exercise in blinkmanship.
Serbia, Yugoslavia's largest republic, is trying to stare down Croatia and Slovenia, the two western republics that are threatening to go their own way.
They are returning the stare in the hope of forcing the powerful Serbs to blink first and let them leave.
On December 22nd Croatia's parliament in Zagreb adopted a new constitution which says that ‘Croatia remains a part of Yugoslavia until a new agreement among the republics, or until the Croat parliament decides otherwise.’
The next day Slovenia held a referendum on independence.
The turnout was 94%, and 89% of the voters said Yes to a ‘sovereign and independent’ Slovenia, either within a Yugoslav confederation or, if that could not be achieved in six months, on its own.
Serbia tried to stop the Slovene referendum by asking the federal constitutional court in Belgrade to rule it illegal.
The court astonished everybody by deciding that it could not rule on the legality or otherwise of something that had not happened yet.
There was great relief in Croatia and Slovenia: bringing the court into play had been seen there (probably correctly) as a potential device for justifying an army intervention.
In anticipation of an army coup, Croatia and Slovenia had placed on alert the security forces under their control — the police and the newly formed gendarmerie, the so-called specijalci.
These ‘specials’ are still there, guarding public buildings in Zagreb and Ljubljana.
Civilian activists are positioned around army barracks, tracking army units' movements and reporting to special emergency headquarters.
But Croat and Slovene leaders have reiterated their willingness to sit down with the Serbs and others to work out how Yugoslavia could be turned into a body not unlike the European Community.
Bosnia & Hercegovina and Macedonia, under their new non-communist leaderships, favour any new Yugoslav deal that would restrain Serbia.
Bosnia's new president, Alija Izetbegovic, a devout Muslim and a former political prisoner, has already had exploratory talks with Croat, Serb and Slovene leaders.
Macedonia's main nationalist party has welcomed both the Slovene referendum and the new Croat constitution.
But what of Serbia, which has the power to wreck any deal cobbled together by the others?
Its leader, Slobodan Milosevic (‘Slobo’ to his friends), has for the past three years resisted any idea of a looser Yugoslavia.
On the contrary, he has pressed for a centralised federation in which Serbia would presumably play a dominant role.
Last month he and his Socialist Party (the renamed Communists) won both the presidential and the parliamentary elections; the victories were convincing, despite evidence of vote-rigging.
Some people in Serbia suspect that Slobo, an impulsive man, might one day decide to go it alone.
With Kosovo and Vojvodina under his belt and Montenegro to come (perhaps after a referendum there leading to that republic's formal incorporation into Serbia), he could have a respectable country to run.
But not just yet.
The biggest problem is Serbia's economy.
Many factory closures are on the way, with perhaps as many as 600,000 jobs at risk.
There is the heavy cost of occupying unhappy Kosovo, where 90% of the population are Albanians.
Neither Croatia nor Slovenia could afford to bribe Serbia into letting them go.
They themselves face the threat of social unrest over the coming factory closures.
But they can see that there are advantages, worth paying a price for, to an orderly, step-by-step separation, as the federal prime minister, Ante Markovic, reminded everybody recently.
He himself has an eye on the post of super-manager of a new Yugoslav ‘economic space’ and has called leaders from all the republics to talks on January 10th.
But even if, for sound economic reasons, bargaining about a new, looser Yugoslavia starts in earnest, much could go wrong.
An uprising in Kosovo, put down by force, could ruin the chances of accommodation between Serbia and the rest.
There could be trouble from the Serbs in Bosnia and Croatia.
The army's impatient colonels and majors may yet overrule the more cautious generals and decide to have a go.
So there is still an uncomfortably strong possibility that the Yugoslav confrontation may end messily, perhaps even bloodily, just as it might in the Soviet Union, where Yugoslav events are followed with special interest.
On December 24th in Moscow a Ukrainian member of the Congress of People's Deputies rose to welcome Croat and Slovene moves towards independence, but he was shouted down.
Neither in the Soviet Union nor in Yugoslavia have the centralisers blinked yet.
Czechoslovakia
Fissures in the Forum
FROM OUR PRAGUE CORRESPONDENT
JANUARY 1st dawned in Czechoslovakia and the world did not come to an end.
This despite the increasingly apocalyptic talk about the inflation and unemployment that would arrive with the launch on new year's day of a set of economic reforms: price liberalisation, the sale of small businesses and internal convertibility of the crown (meaning that Czechoslovak firms licensed to conduct foreign trade can now buy as much foreign currency as they want at the newly unified exchange rate).
Shops were empty from panic-buying ahead of Czechoslovakia's ‘big bang’— which is turning out to be more like a big pop.
The changes will take several months to make much difference to most people's lives (price controls remain on basic foods, heating and transport; the auctions of small businesses will begin only at the end of January).
But the reforms are already having a big impact on the politicians, who are deeply divided about how best to deal with the social tensions the reforms are expected to produce.
In Civic Forum, Czechoslovakia's largest political group, divorce is in the air.
Cracks within the Forum have been apparent ever since last June's general election.
Some of its members interpreted the result as showing that voters preferred a broad movement such as the Forum to the sort of disciplined party that had misruled Czechoslovakia for more than 40 years.
But the Forum's new chairman, Vaclav Klaus, had other ideas.
Mr Klaus, who is also the finance minister, has used the Forum's regional activists as a base to gain backing for his own conception — a right-of-centre party with a stricter line of command.
Last month he emerged from a meeting in the northern city of Olomouc with support for his ‘Olomouc theses’, which outlined his ideas for the Forum in advance of its conference, due to open on January 12th.
A long list of prominent politicians — including the foreign minister, Jiri Dienstbier, and a deputy prime minister, Pavel Rychetsky — promptly launched the so-called Civic Forum Liberal Club.
It aims to emphasise ‘human values and the rights of the individual’ during the process of economic reform.
This is widely understood as a call to arms to defend the movement against a takeover by Mr Klaus.
All the members of the Forum say they want to avoid a split at this month's conference; but most now reckon a split is unavoidable.
President Vaclav Havel, who counts many Liberal Club signatories among his closest friends, has refrained from taking sides.
But the club's rhetoric echoes his own recent comments that economic reform should be a ‘means to an end rather than a goal in itself’.
In his new year's message he urged the government to mitigate its harshest effects.
According to the Klaus camp, the Liberal Club is in fact a group of left-wingers bent on slowing the pace of reform.
Mr Klaus and his supporters claim to be the ‘real’ liberals, with their hard-headed free-market philosophy.
But Mr Rychetsky argues that the Liberal Club is merely trying to safeguard the reforms by winning popular support for them.
Besides, say the Liberal Club's supporters, Civic Forum has a responsibility to carry out its programme and must continue to function until the next general election, in less than two years' time.
By all means let different groups within the Forum emerge, but they should remain within the movement until the election.
It is not clear how much of the argument is really about policy, and how much about personality.
Mr Klaus irritates a lot of people.
‘Everyone knows that the Liberal Club is just a name for people opposed to Klaus,’ says a financial expert who shares the minister's economic ideas.
‘He is a splitter.
He is one of the most able men I've ever met but he's a disastrous politician.’
Germany
New Jews, old guilt
FROM OUR BERLIN CORRESPONDENT
WEST GERMANY'S immigration laws were famously liberal in guaranteeing asylum to political refugees.
Now, with the opening of Eastern Europe, united Germany has become the preferred destination for thousands of refugees fleeing hardship at home.
This is making Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government think about a new immigration policy.
Last summer Berlin's streets suddenly became home to thousands of Romanian and Bulgarian refugees, many of them gypsies, who took advantage of easy entry into soon-to-disappear East Germany to gain access to the West.
In recent weeks, however, it has been the sudden rise in the number of Soviet Jews that has alarmed the authorities.
Unlike their fellow Soviet citizens, Jews can now apply for passports and leave the Soviet Union with relative ease.
Many are leaving out of a fear of growing anti-Semitism.
They are mostly heading for Israel, but a lot would prefer to stay in Europe.
Rich Germany is a magnet.
This presents Germany, still haunted by guilt from the Nazi years, with an awkward problem.
The government wants to tighten immigration controls, but it does not want to be seen as anti-Semitic.
The Länder (federal states), which are responsible for integrating refugees, complain about the cost.
They want strict quotas introduced.
The premiers of the 16 Länder are due to meet on January 9th to decide what the quotas should be (some seem inclined to be far more generous than others).
The notion of quotas has angered the Central Council for Jews in Germany, whose chairman, Heinz Galinski, has said that this would represent a sinister form of selection.
The Council, for historical reasons an influential force in German politics, would like to see the Soviet Jews welcomed in Germany.
Israel, on the other hand, would prefer to draw them to the land of their forefathers.
The German government is treading carefully.
Immigration laws inherited from the former East German state, which were due to expire on January 1st, are being allowed to carry on for Soviet Jews arriving in Berlin.
Berlin is therefore still the destination for virtually all Soviet Jews arriving in Germany.
At present the authorities in Berlin are having difficulty coping with those who have arrived so far, though no more than 1,100 or so have come in the past few days.
But the numbers are expected to rise sharply.
BRITAIN
Making money out of museums
MOST self-respecting museum directors will now be counting up the takings from the holiday season.
Few can rival the Natural History Museum's offer of drinks beneath its dinosaur, but Christmas and new-year parties have become a nice little earner for museums and galleries right across the country.
They need the cash.
Despite an increase of 8.5% in the public subsidy for national museums in 1991–92, most are still struggling to come to terms with the squeeze imposed on their budgets by the Treasury over the past few years.
Many have responded, as the government intended, by becoming more entrepreneurial.
Parties aside, yesterday's dark and dusty treasure troves are now often approached through glossy souvenir-shops and high-tech cafés.
Old attitudes linger, though.
The strongest rejection of the new approach tends to be a reluctance to charge for the product.
Of the 19 national museums that receive direct public grants, only eight demand a fee at the door.
Given the need for new sources of revenue, this seems odd.
Not so, says Sir David Wilson, director of London's British Museum and veteran of the anti-fee lobby: ‘Economic arguments should not always rule.’
Though he admits he could do with the cash from ticket receipts (£2.4m at the Science Museum in 1989, £1.9m at the Natural History), Sir David argues that the British Museum ‘should be freely available to everyone — to stretch minds, stimulate their curiosity and provide for their academic needs.’
If people have to pay to get in, goes the argument, fewer will turn up.
The Science Museum claims to have lost about 60% of its visitors in the 12 months after introducing a £3.50 fee for adults in October 1988 (though the fall is based on a dodgy head-count, before entrance tickets provided the first precise numbers).
And surveys of visitors to the Victoria and Albert Museum, which has a voluntary charge, strengthen the suspicion that those lost are teenagers, often from London.
Neil Cossons, the director of the Science Museum, is confident the old numbers can be restored.
Experience elsewhere suggests he is right.
The National Museum of Wales, for example, saw an even more dramatic fall in visitors after introducing entrance fees in December 1988: 68,000 paid up to visit the main Cardiff branch of the museum in 1989, where 525,000 and 354,000 visitors were admitted free in 1987 and 1988, respectively.
(Again, the numbers are only a rough guide: plenty of the free visitors used the museum's ‘non-exhibition facilities’— less coyly, its toilets.)
But John Bevan, who runs the museum's promotional activities, says the outlook on admissions has been brightening steadily; and the final tally for 1990 was 199,000.
Some places have even seen the publicity over new fees attracting extra visitors.
Alan Borg, the director of the Imperial War Museum, subscribes fully to the value-for-money school: museums that charge the customer, he says, are more likely to think harder about what he wants to see.
So the Imperial War Museum started charging in June 1989.
The result: monthly attendances immediately jumped by as much as 20%.
Paradoxical?
Not for the War Museum, where the season of peace and goodwill has found plenty of Rambo-esque revellers prepared to toast each other across tank turrets and artillery guns.
A palace revolution?
SPARE a thought for John MacGregor, Leader of the House of Commons.
While the rest of the nation was sleeping through old films on television or being towed across wintry landscapes by wheezing terriers, Mr MacGregor was spending much of his holiday deep in thought, pondering the modernisation of the Commons.
With a new prime minister and, in effect, a new government, it was perhaps inevitable that the ancient sillinesses of Britain's elected chamber should be a talking-point once more.
In the Conservative leadership contest, Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, made reform of the hours kept by the Commons one of his themes.
After winning, John Major patrolled the Commons tea-room, soliciting opinions on the subject from his backbenchers.
Few institutions in the western world have proved as resistant to change as the Commons.
The shock of the old is everywhere, in small things and great.
The layout of the chamber, with its in-built bias to confrontational politics, derives directly and in detail from St Stephen's chapel, where the Commons moved to in 1547.
At prayers, MPs turn towards their seats because they used to get tangled up in their swords if they tried to kneel.
The cumbersome and time-consuming method of voting, which involves each MP walking between two tellers and announcing his name, was partly designed to stop members sending their footmen to vote for them.
And so on.
There is an element of pleasing comedy in it all, and the loopiness of the Commons certainly adds to life's rich tapestry.
For an increasing number of MPs, though, its archaic inefficiency is getting in the way of its political effectiveness.
There are three often-repeated complaints about the way the Commons works.
First, the hours: business in the chamber starts, except on Fridays, at 2.30pm and can often last until the small hours of the morning — resulting in tired (and tired as a newt) legislators.
Second, MPs moan about the cramped conditions they work in.
Third, they complain about the way business is conducted, both in the chamber and in committees.
The hours question gets MPs most excited.
One of the latest recruits to the campaign for more normal working-hours is a Labour front-bencher, Harriet Harman, who argues that the current system helps keep women out of the clubby, late-night world of Parliament.
But Ms Harman, a London member, has angered many MPs whose families live in the north of England and Scotland.
They want a shorter working week, but are prepared to sit long and late while they are in London.
It now seems likely that a committee of inquiry into the hours and working practices of the Commons, staffed by senior MPs from all sides, could be announced shortly by the government.
Later this month, an official review committee of Labour MPs, which has already described the working hours as ‘largely indefensible’, will produce proposals for a new working day, probably involving ministerial question-times during morning sittings, and an end to business by 7pm (compare the midday-to-7pm sittings of Congress).
If this flurry of activity really does lead to changes, expect a marvellous, Gilbert-and-Sullivan row.
A significant number of MPs have second careers in City boardrooms or the courts, and they will be furious at any curtailment of their activities.
Ministers would be angry, too — which might explain any reluctance on Mr MacGregor's part to push for morning sittings.
Richard Crossman, the Labour minister who introduced a failed attempt at morning sittings in 1967, wrote in his diary about the reaction of fellow cabinet ministers (‘It's asking a terrible lot of us…
We're busy men’).
The problem of lack of space is perhaps easier, since new parliamentary buildings giving around 100 more MPs their own offices should be ready by this summer.
Still, there will be severe overcrowding in the palace for at least another decade.
Most foreign politicians would be shocked by the conditions some MPs have to put up with, crammed together in dim corridors and insanitary Gothic broom-cupboards.
This, too, is nothing new.
One radical MP, William Cobbett, elected in 1833, wondered: ‘Why are we squeezed into so small a space that it is absolutely impossible that there should be calm and regular discussion…
Why do we live in this hubbub?
Why are we exposed to all these inconveniences?’
(Tradition, William, tradition.)
Graham Allen, a Labour campaigner for better conditions, is one of many MPs who also want more research and computer help.
Though his proposals could cost the taxpayer another £18m or so a year, they might help produce more effective constituency MPs.
In the conduct of business, most eyes are on a mooted change in the normal procedure for law-making, to encourage MPs to sit in select committees taking public evidence on bills before they discuss their details.
This would ensure that issues of principle could be dealt with before the painstaking, line-by-line consideration of parliamentary drafting.
Interestingly, this reform is strongly backed by those shadowy but influential Commons figures, the senior parliamentary clerks.
The great ragbag of reforms now being discussed behind closed doors will probably be displayed on January 17th, when the Commons is to debate a report on modernising its finances and management.
The debate could well lead to an overhaul of the arcane management of the Commons (with its £80m budget for services and its 3,000-odd denizens) under the direction of a senior clerk, Donald Limon.
Would anyone outside that over-decorated mudbank, Westminster, really notice if the Commons was modernised?
Few enough; but the service offered to individuals seeking redress from their MPs could improve, and the executive in Whitehall might start noticing that the legislature was less quiescent and incompetent.
Never forget that parliamentary reform has affected the lives of most readers of this paper.
If you enjoy your Saturday snooze or a weekend round of golf, give some of the credit to Sir Robert Walpole.
That statesman, in 1732, persuaded the Commons to consider abandoning its regular Saturday sittings, so that he ‘might secure at least one day's hunting a week’.
The habit of taking two days off proved popular in London.
According to Commons research, this may be the origin ‘of the weekend, which spread eventually to the public life of most of the world.’
Still stuck over training
While the economy was booming, the Training and Enterprise Councils sounded like a neat solution to the skills shortage.
Now they are being squeezed by rising unemployment and falling profits
ALMOST two years after it was launched to the sound of grandiloquent claims from Tory ministers and loud cheers from businessmen, the Department of Employment's market-led training policy is in danger of falling apart.
The single most important aspect of the policy has been its introduction of training and enterprise councils — TECs, in the acronym-speak that clogs up all talk of the labour market.
Geared to local economic needs, dominated by businessmen rather than bureaucrats and financed by a mixture of public and private money, TECs originally promised a genuine break with the Whitehall-dominated past: a chance, at last, to give high-quality training the priority so often denied it for decades.
The prospects of success withered with alarming speed.
A few months ago, even the gruffest company bosses could be heard enthusing over jazzy Department of Employment leaflets.
Mixing their metaphors with exuberance, they talked of reversing the tide of history, delivering a skills revolution and mounting a crusade to make the British workforce the best trained in Western Europe.
Hundreds of chief executives agreed to act as unpaid board members of the fledgling TECs.
The Treasury, however, conspicuously failed to bring a bottle to this party.
Irritated by the idea at the heart of the initiative — mixing cash and staff from the public and private sectors — Treasury officials jumped in the other direction.
They pointed out that, because of a simultaneous fall in the numbers of unemployed and of teenagers, expenditure per head on training had been growing rapidly since the mid-1980s.
The Department of Employment promptly found its budget cut by £120m in 1990–91 and by £230m in 1991–92, with the most drastic reductions falling on the programme for training unemployed adults.
Michael Howard, the employment secretary, was left to make the best of this glum news by telling the TECs' directors — 1,200 of them, by December 1990 — that they could make up for a shortfall in cash from the Treasury by raising money from the private sector.
Shifting more of the cost of training to the private sector in this way might have posed a problem, even in a buoyant economy.
But the chilly economic climate has made a tricky situation desperate, in two respects.
Falling demand and rising costs are tempting many a finance director to curb spending on his firm's in-house training, let alone its contribution to the local TEC.
And TECs are having to deliver their promises, on dwindling incomes, just as the number of unemployed is rising sharply (see next page).
Unsurprisingly, many TEC directors think that they have been badly short-changed.
In public they have to boast about the training revolution they are supposedly leading.
In private the more cynical express a different view of their task.
The government, they say, is bluffing when it claims that TECs are intended to tackle Britain's persistent skills shortage.
In fact, the TECs are little more than a device for luring the private sector into tackling unemployment.
As the recession deepens, it is going to force the TECs into choosing between three undesirable options.
The first will involve cutting back on training for the unemployed.
Many chairmen might see this as a blessing: most are certainly keener on inventing new forms of high-level training than on managing anti-unemployment schemes like Employment Training (ET) and the Youth Training Scheme (YTS).
But in reality this option will be closed to all but a handful.
Virtually all the TECs still rely on government budgets which are heavily earmarked for ET and YTS.
And even the most optimistic TEC directors do not expect to raise more than 5% of their income from private sources.
The second option will be to forget about the skills revolution for a while and concentrate on helping the unemployed.
But the businessmen who are the driving force behind the TECs may feel diffident about administering a chunk of the welfare state.
The TECs' chairmen are already warning that budget cuts are forcing them to concentrate on alleviating the worst excesses of the training shortage, rather than on instigating innovative schemes.
‘You cannot have world-class targets for training, with a third-world budget,’ says one.
The third option will require the TECs to boost their incomes by gobbling up as many government programmes and grants as they can find.
TEC directors have already persuaded the Home Office to hand them responsibility for smartening up the employment prospects of black and brown Britons.
They are also angling for control of the Careers Advisory Service.
And they have been pushing hard to shake money out of any European Community project that looks remotely applicable.
Accumulating grants in this way, though, is a time-consuming business and risks exposing a TEC's staff to all the rigours of inter-departmental bickering in Whitehall.
That ought to be enough to scare away even the most devoted private-sector champions of better training.
Robert Jackson, the employment minister, has a ready reply to criticisms of TEC funding.
He says that the skill shortages that followed cut-backs in the 1979–81 recession forced industry to recognise the importance of training.
Businessmen are now so convinced of the need to have a well-trained workforce — partly because of persistent skills shortages and partly because of the evangelising work of the TECs themselves — that they will cut almost anything before they cut their training budgets.
Mr Jackson is tantalisingly vague, though, about the question that worries most TEC directors: how will they be able to fulfil their contractual obligations to the unemployed, if the number of jobless people continues to rise sharply while the TEC budgets continue to shrink?
Worse, his thoughts on the matter hint at a general approach that sounds not much different from government attitudes in the bad old past.
He questions, for example, the idea that the only reason why people are out of work is that they lack skills.
Confidence and motivation often matter more.
He is critical of the high cost and low success rate of the ET scheme.
The government is getting much better value for its money, he claims, from Jobclubs which offer the unemployed services such as free telephones and confidence-boosting sessions, but which eschew training.
Above all, thinks Mr Jackson, business ought to learn from its past mistakes.
A key role for the TECs, in this view, will be to keep reminding employers of the lessons of the 1980s.
A legitimate task, no doubt.
But was it for this that the trumpets blew so confidently when the TECs appeared, less than two years ago?
Unemployment
NAIRUles OK
HOW high must unemployment rise to squeeze inflation out of the economy?
Higher than its current rate of 1.8m (6.2%), but probably not as high as it had to in the mid-1980s.
That is not just because inflation is raging less fiercely than it was in the early 1980s, but also because of improvements in the way the labour market works.
Economists talk about the ‘non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment’(NAIRU)— or, in simple English, the unemployment rate which stops inflation taking off.
The interaction between inflation and unemployment depends upon how well the labour market works.
The better it works, the lower is the rate of unemployment compatible with stable inflation — ie, the lower the NAIRU.
Putting an exact figure on Britain's NAIRU is rather like chasing a mirage, but changes in unemployment and inflation give clues to its general area.
In the halcyon days of the 1960s, it was lower than is dreamed of now: inflation and unemployment shuffled along together comfortably within ranges of, respectively, 0.8%-6.3% and 1.5%-2.6%.
By the early 1980s, it took an unemployment rate of 11% to bring inflation down.
After six years of rising unemployment, inflation dropped to a low point of 2.4% by July 1986.
In the second half of the decade the NAIRU seemed to become much less daunting, as unemployment fell without provoking much rise in inflation.
The number out of work fell from a seasonally-adjusted peak of 3.1m (11.2% of the workforce) in July 1986 to a low of 1.6m (5.6%) in March 1990, while the rise in earnings jumped by only two percentage points over the same period, to 9.5%.
There are two possible explanations for that pleasant interlude.
The NAIRU may, as the figures imply, have fallen sharply.
Or the link between inflation and unemployment may simply have been operating on a long lag, with the old, high NAIRU returning after several years to smack ministers in the face.
The answer is probably a bit of both.
Certainly, it takes time for workers and employers to react to changing conditions in the labour market.
Inflation did eventually accelerate, and tight-money measures have barely begun to halt it.
But the NAIRU is indeed likely to be lower these days — partly because the labour market works better, and partly because some of those out of work will not show up in the figures.
Weaker unions tend to mean that wages are more flexible.
Without unions fighting to keep up wages, employers are free to cut back costs by squeezing pay rather than by sacking marginal workers.
The rise in self-employment is also likely to increase the flexibility of earnings.
A company employing ten workers might lay off two in bad times; ten self-employed workers would probably carry on with a 20% reduction in their turnover rather than voluntarily go on the dole.
Self-employment will also tend to keep down the figures of those claiming unemployment benefit — and thus registering as unemployed — because some of the self-employed have not contributed enough to qualify.
Much of the rise in employment in the boom came in the marginal, part-time jobs generally done by women.
They will be the first to go in a slump.
Many of them will not have been earning enough to pay national insurance, so will not qualify for unemployment benefit — and will not affect the unemployment statistics.
Those whose husbands are earning will not even qualify for supplementary benefit.
Throughout the 1980s, changes were introduced in the benefits system, on the one hand keeping out ineligible claimants and on the other improving the system for putting jobless people in touch with vacancies.
That tightening-up process is still going on, and is likely to dampen the rise in the unemployment figures.
Britain's labour market may be working better, but it is still not working well.
Western Germany manages to maintain an inflation rate of 3% with an unemployment rate of 6.7%.
One obvious failing in Britain is the gap between the skills the workforce offers and those employers want.
That mismatch seems worse than it was ten years ago.
According to the Confederation of British Industry, in 1980 when unemployment was at the same level as now, around 5% of firms were reporting skill shortages; the equivalent figure in 1990 was around 25%.
Where there's a will, there's a home
INHERITANCE, once the preserve of the wealthy, will soon make most people richer.
The spread of owner occupation means that, in 30 years' time, between 70% and 90% of households are likely to inherit a property.
That much is predictable.
But how will the wealth be shared, and what will inheritors do with it?
A new study* by three academic researchers has tried to find out.
A previous attempt to guess the pattern of housing inheritance, by Morgan Grenfell, a merchant bank, in 1987, worked mainly from circumstantial evidence: from the rise in home ownership and house prices (to predict the amounts to be inherited) and from the rise in holdings of financial assets (to predict that inheritors would invest much of their new wealth in deposit accounts and shares).
The latest study has gone for first-hand evidence, by looking at Inland Revenue figures for bequeathed estates, and by conducting a couple of sample surveys.
Inland Revenue figures show that housing now accounts for 40% of the total value of inherited estates.
It looms large in middle-sized estates; not surprisingly, as the big increase in home ownership and house prices in the past 30 years has mainly benefited the comfortably-off.
Unpublished Inland Revenue figures show big regional variations in property inheritance.
Where home ownership is low, as in Scotland and Northern Ireland, housing made up 33% and 28.1% respectively of the value of inherited estates in 1980–81.
In England that year, homes accounted for 45.6% of the value of bequests.
Even in death, the north-south split survives.
Inheritance gives mainly to those who already have.
The researchers looked at a sample of 302 people who had inherited a house.
Half were in their 40s or 50s.
Professional and managerial households were four times as likely to inherit as were the least skilled or the unemployed.
Two-thirds of those who inherited a property promptly sold it.
Typically, roughly half the proceeds were invested; just over a quarter spent on buying another property or improving one; and the remaining quarter spent as part of the family budget.
A small, detailed survey found that older inheritors tended to put aside much of their cash to benefit their own children.
Because home ownership has grown so fast, and old people now live longer, the main impact of inheritance still lies ahead.
By 2031 the average number of homes passed on each year, excluding bequests to spouses, could be 343,000 — more than double the current average (see chart).
Some of those homes may already have been hocked by granny to pay for care in her declining years; and house prices may be depressed as inheritors who already own their homes sell those they inherit.
But more and more lucky people will be able to plan their retirement around the cash their parents leave them.
Unsurprisingly, the prospects for inheritance greatly interest financial institutions, which hope to offer inheritors new ways of spending their windfall.
Another study, by Mintel, a market-research company, covers some of the same ground as the academics' book (but costs £795).
A survey of 295 property inheritors carried out for it by the Housing Research Foundation confirmed that two-thirds of inheritors promptly sold the houses they were left, whereas 22% moved into them.
Inland Revenue figures show a rise of nearly 10% a year in the post-tax value of bequests in the 1980s.
If that continues during the 1990s, inflation averages 5%, and homes account for half the value of all bequests, Mintel thinks property transfers between generations will rise from perhaps £16 billion in 1990–91 to £25 billion in 1999–2000.
Maybe.
More likely, the value of bequests will depend crucially on house prices — which will be depressed by all those inherited homes for sale.
BRITAIN THIS WEEK
Feeling the pinch
In his first broadcast interview as chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont said there was too much pessimistic talk about the economy.
Then he warned of a stiff year ahead, with rising costs in the Gulf squeezing public spending, and membership of the ERM precluding any rapid reduction in interest rates.
Local councils in a dozen areas were granted High Court injunctions to prevent Sunday trading, but a handful of national store chains opened on the two Sundays before Christmas.
Just enough shoppers turned up to leave both sides of the Sunday-trading debate feeling vindicated.
How many businesses that went up in the 1980s might now come down?
A record number failed in 1990.
Waiting for war
John Major said he would visit Saudi Arabia, Oman and Egypt, starting on January 6th.
The Foreign Office moved to expel 67 Iraqis and eight staff from the Iraqi embassy.
The Ministry of Defence served call-up papers on 390 army reservists.
An earlier appeal had produced only 700 volunteers.
Undaunted, the navy asked for 2,500 volunteers from its own reserves.
Confidential Whitehall papers from 1960, released under the 30-year rule, struck an unusually topical note.
They showed the Foreign Office keen to encourage talks between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti rulers over their border dispute — but also adamant that Kuwait was the one area in the Gulf where the defence of oil supplies would justify the use of force.
Faces reddened at the Ministry of Defence when it was revealed that a thief had snatched top-secret documents about the Gulf from an unlocked car on December 17th.
The papers belonged to a staff officer, who left them unattended while he and his driver visited a used-car salesroom in Acton.
They were spotted on a near-by builder's tip and handed to the police.
Unexpected
The IRA declared a three-day Christmas truce.
Welcoming the initiative, Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland secretary of state, suggested it might provide an opportunity for progress to be made in the province.
Unionist politicians accused him of naivety and dismissed the truce as a publicity stunt.
One man died and his brother was seriously injured after their car was fired on by soldiers at a checkpoint in South Armagh.
Cahal Daly, the recently installed Archbishop of Armagh, said he was ‘deeply disturbed’ and joined calls for an independent inquiry.
Sonia Sutcliffe, the wife of the Yorkshire Ripper, lost her libel case against the News of the World newspaper, over an article alleging a holiday affair with a Greek businessman.
She also had the costs of the case awarded against her — wiping out virtually all of the £334,000-worth of damages won by her in previous court actions against the press.
Salman Rushdie followed up a meeting with prominent Muslims on Christmas Eve by announcing his conversion to Islam.
He also undertook not to publish any paperback version of ‘The Satanic Verses’ as long as it gave offence.
Mr Rushdie hoped the fatwa against him might be lifted.
Radical Muslim leaders in Bradford were unimpressed.
New vehicle registrations in November, at 148,700, were 19% lower than in November 1989 and the lowest seen in any November since 1979.
The Consumers' Association magazine, Which?, produced a sharply critical report on the services provided in airports.
BAA, the owner of eight airports including Heathrow, was blamed for neglecting the interests of passengers and allowing overpricing in airport shops.
Useful reading, perhaps, for the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, currently reviewing BAA?
Nanny knows best
The press got a new watchdog, as the Press Complaints Commission succeeded the Press Council on January 1st.
And the Broadcasting Standards Council began its monitoring of the small screen with a warning from its chairman, Lord Rees-Mogg, that television producers should not impose their own values if they offended the viewing public.
Signalling his commitment to a classless society, the prime minister bestowed peerages, knighthoods and other assorted gongs in the New Year's Honours list.
P.D.
James, a crime writer, became a baroness, and James Anderton, outspoken Chief Constable of Manchester, a knight.
School pupils must go on learning about 1066 and all that, declared the National Curriculum Council.
Advocates of traditional history-teaching welcomed the emphasis on events, people and dates.
One in the eye for progressive educationalists, after a hard battle?
Company cars
Queering the motor market
The tax break enjoyed by people with company cars distorts the market for new cars in Britain, putting private buyers at a disadvantage
A PECULIAR aspect of British business one-upmanship is to be found not in the office, but in the car park.
Here a salesman flaunts his status by showing the sunshine roof, electric windows and alloy wheels on his family saloon.
Managers gauge each others' prestige by comparing the sizes of their BMWs.
Directors say it silkily with a Jaguar or a Mercedes.
Cars, provided by the company, have become the physical symbols of the employees' progress through it.
Now take such ritual posturing and stage it nation-wide.
Car fleets have grown to the point where they dominate the national market for new cars: in 1990 more than half the 2m new cars sold in Britain were bought by companies and other organisations.
(Elsewhere in Europe, only Germany comes close, with about one-third of its market accounted for in this way.
In France the proportion is less than a fifth.
Most Americans do not even know what a company car is.)
More than 3m of the 22m cars (of all ages) now clogging Britain's roads are registered by companies or other organisations.
Some are police cars or rental vehicles, for example, but most are kept by individual drivers.
The recent row between Nissan and its British distributor owes much to the pressure that both have been under recently to break into the fleet market.
The Japanese company's Bluebird model, the first to be built at its Sunderland factory, never rated: dealers thought it lacked pzazz for executives.
So Nissan replaced it with a snappier car, the Primera.
But its privately-owned British distributor and dealer, Nissan UK, reckoned the Primera was too expensive to have much of a chance with fleet purchasers.
Relations between the car maker and its dealer were already strained by previous rows; so, on December 27th, Nissan UK was fired.
According to the Inland Revenue, 500,000 people were being taxed on the benefit of having a company car in the 1978–79 tax year.
Since then, company-car taxation scales have increased tenfold, but despite the supposed deterrent effect of this the number of people affected has risen to about 2m.
For company cars are still a bargain.
The driver of a 1.6 litre company car who can justify more than 2,500 business miles a year and whose petrol bills (including personal mileage) are paid for by the company, will be taxed as though the benefit were equivalent to an extra £2,800 in salary.
For a basic-rate taxpayer, that would cost just £700 a year.
But it actually costs about £4,300 a year to buy, tax, insure and run a 1.6 litre car, according to the Monks Partnership, a firm of management-remuneration consultants.
For the executive, in other words, company money spent on his car is mainly a gift.
And never does this feel better than when he chooses a new car in the showroom.
Most employees select their company car from a list of vehicles within a certain price range.
Manufacturers, knowing that an extra few hundred pounds on the price will not be any deterrent, load their cars with all manner of profitable goodies from ten-speaker hi-fi systems to turbo engine-chargers.
Garel Rhys, a motor-industry economist at Cardiff University, reckons that if more cars were privately bought, the average British model would be much less lavishly equipped, and probably smaller.
As it is, not only is the average specification of cars sold in Britain the highest in Europe, but cars destined for the British market also tend to be bigger, with ‘upper-medium-sized’ cars disproportionately popular compared with elsewhere in Europe.
Prices are affected, too.
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission is currently investigating the pre-tax price of cars, which is some 30% higher in Britain than in, say, Belgium.
Carmakers claim that such figures do not compare similar models, and that the price differentials take no account of discounts given to British buyers.
The big fleet operators get the biggest discounts — putting the dealers under pressure to maintain higher prices for private buyers.
As company-car drivers tend to travel farther and more often on motorways, they consider themselves more experienced and skilful than private motorists, according to a recent survey by Gallup for General Accident, an insurance company.
Yet the survey also found the same drivers were far more likely to drive badly and to flout the law.
Almost half of the company-car drivers surveyed thought that it was acceptable to drive at 90mph on a motorway (20mph over the speed limit), compared with a quarter of drivers of privately-owned cars.
One third of them also admitted they would drive more carefully if they had to buy their own cars and pay all the running and repair costs.
BUSINESS
The value-subtractors of Eastern Europe
The standard approach to trade reform assumes that devaluing the currency makes firms competitive.
In Eastern Europe this may not be true
THINKING on economic reform in Eastern Europe has, up to now, drawn heavily on experience from the third world.
A reforming government first needs to ‘stabilise’ its economy — ie, cut its budget deficit and stop printing money in order to finance whatever deficit remains.
After that it needs to open its economy to international trade and, most likely, devalue its currency; this will align domestic prices with prices in world markets and force the economy to use resources more efficiently.
This advice makes sense for most developing countries, but is it relevant to Eastern Europe?
In one respect, at least, the answer is no.
The standard third-world prescription heavily underplays the role of private property.
In most developing countries, private ownership is already the rule.
Producers are obstructed by governments in all sorts of ways, but enterprises are, by and large, private.
In the ex-communist countries almost all enterprises are still owned by the state; that fact is directly and indirectly linked to just about every economic difficulty these countries face.
Governments are coming to understand the importance of privatising quickly.
However, the past year's changes in eastern Germany and Poland point to another mistake in the standard prescription: its advice on trade policy.
Eastern Germany and Poland opened their economies to the outside world all at once— eastern Germany on July 1st 1990, the day of its monetary union with western Germany; Poland on January 1st 1990, the day of its ‘Big Bang’ of economic reforms.
Since then both have seen output fall sharply.
Enterprises have sacked workers and are running at much less than their full capacity.
Many have shut down altogether.
Eastern Germany and Poland have this in common, even though their exchange-rate policies were quite different.
German monetary union converted old East German marks one-for-one into D-marks.
At such a rate the East German mark was handsomely overvalued.
Poland, in contrast, devalued the zloty by 31% on January 1st 1990.
This approach, according to the standard thinking, should have made Poland's producers more competitive.
Yet the fall in Poland's output since its reforms began has been at least as severe as in eastern Germany.
In some ways, the comparison is misleading.
Unlike Poland, eastern Germany can count on plenty of economic support in the form of subsidies and inward investment.
Even so, the sharp contraction in Poland's output — despite the fall in the zloty — raises doubts about the efficacy of devaluation.
In a book to be published soon (‘The Order of Economic Liberalisation: Financial Control in the Transition to a Market Economy’), Ronald McKinnon of Stanford University suggests a disturbing reason why devaluation may fail in Eastern Europe.
For most purposes it is enough to know that an enterprise makes losses — that its revenues are less than the sum of its wages, its cost of capital and its cost of material inputs (raw materials, components, energy and so on).
But, in principle, an enterprise might be so inefficient that its revenues fail to cover even the cost of materials.
Such an enterprise is an absurdity: it uses scarce capital and labour to subtract value from its other inputs (see chart).
Valuable metal, plastic, cardboard, rubber, energy go in at one end; Trabant cars worth less than the sum of these parts emerge at the other.
The distinction between making losses and subtracting value is crucial for exchange-rate policy.
Devaluation makes an enterprise more competitive by reducing its labour costs measured in foreign currency.
Note that devaluation does not affect the cost, measured in foreign currency, of capital or material inputs; in an open economy, these will command their world-market price.
A barrel of oil costs Poland so many dollars regardless of the zloty's exchange rate.
Even domestically produced coal has a given value in foreign-currency terms.
Because devaluation can cut labour costs, it can make a loss-making enterprise profitable.
But a value-subtracting enterprise loses money even if labour (and capital) are free.
It is a failure regardless of the exchange rate.
Value-subtractors have been spotted in many of the worst-run developing countries, but they are rare.
In Eastern Europe they are probably much more common.
Socialist central planners deliberately underpriced energy and other inputs.
So what might seem, at local prices, an ordinarily loss-making factory could be a value-subtractor.
Poland's price system now works, but even there the true extent of value-subtraction is hard to guess.
Many of the enterprises that have survived the first year of reform are still at risk.
They are hanging on by refusing to pay suppliers.
That cannot last.
In their recent joint report on the Soviet economy, the IMF and other multilateral agencies urged the Soviet Union not to move to free trade overnight, but to set a temporary tariff of 30%.
Their reason was that many of the country's enterprises will be uncompetitive at any ‘realistic’ exchange rate.
The idea of value-subtraction goes further: it deletes ‘realistic’.
But the implication for policy is similar.
These countries should move gradually to free trade.
All-at-once liberalisation could flatten a large part of the economy overnight.
To give enterprises a chance to adjust and to avoid a crunch that would undermine support for further reform, governments might need to start with high tariffs, promising to eliminate them over, say, five years.
Adopting initial tariffs of even 100% would still be a bold reform; the implicit tariffs set by central planners approach infinity.
The third-world prescription was clear: liberalise trade immediately and leave privatisation for the longer term.
Poland did this.
Its reforms have not failed, but they are proving terribly painful.
Eastern Germany aside, the rest of Eastern Europe has been economically timid, and the Soviet Union has done next to nothing.
When these reluctant reformers are willing to take their chance, they might be wise to do the opposite of what Poland did.
They should privatise as fast as possible, and preferably all at once; but then go carefully on trade.
COMMODITIES BRIEF
The Economist indicators
EACH week The Economist publishes a set of commodity-price indicators.
Once a year these are published in summary form: last year's appeared in the issue of January 6th 1990.
The Economist indices are based on 1985=100, and are weighted by the value of imports into OECD countries in 1984–86 (net of intra-EC trade in farm products covered by EC subsidies).
After falling throughout 1989, commodity prices rallied in the first part of 1990.
In the three months to the beginning of May, the all-items index, measured in terms of SDRs, a basket of currencies, gained 15%.
But the rally did not last: over the whole year the SDR index fell 12%.
In sterling terms the fall was 18%, but the dollar index fell only 6% — its slide slowed by a weaker dollar.
Metal prices were the most volatile.
Low world stocks left the markets vulnerable to supply disruptions and encouraged speculative squeezes.
Lead experienced the biggest swing, hitting a ten-year high of £800 a tonne in March.
The SDR metals index rose 39% between the end of January and September, before fears of recession, heightened by the Gulf, claimed back the gain.
Tin prices in Malaysia are now the lowest for nearly five years.
The downturn in the tyre industry hit rubber prices, which fell to a four-year low in Asia, despite purchases for the buffer stock and by the American government for its defence stockpile.
The Australian Wool Corporation, which controls wool marketing down under, lowered its floor price by 20% because of falling demand, but still had to buy 70% of the wool on sale at auction each week.
World cotton consumption was a record 86m bales, and the ratio of stocks to consumption was at an all-time low.
Small wonder that prices stayed high.
Surpluses pushed the SDR food index down 11% over the year.
Grain output rose by 6%, and wheat was in surplus for the first time in four years.
The Soviet Union had a near-record grain harvest of 236m tonnes.
Wheat futures in Chicago dropped to 13-year lows in November when grain sales to the Soviet Union petered out after that country ran out of cash.
In the last quarter of 1989 the Soviet Union bought 15m tonnes of American grain and soyabean meal.
But in the same period of 1990 it bought only 2m tonnes.
Brazil's 1990 coffee crop was only 22m bags, but world supplies remained plentiful.
Cocoa stocks reached a record 1.2m tonnes and a seventh year of surplus is forecast for the year to September 1991.
Political tensions in Côte d'Ivoire briefly lifted cocoa prices above £900 a tonne in May, after which they fell by 30%.
Tea sank to a two-year low of 89 pence a kilo in August as production increased.
Japan's industrial structure
Inside the charmed circle
TOKYO
Japanese firms prefer to conspire rather than compete with each other, complain American rivals, and now they are doing it in our own backyard
FAMILIES of firms with interlocking stakes in one another, known as keiretsu, have long dominated the Japanese economy.
In the eyes of foreigners trying to do business in Japan, they have become the symbol, and source, of the country's most exclusionary practices.
Six prominent keiretsu (networks of firms centred on the Mitsui, Mitsubishi and Sumitomo trading groups and the Fuji, Sanwa and Dai-Ichi Kangyo banking empires) group together 12,000 companies which between them have sales equivalent to a quarter of Japan's GNP.
Little wonder the keiretsu are feared and respected in Japan.
Now American politicians are starting to worry that Japan's keiretsu syndrome may be creeping into America.
Sander Levin, a congressman from Michigan, claims that Japanese car plants in the United States favour their keiretsu partners unfairly when ordering components.
A recent study by the University of Michigan suggests that 90% of the parts in Japanese cars built in America come either direct from Japan or from Japanese manufacturers which have set up shop in the United States.
A congressional study is under way to see whether any of America's antitrust laws are being breached.
There are also complaints in Japan, where foreign suppliers have long blamed their difficulty in penetrating the Japanese market on the closed ranks of the keiretsu.
A more complicated charge is that, by holding so many of each other 's shares, keiretsu companies permit each other to pay out paltry dividends, freeing up large sums for capital investment.
Despite the moans of American companies, there is nothing inherently unfair about this.
Nor is it irrational: low dividends are often compensated for by other commercial advantages.
But it is true that, with some 70% of outstanding shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in the vaults of friendly business partners, Japanese firms are under little pressure to increase dividends and their managements have few fears of being replaced in a sudden stockmarket coup.
The origins of the keiretsu go back to the rise of Japan's great banking families in the 19th century.
By the 1930s the country's bankers had built vast mining-to-manufacturing conglomerates, known as zaibatsu, which became the driving force of Japanese militarism.
After the war, American occupation authorities disbanded the zaibatsu, but many of these companies later regrouped themselves after the Americans left and restrictions on cross-holdings and other ties were relaxed.
Today keiretsu companies often co-ordinate their investment plans, employment practices and even political donations.
The old-style conglomerates based around a bank which emerged from the pre-war zaibatsu differ markedly from newer groups that have sprung up since the second world war.
The former (eg, Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, Fuji, Sanwa and Dai-Ichi Kangyo) tend to be more loosely affiliated and more diversified.
The latter are more specialised, and usually based on a single large manufacturer.
Kenichi Imai, an industrial-policy expert at Hitotsubashi University in Tokyo, distinguishes five different types among the newer keiretsu:
Groups of semi-autonomous firms in a variety of fields revolving around a single manufacturer but with a web of cross-holdings in each other.
With 688 subsidiaries, Hitachi has the largest such family in Japan.
Groups formed as a result of a parent company, such as Matsushita Electric, spinning off its own operating divisions to form separate companies within the same field to act as suppliers, distributors and even retailers.
Groups resulting from a parent manufacturer establishing a pyramid of subcontractors and component suppliers.
Toyota is the best-known example.
Groups led by a company, such as NEC, an electronics firm, which have floated off old manufacturing subsidiaries and expanded into diverse new businesses by fostering affiliates.
Groups of firms related through the charismatic leadership of the parent company's founder or owner, such as Seibu Railway.
As Mr Imai's analysis makes clear, the term keiretsu is used to refer to so many different kinds of industrial groups in Japan that generalising about all of them, and especially complaining about them as a group, makes little sense.
Besides, most keiretsu are not nearly as exclusive as American critics claim.
Many are similar to large vertically integrated corporations in the West including such giants as Ford, General Electric, Daimler-Benz, Siemens or Philips.
The most insular, to outsiders, are descendants of the snobby, old zaibatsu and some of the newer vertically integrated manufacturers (especially Toyota).
Even so, the Japanese government's Fair Trade Commission reckons that the average firm even within the former zaibatsu relies on other group members for only 13% of purchases and 15% of sales.
Nevertheless, the predominance of keiretsu groups does often act as a brake on competition in Japan.
Mr Imai questions whether keiretsu companies really need to hold such large quantities of each other 's shares.
Nor, says Mr Imai, should they be allowed to write off the exorbitant sums they spend on promoting group-wide harmony.
The ¥5 trillion ($35 billion) that managers in Japanese companies spend annually on entertaining one another is more than they pay out between them in dividends.
American rivals might console themselves with the thought that this represents a hidden, but substantial, addition to the cost of capital.
Eliminating tax breaks on corporate entertaining would probably do more to break the power of keiretsu than beefing up Japan's feeble antitrust laws or passing intricate rules on cross share-holdings.
But it is difficult to imagine America's corporate leaders advocating a crackdown on executive wining-and-dining, even for the Japanese.
The lapse of luxury
PARIS, NEW YORK AND TOKYO
Snobby brands have been one of the success stories of the late 1980s.
Now luxury-goods firms are suffering a hangover that may last for years
MANAGEMENT’ is a little-used word in the lexicon of the luxury-goods business.
Instead, in a $52 billion-a-year industry obsessed with appearances, some companies seem to think that ‘creativity’ and ‘style’rather than hard-headed business strategies are the keys to success.
Recession, a crisis in American retailing and the tarnishing of many once-snobby luxury brands are making them think again.
Over the past few years even badly managed luxury groups have made a profit, thanks to a booming world economy.
Lower income taxes and rising stockmarkets created a rapidly growing class of newly-rich consumers eager to flaunt their prosperity.
Purveyors of perfumes, porcelain and other expensive wares were more than happy to oblige yuppies and other brazen consumers willing to pay lavish prices for labels once only sported by the elite.
These companies stepped up production of ‘exclusive’ products and concocted hundreds of new items to sell, usually under the same upmarket brands.
Many firms made a fortune.
The members of the Comité Colbert, an association of 70 of France's biggest luxury companies, increased their sales by a quarter in 1989 to $5.4 billion.
Christmas marked the end of this boom.
In America, which accounts for a third of all luxury purchases, shares of Tiffany & Co., an upper-crust jeweller and a weathervane of the industry, fell on news of disappointing sales.
On the other side of the Atlantic, stores in Paris's chic Avenue Montaigne, a mecca for Japanese tourists, said that sales to foreigners had fallen sharply.
European luxury-goods firms blamed their poor Christmas performance on Iraq's August invasion of Kuwait.
For companies expert at peddling dreams, this is a dangerous bit of fantasy.
The Gulf is the least of the industry's worries.
A bigger headache, unlikely to go away even if the Gulf threat evaporates, is the weakness of both the yen and the dollar.
Though this is good news for American and Japanese firms, who share a paltry 11% slice of the luxury market, it is disastrous for European companies which account for the remaining 89% of sales (see chart on next page), but which sell nearly half of all their fancy products in America or Japan.
European exporters have pushed up prices in both countries to protect margins.
This is already beginning to backfire.
American consumers have shown a disconcerting willingness to substitute sparkling wine for champagne, off-the-rack imitations for pricey designer clothes.
They are also displaying a most unsnoblike taste for ‘replica brands’— illegal copies of perfumes and bags that smell or look like originals, but cost a fraction of the price.
Replicas pose a serious threat to some luxury brands.
Hubert Joly of McKinsey, a management consultancy, says copies of perfumes took 10% of the American market in 1988, up from 1% in 1984.
Sales to budget-conscious American consumers will also be hit by a new luxury tax that began on January 1st.
This tax is set at 10% of the portion of the purchase price above $30,000 for cars and $10,000 for furs and jewellery.
Though some Americans went on a spending spree in December to beat the new tax, its introduction will almost certainly hurt sales in 1991.
Similarly, the likely phasing out of duty-free sales for people travelling within the European Community could also make many luxury items more expensive just as many of the newly-rich who fuelled the consumer boom are feeling newly poor.
Luxury-goods sales are falling precisely when lots of new competitors, attracted by what once looked like easy business, are jumping into the market.
In America, for example, 120 perfumes were launched in 1988 and 59 in 1989, compared with just 30 in 1980.
Competition could soon be even fiercer.
Shiseido, a Japanese cosmetics giant, plans to boost exports, which currently take a mere 2% of its production.
In the upmarket rag trade, where new fashion houses like Italy's Armani and Germany's Hugo Boss have pulled in the crowds, the story is the same.
Though French brands still account for nearly half of the luxury market, German, British, Italian and even a few Japanese and American brands are showing up on the shelves.
Faced with dwindling sales and stiffer competition, all luxury-goods firms need to turn to the boring disciplines that many have dismissed as suitable for widget-makers, but hardly appropriate for a trade where cachet brings in the cash.
In the harsher 1990s there will not be many corks popping at companies that fail to:
Reduce costs.
These have risen fast, especially the cost of advertising.
For example, launching a new perfume worldwide now costs an extravagant $50m.
To keep profits up, firms will need to lower costs or get more value for their money.
Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton (LVMH), a French group selling bags and booze, is doing the latter.
It plans to set up an in-house agency to manage its $400m-a-year advertising budget.
Cost-cutting means challenging accepted wisdom.
In December France's Balmain shocked the fashion world by pulling out of haute couture.
Heavily indebted, the firm could no longer afford to lose money making $20,000 outfits for a handful of wealthy women.
Other fashion houses, which also lose millions staging haute couture fashion shows, say these create an image that helps sell other profitable products.
Now that times are tougher, such costly publicity stunts are harder to justify.
Protect brands.
As Bernard Arnault, the boss of LVMH, points out, the hardest trick in managing luxury brands is ‘keeping a balance between volume and scarcity.’
It is a trick that many groups, including Mr Arnault's, have yet to master.
By stretching brands across a wide range of products, some groups like Pierre Cardin, whose name appears on everything from fragrances to frying pans, have damaged their image.
Others like Louis Vuitton, which makes monogrammed bags, have made a once-classy item banal by saturating markets.
Only a handful of luxury groups have struck the right balance between mass-marketing and exclusivity.
So far, America's Ralph Lauren is one of them.
It cleverly created its Polo brand to exploit Americans' nostalgia for an English country life which never really existed except in Hollywood movies, and has been careful to use the brand only for top-of-the-range products.
Yves Saint Laurent, on the other hand, licensed its brand worldwide, but had to buy it back again when the licensees splashed YSL initials everywhere.
Control distribution.
Luxury firms can sell their wares at high prices only by keeping them ‘exclusive’, even if only in the minds of shop-till-you-drop status-seekers.
America provides a cautionary tale.
Last year indebted retailers like Macy's frantically discounted to raise cash to meet interest payments.
The result, says André Sacau of Orcofi, a French holding company with stakes in a range of luxury-goods makers, is that ‘buyers of luxury brands have been turned into bargain-hunters.’
Rather than see their goods hawked by retailers on the brink of bankruptcy, luxury firms must act fast to protect their brands.
Italy's Gucci has already pulled its products out of hundreds of American stores.
Other companies, like Britain's Harrods, have set up their own shops within big stores or have bought their own boutiques abroad.
One of Orcofi's companies has even opened a shopping centre in Taipei that groups together shops selling only luxury goods.
Professional management will be needed to keep firms afloat, but it may not be enough to restore the explosive growth of the past few years.
That is because the luxury industry is also facing its nemesis: a self-righteous backlash against conspicuous consumption in America and Britain, though not yet in Japan.
A grudge against the ‘flaunt it’ Reagan and Thatcher years is in the air.
One sign of the times: the film ‘Bonfire of the Vanities’ flopped after critics accused it of being kinder to yuppies than the original Tom Wolfe novel.
Another sign is the campaign against the fur trade launched by animal-rights activists, which has led to the bankruptcy of several furriers.
Christian Lacroix, who gained notoriety as one of Paris's most flamboyant dress designers in the 1980s, has had to tone down his gaudy garments to get them into department stores.
Personal vanity and the taste for consuming conspicuously will always link within the human breast.
But a more puritan era of egalitarian austerity could make them a lot shyer — and for some time to come.
Corning's strategy
Time to get out of the  kitchen 
CORNING, NEW YORK
AMERICA'S Corning prides itself on being lean and nice.
But like many other paternalistic firms, it may have to become a little meaner to stop its past from handicapping its future.
The company has been adept at moving into high-margin businesses such as laboratory services, optical fibres and speciality materials.
And yet this high-tech portfolio looks strange beside pots and pans, which continue to account for 28% of its sales.
Though far less profitable, Corning's kitchenware business encompasses the brand names — Pyrex, Corning Ware, Visions, Corelle — which have made the company, and the company town of Corning in upstate New York, world famous.
That explains why the firm has been so reluctant to shed its pots and pans.
Even so, sentiment may not protect it forever.
Neither James Houghton, chairman of the company since 1983 and a great-great grandson of its founder, nor his predecessor as chairman, his brother Amory, have proved sentimental about other products.
Under their leadership Corning has prospered by making well-timed exits from mature, slow-growing industries and equally well-timed entrances into young, fast-growing ones.
Mr Houghton still glows proudly when recounting Corning's role in helping to create the electric light-bulb after Thomas Edison came to the company in 1879 with his ideas.
‘We really developed the processes for making incandescent light bulbs very fast, very cheaply,’ explains Mr Houghton.
Nevertheless when the growth of light-bulb sales and profits slowed in the 1970s, Corning promptly sold the business.
Similarly, Corning dropped the ceramic bricks used to line glass and steel furnaces, and passive electrical components such as resistors and capacitors, all cherished as traditional products at the company.
Being so fleet-footed, and tough-minded, has enabled Corning's managers to raise the company's return on equity from about 8% in 1983 to 15% in 1990.
Mr Houghton's ambition is to raise return on equity to 17–20% within five years, a performance that would put Corning into the top 25% of Fortune 500 companies.
This target looks realistic because Corning is only just starting to reap the rewards of patiently pursuing earlier long-term investments.
The company's pioneering effort in optical fibres failed to make a penny for 17 years, but is now set to make a fortune.
Hair-thin glass filaments that transmit information using light, optical fibres are now cheap enough to compete with copper; their reliability and security appeal to Pentagon generals.
In a similarly shrewd move the firm recently sold its laboratory-equipment business to Switzerland's Ciba-Geigy.
It has decided to concentrate on laboratory services instead.
Stiffer government regulations are persuading American hospitals and drugs firms to stop using small, local laboratories to test medical samples and new drugs, and to give their business instead to the kind of nationally known laboratories acquired by Corning.
The company also looks set to prosper from making the substrates which go into catalytic converters used to clean car-exhaust emissions.
Perhaps still more impressive is Corning's record in exploiting its technology through joint ventures, a notoriously difficult form of business.
The company participates in nearly a score of such ventures, some of them dating back to the 1930s.
Income from joint ventures produced about half of Corning's net profits last year.
So why does a company with such a history of agility and skill remain tied to pots and pans even though they act as such a drag on its performance?
To his credit, Mr Houghton admits to being ‘less than totally objective’ about these products.
‘I used to run that business back in the late 1960s and early 1970s,’ he recalls.
One of the reasons Mr Houghton and his managers cite for staying in the pots-and-pans business sounds pretty lame: namely that the business was handicapped in the 1980s first by a recession at the start of the decade and then later by a strong dollar and so could now recover.
Another reason cited is more plausible: the contribution the business makes to corporate overheads and the way it is entwined with the company's other operations makes it difficult to detach from more profitable bits of the company.
But the real reason is almost certainly the devastating impact which selling the pots-and-pans business could have on Corning and other small towns that depend on the company for their prosperity.
Getting out of making pots and pans, says one Corning executive, would be ‘like cutting 200 umbilical cords.’
That may be why Mr Houghton has given the job of turning round the kitchenware business to Richard Dulude.
Now near retirement after a long career in product development, Mr Dulude can presumably act without fear or favour.
He has his work cut out for him.
Corning's high-quality, high-priced pots and pans are more vulnerable to recession than more humble vessels.
Before Christmas, Macy's, the huge New York department store, was discounting Corning's products by up to 50%.
If price cuts on this scale continue, they will make retaining the kitchenware business an expensive, as well as a sentimental, indulgence.
British television
Wheel of fortune
IMAGINE you are bidding in an auction.
There are 15 items up for sale, but you may buy only two of them.
You do not know who the rival bidders are, who wants what, or how much they are likely to bid.
Even if you do make the highest offer for any particular item, the auctioneer can hand it over to another, friendlier-looking buyer instead.
That is the puzzle facing companies wanting to buy Britain's juiciest regional monopolies — its 15 commercial-television franchises (which include one nationwide breakfast channel).
Bids must be submitted by the end of April; winners will be announced by September.
Despite the bizarre method being used, dozens of foreign companies are likely to bid for the rare chance to invade a new broadcasting market.
Until now British TV licences were given away free, mostly to firms headed by establishment figures.
Though applicants had to demonstrate financial soundness and programming ability, they paid nothing for their regional monopolies, which guaranteed them a share of the £1 billion-plus ($1.95 billion) of television advertising sold in Britain each year.
Once inside the ‘independent’ television (ITV) club, firms were rarely thrown out.
In the last round of contract awards, held in 1980, only two out of 15 ITV companies failed to get their licences renewed.
A new law, passed in November 1990, should change all that.
When the current round of licences expires at the end of 1992, new licence-holders will be (more or less) the firms that have paid most for them.
Not surprisingly, that makes existing franchisees nervous.
Since most depend heavily on broadcasting, they are desperate to keep their franchises.
Hanging on hardest will be the two London franchise-holders, Thames Television and its weekend equivalent, LWT.
London boasts more viewers than any other franchise area, and the highest proportion of rich ones.
Small franchises in rich areas, like the south-west of England and East Anglia will also be popular.
What happens to ITV firms that lose their franchises?
The larger ones hope to soldier on as independent producers.
Those owning rights to cheap-to-make, popular series could even do well; they will be able to charge much more for programming once out of the ITV club, which currently prices programmes on the basis of production costs.
Though Coronation Street, a downmarket soap, has lots of viewers, Granada, the firm that makes it, has to sell it to other ITV companies for a mere £100,000 per episode.
That is only a fifth of what ITV companies charge each other for less popular, but, less economical, ‘quality’ drama.
Meanwhile, ITV companies are busy scraping together the highest bids they can muster.
For most, that means finding outside investment.
TVS is rumoured to be teaming up with Carlton Communications (a video distributor), Canal Plus (a French cable-TV company), and the Compagnie Générale des Eaux (a utility with various media holdings).
Both French firms hold 10% stakes in TVS already.
Other ITV companies are also looking for partners — frightened of industrial espionage, one firm recently swept its London offices for listening devices.
Jettisoning people and property is another way to save money.
Thames has sacked 300 staff, Central 600.
ITV companies may be wrong to worry.
At the beginning of last year 70 franchise bids were expected, but more recent guesses have lowered the number to 30.
One reason is recession.
Less advertising spending makes the media conglomerates that are the most likely bidders poorer, as well as reducing the value of the franchises themselves.
Also at fault is the new broadcasting law, which rules out many potential buyers.
Firms based outside the European Community may not take controlling stakes.
British newspaper groups, satellite-television firms and companies owning radio stations are limited to 20% holdings.
Firms left in the running must pass high ‘quality thresholds’ to get their bids considered.
For example, a quarter of all programmes must be purchased from independent production companies; and a vague ‘proper proportion’ must be of European origin.
Bidders must also promise to show plenty of local news as well as educational and religious shows.
If an applicant's programme quality is deemed ‘exceptionally high’, it may even win over a higher bidder.
To boost their credentials, bidders who do not already hold an ITV franchise need to acquire, or strike deals with, independent production companies.
The result has already been a bonanza for the founders of small production firms.
Many of these deals also indicate likely outside bidders for the franchises.
Chrysalis, a record-and-documentary producer, recently bought Red Rooster, an independent drama-maker.
CLT, a Luxembourg radio station, took a stake in Humphrey Barclay, another small independent.
Westinghouse, an American electronics conglomerate, is teaming up with Richard Branson's Virgin, a producer of records and television.
To pitch franchise bids correctly, firms need to be expert market-forecasters as well as programmers.
By the time new licensees start broadcasting in 1993, ITV stations will no longer enjoy a monopoly.
Satellite channels already claim 1.2m subscribers, and Britain's cable-television operators another 115,000.
Both numbers are expected to grow rapidly.
Still interested?
Snooze-along
AS THE number of television channels grows in countries such as Britain, more and cheaper programmes are needed to fill them.
Enter Art of Landscape, a no-script, no-actors alternative to game shows and repeats.
The recipe is mind-numbingly simple: shots of pretty landscapes set to classical music.
One episode features Emperor penguins set to Pachelbel's ‘Canon in D major’.
The London company that produces the show claims 30m viewers in seven European countries and Japan.
But Channel Four, the only British broadcaster currently airing the series, has just announced its cancellation.
The programme attracts viewers, admits a Channel Four spokesman, but does not attract ‘any kind of interest whatsoever’ from advertisers.
Undaunted, the Art of Landscape's producers are hoping to sell the show to American stations.
America's car market
Showdown in Motown
DETROIT
WORKERS at almost half the American plants run by General Motors (GM), Ford and Chrysler are getting an unexpectedly long holiday.
Their factories will remain closed for up to six weeks in order to reduce stocks of unsold cars.
With consumer confidence at its lowest level in years, there is no longer any doubt in Motown that the American car market has entered its worst recession in a decade.
This alone is enough to overshadow the glitzy North American International Auto Show, which opens its doors in Detroit on January 10th.
But what will make the industry's traditional jamboree an even more painful experience for America's big three car makers is that the Japanese will hog the limelight with a clutch of flashy new models.
When the final numbers are tallied, sales of new cars and light trucks in the United States in 1990 will almost certainly have fallen by about 500,000, to 14m vehicles.
This is the lowest level since the slump in the early 1980s.
In 1991 sales are expected to slip to around 13.5m.
If war erupts in the Gulf, the figures could be even lower, concedes Robert Stempel, GM's chairman.
Although American car workers will get a lot more free time in the months to come, they will at least be better off than they were a decade ago.
In that recession hundreds of thousands of car workers were made redundant.
New union contracts guarantee that hourly employees will receive most of their pay even if laid off.
This will further dent the earnings of GM, Ford and Chrysler.
In the fourth quarter of 1990, analysts guess, GM lost as much as $1.2 billion.
Ford is estimated to have lost $250m and Chrysler up to $40m.
Developing urgently needed new models will be difficult and costly for all three.
At the Detroit show American car makers will unveil some new models, including GM's long-awaited replacement for the stodgy Cadillac Seville.
But the display hall will also be crowded with glamorous, new Japanese cars, like the Diamante, a luxury model from Mitsubishi.
The problem faced by Detroit's producers is that, while some new American cars have been panned as dumpy and boring, the Japanese have been rolling out a stream of glittering and highly praised new vehicles.
Honda's luxury-car division, Acura, is an example.
Last year it introduced its second-generation Legend saloon just four years after the first model was launched.
American manufacturers typically take about twice as long before replacing similar models.
Ford does not plan to introduce a completely new replacement for its Taurus family car until the mid-1990s — more than a decade after the car first appeared.
And even to meet that schedule Ford's president, Philip Benton, warns that his company may have to cut its dividend if earnings do not pick up in 1991.
Last year Detroit's car makers thought they were about to turn the corner in their battle against the Japanese.
They have been ‘closing the gap’ on productivity and quality with their Japanese rivals, says Mr David Cole, director of the Centre for the Study of Automotive Transportation at the University of Michigan.
Indeed GM's Buick division has climbed to the top in surveys of customers' satisfaction while its Cadillac division recently won a prestigious quality award.
But without sexy new cars, high quality will not be enough to maintain market share.
In 1990 the Japanese share of the American car market is thought to have increased by one percentage point, to a record 30%.
Many analysts predict the Japanese will gain another point in 1991.
Yet even the Japanese are finding the American car market tough.
Subaru of America, whose cars are made by Japan's Fuji Heavy Industries, is struggling and a few of the Japanese-owned car factories in America are also running below capacity.
But, overall, the Japanese are continuing to make gains as the American firms decline.
Toyota's ambitions alone should give Detroit nightmares.
In 1990 Toyota is likely to have sold 1m vehicles in the United States and to have produced about one-third of those vehicles in America.
By 1995 the company aims to have American sales of about 1.5m — making it as big in America as Chrysler.
With the opening of the company's fourth North American assembly plant in two years' time, Toyota will also have the capacity to produce almost 1m vehicles a year in America.
THE WORLD ECONOMY
Echoes of the 1930s
In 1991 the world economy faces, at best, a year of slow growth.
But what might it face at worst?
Reminders of this century's deepest depression are all too easy to find
IN THE days that followed the stockmarket crash of October 1987, investors dusted off their economic histories and recalled that the Wall Street crash of October 1929 had marked the beginning of a ten-year, worldwide depression.
Quite soon their fears faded.
Governments cut interest rates to spur demand.
The Group of Seven (G7) industrial economies grew, on average, by 4.6% in 1988 — a lot faster than in 1987.
For the next two years businessmen and governments saw inflation, not the threat of recession, as the real risk.
Though two of the G7 countries — Britain and America — now appear to be in recession, the likeliest outlook for the world in 1991 is a tolerable mixture of slower growth and lower inflation than of late, with a brighter year to follow in 1992.
The trouble is that in economics the likeliest result often fails to turn up.
If you ask what is the worst that might foreseeably happen, the answer at the start of 1991 is bleaker than for many years past.
As yet, few economists are contemplating this worst case.
The stockmarket crash of 1987 is remembered, if at all, as proof that governments have learnt to protect the ‘real’ economy from upsets in financial markets.
A mild recession may cause far more economic damage than a one-day stockmarket fall of, say, 25%, but it is much less unsettling.
A crash is a moment of panic when events are out of control and outlandish predictions become thinkable.
Mere recessions leave governments and central banks safely in command.
In both Britain and America, the financial markets seem quite reconciled to several quarters of slow economic advance, or even some retreat.
Economists at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development reckon that Britain and America will both grow by .5–1% in 1991.
Private forecasters are a bit gloomier, especially about America: according to the averages worked out by Consensus Economics, a polling firm, America's growth will be just 0.1% this year.
That is still a far cry from the several years of falling output that would be needed to justify the term ‘depression’.
Between 1929 and 1933 America's national income fell by more than half in money terms, and by more than a third in real terms.
Another good reason for calm is that today Britain and America can no longer create a global depression by themselves; Japan and Germany would need to join in.
In fact, those countries seem likely to grow strongly: the OECD predicts growth this year of 3.7% in Japan and 3% in Germany (including its struggling eastern part).
In the 24 industrial countries of the OECD, growth is expected to average 2% in 1991, rising to 2.5% in 1992.
Even if the forecasters are being far too optimistic, modern industrial economies are much better equipped to resist depression than were their predecessors.
One of the biggest economic changes of the past 60 years — prompted, as it happens, by the 1930s depression — has been the steady rise of taxes and government spending in relation to national income.
This has had its drawbacks, but also one undoubted benefit: when economies slow, tax receipts fall and public spending rises, automatically moderating the downturn.
So there are plenty of reasons to be unalarmed by the economic outlook for 1991.
The skills of the authorities in responding to stockmarket crashes, the spread of economic weight around the globe, the fact that the economic cycles of Japan and Germany seem unsynchronised with those of America and Britain, the role of taxes and public spending as automatic stabilisers in modern economies — all these are most reassuring.
The road to depression
Even so, parallels with the 1930s are far more compelling now than they were in 1987.Though economists quarrel about the causes of the 1930s depression as inconclusively as they do about everything else, certain basic features are not in doubt.
Self-reinforcing contractions in output and employment start when people and businesses choose, or are obliged, to spend much less.
A necessary condition for a steep fall in demand is a widespread collapse in confidence, as people suddenly become worried about the future.
For the initial contraction to worsen into a depression, various corrective mechanisms (autonomous shifts in the way people and businesses behave, government policies, forces in the international economy) must then fail to work.
The Wall Street crash of 1929 was severe enough, by itself, to reduce wealth in the American economy substantially, and thus to cut personal and business spending (which had already been falling for two months).
The earlier mood of optimism was punctured, and output fell.
This was a bad recession.
It became the Great Depression as successive waves of bank failures rolled over America's monetary system.
Throughout the 1920s, small banks had been failing in America at a rate of hundreds a year: in 1926, for example, 976 banks out of 28,350 collapsed.
The economic downturn that began in 1929 was enough on its own to cause an initial increase in failures.
Then the trouble began feeding on itself.
People rushed to convert their bank deposits into cash.
As they did so, more banks failed.
So more people wanted to convert deposits into cash, more banks failed, and so on.
In 1933 roughly 4,000 banks shut their doors, and the United States was left with only half as many as it had had in 1929.
As banks closed, millions of people saw their savings disappear.
If you had a deposit in an American bank between 1929 and 1932, you had a one-in-ten chance of losing it.
The vicious circle of vanishing confidence and financial distress compressed the deposit-base of the economy: the supply of money shrank, so the depression deepened.
Today the most difficult and controversial questions about the depression of the 1930s concern its deeper causes, domestic and international.
Candidates include: the inability or unwillingness of the Federal Reserve to stem the banking panic and maintain the money supply; the failure to use fiscal policy intelligently (up to and including Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal after 1933); the uses and abuses of the gold standard (Britain deciding to go back on the gold standard in 1925 at the pre-1914 parity, then deciding to come off the standard altogether in 1931; the refusal of many countries, especially America, to follow gold-standard rules); the outbreak of trade war sparked by America's Smoot-Hawley tariffs in 1930; and so on.
There is no want of causes of the Great Depression.
The parallels
It might seem that 1991 cannot match this catalogue of ills.
Can't it?
Financial markets are jittery, as a war looms in the Gulf.
Such a war, if it went badly, might well cause stockmarkets to crash again.
It might also cause the price of oil to soar above $50 a barrel and stay there for some months.
That would both worsen the recession already under way in America and, by forcing inflation higher, make it harder for the Federal Reserve to continue easing monetary policy.
Confidence is vulnerable in many other ways.
The Soviet Union is falling to pieces; a bloody struggle for those pieces cannot be ruled out.
That would shatter Germany's present mood of economic optimism, already faltering as the difficulties of modernising what used to be East Germany grow clearer.
Property markets worldwide have crashed or look about to; especially in Japan, a collapse in land and property prices would have a powerfully contractionary effect on the economy as a whole.
America's financial system is under great strain: the savings-and-loan industry is crippled, banks and insurance companies are struggling, firms and consumers look over-indebted.
America and Europe have fallen out over farm trade; as a result, the negotiations at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have broken down.
Unless these talks can be revived, and succeed, a series of bitter trade battles, if not an all-out trade war, is possible.
For all these things to go wrong at once would be bad luck, to put it mildly.
But if the worst did happen, the necessary conditions for a depression — a dramatic collapse of economic confidence, and the inability of governments to restore it — might well be met.
Crunchy credit
Of the narrowly economic dangers, the fragility of America's banking system is potentially the most threatening.
Fears of a ‘credit crunch’ have prompted policy changes at the Federal Reserve in recent months: the Fed has cut its benchmark interest rate four times and, a bolder move, has reduced the amount of reserves that banks are obliged to hold with it against their customers' deposits.
This, in effect, is a tax cut for banks.
The American authorities cannot be accused, as in the 1930s, of unwillingness to act.
The question instead is whether the Fed's remedies will work.
A credit crunch is the name economists give to a sudden reluctance among banks to lend money.
It works in such a way that lower interest rates may fail to boost credit and demand.
Typically, a credit crunch happens when banks start to worry about the creditworthiness of their borrowers.
If borrowers are struggling, banks will suffer losses, and lending will be cut.
Borrowers will find it harder to refinance their loans, so they will struggle all the more, banks will suffer bigger losses, and so on.
This cycle is shown in the left-hand part of the first chart on this page (borrowed from Alan Budd, the chief economist of Barclays Bank).
A full-scale financial crisis happens if this sequence merges with another: if bank losses lead to fears about bank solvency, and thus to the withdrawal of funds, further bank losses and so on, as in the right-hand part of the chart.
This combination was the financial engine of the Great Depression.
A credit crunch — mild, as yet— is undoubtedly under way in America.
The 1980s saw a rising trend of bad debts, first in developing countries but more recently at home, especially in property loans.
The number of ‘problem banks’ monitored by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) rose sharply, and the big banks' credit-ratings were heavily down-graded.
This weakness of the banking system came during a period of rapid economic growth.
As the recession proceeds, things will get worse.
Consumers and businesses will find it difficult to service their heavy load of debt.
The debt-service burden of American (non-financial) businesses was equivalent to 16% of their cash flow in 1980; it is now roughly 20%.
This average conceals an important fact: many of the industries that tend to suffer most during recessions (suppliers of consumer durables, transport and communications, for example) have actually cut their debt-service burden since 1980; the biggest increases in debt service have been taken on by relatively stable industries (such as producers of services and consumer non-durables).
Nonetheless, consumers and businesses alike are, in the aggregate, deeper in debt than ever before.
America's household and (non-financial) corporate debt stands at some 130% of GNP.
According to estimates by Salomon Brothers, an investment bank, during four earlier credit crunches (in 1966, 1969–70, 1973–74 and 1980–81) this ratio was never more than 100%.
This heavy burden of debt, especially among consumers, is a plausible reason why spending has slowed in recent months: borrowers are striving to ease their financial position by spending less and saving more than they otherwise would.
Recessions often start because the demand for credit falls.
That need be no great problem: if it falls too quickly, central banks can cut interest rates, as the Fed has, to brake the decline.
There is a risk, though, that the supply of credit will start to fall faster than the demand; in other words, that a credit crunch will start to drive the process of credit contraction.
In that event, lower interest rates might not help.
Banks wishing to lend less would use lower rates to broaden the spread between their lending rates and the rates they pay depositors, rather than to make their loans cheaper.
Worries over corporate and consumer creditworthiness might shrink the supply of credit in a way that the authorities would find hard to reverse.
These difficulties are most obvious in America, but they are not confined to it.
After a period of exceptionally rapid growth in lending, British banks too have had to make big provisions for bad debts; defaults are growing faster than during the recession of 1980–81.
The Bank of England, responding to fears of a credit crunch, has asked banks to think twice before turning away would-be corporate borrowers.
Japanese banks also are struggling.
Their exposure to the property market is unusually large; a sharp fall in Japanese property values, long predicted but yet to happen, could make them wobble.
The fall in the Tokyo stockmarket since the second half of 1989 has hurt the banks, by reducing the value of their capital.
Several have recently seen their credit ratings down-graded by Moody's.
The squeeze on government
Even America, where the squeeze on banks is tightest, is still a long way from a banking collapse like that of the 1930s.
As they showed in 1987, today's central bankers have a better understanding of their responsibilities as providers of liquidity and lenders of last resort.
Also, thanks to deposit insurance, the threat of bank runs is far less now than it was in the 1930s; the FDIC (which insures deposits up to $100,000) was created expressly to prevent them.
Ominously, however, this confidence-promoting institution is itself undergoing a crisis of confidence.
The FDIC is badly underfunded; on some estimates, it is technically insolvent.
In a crisis, it would need a huge injection of public money.
The continuing bail-out of the FSLC, the FDIC's counterpart for the savings-and-loan industry, shows the scale of the trouble.
Capital spending by the Resolution Trust Corporation, the federal agency charged with disposing of bankrupt S&Ls, will be $70 billion in the current fiscal year alone.
Such frightening costs undermine the credibility of the FDIC, because, if a banking crisis were to start, the government might find itself facing a credit crunch of its own.
Years of irresponsible budgets have obliged America's fiscal policy to work perversely at a particularly awkward moment.
In previous recessions, governments have added to the budget deficit, over and above the automatic increase caused by the business cycle.
The recent budget agreement means that in the current fiscal year, as America moves into recession, this discretionary component of fiscal policy is tightening to the tune of 1% of GNP, almost enough to cancel out easing in the automatic component.
Even so, the budget deficit will be at least $250 billion.
This demand on the international capital markets raises interest rates, aggravating the problems of debt and credit crunch.
It also deprives the government of any room for manoeuvre in fiscal policy should the recession turn out to be worse than expected.
Trade follies
In different ways, paralysis in monetary and fiscal policy played a critical role in 1929–39.
But the fate of the American economy, and hence the world economy, was sealed by activism where activism could only do harm — in trade policy.
A war of escalating protection and counter-protection combined with falling output to form yet another vicious circle.
The value of world trade collapsed from $3 billion a month at the start of 1929 to less than $1 billion a month by the beginning of 1933.
Will last month's breakdown of the GATT talks do for the 1990s what Smoot-Hawley did for the 1930s?
With any luck, no.
The talks are retrievable.
But if the negotiators do allow them to fail after all, or if the United States Congress rejects any compromise that may be worked out during the next two months, the effects will be disastrous.
Many trade disputes are pending, awaiting the outcome of the talks; failure would activate them immediately.
Protectionists in Europe and America would rejoice, as they buried their governments under demands for trade ‘remedies’ of every sort — a super-301 action here, a countervailing duty there.
The struggling economic reformers in Eastern Europe and the third world would despair.
In time, a world divided into trading blocks would be a real possibility.
It would be a world with much less trade.
That is a bad thing in itself, for it means less competition and more wasted resources.
Worse, in the short term, would be the economic dislocation caused by the retreat from today's multilateral trading system.
Business confidence and investment would surely suffer.
At a time when skilful economic leadership will be needed to manage a variety of financial and other difficulties, and when international economic stability is most desirable, the biggest industrial countries seem ready to engage in trade war.
Disaster-makers, start now
A year from now, in all likelihood, the world will look back on a merely disappointing year of little or no growth in Britain and America, of solid progress in Germany and Japan, of catastrophes skirted in the Gulf and the Soviet Union.
Even if everything that might go wrong does go wrong, it would require extra efforts of neglect, incompetence and ill fortune to fashion a depression even half as bad as that of the 1930s.
But do not dismiss the risk of something much worse than a ‘meaningful downturn’.
If governments really want to shatter the world economy, January 1991 would be an unusually good time to start.
FINANCE
American banking
How banks merge
NEW YORK
Bankers and regulators agree that hundreds, even thousands, of American banks will need to merge if they are to survive the 1990s.
How these banks set about merging will make or break them
IF THE past is any guide, America's 10,000 independent banks will number nearer 6,000 before the decade is out.
Poor in capital but rich in bad loans, many will go bust; probably more will be able to merge with other — with luck healthier — banks.
If so, the coming mergers will only reinforce an already established trend.
During the 1980s the average annual number of bank mergers, 300-odd, was double the figure for the 1970s and three times that for the 1960s.
Through merging and going bust, the number of independent banks fell from 13,400 in the mid-1960s to 12,700 in 1980 and to the 10,000 today.
There are plenty of reasons for supposing that the merger trend will gain vigour.
For one, the legal barriers thrown in the way of interstate banking in the 1930s were progressively lowered after the mid-1980s, leading to the rise of ‘super-regionals’.
From next year those barriers will be gone altogether.
America's populist politicians, who long considered big banking as anathema, now see that even America's largest banks look Lilliputian in comparison with Japan's and Europe's.
Put together, argue those concerned with America's financial muscle, California's Security Pacific, New York's Bankers Trust and a super-regional, NCNB (formerly North Carolina National Bank).
Presto: you have a bank with $250 billion in assets to outrank all but half-a-dozen of Japan's mightiest.
For now, such notions of bigness play well in political circles but thankfully not in all banking ones.
Commercial banks everywhere are realising that profitable banks may become big, but not the other way round.
Many are pulling back from international markets.
And most bankers have come to understand that their trade is in fact a collection of diverse lines of business, each with its own and quite different economies of scale.
Yet banks' most compelling concern is access to precious capital, and mergers could prove one of the quickest ways to get it.
Mergers, especially between banks serving the same area, are being seen as the swiftest route to big cost savings; these, in turn, free up capital.
A joint study by Keefe, Bruyette $ Woods, a stockbrokerage that specialises in bank shares, and Ernst $ Young, a firm of accountants, found that banks achieved an average 35% saving in costs when they joined forces (admittedly less than they expected).
A merger between Chase Manhattan and its New York neighbour, Chemical Bank, could free up more money than the two banks' combined net profit over the past five years.
Marriage counsel
Dandy in theory, dismal in practice.
In a study of 400 of the biggest bank mergers in the 1980s, FMCG Capital Strategies, a New York consultancy, found that four out of five deals failed miserably — to the point where they soon destroyed value for the acquiring bank.
That statistic should unsettle those bankers now contemplating a merger.
FMCG thinks it has found four preconditions that greatly enhance a merger's chances of success.
Not paying too much is one of these.
However, note that the measure of a ‘good’ price varies with the point of view.
An acquirer should concentrate on the discounted value of the acquired bank's cash flow.
An acquired bank will want to maximise the price-to-book value for its shareholders.
Opinion-influencing analysts and commentators concentrate on the potential dilution in earnings per share.
The other three preconditions, according to FMCG, are: that the acquiring bank has a proven record of controlling its non-interest expenses (that is, the costs of computer systems, branches, staff and so forth ); that the acquiring bank will be getting a mix of businesses, which, combined sensibly with their own, add up to more than the sum of the parts; and that the two banks are physically close together.
Though many bankers forget it, control of non-interest expenses is the most vital of the quartet — cost-savings are after all one of the prime motives for mergers.
Successfully merging two banks requires a fast and ruthless attack on costs.
The hard decisions need to be taken early.
Banks that have been repeatedly successful with mergers have a blueprint for consolidation ready to be used the moment a merger is complete.
The steering committee implementing it should include the functional heads of finance, personnel, automation and operations at the two banks, under the chairmanship of a senior manager from the acquiring bank.
William Boardman, the executive vice-president of an Ohio-based super-regional, Banc One, reckons that readiness-to-roll is more crucial than anything else.
Banc One has a team of managers that does little but work on mergers, and with good results.
Mr Boardman's squad now has more than 50 to its credit.
In California, Wells Fargo's acquisition of Crocker National in 1986 is an example of a bigger deal that was planned and executed with military precision.
FMCG thinks that control of non-interest expenses creates a virtuous circle of its own.
The acquiring bank transfers its good habits to the acquired, so increasing the group's return on equity.
This boosts the group's share price, making the next acquisition easier.
Banc One sets basic yet strict financial targets for the banks it takes over, but it lets local managers decide how to meet them.
It then gives the process a stamp of its own by running league tables within the group that show how the various subsidiary banks are performing against each target.
In regular group confessionals, the worst performers on any measure have to explain themselves to their peers.
Newcomers find it an acutely uncomfortable experience, which, of course, is the idea.
The Ohio bank does not leave its newcomers to sink or swim by themselves.
One of its first acts is to hook a newly acquired bank into its own computer systems.
Properly done, absorbing one system into the other brings immediate savings, particularly from those systems used for processing large amounts of data.
Scrapping duplicate computer facilities and staff accounts typically for four-fifths of all potential savings, according to FMCG's John Moynihan.
The ability of a bigger bank to absorb a smaller one into its systems is a main reason why purchases of smaller banks bring up to three times bigger savings than mergers of equals.
Banc One has a rule that it will not merge with an institution that is larger than one-third its own size.
The bank's other reason for turning two computers quickly into one is to get the newly acquired bank on Banc One's own financial-reporting system.
That lets it use software that standardises such products as deposits and instalment loans.
As well as letting the head office in Columbus keep track of its new siblings, this builds in lower costs from economies of scale.
It also means that all staff across the group get familiar with the same range of products.
Banc One leaves in place most of an acquired bank's existing management, with a handful of parent-bank staff moving into some of the top jobs.
These people bring with them something of the evangelist's zeal.
This faith is now facing its toughest test, for Banc One has moved into Texas, where it has acquired some bust thrifts.
On the drawing board, the acquisitions make sense: they give Banc One new and young customers in the reviving Texas market to balance its ageing ones in the Midwest.
They also let the bank apply its consumer-banking skills in an underdeveloped state.
But the new mergers are its first in a state that is not contiguous to one in which Banc One already operates.
As much as anything, successful mergers depend upon the chief executive.
But even Napoleons need their armies.
It is here that the ability of banks to pull off mergers successfully is most at question.
The 1980s bear testament to the appalling condition of American bank management.
As the country sees more mergers, success will become ever more elusive.
Investing in Wall Street's woes
Modish shorts
NEW YORK
YOU can get almost anything in New York by telephone, from sandwiches to sex.
So why not tips on shorting the stockmarket?
For $2 a minute a new bear's hotline gives investors share tips instead of hot breath.
The service thinks that stocks are heading downwards.
Soon to be cheaper by the dozen, if the service's ‘famous whisper section’ was correct on December 31st, are such stocks as Federal Express, PepsiCo, Coca-Cola and McDonnell Douglas.
Shorting the market means selling shares you have borrowed.
You will do that because you think their price will be lower when it comes to delivering them back to the lender at an agreed date.
For those with the nerves for it, shorting was a grand way to make money in the American market for most of 1990, as the thrifts mess, the problems of the commercial banks, falling property prices and a bevy of highly borrowed companies going bust provided plenty of reasons for share prices to fall.
The shares of Goodyear, a tyre maker, lost 56% last year; Navistar, a lorry maker, fell by 45%; American Express was down 42%; and AT$T and Sears, Roebuck were both down by 34%.
Should the current recession or events in the Gulf turn truly nasty, selling stock short could also be the best way to make money in 1991.
So far, shorting is still a specialists' game, but a growing one.
Professional investors have put at least $5 billion to work on the short side of the market.
This is equivalent to five days' trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange, 2.5 times more than a couple of years ago.
Shorting has much more influence than its size would suggest.
This is because short professionals tend to concentrate their firepower.
In Citicorp, the stock with the biggest short position outstanding, shorts have borrowed and sold 17m shares, or some 5% of the equity.
Firms like Eli Lilly, Varity (formerly International Harvester) and GTE have also attracted large short holdings.
At LA Gear, a fashion-clothing company, shorts have borrowed and sold no less than 40% of the stock.
Such exposures are destroying long-held notions that it is somehow unpatriotic for American investors to sell short the shares of American companies.
The other inhibition is more pragmatic: fear of unlimited losses on short positions that might result from a sudden market rally.
This happened to many punters who shorted bank stocks last year just as the Federal Reserve eased interest rates and so triggered a sharp rally in bank share prices.
Shorting is not for maiden aunts.
Intrepid professional shorts, like George Soros, are even short of the Tokyo market.
The Feshbach brothers in California are betting that the equity of some American money-centre banks will someday be practically worthless.
Joseph Feshbach, whose Southgate Partners manages $900m in short positions, feels that the price of bank shares does not yet reflect the decline in property values.
Nor does he feel the stockmarket has fully discounted a recession.
Mr Feshbach mentions Itel, a rail-car leasing company, Westinghouse Electric, Wells Fargo and First Interstate as tomorrow's tumblers.
Ed Levy of Levy Harkin concentrates on potential bankruptcies, like Integrated Resources, or companies that he believes have borrowed too heavily for their own good, such as Panhandle Eastern Pipeline and Marriott Hotels.
But both Mr Levy and Mr Feshbach short for the long-term, as it were.
Michael Steinhardt, on the other hand, has become one of America's most successful investors by being an active short-trader.
Over the past two months Mr Steinhardt has juggled positions in banks, drugs and oil-service companies to build up a short portfolio of $640m.
His prime shorts are what he calls his ‘vestal virgins’, growth stocks selling at or near their all-time highs.
These include the shares of Microsoft, Costco, Forest Labs, Autodesk, Sci-Med and Sara Lee.
The shorts are betting that theirs is an industry with a bright future.
The Dow, at around 2,600, is down 400 points from its peak.
This is a mere stumble compared with the near 50% fall during the mid-1970s bear market.
Just the sort of miserable fact that keeps a short giggling in his sleep.
The top tier
AAA/Aaa rated banks in the world as rated by Standard & Poor's and Moody's
Iraq and a hard place
Investors on Wall Street have rarely been in such an uncertain state — which means big money is about to be lost and won
THERE are at least three reasons to be glum.
Investors in America's stockmarkets face the uncertainties of events in the Gulf as the January 15th deadline imposed by the United Nations approaches.
There is also the knowledge that rolling regional recessions at home combined into a national one sometime last autumn.
And there is the nagging doubt that weaknesses in the financial system will hamper the real economy's ability to pull through the hard days now at hand.
It all makes many believe that over the coming months share prices will drop below the levels at which they opened 1991.
On January 2nd the Dow Jones industrial average closed its first trading day of the year at 2,610.6 and the broader based Standard & Poor's (S&P) 500 at 326.5, 13% and 12% off their respective all-time highs.
Will these measures fall much farther?
If so, for how long?
The fate of Kuwait is likely to have more influence over the answers than anything else.
A quick and clean military victory for the American-led alliance (or, even less plausibly, a sudden withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait) would be the best outcome both for the market and for the economy.
Oil prices would spike in a short war, but quickly fall back to perhaps $20 a barrel.
America could then get away with a mild and relatively short recession, provided the domestic financial system did not spring any surprises.
A long and inconclusive stand-off in the Middle East, when oil prices could probably edge down from their recent $28-odd a barrel, would string out the recession but not deepen it greatly.
There is enough crude being produced outside Iraq and Kuwait to keep the world economy afloat.
A lengthy war, though, would be another matter.
If oil prices pushed up to $40 for even a couple of months, and if Middle Eastern fields became damaged, the contraction in the American economy could be severe.
If history is any guide, the average length of a recession in the past 60 years has been 18 months, with the average bear market wiping out about half the gain made during the bull market it succeeded.
Typically, stockmarkets lead the recovery of the real economy by four to six months.
Assuming that the start of the current recession (which on January 2nd was officially acknowledged, at last) was some time in October, investors can look forward to the Dow tumbling to 1,800 by the late autumn of 1991.
Yet the current recession is far from average.
It follows the American economy's longest (eight years) peacetime expansion.
It is also being ushered in by an unusual duo: contracting credit and falling interest rates.
Last December the Federal Reserve adjusted its reserve requirements on time deposits to encourage banks to lend more.
At the turn of the year the Fed further nudged down interest rates to encourage the banks' customers to borrow more.
Banks are now cutting their prime rates.
With the yield on 30-year Treasury bonds at 8.25% and that on three-month bills at 6.6%, long- and short-term interest rates are now lower than they were at the end of the two previous deep recessions, in 1981 and 1973.
Since such low rates are failing to revive growth, some economists reckon that the yield on long-dated government bonds would need to drop to around 7% to have much effect.
(That figure, though, depends as much on the future price of oil and the level of the dollar as on the price of credit alone.)
Another characteristic of this recession is that financial and property businesses have been the first to feel the pain of collapsing prices and profits.
Manufacturing, which bore the brunt of the deep 1981 recession, is so far not badly scathed.
It is harder to predict the length of a financial-led recession than a manufacturing-led one.
One reason is that one clue for recession-watchers, the build-up of manufactured stocks (inventories), is not much of a guide to a financial recession.
This time round, other things being equal, that indicator suggests the second-shortest recession since the second world war: that is, between six and eight months.
The low level of stocks — manufacturers and retailers were cutting back even before the Iraqi invasion — is a main prop of the short-and-mild school.
Proponents of the long-and-severe recession point to finance.
They say that financial institutions' troubled assets, such as loans for property and highly-geared companies, will take years to sort out.
In the meantime, banks will want to shrink their assets.
The resultant liquidity squeeze will hurt their customers.
The recent excesses of the financial world inevitably invite comparisons with the 1930s, when share prices fell by two-thirds in the five years following the Great Crash of 1929.
The chance of the financial system collapsing again is real enough — particularly if Congress makes a mess of addressing the structural problems of America's banking system.
Parallels with the 1930s (see pages 17–22) are also prompted by the protectionist threat to world trade from the breakdown of the Uruguay round of GATT talks.
Those leafing through their history books for an earlier model for the current recession could linger fruitfully over the pages that cover the 1870s.
That post bellum decade was ushered in by financial scandals, bank panics and a restructuring of the financial system.
The recession of the 1870s was shallow, but one that took the economy a long time to climb out of.
With the recovery, though, came a boom that confirmed America's coming of age as an industrial and financial power.
Today's investor with a bent for history — and therefore an appreciation for the long term — would not be nearly as cheerless as his short-term friends.
The historian-punter would be sitting in bonds (which have rallied in the past few months) waiting patiently to switch back to equities, starting cautiously in the middle of this year, and so to ride the bull market of the mid-1990s.
That could only be upset by pig-headedness in the Gulf or dumb-mindedness in Washington.
Both of which are entirely feasible.
Europe's reluctant superbanks
PARIS
With American and Japanese banks beating a hasty retreat, the 1990s could be the decade of the European.
But don't bet your shirt on it
A RULE of thumb in banking is that those firms at the top of the industry's league tables are ripe for relegation.
In the late 1970s and the early 1980s, American banks headed the league, but third-world debt then dragged them down.
Japanese banks took the Americans' place.
They bid fiercely for business for most of the 1980s, until a collapsing Tokyo stockmarket brought their come-downance.
If European bankers now want to keep their newly won crown, they must resist the same temptation to lend, lend, lend.
European banks could stay at the top for longer than their predecessors.
American banks will need years to recover from the now souring loans to property developers and leveraged buy-outs that followed their third-world lending.
Last year 169 American banks, with $16 billion-worth of assets, failed; the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation now has some 1,100 rickety banks under observation.
Japan's banks are cutting back their business after years of reckless lending.
The city banks (Japan's version of commercial banks) were some of the worst culprits.
As the booming Tokyo stockmarket increased their capital backing, they increased their loan books by 80% in 1985–89.
As many of their domestic loans were backed by property, the banks were also betting that Japan's land bubble would not burst.
Some institutions, such as Mitsubishi Bank, are doing well to worry that it might.
According to the capital-adequacy regime negotiated under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in Basle, banks must have capital equal to at least 8% of their assets (weighted according to their riskiness) by, in Japan's case, March 1993.
As Japanese banks can count 45% of unrealised gains on shareholdings as capital, Japanese banks with huge equity portfolios thought they would easily meet the deadline.
Yet the Tokyo stockmarket fell by two-fifths in 1990, leaving some banks no choice but to shrink to fit.
The chart shows the weakness of Japanese banks' overall BIS ratios even before the Tokyo market began to fall.
Among the big city banks, only Fuji, which has shed some of its assets, had made the 8% minimum ratio by the end of September 1990.
In contrast, most big American and European institutions are already at or above the BIS target.
Some, like Germany's mighty Deutsche Bank, are awash with capital.
Credit ratings are another measure of muscle.
These set Europe's banks apart from both the Japanese and the Americans.
While only Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ), Japan's Norinchukin Bank and America's J.P.
Morgan have AAA debt ratings from both Standard $ Poor's and Moody's, two big American rating agencies, Barclays Bank, Deutsche Bank and Union Bank of Switzerland are among the eight European banks in the same category (see table on next page).
Though proud of their strong balance sheets, most European superbanks have yet to imitate the Japanese by lending aggressively abroad.
There are several reasons for their caution.
First, not all European banks are as invincible as they look.
British ones — National Westminster, for example— have used doubtful property revaluations to improve their capital ratios.
State-owned French banks, such as Crédit Lyonnais, have relied on share-swaps with other state companies.
Although such ploys help to boost banks' capital ratios, they do not bring in new cash.
Second, some European banks' profits have slowed with their economies.
British banks have suffered as high interest rates pushed property into slump.
French banks have also seen their bad debts rise swiftly.
Société Générale, one of the country's biggest banks, had to raise provisions against dud loans by more than half in the first six months of 1990.
Spanish banks are also suffering from a novel dose of competition.
They are offering interest-bearing current accounts to customers, but attracting few new deposits.
Lastly, many European banks are wary of transatlantic lending.
Though margins on top-notch corporate loans have nearly doubled in the American market to about 50 basis points (hundredths of one percent), they must widen further before it is worth lending in the midst of a recession.
Even if margins oblige, Europeans should tread warily.
As American banks retrench, they will corner almost all the profitable business at home, leaving Europeans and a handful of Japanese banks to fight over deals that are either unprofitable or too risky to be of interest.
So some European banks may think of buying a cheap American network in a shake-out of America's banking industry.
They should think again.
Britain's Midland Bank has still not recovered from its purchase of California's Crocker Bank, saddled with third-world debt.
The Bank of Ireland and National Westminster have burnt themselves in New England.
NatWest Bancorp lost $140m in the first nine months of 1990, mainly because of dud property loans.
Rather than looking abroad, smart European bankers will already have realised that with banks like Chase Manhattan and Security Pacific pulling back from Europe, some of the best corporate business will now be up for grabs in their own backyards.
Others will have started to look east, where the German banks are already preoccupied.
As well as German banks, British, French and Italian ones could steal a march on American and Japanese rivals in what could be a huge East European market.
But it is Western Europe that will prove the toughest test for Europe's biggest banks.
Some, like Deutsche Bank and Crédit Lyonnais, are piecing together hugely expensive pan-European bank networks in the firm belief that retail banking can be moved across borders.
If they can get this grandiose strategy to work, the 1990s will undoubtedly be the decade of the European bank.
If they cannot, then banking's rule of thumb will have been right once again.
Latin American debt
Money in the well
WHEN in March 1989 the American treasury secretary, Nicholas Brady, announced his plan to reduce the third world's commercial-bank debt, particularly Latin America's, he was criticised for being too vague.
Nonetheless, in an admittedly modest way, his idea is beginning to work.
The most recent and most improbable Brady-plan deal, between oil-rich Venezuela and its bank creditors, was completed before Christmas in New York.
Under the Brady plan, hard-up countries which carry out structural economic reforms that meet the approval of the International Monetary Fund qualify not only for partial debt forgiveness by the banks but also, in some cases, for new money.
The terms of each deal vary with individual governments' performance.
The IMF's managing director, Michel Camdessus, thinks that the Brady plan ‘may even be gaining momentum.’
Once a country has reached a Brady-plan deal, it is on the road to financial respectability.
The first of the debt-reduction deals came before the Brady plan was announced and, indeed, paved the way for it.
In 1987 dirt-poor Bolivia, which cut inflation from 20,000% a year to less than 10%, was allowed to use borrowed money to buy back most of its commercial-bank debt at 11% of the face value.
It thereby cut its total bank debt from $1.5 billion to $259m.
There was no new money, for Bolivia would not have been able to service it.
This was followed by Mexico, which was in deep trouble, though not as deep as Bolivia.
Its agreement in February 1990 set a Brady pattern by offering three options to commercial-bank creditors.
In Mexico's case, these could get out of their exposure by converting their debt into new saleable bonds with guarantees attached, but worth 65% of the face value of the old paper.
Or they could convert their debt into new guaranteed bonds whose yield was just 6.5%.
Or they could keep their old loans but with new guarantees, at the same time providing new money worth 25% of their exposure's value.
Only 10% of the banks risked the new-money option, while 41% agreed to debt reduction and 49% chose a lower interest rate.
This saved Mexico $3.8 billion a year in debt-servicing costs — and dissuaded many banks from fleeing across the Rio Grande.
Venezuela stands in sharp contrast because the banks see it as a better bet than Mexico.
In its Brady deal they took a dim view of a proposal to encash the country's paper at just 45% of its face value, which attracted a mere 7% of the total debt tendered.
The substitution of old debt for new low-interest bonds offering 6.75% with guarantees was the most popular (38% of the debt tendered), followed by an option for banks to have their old debt guaranteed in return for providing new money worth 20% of current exposure (31%).
This should bring in $1.15 billion for Venezuela.
In third place (15%) was a clever idea of swapping old paper for new bonds whose interest rate rises in steps over six years as (or if) Venezuela's financial position improves.
Less popular (9%) was an option to exchange existing loans at a discount of 30% for paper paying interest at the LIBOR interbank rate plus almost 1%.
Improvident Costa Rica, which has lately been trying to behave better, was not treated in May 1990 with the respect accorded to Venezuela.
Most creditor banks decided to pull out.
About 65% took an option of letting Costa Rica buy back its paper at 15% of face value, while only 35% picked two types of low-interest bonds; there was no new money.
Costa Rica was delighted, nonetheless.
The deal cut its debt-servicing cost from $150m a year to $40m.
Uruguay has obtained new money in a deal due to be signed on January 31st.
Banks covering 28% of the debt said they would make loans equivalent to 20% of their existing exposure.
Banks with 33% of the debt agreed to swap their paper for new bonds that yield 6.34%.
But those covering 39% of the debt decided to sell out for 56% of the debt's face value.
The two most prudent Latin American governments, Chile and Colombia, do not seem interested in the Brady plan.
They have managed to refinance their debts and even obtain modest amounts of new money fairly painlessly.
A Brady-plan sell-off of their debt at bargain-basement rates might damage their standing.
Next to‘do a Brady’ in the western hemisphere, according to Mr Camdessus, may be Jamaica.
Ecuador may also send a proposal to the banks shortly.
But three big absentees remain.
These are Argentina (with interest arrears of about $8 billion), Brazil (with arrears of about $9 billion) and shambolic Peru.
Argentina has recently been paying the banks $40m a month (equivalent to three days of the monthly amount due), but has had no formal discussions with its banks about a rescheduling.
Brazil's sporadic talks have led nowhere.
Peru is still trying to climb out of the mire left by its previous president, Alan Garcia.
If these governments want to win back the access to international capital markets that they need in order to expand and prosper, they will have to come up with some ideas of their own.
In the Rhode Island red
NEW YORK
IF AMERICA ever needs a banking tsar, Bruce Sundlun is your man.
If nothing else, he is decisive.
Just three hours after being sworn in to his new job on January 1st as governor of Rhode Island, the gravelly-voiced Mr Sundlun ordered the closure of 45 small banks and credit unions.
These had a privately run deposit-insurance scheme that was on the point of going bust, following the failure in October of the two-branch Heritage Loan and Investment of Providence.
True, Rhode Island is hardly the financial capital of America.
Some 300,000 accounts, containing $1.7 billion of deposits, are affected by the temporary closures, which in effect froze the accounts.
Even so, the episode has hurt the prestige of private deposit-insurance schemes.
These have been touted by free marketeers as an answer to the growing financial problems of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).
In a small way, private schemes also exist in Maryland and Ohio, though these too have been struggling of late.
Because they are small, both schemes would be hurt by a shock similar to the one that hit the Rhode Island fund.
The Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity Corporation, as the fund was known, is now in voluntary financial conservatorship.
Its $25m reserve fund had been run down to around $8m after auditors, following a takeover of Heritage in October, found $13m missing from Heritage's tills.
Neither were the auditors able to find Heritage's former president, Joseph Mollicone, to inquire where the money might be.
Heritage's depositors just took what they could of their own money and ran.
The insurance fund has since doubled its reserves through a levy on its other members, but fears that it still has insufficient funds to cover its potential obligations.
All but two of the closed institutions in Rhode Island have applied to join either the FDIC's scheme or a parallel one run by the National Credit Union Administration.
Only the healthiest will get it, the agency says.
For the rejects, Mr Sundlun's next decision will be to decide how quickly temporary closure becomes permanent, and by how much he can limit the cost to Rhode Island taxpayers.
Just the sorts of skills that are going to be increasingly in demand in Washington.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The big picture
As the echoes of the big bang died away, the universe evolved from a bland ball of gas into a lacy web of galaxies.
How?
PARTICLE accelerators are designed to push as much energy into as small a volume as possible, which makes them big and costly.
Early in the universe's history, though, such concentrations of energy were the norm.
In an attempt to get data from this natural laboratory, particle physics has become ever more entwined with cosmology.
The result has been a theory to explain what would in any earlier age have been inexplicable: the birth of the universe.
In general, the theory has been a success.
But it is not flawless.
Until recently some of its predictions were at odds with what astronomers see in the sky.
New observations go some way to patching up that discrepancy but also bring difficulties of their own.
As things now stand, there is no convincing explanation of the biggest fact of all: the overall structure of the universe.
This was one of the problems tackled at a bumper symposium held in Brighton last month on cosmology, particle physics and astrophysics.
It was sponsored by the University of Texas, the European Southern Observatory and the European particle-physics laboratory, CERN.
Although the 600 participants disagreed about much, they were almost unanimous in one belief: the universe began in a big bang.
A veil of ignorance hangs over the moment of creation.
Theory-builders have tried to peer behind it, but none agrees on what they see, nor on ways of telling which of their glimpses is true.
However, within a second of creation the universe reached a state about which there is plenty of agreement.
It was small, immensely hot and filled with a dense soup of the fundamental particles: quarks (which are heavy) and leptons (which are light).
It is this state that fascinates particle physicists.
Their abiding passion is the unification of forces.
Today's universe contains four observable forces — the electromagnetic and gravitational ones, which work over long ranges, and the weak and strong nuclear ones, which work only locally.
Inside particle accelerators it is possible to show that the weak force and electromagnetism are two parts of a single ‘electro-weak’ force.
Above a certain energy, the difference between electromagnetism and the weak force vanishes.
The next aim for particle physics is to find a theory that unites the strong force with the electro-weak interaction.
Such a grand unified theory (GUT) would describe phenomena that take place at energies unobtainable in any accelerator.
It would also describe the behaviour of the quarks and other particles immediately after the big bang.
So one way to sort out the various GUTs is to see which can be used to tell believable — and, ideally, testable — stories about the big bang.
As the roar of the big bang faded, the universe got larger and its contents cooled down.
The GUT era ended, and the quarks gathered together to make protons and neutrons.
Eventually things got cool enough for the protons and neutrons to fuse and form atomic nuclei; later still it was possible for electrons to cling to the nuclei, thus creating atoms.
By this stage the universe was a warm ball of gas, about half as hot as the surface of the sun.
From then on gravity dominates the story.
The gas falls into clumps, eventually producing stars, galaxies and all the other astronomical paraphernalia.
Not by faith alone
There are three good reasons to believe this big-bang story.
In the 1920s Edwin Hubble observed that distant galaxies look redder than nearby ones.
That ‘red shift’ means that the galaxies are receding, and the light from them is being stretched out.
The farther the galaxy, the redder its light, and so the faster it is receding.
Hubble's conclusion was that the universe was expanding — a conclusion that could be described in terms of Einstein's theory of relativity, which provided the mathematics for describing the ‘fabric’ of space.
The galaxies are embroidered on this fabric: as it expands, they move apart.
An expanding universe must have been smaller in the past.
The speed at which galaxies are now receding implies that the universe was infinitely compressed some time between 12 billion and 18 billion years ago — thus giving a date for the big bang.
Scientists have studied how the cloud of electrons, protons and neutrons that came out of the big bang would have coalesced to make nuclei and atoms; their studies correctly predict the proportion of various chemical elements in the universe.
Such calculations also provide an insight into particle physics.
The fundamental particles of which matter is made are arranged in generations.
Each generation contains two quarks and two leptons, of which one is an electron or something like it and the other a neutrino.
Members of three such generations have been discovered; until recently there was no evidence from particle physics to rule out more.
However, the proportions in which elements are produced in the big bang depend on the number of types of neutrino (the neutrinos play a role in moving energy around the fireball).
By the mid-1980s scientists working on the problem were sufficiently sure about the amount of helium in the universe to say that there were probably only three types of neutrino, and thus only three generations.
In 1989 experiments confirmed this.
The third piece of evidence for the big bang is that you can see it.
Light from distant places is not only red-shifted by the expansion of the universe, it is also old.
Light from some distant objects was emitted before the sun first shone, and has been making its way to mankind's eyes throughout the history of the earth.
The light from the big bang, though, has come much farther — it has been travelling since the time, less than 1m years after the moment of creation, when the universe became thin enough for radiation emitted by one atom to be unlikely to hit another.
That radiation, red-shifted from visible light into radio waves, now suffuses the cosmos.
The distribution of frequencies in this ‘microwave background’ is just like the distribution of frequencies given off by a hot gas.
The uses of inflation
One problem with the big bang is the neatness of the universe.
Most explosions spread things unevenly.
The universe, though, seems a rather regular place.
Although it is quite lumpy on a small scale, with matter gathered in planets and stars and emptiness in between, on larger scales the matter is surprisingly evenly spread.
A related problem is the evenness of the microwave background.
As NASA's recently launched Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) confirmed, the background looks the same all over the sky, which implies that the cooling fireball which produced it was not given to clumpiness.
In the 1980s a new idea was added to the big bang to explain this evenness, and other problems.
Well before a billionth of a second had elapsed, when the universe was still only the size of an atom, it started to grow exponentially.
For a time briefer than the smallest period measurable by today's clocks, the universe grew ever faster, as energy stored up in some hitherto unsuspected field of force was released.
By the end of this period, it had grown to the size of a grapefruit — not much, admittedly, but a billion billion times larger than before.
It was all so sudden that the universe had no time to lose the smoothness it had when it was the size of an atom.
‘Inflation’, as this is called, got a rapturous reception when it was put forward in 1980, despite, or perhaps because of, its weirdness (cosmologists, after all, undergo years of training so that they can say things like ‘When the universe was the size of a grapefruit’ without blushing or laughing).
It does not explain all the peculiar initial conditions of the big bang; but it does provide some rationale for conditions that otherwise have to be accepted as given.
However, inflation also makes some demands on observers.
It requires that the density of the universe, a number known as W, be exactly 1.
Unfortunately, estimates of W based on the visible stars and galaxies were, at the time, much lower: around W=0.01.
The theorists were adamant, though, and thus began the hunt for the ‘missing mass’— unobserved dark stuff that would bring W up to 1.
This dark matter is of special interest to the particle physicists.
The same calculations that so accurately predict the proportions in which the elements are made in the big bang also predict the amounts in which they are made.
If the universe consisted of just the elements cooked up in the big bang, then W would be about 0.1 — ten times larger than it appears, but ten times less than theory demands.
Rather than see this as a problem, the particle physicists see it as an opportunity.
It implies that 90% of the universe is composed of something other than everyday atoms — swarms of exotic particles never seen on earth.
The congregating flotsam
The problem of the missing mass is bound up with the other great problem of cosmology — where did the overall structure of the universe come from?
Stars congregate in galaxies.
Galaxies, too, tend to clump together in clusters, which in turn may be parts of superclusters.
Surveys of galaxies show large voids with virtually nothing in them, and filaments and walls made up of clusters and superclusters.
And new structure is always being found.
The size of the largest known structure in the universe seems to increase hand in hand with the scale of the largest maps.
Although inflation was invoked to make the universe smooth, it can provide a certain degree of clumpiness.
There will be fluctuations in the density of an inflationary universe.
They alone would not be enough to account for the clumpiness on intermediate scales that studies of the sky reveal; but there is a way to amplify their effects.
In a rare fit of parsimony, theorists suggested that the dark matter already invoked to bring W up to 1 might also serve to make large structures.
As the universe aged, the slightly over-dense areas left by inflation would draw dark matter to themselves because of the force of gravity.
Thus the dark matter would be spread around in a way that mimicked but exaggerated the initial fluctuations.
Everyday atoms would fall in towards the dark matter, and eventually form stars and galaxies, highlighting the peaks in the distribution of dark matter.
Computer models show that the best way of coming up with an inflationary universe that shows the same degree of clumpiness as the real one is to use dark matter that is ‘cold’.
Cold dark-matter particles move slowly — hot ones move at nearly the speed of light.
Because hot dark matter is always rushing about, it wipes out details, and does not allow thin delicate structures like those seen in the sky.
During the 1980s, cold dark matter (CDM) became the most popular explanation of the large-scale structure of the universe.
At the Brighton conference, though, it came under attack from those who make maps of the sky.
A group based in Oxford and Cambridge produced a picture that shows the positions of 2m galaxies in the sky.
Although the map does not reveal how far away they are, and thus their three-dimensional layout, statistics derived from it show a higher degree of structure at large scales — supercluster size and upwards — than CDM would predict.
It is possible to make three-dimensional maps.
There are ways to measure the distance to nearby galaxies that do not rely on their red shift.
If you know that distance, you can work out what the red shift would be if it were due entirely to the expansion of the universe.
If the actual red shift is different, you have a measure of the galaxy's ‘peculiar’ movement.
That movement presumably stems from the galaxy being gravitationally drawn towards something.
Maps that use these peculiar motions to build up pictures of the amount of matter in space have been prepared by various researchers over the past year or so.
Using the movements of visible things to track down their invisible causes has a healthy set of precedents.
The rotation of the spiral arms of galaxies convinced astronomers that galaxies are embedded in haloes of dark matter, regardless of whether theory needed that dark matter or not.
Now the movements of whole groups of galaxies are providing estimates of W. At Brighton, Avishai Dekel of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and Nick Kaiser of the University of Toronto presented maps derived from the peculiar velocities of galaxies using different methods.
The group Dr Kaiser works with finds W to be about 0.8; Dr Dekel and his colleagues find much the same.
This is by far the best evidence so far for the existence of a large amount of some sort of dark matter.
But the orthodox CDM model cannot draw much comfort from it.
The survey Dr Kaiser has worked on shows evidence of structure at a scale which he thinks is too large for CDM to explain.
A controversial survey done by astronomers at Durham and London may provide yet more evidence against it.
Looking a long way out along one line, it found ‘walls’ of galaxies at regular intervals.
Many are sceptical about that finding, but Dr Dekel feels that if something similar, of equal statistical validity, could be found along another line of sight, the CDM model would become untenable.
Oh dear, what can the matter be?
In the search for alternatives, eyes are turning away from faraway galaxies and towards the nearest and most humdrum piece of astrophysics: the sun.
The fusion reactions that power the sun must produce vast numbers of neutrinos.
But experiments designed to detect them fail to find enough.
That has led to a suggestion with far-reaching consequences.
There are three generations of neutrino just as there are of every other particle.
The sun produces first-generation, ‘electron-type’ neutrinos.
If on their way out of the sun some of these become second- or third-generation neutrinos, then they would slip through earthly detectors unnoticed.
Explaining this generation-skipping will require new physical theories; those should provide pointers towards a grand unified theory of the strong, weak and electromagnetic forces, or even a substantial portion of the GUT itself.
Sidney Bludman, of the University of Pennsylvania, argued in Brighton that the turncoat neutrinos suggest that GUTs come into the picture at lower energies than are normally expected.
Dennis Sciama, of the Institute for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, teased out the consequences the neutrinos could have for the dark-matter debate in a journal, Nature, a week before the conference.
Up until now there has been no need to believe that neutrinos have any mass at all.
If they do indeed oscillate between generations, though, they must have mass.
The mass of the first-generation neutrino is probably negligible.
But if each generation is heavier than the last, as is the case with quarks, then the third-generation neutrino could well be heavy enough to make W=1.
However, neutrino dark matter would not be cold — it would be hot, since the neutrinos would still be light enough to zip around.
The reason for preferring one's dark matter cold is that CDM is better at turning the density fluctuations of inflation-theory into wells in which galaxies can form.
Other origins for the structure might be as well or better served by hot dark matter.
The most popular alternatives are ‘flaws’ of various sorts.
As the big bang cooled off, the universe went through a series of transitions (for example, from the high-energy state when all the forces were the same to the low-energy state in which they are different).
These transitions would not occur altogether smoothly — flaws would be created, like the planes and lines formed when water freezes.
Cosmic strings — heavy, one-dimensional flaws that are really just strands of energy — had a brief spell in the limelight in the mid-1980s.
They have since run into some problems and it is often easier to invent a new theory than to repair yesterday's novelties.
According to Robert Brandenberger, of Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, hot dark matter and cosmic strings can be used to produce large-scale structures like the ones actually observed.
Neil Turok, of Princeton University, favours a more complex, multi-dimensional type of flaw he calls a texture.
With CDM, the textures produce more clumpiness at large scales than inflation's density fluctuations can provide — which puts them in line with the observations.
What they might manage with hot dark matter is not clear.
The creation of strings, textures and their weird kin is traditionally kept in the earliest universe — about which less is known, providing more room for manoeuvre.
That means they would already be exerting their influence by the time the microwave background was born.
As yet, though, the best measurements of the microwave background show none of the tell-tale marks that such flaws would leave.
If measurements ten times more sensitive, already being planned, show the same thing, yet more radical ideas may be needed.
Unless, that is, the flaws appeared after the background glow.
David Schramm, of the University of Chicago, along with Chris Hill from Fermilab, the particle-physics laboratory just outside Chicago, has recently suggested that there may have been transitions after the microwave background was emitted.
Here again, neutrinos with mass might help.
At Brighton, Dr Schramm speculated that neutrinos might all have been massless until quite late in the story, when the average energy of the neutrinos would have dropped below some threshold, making the three neutrinos develop their masses.
Such a late transition could produce galaxy- and cluster-sized flaws.
Some will throw up their hands at such tottering edifices of supposition.
There is no doubt that more data are needed.
The universities of Chicago and Princeton are planning to dedicate a new telescope to producing a three-dimensional map of 1m galaxies.
Other deep surveys are underway.
New large telescopes may clarify how galaxies form — at present a surprisingly difficult puzzle — and why they cluster.
New studies will search for the tiniest blips in the microwave background.
Nor are the astronomers doing all the work.
Isolated detectors are sitting in laboratories around the world, waiting for a piece of dark matter — hot, cold, lukewarm or otherwise — to come along.
New observatories to spot neutrinos arriving from space are being built in Italian mountains, Canadian mines and perhaps the depths of the Pacific.
Fermilab and CERN will make new efforts to catch homegrown neutrinos changing their colours.
The next decade looks promising — especially for those who study the newly hot topic of neutrinos.
One of today's hypotheses may become orthodox; some new notion may sweep all before it.
By making more use of data from the sky, particle physics could well be freed, at least to some extent, from the dark caverns of ever-bigger atom smashers.
In so doing, it may also win new respect in other areas of physics, where many see it as a fascinating but over-costly irrelevance.
By predating everything else, particle physics may yet be able to underpin it all.
BUSINESS WEEK
Money matters
George Bush finally admitted that parts of the American economy are ‘clearly in a recession’, claiming that the last quarter of 1990 will have been the worst.
The Commerce Department's index of leading economic indicators fell twice as much as expected during November.
Four big banks cut their prime lending rate by half a point to 9.5%.
Brazil has passed a law that allows five-year prison terms and heavy fines to be inflicted on multinationals that fail to restrain their prices.
The government puts particular blame on car makers and pharmaceutical companies for an inflation rate that in December was nearly 20%.
More than 226,000 new private businesses registered in eastern Germany in the first ten months of last year.
The Soviet Union and its Comecon trading partners switched from the so-called transferable rouble to the dollar for their rapidly diminishing trade.
Paying real money for imports will hurt Eastern Europe.
Cash flows
The Japanese spent ¥5 trillion ($35 billion) on business entertaining in 1990, up a belt-busting 9.4% from 1989.
Another big Japanese property company has collapsed.
After chalking up debts of ¥500 billion ($3.5 billion), Tokyo-based EIE is being rescued by five large Japanese banks.
The rescue should be Japan's second-largest ever.
Rupert Murdoch's media empire neared the rocks as he negotiated with 150 banks to reschedule virtually all of News Corp's $8 billion of debt.
As part of the deal he may be forced to sell assets worth $2 billion within the next three years.
With losses amounting to £71m ($137m) in Italian life insurance, Guardian Royal Exchange, a British insurance company, is shedding two of three Italian subsidiaries it bought nearly two years ago.
General gloom means that GRE could face a total 1990 loss of £100m.
A smart department store in London, Harrods, has signed an agreement with a Japanese trading company, Mitsubishi Corporation, to sell fashions through ‘signature shops’ in Japanese department stores.
The deal could generate annual sales of up to £50m ($97m) within five years.
In a move which makes it Australia's largest distributor of spirits, Guinness has paid an undisclosed sum to Carlton and United Breweries for a half-share in Bundaberg rum, the country's largest selling spirit.
Bank statements
A complicated share swap between a top Belgian industrial group, Société Générale de Belgique, and holding companies controlled by Albert Frère, a Belgian industrialist, will bring La Générale nearer to the Frère family, which controls Groupe Bruxelles Lambert.
The new governor of Rhode Island closed more than half the state's banks following the collapse of a private insurance fund which guarantees deposits at 45 banks not insured by the federal government.
Order, order
Nomura held on to top spot in the annual Eurobond underwriting rankings while other Japanese firms slipped; Yamaichi dropped to tenth while London's CSFB shot up to second place.
The proportion of issues in dollars dropped in 1990 to 39.5% from 56% in 1989, while yen bonds doubled their share in the same period, to 12%.
Ecu bonds rose from 5% to 10%.
After a year of arguments, a new corporate watchdog, the Australian Securities Commission, came into being.
The commission has more money and wider powers than its feeble predecessor.
Four years after its launch, London's Third Market sank.
Set up to provide money for growing companies, the stockmarket failed to attract investors.
For the first time since 1979, western semiconductor companies gained market share from Japanese rivals last year, according to Dataquest, a market researcher.
Wheelies
Despite abandoning a planned £34m ($66m) European airline venture with Belgium's carrier, Sabena, and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, British Airways still wants an alliance with the troubled Sabena, but faces competition from other airlines pursuing the same goal.
Japan's second largest car maker, Nissan, is to cut its links with Nissan UK, the privately owned company that has had exclusive distribution rights for its cars in Britain for 21 years.
Nissan claimed that Octav Botnar, the reclusive owner of Nissan UK, is too difficult to deal with.
Mr Botnar is consulting lawyers.
After stalemate on the proposed merger between the two American airlines, Carl Icahn, owner of TWA, is set to make a formal offer for beleaguered Pan Am.
He has already hinted at a price of around $375m.
General Dynamics and McDonnell Douglas, builders of the super-expensive A-12 fighter for the United States Navy, want the Pentagon to bail them out of a possible $2.7 billion overrun on the development and production of A-12s.
That would put the cost at $7.5 billion.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
America's retail sales fell in November, for the fourth consecutive month, and were 1.7% lower than a year ago.
New figures for Canada, Sweden and Switzerland also show falls.
Japanese retail sales leapt 7.5% in the 12 months to September.
French industrial production rose 1.1% in the year to October.
Over the same period Canada's industrial output fell 2.8%.
Japan's jobless rate fell to 2.1% in November, after two months at 2.2%.
In the same month Swiss unemployment rose to the still modest rate of 0.7%.
PRICES AND WAGES
German consumer-price inflation fell to 2.7% in the 12 months to December, from 3.0% in November.
Japan's inflation jumped to 4.2% in the year to November, the fastest rate since 1981.
Canadian workers received a 5.4% wage increase in the year to October, a real rise of 0.6%; Italian employees got a 7.1% rise in the year to September, or 0.8% in real terms.
Switzerland's wholesale prices rose 0.7% in the 12 months to November.
ECONOMIC GROWTH
The OECD forecasts growth for industrial economies of an average of 2.0% in 1991, down from an estimated 2.8% last year.
That average conceals more than it reveals: the OECD expects seven countries to have real GNP growth of 3% or more.
Two economies are tipped to enjoy significantly faster growth than in 1990: Iceland (3.4%, compared with a decline of 0.1% in 1990) and New Zealand where GNP is forecast to ‘surge’ by 1.5%, after a dismal annual average of 0.3% during the past five years.
Only one country is expected to see its GNP decline between the two years: Sweden, with a 0.5% drop.
At the other extreme, Japan is predicted to be the OECD's fastest grower in 1991 (3.7%), followed closely by Turkey (3.5%), which was last year's top performer.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
The tin mines at Bom Futuro in the Brazilian Amazon near the border with Bolivia are open again.
But only 3,000 wildcat miners are digging at the mine, compared with 20,000 a year ago.
Miners blame the fall in world prices — down by almost half in 18 months, to $5,700 a tonne.
The mine was closed last September when Brazil informally agreed with the Association of Tin Producers to limit its tin exports to 38,000 tonnes in 1990.
Brazil produced more than 50,000 tonnes of tin in 1989.
Some 30,000 tonnes of it came from Bom Futuro and an estimated 12,000 tonnes were smuggled into Bolivia.
In 1990 output at Bom Futuro is likely to have totalled only 21,000 tonnes.
STOCKMARKETS
Though few investors would believe it, stockmarket indices rarely end a year worth less, in nominal terms, than they began it.
That is rarer still for a worldwide index.
Yet 1990 was an exception: thanks to economic slowdown, rising interest rates and Saddam Hussein, Morgan Stanley Capital International's world index ended the year 18.6% lower, in dollar terms, than it began it.
This is only the fifth time this has happened in 20 years: the others were in 1970, 1973, 1974 and 1981.
Of the 16 countries in our table only three produced gains for dollar-based investors and only two — South Africa and Hong Kong — in terms of local currency.
The wooden spoon was won by a frequent former champion: Japan.
There, a sharp rise in interest rates popped the market's speculative bubble.
Share prices ended 1990 38.7% down in yen terms.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES Japan's visible-trade surplus widened to $62.3 billion in the 12 months to November, but its current-account surplus fell to $37.7 billion.
In the same period Britain's visible-trade deficit declined slightly to $30.8 billion; its current-account deficit shrank to $27.2 billion.
WORLD BOURSES
Renewed fears of war in the Gulf left stockmarkets depressed.
In Europe Madrid lost 2.0%, Frankfurt 1.9%, Paris 0.8% and London 0.6%.
Asian bourses also fell: Tokyo lost 1.1%, Singapore 1.5% and Hong Kong 1.2%.
Wall Street gained 0.5%.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
Britain's broad-money growth quickened to 14.4% in the 12 months to November; its narrow-money growth slowed to 3.1%.
Over the same period, Germany's broad money supply grew by 5.5%.
Australian banks cut their prime lending rate to 15.5%.