

Crude justice
Deal with oil spills in a way that cleans up fast and settles up later
A YEAR after the Exxon Valdez spilt its sticky cargo along the shores of Prince William Sound, the main oil-shipping countries are locked in bitter battle over how to pay to clean up such incidents.
The shipping countries of Europe and Japan want a system of no-fault compensation that would quickly foot the bill for scraping oil off the beach.
Powerful voices in the American Senate want the polluter to pay.
The senators may have principle on their side; the Europeans and Japanese have common sense on theirs.
At the root of the debate is a pair of treaties, produced 20 years ago after the Torrey Canyon disaster.
They established that, in the first instance, shipowners would automatically meet the cost of oil spills, through insurance cover which they would be obliged to carry; but the owners' liability was to be limited to a maximum of $18m.
Above that, up to a ceiling of about $65m, the cost would be paid by a fund, financed by a levy on oil importers.
Countries that signed receive compensation for spills, however they occur.
In 1984 new treaties were negotiated to raise shipowners' maximum liability to $78m, and the ceiling on payments for each clean-up to $260m.
They are still sitting on the shelf.
America has never ratified the treaties.
Enough countries signed the first lot to bring the fund into existence; but most are now waiting for America's signature before agreeing to enlargement of it.
The House of Representatives favours ratification; Senate opposition has been led by Mr George Mitchell, leader of the majority Democrats.
He objects to the treaties' limits on the liability of shipowners: only if damage was committed with ‘intent’ or with ‘knowledge that [it]would probably result’can they be obliged to pay more than $78m.
Acceptance of this, says Senator Mitchell, would remove a deterrent to polluters — and take away from individual American states their right to set tougher environmental standards than the federal government does.
Mr Mitchell's own state of Maine is one of 18 that impose unlimited liability.
Clean up first, punish after
Much of Mr Mitchell's argument is true, but also unworldly.
Both punishment and compensation are necessary, but had better run on separate tracks.
Link them, and the main result will be interminable delay.
The bill for the damage when the Amoco Cadiz foundered off the coast of Brittany, before the compensation fund was set up, is still grinding through the courts, 12 years on.
The fund offers quick payments, while the alternative is much legal red tape at a moment when speed counts.
Fearful of punitive damages, companies will avoid doing anything that might later be seen as an admission of guilt.
Unlimited liability is a difficult concept to apply, and a guaranteed recipe for endless litigation.
As insurance companies realise that unlimited liability may mean just what it says, they will become deeply unhappy about insuring for it.
The Exxon Valdez was an oddity: one large oil company owned both tanker and oil, and employed the crew.
More typical is the confused plight of Ewing Oil and its rickety chartered tanker, familiar to viewers of ‘Dallas’; or, in the real world, the American Trader whose load fouled southern California last month.
The oil in the American Trader was owned by BP America, but the tanker by a New York shipping company.
In future, there will be fewer Exxon Valdezes, because big oil companies will make sure that they do not own any oil until it arrives safely in port.
More oil will be shipped by small companies.
Already, roughly half the world's oil is carried by one-tanker companies, whose entire assets founder with a single wreck.
The existence of a compensation fund, says Senator Mitchell, would reduce the penalties for pollution.
A shipowner whose liability is automatically assumed up to a certain level, and strictly limited above that, will have less incentive to avoid a costly spill.
Actually, once the fund has footed a bill, it has in the past successfully pursued a polluter through the courts.
All that stuff about ‘intent’ and ‘knowledge’might not save a future Exxon from damages in the American courts, if it transpired that a tanker captain was a known incompetent steering through a dangerous place.
Last year was the worst for tanker spills since 1980.
More oil is being shipped in less seaworthy vessels.
More than half the world tanker fleet is now over ten years old, and a squeeze on pay means more tankers are manned by inexperienced crew.
All these changes are making spills more likely still.
If America fails to sign the treaties, the enlarged compensation fund will be stillborn.
The main results will be less cash to clean up spills in countries that cannot afford an Alaskan scale of effort; higher insurance rates for oil tankers; and less seaworthy ships carrying oil down the coast of Maine.
It is a high price to pay for supporting senatorial principle, rather than pragmatism.
Gorbachev's greatest gamble
What happens if he really makes the break for a market economy?
CROSS your fingers.
One of the biggest economic adventures of all time is, with luck, about to begin.
It dwarfs even the extraordinary experiments under way in Poland and Hungary, and the one just starting in East Germany.
The challenge: to turn the Soviet Union into a market economy.
Surely that is what perestroika has been about these past five years?
Alas, no.
Mr Gorbachev has allowed joint ventures with western firms, promoted quasi-capitalist co-operatives, tried to trim the planning bureaucracy.
But this has been a mere flirtation with the market.
It was far short of unambiguous espousal, even though it upset the old planners.
Also, small point, it did not work.
Queues have lengthened, real incomes have fallen and inflation has soared.
Mounting chaos in the state's finances has threatened a collapse of the money economy and a retreat to 100% rationing.
Radical economists have argued for an escape to a market system before it is too late, but the conservative establishment has always over-ruled them.
No longer, maybe.
According to the hitherto reliable Interfax news agency in Moscow, Mr Gorbachev plans to introduce a daring set of reforms, a ‘180-degree about-turn’, by July.
He may be willing to use his new powers as executive president to brush aside resistance.
The reforms were reportedly prepared by a group of specialists and astonishingly kept secret from the prime minister's cabinet.
What is known of them suggests two strong influences: Poland's ‘Big Bang’ and Mr Gorbachev's new personal economic adviser, Mr Nikolai Petrakov.
Mr Petrakov is one of the band of influential economists who have made the mental leap to the market (‘We need a normal, civilised market,’ he says), and have been saying with growing urgency that Mr Gorbachev must join them, and bring the country with him.
The policy they have prepared is said to involve liberalising prices, freeing trade, selling state companies, smashing monopolies and moving rapidly towards a convertible rouble.
A fast track to currency convertibility is one of Mr Petrakov's pet ideas.
He has argued for the introduction of a convertible currency parallel to the existing non-convertible rouble.
Perestroika will not work without opening the Soviet economy to the West, he rightly reckons, and that will not happen properly until there is a hard rouble.
The West will face some difficult decisions if Mr Gorbachev really does make a dash for economic freedom.
A market three times the size of all the liberalising economies of Eastern Europe combined would suddenly be wide open.
The IMF, the World Bank and the GATT would swiftly face applications to admit a giant new member.
And western politicians would probably find themselves faced with a request for enormous help — including consumer goods to fill shops and soak up roubles — to contain the shock of a Soviet Big Bang.
Many roads to capitalism
The change would be traumatic.
In Poland Big Bang has piled on pain for consumers in the hope of taming inflation.
Success there is far from certain: it will come even harder in the Soviet Union.
It is not just the country's size, and its 70 years under communism (against Poland's 40).
Poles have so far accepted yet more economic misery because they trust their Solidarity-led government.
The Soviet leadership enjoys no such trust.
In backing a Petrakov plan, Mr Gorbachev risks popular unrest as well as revolt within the Communist party (and perhaps the resignation of his prime minister, Mr Nikolai Ryzhkov, if economic policy is rammed through by decree rather than through his government).
It would be a mighty gamble.
But Mr Gorbachev may judge the risks of non-reform to be even higher.
Would the gamble work?
It is easy to find fault with any programme for converting a planned economy back into a market one.
Czechoslovaks criticise the Polish way of doing it.
What is the point, they ask, of freeing the market when it is still monopoly-ridden?
In Prague the talk is of starting with a break-up of the monopolies, and letting the market rip later — but de-monopolising the economy might take a long time.
Mr Petrakov is in an understandable hurry, but his idea for a short-cut to a convertible currency could bring a wild ride.
A parallel ‘hard’ rouble might lead to hyperinflation in old roubles — unless budgetary control were tight enough to make roubles ‘real’money anyway.
There is no proven recipe for undoing the communist economic mess, any more than there is a recipe for unbaking an inedible cake.
But you have to start somewhere.
The starting-point in Eastern Europe has been clear rejection of Marxist economics and clear commitment to a market system, complete with private ownership and private enterprise.
If Mr Gorbachev really does now intend to take that step in his own country, his political revolution is about to become an economic one too.
And the consequences could be even more startling, for better or for worse.
All his own work
WHEN you are deep in the valley and don't want your companions to realise how cold it is, talk loudly about the sunlit uplands.
That was John Major's ploy on Tuesday.
For a new chancellor, presenting a budget for an unpopular government, it was the best he could do.
For the British economy, with inflation rising and growth slowing, his budget will do little harm.
Neither judgment is quite the epitaph it seems at first sight.
To do little damage to the economy is, for a chancellor, a huge achievement.
Most of Mr Major's predecessors had no guiding principles for microeconomic things like the tax code, so they tinkered obsessively instead.
And most, in their macroeconomic management, lurched between unjustified fears of recession and unwarranted euphoria about growth.
Mr Major avoided these mistakes, at least in their extreme forms.
His sins of micro-commission were small; and the macro thing he did not do was hardly a new failure.
So-so little bits
The detailed changes to the tax system were mostly unambitious (see pages 29–34).
Mr Major was straightforward in raising most personal allowances in line with inflation, and most excise duties by slightly more.
That was the mark of an honest chancellor who is prepared to take a longish view.
Unfortunately, he then lost his way over cars and creches.
On company cars, he continued the policy of his predecessor, Mr Nigel Lawson, in recognising that perks provided by employers are just as much part of employees' remuneration as salaries are, and should therefore be just as taxable.
Then, bizarrely, he announced that the perk of a workplace nursery would no longer be taxable.
The House of Commons roared in (overwhelmingly masculine) approval.
Working mothers, it seems, are a motherhood issue.
The budget's biggest microeconomic change was on another motherhood issue, the treatment of savings.
When Britons are saving just 6% of their post-tax income, surely everybody agrees that they should be encouraged to do more.
It seems churlish to point out that most such carrots cause a diversion of savings from taxed to untaxed channels, not an increase in the absolute amount.
But there is a bigger caveat about what Mr Major did, a caveat about tax philosophy.
The best fiscal system is one which taxes any part of income or wealth that is spent on consumption, and exempts any part of them that is saved.
Mr Major, by picking on certain types of savings for exemption, moved further away from this ideal, not nearer to it.
He is moving back towards the bad practice of selective tax shelters, which Mr Lawson had undermined in his five years as chancellor.
The old system gave tax breaks for saving with life assurance companies; the new one gives them for saving with banks and building societies.
Mr Major's big omission was on macroeconomic management.
After eleven years of Thatcherism the government's macro policies have been transformed — for the worse.
Initially their aim was to set some rules and, as far as possible, stick to them.
This, it was hoped, would reassure the financial markets that fine-tuning, and the inflationary bias that went with it, was out, shunned, verboten, dead.
All those rules were for nominal measures — money supply, public spending and borrowing, growth in money GDP — rather than for the volume goals of output, jobs and expenditure that most earlier governments had pursued in vain.
The new principle was a good one, because it forced the government to live in a world where inflation matters and cannot be conveniently assumed away.
All those rules got forgotten, notably by Mr Lawson, who had done most to introduce them.
Trust me, he said — and then presided over an inflationary boom.
To his credit, he wanted to give the markets a new nominal rule, on the exchange rate, but was prevented from doing so by Mrs Margaret Thatcher's visceral dislike of the European Monetary System.
So Britain has been stuck with trust-me pragmatism.
The result is an inflation rate double that of the other large OECD economies, and interest rates that have to be kept higher than they otherwise would be — because moneymen, on the whole, are not the most trusting (read gullible) of types.
For Tuesday's budget, the man was different but the message was the same: trust me.
Mr Major produced some nominal figures, but none that proves he is an inflation-fighter.
He projects a fiscal surplus for 1990–91 of £7 billion, the same as the outturn he now expects for 1989–90.
Simple extrapolation has been the pattern for five years now, to the point where the financial markets treat it as a game.
There is little to choose between a game-based policy and a trust-based one; both are miles from a rule-based system that the world could understand and the government would stick to.
The same applies to monetary targets, now just a melange of notes and coins; and to nominal GDP, which Mr Major didn't even mention.
Instead, he offered a pair of trust-mes: ‘I favour a strong exchange rate…
The moment I judge I can safely lower [interest rates], I will.’
That is Britain's macroeconomic policy, to go naked into the market place.
Not surprisingly, sterling shivers.
If it falls much further over the next few days, Mr Major will have no choice but to raise interest rates.
Unless, that is, he wants to be branded as the man who brought double-digit inflation back to Britain.
To the aid of the party
Mr Major may be chancellor of the exchequer but he is also the member of Parliament for Huntingdon and is on most short-lists to succeed Mrs Thatcher as Tory leader.
So his was a budget full of politics, with several points to make.
One mattered for him personally: he showed himself to be his own man.
He did not raise the ceiling on mortgage-interest relief, which Mrs Thatcher had pressed him to do.
He offered some minor Major themes, stressing the role of small businesses, small savers, charities and football: all of them got tax breaks.
And, most cunningly of all, he did not raise the starting level for higher-rate income tax.
It is now barely 1.5 times average earnings, so Labour's pledge to raise the top rate from 40% to (in effect) 59% can be made to sound threatening to millions of ordinary Britons.
Their frustrations used to be articulated by Mrs Thatcher, but she is now as likely to be a cause of them as a cure.
It is Mr Major who seems to sense the fears and hopes of middle Britain.
He is an ordinary bloke, everybody's idea of a bank manager.
Because his budget went down well with Tory MPs (see page 39), however, Mr Major has given Mrs Thatcher a valuable breather.
Had he produced a no-hoper, the pressure on her to quit this summer would have started growing on Tuesday evening.
As it is, she can now feel a little safer in one of her jobs, as leader of the Conservative party.
And what of her other job?
The clear message from the budget was that the next general election should be delayed until the last minute, in June 1992.
Several of the changes Mr Major announced will not come in until next year, and their effects will hardly be noticed for a while after that.
More, the economy is going to look grim — slow growth, fast inflation, an income squeeze, high interest rates — for a year or more.
But the sunshine in Mr Major's vision may be felt, just, by the end of 1991, with inflation down to 5%, growth recovering and interest rates on the wane.
In which case the member for Huntingdon could deliver a 1992 budget of generous tax cuts and more spending, with the markets roaring at the prospect of another Tory triumph.
That is not a prediction.
But there was just enough from John Major this week to suggest that it isn't a fantasy either.
Kohl's kingdom
How to live with a united Germany
HATS off to Helmut.
For a chap who was reckoned a bit of a bumbler by his friends and a bit of a bruiser by his country's neighbours, West Germany's chancellor may have surprised even himself this week.
He is now, beyond doubt, the power-broker of Europe.
East Germany's ringing endorsement of his plan for speedy German unity makes him the strongest contender to lead the strongest power in non-communist Europe.
That gives him clout not only in tricky talks with America, Britain, France and the Soviet Union over how the new Germany will fit into Europe, but also in negotiations within the European Community over what sort of Europe it will be.
No doubt about Mr Kohl's victory this week.
His worry is how to handle success.
Mr Kohl rightly sees the East German vote as a personal vindication.
He recognised the opportunity in last year's East German revolution and grabbed it.
He bamboozled all four of the occupying powers — including that arch-bamboozler Mikhail Gorbachev — into accepting fast-forward unity more or less on his terms.
And he made unity on those terms the campaign issue in East Germany.
At each stage Mr Kohl has followed his instincts, taken his chances — and won.
At each stage the opposition Social Democrats, both in East and West Germany, have hesitated — and lost.
But if Mr Kohl is now riding high, East German expectations are riding higher.
Not disappointing them will tax even his instincts.
To make swifter unity on West German terms more attractive to East Germans, Mr Kohl has all but promised that their savings will be converted, over time, from Monopoly-money Ostmarks into rock-ribbed D-marks at the ridiculously unrealistic rate of 1:1.
So far he seems as good as his word.
His economics minister is talking of currency union between the two Germanies by July.
Full economic and then political union cannot be far behind.
East Germans will get what they voted for, and much else besides.
Unity will not swiftly mean equality.
Even on the cheeriest estimates, it will take five or ten years to rescue East Germany's economy from 40 years of communism.
That will mean cutting subsidies — on food, housing and most other things East Germans buy — and shedding unproductive jobs.
East Germans who stay in work will have to work a lot harder as tough private bosses take over flabby state-run factories.
Not that anybody will miss the Wartburgs and Interflugs, those trademarks of failure.
And things could be worse.
Unlike Poland and Hungary, East Germany will not have to coax in private capital: the stuff will flood in from West Germany.
All the same, it will be a while before a freer East Germany also feels like a richer one to most of its people.
As times get harder, the Social Democrats may get their chance.
They (and East Germany's communists) argued throughout the election campaign for a slower road to unity, one that would give East Germans the chance to negotiate some safeguards for their livelihoods.
If monetary union goes badly, bringing either too much inflation to West Germany or industrial collapse to East Germany (and hence an even bigger flood of refugees to the West), Germany's voters may turn against Mr Kohl.
But the chances are that the momentum of this week's success will carry his Christian Democrats to victory in West Germany's election in December and then in all of Germany next year.
On present evidence, that would be welcome: a reunited Germany with Mr Kohl as its first chancellor is likely to be more prosperous, and stabler, than it would be under the Social Democrats.
The only Germany there is
Despite last month's bruising row over the fate of the German-Polish border, further Kohl victories would also be better for Germany's neighbours than Kohl defeats.
Most Europeans, Poles included, now accept that a united German democracy is a place they can live with, provided it stays securely anchored in the western alliance.
Mr Kohl says it should stay anchored.
Only the Russians and some German Social Democrats keep banging on about a neutral Germany.
Had the Social Democrats won in East Germany, Mr Gorbachev would have gained himself a valuable ally.
He may still try to insist on neutrality at the two-plus-four talks on Germany.
Or he may try to trade in that idea for something he might think would be almost as valuable, the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Germany.
It is there that Mr Kohl's fine political antennae could get the worse of him.
So far he and his foreign minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, have stuck nobly to the view that Germany should remain a member of NATO, with some (no doubt far fewer) NATO troops staying on in what is now West Germany and with enough Soviet troops staying on in eastern Germany for a while to make the Russians feel better about it.
But no German, least of all the East Germans, would want Soviet troops to stay there indefinitely.
Rather than let the pressure grow for them to leave, Mr Gorbachev may offer to take them out — in return for the departure of the Americans and other NATO forces from West Germany.
If that seems to be the Russian price for full German unity, and if Mr Kohl's instincts tell him it is also his price for winning the next German election, he may be tempted to go for it.
Why shouldn't he?
Mr Gorbachev is already pulling troops and tanks out of Eastern Europe.
More will go by agreement later this year, after the Vienna talks on conventional forces in Europe.
Why put up with any foreign troops on German soil?
The answer is that American troops are in Germany, and elsewhere on the continent, not only to help defend Western Europe against a conventional Soviet attack, but also to keep the edge of the American nuclear umbrella pulled over Europe.
Even a demobilising Soviet Union will still be a nuclear-armed one.
And who knows who comes after the affable Mr Gorbachev?
Mightn't a European Treaty Organisation, either in NATO or in place of it, be able one day to do the protection-cum-deterrence job that America does today?
Perhaps.
But if push ever did threaten to come to shove, British and French nuclear weapons are unlikely to inspire the confidence in West Germany that America's much bigger armoury does.
Mr Gorbachev, and others, should remember that a shrinking of American protection for Germany could raise the tricky issue of how Germany will defend itself — including the until now unthinkable thought of German nuclear missiles.
German confidence will also depend on how robust Europe's other structures prove to be.
So far fears that West Germany will be too distracted by the rebuilding of East Germany to continue the building of the European Community have been exaggerated.
Economic and monetary union in Western Europe will be delayed until it is clear what effects the union in Germany will have.
But the post-1992 European single market remains as attractive as ever, to Germans east and west.
The real worries about Germany may come after the 1990s, when Germany is not only whole, free and rich, but has also begun to sense its real power.
Today's West Germany bends over backwards to be a reliable ally.
Would a democratic and successful Germany, bound into a democratic and successful Europe, have reason to do otherwise?
Defence might be one reason; there could be others.
Once assertiveness starts coming more naturally to Germany, as naturally it will, might the Kohl sort of Germany want to make its political weight in the Community match its economic power, and be more protective of German minorities across its borders?
It might.
But the only answer to that is for the West to build the most solid alliance it can with the only Germany it's got.
Tokyo's money crunch
Policy co-ordination lies at the root of Japan's financial troubles
FOR an economy that is supposedly manipulated to make it impervious to market forces, Japan has moved remarkably rapidly from joy to gloom.
Only a few months ago it was full of optimism, with real GNP growing at 5% a year, financial markets soaring, companies rushing to invest, and consumers strutting the streets with their furs and Rolex watches.
Now, with the Tokyo stockmarket's Nikkei index down more than 23% from its December 29th peak, with the yen sliding against the dollar and with interest rates on the up, the mood has switched to fear.
Everyone knows that the party is over.
The question is how bad the hangover will be, and not merely for Japan.
Nothing has changed in the bedrock of Japanese industry to cause this.
People work as hard as ever.
Innovation is even more frenetic.
Japanese companies are getting stronger and stronger, as they turn themselves from exporters into true multinationals.
But in the past five years the economy has been pulled along at an even faster pace than that merited by its industrial over-achievers.
The mechanism has been a rapid rise in share prices and a trebling in urban-property prices, which in turn have boosted consumption, revved up BMW sales and, for top-notch manufacturers and banks, reduced the cost of capital virtually to zero.
It is as if the 200mph financial economy overtook the 100mph real economy, but, with its slipstream, helped the slowcoach to accelerate.
This did not just happen by itself.
It happened with the help of a loose monetary policy, under which the central bank's discount rate was pushed down four times in 1985–87, to a historic low of 2.5%.
Japan's financial markets had been substantially deregulated in the previous three years, making them more sensitive to changes in the price of money.
But the supply of financial assets remained rigid, especially in the case of land and shares.
When demand rockets and supply stays fixed, there is only one way prices can move: up, often unsustainably fast.
Why didn't Japan's ever-prudent and oh-so-dominant bureaucrats step in to prevent it?
Partly because the financial fun enriched lots of powerful people in Japan.
Partly because cheap capital and a shot at some financial profits were just what exporters needed to help them deflect the blow of the strong yen after 1985.
But the main reason lay 7,000 miles away, in Washington, DC.
From 1985 to 1988 the chief target of Japan's monetary policy was America, not Japan.
In the name of international policy co-ordination, Japan held its interest rates down to support the dollar and to help America finance its external deficit.
In effect, Japan bailed out America — and is now facing the consequences.
The liberation of Eastern Europe and a worldwide rise in inflation have forced interest rates to rise virtually everywhere.
Japan's money policy had to tighten sharply, if the yen were not to collapse and if inflation was to be kept under control.
That is why on March 20th the Bank of Japan raised its discount rate from 4.25% to 5.25%, and why it will raise it again soon.
It is also why share prices are returning towards reality, and why many fear that property prices will soon do the same.
Japan has done too little, too late about tightening money policy and deflating its financial bubble.
By waiting so long, it has made itself vulnerable to a systemic collapse.
It may still avoid one, by luck or by a decisive further tightening now.
But meanwhile many Japanese eyes are turning back to the root cause: policy co-ordination and America.
When finance ministers from the biggest economies meet on April 7th, Japan will ask America to cut its interest rates to support the yen.
After all, the Japanese will say, we did it for you.
But America will be right to say no, as long as it has worries about its own inflation.
At that point, many will conclude that policy co-ordination is dead.
Partial partnership is worse than none
With any luck they will be right, at least in the form in which co-ordination has been practised since 1985.
Under the Plaza and Louvre accords, the policy has been a pretence.
The only thing that has been co-ordinated has been monetary policy, because participating countries, most notably America, refused to include fiscal policies at the same time.
The result was inflation, especially of Japanese asset prices.
It went on too long, until its recent shuddering halt.
There is no point in another try at partial co-ordination.
What is needed is either full co-ordination, or none at all, with countries concentrating on their domestic needs.
In America's case that should amount to the same thing.
The best way for America to help Japan would be to slash the budget deficit, lowering its demand for Japanese capital and thus helping the yen.
Helping Japan is not a popular theme in Washington.
But if the worst really came to the worst in Japan, the resulting mess could not simply be welcomed as come-uppance.
It would dry up the flow of Japanese credit to all American borrowers, private or public.
Then congressmen would no longer be resenting the arrival of Japanese investors in America.
They would be wailing at their departure.
Farewell, HQ
Should companies tear out their hearts to prosper?
A DECADE ago the sparkling new headquarters building and executive jet were corporate status-symbols, sure signs that your company had made it.
HQ was the place to be, and to be seen.
In the leaner 1990s that headquarters glamour is increasingly seen as gluttony — an unnecessary layer of bureaucracy and overheads.
One study estimates that the headquarters and related functions of big American companies gobble up almost a fifth of their annual profits.
Another estimates that British firms squander £18 billion ($30 billion) each year by mismanaging corporate overheads.
Around the world, companies are pruning their headquarters teams in an attempt to save money.
Firms as diverse as ICI, IBM, Chevron and RTZ have each taken that route.
BP is the latest to do so: the world's third-biggest oil company is cutting its 540-strong head-office management team by a third; around 70 central committees are being disbanded.
Mr Robert Horton, BP's new chairman, says he is scraping the barnacles off the company's hull.
But need a group of businesses be under the control of a central corporate team at all?
Launching his bid for B.A.T Industries last year, Sir James Goldsmith argued that the tobacco-to-insurance group's headquarters team subtracted, rather than added, value.
By ‘unbundling’ itself in an attempt to fight off Sir James, B.A.T seems to be agreeing.
Make parents pay their way
Why should a mixed bag of businesses perform better under the direction of a headquarters team, rather than as individual firms responding to external commercial pressures?
The question goes to the heart of the debate between conglomerateers and knitting-stickers.
Much of the head-office slashing now going on is an attempt by conglomerates to act like specialists — while remaining conglomerates.
To justify its existence, a conglomerate's headquarters has to add more value than an independent business unit could get from outside advisers and banks.
It has to do something else as well.
A headquarters team must add more value to its businesses than any competing parent.
One way is by bringing about a once-and-for-all transformation in the structure and strategy of a business unit.
The HQ team at Britain's Hanson, for example, buys underperforming businesses, sells unprofitable or unrelated activities, then concentrates on generating cash from what remains.
Another approach is typified by BTR, an acquisitive British conglomerate which this month made a $1.6 billion bid for Norton, an American abrasives group.
Its 50-strong headquarters keeps an iron financial grip on some 500 profit centres, setting each business rigorous short-term targets.
BTR's headquarters leaves decentralised management teams to get on with the day-to-day job of running each business.
Both Hanson and BTR have prospered by matching specific management skills with a group of seemingly unrelated businesses.
Both firms have low headquarters costs — last year BTR's were less than .5% of net profits.
Impressive though they are, Hanson and BTR are too acquisitive to be comfortable models for ordinary industrialists.
So how to judge if your company's headquarters is worth its weight?
Hard as it is for bosses to accept it, head office delivers many services in the same way as would an outside subcontractor.
So make it compete with outsiders.
Only keep the function in-house if headquarters wins a contract.
What remains of the headquarters team should then be reorganised to make the most of computers, and exposed to the sort of cost-cutting techniques usually associated with the shop floor.
If all that fails, head for the jet.
LETTERS
Fear of a united Germany
It should neither be surprising nor intriguing that many European countries, as well as Israel, have viewed recent efforts aimed at German unification with scepticism and concern.
After all, Germany does have a disturbingly long tradition of attempts to expand and dominate militarily the European continent.
Twice in this century it has been the cause of global conflict, the lasting effects of which are still at issue today.
To say merely that ‘things are different now’ is hardly any consolation for the pain and bitterness of past experience and bears little assurance of a future political and military stability in Europe.
It is not up to us to forget or forgive the crime that Germany committed only a few decades ago; the only ones who might have done so died on the battlefield or, worse yet, in the gas chambers.
And if Germany is destined to become one and inevitably rise to a position of leadership in Europe, let us seriously consider the sceptics' view that it should at least not happen in our generation.
Cincinnati MOSES ALTSECH
Labour's pound
Your article on the economic policy of the Labour party (February 17th) concludes with a cautionary note about the spending plans of an incoming Labour government.
With Labour having scrapped its unilateralist defence policy, the ability of its economics team to manage the economy responsibly could become the major issue in the next election campaign.
Perhaps the debate about membership of the European exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) is relevant here.
Within the ERM a Labour government would presumably find its freedom to launch into an unwise, inflationary spending spree greatly restricted.
The credibility of the party's claims that it could safely be entrusted with the running of the British economy would thus be greatly enhanced.
Might such considerations explain Mrs Thatcher's reluctance to join the system, at least before the next election?
Ashford, Kent COLIN POULTON
Tooth and law
Your essay on the important role of co-operation in our ever-changing understanding of evolution (February 24th) is also an apt testimony to the unity of the sciences.
Darwin's idea of ‘survival of the fittest’ found a home in political philosophy in the form (albeit distorted) of social darwinism.
Likewise, Dr Lynn Margulis's theories, which hold that evolution advances as much through symbiosis as by tooth and claw, correspond to the late anarchist Kropotkin's theories of social evolution.
He argued that sociability, not ferociousness, is the greatest advantage in the struggle for survival.
He also held, dubiously, that were it not for the corruptions imposed by state and law, men would develop bonds of instinctive solidarity which would make government unnecessary.
We can at least be thankful that microbes are not subject to such corruptions.
Annapolis, Maryland JIM O'GARA
Perfect competition
Your perceptive articles on European airlines (January 20th) and high-speed travel in Europe (February 3rd) raise a number of issues for the contestable market-theory debate.
Baumol's theory of contestable markets states that consumer welfare can be maximised regardless of the number of firms in an industry, as long as it is greater than one.
Producers have to operate efficiently due to the pressure of potential ‘hit and run entry’ into the market.
If airlines can fly wherever and whenever they want to after the EC's liberalisation of aviation, experience will be similar to that of the United States, where empirical work suggests the market is ‘imperfectly contestable’.
However, coupled with a European high-speed rail network, owned by an EC track authority with both national and private operators running trains on it, the high-speed travel market in Europe could well come as close to perfect contestability as anything.
The implication for competition policy would be profound, with the realisation that big operators are susceptible to hit-and-run entry from independent companies.
Lenton, Nottinghamshire TIM NORTHAM
Poland and Lithuania
In your article on the Lithuanian elections (February 17th), you state that Poland held Lithuania's capital, Vilnius, between 1920 and 1939.
While this is correct, you neglected to mention that Poland occupied the city against Lithuanian wishes, through the actions of the Polish army.
This is much less well known than the standard image of Poland as a nation constantly overrun by hostile forces.
Poland may well be worried at the prospect of a unified Germany, given its past history.
Lithuania should be just as concerned with the emergence of a free Poland, for the same reasons.
Perth, Australia RAY KALINAUSKAS
Is Canada dull?
Could it be that you are just a little bit jealous of The Great White North — a society, after all, rather less divisive and certainly more prosperous than decaying, decadent Britain?
I write as a joint citizen of Britain and Canada.
I value my Canadian citizenship rather more, however.
And a temporary sojourn in the murder capital of the United States reinforces the value of supposedly ‘dull’ old Canada.
Yes, peace, order and good government can be rather dull.
It is surprising, though, how many nations these days seem to crave it.
Washington, DC MICHAEL MCDOWELL
Why do you persist in calling Canada dull?
What is it you want?
Do you know that Canadians are the world curling champions?
Do you realise that the paint roller is a Canadian invention?
Have you ever heard Michael Wilson speak?
A country can only stand so much excitement.
Washington, DC FRANK POTTER
BOOKS AND ARTS
American life
Buffalo and sweat baths
GREAT PLAINS.
By Ian Frazier.
Faber and Faber; 290 pages; £14.99.
Farrar Strauss & Giroux; $17.95
THE Great Plains of the United States cover a huge swathe of land, about 600 miles wide, stretching some 2,500 miles south from eastern Montana and western North Dakota through parts of South Dakota, Wyoming, Nebraska, Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico and Oklahoma to west Texas.
For most Americans, it is simply what they fly over on the way to either coast.
Ian Frazier, a writer for the New Yorker, has taken this bleak and maligned region and given it life.
His glorious book is more than a history and more than a 25,000-mile travelogue, although it is also both of those.
It is an ode to the Great Plains, a psalm to the people who once lived there, who have tried to live there and who live there still.
Once called, inaccurately, the ‘Great American Desert’, the plains region was generally ignored by white Americans until after the Civil War.
Then, with the railroads as chief boosters, the plains saw the arrival of thousands upon thousands of settlers.
They wiped out the buffalo, more or less wiped out the Indians and, eventually, were driven away themselves by loneliness, extreme weather, drought, and the loss of topsoil brought on by over-farming.
The region today is a sparsely populated land of ruined homesteads, small towns that have seen better days, farmers who are too reliant on unreplenishable groundwater, and missile silos.
Mr Frazier found more.
Down an almost impassable dirt track near McLaughlin, South Dakota, he found, with the help of an Indian hitchhiker called Jim Yellow Earring, the site of the cabin belonging to the famous Sioux chief, Sitting Bull.
Just off Highway 83 north of Wellington, Texas, he came across the abandoned house of Mr and Mrs Sam Pritchard, who were unlucky enough to have been at home when the gangsters Clyde Barrow and Bonnie Parker paid a call after their car had plunged off the road.
Three miles outside Strasburg, North Dakota, he found the  childhood home of Lawrence Welk, a nationally-known accordion-player and band-leader.
Some of the modern-day folk are treasures.
Gerald Baker, a Mandan-Hidatsa Indian who is the park ranger at Fort Union Trading Post in North Dakota, once the ‘Times Square of the plains’, taught Mr Frazier how to use a double-bladed throwing axe and offered him the honour of joining him in a ceremonial sweat bath.
Kathleen Claar, custodian of the Last Indian Raid Museum in Oberlin, Kansas, took him to a small cemetery to show him the grave of her husband and of Rick Read, the last man lynched in the state.
Le War Lance, an Oglala Sioux, stood on a street corner in New York city regaling Mr Frazier with the tale of his grandfather, the proud and independent Crazy Horse.
Through these encounters the Great Plains are unveiled with style and wit.
‘The sky’, we are told, ‘is like a person yawned and never stopped.’
Buffalo skinners wore heavy clothes which they seldom changed.
Dried blood caked in their beards.
When a group of them walked up to a bar, they would reach into their clothes, and the last one to catch a louse had to buy.
The prostitutes who catered to them were a special type.
In Nicodemus, Kansas, the sole remaining town of black settlers on the plains, Mr Frazier says he found true joy watching the people at a dance.
He imparts it so generously to his readers that they may wish to follow him themselves.
Hans Eysenck
The LSE man
REBEL WITH A CAUSE: THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF HANS EYSENCK.
W.H. Allen; 310 pages; £14.95
THIS is an autobiography with a difference.
As well as the usual smattering of quotations from the likes of Diderot and Montaigne, it features figures, diagrams, a glossary of technical terms and a bibliography — all the paraphernalia, that is, of an academic monograph.
The most revealing bit of the book is not a lyrical evocation of lost love but a graph showing Hans Eysenck's productivity over the years.
Each article or book chapter counts for one point; each book counts for ten; and the productivity trend, needless to say, is on the up and up.
Mr Eysenck has no time for English diffidence.
‘Rebel With a Cause’ is an unabashed celebration of academic success and private fulfilment.
Mr Eysenck tells his readers, with obvious relish, that he has an extremely high IQ, a gift for language and a pellucid style; that he was a doughty boxer in youth and an excellent tennis player in maturity; and that he has always preferred principle and persecution to conformity and an easy life.
Quoting Bertrand Russell's dictum that if you hold unorthodox opinions in England you will be disregarded at first, persecuted if you persist, but finally canonised if you live long enough, he comments: ‘having experienced the first two stages, I seem to be approaching the third.’
Inflation apart, Mr Eysenck had a dramatic, even an heroic, childhood.
Born in Berlin in 1916, he lived through defeat, mass unemployment and the rise of the Nazis.
His adolescent distaste for Hitler was sharpened by the fact that his mother remarried to a Jew, and in 1934 he went into exile, first to France and then to England, where he settled.
It must have been galling, to say the least, for a man from such a background to be accused of being a Nazi by student revolutionaries at the London School of Economics, whose only experience of a ‘fascist regime’ was being refused service in the college bar after closing time.
Mr Eysenck undoubtedly made large contributions to psychology.
He founded the Institute of Psychiatry and applied psychometric and experimental methods to the study of personality, long regarded as a soft option.
He is one of the great popularisers of science, blessed with a fluent, if over-declamatory, style.
It is difficult to imagine any of the jargon-junkies who preside over American psychology writing, for example, that ‘nothing filthy, disgusting, foul, loathsome, nauseous, offensive, revolting, vile, squalid, feculent, or obscene’ seems to have escaped the attention of modern ‘artists’.
The pity is that Mr Eysenck leaves so many hostages to fortune.
His numerous critics will find plenty to amuse them in this volume.
One example is irresistible.
Having boasted at length of his near-photographic memory and profound passion for poetry, he ends his book by saying ‘I shall follow the advice of W.B. Yeats: ‘Do not go gentle into that good night/Old age should burn and rage at close of day.'
’ Whoops.
International crime
Not yet IBM
THE MAFIA.
By Claire Sterling.
Hamish Hamilton; 384 pages; £15.99.
Published by Norton as ‘The Octopus’; $19.95
THIS book ends with ‘The Dead (a partial list)’, subdivided into ‘Distinguished Cadavers’ and ‘Mafia Losers’.
Scanning the names of judges, senior policemen, politicians, journalists and hoodlums, together with the abrupt manner of their disposal — shot, strangled, dissolved in acid, fed to pigs — the reader is left in little doubt that, although today's Mafia may have grown into a global enterprise, it is still a long way from joining the ranks of the world's leading multinationals.
Contradict your boss in a big corporation, or fumble a marketing campaign, and you could lose your job.
Cross a Mafia boss, and you could end up as a protein supplement for Sicilian swine.
Claire Sterling sets out to prove that the Sicilian Mafia is an omnipotent organisation rapidly infiltrating the above-ground economy.
Her book, in fact, demonstrates the opposite.
Only in southern Italy does the Mafia wield the influence Miss Sterling claims it enjoys in America and dozens of other countries.
This is a loose, disjointed organisation, riven by strife, which can flourish only where weak or corrupt politicians have lost the will to enforce the law.
The Mafia is supposed to make gigantic sums of money.
Miss Sterling cites reports that the Sicilian branch alone allegedly made a $30 billion profit in 1989, and that the American and Sicilian Mafias combined enjoy an annual turnover of $250 billion.
Scores of anecdotes in this book make these figures look highly unlikely.
Vincenzo Napoli, allegedly one of the Sicilian Mafia's top men in New York, was arrested after trying to peddle diamonds, guns, stolen paintings and dope to an undercover American police officer.
Napoli's proceeds from months of negotiations amounted to a paltry $6,500.
Another top Mafia man, who is supposed to have directed billions of dollars-worth of heroin shipments, spent a decade hanging around Knickerbocker Avenue, a run-down neighbourhood in Brooklyn.
The best method the Mafia can think of for distributing its heroin in America is a chain of pizza parlours, where the sons of top mafiosi are frequently offered jobs as a favour to their fathers.
Does this sound like the behaviour of men directing a criminal operation boasting an annual turnover four times that of IBM?
Even conceding that the drugs trade generates large flows of cash, the idea that the Mafia is a single, stable organisation which has survived for the past 50 years largely intact is plainly wrong.
The lives of top Mafia bosses are nasty, brutish and short.
They shoot and blow each other up with reckless abandon.
A significant number of them end up in jail for long prison terms, often at an age when less adventurous corporate executives are retiring to the golf course.
Luciano Leggio, the Sicilian capo who, according to Miss Sterling, claims controls most of the world's heroin trade, has languished behind bars since 1974 and is likely to stay there for life.
No business enterprise, however flexible or innovative, could survive such violent upheaval.
A better description of the Mafia would be as a network of criminal contacts regularly exploited by shifting alliances of ruthless drug-traffickers and extortionists, who flourish where politicians and policemen are venal or lazy.
Sicily has been both the home and haven of the Mafia because politicians throughout Italy have found it convenient to tolerate, rather than prosecute, its activities.
The same applies to countries as different as America and Switzerland.
Energetic international regulation of banking and tax laws, making it impossible for the mafiosi to launder their ill-gotten gains, would quickly destroy the Mafia and with it the myth of an irrepressible global conspiracy.
Italian opera
Diminuendo
ROME
IN THE week that Luciano Pavarotti, arthritic in knee but glorious in voice, was making his triumphant return to the London stage, the operatic news from home was alarming.
Although ticket sales may be steadily rising in all 13 of Italy's big opera houses, these owe their survival — as opera houses do almost everywhere — to lavish state subsidies; and this season the subsidies have been cut in half, down to £204m ($329m).
Next year another cut will bring them to a mere £182m.
As Carlo Fontana, the manager of Bologna's Teatro Comunale, puts it, animosamente: ‘We shall simply be obliged to shut down.’
With the exception of Verona's open-air summer season in its Roman arena, opera in Italy routinely loses money.
Even La Scala, where an opening-night stall seat goes for £500, rarely comes close to breaking even.
Each ticket-holder at any Italian opera costs the state an additional £100; £250 in the case of smaller opera houses, such as La Fenice in Venice.
And still they boo if the mood takes them.
Opera managers, for once, are not simply weeping and wailing; they are trying to adjust to the cuts as best they can.
For a start, they have agreed that only eight opera stars will be paid their top wage per performance, £15,000 ($24,165): Jose Carreras, Mr Pavarotti, Placido Domingo, Alfredo Kraus, Ruggero Raimondi, Samuel Ramey, Mirella Freni and Montserrat Caballé.
However, as Mr Fontana points out, singers' stipends make up only 19% of opera-house budgets.
He believes that the houses can survive next year only if they start making their own videotapes of performances, make a habit of exchanging productions among the 13 houses and pray for the arrival of pay-television in Italy.
The chief and perhaps insurmountable fault in the Italian opera scene is its dominance by the political parties.
Almost everyone on yearly wages in the opera houses owes his or her job to party pull and, once hired, the unions see to it that they are not sacked.
An entire production of Strauss's ‘Ariadne Auf Naxos’ had to be cancelled in Rome last month when the management tried to fire seven members of the orchestra and three dancers.
Incompetent as they were, their jobs were untouchable.
The eight superstars judged worthy of maximum pay (they could earn much more in Chicago or Tokyo) include only three Italians, Mr Raimondi, Mr Pavarotti and Miss Freni.
On top of everything else, Italy is running out of opera singers, probably because the theatres have to spend their money on things other than academies for voice-training.
This month's annual Maria Callas international competition for new voices awarded first prizes to a Japanese soprano, Michie Nakamaru, and an Italian mezzo-soprano, Serena Lazzarini.
The male contestants, the jury found, were not worth a mention.
When is deception not deception?
The art of the fake
WE MIGHT well be stirred by the sudden prospect of ruins, but once we knew them to be artificial our pleasure would evaporate,’ wrote Kenneth Clark in his 1928 ‘Gothic Revival’.
‘There has come to be something shocking in the discovery that a seeming castle is only a cowshed.
It is a sham; it is telling a lie.
Our critical outfit is no longer complete without the weapons of morality.’
Clark had chanced upon one of the abiding ironies of the century: that this most stridently liberal of times manages to be the most illiberal in its insistence that things should be ‘genuine’.
This irony is at the heart of the British Museum's witty and challenging exhibition, ‘Fake?
The Art of Deception’, which runs until September 2nd.
Mark Jones, the exhibition's curator, has taken on the dual task of tracing the history of forgery from archaic Babylon to contemporary California, while at the same time tracing the history of how forgery is understood.
Neither is straightforward.
Some of the objects on show are clearly and satisfyingly ‘fake’, in the sense that their sole intention is deception for some form of gain.
Thus the show establishes an unlikely moral continuum between a ‘fur-bearing trout’, cobbled together by an anonymous naturalist in Victorian Canada, and the Zinoviev Letter, forged by a White Russian cell in 1924 with the (successful) intention of queering the Labour party's pitch in the general election of that year.
So far, so good: but other objects are more tricky.
Is a Rembrandt etching produced from the artist's own plate, but after his death, a fake?
Or does it become one when that plate is restored by another hand (as with Rembrandt's ‘Christ Healing the Sick’?)
A flower study by the seventeenth-century Flemish painter, Baptiste, is certainly by the artist, and bears his signature: but the blooms (and signature) were pieced together from pirated canvases.
A ‘genuine’ Baptiste?
And should an original and lovely ‘Samuel Palmer’ sketch or ‘Vermeer’canvas be any less valued when it turns out to be by Tom Keating or Henricus van Meegaeren?
When the young Raphael painted in the style of Leonardo, he was invited to redecorate the Vatican.
When Keating painted in the style of Palmer, he was picked up by the Fraud Squad.
So much for liberalism.
The uncovering of frauds is fascinating in itself.
The ‘Botticelli’ shown here, for example, was cast in doubt when Clark, then a young man, thought the face too like that of a twentieth-century screen goddess.
The robe, too, is painted in Prussian blue, a pigment not introduced until the eighteenth century.
The piece is still lovely; it was sold in 1930 for $25,000.
But it may be as little as a century old.
Perhaps the most audacious thing about this exhibition is that the British Museum should have countenanced it at all.
It is set, after all, in a museum which is a perfect Periclean Ionic temple: but it is not a temple, not in Ionia, and was built 2,300 years after Pericles's death.
Most of the 600 artefacts on show, too, come from the BM's own collection.
One of the exhibition's most striking images is the so-called Townley Discobolus.
The Discobolus, a life-size model of a discus-thrower, was a Hellenistic reworking of a classical sculpture in the first place, but that did not stop the BM from buying it; fakes seem to get less fake with age.
When it was irrefutably demonstrated to the museum's elders in 1809 that the statue's head was not genuine, however, its potential fakeness became a threat.
The museum did what any other body might have done: it firmly denied the veracity of the new evidence, not owning up until 1861.
Truth is a mutable commodity, even among its purveyors.
Perhaps the greatest irony, though, is that the birth of the great museums in the last century did as much as anything to foster the idea that there was a single, empirical truth to be told.
By narrowing the field of what is ‘real’, museums like the BM have broadened the definition of what is false.
Mr Jones's catalogue introduction claims that ‘Fakes?’ may well ‘affect our conception of reality (sic) itself’.
Unfortunately for the British Museum, the first examples of that reality experienced by the viewer on leaving the exhibition are the rooms containing its Roman collection.
One thing that has not changed with the passing millennia, however, is the rage of the man whose work is forged.
In 1506 Dürer sued Marcantonio Raimondi for producing forged engravings of his ‘Life of the Virgin’ series.
In 1981 David Hockney scrawled ‘This is not my work’ across a drawing purporting to be Hockney's ‘Colourful head-dress’of 1963.
According to Mr Jones, the modern forger's energies are more usually expended on producing counterfeit Rolexes or Lebanese ‘Johnnie Hawker’ Red Label whisky than on fine art.
One artist who managed to turn the tables on this trend was an American painter, J.S.G. Boggs.
In October 1986 Mr Boggs's drawing of a £5 note was exhibited at London's Young Unknowns Gallery.
In October 1987 it featured as an exhibit of an altogether different type, in a private criminal prosecution at the Old Bailey.
Mr Boggs was acquitted, but has subsequently been prosecuted in Australia for drawing Australian dollars.
Curiouser and curiouser.
The man after Mikhail?
GAINST THE GRAIN.
By Boris Yeltsin.
Jonathan Cape; 215 pages; £12.95.
Summit; $19.95
BORIS YELTSIN, maverick and volleyball enthusiast, is the only plausible rival to Mikhail Gorbachev for the first freely elected president of the Soviet Union.
As Mr Gorbachev's popularity wanes, the question of whether Mr Yeltsin is suited for such a job becomes more urgent.
On the evidence of this book, he is far better suited to winning the election than to succeeding in the presidency.
Boastful, overbearing and bumptious, he emerges by his own account as the eternal mocker of authority, rarely the effective wielder of it.
Here is young Boris Nikolayevich fearlessly exposing his primary-school teacher as a sadist; deprived of his right to secondary education by vengeful teachers, he triumphantly appeals over their heads and continues his studies.
Here is conscientious Boris Nikolayevich, completing his graduate dissertation in one month rather than the usual five and then refusing the automatic promotion for which this would normally have qualified him, resolving instead to spend a year laying bricks, mixing concrete and becoming one of the boys.
There again is the brave Boris Nikolayevich facing up to a murderous convict who has been given work on a building site and is threatening foreman Yeltsin with an axe; sheer strength of will sends the man packing and the construction team gets the work done on time.
Presumably Mr Yeltsin was doing all this in the name of some ideas or policies, but he barely mentions them.
He seems not to have thought, for example, about the future role of the Communist party or the way in which elections — of which he is a living symbol — might shape a future Soviet Union.
The book seems concerned with defending Mr Yeltsin rather than propounding a set of distinctive policies; it gives an unsettling impression that this man does admirable things out of vanity.
Ironically, this also makes his autobiography unsatisfactory even as a self-portrait.
Mr Yeltsin is a successful career communist who fought his way up through the construction-industry bureaucracy to become first secretary of Sverdlovsk, his home town and one of the largest cities in the Soviet Union.
This background is shared by other prominent politicians, notably the prime minister, Nikolai Ryzhkov, who also comes from Sverdlovsk and also made his name in the industrial bureaucracy.
Yet the book makes no attempt to explain why the rebellious Mr Yeltsin turned out so differently from the establishment Mr Ryzhkov.
It therefore gives little hint of what makes its author so extraordinary a figure.
Similarly, Mr Yeltsin, like Mr Gorbachev, was born into a peasant family during the calamitous 1930s and came to political maturity during the first days of Khrushchev, when hope began to dawn after Stalin's long night.
A generation of politicians is now in power whose opinions have been shaped not only by the Stalinist dictatorship but also by the defeat of the first attempts at reform.
It would be revealing to know more about the lessons Mr Yeltsin draws from this historical experience, yet the experience — along with Khrushchev's name — is all but absent from the book.
This lack of reflectiveness and disinclination to make policy has contributed to the failure of the Interregional Group of Deputies, an informal club of MPs, to turn itself into an effective parliamentary opposition.
Mr Yeltsin is its best known member and probably the only one who could give it party discipline and a distinctive ideology.
In fact, it has neither; and because of this, Mr Yeltsin himself is often underestimated.
Last September, by his own account, he was bundled into a car late one night and dumped into the Moscow river.
A police investigation found no evidence that this had happened; Mr Yeltsin refused to press charges and, in front of the parliament, dismissed the events as ‘a joke’.
The story would have sunk most politicians yet, six months later, Mr Yeltsin is the front runner for the post of president of the Russian federation — a post which, according to the logic of Mr Gorbachev's decentralising reforms, will become the second most important in the country.
His success shows that Mr Yeltsin has a useful service to perform for Soviet democracy.
He can be the scourge of the corrupt old guard.
Only a bully could have stood up to the bullying party bureaucracy; Mr Yeltsin has taken them on at their own game and beaten them.
The best parts of his book reveal the Honecker-like corruption that weaves around the top of the Communist party and embraces even Mr Gorbachev himself.
This might one day play a powerful role in the reaction against the president.
The book has one last virtue: it is, at least when it talks about people other than Mr Yeltsin, far more entertaining than most books by western politicians.
Here, as proof of glasnost, are some of Mr Yeltsin's opinions of his former colleagues:
Dmitri Yazov:’ completely lacks the grounding for the post of defence minister.’
Vadim Medvedev: ‘His grossly sententious remarks and stale vocabulary that reeked of hack journalism were unbearable.’
Mikhail Gorbachev: ‘growing more and more fond of his own voice.
It was obvious that power was exerting its hold over him; he was losing his grip on reality, possessed as he was by the illusion that perestroika was developing widely.’
Art theft
Mrs Gardner's folly
BOSTON
AN UNCONSCIOUS irony lies behind this week's massive art theft from Boston's Gardner Museum.
The sense of outrage has almost as much to do with the invasion of a hallowed shrine of old Boston as with the robbery.
Yet Mrs Gardner, a New Yorker, was cold-shouldered by Boston nineteenth-century society as a pushy outsider whose Parisian dresses were viewed with horror by the matrons of Back Bay.
‘Pray, who undressed you?’ one wit inquired, hoping to embarrass her.
He failed.
‘Worth,’ she answered.
‘And didn't he do it well?’
It might be said that the museum was Mrs Gardner's revenge; Fenway Court, the remarkable Italian palazzo which she built well outside respectable Boston among the city's breweries and distilleries, was named by her The Isabella Stuart Gardner Museum.
It was created as a monument to her own taste; her will left clear instructions against any alteration at any time to the collection of paintings, statuary and furniture.
The moving of a single chair would be sufficient reason for the museum to be instantly dissolved.
Boston might have succeeded in snubbing Mrs Gardner, but she made sure that they would never forget her.
A friend of Henry James who shared his passion for Venice (although the novelist had reservations about her creation of a fake palace in his home town), Mrs Gardner transferred her passion from clothes and jewels to art in the 1890s.
One of her first purchases has become the museum's biggest loss: ‘The Concert’ by Jan Vermeer, bought at an auction in Paris for FFr29,000.
Two years later she began using Bernard Berenson as her buyer of Italian old masters, although it might be said that Berenson was using her, praising each new find in breathless superlatives in order to get the best price out of his patroness.
No fool, Berenson went in for finding ‘Isabellas’; Mrs Gardner fancied herself as America's answer to Isabella d'Este, the great Renaissance art collector.
Her favourite Isabella (later demoted to ‘Lady in a Turban’) was snapped up for the museum in 1896, a few weeks before one of Berenson's best finds, a Rembrandt self-portrait.
Next year brought her a Titian and in 1898 Berenson persuaded her to buy Rembrandt's only known seascape.
A fine of $200,000 for violating customs laws brought her collecting to a halt in 1904, but two years later the museum was open and Mrs Gardner was collecting again.
Mrs Gardner was a regal custodian of her palace museum.
Visitors were allowed entry only in batches of 200; no sketches or notes were permitted on the premises; future directors were obliged by her will to live in situ, on the fourth floor (a rule which has been broken only by the present director).
In her own lifetime, the owner's formidable presence helped to keep the treasures safe.
‘Tapestries Slashed’, ran a dramatic headline in one paper; in fact, the would-be vandal had  scarcely taken her scissors out of her pocket before Mrs Gardner swooped on her and called the police.
It is unfortunate that Mrs Gardner's thoroughness did not extend to laying down the law about insurance.
It was only after the two thieves dressed up as policemen had escaped last Sunday with treasures conservatively estimated at $200m that it was revealed that they were uninsured.
No clear pattern has been found in the theft.
The Vermeer has gone, but the Titian was left untouched.
Two Rembrandts have gone, including the priceless seascape, but not the self-portrait.
Other losses are a superb Manet, five paintings by Degas, a Shang Dynasty beaker and a landscape by one of Rembrandt's pupils.
There is not much comfort for the museum in the knowledge that celebrated works are impossible to fence; the idiosyncratic choice of stolen works strongly suggests that one buyer's taste was being followed and that they are destined to be hidden away in a private collection, possibly in South America or Japan.
The museum has been closed since the robbery.
Concern for the safety of the remaining masterpieces makes it unlikely that  future visitors will be able to enjoy the relaxed atmosphere which was one of the museum's greatest charms.
Until now, Fenway Court has always retained the feeling of a private home, enhanced by such domestic touches as little vases of flowers, evening concerts and even a table laid out as if for tea; it never seemed wholly incredible that Mrs Gardner herself would suddenly stroll through the door.
In her charm, alas, lay her folly.
Politics and the countryside
Born-again greenery
TITMUSS REGAINED.
By John Mortimer.
Viking; 281 pages; £13.99 and $19.95
WHO are more preposterous: the developers marching round southern England drawing up plans to turn some of the world's most pleasing countryside into toytown suburbs; or the nouveau-rural Volvo commuters looking for trendy ways to stop them?
With even-handed ridicule, John Mortimer spends much of this novel making you laugh at both.
This is the sequel to ‘Paradise Postponed’, which charted the rise of Leslie Titmuss — a rural version of Norman Tebbit — from country yokel to cabinet minister.
‘Titmuss Regained’ is the story of how Titmuss, like the present Conservative party, attempts to go green.
He does so as an expedient: to protect his newly acquired country manor, threatened by a new town, and to conserve the votes of the green-welly brigade.
One of Mr Mortimer's more subtle themes is the way these new-found principles throw Titmuss into an ideological tangle.
How can he reconcile his selective greenness with a recent speech to the construction industry condemning conservationists as ‘the rich socialists who live in their converted farmhouses’?
‘Free scope for market forces and commercial development’, Titmuss muses, ‘must be balanced against the claims of the environment, and there was, surely, more environment round Rapstone Valley [his country seat]than almost anywhere else in the British Isles.’
Yet this is a politician not given to balancing market forces against anything: as unreal an animal, implies rich socialist Mr Mortimer, as a green Tory party in real life.
Political novels rarely work well both as politics and as literature.
Mr Mortimer wisely limits his literary aim to writing a ‘good bad book’: highly entertaining, but with no great subtlety of characterisation or plot.
As in Dickens, things are mainly black and white.
That makes a light read, with the serious points easily digestible.
And even characters who seem unconvincing become enjoyable representatives of their times.
Mr Mortimer does not confine his message to high politics.
He caricatures a host of little people shaped by the 1980s, from hillbillies-turned-entrepreneurs to fund-raisers who have learnt to make money out of charity.
Most are judged harshly; the exception, a quiet country doctor whose simple life is upset by the forces unleashed by Leslie Titmuss, betrays Mr Mortimer's prejudice.
For all his irreverence about ‘Nimbies’, he clearly believes there is some genuine rural idyll worth preserving.
Threatened by a new motorway or housing development near his home in the Chilterns, Mr Mortimer would probably be the biggest Nimby of them all.
AMERICAN SURVEY
The census
One, two, three…
WASHINGTON, DC
COUNTING Americans is not easy but the law insists that it be done.
The Founding Fathers declared that an ‘enumeration’ should take place every ten years so that members of the House of Representatives can be fairly apportioned among the states.
Easy for them to say.
When Americans reply to the twenty-first national census on April 1st, they will take part in a statistical marathon costing $2.5 billion and employing 8,500 full-time and 500,000 part-time staff.
It took two years for the Bureau of the Census to draw up the list of 106m households to which, on March 23rd, it posted its questionnaires.
Millions of other Americans — mainly those living in rural areas, in institutions, and in certain housing estates — will have personal visits from census-takers either to deliver or pick up the forms.
So will anybody who fails to return the questionnaire.
Other groups merit special treatment.
Census-takers have already trudged across Alaskan snow to count the Aleuts and Eskimos who quit their winter villages when the spring comes.
On March 20th their colleagues fanned out across cities to shelters, soup kitchens and street corners in order, for the first time, to try to count the homeless.
Most people will be asked 14 questions about their age, sex, race, marital status and the kind of home they live in.
One in six will get a longer form asking 59 questions about such things as housing loans, commuting patterns and job history.
In the end, the Census Bureau expects to find that the total population is about 250m, is getting older, is still moving from the north-east and midwest to the south and west, and that metropolitan areas grew more rapidly in the 1980s than in the 1970s.
It will also, eventually, accumulate a mass of fine detail: on how many people have flush-toilets, for instance.
A new and controversial question will find out how many couples of the same sex are partners (or, more accurately, how many are prepared to report the fact).
The information will become known a bit faster than it used to be.
The technology used by the bureau has improved.
Bar-code-reading ‘wands’ will check in the questionnaires as they arrive at various offices.
The answers — read from microfilm by an optical scanner — can now be processed in district offices.
These changes should allow the bureau to release the first summary reports in late spring next year, some six months or so earlier than in 1980.
For the first time, the bureau will compile population figures for the whole country by ‘street blocks’ that will be defined by roads, rivers, county boundaries and the like.
A computerised-map system known as Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing or TIGER will organise data from the census according to geography.
This should enable computers to give highly detailed information: how many people live within a radius of a certain point, for example, or how many live along a river's flood plain.
Can't please everyone
By its nature a census is political.
The American one has to decide how many members of Congress each state should have.
The bureau will tell the president this on December 31st.
It will tell the states by April 1 1991 about the shifts in their populations that call for changes in state and local constituency boundaries.
These figures not only lead to partisan squabbles and gerrymandering but also affect the amount of money that states and local jurisdictions receive from the federal government.
Some $39 billion in grants each year — for housing, education and roads — depends on the census.
This makes everybody worry about the result, wanting to make sure that the numbers are properly added up.
The counting of the homeless — and the arguments about how exact the results will be — is one manifestation of this.
Minority groups have traditionally been under-counted, particularly in big cities.
In an attempt to change that, the Census Bureau has launched a vigorous campaign to get as many people as possible to answer its questions.
To help, it has hired 300 specialists, half of them black and all but two from minority groups, to work with ethnic groups.
The bureau has designed colourful posters and brochures in different languages, aimed at audiences that include minorities, religious congregations and businesses.
Public-service advertisements have been sent to newspapers, magazines and television programmes.
Some 5,000 towns and cities have agreed, at the bureau's urging, to run their own census-awareness programmes.
Los Angeles took the census as its theme for its float in the Rose Bowl Parade.
But those who stand to lose the most from under-counting want more to be done.
After every census, the bureau conducts its own internal estimate of how many people it missed: in 1980 it thought it had missed 1.4% of the population, including 5–6% of blacks (and perhaps as many as 18% of black males).
This was made worse by a slight over-count of whites — people with two homes, for instance, tended to be double-counted.
This time the losers, including the cities of New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Houston, and the US Conference of Mayors, have taken the bureau to court to try to make it agree to change its initial 1990 findings and to add in its estimated under-count.
The bureau has said it will consider doing so if its estimates are good enough.
This will not be the only lawsuit.
After 1980 the bureau — which most people believe does as good a job as can be expected — had 52 suits filed against it.
The Founding Fathers would have been amazed.
Religion
Shelters of the Lord
SEATTLE
THE Rev Robert Schuller is possibly the best known television minister in America.
Yet he has a problem that most video pulpiteers do not.
He has a real church to manage.
And although his glitzy Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove, California, is not everybody's idea of a parish church, in its own way that is what it is.
Balancing the dual roles of minister to the world and shepherd to his own flock has taken its toll.
Early in March Mr Schuller announced that he was bringing a Seattle minister, the Rev Bruce Larson, to Garden Grove as his ‘co-pilot’.
It could be a rough flight.
The Crystal Cathedral is invariably full on Sunday.
But most of the 8,000 people sitting in the glass house are tourists drawn by Mr Schuller's fame (he is seen by about 1.3m American households each Sunday) and the eye-popping spectacle of the cathedral designed by Mr Philip Johnson.
But church membership has plunged from nearly 8,000 in 1984 to about 2,000.
Mr Schuller's local congregation is not altogether happy with his imperial style and church finances are suffering.
Enter Mr Larson, the well-liked pastor of Seattle's 3,600-member University Presbyterian Church, who has 22 books to his credit and is witty and literate behind a pulpit.
But it is his organisational and fund-raising skills that Mr Schuller most coveted: in ten years Mr Larson doubled his church's membership with people who are wonderfully ready to whip out their wallets.
Whether Mr Larson will ever start his new job, scheduled to begin in June, might be disputed by Mrs Elizabeth Prophet.
Mrs Prophet, also known as Guru Ma, has predicted a nuclear cataclysm for April 23rd.
In response nearly 3,000 of her followers, members of the Church Universal and Triumphant, have packed their possessions and fled to 33,000 acres of church-owned land in Montana's Paradise Valley.
There they are busily ferreting away food, medical supplies and weapons with which to build a new world after the current one is reduced to a moist cinder.
The church's property is honeycombed with underground shelters.
Forecasting doom is a habit of Mrs Prophet's.
She earlier proclaimed that last October would be the end of life on earth.
Church members are again braced for disappointment should April 23rd pass quietly.
This will simply mean that Guru Ma's prayers for peace were answered.
Such proof of her powers may help Mrs Prophet in her other pursuit: a down-payment of $10,000 is usually required to ensure a place in her post-nuclear world.
Montana officials have responded to Mrs Prophet's ideas of Armageddon like battle-hardened bureaucrats.
Until church members complete a sewer system, they have been forbidden to use their newly hewn bomb shelters.
The politics of death
SAN FRANCISCO AND WASHINGTON, DC
ONE of the most striking differences between the United States and other advanced industrial countries is America's enthusiasm for execution.
Over the past few years several rather unexpected countries — Cambodia, Haiti, Romania (admittedly after executing Nicolae Ceausescu) and, the latest recruit, Namibia — have joined most of Western Europe and Latin America in abolishing the death penalty for ordinary criminal offences.
Since 1976, when the Supreme Court re-established that the death penalty was constitutional, 13 American states have executed 121 people, and the number is on the rise.
Most of the executions have been in the old South.
But now California is poised for its first execution in 23 years.
Mr Robert Harris was convicted in 1978 of the particularly callous murder of two teenage boys in San Diego.
The state Supreme Court recently rejected his latest habeas corpus petition; his execution is scheduled to take place at 3am in the gas chamber at San Quentin prison on April 3rd.
There are 277 people, besides Mr Harris, waiting in the prison's five-tiered death row.
Mr Harris had applied for a clemency hearing before the governor, Mr George Deukmejian.
But on March 20th, a week before the hearing was due, he withdrew his request, saying that he could not expect a fair hearing from the governor and had no wish to take part in an ‘empty game’.
Mr Deukmejian, who was elected governor in 1982, has been trying for a mighty long time to get the death penalty enforced in California.
For several years he was frustrated by the state Supreme Court, which reviews all death sentences: over a nine-year period the court reversed 64 of 68 sentences.
But in 1986 the governor led a successful campaign by the state's voters to remove the chief justice, Miss Rose Bird, and her two liberal colleagues.
The court now upholds three-quarters of the death sentences it reviews.
In many countries besides America, public opinion strongly supports capital punishment — undeterred by the fact that no criminological study has ever been able to prove that it reduces crime.
Recent surveys find 80% of Americans in favour, though the proportion drops when they are offered the alternative of a life imprisonment that genuinely means for life.
Only once, in 1966 when there had been a lot of discussion on the ethics of capital punishment, did a Gallup poll find that American support for death as the punishment for murder had fallen below 50%.
Surveys show similar results in other countries.
The difference is that, in America, politicians are more likely to follow public opinion on this question, not try to change it.
As Mr Michael Dukakis found to his cost in 1988, voters equate opposition to the death penalty with being soft on crime, support for it with being tough.
The 1990 election campaigns are confirming that this lesson was well learnt: candidates are indulging in ghoulish rivalry in support of execution.
In California all three candidates for governor have promised to keep the gas chamber busy.
Miss Dianne Feinstein, a former mayor of San Francisco, jumped ahead of Mr John Van de Kamp, her main rival for the Democratic nomination, largely because of a television commercial in which she stressed that she was pro-choice on abortion and strongly in favour of capital punishment — a stand that some critics have summed up as pro-death.
Mr Van de Kamp, the state attorney-general, who admits to a personal distaste for execution, has responded with a commercial in which he boasts of sending people to death row — while, in the background, the camera dwells on a close-up of the gas chamber.
The Californian pattern is repeated elsewhere.
In the recent Democratic primary for governor in Texas, one candidate, Mr Mark White, put out a gruesome commercial in which he strode triumphantly past photographs of the people who had been executed while he was governor in 1983–87.
He still lost.
But Mr Jim Mattox, one of the two Democrats who will be competing in the run-off election for the party's nomination on April 10th, tried in similar vein to take credit for executions even though, as Texas's attorney-general, he is involved with civil cases, not criminal ones.
When his rival, Mrs Ann Richards, received unwanted support from a prison newspaper, the Mattox campaign quickly adopted the slogan: ‘Jim Mattox.
There are no endorsements for him on death row.’
The death penalty has featured in campaigns in Florida; in Georgia, where Mr Andrew Young, the former mayor of Atlanta who is now running for governor, has said that capital punishment is sometimes necessary; in Michigan, where the Republican Senate candidate, Mr Bill Schuette, has attacked Democratic Senator Carl Levin for opposing it; in one of this week's congressional by-elections in New York.
There is irony in the last example.
Mr Mario Cuomo, New York's governor, has led the way in showing that a politician can stand up to the capital-punishment lobby.
In vetoing repeated efforts by the state legislature to adopt the death penalty (it is still one vote short of a veto override), Mr Cuomo has taken the moral high ground — and does not seem to have lost votes by doing so.
The death penalty is on Congress's agenda too.
The Supreme Court under Chief Justice William Rehnquist is unhappy about the long delays between sentencing and execution.
There are around 2,400 people on death row; 20 times the number executed in the past 13 years.
Mr Harris has been on California's death row for 11 years and has appealed under habeas corpus eight times.
Last year a commission recommended a limit of one such appeal, together with extra safeguards about the quality of legal representation.
Mr Rehnquist urged Congress to adopt these changes.
But on March 14th he was overruled by a majority of federal judges on the Judicial Conference which sets court policy.
The conference recommended increasing the chances of a second appeal as well as toughening the standards for legal representation (there are reports of cases where people sentenced to death had been represented by law students).
The Senate will probably go along with the conference's wishes.
It may be more hesitant than the House of Representatives about extending the death penalty, for instance for drug-dealing.
And it does not like the idea of executing people who are mentally retarded or who committed their crimes when they were juveniles, though the Supreme Court has refused to rule either unconstitutional.
The Senate Judiciary Committee has also been studying evidence that the death penalty discriminates against black Americans.
Reports reviewed recently by the General Accounting Office showed that capital punishment was more likely to be imposed if the murder victim was white rather than black.
The evidence of a similar bias towards the death penalty for black rather than white murderers is less good, but still quite persuasive.
Congress may adopt a racial-justice amendment that would allow blacks to appeal against conviction on the ground of systematic racial bias.
Forgotten in this debate is the issue of cost.
Some death-penalty supporters advance the argument that it is unfair on taxpayers to expect them to finance a convict's imprisonment for life.
Yet, thanks to the cumbersome appeals procedure, each execution currently costs between $2m and $5m, four or five times what it costs to keep someone in prison for life.
And if, as Congress is contemplating, the quality of legal representation is raised to offset any dilution of the appeals procedure, those costs are unlikely to fall much.
Is there any real chance of an American change of heart?
Advocates of capital punishment are unmoved at the prospect of the United States being increasingly isolated among developed countries: such countries, they argue, have less violent crime than America has.
California's first execution may open the floodgates.
What are needed are more Mario Cuomos, politicians who are prepared to put moral and practical argument above political expediency.
Foreign aid
I know my wallet's somewhere
PRESENTED with the bill for the celebration-of-democracy party, President Bush and his legislators on Capitol Hill are searching, or making a great show of searching, their pockets.
Congress scolds the administration for not being forthcoming enough in its proposals for aid to Eastern Europe.
The White House scolds Congress for being dilatory in finding cash for Panama and Nicaragua.
The partygoers wait.
Mr Bush livened the act last week when he said he was giving Congress until March 27th to decide which current defence programmes should be trimmed to raise $870m for Panama and Nicaragua (money that is supposed to come from the 1990 Pentagon budget).
Otherwise, he said, congressmen should hand the job over to him — and he snapped his fingers to show how quickly and easily he could cut defence spending by that measly amount.
It was a vigorous performance that went down well with a public that is feeling a mite embarrassed about not putting its money where America's mouth was once so loud.
Congressmen, relieved that they no longer have to shed their reputations in fighting over Nicaragua, are quite keen to find the $300m that is seen as an inaugural present for Mrs Violeta Chamorro on April 25th.
But they have had since January to come up with the $570m that Mr Bush requested as emergency aid and compensation for post-invasion Panama.
Congressmen are reluctant to make a defence cut that might pain them in their own districts.
And some of them want most of the money to go to Eastern Europe.
As they bicker, Panama is flat broke.
America's economic sanctions failed to dislodge General Manuel Noriega but squeezed the economy dry; the invasion that did dislodge him left a war-battered city, with some 18,000 people homeless and unemployment soaring.
To show ‘solidarity with the poor’, and hoping, politely, to shame the Americans into faster delivery, President Guillermo Endara spent the first half of March fasting in Metropolitan Cathedral.
In less polite ways, Panama may be pushing its luck.
It is, for instance, asking for compensation for the guns confiscated by American troops because they belong to the Panamanian government.
But the Americans, apart from the fact that they probably provided the guns in the first place, paid out $1m to persuade people to hand them in.
A different, and harder, set of problems is raised by Eastern Europe.
The administration and Congress agree on the need to help the new or emerging democracies but disagree on almost everything else: how much aid should be given, where it should come from and who should control it.
Congress, having pooh-poohed Mr Bush's first proposals as inadequate, appropriated $433m for Poland and Hungary in fiscal 1990.
Mr Bush is now suggesting $300m for all Eastern Europe in fiscal 1991; the Senate and the House think this too little.
The lion's share of whatever figure is agreed would go to Poland and Hungary: Czechoslovakia has not, as yet, requested direct aid (President Vaclav Havel, speaking to Congress, concentrated on the importance of helping the Soviet Union); Romania, so far, gets mainly subsidised food; there are no plans for helping Bulgaria; East Germany has West Germany; Yugoslavia gets almost no direct aid.
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, the deputy secretary of state who has been given the job of co-ordinating America's help for Eastern Europe, was told by Congress that the money the administration has in mind is too modest, but that its ideas about who should control the distribution of this money are immodest.
The question is whether the congressional Democrats or the Republican administration should run the programme.
Mr Bush's men are trying to establish the administration's authority: they want to be able to decide freely where the money goes and in what form; and they want to be allowed to shift it at will from one country, and one programme, to another.
At present about 85% of foreign aid is earmarked by Congress for specific purposes in selected countries: unlucky countries that have not been singled out for earmarked money are vulnerable to savage cuts.
Mr Bush, and his secretary of state, Mr James Baker, are trying to get more control for themselves, advocating ‘constructive consultation’ with Congress as an alternative to earmarking.
Members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee got an early taste of this when they asked Mr Eagleburger how the administration proposed dividing up that $300m for Eastern Europe: his answer, again and again, was ‘I don't know’.
The dispute over control spills into the dispute about where the money should come from.
When the Republican leader in the Senate, Mr Robert Dole, suggested that 5% be taken from the five top recipients, he killed two birds with one shock-horror proposal: he sent a signal to the Israeli government, and he queried the sacrosanct nature of the earmarked programmes.
Mr Bush's insouciance in snapping $870m for Panama and Nicaragua from the 1990 defence budget suggests that extra foreign aid for Eastern Europe could, without too much difficulty, be trimmed from the 1991 defence budget.
With the president — though not his defence secretary — proposing cuts in that budget by the day, the consensus is that there will be a peace dividend in fiscal 1991 of at least $12 billion.
The new democracies have a respectable claim to some of that dividend but America's inclination, at present, is that it should all go to reducing the budget deficit.
Goodbye Quarry Heights?
PANAMA CITY
MILITARY planners are once more talking about US Southern Command leaving Panama.
No decision has been taken but the move could be as early as the summer.
Southcom controls all American military activity in Central and South America, covering 19 countries and 8m square miles.
Its headquarters staff includes six generals, headed by its controversial commander, General Maxwell Thurman.
Removing Southcom headquarters from Quarry Heights, a hill with a commanding view over Panama City and the canal, will still leave 13,000 American troops in Panama dispersed among nine bases.
Under the Panama canal treaties, the United States is to hand over all military facilities to Panama in a gradual ‘draw-down’ before the end of 1999.
Debate on Southcom's future, which has dragged on for years, was put on hold when American relations with General Noriega reached rock-bottom.
With him removed, the way has been reopened.
Seven new sites in the United States are under consideration; the likely favourite is the MacDill air force base at Tampa in Florida.
Cab, sir?
NEW YORK
SURPRISING: there are people in New York who say that the city is too rude.
A group called New York Pride is trying to persuade fellow citizens to show more civility.
The idea, supported with advertisements and an ‘anti-scowl’ logo, is that the city would be a less fearsome place if people were nicer to each other.
Will New York's taxi-drivers, known everywhere for their direct approach, heed this message?
A special commission handles 500–800 complaints a day.
Cabbies have been known to overcharge, to threaten passengers and to hurl their luggage around with little concern as to where it lands.
Yes; The Economist's own inspector can report.
Every taxi-driver he encountered was polite, indeed charming.
Two went so far as to offer to reduce the metered fare after having taken a wrong turn in error.
‘My goodness, I do apologise’: or words to that effect.
Clearly the tide of beastliness has turned.
Connecticut
Weicker redux
NEW HAVEN
WHEN Mr William O'Neill, the governor of Connecticut, announced on March 20th that he would not run for re-election, he gave two reasons.
First were the ‘political realities’ that faced him; second, he said, was his fear that he would have to campaign negatively in order to succeed.
The political reality is that Connecticut is suffering from the economic slowdown that has hit most of the north-east.
Last year Mr O'Neill was obliged to raise taxes by $1 billion and to cut both spending and staff (though the state's budget deficit is still expected to rise above $90m this year).
His popularity rating dropped accordingly.
A large cast of characters was lining up to challenge Mr O'Neill before he announced his decision (and others may now join the battle).
The challengers include two congressmen and a heterodox former Republican senator who stirs strong emotions on both sides of the political fence.
The ex-Republican is Mr Lowell Weicker, a blunt critic of the conservative wing of the party, who was unseated in 1988 after a number of prominent right-wing politicians supported his Democratic opponent.
Mr Weicker will now run as an independent.
He has neither a running mate nor a campaign headquarters, but when he announced his bid he shot to the top of the polls.
This prompted two Republican candidates who are faring poorly to invite Mr Weicker back to the party; he refused.
The leading Republican and Democratic contenders are Representatives John Rowland and Bruce Morrison.
Mr Rowland is a man in the mould of Vice-President Dan Quayle: young, handsome and hawkish.
He has supported the MX missile, star wars and chemical-weapons production.
He has visited Vietnam several times to search for missing American soldiers, a venture that plays well in his district which is home to a lot of ex-servicemen.
Mr Morrison has been likened to another vice-president, the late Hubert Humphrey.
A former legal-aid attorney, Mr Morrison is unusual in accepting, even welcoming, a liberal label.
White and black Chicago
‘MARIA PAPPAS for County Commissioner’, ‘Raul Villalobos for State Attorney’, ‘William Patrick O'Malley for Judge’.
After five minutes in Chicago, where every lamp-post is festooned with flyers, where every office is up for grabs, and where every name proclaims the city's ethnic diversity, a visitor swims in the sheer exuberance.
So much for the handwringing about the decline of the political process that goes on in Washington.
In a year without a presidential contest, in elections that were merely primaries — and mainly for local offices — around 45% of registered voters turned out on March 20th.
This would not be bad by any country's standards.
But there is more: Chicago's elections, once notoriously corrupt, now seem pretty clean.
One of the contests on Tuesday was the primary election for Illinois's next governor.
After 14 years in office the state's Republican governor, Mr Jim Thompson, is standing down.
As expected, Mr Jim Edgar, Illinois's secretary of state, won the Republican party's nomination.
But his young challenger, Mr Steven Baer, won around a third of the vote with little money and no organisation.
All he did was to say ‘no’ to tax increases and to abortions.
His relative success was proof that the managerial style that Mr Bush has adopted in Washington has not doused the passions of those conservatives who like their right-wing politics raw.
Chicago was reminded that defeating an incumbent member of the House of Representatives is not easy.
Two members of Chicago's congressional delegation, Mr Sidney Yates and Mr Gus Savage, faced strong challenges.
Yet both won.
Of the two, Mr Yates, who will be 81 in November and has been in Congress almost without a break since he was first elected in 1948, had the easier time of it.
His admirers think of him as a national treasure, rather like the works of art of which he is Congress's most passionate defender.
His critics say that his main contact with his Chicago district is a fond wave from the aeroplane as he travels from Los Angeles to Washington.
His challenger, Mr Edwin Eisendrath, a city alderman, had tried to stitch together a coalition of young apolitical professionals and ‘reform’ Democrats.
He failed.
Mr Savage, like Mr Yates, is an original, but only his most devoted fans would think him a lovable one.
More than any other black member of the House, he plays the racist card.
He has cultivated a reputation on the black south side of Chicago as a battler, and he spices this reputation with attacks on the ‘racist white media’.
In Washington he is considered an ineffective legislator and not a nice man (his latest scrape involved the allegation that he had sexually harassed a Peace Corps worker while on a jaunt to Africa).
But it is different at home.
His coup this time was to read a list, shortly before polling day, of Jews who had contributed to the campaign of his challenger, Mr Mel Reynolds.
Mr Reynolds, a dignified man who was Illinois's first black Rhodes scholar, wondered if Mr Savage would like to ban Jewish contributions to the United Negro Colleges Fund.
For a while, after the polls closed, it looked as if Mr Reynolds might pull off a stunning upset.
But those early returns were from the middle-class parts of the district.
When the poorer south-side wards started to report, it became clear that Mr Savage was back.
His victory speech started by being vicious and unforgiving — and ended by calling for harmony.
Unfortunately, Mr Savage has half a point.
The local contests showed just how racially polarised Chicago politics remains.
Witness the race for the presidency of the Cook County board of commissioners.
It was won by Mr Richard Phelan, a white political novice with a lot of money and appeal in the rich white suburbs; he beat Mr Eugene Pincham, a black judge.
Mr Savage promptly claimed that black Chicagoans support white Democratic candidates, but that the converse does not hold — even when the black candidate is someone as respected as Harold Washington, mayor of the city from 1983 until his death in 1987.
New Daleymen
The surprise winner on election night was Mr Richard Daley, who is now Chicago's mayor.
It was a surprise because the candidates who emerged from the famous political machine put together by his late father (also Richard Daley) did poorly.
But the mayor had studiously avoided endorsing any of the old pols running.
In a host of minor races, younger and mildly reformist Democrats came to the fore.
None of them would necessarily call himself a Daleyite, and Mr Daley would deny that he was creating a Democratic machine anything like the one that his father ran with such effect.
He launched himself, after Mayor Washington's death, on a reformist clean-government ticket and is supported by people sternly opposed to the old-style goings-on.
Nonetheless, something seems to be happening; a new political machine may be being cranked up.
Plainly, Chicago is doing well.
Inner-city areas, such as the Clybourn Avenue corridor and River North, are being revived by young professionals who have decided that the suburbs are boring.
This gentrification is taking place cheek by jowl with large public-housing projects, exactly the kind of urban renewal that pessimists thought American cities would never again be able to manage.
The fly in the ointment, and a huge one, is that this new Chicago, new Democratic party, and new city government is white (or anyhow non-black).
The most popular politician among the 40% of the city that is black may well be Mr Savage.
Therein lies a warning.
ASIA
AIDS?
What AIDS?
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
BANGKOK
IN THE dirt-poor villages of northern Thailand, the birth of a son used to be cause for celebration.
Over the past decade daughters have become more popular.
A few years' work in the brothels of Bangkok can earn girls more money than their families ever dreamt of.
Some even married foreigners.
And the brothel-owners paid for the restoration of village temples and schools to help keep up the supply of young girls.
Many of these girls are now coming home with AIDS.
In one small village in Phayao province, in the north-east, 33 girls are reported to have the disease.
And the villagers' reaction — to ignore the problem as much as possible — is shared by the Thai government.
According to official figures, as of February 1st 141 Thais had died from AIDS and 14,116 were infected with HIV, the virus that causes the disease.
In all of Asia only India had more cases — and India's population is 15 times Thailand's.
The official Thai figures underestimate the true extent of infection.
Thailand is an ideal place for the virus to spread.
Thai society condemns almost no behaviour, except criticism of the royal family.
The country has a huge population of heroin addicts, homosexuality is widely practised, and men of all ages and from all classes make regular use of the big cities' vast red-light districts.
Thailand's health ministry says there are about 80,000 prostitutes in the country; the police reckon there are at least eight times that number.
The size and range of the country's sex business may mean that Thailand is in for the world's fastest upswing in HIV infection.
The fragmentary evidence is frightening enough.
Dr Vicharn Vithayasai, from the University Hospital in Chiang Mai, northern Thailand's biggest city, has recently carried out surveys there and in nearby towns and villages.
He thinks that in Chiang Mai alone 30,000 people are infected with HIV.
A series of tests was carried out among the prostitutes who came voluntarily to venereal-disease clinics in late 1989.
The lowest proportion revealed to have the virus in their blood was 44%, the highest 72%.
In July 1988, when Dr Vicharn started to do tests, only 0.6% were HIV-positive.
Low-class hookers, who charge no more than 50 baht ($2) a time and entertain as many as 20 customers a day, had the highest rates of infection.
Five samples of 100 men each — probably not chosen at random— showed that 2–6% of Chiang Mai's male population carry the virus.
Many of them pass it on to their wives; 1% of the women who came for pre-natal tests at the hospital were HIV-positive.
Government spokesmen say Chiang Mai is untypical: prostitutes in Bangkok found to be infected are often sent home to the north, where they continue to practise the only trade they know.
It is hard to argue the point since no broad surveys have been carried out in Bangkok, but what is known offers little ground for hope.
Drug addicts, for instance, seem just as widely infected in the capital.
Bangkok is well supplied with ‘shooting galleries’ where pushers go down lines of addicts giving them all a fix with the same needle.
In 1987 only 1% of Bangkok addicts who sought medical treatment were infected with HIV.
By April last year more than half were.
Mr Chatichai Choonhavan, Thailand's prime minister, is busy trying to hold his unstable coalition together.
Last November he refused to chair a conference on AIDS for fear it might cause panic.
Most other efforts to air the issue in public have been suppressed.
The moguls of Thailand's flourishing tourist industry do not want bad news to interfere with good times, especially among all those single men who crowd Bangkok airport.
It does not move them that the cost of looking after the hundreds of thousands of Thais who are likely to be infected by 1995 will far exceed that of a few cancelled holidays.
Imelda on trial
THE former first lady of the Philippines, Mrs Imelda Marcos, does not believe in dealing with underlings.
She has written to President Bush offering to hand over part of her late husband's fortune for distribution to the poor in the Philippines.
In return, she says, the body of Ferdinand Marcos should be let into the Philippines for burial.
Mrs Marcos may believe that America still has the final say in Philippine affairs; after all, America persuaded her husband to call the election that led to his downfall in 1986.
Or she may simply be trying to snub President Cory Aquino, who refuses to allow Marcos back, even through he is dead; and has barred Imelda too.
Mrs Marcos does not say how much money she would turn over, or how big the Marcos fortune is.
It is probably a wise precaution in view of allegations that the couple stole billions of dollars from their country.
Mrs Marcos went on trial in New York this week, on March 20th, by coincidence the day on which the contents of her letter to Mr Bush was disclosed.
Like all of the Marcos affairs, the trial promises to be complex.
Mrs Marcos — improbably described by her lawyer as ‘a small, fragile woman’— is accused of fraud in connection with her purchases of property in New York.
Mr Adnan Khashoggi, a Saudi arms dealer, is being tried with her, accused of helping out in the property deals.
In Manila the Philippine government testily rejected Mrs Marcos's offer of help to the poor, and continued its interminable task of trying to get its hands on the Marcos money.
This week art experts have been valuing ‘old master’ paintings bought by the couple and left behind when they fled to America.
Like much of the Marcos story, at least some of the paintings are thought to be fakes.
Behind the screen
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN TOKYO
FOR a man seen in America as an oriental devil incarnate, Mr Shintaro Ishihara, co-author of the notorious ‘The Japan that can say no’, is an appealing fellow.
A natty dresser who looks much younger than his 57 years, he is everything that Americans ask for in Japanese politicians: charismatic, decisive, articulate, a natural leader.
Visiting senators and journalists who meet him generally go away charmed.
It is what he stands for that they don't like.
So he is setting out to change that.
He is putting it about that he is in favour of one of America's most important — and sensitive — trade demands: that Japan should open its markets to rice imports.
It sounds unbelievable: a well-known right-winger advocating the import of an item supposedly sacred to Japanese culture.
But Mr Ishihara has made a career out of being shocking, and he has a good motive.
He represents the Shinagawa area of Tokyo, and so has no worries about offending farmers.
Nor is he part of any of the Liberal Democratic party's main factions; instead, he runs his own small ‘study group’.
He says that a lower rice price would not only help his constituents but also make Japan's economy stronger — which is, after all, a good nationalist aim.
He sneers at the arguments against it: self-sufficiency and the tired old cultural card.
Baloney, he says.
The reputations outside Japan of Mr Ishihara and his co-author, Mr Akio Morita of Sony, could do with some buffing up.
Their book caused a storm in America last year, mainly because of inflammatory passages suggesting Japan might sell technology to the Russians to spite the United States.
The book prospered in Japan — more than 1m copies have been sold — but Mr Morita regrets his part in the venture.
He has withdrawn his chapters from an authorised English translation due later this year, and is about to spend a month in America mending fences.
It is a considerable sacrifice: last month Mr Ishihara sold the world rights to Simon & Schuster for $275,000 — even though without Mr Morita's parts the book will be slim.
Mr Ishihara does himself no harm by playing the renegade.
He is popular in Japan, more like a movie star than a politician (partly because his brother, Yujiro, was a real film star until he died last year).
The public also remembers Mr Ishihara's early career as a novelist.
In 1956 his book ‘Season of the Sun’, which won the Akutagawa award, struck several chords in a Japan seeking to restore its confidence.
In one famous passage the hero vents his frustration by masturbating through a paper shoji screen — a sign of contempt for yet another revered symbol of Japanese culture.
The proud flouting of taboos remains the Ishihara style.
Thailand
The general's manoeuvres
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
THAI democracy is a delicate flower.
Since the beginning of this year Mr Chatichai Choonhavan's coalition government has been agonising over whether General Chaovalit Yongchaiyudh will resign as commander-in-chief of Thailand's armed forces.
It is widely assumed that the general, who has been doing his best to fan the speculation, will try to become prime minister after he leaves the army.
‘An attempted coup without tanks,’ is how a diplomat described the frenzy of political haggling in which Bangkok is now engaged.
General Chaovalit has talked of resigning before.
He may yet decide to serve out his term as army chief until 1992, when he reaches the retirement age of 60.
However, even in the fluid world of Thai politics, this time he may have gone too far to turn back.
He has said, and subsequently confirmed, that he will step down shortly after March 27th, when the King is due to award him a medal.
His successor has been named.
The general's resignation, if it does happen, will be the culmination of months of political manoeuvring.
In January, as charges of corruption began to mount against the government, Mr Chatichai offered General Chaovalit a job in the cabinet.
The general thought he could do better, and for a time considered launching his own party.
This costly option was rejected.
Instead, the general has been playing politics outside the cabinet.
A mysterious strike at Bangkok's port, which handles more than 80% of the country's trade, was settled only after the general intervened.
Last week Mr Chatichai again offered General Chaovalit a job, this time as defence minister and deputy prime minister.
But the general wants to be prime minister.
He sees no reason to give up his present powerful job for anything less.
Thai coups may be a thing of the past, but the army is probably in a stronger position now than it ever was.
When Mr Chatichai was elected in 1988 he arranged an informal slicing of the pie with the armed forces.
The civilians would look after the waves of foreign investment lapping into Thailand, while the armed forces would retain their grip on many state-owned enterprises and would be given a free hand to run Thailand's relations with its neighbours.
The army has profited nicely from acting as a conduit for arms supplies to the resistance armies fighting in Cambodia and from its control of the timber and gem trades with Cambodia, Laos and Burma.
It has been alarmed by Mr Chatichai's dream of turning Indochina ‘from a battlefield into a marketplace’: this would end the army's grip on the border trade.
Mr Chatichai has to rebuild his government's popularity if he is to fend off General Chaovalit.
He is pinning some hope on a cabinet reshuffle.
Mr Pramual Sabhavasu, the finance minister, will probably have to go.
Mr Pramual is a self-made baht-billionaire.
A government commission is now investigating how these billions were made.
Ministers are spending so much time wondering who else might go that little governing is getting done.
This paralysis may ensure that, after three years of breathtaking growth, the Thai economy has a hard rather than a soft landing.
Mainly because of Mr Pramual's opposition a much needed increase in interest rates was delayed until last week.
The government is running the Oil Fund, designed to maintain stable oil prices, at a deficit rather than risk passing on price increases to consumers.
Viewing this mismanagement, General Chaovalit claims that all politicians and businessmen are corrupt.
Bangkok, he says, is another Babylon.
He sees himself as the man to even out inequalities and re-impose Buddhist order.
Will be get a chance to try out his ideas?
Many Thais believe the question is when, not if.
Japan
The lad does well
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
MR TOSHIKI KAIFU, Japan's prime minister, may still be a little wet behind the ears but, not for the first time, he has confounded his more experienced rivals.
Since returning from the weekend meeting in Palm Springs, California, to which President Bush summoned him early this month, Mr Kaifu has seized the high ground at home in Japan's efforts to avert a trade war with the United States.
His efforts may yet come to naught.
But for the first time in his eight months in office, Mr Kaifu now has a chance of pulling off a coup big enough to ensure his survival as prime minister.
Before the Palm Springs meeting, trade talks between Japan and America were going nowhere.
An evidently shaken Mr Kaifu returned from Palm Springs convinced that trade relations were not a problem but a crisis.
This time, Mr Kaifu was convinced, the Americans would not be shut up with a promise here, a concession there.
He convened a group within the cabinet to wrest control of Japan's end of the two countries' Structural Impediments Initiative (SII) talks from the civil servants.
In doing so, Mr Kaifu has neatly tied a handful of fortunes — his own included — to a successful outcome in the talks.
Senior members of the ruling Liberal Democratic party have started to criticise ministries for not taking American complaints seriously.
For the first time, civil servants accustomed to running Japan as they see fit are feeling the hot breath of their political masters on their necks.
The home affairs ministry had been against American requests to relax the law that protects small shopkeepers by making it hard for supermarkets and department stores (big importers all) to open branches in their neighbourhoods.
Now Mr Keiwa Okuda, the new home affairs minister, wants to scrap the store law; he even chastises the trade minister, Mr Kabun Muto, for tolerating half-way measures from his bureaucrats.
The government's interim report on the SII talks, expected in April, will now say that the store law should be scrapped, possibly as early as 1992.
Japan's somnolent Fair Trade Commission is also being shaken awake.
Since Palm Springs, the commission's chairman, Mr Setsuo Umezawa, has been telling everyone that he would welcome an increase in the penalties for anti-competitive behaviour.
His bluff is to be called.
The interim SII report will spell out the new powers that the commission will shortly have at its disposal, including higher penalties (currently 1.5% of the profits earned from operating a cartel).
Mr Kaifu's success in budging the government on all this suggests that powerful people are working on his behalf.
However, his allies in the cabinet — the finance minister, Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, the party secretary-general, Mr Ichiro Ozawa, and Mr Okuda, the home-affairs minister — are all ardent followers of the former prime minister, Mr Noboru Takeshita.
It was Mr Takeshita who picked the unknown Mr Kaifu to serve as a prime ministerial seat-warmer until the Recruit scandal died down sufficiently to return the job to one of the usual party bosses.
Things did not go according to Mr Takeshita's plan.
Mr Kaifu has turned out to be more of a winner than a cipher.
His direct ways won enough support among the voters for the Liberal Democrats to enjoy a bigger-than-expected victory in last month's election for the lower house of parliament.
With every fresh success for the 57-year-old prime minister, it becomes that much harder for a member of Mr Takeshita's generation to reclaim the top job.
After the election, the bosses allowed Mr Kaifu to continue as prime minister on the strict understanding that he would hand over to a heavyweight like the former foreign minister, Mr Shintaro Abe, when the going got rough.
Party officials half expected the trade talks to break down eventually, at which point Mr Abe would make his entrance.
No one imagined that Mr Bush would intervene as abruptly as he did, or that Mr Kaifu would go off to Palm Springs without so much as a by-your-leave to the party barons.
Mr Takeshita, who subsequently wangled a meeting with Mr Bush to chat about the SII talks, has spent the past couple of weeks trying to get back into the limelight.
He has a good reason.
Mr Abe, who was to succeed Mr Takeshita as prime minister before the Recruit scandal intervened, is not a healthy man; he has had to return to hospital.
The most tantalising of opportunities has thus opened up for Mr Takeshita: the chance to be prime minister again.
To seize it he must not let Mr Kaifu get all the credit if the trade talks succeed.
But Mr Kaifu is in no mood to let anyone steal his thunder.
It is a piece of Japanese competition that can only delight the Americans.
China
A dictator's way
FROM OUR CHINA CORRESPONDENT
TIME does not seem to mellow China's prime minister, Mr Li Peng.
‘Only socialism can save China,’ he says.
‘Only socialism can develop China…
If we do not uphold socialism and leadership by the Communist party, we can expect no stability in the country, no unity among the people and no rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.’
China has learned to be sceptical on that score, but on March 20th Mr Li was talking to the theoretically converted — the 2,700 delegates to the annual National People's Congress in Beijing.
In case their faith was wavering, Mr Li, misleadingly dressed in a western business suit instead of the again-fashionable Mao garb, added a reminder of the inevitability of class struggle: ‘While fostering socialist democracy and the socialist legal system, we must intensify dictatorship by the socialist state apparatus.’
But what does Mr Li's brand of socialism portend for the 1.1 billion people who endure life in the world's most populous nation?
The immediate answer is an intolerance of dissent — be it political or economic — and a doctrinaire mistrust of the world outside the Middle Kingdom.
China has been observing the 150th anniversary of the outbreak of the first opium war.
The schools, Mr Li said, must alert children to ‘the crime committed by imperialists in their aggression against China so as to heighten vigilance against the imperialist strategy of peaceful evolution’.
Peaceful evolution?
That is code for seduction by capitalism — the temptation to which Eastern Europe has so eagerly succumbed.
Mr Li, aged 61, does not rule alone.
He owes his position to the support of his elders, who, like the Russian-trained prime minister, are steeped in the dogmatic authority of central planning.
Hence the unwillingness of the senior (and supposedly retired) leader, Mr Deng Xiaoping, to pursue the economic reforms he began in 1978 to their logical conclusion in a free market.
Even for old conservatives, though, a return to central planning carries no guarantee of a stress-free future.
Ever since September 1988, Mr Li's government has been pressing an austerity programme to cool the economy.
The tools of the programme are exactly the ones that Mr Li intends to use in the future: central-bank control of credit and state-set levels for production and prices.
The results have hardly been inspiring.
True, inflation has been brought down from around 30% a year during the gung-ho days of the disgraced party chief, Mr Zhao Ziyang, to single figures.
But industrial output has fallen in four of the past five months.
Some 200m peasants have no real work, and unemployment in the cities is at least 4%.
Factory bonuses have been replaced by compulsory pay deductions to buy government bonds, and many enterprises say they cannot buy the bonds because they no longer have any cash.
It is a nightmare that would test the most brilliant economist.
Mr Li is not an economist, but at least he recognises some of the imperfections of the policy his economists tell him to follow.
Industry had stalled because, Mr Li admitted, his State Council, or cabinet, had ‘failed to adopt timely and rigorous measures for macro-control and apply effective methods’.
The belated correction: investment in agriculture will be increased by 30%; curbs on the money supply will be relaxed; loans will be given to exporters and indebted state enterprises; ‘specialised groups’ will be set up to break ‘debt chains’between enterprises.
It sounds suspiciously like a ‘stop-go’ recipe for the alternation of inflationary booms and resource-misallocating busts.
What happens next?
The great fear of China's leaders is not that western conspirators will weave more plots but that China's people, enraged by corruption and scornful of slogans, will take to the streets, as they did last June, to demand instant solutions that the government cannot possibly provide.
In the days of Chairman Mao, author of the disastrous Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution, the party could belittle such dangers.
Today's China is very different.
The reforming years of Mr Deng and Mr Zhao have ended in inflation and corruption — but not before China achieved annual real GNP growth in the 1980s of 10.5%, the world's highest after Oman.
The challenge of Mr Li and his comrades is to meet the popular expectations inspired by that growth.
To do that, China, with a foreign debt of over $40 billion and with precious few new foreign credits since the bloodshed of last June, needs foreign trade and foreign friends.
Judging by his performance at the opening of the congress, Mr Li is content to be friendless.
Murmurs of the Taiwanese unmentionable, independence
FROM OUR CHINA CORRESPONDENT
TAIPEI
STUDENTS in their thousands gather at the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall, Taiwan's holiest of holies, to demand democracy; teenage idealists begin a fast; daubings (one is the Chinese character for ‘pig’) disfigure Chiang's monument.
As aged members of the National Assembly — some in wheelchairs, others with canes — vote a new six-year term for President Lee Teng-hui, one student slogan reads: ‘If the old thieves don't quit, democracy will never come.’
It all seems like last year in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
It isn't, quite.
President Lee too wants the ‘old thieves’ to retire, even though, on March 21st, some 96% of them endorsed his unopposed candidature.Mr Lee recognises the 752-member assembly for what it is — an anachronism instinctively opposed to the reforms begun three years ago by the late President Chiang Ching-kuo (a son of Chiang Kai-shek) and carried on by Mr Lee.
Only 84 assemblymen were chosen by the people of Taiwan; the rest last faced the voters in China itself, before they had to flee the mainland's victorious communists in 1949.
Some 40 assemblymen are now in their nineties; almost half are octogenarians.
Death will before long end their mockery of representative government.
Yet even old men can stomp about.
The reason Taiwan's normally placid students got upset is that the assembly is showing unexpected signs of vigour.
The assemblymen have precious few functions to perform for their $4,000-a-month salaries and free board and lodging; they merely meet every six years to elect a new president and vice-president.
But the assembly also has the power — never used — to amend the constitution.
This month its old-guard steering committee decided a better constitution would include annual meetings by the assembly, and powers for it to initiate laws and to veto bills from the legislature.
Incidentals were a quadrupling of salaries and the extension for an extra three years, until 1996, of the terms of the 84 Taiwan-elected members.
The implication was obvious: the present National Assembly intended to defy death and select a compliant successor to Mr Lee in 1996.
What should have been equally obvious to the assemblymen was the fury they were thus provoking, including megaphonic demonstrations by the opposition Democratic Progressive party to coincide with the students' protests.
By March 19th the ruling Kuomintang had twisted enough old arms in the assembly to ensure that it would drop its plans.
What next?
It is easy to dismiss recent events as the exuberance of youth and the last power struggle of the impotent old.
The facts speak otherwise — first because Mr Lee is no longer exempted from attacks by his own Kuomintang colleagues; second because the students and the opposition, which won 40% of the vote in December's legislative and local elections, have forced Taiwan's rulers to seek their advice in mapping the island's future.
The two are connected, since they both involve the tactics and ideals of the president.
Mr Lee, who is the first leader to be Taiwan-born and Taiwan-bred, has a taste for reforms that go too far and too fast for the old-guard mainlanders.
He weakens Taiwan's adherence to the Three Noes — no contact, no negotiation and no compromise with the ‘bandit regime’ on the mainland — by easing the rules for travel and trade between Taiwan and China.
By giving more or less free rein to the more extreme parts of the opposition, he encourages talk of Taiwan's independence.
Eleven members of the Democratic Progressive party elected to the National Assembly have been barred from taking their seats because they will not take an oath of loyalty to the Republic of China (the official name for Taiwan), only to the Republic of Taiwan.
Independence may be a reality in fact if not in name, but it contradicts the dream of a united China that both the Kuomintang and the communists of Beijing hold dear — so dear that China has always threatened to use force if Taiwan declared independence.
Somehow Mr Lee has to carry the old guard with him, not least because the mainlanders dominate the legislature as well as the National Assembly.
But the price of party unity is youthful impatience.
It was the president's problems with the old guard that almost led to a challenge to his authority.
Around 150 assemblymen wanted to nominate a rival team: Mr Lin Yang-kang, a Taiwanese, for president, and General Chiang Wei-kuo for vice-president.
Mr Lin is popular enough, but the choice of Mr Chiang, another son of Chiang Kai-shek, looked suspiciously like an attempt to renew the Chiang dynasty.
Eventually, the two men said they would not stand.
The Kuomintang has to accept change.
Taiwan's economic growth has been probably the world's fastest over the past two decades.
The island's 20m people now have an income per head of well over $7,000 a year.
A sturdily middle-class society does not sit easily atop political immobility; and, indeed, Taiwan has been experimenting with reform for the past three years.
The president, at least, has recognised the challenge.
He got the students to leave the Memorial Hall by promising a ‘National Affairs Conference’ to reach a ‘consensus on issues such as constitutional reform and mainland China policy’.
Such a conference is one of the students' demands.
The others are a timetable for democratic reform, the scrapping of ‘temporary provisions’ which allow the constitution to be suspended while the ‘communist rebels’rule China; and the disbanding of the National Assembly.
The demands are easier stated than met.
Only the National Assembly has the power to amend the constitution or vote itself out of office — an unlikely prospect given that only 50 or so assemblymen have accepted the government's offer of a $175,000 tax-free retirement pension.
One demand would be met, said Mr Ma Ying-jeou, a Kuomintang Central Committee member, if the president ended the ‘temporary provisions’ by formally declaring the communist rebellion to be over.
An odd proposal, but no odder than the belief sustained for 40 years that the Kuomintang would return to Beijing to rule all of China.
In their convoluted way, the Taiwanese may be thinking of power-sharing with Beijing.
Or they may be thinking about the unthinkable: independence for their tiny — but vastly more successful — China.
INTERNATIONAL
How Brazil's new president turned off the money
FROM OUR BRAZIL CORRESPONDENT
THE latest piece of Brazilian economics is of a kind to make heads spin.
The new president, Mr Fernando Collor de Mello, has cast aside the timid economic adjustments that have failed to cure Latin America's sick borrowers.
He offers the unassailable proposition that without money there can be no inflation.
President Collor's plan combines free marketeering and authoritarian intervention in a bewildering but roughly equal mix.
He launched it on March 16th, the day he took office, and thus fulfilled his campaign promise to ‘leave the right wing indignant and the left gasping.’
He has locked away $115 billion in private savings and taxed wealth to the hilt.
The businessmen who last year jostled to fill Mr Collor's campaign chest now sound like the turkeys who cackled for an early Christmas.
The trade unions and the left are protesting about a drop in real pay and the prospect of mass unemployment.
Yet the first opinion polls showed almost 60% of those questioned behind the president.
Congress, which has frustrated so many earlier reformers' ambitions, will heed that sign.
Within a month, the president needs congressional approval for his package of 22 provisional measures.
No one doubts that, if the programme is rigorously carried out, inflation, which had topped 80% a month when the new government took office, will collapse.
Fiscal, monetary and administrative reforms, and the elimination of almost all subsidies, are designed to squeeze $35 billion out of the government deficit.
Last year the government had a budget deficit equal to 8% of GDP.
This year it intends to run a surplus equal to 2% of GDP.
All this will fall hard on the private sector.
The chief of the federal police, Mr Romeu Tuma, now doubles as chief inspector of taxes, with new legislation to punish evasion.
Taxes on share dealings, gold trading, large fortunes and even farm income spell the end of an era for Brazil's rich — unless they find the loopholes.
Nobody can dodge the monetary reform.
For five days before the president's announcement all banks were closed, by order.
People with interest-bearing deposits (and, with inflation roaring away, no sensible person held cash) now find most of what they used as ready money locked away.
Depositors in overnight money-market accounts — which total around $70 billion — have seen 80% of their assets frozen for 18 months.
Those with deposits in savings accounts fared even worse: all but $1,000 of each deposit is put out of circulation.
The limits on cash withdrawals were so strict that many companies found themselves without cash even to pay wages.
The banks, threatened with the loss of many lucrative transactions (and with expensive computer networks to maintain) were not co-operating with the authorities, who talked of sending the police round to see that they did.
Once again, the Brazilians get a new currency.
Last week's ‘new cruzados’, ravaged by inflation, are blocked and replaced by cruzeiros (which happens to be what the currency was called up till 1986).
Those who want to get at the frozen part of their savings in the old currency will have to buy new currency from the central bank, at auctions where it will cost them well over its face value.
Meanwhile, the government claims that old currency left in interest-bearing accounts should hold its value, so long as it is not spent.
The impact of the freeze was instantaneous.
As soon as the banks reopened everybody was short of cruzeiros to spend.
Share trading collapsed, the gold price plummeted and the black market for dollars vanished.
The immediate effect should be a deep recession; that must be what the government intended.
But, showing his interventionist hand, the president warned employers that, if they lay off too many workers, six-month job security will become mandatory.
Even more interventionist was the one-month compulsory ‘truce’ imposed on prices.
But the policemen sent to see that shops obeyed the rule had little work to do: there was no money to push up prices.
On pay, the bad old tradition of linking monthly wage rises to the government estimate of monthly inflation was preserved — with the difference that only half of March's 80% decline in the value of pay-packets will be made up in April.
The president tried to soothe the unions by promising that, as inflation drops to zero in a few weeks, real pay will increase.
Yet the president's radicalism unfortunately did falter when it came to the public sector.
Electioneering, he had talked tough about getting government off the backs of the people.
His great plan did little to curb the spendthrift state.
The country has about 6m public employees of all kinds.
Closing a raft of useless federal establishments will get rid of only some 80,000 of them.
No dismissals have been announced among the millions who get their pay from the state and municipal administrations, which are anyway being exempted from the liquidity squeeze.
The president's disappointing administrative reform will pare off public spending worth only 0.5% of GDP.
The initial privatisation programme looks relatively timid.
There had been talk of privatisations worth $16m; in the event the take will be half that.
Banks and financial institutions will be forced to buy privatisation certificates, but will gain only the dead twigs of the state sector.
The heartwood — the oil, steel, communications and electricity companies — is being saved for later; nationalists will resist a sell-off, while employees will cling to their pay-packets.
There is little comfort for foreign creditors hoping for an end to the six-month moratorium on debt payments.
The Central Bank has frozen all remittances of profits, dividends and interest.
The Collor administration wants to start fresh debt talks next month, while insisting that annual interest payments must not exceed $5 billion, half of what normally comes due.
Yet the government, by bravely liberalising imports and by treating foreign investors more favourably, hopes in the longer run to push Brazil at last into the corral of ‘model debtors’, with access to overseas money and to debt relief under the Brady plan.
Traps ahead
The president will have to get his scheme through the courts.
A lot of people suspect that blocking savers' access to their money violates the new constitution's explicit ban on compulsory loans to the government.
Mr Collor seems to fear so; at least, he has produced legislation preventing judges from granting interim injunctions to allow depositors access to their money.
This looks even more unconstitutional — but while the lawyers debate that question, the government could be holding the monetary line.
In Congress the fight could be tougher yet.
An election is due in October.
The 10% of the people rich enough to have savings accounts will be yelling for their money.
Businessmen — especially Mr Collor's original fans, from the subsidy-hooked north-east — will be lobbying and bribing as usual.
Yet the polls show that most voters want inflation stopped, and the main opposition, the Workers' party, while formally denouncing the plan as ‘authoritarian, demagogic, privatising and favourable to foreign capital’, may merely wish it were in a position to do likewise.
Few doubt that the Collor plan will pass Congress.
The president wants it entire.
His economy minister, Miss Zelia Cardoso de Mello, wants changes, if any, to be coherent, so promptly began negotiating concessions with the parties.
She points out that the cash squeeze could be relaxed quickly if Brazilian inflation really does perish from a single shot.
Then she and the president can set about hacking away as vigorously at the wasteful government machine as they have at the sheltered private sector.
Colombia
By an editor's mistake we described (March 17th) the drug baron Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha as the Colombian government's main surviving enemy.
Soldiers killed him in December; the main survivor is Mr Pablo Escobar.
Egypt's taste for tittle-tattle
FROM OUR CAIRO CORRESPONDENT
EIGHTEEN-YEAR-OLD Miss Ghada Ahmed Musa, a good Muslim girl from Egypt's poor southern province of El Minya, loved to listen to a lurid radio serial called ‘Alarm Bells’.
Inspired by the show, she dreamed up a tale of a Christian boy who blackmailed Muslim girls by luring them to an apartment where hidden video cameras filmed them in indecent postures.
A gang of Muslim extremists believed her story, and the results were dire.
Earlier this month they attacked property belonging to Coptic Christians, burning their churches, shops and homes.
Nothing, it seems, is too fanciful for Egypt's rumour mill; especially sex, violence and sectarianism.
Three years ago riots were sparked by a ludicrous tale that Christians had used American-designed spray guns to stain Muslim women's clothing with indelible crosses.
Last year's fantasy was that Mossad, the Israeli secret service, had sent prostitutes to Egypt to spread AIDS, and had contaminated fruit and vegetables with the AIDS virus.
This year the minister of agriculture was said to have ruined the tomato crop by importing sterile seeds from Israel — because (rumour had it) his grandfather was Jewish.
The very latest Cairo tittle-tattle is that President Hosni Mubarak (who has a reputation for honesty) has made himself rich by taking a cut from every barrel of oil exported.
That false report was falsely attributed to The Economist in order, we are flattered to suppose, to give it a wholly undeserved credibility.
How can such fictions flourish in a country with the freest press in the Arab world?
Well, since barely half the population can read or write, many people still rely entirely on that notoriously unreliable medium, word of mouth.
Few of those who can read actually believe what is said even in the more responsible newspapers; like many Middle Easterners they prefer the racy, outlandish explanation.
Egypt's laws of libel are weak and journalistic standards low.
Some papers gleefully printed the video-blackmail story as fact.
There is something, too, which Egyptians share with people everywhere: eagerness to believe the worst, for the thrill of a good yarn.
Israel
Go on, try
FROM OUR ISRAEL CORRESPONDENT
EVEN by the exacting standards of Israeli politics, Mr Shimon Peres of the Labour party faces a tough task.
On March 20th President Chaim Herzog gave him first shot at forming a new government to replace the fallen Likud-Labour coalition.
The president evidently assumes that Labour is likelier to muster a majority in parliament.
Yet only 60 of the Knesset's 120 members supported Mr Peres; Mr Yitzhak Shamir, the Likud leader, got the other 60.
The 15-month-old coalition fell on the issue of peace with the Palestinians.
Mr Shamir, besieged by his party's hawks, refused to accept America's terms for holding Israeli-Palestinian talks in Cairo to prepare the election he had himself proposed for the occupied West Bank and Gaza.
Labour, exasperated, broke the coalition.
Now the question is whether enough members of the Knesset are keen enough on the peace talks to support a government led by Mr Peres.
Israel's system of proportional representation gives tiny parties disproportionate power.
Four religious parties led by elderly rabbis hold 13 seats in the Knesset, controlling the balance between Labour and its friends on the left and the Likud and its friends on the right.
In the past the rabbis have concentrated on tilting the balance between the religious and the secular in Israeli life further their way.
Because of their attachment to Judaism's holy places, the religious parties have often seemed closer to the Greater Israel policy of the Likud than to Labour, with its belief in exchanging territorial concessions for peace.
But the religious parties also claim to embody the ancient Jewish wisdom of survival and compromise.
Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, the worldly mentor of the Sephardic (oriental Jewish) party known as Shas, brought Mr Shamir's government down, when five of Shas's six Knesset members abstained in a no-confidence motion.
In fact Shas split; Rabbi Yosef likes Labour much more than his colleagues do.
Mr Peres has an initial three weeks to put together a coalition; then it is Mr Shamir's turn to try.
The rabbis are skilled brinkmen.
Labour seems assured, for the moment, of the support of one religious party, the ultra-orthodox Agudat Israel, and Mr Peres has said he hopes to form a majority government as quickly as possible.
Or he might aim for a minority government dependent on the votes of six Arab members of the Knesset.
If all fails a new election is possible — or a new Labour-Likud coalition.
Mr Shamir, who now leads a caretaker government, must play for time while doing his utmost to talk the religious parties out of making a deal with Labour.
So long as he can block Labour, his own party will stick together.
But the Likud is seething with ambitious men like Mr Ariel Sharon and Mr David Levy.
If Mr Shamir fails, his party will be riven by a bitter leadership struggle which will, in turn, help Mr Peres.
And Middle East peace?
When Mr Shamir's government fell apart, it was closer than ever before to accepting the American terms for talks with the Palestinians, even though in the end Mr Shamir proved too much of a hawk to start talking.
Unfettered by the Likud, a Labour government could stride towards peace — but on the slenderest of parliamentary mandates.
Guatemala
Breaking the rules
THE government of the United States wants to show it is on the side of the angels, but finds too few of them in Central America.
It has just taken the unusual step of calling home its ambassador to Guatemala ‘for consultations’.
The ambassador, Mr Thomas Stroock, had earlier complained of ‘the inability of the Guatemalan government to protect the human rights of its citizens’.
The State Department had accused Guatemala of ‘failing to investigate effectively, to detain or prosecute’ people in the security forces or half a dozen armed groups who took part in ‘extrajudicial killings’.
In return Guatemala's president, Mr Vinicio Cerezo, accused Mr Stroock of meddling in Guatemalan affairs.
There was a pause in the killings.
It may not last long.
Human-rights groups have been denouncing Mr Cerezo since his election in 1986.
Amnesty International says the killings have been carried out by ‘police and military agents in civilian clothes and uniform’.
Americas Watch, a well-informed group based in Washington, says ‘the military remains a law unto itself’.
On March 11th it named 35 people who, it said, had probably been murdered by ‘government forces’ since November 1988.
Bad though it is, the figure suggests that Guatemala is not yet back to the horrors of the early 1980s when death squads, organised by military presidents, murdered at will.
In 1982, for example, 54 of the country's 2,400 lawyers were killed.
They accounted for a tiny fraction of that year's death toll.
President Cerezo is accused not of murder but of neglect.
He replies that investigations are under way.
But little has been done.
The public prosecutor's offices are hopelessly undermanned.
There are 30 prosecutors for the country's 90 courts; only five of them are supposed to handle the 17 courts in Guatemala City.
To be sure, Guatemala has some of the virtues of a poor Latin American democracy.
It is gearing up for its second consecutive presidential election in November, with candidates ranging from far right to soft left, and front-runners representing the centre.
The press is competitive.
Trade unions are spreading: teachers staged a long strike last year.
The government's spending programme is the subject of vigorous debates.
The defence minister, General Hector Gramajo, is trying to turn the army into a professional force.
But Guatemalans can enjoy their freedom only if they stick to the unwritten rules.
Those linked in any way with the half-dozen Marxist guerrilla groups, or who are vaguely suspected of being ‘subversives’ by the country's right-wing extremists, may be shot at, bombed, tortured or killed.
When Mr Cerezo, before his election, stood up against successive military regimes the rightists tried to kill him.
Guatemala is divided against itself.
It is one of the world's most unequal societies, with rich landowners on the fertile lowlands and illiterate Indians (about half of the population, speaking 20 separate languages) scraping a living in the Mayan highlands.
There is economic growth and American agricultural investment, but little justice.
Left-wing guerrillas think their cause worth killing for, and better-armed right-wingers strike back.
The United States can influence Guatemala's government and restrain its army by the aid it gives.
The upshot of President Bush's efforts to exercise this influence is a cut in 1990 of 68% in Guatemala's military aid and of 23% in economic aid.
Mr Stroock may be visiting Washington again soon.
Ivory Coast
Worn out
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN ABIDJAN
IN THREE decades at the top, President Félix Houphouet-Boigny transformed a tropical slum into a model for Africa.
Now it is being  transformed back again.
In 1980 the Ivory Coast was the World Bank's star pupil; in December 1989 Mr Michel Camdessus, managing director of the IMF, said its economic crisis was ‘deep and serious’.
In mid-March there were riots in the capital after students demanded payment of their overdue grants and cuts in the cost of university meals and accommodation.
The president deployed the weapon with which he has calmed past discontents, saying he would announce his heir-apparent.
For that purpose Mr Houphouet, who is at least 85, brought forward to June the five-yearly congress of the ruling party that is his personal tool.
The conference was originally scheduled for November.
‘I want my successor to be known while I am alive,’ he explained.
The student riots were the tip of a tree of discontent.
Some 97,000 families will be affected by cuts of up to 40% in civil servants' pay, part of a World Bank/IMF plan to reduce government spending.
The decree was greeted by further demonstrations.
The government responded by ordering cuts in the prices of essential goods, including food and petrol, and a 5% to 10% ‘solidarity tax’ on private-sector workers, designed to equalise the misery.
The usual chorus of public-sector workers — university lecturers, school teachers, representatives of official trade unions — has been formed to oppose the austerity programme.
A senior academic was arrested ‘for carrying unsigned tracts’ of a kind that had been circulating throughout the city for a month.
Mr Laurent Gbagbo, the country's most prominent opposition politician and the leader of a clandestine political party, the Ivorian Popular Front, was put under house arrest.
He blames foreigners for the country's troubles.
So does the president; but most, and most justly, he blames world commodity markets.
Between 1986 and 1989 the prices of the country's two main exports, coffee and cocoa, halved, and so did export earnings from them, to $776 million from $1.5 billion.
The state marketing board passed on the losses to producers.
With the public-sector pay cuts, the government has now hit the towns as hard as the country.
Businessmen and politicians (often the same people) are blamed for overspending on prestige projects — including the president's $250 million basilica — and for luxurious living.
In place of his old magical rhetoric, the president quietly joined the rough popular outcry against the Lebanese traders who run most of the businesses in the country and who help most politicians with their private affairs.
A brave few are calling, quietly, for the old president to go.
As he fumbles, calls for multi-party democracy increase.
Pressure from the people, and from the French government, has in the past few weeks nudged some neighbouring West African dictatorships the same way.
In Benin in February a national constitutional conference of notables brought an end to the regime of General Mathieu Kérékou and laid plans for a general election next year.
In Gabon too, President Omar Bongo has been forced to announce political reforms.
Mr Houphouet-Boigny has been a political giant, a supreme operator.
Should he be forced not only to retire but to leave behind a multi-party state, the example will be widely noted in Africa.
If, as some think, the French are at last cutting their losses in the Ivory Coast, they may use their influence to leave something healthy behind.
Namibia
Freedom trail
FROM OUR SOUTH AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
MR SAM NUJOMA is the latest on the liberation trail that has led so many Africans from jail and exile to the presidency of their country.
When South Africa's President F.W. de Klerk was a lad, his people treated the territory that is now Namibia as a fifth province of their own country.
At the ceremony enshrining Namibia's nationhood, at midnight on March 20th, Mr de Klerk — vanquished by, of all people, the UN — smiled dutifully as his flag came down.
The best way to face irresistible change is to behave as if it were welcome.
Namibia's new rulers, who have good reason to bear rancour, seem to have put it aside.
Their political and economic plans are designed, as far as such things can be, to remove the fears of settler citizens and settler firms.
Namibia is almost all desert, and its wealth lies almost entirely under the ground.
Without white men's capital and white men's skills the place cannot function.
Mr Nujoma is accepting the inevitable as much as Mr de Klerk.
One of the things Namibia's new president must accept is that he lacked the two-thirds majority in the constituent assembly he would have needed to push through plans supported only by his party, SWAPO.
At the one-man-one-vote election for the assembly, Mr Nujoma got his majority.
The runner-up, with almost 29% of the votes, was the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance.
It includes people from 11 of Namibia's tribes, including the white one.
Its co-founder and leading spirit is an Afrikaner farmer, Mr Dirk Mudge, who foresaw by a dozen years that his people would need allies for survival, and broke away from the whites-only Nationalist party to find black and brown ones.
Some far-sighted Nationalists in South Africa itself are wondering whether they should do the same.
A multi-tribal alliance of their own is their only chance of hanging on to power when white rule ends at last.
EUROPE
The face of a new Germany
FROM OUR BONN CORRESPONDENT
AFTER the best week of his career, crowned by the unexpectedly decisive victory of the centre-right Alliance for Germany in the East German election on March 18th, Mr Helmut Kohl is well on the way to becoming chancellor of a united Germany, possibly next year.
Even his many critics admit that Mr Kohl is a mightily impressive election campaigner.
He proved the point again this time, first by personally ensuring that the Alliance (of three pretty diverse parties) was formed at all, then by drawing huge crowds on his six election stomps through East Germany.
The Kohl factor was not the only reason the Alliance, dominated by Christian Democrats under Mr Lothar de Maizière, routed the much-touted Social Democrats, but it was probably the decisive one.
With less than nine months to go to the West German election on December 2nd, the East German result also strengthens Mr Kohl's hold over his centre-right coalition in Bonn.
Some people in the liberal Free Democratic party, the junior partner in the government, had been toying with the idea of switching their support to the Social Democrats after December.
They will be less keen now.
The Christian Social Union, the Bavarian sister-party of Mr Kohl's Christian Democrats, is also discomfited.
It had seen the East German poll as a possible stepping-stone to countrywide influence, but the results hardly look like that.
Wherever its East German ally, the German Social Union, did well, the Christian Democrats did far better.
All that might have made Mr Kohl even more overbearing than he has been in recent weeks, to the dismay of West Germany's allies and neighbours.
But in his first public comments after the March 18th triumph the chancellor carefully began by praising the western allies, especially America, for making a united, democratic Germany possible.
He had already agreed that the ‘two-plus-four’ talks between the Germanies and the victorious powers of 1945 — the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France — should start just before the East Germans voted: thereby underlining that foreigners have as much interest as Germans in the issue of unification.
And he has made it clear that an all-German election should be held next year at the earliest, not as a quick substitute for the West German one in December.
Does Mr Kohl's greater public caution mean that the process of unification will be slowed?
Hardly.
Economic and monetary union between the two German states (GEMU) may actually come sooner than many people have expected.
The government's official line is that it is aiming for an agreement with East Germany on monetary matters by the end of next month; it does not deny reports that D-Day for GEMU could be July 1st.
But there are signs that East Germans may get hard D-marks for their funny-money Ostmarks even earlier, as a nice surprise before the summer holidays.
Despite what he privately calls Russian ‘poker-playing’ over a united Germany's relationship with NATO and the Atlantic alliance, Mr Kohl still hopes for an accord in the ‘two-plus-four’talks by the autumn.
This in turn would be ‘acknowledged’ by a meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) by the end of the year.
The external aspects of German unity would then be just about settled.
And the internal ones?
Although the centre-right Alliance handsomely won the East German election, it does not have the two-thirds majority in parliament needed to change the constitution to allow unification to go ahead.
The Alliance, like Mr Kohl, favours making use of Article 23 of the West German constitution, which would allow East Germany to join the Federal Republic quickly; the Social Democrats, whose support will be needed, favour Article 146, which could mean working out a new all-German constitution first.
Might this mean years of delay?
Almost certainly not.
Senior East German Social Democrats believe that even the slower process under Article 146 could be completed this year.
They are aware of the danger of putting themselves in the same opposition boat as the Party of Democratic Socialism, formerly the communist party, which has its doubts about unity.
Besides, with GEMU, which no East German politician dare oppose, East Germany will already have yielded its monetary sovereignty to the West German Bundesbank and with it a lot of its room for political manoeuvre.
Foot-dragging over political union will then seem pretty pointless.
With all this, some people might feel sorry for Mr Oskar Lafontaine, the Social Democrat who will be challenging Mr Kohl for the West German chancellorship in the December election.
Mr Lafontaine favours a slow road to unity, underlines the costs and stresses for West Germany, and seemed ill at ease on his campaign appearances in the East.
He scheduled the announcement of his chancellor-candidacy for March 19th on the assumption that he would bask in the reflected glory of a victory by the East German Social Democrats the day before.
As it turned out, his timing could not have been worse.
Spare your sympathy.
Mr Lafontaine is artful, tenacious and (unlike Mr Kohl) a fine orator.
He reckons the chancellor has awakened get-rich-quick expectations in East Germans which are likely to be disappointed.
And he believes that West German voters may revolt when they realise still more clearly that they will have to foot the bill for unity.
There is something in that.
Even with a new economic miracle somewhere ahead, it will take years for the East Germans' standard of living to come close to that of their rich cousins.
Mr Kohl talks about five years, some economists of at least a decade.
Moreover, although private investment will play much the biggest role in the East's economic renewal, the government in Bonn will have to give big subsidies to the East German social-security system.
Just bringing East German pensions up to the West German level could cost the Bonn exchequer DM6 billion ($3.5 billion) a year.
But here too Mr Kohl is in luck.
The West German economy is again growing faster than expected (latest forecast: 4% in real terms this year), so more tax revenue is flowing in.
That bodes well for the government's aim to pay the East German bills without either raising taxes or boosting borrowing greatly.
Naturally, the tricky business of welding the Germanies together could still bring nasty surprises.
But Mr Kohl, usually underestimated in his eight years as chancellor, has never looked more firmly in command or keener to carry on.
Funny thing, democracy
FROM OUR BONN CORRESPONDENT
HE first, and almost certainly the last, free election in a separate East German state was a decidedly odd affair.
The Social Democrats were expected to emerge on top thanks to traditional backing from workers in the industrial south.
Instead, the conservative-led Alliance for Germany (Christian Democrats, German Social Union and Democratic Awakening) grabbed nearly 60% of the workers' vote and won easily overall.
Why?
Largely because the Alliance, especially its weightiest backer, Mr Helmut Kohl, clearly drummed home that it aimed for quick German unity, with D-marks in the East ‘within months’.
Quite a lot of white-collar workers and farmers were ready to wait on unity a bit, as Social Democrats and other leftist parties proposed.
But the ‘industrial proletariat’, sick of rotten working conditions and low pay in Ostmarks, rallied to the conservative call.
What would Marx have thought?
Hardly less surprising was the strong showing of the Party of Democratic Socialism, as the communists now call themselves.
You might have thought almost no one would back the successor to an organisation that collapsed in disgrace only months ago after 40 years of misrule.
In fact, 1.9m East Germans gave them their votes.
The party won the support of people who fear change and apparatchiks who have most to lose from it — hence the thumping 30% the party won in East Berlin.
The new-model communists had as their standard-bearer Mr Hans Modrow, the prime minister widely judged (rightly or wrongly) a pretty honest chap.
And it had the most money of its own to spend on the election campaign, though unlike many of the other parties it got no western aid.
In the days when the communists dominated the rubber-stamp Volkskammer, the Christian Democrats were their loyal vassals.
It is ironic to think that, if the ex-communist Socialists and the revived Christian Democrats joined forces now, they still would have an easy parliamentary majority.
By sad contrast, the people who led the bloodless revolution last autumn — many of them artists, writers, musicians and teachers — were eclipsed at the polls.
Alliance 90, bringing together leading opposition groups including New Forum, scored less than 3%.
Yesterday's heroes ran an amateurish campaign and, in the main, are no fans of quick unity.
One last oddity.
The East German economics minister-designate is Mr Elmar Pieroth, until recently a leading West German Christian Democrat.
He now recommends that East Germany stay in Comecon and fulfill its commitments to the Soviet Union and other eastern partners.
That, he reckons, will keep a lot of East Germans in jobs while they learn western ways.
Small wonder that only four months after the Berlin Wall came down East German satirists are finding it hard not to be outdone by reality.
Ménage à deux
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
ARM British and French congratulations to Mr Helmut Kohl for his allies' victory in the East German election are not the best gauge of how the West German chancellor is viewed in London and Paris.
For a while now, Mrs Thatcher and President Mitterrand have had a communication problem with Mr Kohl.
As a result, they are communicating much better with each other.
They want their governments to do the same, especially on defence.
Mrs Thatcher found Mr Kohl unreliable in last year's row over new short-range nuclear weapons for NATO.
Mr Mitterrand was put out by a whole series of German slights, culminating in the chancellor's hesitations over Economic and Monetary Union before the European Community's summit in December.
Both leaders were caught short by Mr Kohl's speech to the Bundestag not long after the opening of the Berlin Wall, in which he threw his weight behind German unification.
What, the British and French leaders asked, might he do next?
And what should Britain and France do about it?
An answer came in talks in Paris on January 20th.
The two leaders have had their differences.
But he agreed not to complain about her market-minded vision of the Community and she not to bully him about France's half-in, half-out position in NATO.
Instead, they would concentrate on France's and Britain's common interests.
The two agreed to set up a ‘process’ or ‘structure’by which the two governments could together study issues such as the future of NATO and the Western European Union, British-French nuclear co-operation and joint positions on disarmament.
Officials are coy about the details.
The shyness is most noticeable in Paris, where there is a wish to avoid anything that smacks of a French-British axis.
‘What could we do with Mrs Thatcher that was not anti-German?’, a senior adviser to the French president asks rhetorically.
Yet discretion may not last.
One idea is that before or at the next French-British summit in late spring, the foreign and defence ministers on both sides will meet to review progress.
‘There is a lot of blood coursing in the veins on all this,’ a top Whitehall man says.
The most pressing need is for close consultation on Germany.
Since the ‘two-plus-four’ process began, Britain and France have been in tune, notably on a place for Poland when the talks turn to frontiers.
The British official at the two-plus-four talks is the Foreign Office's political director, Mr John Weston.
He is a political-military expert who was number two at the British embassy in Paris during the late 1980s; he is gathering round him other ex-Paris hands.
British and French defence co-operation has been ‘thickening’ for around two years.
The armies are talking about closer planning of things like use of French ports.
French troops are not about to come back under NATO command.
Nor is France responding to pressure to take American troops if they leave Germany.
But one idea going around is that French troops might be mixed in with brigades from Britain or other NATO countries on a multinational — ie, non-NATO — basis.
The chance that Britain would work with the French on the new air-launched nuclear missile they have developed is on again, after Mrs Thatcher had all but made up her mind to buy American.
Focusing on European defence when most people, especially in Germany, are thinking about peace dividends has its drawbacks.
A minor but telling incident: a big army exercise scheduled for last week in which French soldiers were, for the first time, to do mock battle alongside British troops in West Germany was called off at the last moment because of East Germany's election.
Still, while the Germanies bill and coo, Europe's two hawks are watching, and clucking.
The EC and a united Germany
Don't panic
THE prospect of a rapid merging of the Germanies has provoked a fashionable fatalism about the future of the European Community.
Having rediscovered nationhood, the theory goes, West Germany is bound to lose interest in its postwar surrogate, the EC.
So Project 1992 will grind to a halt.
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) won't happen, nor will the progress towards European political union that it was supposed to advance.
The fatalism is pervasive because it is shared by two opposing camps — frowning European idealists and smiling national realists.
The frowners fear that the ideal of European union will fade just when it is usefully poised to temper the return of nationalism to Europe in general and Germany in particular.
German protestations of good Euro-intentions do not soothe these frowners.
They want German Euro-deeds, now.
Prominent frowners include Jacques Delors, Helmut Schmidt, François Mitterrand and his foreign minister, Roland Dumas.
The French accent of this list is no coincidence.
Many French politicians take for granted a Europe in which France shares a lead; they sense it is at risk.
The smiling realists are relieved that good old-fashioned national interest may burst out of the straitjacket of Brussels directives.
What idealists see as the ‘binding in’ of a powerful Germany, Mrs Thatcher would call being lashed to it.
The smilers are relieved that the removal of the iron curtain has revealed a broader, more variegated Europe, full of national pride and unripe for Euro-regulation.
Mr Jacques Calvet, the head of Peugeot, the French carmaker, is a smiler.
He never liked the prospect of a pan-European car market into which Japan would enjoy relatively free access.
So he argues that ‘it would be wild madness to continue calmly writing pieces of paper and making directives.
Directives to do what?
What is the common future?
I don't know.’
Conveniently.
Is the common view justified?
Our answer divides into three parts, involving, first, the completion by the end of 1992 of the single market set out in the EC White Paper of 1985; second, the plans that stretch beyond 1992 for changes to the Treaty of Rome that will set up EMU and further increase the legislative power of the Community; and third, the difficulties of bringing East Germany into the EC.
Project 1992.
Certainly, some tough market-building decisions are looming for the Germans — in particular, attempts to create European regimes for road transport and the insurance business that will hurt German interests.
These may reveal a new German prickliness.
But, so far, government officials involved in negotiating the 1992 directives cannot point to instances of the Germans becoming more obstructive.
Indeed, West German officials in Brussels find that the prospect of German unity can make it easier to extract concessions from Bonn: the words ‘but minister, this will be taken as a sign of German nationalism’ work wonders.
The one exception is that the opening of the inter-German frontier has complicated the campaign for the frontier-free movement of people within the EC, because it has become impossible to say where the EC's secure external frontier is.
Yet, even without this complication, people-movement was already one of the most difficult parts of 1992.
Beyond 1992.
The prospect of German unity has whetted appetites on the continent for more rapid moves towards political union, and not only in France and Italy.
The Danes, too, who tended to side with Britain in resisting this idea, have become noticeably more enthusiastic of late.
But West Germany, always cautious about monetary union, has shrugged aside attempts by the Italians to bring forward by several months the start of the inter-governmental conference that will discuss the road to EMU.
This week President Mitterrand renewed the call for an early conference.
Mr Delors, for whom EMU is the next castle in his European crusade, wants to drive EMU forward too.
He hopes to sweeten EMU for the Germans by mixing in reforms to boost the powers of the European Parliament, which the Germans are keen on.
(Tell that to Mrs Thatcher.)
This is the line-up of worriers that Mr Helmut Kohl will try to soothe when he goes to Brussels this Friday.
The signs are that West Germany will still insist that the EMU negotiations start after its election on December 2nd, not least because the fusion of the Ostmark and the D-mark will inevitably distract minds in the Bundesbank and the finance ministry that could otherwise be thinking about EMU.
Sticking to an existing timetable scarcely amounts to loss of German interest.
East German entry.
Here is where the frowns/smiles are most justified: EC-German argument will be hard to avoid.
How strictly will EC rules on subsidies, product safety and the environment be applied to East German products?
How long will East Germany's grace period last and will the grace (on, say, the sale of shoddy products) extend into West Germany?
When will East Germany become eligible for EC regional aid, and for how much?
Who will pay?
How free to move will be the up to 200,000 resident aliens in East Germany, many from Vietnam, and some 30,000 Polish guestworkers?
How long will Russian oil and Czech coal be allowed to flow into East Germany on cheap long-term contracts?
The devil in such details could come to infect Germany's attitude to the EC as a whole.
But the Germany-aloof thesis remains, so far, more a plausible presumption than a fact.
Closet nationalists and protected industrialists would be wise not to count on Germany to release them from the awful fate of an open-market Europe and more moves towards European union.
Soviet Union
The tremors
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
THE tectonic plates of Soviet politics are slipping.
After the dramatic changes of recent weeks — the creation of a powerful new presidency, the ending of the Communist party's guaranteed right to rule, Lithuania's attempted secession from the Soviet Union — comes the jockeying for power in the new Soviet Union.
It begins just as President Gorbachev embarks on his most radical policy changes yet: a new economic strategy and, possibly, a new treaty of the union.
Among the different groups now contending for influence, the most important are the democratic reformers, the men and women who stood in recent local elections on platforms that broadly advocated multi-party politics and bolder economic change.
A few months ago they were a rag-bag of local pressure groups.
As the final election results come in from all over the country, it is clear they will be helping to run many Soviet towns and cities.
In Leningrad, candidates supported by the main reformist umbrella organisation, Democratic Elections 90, won 28 of the city's 34 seats in the Russian parliament.
In Moscow, the equivalent organisation, called Democratic Russia, won 55 of the city's 65 parliamentary seats.
By contrast, only nine of the 49 regional party secretaries in Russia — the bulwarks of party authority outside Moscow — were elected.
These results will step up pressure for roundtable talks between party and reformers, along the lines of those held last year all over Eastern Europe.
There they eventually led to coalition governments.
Even before the elections, the Communist party boss of Moldavia, Mr Petru Luchinsky, had proposed such a roundtable.
At a recent meeting of the party's Central Committee, President Gorbachev opened up the prospect of a future coalition government when he talked of ‘equal possibilities for the Communist party and other political and social organisations.’
The old monolithic Communist party has become an anachronism.
But two things still matter a great deal.
One is whether Communists continue to see the president as their leader, or start to feel he has abandoned them.
In an impassioned speech to the Congress of People's Deputies, Mr Dmitri Likhachev, who since the death of Andrei Sakharov has emerged as the conscience of the nation, argued that if President Gorbachev had to give up his party post (as some radicals have demanded) this ‘will lead again to a civil war’.
The second issue is how — no longer whether — the party will split.
One faction, called the Democratic Platform, wants to turn the Communist party into a social democratic one.
This group is demanding that delegates to the party congress next July be directly elected by rank-and-file members.
This would deprive party bosses of control over the election.
If it does not get its way, the Democratic Platform has threatened to leave the party, abandoning it to conservatives like Mr Yegor Ligachev, who has renewed his strident criticism of Mr Gorbachev.
That could also drive the country towards the dangers that the venerable Mr Likhachev foresees.
In recent weeks, the armed forces have shown renewed signs of unease.
In early February, the chief of the general staff, General Mikhail Moiseev, sharply attacked the party's military policies and accused it of failing to stem the tide of anti-military sentiment now sweeping the outlying republics (5,000 Lithuanians, for example, recently refused their call-up papers on the ground that the Geneva convention allows people to refuse to serve in the army of an occupying power).
Tensions are bound to rise over two issues.
The first is the economy.
According to Radio Moscow's Interfax, a news service, and Commersant, a magazine of the Union of Co-operatives, after a five-year dither the Soviet Union has at last opted for a Polish-style Big Bang for its economic reform.
Mr Gorbachev may well use his powers to rule by decree to push the reform through.
The second point of tension concerns a proposed new treaty of the union, under which republics would voluntarily surrender certain powers to the central government.
Under the present system they can exercise only the powers which the central government chooses to delegate to them.
Hitherto, Mr Gorbachev has resisted a new treaty.
Party leaders in many republics have been openly demanding one: it seems only a matter of time before the president offers them what they are asking for.
That is academic in the case of the Baltic republics.
They want secession from the union, not a new treaty binding them into it.
In Estonia and Latvia, pro-independence candidates seem to have won a majority of seats in the republics' parliaments even in the first round of the local elections on March 18th.
The two may soon follow Lithuania into direct conflict with Moscow.
Mr Gorbachev's government has responded to Lithuania's declaration of independence by ordering ministries in Moscow to impose direct control over transport, communications and many factories in the republic.
The president has ordered the police and KGB to prevent the construction of new customs posts.
Most controversially, on March 21st he directed Lithuanians to surrender all weapons.
Lithuania's president, Mr Vytautas Landsbergis, promptly called the decree illegal, and said it could be implemented only by ‘brutal armed force’.
Who will blink first?
Solidarity
A good thing while it lasted
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN WARSAW
OR longer than most Poles can bear to remember, their country has been in crisis.
It still is.
Indeed, less than three months after Big Bang, the start of the Solidarity-led government's package of strict austerity and radical market reforms, Poland is in ruins.
Not literally, of course.
The buildings and the factories are still there, drab and decaying; so are most of their occupants, down to the morose, chain-smoking soldiers who sit on guard in every official building.
But the political and economic landscape of Poland has changed beyond recognition.
It is not just that many of the old structures of central planning have been demolished, or that much of the government is now in the hands of people who still refer to themselves quite unselfconsciously as ‘the opposition’.
The bigger point is that nothing in Poland is static any longer.
Even Solidarity may soon be no more.
That is not the official story.
In public, at least , Solidarity is sticking together.
For one thing, the people elected Solidarity to govern and it has been governing for barely seven months.
It still has an enormous job to do.
Some 60 bills are now clogging parliament on everything from privatisation to local government, with more on the way.
Solidarity ministers, who this time last year were huddled in places like Warsaw's scruffy Czytelnik café plotting nothing more ambitious than the legalisation of their union, now wake up each morning to the daunting task of building a new democratic Poland on the rubble of the old communist one.
The other reason for keeping Solidarity solid is the economy.
No other government, so the argument runs, not even a completely freely elected one (Poland's election last year was only partly free), could have detonated Big Bang and survived.
The fallout has been dramatic.
In January rampaging inflation (70% in that month alone, on top of a rate for the previous 12 months estimated at 700–900%) and a tight wage squeeze produced a 40% drop in the average Pole's standard of living.
And that was 40% off what was already, after almost 15 years of economic decline, one of the lowest standards of living in Europe.
Economic reform has so far meant that Poles can gaze in wonderment at now well-stocked meat stalls they have no money to buy from.
The outlook for the rest of this year is bleak.
Although inflation is already sharply down (possibly to as low as 4% this month), so is much else.
Anxious talk of inflation has given way to even more anxious talk of a steep recession that would wring much of Poland's industry out of existence.
In the first two months of this year industrial production dropped by 29%.
The hard men at the finance ministry have promised to review the austerity measures at the end of this month.
But according Mr Marek Dabrowski, a deputy finance minister, the screws will not be loosened much until there are signs that Polish industry is adjusting to the real world.
One consequence will be unemployment.
The number of Poles officially looking for work shot up from 9,600 in December to 220,000 last month.
It is widely expected to soar to 1m-2m this year.
Even Solidarity expects what people, with increasing irony, call its ‘halo effect’ to start wearing off soon.
As it does, old divisions that were welded over by the fight against communism will reappear.
Some already have.
Trade-union Solidarity is at odds with political Solidarity over who should bear the brunt of recession.
Farmers' Solidarity is at odds with urban Solidarity over the high cost of credit.
Religious Solidarity is at odds with secular Solidarity over such things as abortion, crosses in the classroom and religious education in school.
And Solidarity's leader, Mr Lech Walesa, is increasingly at odds with Solidarity's prime minister, Mr Tadeusz Mazowiecki, over everything from the style of government to the speed of economic reform, from the presence of Soviet troops to the date of Poland's next general election.
It is not that one part of Solidarity supports the free-market experiment and another doesn't.
‘There is no third way for Poland,’ says Mr Jan Litynski, a former member of KOR, the pre-Solidarity Committee for Workers' Defence.
Now a left-leaning Solidarity MP with close ties to trade unionists, he points out that the only choice is between more recession and less recession.
Indeed it is ‘the left’(if it still makes sense to talk of left and right in Poland) that is most desperate to present a solid front in support of market economics.
What Poland needs, quips Mr Bronislaw Geremek, Solidarity's hirsute and widely respected parliamentary leader, is a liberal-conservative-social-democratic-rural party.
Part of the left's problem, admits Mr Geremek, is that the communists have sullied the term ‘socialist’ beyond redemption, even though people respond favourably in opinion polls to such left-wing causes as social justice and equality.
The communists' final insult, says Mr Geremek, was to pinch the words ‘social democracy’ for their new title.
The left's discomfort wins little sympathy from the Mr Jaroslaw Kaczynski, a Walesa loyalist whose choir-boy looks barely mask his ambition.
It was Mr Kaczynski who helped broker the deal that put a Solidarity prime minister in power last August.
He now edits Solidarity's weekly newspaper, but probably not for long.
With the blessing of both Mr Walesa and senior Catholic churchmen, he is already working to set up an avowedly Christian party.
It can expect to pick up a lot of support both from mainstream Solidarity and from the squabbling peasants' parties.
The new party will emerge out of the Solidarity chrysalis when Mr Walesa judges the time is right to give the venture his full blessing.
The benediction may not be long in coming.
At a minimum, Solidarity is expected to present more than one list to the voters at the next general election — if it has not already formally split by then.
Nobody is prepared to predict what next month's Solidarity congress will do and nobody knows exactly when the next election might be.
According to the round-table agreement with the now defunct communist party, Mr Mazowiecki's government, containing communist interior, defence and foreign-trade ministers and working under a communist president, was to last until 1993.
Now it is not expected to go on much beyond spring of next year.
But if Big Bang turns to crash and Poles lose their unPolish patience with the austerity plan, or if Solidarity cannot contain its differences any longer, a fresh election could come as early as this autumn.
That would probably suit Mr Walesa.
He has been stamping his feet impatiently in Gdansk waiting for the call to be Poland's first non-communist president in more than 40 years.
That prospect fills the Solidarity left with gloom.
For them Poland's dream ticket would combine the dignified Mr Mazowiecki as president with the brainy Mr Geremek as prime minister.
They were probably saved from an early Walesa push for the presidency by the recent row with West Germany's Mr Helmut Kohl over the permanence of Poland's western border.
Worried about Germany, Poles stopped worrying about Soviet troops in Poland and began to feel rather relieved that their current president, General Wojciech Jaruzelski, was so well connected in Moscow.
But Mr Walesa will not hold off forever.
He is known to have been angry last autumn when Mr Mazowiecki, the man he picked for prime minister, chose his cabinet without consulting him.
Mr Mazowiecki also said pointedly at the time that he was not prepared to replace one philosophically biased government (a communist one) with another philosophically biased government (an avowedly Catholic one).
And Mr Walesa is probably miffed, too, that opinion polls show Mr Mazowiecki to be more popular than he is.
The two men now barely speak to each other.
Asked about differences with Mr Walesa, the prime minister merely rolls his eyes heavenwards.
But it is not just this personality clash that is driving Solidarity-as-we-know-it to extinction.
Solidarity was born as a protest movement, not a political party.
It drew together Poles who had little else in common save a hatred of communist rule.
If it hangs together too long, it will create a dangerous lack of public debate.
Without healthily competing parties, Poland's brave experiment with free-market economics risks having no solid political base to rest on.
Solidarity's time may soon be past.
France
Dauphin surplus
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN RENNES
NOT once in the 19-year life of France's modern Socialist party had a party congress ended without a piece of paper to carry away.
Yet that was the outcome of the Socialists' two-yearly congress in Rennes on March 15th-18th.
Delegates hooted in disgust or yanked up their ties to imitate nooses.
Watching balefully from afar was the party's ultimate, though lame-duck, boss, President Mitterrand.
An open split, he warned the party, would almost certainly cost it the 1993 general election.
Once back in Paris, red-faced party leaders hurried to repair the damage.
At a 12-hour meeting that ended early on March 21st, they found a compromise.
Mr Pierre Mauroy, an ex-prime minister and party workhorse, will stay on as the party's first secretary.
A vague statement of principle papers over policy disputes.
The quarrel will go on, because the real issue is power.
The congress at Rennes was the opening shot in the battle to succeed President Mitterrand.
His influence on the party is weakening.
Two years ago he backed away from imposing a favourite, Mr Laurent Fabius, also an ex-prime minister, as first secretary.
Now aged 73, Mr Mitterrand is unlikely to run again for president in 1995.
The Mitterrand ‘current’ or faction, which once controlled 60% of the party, has split.
To simplify, the yuppie half of Mr Mitterrand's old support has gone to Mr Fabius, a smooth technocrat who is president of the National Assembly.
The other half, mainly schoolteachers and low-paid officials, has gone to the traditionalists led by Mr Mauroy and Mr Lionel Jospin, the minister of education.
Mr Fabius sees the party's future as a loose campaigning machine on American lines.
Mr Jospin wants it to remain more ‘fraternal’, with its clublike network of 200,000 paid-up members.
The prime minister, Mr Michel Rocard, was hoping for better from its break-up.
He won the support of only a quarter of the delegates to the Rennes congress.
More popular with the public than with his party, Mr Rocard would make a strong Socialist candidate for president.
Yet he has a timing problem: can he last five years as prime minister, even assuming the Socialists survive a parliamentary election in between?
He worries — wrongly, it now seems — that Mr Mitterrand will do anything to cheat him of the succession.
Someone Mr Rocard should worry more about is Mr Jacques Delors, another Socialist popular with voters, whose mandate as president of the European Commission is up in 1992.
He was a smiling, sun-tanned observer at Rennes.
BRITAIN
Palaver
FOREIGNERS must wonder — and this year more than usual — why the British budget causes such a fuss.
Every spring Britain faces an avalanche of punditry before, during and after the not-so-great event.
This year, for the first time, live television coverage of the chancellor's speech had 3m people absorbed in details of complex restructurings of VAT reliefs.
In America, a sensible country, the president would expect his budget to be top of the evening news only on a very slow day.
France, West Germany and Japan have an even better arrangement: no ‘budget day’, as such, at all.
Is this the secret of rapid growth and low inflation?
To be fair, Britain's budget does matter more than most — even though, unlike the others, it is concerned with gathering revenue rather than spraying it around.
America's budget is a mere spending proposal, usually intended for instant rejection.
The documents travel from printing press to wastepaper basket in one uninterrupted motion.
Other countries' budgets are less frivolous than America's, but the process is stretched out and therefore less exciting than Britain's.
Oddly enough, many parliaments expect to modify government plans, which takes time.
Britain's is content to debate it all after the decisions have been made, and then pass the lot virtually unamended.
Even the protection of the House of Lords is lacking, thanks to a spot of bother Lloyd George had in 1911.
Their lordships cannot amend the finance bill.
Britain's eccentricity is not entirely harmless.
This year City pundits, working hard to get themselves quoted in the media, bid up their idea of a suitably tough budget.
In the space of a few weeks they went from favouring broadly no change in taxation (which is what the chancellor gave them) to yearning for the rod — in one case a tax rise of £5 billion-10 billion.
Budget palaver and acute short-termism seem to go hand in hand.
The healer's art
IT WAS absorbing political theatre.
A new chancellor, unexpectedly shifted from the foreign secretary's post a few months earlier, delivered a ‘budget for savers’.
His limpid style and flashes of wit overcame Labour heckling, tickled the press and brought a smile to jaded Tory backbenchers.
Even his modernising, pipe-smoking Labour opponent was amused and nodded at times.
Was this chancellor the next prime minister?
Yes, indeed — for it was Harold Macmillan presenting his 1956 budget, watched from the gallery by a youthful John Major.
The grown-up version, now chancellor himself, would doubtless cringe at the Macmillan rhetoric of 34 years ago —‘we must all be expansionists…
The problem of inflation cannot be dealt with by cutting down demand’.
But there are irresistible parallels, too.
Not only is there Mr Major's new vehicle for small savers, acronymed TESSA and a reminder of the introduction of the premium bond and Ernie.
Macmillan also left income-tax rates alone, hit cigarette-smoking and made stern noises about public expenditure; and he presided over the highest interest rates for decades — bank rate was a horrific 5.5%.
In 1956, of course, the Conservative party was heading for one of the few post-war political events unequivocally more damaging to it than the current poll-tax furore — the Suez crisis.
Macmillan became prime minister with the job of healing a divided and warring party.
Standing around the lobbies, bars and corridors of the Commons after Mr Major's 1990 budget speech were plenty of Tories ready to speak of the new chancellor as a possible ‘healing’ prime minister.
‘Sell Heseltines, buy Majors,’ said one right-winger.
‘Healing balm, not a violent emetic,’ said another.
And Mr Major himself could not have been more emollient.
He transformed the atmosphere in the budget-day chamber.
Where his predecessor, Mr Nigel Lawson, was all dry-ice and thunderflash, Mr Major was courteous and measured.
He even developed a nice line in badinage with the unusually genial Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock.
The two men seem genuinely to like one another.
Tory members who felt that Mr Lawson regarded them as intellectual pigmies (as, doubtless, he did) are puffed up with pleasure at how this kinder, gentler chancellor listens to them.
Some members of the backbench Tory Treasury committee are under the impression that they virtually dictated his budget — which is harmless and quite touching.
Backbenchers also noted, and liked, the political populism that is starting to become the Major hallmark — good news for the football-watching, pipe-smoking, beer-drinking man on a modest income, less good news for directors with free flats and swanky company cars.
He was prepared to buy off political pressure, as over workplace nurseries, in a way Mr Lawson would surely have disdained.
All this means that Mr Major has improved his chances of succeeding Mrs Thatcher and might even be a serious contender if she retired early.
More importantly, by giving the impression that the government's control-room department is neither flustered nor panicky, his confident, self-possessed performance has bolstered the prime minister's own position just when she needed that support most.
During Mr Kinnock's amusing budget counter-attack, she sat with Mr Major and Mr Kenneth Baker, the party chairman, squeezed protectively around her.
The trio's body-language was eloquent.
Some Conservative spoil-sports fear the impact of the budget will be short-lived.
Certainly, Mr Major did not frame his budget with much of an eye on the next dreadful six months — and may yet be forced to raise interest rates.
But for most Tories, excluding a minority who thought he was too soft, this budget was welcome relief.
One cautionary note: Mr Major's real Tory hero is not Macmillan nor Mr Lawson, but the late Iain Macleod.
Macleod used to say that budgets which were praised at Easter would be condemned by the autumn.
City of philosophers
The only budget announcement that might have influenced the mid-Staffordshire result was the doubling of the savings limit for those entitled to claim poll-tax relief.
In that long thin strip of middle England, with its old towns and charmless Birmingham commuter-belt estates, Tory canvassers heard time and time again that voters wanted to punish the government for the poll tax.
When Sir Geoffrey Howe, the deputy prime minister, spoke in the town of Stone to grey-haired party loyalists, five out of the seven questions addressed to him were stingingly hostile.
One self-described Heathite Tory said that the message from the doorsteps was of profound disillusion with Mrs Thatcher.
Dr Samuel Johnson, the most famous son of Lichfield, in the south of the constituency, described it as a city of philosophers.
Faced with the poll tax, most of its modern citizenry have sounded distinctly unphilosophical these past few weeks.
A Tory campaign machine on full throttle generally encountered sour looks and sullen stares.
Depressingly, the Labour party managed to run an entire campaign without exposing its candidate to genuine scrutiny at public meetings.
As in the 1987 general election, the Conservatives were readier to put themselves on the line — to be made fools of, as might be, by voters and journalists.
The Labour candidate, Mrs Sylvia Heal, who rarely departed from script, is said to be a personal friend of Mr Kinnock.
This has been the case with three out of the past four successful Labour by-election candidates: a slow but novel way for Mr Kinnock to stamp out dissent in his parliamentary party.
The most interesting aspect of the Labour campaign was, however, its glossy, middle-class niceness.
A Labour campaign document championed the ‘traditional values and firm foundations of the mid-Staffordshire way of life’ and complained that its ‘serenity…has been shattered in recent times’by crime.
This essentially conservative message was reinforced with the comfortable-sounding election slogan: ‘Vote for what you value’.
Gazing down from his plinth in Lichfield, you could almost hear Dr Johnson muttering: ‘Socialism, Sir, is a cow, which will yield such people no more milk — and so they are gone to milk the bull’.
Bankers and brokers
Tidying up
Changes to banks' bad-debt provisions; lower taxes on futures dealings; abolition of stamp duty on share dealings
IT IS just as well that Britain's banks chose 1989 to increase their provisions on third-world loans.
If they had not, they would have been vulnerable to a Conservative chancellor's most unlikely weapon, a windfall-profits tax.
They feared such a punishment for insolently pointing out that Mrs Thatcher's pet plan for student loans was a non-starter.
Instead of a windfall-profits tax, which cost them £375m in 1981, the banks merely have to suffer the pin-prick of a delay in claiming tax-relief on those same provisions which hit their profits.
Banks made provisions of up to around 70% against total third-world loans, and assumed they would get tax relief as if they had actually lost money.
Under the chancellor's proposals the Bank of England will decide how much will be immediately available for relief — probably an average of 50%.
Relief on the rest will be taken at the rate of 5% a year.
The chancellor's threats that the banks should be more cautious about selling credit in Britain will have little effect.
Most will follow Barclays and write to their customers asking for permission to post them corrupting materials.
But the bright side for the chancellor is that there should be higher bank profits to tax, especially if interest rates fall.
The TESSAs (tax-exempt special savings accounts) he introduced will allow banks to raise more, cheap retail deposits.
Two measures should do a good deal to grease the wheels of the City's securities business.
By exempting pension funds and unit trusts from income tax on trading profits from futures and options dealings, he has managed to clear up an uncertainty that has kept many investing institutions shy of London's derivatives markets.
The line that the Inland Revenue has hitherto drawn between investment and trading has been exasperatingly unclear.
The abolition of the 0.5% stamp duty on shares will also please institutions more than private investors.
That is because institutions pay proportionately much less on dealing commissions (which average around 0.2%) than do private clients (about 1.5%).
The chancellor tied the abolition of duty to the planned arrival, in 1991–92, of the London stock exchange's Taurus.
Though Mr Major called Taurus a dealing system, it is not: it is a paperless settlement system, which means it will be rather hard to put a stamp on anything.
That is why, if the stock exchange had built Taurus many years ago, as promised, it could also have ensured the earlier abolition of stamp duty.
Advertising
Single marketing
As the Community juggles with new rules on advertising, the advertising business is gearing up to do battle in Brussels and Strasbourg
BRITAIN'S advertisers are worrying that European Community legislation is set to reach parts that other laws do not reach.
The European Parliament's vote on March 14th for a complete ban on tobacco advertising has sharpened the advertising industry's fears that moves towards harmonising laws will mean, in liberal Britain, tighter regulation on ads for drugs, drink, food and financial services.
Meanwhile the health and consumer lobbies fear the opposite — that harmonisation will mean the unravelling of national controls.
Unfortunately for the advertisers, the first battle has been over the least defensible product.
Britain bans cigarette advertising on television, but, with tough restrictions, allows other tobacco advertising.
EC laws already passed are stiffer.
From next year, cigar and pipe-tobacco advertising will be banned from British television.
Viewers as well as advertisers may regret it.
Cigar advertising is some of the funniest on the small screen.
Hamlet advertisements rely on the ‘humour of suffering’, featuring unfortunates scrabbling under lavatory doors for errant rolls of loo paper or watching airport carousels chew up their luggage: the victim, by lighting a Hamlet cigar, becomes the spiritual victor.
Castella offers a different brand of joke-hero: the ingenious angler who beats the rest by treating the fish to Des O'Connor on a submerged stereo system, until they leap from the water to escape the torture.
Now the European Parliament wants tougher restrictions still.
Despite a heavyweight (and possibly counterproductive) lobbying effort by the tobacco companies, its March 14th vote was aimed at a complete ban on all tobacco advertising — a business worth £46m in Britain in 1988.
The commission in Brussels has vetoed the Strasbourg parliament's line: Brussels knows that Britain and West Germany would never agree to a total ban.
But Strasbourg's anti-nicotine brigade has won a consolation prize: the health and social-affairs commissioner, Mrs Vasso Papandreou, has promised to look at a ban in the future.
These moves on tobacco-advertising have alerted British admen to a growing enthusiasm within the commission for introducing rules product by product.
They believe the commission is unfriendly towards advertising and the parliament, made up of health-obsessed, anti-materialist children of the 1960s, is even worse.
Led by Britain's Advertising Association, which brings together the advertisers, the agencies and the media, the advertising lobby is gearing up to defend products which they reckon are most vulnerable:
Food.
A proposed directive suggests that manufacturers should not be allowed to refer to helpful recommendations by health bodies (‘The Intestines Inspectorate says fibre is good for you.
Frizzo is 79.3% fibre’).
It would also ban the distinction between natural and artificial ingredients.
Drugs.
Lobbying by pharmaceutical companies has already watered down a proposed directive which at first suggested forcing them to include detailed information on dosage and usage on  advertisements .
The companies are watching carefully lest other lobbyists try to slip the tougher provisions back in.
Financial services.
The original draft directive proposed that advertising should be limited to the sort of details a business card carries.
Companies have got the directive weakened, but worry that it may be beefed up again.
Alcohol.
Booze companies fear that tobacco's closest relation may be in for the same treatment: there have been rumours that a directive is being prepared.
Booze sans frontières
Not everyone is opposed to more controls on advertising.
Those who favour a tighter regime are just as unhappy about the EC's approach to date.
They feel that, on alcohol advertising in particular, the EC has ducked the issues posed by a single market and satellite broadcasting; and that as a result regulations may be cut back to the loosest common denominator.
A directive which comes into force next year will set rules on television advertising across frontiers.
After much lobbying, it has ended up as a liberal edict.
The standards it sets on promotion are lower even than Britain's.
In Britain, by industry agreement, gin, whisky and vodka are not advertised on television.
But other sorts of drink may be advertised, so long as they do not link consumption to social or sexual success — thus eliminating the predictable drink-this-and-score line.
France allows no alcohol commercials on television at all.
The broadcasting directive will allow cross-border advertising of all sorts of alcohol.
So a German satellite station could, while conforming to EC law, beam Cognac advertisements into Britain, which Britain's whisky manufacturers would be unable to counter with domestic panegyrics on the pleasures of the malt.
Similarly, a British satellite station could broadcast beer commercials to France, while French television could not.
That could leave broadcasters, manufacturers and admen, faced with competition from less-restricted foreigners, pressing their governments for more liberal treatment.
The control lobby worries that governments, faced with this anomaly, will simply decide to loosen their own controls and allow advertisers to deluge the airwaves with booze ads.
Unlikely, say the drinks companies: given its penchant for regulation, the EC would soon bury them in a pile of new directives.
A budget for savers not sterling
John Major's first budget pleased the Tory party but scared the financial markets.
Our coverage begins with the biggest thing he did, then turns to the biggest thing he left undone.
On page 40 Bagehot looks at the politics
EVERY chancellor faces two main economic tests at budget-time.
One is to offer a coherent and persuasive statement of the government's macro-economic policy, and the other is to make the tax system work better.
This year politics and economics conspired to make the first almost impossible.
Mr Major therefore made a stab at the second — though it might seem that after 11 years in office, Mrs Thatcher's radical government should have had all the time it needed for tax reform.
In an impressive performance he delivered enough of substance, together with a dose of populism, to satisfy his side of the Commons.
But when the City looked at the gap where macroeconomic policy should have been, it took fright.
Sterling slumped.
The affable Mr Major has some worrying days ahead.
Some of the tax reforms in this budget, however, will have a large and lasting effect.
Whatever the chancellor's motives, it is a mistake to dismiss his budget for savers as mere window-dressing.
This chancellor has the best possible reasons for reviving ‘the culture of thrift’.
The slump in household saving, from 14% of disposable income in 1980 to just 5% last year, was partly to blame for the rise in inflation that now plagues the government.
Why did saving collapse in the first place?
The answer is awkward: financial deregulation.
The Tories are proud of the way they let the building societies wrestle the banks for customers, and vice versa.
The retail-finance industry changed in many ways as a result — but most of all in lending for house purchase.
There, a gale of competition swept Britain from a Soviet-style queueing system to one in which people could quickly and conveniently borrow as much as they were able to service, from any of a wide choice of lenders.
This change of financial environment had profound economic effects.
It made monetary policy difficult, because the meaning of ‘money’ was no longer clear.
The flood of credit into the housing market fuelled house-price inflation and, in due course, inflation in the wider economy.
People borrowed and spent more, and saved less.
Not for the first time, therefore, a government keen on deregulation has been upset by the results.
Mr Major won't hear of re-regulation (in the form of credit controls, say) but he does think it a pity that lenders behave so ‘irresponsibly’.
The personal savings rate has already started to bounce back, and is sure to rise further this year.
The present hysteria about reckless lending may therefore fade before long.
However, if it produced the right sort of pro-saving policies in the meantime, the hand-wringing would have served a useful purpose.
Over the long term, if Britain saved more it could grow faster.
And the long-term reason for under-saving is not the after-shock of financial deregulation (a temporary worry) but the anti-saving bias that is built into the tax system.
Put simply, the bias is this: people save out of taxed income, and the interest earned by their savings is then taxed again.
Will Mr Major's reforms make a difference?
His most interesting proposal follows the Treasury tradition of stealing, but slightly spoiling, the ideas of Mr Mervyn King, a professor at the London School of Economics.
The chancellor unveiled the tax-exempt special savings account, or TESSA.
After 1991 people will be able to deposit £1,800 a year over five years in a special account in any bank or building society.
If none of the capital is withdrawn within the five years, then all the interest is tax free.
TESSAs are similar to personal-equity plans (PEPs), which also shelter savings from tax, but they should appeal to less sophisticated savers.
That should help TESSAs to increase, rather than merely divert, saving.
Mr King reckons that the net increase could be big: if 4m take out a TESSA, private saving could rise by about 30%.
Take-up on that scale could make Mr Major's first budget a lot more memorable than it first appeared.
Mr Major also increased the annual limit on investment in PEPs from £4,800 to £6,000 and allowed them more scope to buy unit trusts.
Since the scheme was launched in 1987 690,000 plans have been taken out for a total of almost £1.5 billion.
For many small investors the attraction remains small.
Aside from the risk and complications, fees offset most of the tax break.
Mr Major's third pro-saving policy was to abolish the composite-rate tax on bank and building-society deposits.
At present, interest on deposits is paid after deducting a fixed rate of tax, which cannot be reclaimed by non-taxpayers.
This arrangement was convenient for the taxman, but unfair.
From April, when married couples are taxed separately, 5m married women will get their own tax allowance to set against income from savings.
Counting pensioners and children, 14m savers should not be paying tax, but have to under current legislation.
From April 1991 their interest will be tax-free.
Piecemeal reform makes the tax system more complicated, and is not the best way to promote saving.
Ideally income tax would be replaced by an expenditure tax: all saving would then be tax-deductible, and all spending would be taxed.
It would take a bold, reforming chancellor and an economy where everything was going right.
Mr Major is conceivably the chancellor, but Britain in 1990 is certainly not the economy.
Water industry
Paying for purity
Gradually, directives from the European Commission are affecting business life in Britain.
The next two articles describe their inroads into the businesses of water and advertising
NERVOUS Tories in search of solace like to compare the poll tax to the privatisation of the water industry.
Pundits predicted that the sell-off would be a disaster — a money-loser in the City and a vote-loser in the country.
Four months later the Tories see it as an unqualified success, propelling the man who presided over it, Mr Michael Howard, into the political big league.
The share issue, they note, was massively over-subscribed; investors are making a healthy profit; and consumers are as cheerful as ever.
Are they?
In the past week or so householders throughout the country have been opening their April water bills and gaping.
The post-privatisation product looks and tastes no different; but its price everywhere is sharply higher.
The ten privatised water authorities have lifted their prices by just under 13%; the 29 statutory water companies (which have always been in the private sector and supply water, but not sewage services, to about a quarter of the population of England and Wales) have increased theirs by over 15%.
Irate customers who bother to complain to their local water executives will be told the rises are no higher than were forecast.
Elaborate pricing mechanisms — the K-factors and all the rest — were set up by the government before the sell-off; they were aimed at helping the industry, which had long been a victim of under-investment, to pay for a capital-spending programme of at least £18 billion over the next decade.
These pricing formulas will ensure that prices continue to rise for several years: in Northumbria, for example, prices could more than double by the mid-1990s.
Tying the hands of the regulator
But prices will also be driven by other cost increases that are less easily quantified and controlled.
Many customers will have to foot the bill for water meters, which most companies will eventually install.
Above all, the water companies may pass on to their customers any new costs caused by changes in environmental regulations.
These are likely to be hefty in the next few years as the European Community (EC) tightens the rules on drinking water and imposes new ones on sewage disposal.
Old hands in the water industry are critical of the Brussels commission.
They complain that its standards are unreasonably high.
The EC demands, for example, that water should contain only 50 millionths of a gram of nitrates per litre, whereas the World Health Organisation claims that 100 millionths is acceptable.
The other big complaint is that the commissioners are constantly raising their standards and are insensitive to national differences in such things as the colour of water (Britain has a lot of discoloured water, because it has a lot of peaty soil).
In privatising water, the government has set up a regulatory regime biased towards raising quality rather than controlling costs — and this has played straight into the hands of the commission.
Unable to justify the privatisation of a natural monopoly on familiar grounds such as competition and consumer choice, the government chose instead to emphasise regulation, boasting that privatisation would separate the provider from the regulator — or, to use a phrase much quoted by Mr Howard at the time, the gamekeeper from the poacher.
The regulatory regime does too little to protect cost-conscious customers.
The Office of Water Services (OFWAT) is headed by a director-general — Mr Ian Byatt, a former Treasury official — who is required by law to protect the financial health of the industry.
This obligation comes ahead of any other consideration, including charges to the customer.
And the director-general has little freedom of manoeuvre.
He is stuck with the same rigid pricing arrangements for the next five years.
If it now emerges that the Department of the Environment was over-generous to any of the water authorities last year, OFWAT has no choice but to live with the consequences.
Sceptics in the City think that Mr Byatt's organisation — a staff of 100 based in Birmingham — is too small to deal with a huge and complicated industry.
Thames Water is one of the biggest water companies in the world; Cholderton and District Water Company near Salisbury is run by a man and his wife, and supplies water to a couple of small villages on a private estate.
Both are regulated by Mr Byatt.
As well as being biased towards the purity lobby, the regulatory regime is worryingly complex, contrasting dramatically with the streamlined arrangements for gas and telecoms.
In addition to the secretary of state for the environment, the director-general of water services, and the EC commissioners, regulators include the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (which has already stepped in to prevent unwelcome mergers); the local authorities (responsible for monitoring and controlling the standard of clean water supplies); the Drinking Water Inspectorate (the auditor of technical standards); the National Rivers Authority (responsible for monitoring and controlling pollution in rivers, lakes and coastal waters, and for maintaining sea walls); Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, HMIP (which grants consents for the release of toxic substances into the environment); and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (responsible for granting consents for disposals at sea).
Duplication and bickering are endemic.
Relations between Lord Crickhowell, head of the NRA, and the office of HMIP are cooling fast.
The central problem with the set-up, however, is that no single body is charged with calculating the opportunity costs of environmental bossiness.
The regulators in Brussels have only one interest: raising standards.
They have no qualms about forcing member countries to spend money on water they might think could be better spent elsewhere.
The captains of the water industry are happy to go along with Brussels.
The enormous investment programme is precisely what makes the industry exciting to City investors, since it underpins rising revenues.
The fact that the costs of this programme fall entirely on captive consumers is all too convenient.
‘The purer the better’ might be a reasonable motto for a substance as indispensable as water.
But the quantities of lead and nitrates which the EC is making a fuss about are so small that they represent a negligible — perhaps even a non-existent — hazard to health.
And since only about 3% of water is drunk, while a great deal is used for cruder purposes, much of the industry's investment will be flushed down the drain.
British consumers will have to find £90m to meet the EC's directives over the next few years; might this large amount of money not have been better spent, say, in building hospitals and schools?
Mr Nicholas Ridley, who, as secretary of state for the environment, masterminded the privatisation, likes to think of himself as a scourge of high-minded meddlers and an advocate of consumer choice.
Yet the regulatory regime he put in place is a meddlers' charter.
For years to come, the public will be watering the garden with money.
Personal taxes
See you next year
Basic and top rate of income tax unchanged; personal allowance raised in line with inflation (7.7%); top tax band unchanged.
Excise duties on spirits, cigarettes and petrol to rise by 10%, other duties in line with inflation
IN EVERY budget since 1982 the Conservative government has either reduced income taxes or national insurance contributions.
Mr Major bucked the trend.
He lowered the threshold for the highest rate of income tax in real terms, but otherwise the budget hardly changed the income-tax system.
This pleased those who feared big tax increases, but disappointed the fiscal purists who hoped to see the removal of anomalies.
The chancellor fully indexed personal income-tax allowances.
But by freezing the top-rate threshold he gathered £400m.
Was that the best way?
Mr Major raised the tax on company cars 20% (yielding £200m), but taxing them at their full value would have collected another £300m.
Scrapping the income ceiling at which employees stop paying the 9% national insurance contribution would have attacked another anomaly.
As it is, basic-rate taxpayers who earn more than the £16,900 ceiling face a marginal tax rate of 25%, while those earning less than the ceiling face a rate of 34%.
The chancellor is clearly no stickler for fiscal purity.
He exempted employees from tax on the fringe benefit of company nurseries.
He introduced tax relief for charitable donations of between £600 and £5m, and raised the limit on relief for donations under the payroll-giving scheme from £480 to £600 a year.
He also increased, from £8,000 to £16,000, the amount of savings which disqualify a person from claiming housing benefit and poll-tax benefits.
This will cost about £120m.
Tory backbenchers consider it money well spent.
Those hoping for a green budget were disappointed.
Despite the reams of analysis of new environmental taxes, Mr Major did next to nothing, except raise petrol duties by 10% and widen the tax difference between leaded and unleaded petrol by less than 2p, to 16p a gallon.
Mr Major resisted the temptation to leave some excise duties unchanged in order to hold down the inflation rate.
Most duties were raised in line with inflation; those on spirits and (non-pipe) tobacco were increased by 10%.
These increases will add half a percentage point to the inflation rate.
The duty on spirits had fallen in real terms in every year since 1982 — a total fall of more than 20% — raising worries about the health implications.
The budget leaves the real value of taxes (duties and VAT) on beer, cigarettes and petrol some 40–50% higher than when Mrs Thatcher took office in 1979.
Pipe smokers and whisky drinkers have done much better, with a fall in duties of around 20%, while wine drinkers have had a ball, with a 30% fall in tax.
Is it just coincidence that the previous chancellor was fond of a spritzer?
The present one left vehicle excise duties at £100, unchanged for the fifth year running.
The government's aim is evidently to shift the taxation of motorists on to petrol; this will link the tax more closely to vehicle use, and so provide a greater incentive to economise on fuel.
Not exactly memorable, was it?
Mr Major, the economical populist, may be less frugal next year.
The economy
Nobody understands me
Public-sector debt repayment of £7 billion in 1989–90, and again in 1990–91; target for M0 set at 1–5%, no target for M4; ‘commitment’ to EMS membership reaffirmed; interest rates to stay ‘as high as necessary’
THE economy faces a severe slowdown and possibly a recession over the coming months.
The government is running a large budget surplus and expects to carry on doing so.
This used to be called a tight fiscal policy.
And the government has pushed short-term interest rates to 15%.
Even allowing for inflation, that is dear money.
So are financiers calling for a relaxation of these stringent measures, to cushion the coming slump?
No, they are threatening a sterling crisis because the fiscal and monetary tightening has not been brutal enough.
Strange times.
Just when it is vital to get policy on sterling right, the task has become virtually impossible.
Though the next general election may be more than two years away, the markets have already started taking bets on the outcome.
This has produced a nastily vicious circle.
At least for the moment, the Conservative government has wrecked its popularity by pursuing misconceived projects such as the poll tax.
The Labour party's lead in the opinion polls has shot above 20 points.
So it has dawned on the financial markets that the enemy might actually win the next election.
That, it thinks, would be bad.
Sell sterling.
The pound comes under pressure and the government is forced to keep interest rates high.
This is immensely unpopular in the country and makes a Labour victory more likely.
Sell sterling.
And so on.
This might be called Kinnock's Revenge.
For years the Labour party has been the victim of the City's fears of its policies.
Now the government is the victim of the City's fears of Labour's policies.
Indeed, at this rate the City's fears of Labour's policies could make the difference in getting Labour elected.
Such calculations must have weighed with Mr Major.
A tougher budget, even if economically desirable (which is highly doubtful), might have widened Labour's lead in the polls.
So, after luxuriating in its hair shirt for a few days, the City would have sold sterling anyway.
The only advice for a Tory chancellor in this position is, don't ever get into this position.
Perhaps that is not quite the only advice.
The heart of the government's economic difficulty is sterling, and the credibility of Mr Major's indications (if that is not too strong a word) that he will defend it.
The markets, and the employers who are busy fuelling wage inflation, expect a depreciation.
Mr Major's budget failed to change their minds.
He cannot see why.
The cry of many a chancellor in distress has been ‘Nobody understands me.’
Which is precisely the point.
Mr Nigel Lawson was rude and arrogant — exactly what a chancellor should be.
If he said he would defend the pound, you knew he would do it or bust.
With that sort of credibility, the task becomes feasible — and probably at lower interest rates than Britain now has.
Mr Major is nice, and listens to people who disagree with him.
He therefore seems capable of compromise.
Fatal.
And although Mrs Thatcher has none of these defects, she is known to be not averse to the occasional run on sterling.
The effect is the same: British interest rates embody a Thatcher-Major premium.
Membership of the EMS might go some way to remedy this, though a firm change in rhetoric (‘no question of a realignment’) would also be needed, and even then the ride would be far from smooth.
Increasingly, the argument that membership should wait until Britain's inflation is down looks wrong.
It is like saying ‘when we have restored our credibility, we shall take firm steps to restore our credibility’.
In the meantime, just how bad are things going to get?
The chancellor can hardly be accused of complacency.
The Treasury's once-formidable forecasting record has taken some knocks of late, so a lot of the predictions in the budget have been carefully pitched on the gloomy side.
(Let the next errors be nice surprises, for a change.)
In particular, the Treasury now seems to be more pessimistic than most City economists about inflation and the current-account deficit.
In the short term, the full indexation of excise duties and the introduction of the poll tax are likely to push the inflation rate to 9% in April.
But the Treasury forecasts that it will then fall to 7.25% by the end of this year (this seems to assume no fall in the mortgage rate) and to 5% in the second quarter of 1991.
Several economists in the City expect a bigger fall, to perhaps 3–4% by mid-1991, as interest rates start to fall, and the poll tax, the rise in excise duties and the mortgage-rate increase drop out of the figures.
The Treasury has stuck to its earlier forecast of a £15 billion current-account deficit this year.
It expects a smaller invisibles surplus than before, but the forecasters are a lot more optimistic about visible trade: exports are booming.
Most City forecasters expect a bigger fall in the current-account deficit.
Goldman Sachs, for instance, is fore-casting a deficit of £11 billion.
Look forward to a miserable 1990 and a fast-improving 1991, vicious circles permitting.
BRITAIN THIS WEEK
Blue days
The chancellor, John Major, presented his first budget.
Monetary targets were left virtually unchanged and the fiscal stance was broadly neutral.
Minor reforms were mostly aimed at encouraging savers: Mr Major introduced TESSA, a tax-exempt savings account, and abolished stamp duty on shares.
Football got £100m to improve safety.
Tory MPs gave Mr Major high marks for style and content.
Labour's response was noticeably muted.
The City gave an initial thumbs-down, selling sterling to a new low against the D-mark.
In a Financial Times poll of senior businessmen, 70% said the budget made little or no difference to their companies or their view of government policy.
A budget concession on the poll tax offered more relief to pensioners with savings.
Labour MPs howled for a retrospective rebate in Scotland, where the poll tax came in last year.
Treasury sums said the rebate would be worth £4m, but would cost more to fix.
Better than expected, the February current-account deficit was £1.4 billion; the trade deficit figure was the same — net invisibles vanished.
The BBC hotted up its coverage of the budget by giving breakfast-television viewers the wrong number for a telephone information-line.
It connected callers with Sexy Susie, offering a range of non-financial adult services.
Lord (Victor) Rothschild, former head of Downing Street's think-tank, died.
Scales of justice
David Waddington, the home secretary, announced that he has asked the chief constable of the West Midlands to investigate the conviction of the Birmingham six, who were jailed for an IRA bombing 16 years ago.
Legislation to allow Nazi war criminals to be put on trial passed its first reading in the Commons.
The home secretary announced plans to set up a special police unit to investigate suspects.
Two senior policemen were suspended after the Court of Appeal decided that a junior colleague had been convicted of robbery on fabricated evidence.
He had been picked out at an identification parade only after his photograph had been shown to the prosecution witnesses — three criminals who got shorter sentences for helping the police.
The Court of Appeal heard that a witness whose evidence sent another man to jail for murder in 1988 had been bribed by police.
The convicted man's counsel said that Mr Kevin Sarbutts was given £6,500 by an assistant commissioner at Scotland Yard after the trial.
A detective inspector then took £500 back ‘as his drink for the boys’.
Rate for the job
Brighter prospects for low-paid women workers.
Both J. Sainsbury and Marks & Spencer upgraded their sales assistants, mostly women, to bring their pay closer to that of warehouse workers, mostly men.
Both retailers offered the women big rises on the basis of the regrading.
‘There is no sex angle on this,’ said an M&S director.
The health secretary, Kenneth Clarke, said he would examine a proposal to pay people to look after frail elderly relatives instead of putting them in homes.
He claimed that residential homes cost about £170 a week per person.
Muddle and mayhem
Security at the Shorts company's guided-missile plant in Belfast was exposed again.
Only 17 months after Loyalist workers smuggled missile parts out of the factory, the IRA smuggled two bombs into it.
Extracts from an official report on last summer's Marchioness riverboat disaster were released by the member of Parliament in whose constituency the accident happened.
The report, originally due for publication later in the spring, criticises the Department of Transport for not fully applying lessons from previous, less serious collisions on the river.
Shell, recently fined over £1m for an oil spillage, got into more trouble.
An explosion injured six workers and devastated a petrochemical plant at its Stanlow oil refinery, near Ellesmere Port, leaking solvent into the Mersey.
The ghosts of Bannockburn walked abroad, as Scotland's rugby team brought down the much-fancied England XV at Murrayfield by 13–7 and scooped all the prizes from the five-nations international championship.
That leaves the Scots with just the All Blacks to beat, this summer.
Heathrow airport on Friday March 16th recorded its highest-ever number of aircraft take-offs and landings: 1,162 in all.
June temperatures hit the south of England for a day, with London in the 70s.
An expert on ladybirds from Cambridge University said that they had begun their egg-laying two months early, in time to double the usual crop of adults this summer.
Finding a quiet spot on a south-coast beach could be hard.
Companies
Tinker, tinker
Cuts in corporation tax for small businesses; VAT and BES changes; £100m for football safety; tax relief for TECs
RED ink is splattered all over Britain's companies.
Heavy capital investment led to a record £23.4 billion financial deficit last year.
Company borrowing soared by an annualised £64 billion during the first three quarters of 1989 — the fastest rise ever.
Net interest payments were 69% higher than in 1988, and unit labour costs are soaring.
All this means that the investment boom is over.
The Treasury reckons that, after climbing 8.75% in real terms last year, fixed business investment will fall by 1% in 1990.
Business failures in England and Wales rose 10% last year, after falling since 1984.
The business lobby has been squealing for everything from accelerated depreciation allowances to a Business Development Board to grant cheap loans.
In the event, only small firms received a budget fillip.
Small companies used to pay a reduced rate (25%) of corporation tax on profits of up to £150,000; Mr Major raised the threshold to £200,000.
Firms will no longer pay the top rate (35%) until their profits hit £1m — up from £750,000.
These changes will benefit about 20,000 small firms.
Britain now has ‘the most favourable structure of corporation tax rates for small companies anywhere in the EC’, says Mr Major.
The chancellor also adjusted Britain's VAT rules.
Until now firms have had to pay the tax on all their sales, even when customers have left bills unpaid.
From April 1991 all written-off debts more than two years old will qualify for relief from VAT.
Mr Major also raised the threshold for VAT registration by £1,800, to £24,500, and simplified registration requirements.
The annual limit for investment raised under the Business Expansion Scheme was raised to £750,000.
The only big businesses to receive a boost were oil companies: they will be allowed to write off the total cost of shutting down offshore oil fields against any corporation tax incurred during the last three years of a field's working life.
Whether, close to the end of its days, an oilfield will produce enough profit to offset the hefty cost of abandonment is debatable.
Mr Major scored a more convincing goal with Britain's football clubs, cutting the Pool Betting Duty from 42.5% to 40% for five years.
The savings — altogether £100m over the period of the scheme — are to help pay for safety improvements at football grounds.
In the nick of time: according to one recent report 80 out of 92 league clubs are technically insolvent.
The chancellor made business contributions to Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) tax-deductible.
TECs are private-sector-led bodies that will be responsible for providing or co-ordinating training programmes in their area.
Eventually, all 16-year-olds will be given a voucher to spend on a programme of their choice.
This scheme has drawbacks.
For starters, demographic trends are against it.
The number of people aged 16 to 19 will fall by about a quarter by 1994.
Employees who are already earning good money will see little point in spending their vouchers.
Worse, the courses which training agencies are likely to offer will be narrow: typing for secretaries, plumbing for plumbers.
Tomorrow's job market is more likely to need flexible workers.
BUSINESS
Microsoft
What comes after seven fat years?
SEATTLE
‘QUIT while you're on top’ seems to be the philosophy of Mr Jon Shirley, president of Microsoft, the leading supplier of software for personal computers.
Microsoft's sales should top $1 billion in the year to June 1990.
Profit is soaring.
The company has added to its strength in systems software — particularly the DOS operating system which comes with every IBM-compatible personal computer — with a range of word-processors, spreadsheets and other applications software.
With more than $20m-worth of Microsoft shares, Mr Shirley will sail off into the sunset in June, when he plans to retire.
On March 19th he named his successor, Mr Michael Hallman, most recently the manager of 13,000 employees in the computer-services division of Boeing.
Mr Hallman faces a different set of challenges from those that greeted Mr Shirley in 1983.
Mr Shirley reckons that the greatest of these will be developing closer links with customers.
Traditionally, Microsoft has concentrated on creating products — and left the courting of customers to its dealers or to the computer makers who sold its DOS operating system with their machines.
Though it still has no intention of selling directly, Microsoft wants a bigger say on how its products should be used.
So the company is shifting its attention from selling individual products to selling a range that can work easily together.
Instead of impressing its customers with the ease and convenience of, say, Microsoft's ‘Word’ word-processing program, the company hopes to wow them with the way that ‘Word’can incorporate charts or query a remote database for the latest sales figures.
But selling linked products is more complicated than pushing individual ones, because customers require more help in making things work.
Equally important, the more Microsoft talks to customers, the greater its chances of convincing them to adopt its new OS/2 operating system as the foundation on which to build office automation.
Sales of OS/2 have gone more slowly than some at Microsoft had hoped.
The slower the growth, the more time AT&T will have to strengthen the challenge to OS/2 from its rival Unix operating system.
Mr Hallman's experience at Boeing will have left him well versed in the problems of a large computer-user.
But making the transition from user to supplier can be tricky.
Apple Computer's relationship with Mr Allan Lorenz, who was hired from a giant insurance firm, CIGNA, to beef up Apple's appeal to corporate accounts, ended in tears.
And yet unlike Mr Lorenz, who joined a company perennially being reorganised, Mr Hallman will lead a relatively stable management team.
In addition to installing basic systems for accounting, cost-control and distribution, Mr Shirley helped to create a layer of reliable executives who could translate the technical visions of the company's chairman and founder, Mr Bill Gates, into products that got out the door, on time and to budget.
Though Mr Gates remains in charge of technology in this technology-driven company, he is backed up by seven ‘gurus’.
These seven wise men guide small teams of young programmers.
Each team specialises in a set of functions — eg, handling text or drawing graphs.
The teams work to guidelines that ensure that their creations can work with those of their colleagues.
Though Microsoft offers its programs on three different operating systems — DOS, OS/2 and Apple Macintosh — only about one-fifth of the program need be tinkered with to shift from one computer to another.
The most important job for Mr Hallman will be to get on with his chairman, Mr Gates.
Aged 34, Mr Gates is bright, opinionated, decisive and every bit as sure of himself as one would expect from a man who was a billionaire by the age of 30.
Mr Shirley reckons Mr Hallman will need two qualities.
Anyone working with Mr Gates must take decisions on the spot; studies and committees fray the billionaire's patience.
Second, Mr Hallman must avoid worrying Mr Gates with administrative and financial detail.
Mr Gates would be happy to get his financial information from the quarterly report to shareholders — so long as he can be confident that the news will be as consistently good as it has been during Mr Shirley's seven years in charge.
Surviving the Drexel whirlwind
NEW YORK
The American public crowed when the junk-bond market collapsed.
But junk bonds helped many successful businesses, which now face hard times
EVERYBODY is dancing on the grave of Drexel Burnham Lambert — everybody but entrepreneurial America, that is.
The hundreds of businesses that have grown with the help of the $200 billion-plus market for high-risk, high-yield securities created by Drexel do not share the American public's jubilation over the investment bank's demise, which came after paying a $650m fine on six counts of mail and securities fraud.
When 200 of Drexel's former employees appeared on an hour-long television show recently, their host, Mr Phil Donahue, told them exactly what most Americans probably do think of them.
You not only were arrogant, you were snobbish, and in lots of ways, very impolite and mean…
Nobody likes you.
You're Wall Street yuppies and you've got a bad image…
I mean you are mostly white, mostly north-eastern, Yale, Harvard types.
You are mostly Republican.
You were raised in Connecticut.
You never ride the subway.
So who gives a damn about you guys?
Drexel's 11,000 ex-employees may not be drawn from the rainbow coalition, but lots of consumers and workers in America have reason to like some of what they did very much.
The junk-bond market that these Drexel yuppies and their mentor, Mr Michael Milken, created has financed many successful companies.
Only about 2,000 of the 23,000 companies in America that have annual sales of $35m or more can hope to issue debt that wins an investment-grade rating.
Until Drexel came along, the rest were denied access to the corporate-bond market on anything like reasonable terms.
Mr Milken opened the door.
As the head of Drexel's bond-trading department, until he was dismissed after being charged with securities fraud, Mr Milken convinced many (mainly institutional) investors that the higher yields on bonds that carried a below-investment-grade rating compensated for the extra risk.
Drexel successfully pioneered a mezzanine layer of financing between equity and bank debt for medium-sized American companies.
The collapse of Drexel has drawn the public's attention to over-borrowed companies struggling to service high-yield debts.
That concern is myopic.
Most of the 1,000 issuers of junk bonds have put the money they have raised to good, and sometimes brilliant, use.
One such company is Mr William McGowan's MCI.
It introduced the world's first fibre-optic telephone network with a $3 billion issue arranged by Drexel.
Milken bonds helped Mr Ted Turner's CNN grow into an international supplier of television news.
Hasbro, the maker of the G.I. Joe line of dolls, is another success.
High-yield-bond sales through Drexel helped finance the acquisitions that have turned Hasbro into America's biggest toy company.
Other businesses can be touted as triumphs by other investment banks.
The fortunes of Levi Strauss have been restored by junk bonds arranged by Salomon Brothers.
The jeans maker's bonds are trading above par, even in a badly depressed market.
Kroger, a client of Goldman Sachs, has become the country's second-largest grocery chain with the help of junk bonds.
Such success stories are being ignored.
The institutional investors that charged into junk bonds in the 1980s have now headed off at a gallop in the opposite direction.
The market is scarcely functioning.
Drexel, which used to commit $3 billion-5 billion of its own funds to market-making, has stopped even quoting prices on 3,000–4,000 junk bonds.
Mr Greg Meredith, a bond specialist at Salomon Brothers, notes that only two recent junk-bond issues have been floated successfully: by Goldman Sachs for Kroger, and by Merrill Lynch for Sullivan Graphics.
Amnesia has blotted out all memory of the companies that prospered after issuing junk bonds.
Only the failures linger.
Many of them, like the stores empire assembled by Mr Robert Campeau (owner of Bloomingdale's and Bon Marché), Resorts International, a casino operator, and Paramount Petroleum would probably have gone into bankruptcy whatever happened.
But the collapse of the junk-bond market is a big blow to the scores of companies which were planning new offerings.
Drexel's collapse is especially painful for those junk-bond issuers which had counted on the investment bank to restructure their debt.
Some Drexel orphans are too small to merit the attention of the big Wall Street investment banks.
They are flocking to such company doctors as Mr Bob Sind's Recovery Management Corporation in New York.
‘As long as Drexel was there,’ says Mr Sind, ‘they always managed to find a way to struggle from debt-payment date to debt-payment date.’
The treatment prescribed has a familiar ring: rigorous financial analysis followed by cost-cutting, asset sales and then negotiations to convince creditors that rescheduling beats liquidation.
Restructuring is more complicated for the bigger junk-bond casualties.
Other sources of finance are hard to tap.
The flight to quality by investors has made equity financing prohibitively expensive for all but the soundest of companies.
The commercial-paper market offers only short-term financing.
The bond market is again exclusive.
And America's hard-pressed banks are in no mood for adventurous lending.
Matters have been made worse by the way investment banks scrambled to do junk-bond deals after federal investigators closed in on Mr Milken.
Standards went by the board as they sensed a chance to break Drexel's dominance of the junk-bond business.
Many of the deals struck in this frenzied atmosphere are sure to go sour eventually, sending more companies to the brink.
They will join companies already there.
The biggest is RJR-Nabisco, a food-and-tobacco giant taken private early last year in a record $25 billion leveraged buy-out.
RJR's credit rating is being ruined by junk bonds whose interest rates are supposed to be reset by May 1991 at a level that restores them to 100% of their issue prices.
These bonds are trading at well below 70% of their issue prices.
The message is obvious: RJR will have to restructure its debts to avoid default.
Macy's, a department-store chain, is in nearly as much trouble.
It lost $39m in the three months to January 27th, the Christmas quarter that usually produces its biggest profit of the year.
Southland Corporation, the operator of America's 7-Eleven convenience stores, is also struggling.
On March 22nd, Ito-Yokado, a Japanese retailing giant, and its subsidiary, 7-Eleven Japan, offered to buy 75% of the company.
The collapse of the junk-bond market has put the kibosh on a management buy-out of Wickes, an engineering and home-furnishings company.
The investment bankers that bought Wickes last November have already sold more than $400m in assets and are taking it private.
Mr William Farley, who acquired a slew of manufacturing companies with junk-bond financing arranged by Drexel, has had to resort to a bridging loan from banks to finance his acquisition of West Point-Pepperell, a textile giant.
Two or three years ago signs of such vulnerability would have attracted lots of predators, from home and abroad.
Times have changed.
The $1.6 billion that BTR, a British conglomerate, has offered for Norton, an abrasives maker, is the first big hostile takeover bid made in America so far this year.
With the collapse of Drexel and the junk-bond market, there are many more eager sellers of corporate assets than eager buyers.
Expect a wave of friendly mergers and alliances that do not require new money, either equity or debt.
Indonesia's conglomerates
Time to grow up
JAKARTA
THE world's fifth most populous nation is waking up.
Indonesia now exports more manufactured goods than oil.
Corruption has been tamed, though far from eliminated.
The government seems committed to deregulation.
Foreign investment, mainly from Japan, is pouring in.
The economy is expected to grow 7% this year.
This should all spell good news for Indonesia's two leading conglomerates, the Salim and Astra groups.
But, molly-coddled by the government for years, they may not be equipped to stand on their own two feet.
The two groups dominate the cement, flour, car and motorbike markets.
They also play a leading role in financial services, agribusinesses and timber.
Both companies are facing similar dilemmas.
They are Chinese, family-run empires whose aged founders remain at the helm, creating inevitable speculation about succession squabbles and, more importantly, about whether such a style of management will continue to work for billion-dollar conglomerates with international ambitions.
Both companies are closely identified with the government of 68-year old President Suharto, who has ruled the country for 24 years.
When his reign ends, they could fall on hard times.
Increasing their market share domestically might serve only to increase political resentment.
The other way to grow — by producing goods of export quality — will be a stiff test of whether these groups are the product of commercial logic or government patronage.
Of the two, the Salim Group is the biggest.
Like most family companies it is tight-fisted with information.
Analysts guess its annual sales are over 8.5 trillion rupiah ($4.6 billion).
The company's 74-year-old founder, Mr Soedono Salim (better known by his Chinese name of Liem Sioe Liong) has turned presidential favours into a personal fortune worth at least $2 billion.
Government patronage can be a two-edged sword.
When a Jakarta bureaucrat decided in the early 1980s that Indonesia should develop a steel industry, Mr Liem was ‘encouraged’ to put up 40% of the $800m cost of the Krakatau Steel project.
This shows few signs of ever being profitable.
Ultimately the government will probably bail out Krakatau as it bailed out Mr Liem's Indocement, South-East Asia's largest cement producer, which faced bankruptcy in 1985 after expanding too rapidly.
In turn, Mr Liem bailed the government out by floating 10% of Indocement's shares on the booming Jakarta stockmarket last December, raising $335m, and then using the money to repay most of the government's investment.
Selling more shares to foreigners and a growing Indonesian middle class would be the cheapest way for the group to finance further expansion and defuse some of the widespread resentment at Mr Liem's success.
Astra is trying a similar route.
On March 16th an offer for 30m new shares in Astra International closed, heavily over-subscribed and raising 446 billion rupiah.
Once the shares start trading on April 4th, the public will own 12.4% of Astra; the International Finance Corporation (IFC, the World Bank's private-sector arm) 5.4%; and the controlling Soeryadjaya family the remaining 82.2%.
Astra makes more sense as a public company than the Salim Group, mainly because its core businesses are obvious and integrated.
Over 75% of its operating profit (148.2 billion rupiah in 1989) comes from making and selling cars and motorbikes.
Last year it accounted for 48% of the 178,000 cars sold in Indonesia and 57% of the 289,000 motorbikes.
Its best-selling model is the Kijang, a tin box developed through a joint venture with Toyota.
The Indonesian government is keen to push up the local content of cars.
Astra has set up 21 component-making joint ventures with Japanese companies, which are attracted by low Indonesian wages.
These ventures will spearhead Astra's planned export drive.
It has already bought a component distributor in Canada and is starting one in Virginia.
Astra likes to believe that the quality of its management, blessed with the IFC seal of approval, sets it apart in Indonesia.
Mr William Soeryadjaya (Chinese name: Mr Tjia Kian Liong), the 67-year old seigneur, is a founder-member of the Euro-Asia Centre at INSEAD, the Paris-based business school where Astra's middle managers get sent for a spot of polishing.
The company's INSEAD alumni have yet to prove their skills in an openly competitive market.
The return of Perrier
EauKay
PEOPLE who sell stuff in glass bottles apparently do not throw stones.
In the five weeks since Perrier, a French bubbly-water company, was struck by a contamination scare, its competitors have been exquisitely polite about its travails.
Small wonder.
The industry has a booming though fragile market to protect.
In America, bottled-water sales have grown from $1.2 billion in 1983 to $2.6 billion in 1989.
Last year Britons swigged water worth about £150m ($243m), 60% more than in the previous year.
Perrier's coy advertising, aimed at yuppies everywhere, made bottled water fashionable.
Other companies quickly moved to siphon off a share of the new business.
Nobody wants to see that flow become a trickle.
Perrier's comeback campaign is already being shown on television in France, and appearing in the press and on radio in America.
It is due to appear in Britain on March 28th.
Bottle labels will still describe Perrier's water as ‘naturally carbonated’, although lots of extra fizz gets pumped in above ground.
The company has also neatly glossed over the fact that with this added gas (extracted from water from a second underground source) come added nasties, including benzene, which have to be taken out before bottling.
For over six months faulty filters were letting benzene through.
Perrier's first explanation for the contamination of its water was that a worker at its French plant had mistakenly used the wrong sort of cleaning fluid on bottling equipment.
It took four days for the company to identify the real cause.
Even now advertising copy declares, ‘The spring water itself was never at issue.
It's still as pure as it has been for thousands of years.’
No mention of what has to be taken out to make the bubbles ‘natural’.
Perrier's French television advertisements eschew weighty health talk in favour of Gallic schmaltz.
‘I knew you'd come back, that you wouldn't drop me like that,’ breathes a husky male voice.
‘Don't cry, you'll spoil your beautiful new label.’
A curvaceous green bottle murmurs in reply: ‘I'm not crying; it's happiness.’
The British version, to be launched on April 4th, will initially involve a ‘we're back’ theme, then return to puns on the word ‘eau’.
America's offering is still under wraps.
Frivolity is a better marketing strategy for the bottled-water industry than actually telling consumers about its products.
Just like tap water, bottled water contains a host of minerals — and too much of some of them is bad for you.
Because such minerals are normally present at levels far below safety limits, this usually does not matter to public health.
It does matter to an industry whose selling point is purity.
Last year Archives of Environmental Health, an American science journal, published analyses of 31 mineral-water brands.
A startling 24 failed to meet standards laid down for public water supplies.
Studies like this explain why manufacturers have not started a slanging match.
‘Any statement from us would have been highly irresponsible,’ says a marketing manager at Nestlé, producers of Ashbourne, an English bottled water.
Perhaps a better word would be suicidal.
The industry's solid front seems to have worked.
Retailers claim bottled-water sales have not dropped much.
Perrier's competitors have had to put their plants on 24-hour shifts to cope with added demand from the unaccustomed absence of the once ubiquitous green bottles.
Their good fortune probably will not last.
A straw poll covering 40 London restaurants and two large liquor-store chains unearthed only one outlet not intending to re-order Perrier when it becomes available again.
American sales are expected to recover quickly too.
Martyrs to their share price
NEW YORK
THEY'RE laughing all the way to the funeral,’ said one corporate wit.
This unpleasant humour was prompted by the stockmarket's reaction to the death from heart failure on March 18th of Mr Roland Berner, the 80-year-old chief executive of the Curtiss-Wright precision engineering company.
The day after the announcement of Mr Berner's death, on the evening of March 19th, the price of Curtiss-Wright's shares rose $7.5 to $59.5 on hopes that some or all of Curtiss-Wright may now be sold.
‘It's a very morbid reaction,’ said a company spokesman.
It is also part of a growing trend.
The shares of Campbell Soup jumped $4.875 to $38.25 when Mr John Dorrance, the retired chairman and son of the founder of Campbell Soup, died last April at the age of 70.
Colleagues described Dorrance as a gentlemanly, compassionate man with a lot of moral commitment.
Industry analysts were more interested in the fact that he controlled enough shares in the world's biggest soup maker to veto any takeover bid.
They hoped a row between his sisters and his cousins and his aunts would make the company less acquisition-proof.
Members of Dorrance's extended family have indeed disagreed in public over whether or not the company should be sold.
Quaker Oats has expressed an interest in buying it.
So far, Campbell remains independent.
Occidental Petroleum is another ‘death-watch company’.
The shares attracted buyers when Occidental's 91-year-old boss, Dr Armand Hammer, slipped in the bath three years ago.
Speculators also think that Peter Grace, 78, head of the conglomerate W.R. Grace, and Mr Lew Wasserman, 77, chairman of the MCA entertainment business, might be more valuable to their companies dead than alive.
Investors rushed into the shares of the Amerada Hess oil company when they heard that its chairman Mr Leon Hess, 75, had gone to hospital.
They rushed out again when they learnt that the patient was not Mr Hess, but his wife.
The drug industry in Japan
Sedated by bureaucrats
JAPAN'S pharmaceuticals industry is an oddball.
Like carmaking and machine-tool manufacture, it grew big and profitable in a protected domestic market, its products have become world class and its firms are trying to go global.
Yet the industry is a feeble exporter and will probably always remain so.
Why is it so different from other Japanese manufacturers?
The answer, according to Mr Michael Reich of the Harvard School of Public Health, is that the industry has been nurtured by an arm of the Japanese government that had no interest in exporting, making it a victim of government intervention.
That is a perverse reversal of Japan's controversial government backing for export drives in other industries.
In a recent article in the California Management Review, Mr Reich points out that, as a bailiwick of the Ministry of Health and Welfare, the industry was out of bounds to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and so never had bureaucrats helping or prodding it to export.
Instead the Japanese drug industry has been shaped by national health policy, whose primary goal was to create a stable supply of up-to-date drugs.
The government helped drug makers by keeping out foreigners (though not foreign drugs under licence), limiting competition with heavy regulation and providing firms with substantial profits.
That left them little incentive to export.
When the aims of the health bureaucrats changed, so did the way drug makers had to operate.
It was only when the government started to cut drug prices after 1980, because it wanted to stop health bills rising further as the population greyed, that the drug makers were pushed into thinking about export markets.
Until then, Japanese drug firms' poor R&D and their emphasis on selling imported drugs had left them in poor shape to compete internationally.
Enervated by years of living fat and happy off a cosy domestic market, firms did not respond to price cuts by trying harder to export, as health bureaucrats had hoped.
What did spur them was the invasion by foreign drug multinationals of the Japanese market after restrictions were relaxed in the 1980s.
Since then better R&D and new products have made Japanese companies internationally competitive.
Yet the export drive predicted for nearly a decade has yet to happen.
It may never come.
The industry is already seeking to get round its international weaknesses — particularly one all foreign drug companies face everywhere, dealing with the regulatory complexities of drug approvals — through licensing agreements with local firms abroad as well as joint ventures, and overseas R&D and production.
So instead of an export binge, the industry is more likely to go straight to offshore production in America and Europe.
That would be a neat salve for trade friction.
East European telecoms
Don't hang up
WARSAW
WHATEVER their politics, Poles expect to wait up to 20 years for a new telephone.
Hungarians are used to waiting between five and ten years.
Once a telephone has been installed, it is often useless.
For several months last winter, residents of Warsaw who had a telephone number beginning with three could not call anyone whose number began with four.
Tackling this catastrophe is a top priority for every East European country.
They know that luring foreign investors will be impossible if foreigners cannot make telephone calls.
With their rudimentary networks, Eastern Europe could leap-frog to the latest technology — though that is a daydream, given that no country in the region has the expertise or the money to do so.
Local telecoms-equipment makers can supply only feeble 1950s gear; and foreign exchange is so scarce that importing fancy western hardware or technology is impossible.
Despite this, western companies are queuing up to win contracts.
The risk for any foreign telecoms-supplier is enormous, but so are the possible returns.
The traditional markets of western equipment companies are growing slowly, if at all.
By contrast, forecasts TRC, a British consultant, East European spending on equipment (including Russia's) could double to $30 billion by 2000, not far behind that of America's.
Because of the need for foreigners, East European telecoms markets could become far more open than those in any continental West European country.
Every week brings announcements of international deals.
The best example is Hungary.
It plans to invest $6 billion-7 billion in its telephone network over the next ten years.
It hopes to attract foreign investment and technology by liberalising and privatising the industry and encouraging joint ventures.
Hungary plans to sell half of BHG, the country's largest telecoms-equipment manufacturer, to private investors.
Last month BHG formed a joint venture with Kapsch and Schrack, two Austrian equipment makers, and Canada's Northern Telecom.
Nor does collaboration stop at equipment manufacture.
In December last year Hungary signed a contract with US West, one of America's seven local-telephone companies, and Ericsson, a Swedish manufacturer, for a cellular telephone system.
Hungary is not alone.
Poland is aiming for a type of deregulation akin to America's break-up of AT&T.
The government wants to set the technical standards of Poland's public network and to retain the power to set ceilings on consumer prices.
But officials insist that Poland's national telephone company, PTTP, will be protected only for a few more years and will then be left to go bankrupt if it cannot compete against privately owned network operators.
Like Hungary, Poland is using tax breaks and special currency provisions in an effort to compensate for the lack of a convertible currency.
By 1991 Poland plans to allow foreign companies to repatriate 15% of their profits.
Such details matter because western telecoms companies can make only limited investments until they know when and how they might gain a return.
East European countries are thus competing for the best western companies just as western companies are competing for contracts.
Still, western firms look at Eastern Europe as a step towards winning valuable Russian contracts.
Going there directly can be hard as Alcatel, a French equipment maker, found out.
Last year its deal with Krasnaya Zarya, a Russian equipment producer, was scuppered by Cocom, the international committee that vets the flow of technology to the eastern block.
Cocom is more relaxed about Eastern Europe than it is about Russia.
Pyramid Research, a Boston-based consultancy, reports that western companies hope to use joint ventures in Eastern Europe to strengthen trading ties with Russia in preparation for the day when Cocom relaxes its controls.
Now that the tussle has begun in earnest, the East European telecommunications industry can only grow more confused.
Whatever happens Eastern Europe's long-suffering consumers, numbed by a lifetime of busy signals, can only benefit.
Crowley and Ericsson, two western firms, claim that only six-nine months and $100m would be needed to fit seven Polish cities with mobile-telephone networks compatible with the existing systems.
Most users would then have to wait only a couple of hours for a new telephone.
‘Two hours instead of 20 years,’ marvelled a recent Polish newspaper article.
Colloring the currency
Brazil and Argentina's governments have recently taken drastic steps to wipe out their four-digit inflation rates.
Will they succeed?
ORTHODOX economists believe that governments can wipe out accelerating inflation only by balancing their budgets and sharply reducing the monetary growth.
The snag is that in countries with persistently high inflation hardly anyone holds paper money; instead they put all earnings in index-linked bonds or interest-earning savings accounts.
So the only way to squeeze the money supply is to reduce the public's savings.
The attempt to do this lies behind Brazil's and Argentina's latest anti-inflation programmes.
Brazil's and Argentina's previous anti-inflation plans were based on the belief that high inflation is caused by its own momentum.
If workers believe inflation is likely to accelerate, they will demand high enough wages to compensate for expected increases in prices.
Businesses will then put up prices to pay for the wage increases.
Inflation, if it is accommodated by central banks, spirals upwards.
The first of Argentina's and Brazil's more recent batch of anti-inflation programmes, introduced in June 1985 and February 1986, tried to break inflationary expectations by freezing prices, pegging the exchange rate to the dollar, and fixing wages.
The hope was that inflation could be arrested by decree, without a fall in output or a cut in living standards.
That was the theory.
But inflation was also caused by too much purchasing power in the economy.
The anti-inflation programmes failed because they hardly cut government spending.
The Argentine and Brazilian budget deficits stayed at 7% and 5.5% respectively of GDP in 1987.
In early 1986 Argentina's price controls started to slip, and in October of the same year Brazil's crumbled too.
Inflation rose soon afterwards.
The lesson seemed clear.
Any attempt to reduce inflation permanently would require a deep cut in government spending and tight control over the money supply.
In January 1989 the Brazilian government seemed to acknowledge this.
Its new package, known as the Summer plan, proposed severe cuts in public spending, as well as a wage and price freeze and a new currency.
In 1989 direct government expenditure on agricultural and industrial subsidies fell, in dollar terms, by 56% compared with 1988.
Despite this, the government was unable to fire many civil servants: Congress objected.
In 1989 the central government's salary bill rose by 20% in dollar terms on the previous year.
The attempt to reduce liquidity in the economy through high real interest rates was the government's main mistake.
In January 1989 outstanding government bonds, whose coupon-rate was tied to the market interest rate, amounted to a hefty $75 billion.
In December 1988 the monthly real interest rate was 0.8%; by the following December it had risen to 4.3%.
As real interest rates rose, so did the cost of servicing the government's debt.
The central government paid $20 billion in interest payments and amortisation in 1989, twice as much as it paid in 1988.
The owners of the government debt were in large part Brazilian private investors, and (indirectly) those who had savings accounts in banks.
As government debts increased, the public became richer, and spent more.
Since their savings were completely liquid (ie, they could be withdrawn immediately from banks), they were equivalent to cash.
High interest rates thus increased the effective money supply.
By April 1989 price controls started to crumble and monthly inflation rose from 5% in March 1989 to 73% this February.
Argentina's government failed to arrest inflation for much the same reason.
The public held almost all the local currency in seven-day time deposits, which paid a monthly real interest rate of about 10%.
The government borrowed from the banks about four-fifths of these deposits, to finance its deficit.
As in Brazil, the high real interest rates made the public richer, increased the government deficit, and fuelled inflation.
In January President Menem's government unilaterally converted seven-day time deposits over 1m australs ($560) into ten-year dollar bonds that paid international interest rates.
At a stroke the government removed about 70% of the local currency from the economy.
But these deposits constituted a small part of the total assets of the Argentines, since most people kept their wealth in dollars.
The government started printing more money soon after the savings-freeze and inflation has picked up again.
Mr Fernando Collor de Mello, Brazil's new president, plans to eliminate Brazil's savings (or monetary) overhang in two ways.
On March 16th he froze savings in excess of 50,000 new cruzados ($1,000 at the official rate) and four-fifths of funds (or 25,000 new cruzados, whichever is highest) in overnight accounts for 18 months.
This amounted to a withdrawal of $115 billion from the economy, about a third of Brazil's GDP.
Second, he proposed to turn the budget deficit of 7% of GDP in 1989 into a surplus of 2% of GDP.
Thus the government announced sweeping increases in taxes and cuts in the public sector; it aimed to scrap all the remaining state subsidies, sell off state assets, and fire about 80,000 workers (a small proportion of public employees).
The government will auction cruzeiros (the new currency which will replace the cruzado) for the savings in the frozen accounts.
The exchange rate will be determined by the demand for the new money and the amount of cruzeiros the government is willing to supply.
This will be the critical test for the government.
If it auctions off too few cruzeiros, it risks destroying the economy, as there will not be enough money to pay for anything.
But if the government sells too many cruzeiros, Brazil's inflation rate will remain high.
The Brazilian package combines a liquidity and fiscal squeeze of such austerity that, if it sticks, it will almost certainly wipe out inflation.
The drawback to both this and the Argentine scheme is that, having frozen the public's savings, both governments will find it difficult (or expensive) to borrow in the future.
Given the history of borrowing by the Brazilian and Argentine governments, this may be no bad thing.
Corporate structure
Why big might remain beautiful
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
Big companies are out of fashion.
But one distinguished academic argues they will continue to dominate world markets for decades to come
THE 1990s, say the most fashionable of management gurus, will be the decade of the small, networked company.
Layers of management will be stripped away, and all except core functions will be subcontracted to more efficient, specialist firms.
Big companies, the argument runs, are inefficient, stifle innovation and dissipate wealth.
One dissenting voice is that of Mr Alfred Chandler, emeritus professor of business history at Harvard Business School.
Mr Chandler is best known for his book ‘The Visible Hand’, published in 1977, which chronicled the rise of managerial capitalism in America and won him a Pulitzer prize.
The big industrial company, says Mr Chandler, has been the engine of economic growth for the past 100 years, and will continue to be so for the next 100.
This does not mean that big companies cannot fail as frequently as small companies.
Indeed their collapse is often more spectacular because of their size.
But a ten-year study of 200 large firms in America, West Germany and Britain (the basis for his new book, ‘Scale and Scope’, to be published by Harvard University Press in April) has left Mr Chandler convinced that successful companies evolve in remarkably similar ways.
And to succeed in the long run, they have to grow big.
Mr Chandler argues that the economies of scale and scope bestowed by size have been grossly undervalued by the ‘small is beautiful’ brigade.
In the four years after John D. Rockefeller in 1882 combined 40 oil companies into the Standard Oil Trust (begetter of Exxon, still the world's biggest oil company), scale economies cut refining costs by two-thirds.
That gave Standard a stranglehold on the oil market which it might still enjoy had not America's trustbusters split the company up.
Equally important are economies of scope: big firms can use the materials and processes employed to make one product in the manufacture of related goods, as Japan's consumer-electronics companies did in the 1970s, using the same factories that had previously churned out cheap transistor radios to manufacture televisions and videos.
But size is only a start.
If a company is to become enduringly successful, says Mr Chandler, it must make two kinds of what he calls ‘first-mover’ investments.
One is to create national — preferably international — marketing and distribution networks.
The other is to invest in a hierarchy of managers: lower and middle managers to oversee day-to-day operations, senior managers to coordinate and plan.
That hierarchy need not be cosily ensconced at headquarters: it can be the sort of decentralised management network beloved of management gurus such as Mr Tom Peters.
But even in a decentralised company, says Mr Chandler, bigness is better.
First movers, then, are not always the entrepreneurs who invent a product; but they will be the first to build an organisation which can fully exploit its economies of scale and scope.
To compete globally with established first-movers, newcomers have to build plants of comparable size, invest in a similar distribution network and train a rival managerial hierarchy: a tall order.
This argument, however, ignores the effects of new technologies on markets.
The West's mechanical-typewriter makers were dethroned when Japanese companies like Brother poured electronic models (which employed wholly different manufacturing technologies) into the previously unassailable typewriter markets.
But look at the new companies which take the place of the old order, says Mr Chandler: almost all have followed the first-mover formula and grown big.
IBM was not the first company to produce mainframe computers (Remington Rand, Raytheon and Philco were all pioneers), but it was the first to make vast first-mover investments in integrated production, distribution and management for the introduction of its System 360 in 1964.
By going global before its rivals and by investing heavily in managerial expertise, IBM launched itself as the world's biggest computer company.
It still is.
Failure to make first-mover investments can scupper industrial potential.
William Perkin, an Englishman, invented the first man-made dyes in 1856.
Britain had many comparative advantages in dye-making, including plenty of coal (the raw material for dyes) and a vast textile industry.
Yet West Germany's Bayer and Hoechst went on to dominate the industry (by 1913 Germany produced 90% of the world's dyes) because, unlike British companies, they made the essential first-mover investments in production, distribution and management.
Why, if big remains beautiful, have big companies performed so badly during the past two decades, especially in America and Britain?
Firms can easily dissipate their first-mover advantages, as Henry Ford did after the first world war by sacking many of his best senior managers.
America's carmakers did much the same in the 1980s by failing to respond to the growing Japanese competition in America's small-car market.
But diversification is the main villain.
Facing fiercer competition after the second world war, firms found that the fastest way to grow was to diversify.
Encouraged by management theorists, big firms convinced themselves that they could apply their existing pool of manufacturing and management experience to any business.
But diversifying companies found it much harder to exploit economies of scale and scope in these new fields — usually, says Mr Chandler, because they failed to make the same kind of first-mover investments they had made in their primary businesses.
What diversifiers should have done instead, reckons Mr Chandler (a point on which he is in wholehearted agreement with folk such as Mr Peters), was to concentrate their resources on ‘reinventing’ their existing businesses.
The big chemical companies did just that (after first rashly diversifying) in the 1980s by shifting emphasis from commodity chemicals to pharmaceuticals and biotechnology.
The biggest flaw in Mr Chandler's argument is that it applies more readily to industries where fast changes in technology do not seem likely.
The small firm needling the big multinational may be only a nuisance for the time being, but if it latches on to a new and successful technology and makes all the right first-mover investments it may be tomorrow's market leader.
Minnows who want to become corporate Moby Dicks might take a leaf out of Compaq's book.
Founded in 1982, Compaq ran itself from the start as ‘a major company in its formative stage’, not just ‘a small company with big plans’.
It is now America's eleventh-biggest computer maker.
FINANCE
Hard times for Japan's corporate cash-raisers
TOKYO
THE clobbering of their portfolios by Tokyo's tumbling stockmarket (down 23% on the Nikkei index since January) has made 1990 a terrible year for those Japanese companies that dabble in stocks as a way of boosting their business profits.
Now many are finding that their access to cheap capital is being painfully squeezed as well.
This week Japan's four leading brokerages (Nomura, Daiwa, Nikko and Yamaichi) agreed to stop issuing and underwriting new shares, convertible bonds and warrant bonds by Japanese companies for at least a month.
The securities firms are trying to prop up the tumbling stockmarket by cutting the supply of new issues.
On March 22nd the market reacted by falling a further 3.1%, which took the Nikkei index below 30,000 for the first time since December 1988 to close at 29,843.
The big four have asked all Japanese corporations with equity-financing plans to postpone them for the time being.
Sumitomo Metal Industries agreed to shelve its ¥300 billion warrant-bond issue.
Nintendo, a video-games maker, pulled its issue of convertible bonds.
Yasuda Fire & Marine cancelled its plans for offering 50m new shares.
Even before the securities houses announced their decision, the advantages of issuing new equity had slumped along with the Nikkei.
This has been a favourite route in the past five years when Japanese companies have needed money to build new factories or buy assets abroad.
They have been issuing equity instruments (eg, convertible bonds and warrant bonds) on the capital markets rather than going to their bank managers for costly old-fashioned loans.
It has usually cost them less than 0.5% to raise capital by issuing dollar-denominated warrants (ie, Eurobonds with warrants that give the buyer the right to buy the shares at fixed prices in four or five years' time) in London and then using swaps to get the money back into yen.
That has been much nicer than paying the 5% or so charged on bank loans even when interest rates in Japan were at a record low.
Since March 20th, when the Bank of Japan raised its discount rate by a further 1% (to 5.25%), the banks have been warning corporate customers that loans will now cost more than 7%.
While the stockmarket was rising steadily, even companies stuffed with cash rushed to issue equity.
Toyota has so much cash that it could be mistaken for a mini-bank, not a carmaker.
Since 1986 it has raised ¥843 billion ($5.6 billion) by issuing convertible bonds in Japan and warrant bonds in Europe (see table on next page).
In the past financial year companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) raised a staggering ¥25 trillion through various forms of equity financing — up 65% over the previous year.
Now, as interest rates go up, the cult of equity ends too.
Matsushita, a giant consumer-electronics group, recently postponed an issue that was planned to raise ¥150 billion.
Then a large supermarket chain, Seiyu, shelved its ¥45 billion issue.
A similar issue expected from an office-automation manufacturer, Ricoh, was also abandoned.
Dozens of other companies have fled the capital markets.
Financing woes have even spread to the steel industry — which until now has always enjoyed special treatment from the banks, brokerages and officialdom.
Sumitomo Metal Industries, Japan's third-largest steel company, has abandoned at least the first phase of a big refinancing scheme.
Kawasaki Steel is now saying that it might have to do the same.
Despite its enormous restructuring problems, Big Steel has not been Japan's greatest raiser of cash.
Japanese banks have gobbled up more, and until recently accounted for around half of all equity capital raised by Japanese companies.
Over the past two years Japan's five largest city (ie, national commercial) banks raised ¥3 trillion ($21 billion) in total — to help them meet the new capital-adequacy requirements set under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
With their low capital ratios (ie, equity as a proportion of assets), Japanese banks were accused in the mid-1980s of unfair competition for international clients.
By March 1993, under new BIS rules, banks wishing to do business internationally must have a capital-to-asset ratio of at least 8%.
Even though they still have three years to go before the BIS deadline, Japan's five leading city banks (Dai-Ichi Kangyo, Sumitomo, Fuji, Mitsubishi and Sanwa) have all cleared the 8% hurdle.
The cash was raised when share prices soared.
The peak was reached on December 29th at 38,916 on the Nikkei.
The most aggressive of the bunch, Sumitomo Bank, has issued some ¥930 billion ($6.6 billion) in fresh equity and convertible bonds, and now has a capital-adequacy ratio of 10.6%.
All Japanese banks want to be in Sumitomo's shoes.
To be on the safe side, they feel that they need to have equity ratios of at least a percentage point or two above the BIS minimum.
But the falling yen is now making that especially hard to achieve on the sinking stockmarket.
Over a third of the banks' assets are denominated in foreign currencies, and particularly in dollars.
Each time the yen slips, the larger these dollar-based assets loom in the banks' balance sheets — and the more they have to scrounge for additional yen-based equity at home in order to prevent their capital-adequacy figures from slipping back below the BIS requirement.
Japanese banks are also hard hit by the steady rise in interest rates.
Where once the banks had access to regulated supplies of cheap money, they now have to raise nearly 70% of their funds in the open market.
Since last May, when the Bank of Japan ended its easy-money policy, there have been four increases in the official discount rate (from 2.5% to 5.25%).
The impact of these rises on the banks' cost of funds has been sobering.
For nearly nine months now, money-market instruments (eg, call money and discount bills) have had higher interest rates than even the yields on ten-year government bonds.
Whenever the so-called yield gap (long minus short rates) goes negative, and stays so for longer than two business quarters, past experience suggests that the banks get badly bruised.
Analysts' best guesses are that the underlying operating profits of the big city banks will be down by as much as 30% for the financial year now ending.
Normally, they would seek to make that up by selling some of their huge holdings of securities.
But the banks do not cherish the thought of being distressed sellers in a declining stockmarket.
‘What this all means,’ says Mr Stuart Matthews of Barclays de Zoete Wedd's Tokyo branch, ‘is that the banks will find it increasingly difficult to raise large amounts of equity.’
All of them (bar Sumitomo Bank) still need to raise additional capital.
To do so, they will have to issue a good deal more paper than they would normally like.
The market will have difficulty in mopping this all up.
So some banks will be forced to rely on retained earnings for shoring up their capital-adequacy ratios — unless they are ready to put up with a much slower growth in assets (which few seem prepared to do).
Mr Matthews reckons that about half of the banks' retained earnings comes from securities gains.
Even when the stockmarket was soaring, the Bank of Japan was unhappy about letting the banks rely on securities profits for bolstering their capital bases.
With the Tokyo stockmarket in retreat, the central bank is likely to be even more leery about this now.
Wall Street worriers
New York has so far ignored Tokyo's woes.
Optimistic investors hope that America's economic growth is picking up, which would be good news for company profits.
They are probably wrong
FOR the first time since April 1987 America's stockmarket is again bigger than Japan's.
New York overtook Tokyo on March 19th when its stockmarket (as tracked by Morgan Stanley Capital International) was capitalised at $1.8 trillion compared with falling Tokyo's $1.7 trillion.
American investors feel that their domestic economy is not as weak as they previously feared.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed on March 20th at 2,739, not far below its all-time high of 2,810 on January 2 1990, and well above this year's low of 2,553.
Bulls argue there are increasing signs that America's manufacturers may be pulling out of last year's recession, when the whole economy kept growing only because of the dominant service industries.
In the third and fourth quarters of 1989 after-tax profits of companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 index were respectively 24% and 13% below those of a year before.
In the first three months of 1990, the guess is that they were again about 13% lower than in the first quarter of 1989, but there are now hopes that it was the last drop for a while.
Mr Stefan Abrams, an investment analyst at Kidder Peabody, thinks earnings will start rising again in the second quarter.
He says that the airline and motor industries have seen their worst, that semiconductor orders are rising (IBM's share price is up by 10% so far this year), and prices of metals such as aluminium and copper have rallied.
The American stockmarket now trades on a not-cheap price-earnings ratio of 14 based on Wall Street's profit estimates for 1990.
Rising expectations of stronger economic growth have helped keep the dollar relatively strong.
The snag is that a stronger economy might mean higher inflation and therefore higher interest rates.
That prospect has been worrying bond investors.
Long-term Treasury-bond yields were as low as 7.75% towards the end of 1989.
Bond prices have since fallen and yields risen, partly because of inflation worries, but more because of a worldwide liquidity squeeze which has caused bond yields to rise virtually everywhere.
The 30-year Treasury bond yielded 8.45% on March 20th.
Consumer prices in February rose by a larger-than-expected 0.5%, or an annualised rate of 5.8%.
Wall Street is starting to wonder how long the Federal Reserve can continue to ignore such evidence of rising inflation, despite pressure from the White House to lower interest rates.
The markets are sending the opposite message to the Fed.
Bond yields are above the federal funds rate of 8.25%.
That suggests monetary policy may be too easy, not too tight.
The stockmarket is vulnerable to any hint of Fed tightening and higher interest rates.
So far these prospects are not discounted.
Shares yield only around 3%, 5.5 percentage points below the return on Treasury bonds.
Such a gap is justified only if company earnings start improving in the months ahead.
Fed tightening could deliver a blow to such hopes.
Given Wall Street's wild swings of mood, the fears of recession that were dominant there barely two months ago, and have now see-sawed back to hopes of recovery, could so easily see-saw back.
The scope for share prices to rise further looks limited.
If the economy is picking up steam, the recovery may be nipped in the bud by renewed Fed tightening.
If the economy is weaker than it now appears — because, as some economists suggest, the government's data have been inflated by unseasonably warm weather in January and February — then shares could fall sharply to reflect continued declines in company earnings.
A third possibility is stagflation, where the economy refuses to recover but the rate of inflation does not fall, so reducing the central bank's ability to ease credit.
So far the Fed has talked tougher about inflation than it has acted.
But its chairman, Mr Alan Greenspan, and other Fed governors have begun to remind financial markets that inflation, not recession, remains their main problem.
Any hint of Fed tightening could cause even more chaos than usual, because of the precarious condition of much of America's financial and property markets: the legacy of the huge growth in debt during the 1980s, and the main cause of worry now.
Even if manufacturing America looks relatively healthy, financial America does not.
The glum symptoms range from junk-bond distress to the destruction of wealth caused by falling property values and the thrifts debacle.
Banks are under pressure from zealous regulators to raise reserves against shaky loans, and to be cautious about making new loans.
As a result, banks want to lend money only to the most creditworthy.
The results of the banks' self-imposed credit rationing, and of the mounting creditor distress, are beginning to show in the leap in outstanding commercial paper issued by non-financial companies.
This has jumped to more than $140 billion, from $125 billion in late November.
Much of the rise in commercial paper outstanding is a counterpart to the decline in bank lending.
Since November commercial and industrial loans at America's money-centre banks have fallen by about $6 billion.
In January 1990 the total debt of government, business and consumers in America was 7.6% higher than a year before.
That was the lowest rate of increase since March 1971, but was still faster than the growth in money supply.
M3 is rising at just 3.3% year-to-year.
Ms Nancy Lazar, an economist at C.J. Lawrence, views this as a better measure than M2, which is growing at a faster 6.1% year-on-year: deposits have been flowing out of savings and loan institutions, which do not show up in M2, and into banks, which do.
Slowing growth in debt and money-supply should both be contractionary influences on the economy, and ones that are doubly bearish for the stockmarket.
The 1980s boom was fuelled by rapid growth of debt.
Between 1982 and 1989 non-financial debt as a percentage of America's GNP rose from 140% to 185%.
Previously this ratio had remained stable for more than 20 years.
If the growth of debt continues to slow, either because banks grow more cautious or because borrowed money cannot be paid back and has to be written off, this will send share prices lower.
The extent of the fall will depend on how far liquidity contracts.
Midland Bank
A battered bride
BRITAIN'S third-biggest clearing bank looks fit more for a wake than a wedding.
If Midland does tie the knot with Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, it may need some help up the aisle.
The bank, which has assets of £62 billion ($100m), is Britain's sickest high-street bank.
Midland reported a loss of £261m in 1989.
Even before provisions against third-world debt and local-authority swaps, Midland made only £616m in 1989 — 11% less than a year earlier.
Almost three years after his appointment as chairman and chief executive, Sir Kit McMahon has still not solved any of Midland's three core problems: a big third-world-debt portfolio, high costs, and low-yielding assets.
Compare Lloyds Bank, the smallest of the big-four clearers, with Midland.
Lloyds has assets of £57.5 billion and last year made a profit, before principal third-world-debt provisions, of £910m.
Midland, with £5 billion more in assets, could only make two-thirds as much profit as Lloyds.
Such weakness stops Midland from generating much-needed capital: it can retain a mere £300m this year.
Lloyds generated more than £450m.
Not surprising, Midland's balance sheet looks ropey.
Even after the £383m the bank got from selling a 14.9% stake in itself to the Hongkong Bank and the £1.1 billion it raised from a rights issue and the sale of its Scottish and Irish banks, Midland still struggles to keep its third-world debt provisions up to the level of its rivals.
Over the past year the bank has managed to raise its provisions from 30% to 50% of its loans to poor countries while rivals have hiked theirs to the 70% level.
Its third-world debts of £4.3 billion still leave Midland vulnerable to non-performing loans.
Midland's cost-to-income ratio is at 72.4%; all its big clearing-bank rivals have ratios under 67%.
The income side of the ratio has also let Midland down.
Midland Montagu, the bank's investment-banking arm, has mismatched its books, betting on a fall in British interest rates when in fact they rose.
That cost Midland about £100m last year.
Except in the unlikely event that rates soon plummet, it could cost the bank up to £100m this year.
Since his arrival, Sir Kit McMahon has shunned the clearing-bank careerists who traditionally peppered Midland's senior ranks.
The trouble is that his men have done just as badly as the old guard.
Mr George Louden, a former managing director of Holland's Amro Bank, presided over Midland Montagu's celebrated mismatch.
Mr Gene Lockhart, a brash American former management consultant, was made head of Midland's computer-systems and group operations in 1987.
The bank's rationalisation programme has still not yielded the £200m of savings hoped for.
In 1988 Mr Kevin Gavaghan was brought in from the Burton Group, a British clothes retailer, to be the bank's marketing director.
His flashy marketing campaigns have done little for the success of Midland's new products.
Even Midland's star turn — domestic banking, which increased its profit from £418m in 1987 to £500m last year — is beginning to falter.
In 1989 Midland increased its domestic banking division's bad-debt charges by 53%, from £51m in 1988 to £78m.
Midland's domestic provisions, at 1.1% of domestic assets, are now the highest among the high-street banks.
With its main shareholders, M&G, a unit-trust group, which owns 6.9%, and the Kuwait Investment Office (10%), already nursing losses, Midland seems likely to be heading for the altar before long.
Whether the Hongkong Bank will be the one waiting is a mooter question.
Hip hype
DON'T get into PR, get into IR: Investor Relations.
That is the message from a growing band of crisp-cuffed investment-bankers-turned-IR folk.
Three such smoothies recently opened the doors of their brand-new consultancy, Frew Dale Macmaster, in London's Harley Street, better known for medical doctors than image surgeons.
Investors still need convincing that such firms offer more than mere placebos.
IR was born in America in the 1940s to service the nation's host of small private investors (47m of them at the latest count).
The first shareholder-relations programmes, run by AT&T and General Electric, consisted simply of a telephone-answering service for routine inquiries.
Now IR is big business.
The National Investor Relations Institute (NIRI) lists 2,250 members, 20% of whom are consultants.
These people no longer chat up Joe Blow of Idaho: they talk to Wall Street analysts and to serious-money managers across America.
In Britain investor-relations consultants are newer.
They blossomed in the 1980s, thanks to:
Surging mergers and acquisitions — £21 billion ($33 billion) worth of British companies were taken over in 1989, compared with £6.3 billion five years earlier.
Growing institutional shareholder power (pension-fund assets shot up from £40 billion in 1979 to £250 billion in 1989).
A healthy distrust since Big Bang in October 1986 of stockbrokers' research.
Investor-relations people dress up their jobs, as well as their persons, to the nines.
Shares, goes the patter, are products like any other and so deserve the same marketing effort.
What Mr Chris Meakin, head of investor relations at B.A.T Industries, says he aims for is a ‘congruence of expectations’ between investor and management.
Aha.
Spoil-sports maintain that IR is merely a new name for what companies have been muddling along at anyway: arranging meetings between management and institutions, co-ordinating the annual general meeting, and producing the annual report.
IR folk claim they do it better.
The institutions that the finance director talks to are chosen on the basis of detailed share-register research, rather than who is free for lunch.
Roadshows get slicker — at the fun ones shareholders enter quizzes and win safaris.
Analysts' presentations happen at the dolphinarium rather than in a boring hotel.
What do investors think of it all?
Not much, it seems.
When big investors get on the telephone they expect to be put through to the chairman, not ‘lumbered into a PR-type department’.
Of 60 fund managers asked last year, 55 did not regard IR officers as their primary company contacts; 33 thought that British industry did not need any more IR consultants.
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation
A suitor of convenience
HONGKONG
Merging Midland, Britain's third-biggest and feeblest bank, with Asia's biggest non-Japanese bank, Hongkong and Shanghai, might solve immediate problems for both.
But it could also create a sprawling bank with a mountain of bad debt.
These two articles look at the banks' problems
WHAT would you do if you were chairman of Hongkong and Shanghai Bank?
Your bank dominates the profitable Hongkong retail market, with its population of hard-working small businessmen and savers.
It has a lucrative niche financing trade in the world's fastest-growing economic region.
On the other hand, you cannot get much bigger in Hongkong; some of Asia's strongest economies are closed to foreign banks; and what will happen to your base and best source of profits after Hongkong returns to Chinese rule in 1997?
Mr William Purves, the bank's chairman since 1987, has decided to stick to a strategy developed in the late 1970s.
The bank then decided that remaining a regional bank was too risky, so it should try to become an international one.
During the 1980s it bought Marine Midland, a commercial bank based in upstate New York; Carroll, McEntee & McGinley (CM&M), a primary dealer in American Treasury bonds; and James Capel, a London firm of stockbrokers.
It also tried to buy the Royal Bank of Scotland, but was blocked by the Bank of England, ending up instead with a 14.9% stake in Midland.
None of these investments has yet made a decent return.
Hongkong Bank steered clear of the mania to lend to third-world countries that peaked in the early 1980s.
But through Marine Midland and its stake in Britain's Midland Bank, it is exposed to dodgy third-world debt, as well as to the tumbling property market in north-east America and the troubled British economy.
The bank's other forays have not been any more successful.
CM&M and James Capel, with their highly competitive markets, both barely break even.
On March 21st, exasperated by James Capel's performance but also peeved that it was seeking a fresh (Japanese) parent, Hongkong Bank forced Capel's popular chairman, Mr Peter Quinnen, to resign.
A push to build a banking business from scratch in Australia has ended in near-disaster.
Its list of down-under clients is embarrassing: Mr Christopher Skase's defunct media conglomerate, Qintex; a bankrupt trans-Tasmanian property developer, Equiticorp; Rothwell's, a dud Perth-based merchant bank; the fraud-ridden National Safety Council of Victoria; and Mr Alan Bond, to whom the bank is thought to have had almost $1 billion in loans outstanding at the peak, a figure now cut by half.
Of all its international forays, only Hongkong Bank of Canada has been a clear success.
But it is too late to turn back the clock on the bank's international expansion.
The change in the outlook for Hongkong following last June's massacre in Tiananmen Square demands that Hongkong Bank be able to negotiate with a future Chinese government from a position of strength.
History suggests that Hongkong Bank should expect the worst after 1997; it lost all but one of its 33 branches in mainland China in 1949.
Europe remains the big hole to plug in its international strategy.
The bank looked at 30 possible acquisitions there after the Bank of England opposed its 1981 bid for Royal Bank of Scotland.
All were either too expensive or too narrowly based.
Then in 1987 Midland Bank got itself in such a mess that it was on the receiving end of a laughable offer from the Saatchi & Saatchi advertising empire.
Midland accepted help from a more natural partner.
Hongkong Bank bought a 14.9% stake in Midland, paying £4.75 a share (Midland's shares price is now £3.43).
It signed a standstill agreement under which it promised not to increase its holding for three years.
Both agreed to explore possible areas of co-operation.
That agreement expires in November.
Mr Purves is tight-lipped about what happens then.
He recently vexed rumour-mongers, who bet on a bid for Midland sooner rather than later, by declining to disclose Hongkong Bank's inner reserves when the bank reported its 1989 results on March 13th.
The Bank of England will require such disclosure if Hongkong Bank wants to take over or merge with Midland.
Mr Purves revealed on March 13th that the bank's property holdings had been revalued in the group's balance sheet at HK$13.8 billion ($1.8 billion)— over twice most analysts' estimates.
This surplus lifted disclosed shareholders' funds to HK$52.7 billion.
Add the two together, throw in HK$13 billion of hidden reserves and Hongkong Bank's ‘true’ shareholders' funds could be HK$78 billion, or over HK$13 a share, against a stockmarket price of HK$7.
Such a revaluation might make a paper and cash offer for the remaining 85% of Midland's shares feasible.
However, the Bank of England would probably insist that, in the event of such a bid, Hongkong Bank became a British bank.
A preferable alternative for both sides would be a merger.
One way would be to form a holding company to which both banks would issue shares in proportion to their shareholders' funds.
This would enable Hongkong Bank to avoid paying a packet for goodwill and for it to remain a Hongkong bank while Midland remained British.
Hongkong Bank is determined to be the senior partner after any merger.
Grafting its expatriate Scottish culture onto Midland's stay-at-home heritage could be hard.
Hongkong Bank's backbone is a cadre of 450 ‘international officers’— mostly Anglo-Saxon males (or Scottish-accented Celts).
All the people who matter know each other well and so can take decisions fast.
This tradition of fostering decentralised decisions and a degree of buccaneering, safeguarded by a highly conservative balance sheet, has enabled Hongkong Bank to prosper in the fast-wheeling markets of Asia.
It is the only one of the old British colonial banks to have made good in the modern world.
Midland could be its passport for survival after 1997 — though, like all Hongkong passports these days, a costly one.
EMU and the European Commission
View from a room
BRUSSELS
A YEAR after the European Community's central-bank governors produced what is known as the Delors report on economic and monetary union, the European Commission has at last written its own credo on EMU.
The commission's plan, which is to be discussed by EC finance ministers at the end of March, sticks closely to the Delors report with one big exception.
It drops central bankers' insistence on centrally-set rules for members' budget deficits.
The paper's final wording is a classic piece of commission fudge.
No centrally imposed rules on countries' budgetary policy; instead, there will be ‘binding procedures’.
Governments would have to submit to the council of finance ministers rules or guidelines on budgetary policy that would go into national law.
These would have to be stringent enough to ensure that the country's borrowing did not put pressure on national or Community interest rates.
The commission hopes that peer-group pressure would persuade member states to comply with the council's rulings on their budgetary plans, which would be taken on a majority vote.
But if a country refused to implement good enough budget rules, the Community would apply penalties, eg, the withholding of EC regional funds.
This does not sound much more liberal than the old idea of binding rules.
The difference, says a senior commission official, is that ‘binding procedures’ means interfering only with the real basket-cases (a euphemism for Greece, Italy and Belgium, which respectively run budget deficits of 19%, 10%, and 6% of their GDPs).
But there is no question, says the official, that ‘budgetary sovereignty must be given up.’
Why?
The commission accepts that one country's excessive borrowing would not bust the EMU apart.
But it thinks that to rely solely on market forces is a messy way of reining in a big borrower.
Markets can take time to wake up to excesses, and in the meantime over-borrowing by one member-state could cause a lot of pain for others.
And when, eventually, market forces do take effect they can correct too sharply.
One proposal by the commission would reduce the market's chances of working efficiently.
The Community would ‘have no obligation to rescue a member state in budgetary difficulty’.
But the commission does not exclude the possibility of a bail-out, and says that the EC might provide conditional assistance.
This makes it less likely that investors would encourage a dissolute borrower to mend its ways by withholding finance.
Mr Jacques Delors has another reason for favouring binding procedures.
He believes in the need for a Community macroeconomic policy.
He wants countries to be made to co-ordinate their fiscal policies so that monetary policy does not have to take take all the strain.
Mr Delors claims that ‘binding procedures’ do not break the principle of ‘subsidiarity’— the idea that decisions should be taken at EC level only when it makes sense to do so.
The transfer of budgetary sovereignty would help EMU work more smoothly.
Yet for those — including many British politicians — who reckon EMU would work adequately without binding procedures, the commission's plan sacrifices subsidiarity.
Gobble, gobble, squawk
IF THE Hongkong and Shanghai Bank goes ahead with a takeover of Midland Bank, it may have to replace the pair of bronze lions that grace the entrance to its headquarters with a more appropriate symbol — such as a couple of ducks.
A new study of bank takeovers in America in the 1980s* indicates that four out of five acquisitions are flops.
They fail to benefit the acquiring bank and destroy some of its value.
The study was conducted for the Bank Administrative Institute, an industry think-tank, by FMCG Capital Strategies, a financial-services consultancy.
It covers some 400 of the biggest bank takeovers between 1922 and 1988.
The study's main measure of an acquisition's success is the subsequent course of the acquirer's share price compared with the share-price movement of a group of similar banks.
For banks that fall prey to others, the study finds, the experience was in one sense rewarding.
The value of the shares in a hypothetical portfolio of acquired banks rose by 420% over the period studied, against a 160% increase for a portfolio of wallflower banks.
For the banks doing the taking over, it is a different story.
Instead of vulture banks, the study suggests that turkeys might be a better name for those whose stock prices were on average 15% lower than that of their peer group — or dead ducks for those 25% lower.
The study's long-term tracking of the impact of acquisitions suggests that 80% of the acquiring banks fall into one of these two categories (in a ratio of three to two respectively).
Only one in five was an eagle, ie, its share price soared above that of its peer group.
Five and six years after an acquisition, the average acquiring bank's share price is 30–40% lower than that of its peer group and the acquirer is likely to be taken over.
The FMCG study says there are four key preconditions for eagle acquisitions.
First, the acquiring bank should be strong in controlling its non-interest expenses.
Second, the price paid for the acquisition must not be excessive.
The study recommends that the acquired bank's discounted cash flow following the acquisition must exceed the price paid for it, for the acquisition to be considered reasonable value.
Third, the target bank's business mix must contain the inherent value to repay the premium that the acquirer will have to pay to make the takeover successful.
And last, the closer the target bank is to the acquirer, the better the chance of value creation, because expense control is more easily managed.
If there is some consolation for bankers amidst all this destruction of value, it is that for some eagles practice makes better, if not perfect.
A flock of American eagles have successfully made more than one takeover.
They include First of America, First Union, United Jersey and five super regionals — Wells Fargo, Banc One, Fleet/Norstar, Barnett and Midlantic.
* ‘Analyzing Success and Failure in Banking Consolidation: The Implications for Bank Acquisition Strategies.’
Bank Administration Institute.
1990.
London's stock exchange
Hobson's option
THE traded-options market in London could be about to play Lithuania to the stock exchange's Russia.
A score of the City's biggest securities houses would like to tear the options market (LTOM) from the giant and bureaucratic International Stock Exchange (ISE), which many feel has smothered LTOM since its inception in 1978.
Curiously, some bits of another bureaucracy, the Bank of England, are encouraging the secessionists.
LTOM has never established itself in the way that foreign counterparts have done.
One barometer of health — LTOM's volume of contracts traded compared with the volume of underlying stocks — is less than half of that at the European Options Exchange in Amsterdam or the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
LTOM has failed to entice private clients, who account for only 20% of its business but are the lifeblood of options markets overseas.
And it has failed to capitalise on London's dominant position in financial Europe.
Thus the market is now a money-loser: it needs 47,000 contracts a day to break even, but manages barely 30,000.
There is bad blood between the options market's leading dealing firms and the stock exchange.
The dealers say that barely anyone on the ISE's ruling council has experience in the derivatives markets.
They resent the ISE's bungling negotiations over a logical merger between LTOM and LIFFE, London's financial-futures exchange.
Rather than confront the exchange's Byzantine politics again to try to revive the merger talks, a nascent derivatives association is considering starting a brand-new options market, possibly under LIFFE's arm — or even with the European Options Exchange.
Any such declaration of independence would be a blow to the ISE's reputation, at a time when the exchange is trying to reform itself.
On March 19th a long-awaited report on reforms to the domestic-equity market was presented to the exchange council by a committee chaired by Mr Nigel Elwes of S.G. Warburg.
Two of the report's main proposals concern the use of a central limit-order system, and the use of a ‘green strip’, whereby small-customer orders automatically go to the market-maker offering the best advertised price.
(At present, securities houses offer their private clients the best price in the market, even if they are not offering it on their screens.)
Such systems are designed to re-establish a central market in British shares.
They would show that the private client is still loved in today's institutional world.
Yet some big securities houses are up in arms over the Elwes report.
They feel that these systems are expensive and unnecessary, especially since they undermine firms' existing facilities for small orders.
In the council meeting, Kleinwort Benson and UBS Phillips & Drew objected strongly to the two proposals.
Also an agency broker objected to a proposal that orders currently crossed within a firm be exposed to market-makers first.
Nor is there a guarantee that the Office of Fair Trading, an old sparring partner of the exchange, will take kindly to some proposals.
As well as steering the Elwes report through all the flak, the ISE's new chief executive, Mr Peter Rawlins, has to oversee a reorganisation of the exchange's businesses.
That will mean cutting the jobs of one in ten of the ISE's 2,800 staff, and the creation of three new divisions.
Each with their own board, they will oversee primary markets, trading markets (where the ISE's domestic- and international-share systems will eventually be crunched together), and settlement.
Under the new arrangements, due for approval on April 2nd, the traded-options market will in theory gain more autonomy by falling outside this structure.
That is unlikely to be enough to appease the secessionists.
EASTERN EUROPE MOVES RIGHT
No halfway house
Having thrown out communism, East Europeans are rejecting social democracy too.
But there are worse things to be avoided than that
IT SEEMS an age, but only months ago democratic socialists in Eastern Europe thought they would gain from communism's fall.
People wanted to be rid of neo-Stalinist regimes, they argued, but were not eager for cut-throat capitalism.
They were mistaken.
Given the chance last Sunday, East Germans not only dished the communist would-be reformers who succeeded Erich Hon-ecker but the civil-rights campaigners who had brought his wretched regime down and the Social Democrats who hoped to replace them both.
The hopes of the left across Eastern Europe were dashed.
Its citizens have seen how the capitalist half of Europe lives and they want a share.
True, East Germany is special.
It is taking a short cut to the consumer society that other East Europeans cannot take, by collapsing into West Germany's arms.
But voters in the rest of Eastern Europe too may well be looking for prosperity first from right-wing parties.
Communists and Social Democrats are struggling in Hungary, where a two-round parliamentary election starts on March 25th.
In Romania, the government led by the reform communists who overthrew the dictatorship of Ceausescu has made so many mistakes that it may get a bad surprise in the parliamentary and presidential elections on May 20th.
Czechoslovakia's voters will choose a new parliament on June 8th.
Communists, Socialists and other left-wing parties there are trailing behind the umbrella reform group, Civic Forum, which is running the government in the meantime.
Poland's next general election is not due until 1993, but there are local ones on May 27th — and meanwhile the government is already well set on the capitalist road.
Even Bulgaria has promised free elections, though not yet set a date.
All this has come in a quite unexpected rush.
For most of the past two years, after the first cracks in the ice were heard, Eastern Europe's future used to be seen something like this.
Reform communists would gradually open up power and share government with non-communist opponents.
Competition would slowly replace planning.
Private ownership would grow gradually, with small firms multiplying even as big ones stayed in state hands.
A few economists dared to imagine an eventual move to a full market economy, but hardly anyone thought this would happen quickly.
Instead, many reformers continued to talk, at least in public, of an East European ‘third way’ between Soviet communism and western capitalism.
But last year history left gradualism behind.
In one country after another, ‘reform communism’ proved empty.
Once the Soviet veto on change was withdrawn, there was suddenly no stopping point halfway.
Communist power collapsed.
Democratic socialists began to ask themselves if there really was a ‘middle road’.
There may be.
But it is not one that voters seem much interested in.
The straight road west
The upheaval began in Poland, where governments had avoided direct Russian intervention by snuffing out change themselves, in 1956, 1970 and again in 1981.
In the semi-free election last June, all but one of 100 seats in the upper house went to Solidarity-backed candidates.
The same would have happened in the lower house if Solidarity's share of seats had not been limited in advance to 35%.
In the aftershock, the communists' allies there deserted them for Solidarity.
A new government under Mr Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the first non-communist prime minister in 40 years, took over in September, committed to sweeping free-market reforms more reminiscent of Latin America than Sweden.
When Czechoslovakia's quiet revolution came last November, reform communism was on the menu for less than a week.
The Communist party had kicked out most reformers after Warsaw Pact tanks put an end to the Prague Spring in 1968.
In the meantime, the reformists' belief in socialist answers had wavered.
The new president was not Alexander Dubcek, spokesman of ‘socialism with a human face’, but Vaclav Havel, one of the founders of the human-rights movement Charter 77.
In Hungary, reform communism of a sort had existed ever since the Russians crushed the October uprising in 1956.
Janos Kadar, who led Hungary from then till 1988, offered some cultural and economic freedom in return for obedience to Moscow.
His successors, who have presided over the past year's changes, hoped they too could massage their way to keeping power.
Reformers led by Mr Imre Pozsgay and Mr Rezso Nyers changed even the communist party's name.
People still turned their backs.
These men are bitterly wondering why they have not had more thanks for nursing Hungary towards democracy.
Economic ideas have changed in step.
‘Not long ago, we thought the important thing was to remove industry from state control, not ownership,’ says Mr Marton Tardos of the Free Democrats, Hungary's free-market liberal party.
The idea of a market economy based on private property was taboo.
All sorts of alternatives were canvassed: worker-management, worker ownership, ‘social ownership’, under which public services like health and transport would own industrial shares.
Yugoslavia's worker-management was once offered as a model.
At its very mention, East European economists today tend simply to roll their eyes.
Instead, market-minded liberals have seized the controls.
Economic success, they believe, rises in the West.
Poland's finance minister, Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, is imposing a harsh stabilisation programme.
‘Poland is too poor for social experiments,’ he likes to say.
The zloty is now, in theory, convertible.
Prices are free.
Soft credit is being squeezed.
Privatisation is on its way.
His Czechoslovak equivalent, Mr Vaclav Klaus, may be winning his fight inside the government for ‘market economics without adjectives’— meaning, for a start, a tough budget and early privatisation.
In Hungary, a new government will have to say yes or no to the drastic subsidy cuts and industrial shutdowns that free-marketeers say are needed.
These economic Robespierres have got the policy initiative partly because they are ready to take risks that others balk at.
Hundreds of books have been written on the transition from capitalism to communism, but not the other way.
There is no known recipe for unmaking an omelette.
Many people in Solidarity thought the communists should be left to take the tough measures needed to clear up the mess they themselves had created — and pay the electoral price.
In Czechoslovakia's Civic Forum, there are doubts about how fast reform should go.
Hungary's Democratic Forum, whose Hungary-first populism puts it on the right, also objects to the pace of reform that the Free Democrats want.
These people worry about a backlash if free-market policies stall or if the social cost is too high.
Solidarity ministers are already having to sweet-talk workers out of striking.
How much, how soon?
That the argument is no longer between capitalism and something else does not mean there is no argument.
The questions now are about the timing and completeness of change.
Not everyone accepts Machiavelli's advice that rulers should dispense favours slowly and inflict pain all at once.
What, for instance, in economies where 80% or more of industry is in state hands, is a plausible calendar for privatisation?
Some right-wing Polish economists want a clear-out sale of state industry in one go.
The Free Democrats talk of selling off 35–40% of Hungary's business assets in 2–3 years and 80% within ten years.
Who will buy the shares?
Selling state assets itself will bring little competition to over-centralised economies, if private monopolies replace state ones.
Is there a broad enough base for popular capitalism?
How much worker ownership should there be?
Will state holding companies be needed?
Should foreign shareholdings be limited?
How is economic pain to be shared out?
How much social spending should there be to soften the transition?
Socialists or social democrats in Eastern Europe tend not to be doctrinaire in their answers.
They accept the goal of an enterprise economy, but want it tempered by social concerns, with a place for worker-ownership.
Mr Jan Jozef Lipsky, a veteran Polish socialist and a co-founder of KOR, the Workers' Defence Committee, says of Mr Balcerowicz's programme, ‘When the car's in a sharp turn, you don't snatch the wheel.’
He believes there should be a place for employee share-ownership plans, but not covering more than, say, 15% of industry.
Even one of the most left-wing members of Czechoslovakia's Civic Forum, Mr Petr Uhl, who now runs the Czech news agency, says that ‘only a market can allow the consumer real freedom of choice’.
So far, the debate about economic policy has been confined largely to technocrats and foreign advisers lodged in expensive hotels where one night costs around the average worker's monthly wage.
Among voters, the longing for the consumer society is mixed with concern about the costs of a market shock-treatment.
In Poland, even one outside adviser to the World Bank worries openly about what he sees as a lack of feeling among Mr Balcerowicz and his advisers for the political realities around them.
Mr Bronislaw Geremek, the leader of Solidarity's parliamentary group, counters that ‘Thatcherist policy is not a danger for Poland because it is unrealisable with our handicaps, but it is needed to budge the deadweight of the planned economy.’
People's fears, though, are realistic enough: fear of price rises, of vanishing pensions, of losing the benefits that softened the drabness of life — low rents, cheap transport, subsidised food.
The fears of bureaucrats and industrial workers are simpler still: hard-driving new bosses at best, at worst the sack.
In Poland and Hungary, despite economic centralisation, traditions of local control have sprung up in many industries.
They will be hard to break.
The previous Polish government failed to shut down the famous Lenin shipyard in Gdansk.
When a wealthy American, Mrs Barbara Johnson, offered to buy it, workers rejected her tough conditions for streamlining and layoffs.
Ambivalence and fear
On top of all this is an ambivalence about imitating the West.
The division of Europe at least protected the East from facing up to its thousand-year feeling of backwardness.
There is envy, but also fear, of westerners, who seem so at home with the intricacies of capital markets and proportional representation.
The frequent remark that ‘it was all so much simpler under communism’ is not always said with total irony.
These conflicts are reflected in opinion polls.
‘Social democracy’ scored better than ‘communism’or ‘liberalism’when Poles and Hungarians were asked how they now felt about these ‘isms’in a poll that was organised recently by a French firm, Conseils-Sondages-Analyses and Le Journal des Elections.
Some 70% of Hungarians quizzed and 60% of the Poles thought social democracy was ‘a system with a future’.
They were not directly asked what ‘social democracy’ meant.
One suspects its high rating owes less to a fondness for social-democratic parties with close trade-union links than to a loose wish for economic efficiency plus social justice.
That hunch is borne out in answers Hungarians gave to more probing questions.
Some 42% of them thought that economic liberals were best at handling the economy (against 18% who thought social democrats were); and 50% thought unions should be independent of social-democratic parties (though 39% thought the opposite).
Capitalism brings losses as well as gains.
In these countries, a certain income equality has been achieved in the past 40 years, if one leaves aside the party privilegentsia, black-marketeers and writers or performers with access to foreign earnings.
An equality of poverty, westerners may say.
Yet nobody knows how people will react if some suddenly get a lot richer and some a lot poorer.
Do East Europeans want their capitals to resemble New York, with its skyscrapers of wealth alongside slum ghettos?
In Hungary in 1977, the top-earning fifth of households got 32% of total household income, the bottom fifth 11%.
In Poland in 1982, the best-off fifth of ‘employee households’— anybody not on a farm or retired — got 31% of total ‘employee’ income.
In both countries, the income differences had been narrowing.
For comparison, in Britain, at the end of the 1970s, the gap between rich and poor was considerably wider than that in Hungary or Poland, and has widened further since.
The dangers for democracy
The hard work in Eastern Europe is just beginning, and not just economic.
While free markets are to be introduced, free constitutions are to be written.
This will be one main job of the new parliaments in Czechoslovakia and Romania.
Poland's parliament is already drafting one, to be ready, it is hoped, by mid-1991.
Hungary's new parliament will have to decide how to choose a president, and how strong he will be.
Investors, especially foreign ones, want political stability, to go with economic growth.
Governments want both.
So do voters.
But getting both will not be easy: they don't necessarily go together.
Governments must both deliver economic success — hard enough — and yet avoid too much short-term social injustice, which may be harder still.
If they fail on either count, they are in trouble.
And trouble may not mean just the change of ruling party that it would in Western Europe.
After the first world war, most states in central and eastern Europe got more or less democratic constitutions.
Admiral Horthy soon ended chaos and democracy alike in Hungary.
By 1926 Poland was under a military strongman.
Romania's king ended democracy there.
The failures of the Weimar republic spawned Hitler.
Austria functioned as a semi-democracy, only Czechoslovakia as a real one, until Hitler crushed them.
‘We are are building democracy on a slippery surface,’ says Mr Petr Pithart, the premier of the Czech lands (Bohemia and Moravia).
Society, he says, has been ‘flattened out’, with consequent risks of demagogy and nationalism.
A leading Solidarity activist, Mr Adam Michnik, argues that the real arguments in Eastern Europe will be less between economic liberalism and social-democracy than between an open, tolerant vision of society and more bigoted or authoritarian ones.
Where it survives at all, belief in a special East European road may be strongest in parties with a nationalist tinge, like Hungary's Democratic Forum.
This sort of thing was common between the wars, when one East European country after another tried to keep out foreign goods and capital.
‘Nostrification’, as it was pompously known, was a dream.
Poland, for example, was too poor.
By the 1930s, 40% of its industry was owned by foreigners.
This time round, how patiently will touchy Poles put up with working to German standards for German bosses in German-owned firms?
For the moment, however, Solidarity and Czechoslovakia's Civic Forum continue to enjoy huge credit.
As in Spain after Franco, they can probably count for some while on a ‘democracy bonus’: people will put up with hardship as the price of freedom.
In Czechoslovakia the big argument is inside Civic Forum.
How thorough a reform programme should it put forward?
Some of its leaders fear a revival of left-wing parties waving the banner of social justice.
Others argue that any new government must have a clear mandate for change.
At the moment, unelected technocrats are being asked to provide economic reform from above.
In Poland, Solidarity too is more threatened by its own internal arguments than by the Socialist or Peasant parties.
Some people think the parliamentary election should be brought forward from 1993, to give the government legitimacy and to open the way for a new president — Mr Lech Walesa?— in place of General Jaruzelski.
Both Civic Forum and Solidarity want to hang on to the one-nation sense of anti-communism (and anti-Sovietism).
Both are keen to remain as ‘movements’ rather than‘parties’.
The distinction, which may seem over-fine to westerners, matters in countries where the word ‘party’ meant a monopoly of political life.
Yet the fraternal phase of revolutions does not last.
Movements in time tend to become ragged coalitions in disguise, denying voters the chance to make clear choices.
In Hungary the issue is whether stable governments can be formed from the wide band of parties produced by a complex electoral system.
But here too there may well be a democracy bonus, as politicians of all the big parties try to make the system work, knowing that voters will be quick to punish failure.
It is harder to be confident about Romania, if only because politicians there, of whatever stripe, mostly treat their opponents as liars and scoundrels.
Forecasts about the course of democracy tend to swing from optimism to despair with alarming speed.
In Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia former enemies who by rights should, and quite probably do, detest each other are vigorously horse-trading today.
Romania seems to lack that valuable sense of compromise.
It may yet serve as an unhappy reminder that there are divides greater than those between modern capitalism and modern social democracy.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The promise of atomic eyes
IMAGINE a gramophone needle so sensitive that it could detect the individual atoms on a record.
Crudely speaking, this is the principle behind a breed of microscopes that may turn out to have as much impact on the microchip-production line as they have already had in the laboratory.
The scanning-tunnelling microscope (STM) was devised by Dr Gerd Binnig and Dr Heinrich Rohrer at IBM's Zurich laboratories in 1981.
It is the first of a rapidly growing family of microscopes based on the idea of moving a needle over a surface to sense its shape.
The STM works by putting a voltage on the needle so that a tiny current flows to the surface.
It flows despite the fact that there is an insulating vacuum between the tip and the surface: thanks to the vagaries of quantum mechanics, electrons can ‘tunnel’ through the gap to produce a current.
If the vacuum gap diminishes slightly, as it does when the tip approaches a bump on the surface, the current increases.
A feedback system moves the tip away from the surface to keep the current constant.
And the amount the tip is moved reveals the height of the protuberance, even if it is only a single atom high.
The STM is also sensitive to the electronic properties of a surface.
For instance, in gallium arsenide (often touted as an eventual successor to silicon in the microchip industry), the gallium and arsenic atoms form a type of bond in which each gallium atom ‘borrows’ an electron from an arsenic atom.
This affects the STM, as Dr Joseph Stroscio and Dr Randall Feenstra at IBM's Watson research laboratories in New York state have shown.
If a negative voltage is applied to the tip, pushing electrons into the surface, the gallium atoms will show up clearly in the STM, because electrons will flow into the surface most when the tip is above a gallium atom.
Likewise, the arsenic atoms appear if the voltage is positive.
Circuitous progress
Taking snaps of single atoms is a feat worthy of a Nobel prize, and the STM got one for its inventors.
It may turn out to earn rather more than that in the semiconductor industry.
If the silicon chips coming off a production line begin to fail, ordinary optical-microscope pictures of the minute circuitry can often help to sort out what is going wrong.
However, the dimensions of the smallest circuit-parts will soon have shrunk beyond the limit that optical microscopes can resolve.
Traditional electron microscopes, which emit beams of electrons and watch them bounce off the surface, can see much smaller details but their pictures usually give only a poor impression of the relief of the surface.
The STM can give an accurate one; and the smallest circuit features are still several hundred atoms in size — easy for the STM to resolve.
Various companies have sprouted their own STM products.
Digital Instruments in California has been marketing a Nanoscope since 1986.
It has sold over 300 of them, at around $70,000 each.
According to the company, the market is expanding fast: three-quarters of its sales were made in the past 18 months.
Industry, at least in America and Europe, has been slow to show interest.
Digital Instruments still relies on universities and research institutes for about half of its sales.
But the Japanese have decided that anything with the slightest chance of helping to make better microchips deserves a close look.
The company has sold to most big Japanese chipmakers and many manufacturers of electronic and optical-storage discs.
Japanese industry now accounts for nearly a third of sales.
Other firms are profiting too.
Britain's WA Technology, based in Cambridge, started selling STMs three years ago from the dining room of one of the company's founders.
It has now sold around 15.
The company is a relatively rare thing for Europe: a successful high-technology start-up.
More typical of European STM builders is Omicron, a West German specialist in vacuum equipment, and Struers, a Danish company that makes metallurgical equipment.
Both are established firms which see STMs as a logical extension of their business.
Some makers are aiming at specialist niches.
NHK, an American firm based in Michigan, sells an STM that can be run at extremely low temperatures.
This makes it popular for studying superconductors (materials that conduct electricity without resistance at low temperatures).
Seiko in Japan has developed an STM capable of accurately placing the needle anywhere on the five-inch wafers of silicon on which microelectronic circuitry is printed before it is diced into chips.
Most of the companies that have bought STMs are still working out what to do with them.
A few have already introduced them as analytical tools in their product-development laboratories.
But sales will not really take off until they become a standard quality-control feature on production lines.
Already, though, some STM makers have their sights on other markets.
Digital Instruments will soon be selling a version of the Nanoscope that works in an electrolytic bath.
Such a device can be used to study the quality of electroplated metal films or to investigate corrosion as it happens.
The company expects the makers of electrolytic batteries (like the ones in cars) to be big customers for its new product.
Many other ways of using the STM are pouring out of research laboratories and are likely to make their way to market.
One example: last year Dr Kumar Wickramasinghe and an IBM team in New York demonstrated a version of the STM that is sensitive to temperature.
The needle and sample are chosen so that they form a thermocouple: a device that produces a voltage if the point at which the two materials meet is hotter than its surroundings.
If light of a certain colour shines on the surface, molecules on the surface will absorb the light and heat up so that they ‘glow’ in the STM picture.
Since different molecules absorb different colours, this microscope can be used to make a microscopic chemical analysis of the surface.
Some researchers think the STM may have a more distant future not just analysing molecules and microcircuits but helping to make them.
By dipping the STM needle in a drop of organic molecules on a piece of graphite, and then briefly applying a large voltage to the tip, Dr John Foster and colleagues at IBM's research laboratories in San Jose, California, have shown how to fix a single molecule at a specific point on the graphite.
In addition, further pulses of volts can be used to dissect the molecule or to remove it altogether.
Another feat of microengineering was demonstrated by Dr Russell Becker and a team at AT&T Bell Laboratories in New Jersey.
By briefly touching the metal tip on a germanium crystal, moving the tip to another part of the crystal and then applying a large voltage, they placed a single germanium atom at the new spot.
One day, the team hopes, it will be possible to build tiny circuits atom by atom.
Russian science
Rockets into ploughshares
MOSCOW
SCIENCE and technology are supposed to be two keystones of Mikhail Gorbachev's attempts to liven up the Soviet economy.
But perestroika came late to the Soviet Academy of Sciences, and the reforms introduced over the past two years have yet to take effect.
‘The academy was too sleepy in the beginning,’ Dr Roald Sagdeev, a radical academician and former director of the Space Research Institute, told The Economist.
‘It began to overhaul itself only as a result of demands from the public and from individual scientists.’
The academy had become little more than a rubber stamp for huge prestigious projects drawn up by the industrial ministries.
What power it had was in the hands of an aging bureaucracy.
By 1988 age-limits had been set for top posts and the way they were filled had become more democratic.
New faces appeared in the academy and its institutes; unpopular projects, like plans to divert Siberia's rivers to southern desert areas, were dropped.
Old habits die hard and Dr Sagdeev believes the changes are superficial.
‘As long as top officials are nominated by the party or through party bosses like Yegor Ligachev, perestroika in the academy will be a phantom.’
Fundamental science was a casualty of the ‘period of stagnation’— it got less than 9% of Soviet spending on science in 1988.
Things appear to be improving.
In 1989 500m roubles was allocated to basic research; earlier this year, overall finance for science was increased by 30%.
Dr Sagdeev approves, but does not expect the trend to continue, given the budget deficit.
The way science money is allocated has also been changed.
Instead of going directly to the academy's institutes, much of it is now awarded to projects by committees representing science and industry.
Last year 6,200 projects competed, of which 3,860 received money.
But, says Dr Sagdeev, a large part of the money is still spent to support unprofitable institutes.
Getting industry to adopt new technologies has long been a problem.
For decades the main aim of every enterprise was to meet or exceed government-set output targets rather than to improve production methods.
Now institutes are being encouraged to seek contracts from industry, with the aim of eventually becoming self-financing.
Such contracts so far account for around 15% of most institutes' funds.
Dr Sagdeev is concerned that it should not exceed 50%, ‘otherwise institutes will lose their stability and become preoccupied with ad hoc projects.’
New institutions have been created to foster links between science and industry, ‘interdepartmental technology centres’ known as MNTKs, which represent research institutes, ministries, government departments and enterprises.
So far 23 have been set up, 17 involving academy institutes.
These 17 have produced goods worth 500m roubles.
The problem, Dr Sagdeev points out, is that in some cases government ministries and departments still have control.
He does not think MNTKs will last; they are ‘a form of transition from a state-run system to an independent one’.
Dr Sagdeev reports that morale among scientists is very low.
In the old days, researchers in the military sector were pampered while scientists in civil research were ill-equipped and badly paid, with few prospects for promotion or international recognition.
But instead of bringing civilian scientists up to the standard of their military colleagues, many Soviet scientists feel there has been a levelling down.
The government is trying to boost the ailing economy by converting the defence industry to civilian production.
This has meant big cuts in some scientific areas.
The academy ‘cut out funding of projects which had nothing to do with military programmes — space research was one victim’.
And space research is Dr Sagdeev's own field.
This might help to explain why he is not optimistic about the future of Soviet science.
Scanning horizons
THE scanning-tunnelling microscope (STM) has one drawback.
It works well on metal or semiconductor surfaces, but insulating materials are a problem.
No current can be made to flow from the STM's needle on to their surfaces.
Dr Binnig, co-inventor of the STM, and his colleagues in Zurich have developed a solution: a needle made of diamond, say, can be made to sense an insulating surface by exploiting the weak repulsive forces that exist between atoms.
The needle will move up and down because of these forces.
Its motion can be detected — for example, by deflecting a laser beam that bounces off a mirror attached to the needle.
Such a device is called an atomic-force microscope (AFM).
Although the AFM cannot quite achieve the resolution of an STM, it is likely to have its uses in microelectronics.
Optical discs, for example, are made of insulating material; although they can be coated with a thin metal film and put under an STM, an AFM could examine a product without destroying it.
Digital Instruments will start delivering AFMs this spring, many to Japanese optical-disc manufacturers.
They hope to sell 100 by the end of the year.
Variants of the AFM abound.
The magnetic-force microscope, developed at IBM's Watson research laboratories in New York, uses a magnetic needle made of nickel which is sensitive to variations of the magnetic field on a surface.
Such a microscope can easily form images of the individual bits of magnetic information.
In its development laboratories, IBM is using the microscope to check the quality of magnetic-storage discs.
In one case it was able to show that tracks of information were being written too closely together, thus partially erasing each other.
At the same laboratory, Dr Clayton Williams and colleagues have developed a type of AFM for measuring the distribution of atoms of a ‘dopant’ in semiconductors.
Dopants are used to tailor the electronic properties of different parts of circuitry.
When a voltage is applied to the tip of the AFM needle (which is kept far enough away from the surface so that no tunnelling current can flow), the dopant's electrons are disturbed and exert an electrostatic force on the tip.
The resulting motion of the tip can be used to measure the amount of dopant atoms below it.
Researchers around the world have only a dozen or so AFMs, compared with hundreds of STMs.
When AFMs become more widely available, they seem sure to make a hit in biology.
Most interesting organic substances are non-conducting, and biologists like to put their samples on insulating glass slides.
Dr Paul Hansma and colleagues at the University of California at Santa Barbara have already produced AFM pictures of individual amino acids making up a peptide chain.
Some researchers think that scanning microscopes could eventually be used to read off the sequence of amino acids that form DNA.
Today's techniques for DNA sequencing are comparatively laborious and indirect.
The microscope could even move from reading to writing.
One idea on the horizon is to alter the structure of molecules with an AFM — making it the ultimate precision tool.
Objects of desire
Databases are being taught how the world works, and thus becoming more than mere filing cabinets
THE computers that most companies want do not beat grandmasters at chess, attempt to predict the weather, or do scientists out of a job.
One of their main uses is simply to store and sort information — in ‘databases’.
The past two decades of database development have been rather boring.
The aim of such work has been to realise the ideal of ‘relational-model’ databases, as defined by Mr Ted Codd, a researcher at IBM, in 1970.
This task has often seemed to combine the pedantry of library theory with the incomprehensibility of computer science.
Now that the goal has finally been reached, the fun can begin.
What makes the new round of work potentially so profitable is the scope it offers for experiment.
Plenty of new technology had to be devised to implement relational databases.
But the work was dictated by Mr Codd's theory.
Today's wave of experiments has no such rulebook: anybody with a good idea can try it out, and perhaps strike gold.
One fruitful source of experiment is to apply ideas from ‘object-oriented’ programming languages to databases.
To see why, start with a look at the pros and cons of Mr Codd's creation.
His relational model is a theory of what data is and how it can be stored and retrieved.
It provides a series of rules and techniques for ensuring that each piece of information is stored in only one place in the database.
And it shows how to build up descriptions of complex data from these ‘atomic’ pieces.
The advantages of such a computerised filing system are reliability and flexibility.
It has one, and only one, place for everything.
But there are costs too.
Although for many applications the costs are negligible, they raise their heads too often to be ignored.
Reassembling, say, all the designs for all the parts which make up a jet engine can be a time-consuming task on a relational database.
Worse, all the details of that task have to be specified in detail by a programmer, who can be overwhelmed by the complexity of the data he is trying to manage.
As one wag noted, storing information in a relational database is a bit like storing a car in a filing cabinet — engine under ‘E’, wheels under ‘W’ and so on.
It is all there, but there is a lot of reconstruction to do after getting it out.
Object-oriented programming offers techniques for boosting efficiency and hiding complexity.
They work by building into the database some knowledge about the world it records.
Instead of maintaining a distinction between programs (the computer's rules for thinking) and data (what it thinks about) the idea of object-oriented programming is to create abstract ‘objects’ that contain both.
An object describing an employee might record data like name, rank and salary, and also contain programs like ‘raise salary’ and ‘promote’.
Implicit in the object-oriented approach are a wealth of ideas for databases.
One of the most important is using information about the type of data stored in order to to prevent howlers.
To a conventional database, data is data is data.
No distinction is made between a number that records salary and one that records the number of parts in a warehouse in St Louis.
If a programmer adds the two together, the database will not complain, though the programmer's boss might.
Object-oriented systems keep track of the qualities of quantities, and complain about attempted daftness.
In addition to catching errors, object-oriented systems can shelter the user from the complexity of dealing with lots of different kinds of data.
They keep track of which procedures work on which types of data-object.
Adding feet and inches, for example, requires a procedure different from adding metres; displaying graphics is different from displaying text.
Because they store appropriate procedures with each type of data-object, object-oriented databases never forget such details.
The information contained in the definition of objects can also boost efficiency by reducing the time needed to retrieve complex collections of data.
Computer-aided design systems, for example, might define an ‘object’ called ‘jet engine’.
When an engineer calls up the plans for a jet engine, the information in the definition of that object allows the system — automatically and efficiently — to retrieve the plans for all its sub-components.
There is more.
Ideas from object-oriented programming may also help databases to communicate better with the programming languages that modify their data — and to tell the difference between two items which coincidentally have the same characteristics.
Increasing quantities of these bright ideas are making the leap from laboratory to marketplace.
Several American companies now offer object-oriented databases — among them Symbolics (noted for computers that run the LISP programming language), Ingres (maker of a best-selling relational database), and start-ups including Servio Logic, Ontologic and Object Design.
Others, including Hewlett-Packard, have research prototypes in the wings.
Each reflects the concerns of its creator.
Symbolics, predictably, offers a particularly good link between its database and LISP.
One of its clients, Houston Power and Light, uses the object-oriented system to help schedule maintenance of its power stations.
The system manages not only data about maintenance crews and equipment, but also rules that specify how long crews can work, which stations can be taken off-line without blacking out the city, and so on.
Servio Logic has tried to make its object-oriented database easy to modify, on the grounds that complex data is likely also to be fast-changing.
Hewlett-Packard has sacrificed some speed for flexibility and compatibility with relational databases.
Computer-aided design companies, by contrast, have concentrated on tapping the speed offered by object-oriented techniques in assembling and modifying vast quantities of blueprints and design data.
Time and competition will tell which ideas will prosper, and which will be forgotten.
Ants
Old colonials
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
PICK a good story and just tell it,’ is the advice given to aspiring scientists by Dr Edward O. Wilson.
He has certainly picked one of the best for himself.
A lifetime's devotion to ants has made him the principal authority on the subject.
Last week Harvard University Press published the first conspectus of myremecology since 1910, by Dr Wilson and Dr Bert Holldobler (a fellow Harvard professor).
* Why, they ask, have ants been relatively neglected by other biologists?
Put all the world's land animals on a pair of scales and 10% of the weight would be ants.
But it is their achievements, not their weight, which distinguishes them.
Ants are the world's secret workers.
Together with termites they turn most of the earth's soil, enriching it, draining it and airing it.
They are among the most important disseminators of plant seeds; and they eat perhaps 90% of the corpses of small animals.
Dr Wilson argues that if ants were to disappear, most of the world's ecosystems would be dangerously destabilised.
Still, it is not that he wants biologists to give them more credit for maintaining the planet.
Rather he thinks that ants' social organisation and skills should make them at least as rewarding to study as the birds and mammals on which animal behaviourists have focused.
One reason why ants are so sophisticated is because of their complex language of chemical communication, which Dr Wilson has done more than anyone to elucidate.
An average ant colony might use around 12 different types of signal, most of them conveyed by means of chemical ‘pheromones’ secreted on to the ground by various glands and then sniffed in the air by other ants.
Another reason for their success is a lack of sex.
Workers do not reproduce, so to propagate their genes they must protect their nest, thus ensuring that the queen — their relative — can reproduce copiously.
One type of ant is understandably known as the kamikaze ant.
Another is a walking bomb: a Malaysian species of carpenter ant ruptures an enormous poison-filled gland during fights, spraying poison over the enemy as it explodes.
Explaining social behaviour — such as such selflessness — in terms of biology (especially genes) is a hallmark of sociobiology, of which Dr Wilson is regarded as the father.
Although most ants are accomplished fighters and hunters, there are also many farmers among them.
Ants of the genus Hypoclinea are the only known genuine nomads, apart from some tribes of man.
They keep livestock — in the form of mealybugs which feed on sap — and move them continuously to fresh pastures, placing them on new plants and trees when the old ones have been sucked dry.
Nutrients from the sap are passed on to the ants in the mealybugs' excrement.
The most sophisticated farmers are the leaf-cutting ants, which cultivate fungus on fresh vegetation thanks to an assembly-line of specialised castes.
Co-operation within a colony, especially by means of labour-dividing castes, is probably what ants are most famous for.
One ‘super-colony’ of interconnected nests, spread over 2.7 square kilometres in Hokkaido, Japan, consisted of some 306m workers and over 1m queens.
But genuine co-operation between colonies seems always to boil down to pure parasitism.
Often one colony will enslave another of the same species, or one species will exploit another.
Queens of the North African Bothrio myrmex decapitans take control of colonies of Tapinoma ants.
They let Tapinoma workers drag them into their nests, then they find the Tapinoma queen, sit on her back and do what they have evolved to do best: slowly saw off her head.
The new queen takes over as sole reproducer and soon swamps the colony with her own offspring.
The honeypot ant, Myremocystus mimicus, enslaves other colonies of its own species.
Territorial disputes give rise to elaborate tournaments in which workers extend their legs to walk on stilts and drum their antennae on each other 's abdomens.
When one colony is markedly smaller than the other and so cannot field an imposing team, it is raided, the queen is killed, and workers, pupae and larvae are carried off to be set to work in the victors' nest.
The kings (or rather, queens) of slave-owners are the Amazon ants, who are splendid at killing and enslaving other ants but have grown so dependent on their slaves that they cannot dig their own nests, care for their young or even get their own food.
Dr Wilson works hard to find evolutionary explanations for most of such oddities of ant life.
And he and his fellow sociobiologists have high but distant hopes of doing the same for man.
If sociobiologists have tended sometimes to describe higher societies (such as man's) too much as if they were simpler ones, some entomologists have been guilty of the reverse.
Here is William Wheeler, the last great encyclopediast of ants (1910), describing Amazon ants at home: they sit about in stolid idleness, or pass the long hours begging the slaves for food or cleaning themselves and burnishing their ruddy armour.
No doubt they also do crossword puzzles when it rains.
* ‘The Ants’ by Bert Holldobler and E. O. Wilson.
Harvard University Press; 732 pages; $65.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
America's industrial production recovered in the 12 months to February, rising 0.9% compared with a rise of 0.1% in the year to January.
Britain's industrial output slowed in January, leaving it only 0.3% up on the year, compared with a 1.2% increase in the year to December.
Britain's jobless rate edged down to 5.6% in February, but the fall was the smallest since the present decline began in 1986.
Australia's unemployment rate rose to 6.5% in February, the highest for a year.
Holland's was 5.4% in January, down from 6.3% a year ago.
PRICES AND WAGES
America's 12-month consumer-price inflation edged up to 5.3% in February.
Its wholesale prices were unchanged, trimming the annual rise to 5.1%, down from 5.8% in January.
Japan's wholesale prices rose 3.5% in the year to February, the smallest year-on-year increase for four months.
Japanese earnings rose by 5.9% in the year to January, equivalent to a real pay increase of 2.8%; Britain's workers had a pay rise of 9.3%, a real increase of 1.5%.
WEST GERMANY
What will be the impact on the West German economy of its forthcoming unification with East Germany?
A little like the curate's egg, reckons Consensus Economics, a consultancy which polls other forecasters.
Its consensus forecast suggests that a united Germany would see its GNP growth rise by a net 0.6 of a percentage point in 1991, relative to that of West Germany, and by half a point in 1992.
But inflation is expected to be 0.4 percentage points higher in both years, while interest rates might rise by half a point in 1991 and perhaps by 30 basis points in 1992.
The consensus forecast says Germany's current-account surplus will fall swiftly: to DM88 billion ($52 billion) in 1991, compared with a forecast of DM96 billion for an un-united West Germany.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
Metal prices have risen 29% from their lows in late January.
Lead, normally the dullest of metals, has seen the most spectacular advance.
Fuelled by low stocks and production problems, prices have almost doubled during the period.
Cash lead hit a ten-year high of £800 ($1,300) a tonne in London this month.
The Samin smelter in Sardinia has been closed since last August, with a loss of 68,000 tonnes, and is unlikely to reopen until June.
Producer stocks have been below five week's consumption since the second half of 1989.
Stocks on the London Metal Exchange had almost halved to 12,900 tonnes since the beginning of the year, before recovering sharply to 16,475 tonnes this week.
INTERNATIONAL BORROWING
Borrowing on international capital markets in 1989 was little changed from 1988's level, at $360 billion for medium- and long-term bonds and loans.
There was, however, a swing from bonds and bank lending to equity-related bonds.
Some 97% of the equity-related bond issues were by Japanese companies; the market reached a peak of $28 billion in the second quarter, easing back to $16 billion in each of the third and fourth.
Fixed-rate bonds (‘straights’) were again the most popular, at $154 billion.
This total disguises the fact that offerings in dollars and yen both rose 17%, but Swiss francs and D-marks fell sharply because of their rising interest rates.
Syndicated loans fell 23%, due to fewer corporate restructurings and property financings.
Floating-rate bonds amounted to $17 billion in 1989.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
America's visible-trade deficit widened to $9.3 billion in January, boosted by a surge in oil imports.
Its 12-month deficit edged up to $109.6 billion.
West Germany's trade surplus climbed to $72.7 billion in the year to January.
France's trade deficit rose to $6.9 billion in the year to February.
In trade-weighted terms the dollar fell 0.4% during the week, the D-mark rose 0.5% and the yen lost 1.1%.
WORLD BOURSES
A one-point rise in Japan's discount rate pushed Tokyo below 31,000 for the first time since January 1989; during the week it lost 5.6%.
Wall Street ignored January's poor trade figures, rising 2.4%.
London climbed 1.6%, but reacted coolly to Britain's budget.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
In the year to February America's narrow-money growth quickened to 1.9%, Japan's increased to 0.7% and Britain's accelerated to 6.4%.
In the same period America's broad-money supply rose by 3.3%, Japan's by 11.8% and Britain's by 17.9%.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Sundowners
Tokyo stocks plummeted before and after the Bank of Japan raised its discount rate from 4.25% to 5.25%, the fourth increase in ten months.
The yen fell too, pushing the total market capitalisation of the Tokyo exchange beneath that of the New York exchange for the first time in three years.
Japan's four leading brokerages, Nomura, Daiwa, Nikko and Yamaichi, agreed to stop issuing new shares, convertible bonds and warrant bonds for Japanese companies both in Tokyo and in the Euromarkets for at least a month.
They are trying to prop up the tumbling stockmarket by cutting the supply of new issues.
But who would want to issue now anyway?
Brazil's financial markets were immobilised by the inflation-fighting plan announced by Fernando Collor, the newly elected president.
The plan created a new, free-floating currency called the cruzeiro, and froze deposits worth about $115 billion.
London's International Stock Exchange said it would cut 350 people from its staff of 2,800 in the first stage of a big slimming campaign.
The second stage of the rocket carrying Intelsat 6, the world's biggest communications satellite, failed to separate.
So Intelsat 6 is stuck in a uselessly low orbit until a space shuttle can be persuaded to collect it, or until it falls down.
The $150m satellite is not insured.
With spring warming the northern hemisphere and OPEC unable to agree on cuts in production at the cartel's meeting in Vienna, oil prices tumbled to their lowest level this year.
In January, in contrast, high oil prices pushed the cost of America's oil imports to a record level.
Happy together
D-mark bond prices fell, but the currency soared as East Germany's conservative Alliance for Germany won 48% of the vote in the country's first free election.
Bonn promises monetary union by June 30th, but the Alliance needs two-thirds of the parliamentary vote before it can complete unification.
The European Commission made its first concrete proposal on monetary union.
It called for a EuroFed to co-ordinate monetary policies.
It also asked member states to replace their currencies with the ecu, eventually.
New beginnings
Wall Street whizz-kid Don Carter is entering a new stage of his career.
After pleading guilty to stealing $1m from his clients he may go to jail.
VPI Group, which paid $75m for Mr Carter's company in 1987, is not amused.
Ito-Yokado, a Japanese retailing giant and its subsidiary, 7-Eleven of Japan, offered to buy 75% of Southland  Corporation , which operates America's 7-Eleven chain of convenience stores.
Southland is a casualty of the collapse of the junk bond markets.
The offer depends upon its debt being  restructured successfully.
Terrific trade
The value of world merchandise trade grew by over 7% in 1989 to top $3 trillion for the first time, reported GATT.
America climbed back to the top of the exporters' league table after three years in second place to West Germany.
California's Getty Museum bought Van Gogh's Irises from Alan Bond for $40m.
Mr Bond bought the painting for a record $53.9m in 1987.
Everybody chip in
Six of America's leading technology companies — including IBM, Du Pont and Micron Technology — teamed up with Perkin-Elmer managers to buy that company's electron-beam business.
Though its technology, which makes chips, has won much praise, Perkin-Elmer did not think it could profit in the face of Japanese competition.
A task force sent out by the House of Representatives' banking committee estimates that sorting out America's savings and loan mess could cost as much as $162 billion more than the $50 billion authorised by Congress less than a year ago.
Deals on wheels
President Bush proposed a near-doubling of federal spending on airport expansion over the next five years — but would pay the bill with a controversial departures tax.
Tate & Lyle began talks with Berisford, another British sugar company, about a possible merger.
America's Federal Highway Administration said it might invest in smart roads which could warn drivers of traffic jams and electronically collect tolls for using the road.
New departures
Details of new economic reform in the Soviet Union emerged.
The government says it will break up state monopolies, liberalise prices, set up an independent central bank and introduce a single rouble exchange rate.
Peter Quinnen, head of James Capel, a top British stockbrokerage, resigned.
The firm's parent, the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, despaired at James Capel's lack of profits.
Nevertheless, it was unamused by Mr Quinnen's attempts to find a new (Japanese) owner.