

LEADERS
Never mind the width
A healthy economy needs involved shareholders, not numerous ones
SID, Joe Sixpack, Mrs Watanabe — call them what you will, modest private investors are getting an extraordinary amount of attention from the world's big stockmarkets.
In America corporate bosses and Wall Street are in rare agreement about the need to get retail investors back onto the shareholding registers.
In Japan the securities industry, whose profits have been built on shares sold to housewives in the Japanese equivalent of Tupperware parties, is desperately worried that last year's stockmarket crash may have brought the party to an end.
And in Britain company chairmen agree with the chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont, about the need for ‘wider share ownership’, but only wish that he had done more in his budget last week than simply to promise to bring privatisation sales direct to the high street.
Everyone, it seems, wants individual investors.
Can anyone remember why?
If they can, they are keeping quiet about it.
There is an iron law of finance: the harder that financial folk campaign for something, the tougher the padlock you should put on your wallet.
Most of those pressing for more individuals in the stockmarket have an interest in doing so.
That would be fine, if their interest happened to coincide with that of the economy.
But, in its usual sense, wider share ownership does not.
What the economy needs is narrower ownership.
Stockbrokers, politicians and company chairmen hanker after retail investors for the same, simple reason: they think they are chumps.
Stockbrokers, especially Japanese ones with fixed commissions, like individual buyers because they are a softer touch for the hard sell.
Politicians like them because holding shares may persuade people to vote against parties keen on renationalising former state businesses.
As for chairmen, they do not like having to print millions of copies of their annual reports or having to answer tedious questions at their AGMs from Disgusted of Worthing.
But they are keen on the average private investor because he does not expect to have lunch once a quarter and is less likely to sell out during a takeover bid.
In other words, he is a longer-term investor than the short-sighted institutions.
Feel the quality
Long-term: that is another of today's business motherhoods, along with wider ownership.
But long-term investors do not guarantee a healthy economy.
The nature of the investor's interest matters as much as the length of his nose.
The trouble with most retail investors is that they are ignorant, and in no position to educate themselves.
They are pure punters, unable to monitor whether a board of directors is doing its job — which is why boards like them.
They punt for the long term, but protect incumbent management.
What an economy needs is shareholders who have both a long-term interest in the companies they own and the desire and ability to apply some discipline to managers.
What an ordinary individual needs is to have a slice of his savings invested in the company he works for, and the rest spread widely so as to spread his risk, through unit trusts (mutual funds), life-insurance policies or pension funds.
These institutions represent the wide ownership of shares, held in trust for millions of people.
But institutional ownership is not proving ideal for economies, because fund managers are poorly placed to monitor firms.
Their inadequacy is often disguised by the tax incentives that many governments give to institutional saving.
But the point remains: retail ownership is often a move in a worse direction, not a better one.
That is why the slogan should really be ‘narrower share ownership’.
The aim of public policy — and of chairmen who do not merely want protection — should be to lean in the direction of involved shareholders, those who have a direct interest in a company's fate.
This can take several different forms.
It can mean firms owned and disciplined by specialist boutiques such as Hanson and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, which in turn attract institutional money.
It can mean management buy-outs, with staff becoming proprietors, helped by bank loans.
It can mean share-option schemes, so that top executives have their wealth tied (in both directions) to their firm's long-term performance.
It can mean employee share-ownership schemes, especially if companies are small enough for workers to feel they can make a difference.
Whatever the form of ownership — and there is plenty of room and need for experiment — the aim is the same: to bridge the gap between ownership and control that has grown ever since companies ceased to be run by proprietors in the first half of this century.
Well-meaning (as opposed to self-interested) campaigners for wider share ownership may have the right problem, but they are advocating the wrong solution.
The opposite of popular capitalism is not the unpopular sort.
It is prosperous capitalism.
America's wasted blacks
GENERATION ago America convulsed its society and changed its laws to free black people from discrimination.
Legally and socially, no country on earth tries so hard to be free of racism.
Yet no country is so obsessed by race.
It infects almost every debate.
George Bush makes a campaign television commercial about crime, but it features a black criminal, so he is called racist.
The FBI prosecutes a cocaine-using mayor and is accused of racism because he is black.
The army that fought in the Gulf was disproportionately black, so there were cries that blacks would die for a white quarrel.
Car dealers are found to offer better deals to white people than black.
AIDS kills more blacks than whites.
The high blood pressure of black men was blamed by a medical report on discrimination.
A film director turned the Jewish judge in ‘The Bonfire of the Vanities’ black, to avoid giving offence.
Race is still America's top domestic issue.
No wonder.
The average black boy is more likely to go to prison than university.
His life expectancy is falling and he is seven times as likely to be murdered as a white boy.
In parts of the country, a black man between the ages of 15 and 25 is more likely to be killed than was an American soldier in Vietnam.
The chances are almost two-to-one that he was brought up in a fatherless household.
The median family income of blacks is just 56% of that of whites.
Despite all its efforts, America still has its racists.
In January a national poll found that most whites think blacks are lazy, less intelligent and less patriotic than whites are.
David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan grand wizard, won almost two-thirds of the white vote in the Louisiana Senate race last year.
And in one poll 29% of blacks were willing to countenance the idea that AIDS was created by whites to eradicate blacks.
Race is genetic, poverty is not
But is racism the cause of black deprivation?
Historically, yes.
Blacks would have been better off now if, after being shipped to America in chains, they had been allowed the same freedom to prosper as willing immigrants were.
But what about today?
The progress America has made in dismantling discrimination is extraordinary.
A generation ago in the South, blacks could not even go to white lavatories or be buried in white cemeteries — let alone compete for good jobs or live in white suburbs.
Since then blacks have got richer at almost the same rate as whites, but they have not caught up at all.
In recent years they have fallen back.
Is that because discrimination lingers on?
Many black-rights groups claim that black deprivation is the result of continuing racism, and that reversing discrimination will rescue blacks from poverty.
A growing number of black intellectuals, and white politicians, disagree.
Ending what remains of racism is eminently desirable, they say, but it will do little to improve the lot of the poorest blacks.
It suits both white guilt and black anger to sustain the myth that racism is still the main problem.
The irony of black power is that just as whites once used skin colour as a source of privilege, so blacks now use it as a source of entitlement.
At one university, professors have demanded higher pay for black professors — because they are black.
At another, black students (but only blacks) are paid for improving their grades, a Pavlovian training in the mentality of entitlement and a perpetuation of the idea of blacks as victims.
Are they?
First, confront the one thing everybody avoids discussing.
Deep in their minds some whites have begun to think again what their ancestors thought, that blacks are genetically inferior in the traits that count for economic success, and that this is proven by the fact that blacks have lost ground as discrimination has retreated.
Therefore, think some whites, the plight of blacks is a problem that cannot be solved.
That conclusion is utterly unjustified.
The underclass is disproportionately black by historical accident, not genetics: blacks migrated to the northern cities at an unlucky moment, just as manufacturing jobs were disappearing to take new form in the suburbs.
They are trapped there by crime, drugs, unemployment and poor education.
The cultural variant on this argument holds that black family structure — more single mothers and itinerant fathers — is the source of black disadvantage.
Certainly, single-parent families are commoner among blacks, are worse for children and are perversely rewarded by the welfare system (see pages 21–23).
But they are more symptom than cause.
Rural blacks in the South stick together more.
Yet would a white child born into the same conditions as the most disadvantaged inner-city black (to a drug-taking, teenage, single mother, say) be more likely to succeed than a black?
Quite possibly — but not because of present discrimination.
That white can see, by looking at other whites, that he is capable of success in lots of different ways.
A black can envisage success most easily as a musician or a footballer.
Which is why, in recent years, policy has increasingly turned to ‘affirmative action’(American for positive discrimination) in the hope that better black role models will result.
But affirmative action is a two-edged sword.
It suggests to the black who gets the job, and the white colleagues he meets, that he did not get there on merit, but because of the colour of his skin.
Racial resentment follows.
In 1990 Jesse Helms defeated a black opponent in a Senate race in North Carolina after running television commercials showing imaginary whites being rejected for jobs because affirmative action had given those jobs to blacks.
Job preferment stigmatises those who do not need help, starts a backlash from whites and reinforces the myth of racial inferiority, the most pernicious effect of which is that blacks have believed it as much as whites.
Above all, affirmative action assuages white guilt.
For some individuals, affirmative action may still do more good than harm.
But the real problem is that it reaches mainly those who need it least.
The chief beneficiaries of affirmative action are university students and black businessmen, who are the blacks most likely to succeed anyway.
It does not touch most poor blacks' lives.
And yet it dominates the debate.
Democrats in Congress are determined to reverse the Supreme Court's recent anti-affirmative-action rulings.
They want to reintroduce the bill President Bush vetoed last year; they claim it will merely allow blacks to sue those who discriminate against them.
Republicans reply that the bill enforces racial ‘quotas’ on employers.
The whole argument is a diversion.
Blacks need to realise that affirmative action cannot solve their most serious problems, whites need to remember that affirmative action does not make it an advantage to be born black.
Two bad ideas clutter the debate.
The first is black separatism, in vogue in universities (racially separate degree-ceremonies and fraternities are popular with the people most angry at apartheid) and with extreme black activists.
But who can doubt that, if the two races were to ‘separate’, the blacks would be the poorer?
They live in a mainly white country, just as South African whites live in a mainly black one.
Integration is the best hope for both.
Black separatism is like the free East Germans choosing to rebuild the Berlin Wall.
The second bad idea is reparations.
A few years ago Japanese-Americans were compensated for being interned during the second world war, and some (mostly white) people have begun to point out that blacks have yet to be compensated for centuries of slavery.
In other words, for a steep sum, whites could buy the right to forget their guilt.
In reality that would only increase white racism and try to solve with money a problem that cannot be bribed away.
A better idea is to forget such racially minded solutions altogether.
If America were to attack the reasons for the underclass's existence, the beneficiaries would be disproportionately black.
Whites need to recognise that blacks cannot hope to prosper in any numbers while they are confined to ghettos of crime, poverty and lousy schools, and that it is society's duty to do something about it.
That means the same law enforcement in inner cities that the rest of the country expects and receives.
Firmness on crime is what most inner-city blacks cry out for: their life is made hell by muggers, pimps and drug dealers.
(And four Los Angeles policemen beating a black man 56 times after stopping him for speeding does not count as better law enforcement.)
It means gun control, which urban blacks want, but many whites illogically hate.
It means treatment, not just punishment, for drug takers.
It means expensive policies from governments and companies to lure better teachers and school managers into the cities, to build transport links to the suburbs where the jobs are, to train young people for jobs.
Whites have retreated to the comfortable suburbs, whence they contribute to a city's costs but avoid paying its taxes or providing work for its underclass.
Such policies are not cheap or easy, but nor is the waste of black America's talent.
Helping themselves
Black leaders in turn need to recognise that such measures will do far more to help poor blacks than any amount of affirmative action, reparation, calls for black separation, or courses designed to teach that Socrates stole his ideas from ancient black Egyptians.
Their duty is to tell blacks that although group political activism can stop discrimination, growing rich, wise and safe is then up to the individual — to hammer home a message of homework, punctuality, saving and self-discipline, the things that helped America's immigrants get off the floor.
Some black leaders already say this.
Most still prefer the rhetoric of victimisation or separatism.
Unless something like this is done, America's blacks will suffer the same collapse of morale that American Indians have.
In 1965 Lyndon Johnson told Congress that ‘If we stand passively by while the centre of each city becomes a hive of deprivation, crime and hopelessness…if we become two people, the suburban affluent and the urban poor, each filled with mistrust and fear for the other…then we shall effectively cripple each generation to come.’
A generation has passed, and the crippling goes on.
No escape
Out of sight, never out of touch
TIME is money.
Or is money time?
It certainly used to be.
Before the first world war, and even after it, the rich were notable not just for having money but for having the leisure to enjoy it.
The world divided into the idle rich and the labouring poor.
Nowadays things are reversed.
The rich tend to work 18-hour days, and some of them burn themselves out at bond desks and on trading floors before they are 30.
As for the poor, they have no money because they are out of work; they pass their time watching game shows on television.
It's the labouring rich and the idle poor.
Of course, modern tycoons have yachts and private aircraft and tropical islands, but do they enjoy them?
Not much.
It is not just the matter of staff: you can still find them if you are rich enough.
The trouble is the telephone.
You cannot get away from it.
You are expected not just to have one by you, but to answer it or, if you cannot (because you are ‘in a meeting’), then to have a secretary to take messages and make sure that calls are returned.
Not returning calls is a grave crime in today's culture.
It is all right to tell a whopper on an answering machine (‘We're sorry that we cannot answer your call right now’ is either a lie or a statement of the obvious), but no one will forgive you for not ‘getting back’to him later.
It is this that turns a get-away-from-it-all holiday into a get-away-from-only-a-bit-of-it one.
The technology that supposedly enables you to telecommute from Tahiti to your office in London or Chicago in fact brings the damn office on to your patch of surf-swept sand.
Italy's greatest modern industrialist, Enrico Mattei, used to have to take to the air in his private jet in order to get away from the telephone and think.
He would be in trouble today.
Bells ring, or warble, or bleep, almost everywhere: on aircraft, in cars, in trains, in the street, in restaurants, even in concert halls.
Comment is free, fax are sacred
It is tough not only on you but also on your deputy.
Because you are always available, he never gets a chance to take any decisions while you are away.
Norman Lamont was right.
When Britain's chancellor of the exchequer introduced his new tax on mobile telephones last week, he called them ‘one of the greatest scourges of modern life’.
But when he is away from his desk does he leave all the decisions about running the British economy to one of his colleagues?
Not likely.
It is not such fun being number two any more.
The devolution of power, whether to the deputy chairman or the deputy prime minister (remember Sir Geoffrey Howe?), becomes rarer by the day.
Technology concentrates power at the top.
And because you have to be bursting with energy and health to do the top jobs, they have to be given to younger men.
Number twos tend therefore to be passed over (except for the top job in America, for which agreeably relaxed standards of industry have been set by a recent incumbent).
So time is not money.
Nor is money time.
Time is relative — and Einstein has a lot to answer for.
The common name of Irishman
The south could do much to reassure the north
PATIENCE has been rewarded: talks on the political future of Northern Ireland should begin shortly after Easter.
Assuming no last-minute collapse, that will be a triumph for Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland secretary.
Two years ago few people thought he could cajole the island's two separate tribes — sprung from Protestant planters on the one side and Catholic Gaels on the other — into meeting at all.
But what happens now will depend not on a strategy cooked up in Westminster, but on what Irish politicians from north and south of the border choose to make of each other.
Beyond that, the future of the island will be determined by one test above all: the willingness of the republic to take stock of its past failings — and to build on recent signs that a self-confident and modern state is in the making.
The republic's long estrangement from the six counties of the north was never meant to be.
The British architects of the original partition did not see it, 70 years ago, as a supporting wall for the new Irish state they were hurriedly trying to build.
Separating the province from the rest of the island was just a way of sidestepping the Protestant minority's implacable hostility to a British withdrawal.
Time, many believed, would see an inherently absurd partition quickly dismantled.
Their reasoning was sound.
Britain's strategic interest in the province has evaporated, as people hoped it would.
And the anomalies of a divided Ireland remain as absurd as ever: both bits can be almost equally foreign to the casual English visitor, are often equally hostile to Westminster, and have long been equally illiberal on moral issues like abortion and homosexuality.
But sound reasoning led those original optimists astray for two reasons.
They underestimated the ruthlessness with which the Unionists, unhappy at the poverty and popery to the south, would (with Westminster's shameful connivance) exploit their rigged majority in the north to assert the province's Protestant identity.
And they overestimated the attraction to all Irishmen, Protestant and Catholic, of belonging to the newly independent state.
Fewer shades of green
Now the old Stormont-based hegemony in the north has been swept away, destroyed by its own excesses in the half-century to 1972 — though the poisonous legacy of those years lingers on in terrorism.
So what has become of that other bulwark of partition, the unattractiveness of the republic to its Protestant neighbours?
A narrow sectarian outlook has blighted Irish society for decades.
The influence of the Catholic church is less suffocating today than it was two generations ago, but it is still striking to outsiders.
Contraceptives cannot be sold freely — Ireland's Family Planning Association has just been fined in the courts for putting condoms on sale in a Dublin record store — and divorce is illegal.
The fate of attempted reforms has only added to the north's alienation, as Catholic bishops have time and again pulled Dublin's politicians by the ear —‘a question’, as the senior archbishop put it earlier this month, ‘of legislators respecting the moral convictions to which people adhere, and which are influenced by their membership of the church.’
Nor has conventional Irish politics given northern Unionists much cheer.
The two main parties, defined by Ireland's civil-war allegiances in the 1920s, coexist in a murky world of unprincipled favour-mongering.
The dominant Fianna Fail long ago gave up any pretence of offering Ireland a coherent vision for the future — a failure epitomised, for many, by the wanton destruction over the past 20 years of Georgian Dublin, once one of Europe's finest cities.
Above all, from a Unionist point of view, the republic's government has behaved with crass insensitivity in clinging to a constitution that still calls explicitly for a unitary state.
But Ireland is changing.
Membership of the European Community since 1973 has helped attract foreign companies in droves, while better management of a virtually strike-free economy has transformed its performance in the past few years.
Despite huge debts and a still disproportionate reliance on farming, an enviable record of strong growth and low inflation matches an appetite for change that ought not to be surprising in a society where half the population is under 28 (and more than half the nuns and priests are over 60).
It is evident in the vitality of the arts — hardly a city in the country now lacks for an international festival — and it contributed last year to the remarkable election of Mary Robinson, only in her mid-40s and impatient with old ways, to the (largely honorary) post of president.
What is needed now is a new spirit of political leadership in Ireland, able to respond to the changing social mood as effectively as Charles Haughey's government has responded since 1987 to the changing economy.
This would not bring an instant end to the island's problems.
Unionists may not be ready to judge the republic on its merits for years yet, and the hatred bred by three centuries of religious animosity is not going to be bartered away by any group of politicians.
But the emergence of a strong, secular republic in the south could do much to encourage a better neighbourliness in the north.
Without that, no talks will ever amount to more than the briefest of encounters.
Persians bearing gifts
Rafsanjani offers a pragmatic foreign policy — but so, it was thought, did Saddam Hussein
FROM cop to robber to cop again: Iran is once more urging its protective services, through some kind of joint security system, on the smaller neighbours whom, for most of the 1980s, it was threatening to gobble up.
For a good reason, but also for a bad one, this latest change in Iran's persona is being looked at seriously.
The Islamic Republic has changed in one fundamental respect since the death of Ayatollah Khomeini two years ago.
It seems to have persuaded the Gulf kingdoms and sheikhdoms that it is no longer a militant exporter of Islamic revolution.
If Iran, weary and broke after its war with Iraq, has waved goodbye to its proselytising days, this is a valid reason for easing it out of its isolation and back to the position in Gulf politics which, from the shah on, it has craved and which reflects the size of its population and length of its coastline.
Ancient hostility between Iranians and Arabs is mirrored in the squabble about whether the Gulf should be called ‘Persian’ or ‘Arabian’or, the boring compromise, neither.
Iran's ayatollahs, having established their own Islamic state in 1979, sought to spread the Islamic word, urging militant factions in Arab countries to rise up and overthrow their traditional, often repressive, rulers.
But all Iran could foment was unrest, not revolt — and it was further discouraged, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, by the loyalty that most Islamic fundamentalist parties showed to Saddam Hussein.
After managing, more successfully than most, to be neutral in a Gulf drama that saw two of its deepest fears come true — Iraq's territorial expansion and America's intervention with guns — Iran was presented with a new chance for trouble-making by Mr Hussein's defeat.
It took it: there is no doubt that it is helping the Shia rebels in southern Iraq and, to a lesser extent, the more successful Kurds in the north.
But it has supplied this help without objection from Arab governments which, though alarmed at the prospect of Shia ascendancy in Iraq, want most of all to see Mr Hussein out.
So on March 26th Saudi Arabia signalled Iran's return to international respectability by resuming the diplomatic relations that had been broken in 1987 after an appalling incident at Mecca when 400 pilgrims, most of them Iranian, were killed.
The smaller Gulf states had already decided that, under threat from their ex-champion Iraq, they should sensibly make up with their ex-enemy Iran.
Egypt, also on March 26th, opened an interests section in Tehran.
Soon after Saddam's invasion, Europeans were quick to decide that, with the graver threat from Iraq, relations should be patched up with Iran.
Britain resumed diplomatic links; the EC dropped sanctions; western  businessmen queued to offer their services.
Only America, more inclined than Europe to judge things in black or white rather than tones of grey, and still embarrassed by its bizarre secret opening to Iran during Mr Reagan's presidency, remains cool.
Iran has made it plain that it would take it amiss if it were left out of any post-war security arrangements for the Gulf — but even more amiss if outsiders (read Americans) were to stay on.
Since it is now pretty clear that the Americans do intend to stay on, probably setting up a base in Bahrain, the chances of Iran joining a co-operative policing system in the near future are remote.
Yet, if it can be fixed, it would probably be safer to have Iran inside such an arrangement than outside it.
Look inwards
The bad reason for accepting Iran as a reformed character lies in the automatic business of letting Iran's star rise when Iraq's falls, and vice versa.
Iraq and Iran have long been regarded as strategic counterweights.
But it would be folly to repeat the mistake, made with Iraq, of allowing foreign-policy merit to blot out oppression at home.
Mr Hussein was embraced by the West in the 1980s because he was trying to contain the mad mullahs across the border; all else was ignored.
President Ali Akbar Rafsanjani's moderation in foreign policy seems to have carried the day in Iran; hardliners are vociferous in parliament and elsewhere (the Islamic Republic allows more debate than the shah ever countenanced), but they are out of power.
Yet Iran is still a darkly repressive regime.
Amnesty International, in a report last December, said that nothing at home had changed ‘to alleviate gross violations of human rights’.
Political opponents continue to be arbitrarily arrested; the death sentence against Salman Rushdie has not been lifted; at least 13 western hostages (six Americans, five Britons and two Germans) are still held by pro-Iranian kidnappers in Lebanon.
Mr Rafsanjani's pragmatism deserves pragmatic acceptance.
But the lesson from the Iraqi experience is that a regime that behaves badly to its own people is likely to behave badly to its neighbours too.
LETTERS
Go east, young men
Has the time not come to investigate the factors which led to the move west from the 13 colonies in North America, to consider how these might be created to apply to a move east from the Urals to provide a similar development in potentially the greatest storehouse of raw materials and energy?
I have witnessed this expansion in parts of North America for nearly 60 years, first working as a student with a pitchfork on the harvest in Alberta.
A few years later, visiting Moscow after passing through the Ukraine during the great famine, I was asked, ‘How did North America expand west, but we have failed to expand east?’
Were the necessary factors to be applied, would there not be a great upsurge of outside experience and help, from Nordic cold-weather techniques, Israeli water-usage, Japanese capital and many trained young people eager to meet modern challenges?
London DOUGLAS DODDS-PARKER
Mixed emotions
As an Iranian-American Jew with Iraqi grandparents, I experienced the unfolding of the Gulf war with mixed emotions.
For my adopted country America, I felt much pride and admiration.
I can only hope the experience encourages America to apply better judgment in its selection of ‘allies’.
For my native country, Iran, I felt a surge of admiration.
After having suffered from domestic fundamentalism and a devastating war, the Iranians showed impressive judgment by staying on the sidelines.
For them I hope the experience reinforces their movement away from fanaticism and fundamentalism.
For my emotional home Israel, pride and admiration are also in order.
May they come out of it more secure, but level-headed and magnanimous towards the Palestinians.
I am sad for the suffering of the Iraqi people.
I am sadder yet that with all their sacrifices, the Iraqis have yet to rid themselves of their biggest problem, the scourge of Saddam.
New York RODNEY EZRAPOUR
The tragedy of Cyprus
In his ‘analysis’ of the situation in Cyprus, Jerry Gustafson (Letters, February 23rd) claims that Turkey's only crime is to protect the rights of the Turkish Cypriots.
Obviously, then, the fact that 200,000 Greek Cypriots (a third of the population) were kicked out of their homes by the Turkish invaders, thus becoming refugees in their own country, is not a crime, according to Mr Gustafson; nor is the fact that 80,000 settlers were imported from Turkey in an attempt to alter the demographic composition of the island; nor is the fact that 1,619 people are still reported as missing in action almost 17 years after the invasion; nor is the fact that the Turks are destroying every trace of the 3,000-year-old Greek culture that exists in the occupied territories, a fact that even the Turkish Cypriot press often reports.
But the most outrageous claim he makes is that Turkey ‘is anxious to withdraw according to UN resolutions and proposals which the majority will not accept.’
Obviously, Mr Gustafson has not been doing his homework, otherwise he would know that there are 48 UN resolutions calling for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Cyprus, and the restoration of its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Claiming that the (Greek Cypriot) majority does not accept these resolutions is plain absurd, given that it is that majority that initiated almost all of them.
Madison, Wisconsin SOFRONIS CLERIDES
A hundred yellow ribbons
It is unassailable that the 1973 song, ‘Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Old Oak Tree’, brought the symbol of the yellow ribbon to national attention in the United States (March 2nd).
However, it must have some earlier source.
During my basic training in the army in 1968, one of the traditional marching songs we used went like this:
On her hair
She wore a yellow ribbon
She wore it in the Springtime
And in the month of May.
And if you asked her
Why the Hell she wore it
She wore it for her lover who was far, far away
Far away, far away,
Oh, she wore it for her lover who was far, far away.
Because this song was simply handed down from one generation of drill sergeants to another, the symbolism may have origins much earlier than a superficial analysis may indicate.
Was there evidence of yellow-ribbon use during the Crusades?
At the home bases of Viking raiding parties?
San Diego JEFFREY GETTLEMAN
As a schoolboy in the 1940s I learnt a folk song with the verse:
Around her hair she wore a yellow ribbon,
She wore it in the winter and the merry month of May;
And when they asked her why the yellow ribbon,
She said ‘It's for a soldier who is far, far away.’
Such a song probably originated in 18th-century England, perhaps even during the American War of Independence, whence the victors captured it along with‘Yankee Doodle’.
Lewes, East Sussex ALAN WOLFE
I understand that ribbon-wearing to symbolise support for troops was a practice employed in England several centuries ago.
In the United States it dates back at least to the Civil War; the 1949 John Ford-John Wayne movie, ‘She Wore a Yellow Ribbon’, underscores the practice's lineage.
Yellow is the official colour of the United States Cavalry, used in the piping of uniforms and on regimental standards.
The alleged inspiration of the song from Pete Hamill's story was the subject of a lawsuit in the 1970s and some have suggested that Mr Hamill's story is fiction, not fact.
New York THOMAS BERNER
In response to your assertion that the yellow handkerchief was transmuted into a ribbon because ‘you can't find anything to rhyme with handkerchief’, I must point out that, in the song, the word ribbon never rhymed with anything.
‘Ribbon’ was used for its trochaic rhythm rather than any rhyming qualities.
It just wouldn't be the same singing ‘Tie a yellow hankie 'round the old oak tree.’
Woburn, Maryland DAVID PLATT
Dismal science fiction
Although economics may not be a staple of mass-market science fiction, it is hardly ignored, as you say in your final schools brief on economics (March 9th).
The works of the most influential modern writer in the genre, Robert Heinlein, are suffused with economics.
He is widely credited with coining the phrase ‘There ain't no such thing as a free lunch’ in his novel ‘The Moon is a Harsh Mistress’, about a revolution which replaces a command economy with a market economy.
It is ironic that your educational piece did not recognise Mr Heinlein, as he clearly recognised your educational role.
In his last novel, a mother offers this advice to her son: ‘Money.
Donald, any question that starts out ‘Why don't they —’ the answer is always ‘Money’…
[I]f you intend to cope with the jungle out there, you need to make the Wall Street Journal and similar publications such as The Economist your favourite comic books.’
Woolwich OLIVER MORTON
Hard on small airlines
Be careful not to make one mistake when you advocate the American model of airline deregulation (February 23rd).
Don't permit frequent-flier programmes.
The frequent-flier coupons in practice become the property of the flier, not his employer (who paid for the ticket).
They thus add to the business flier's personal income, income on which no personal income tax is paid.
Business fliers fly with the airline that will most quickly give them the necessary coupons to go to, say, Hawaii with the family.
The result has been to reward the biggest airlines, which incidentally go to the most attractive places for leisure travel, and to destroy the small carriers which go to a limited number of places.
Oxford, Ohio ROBERT THORNTON
Opening up to gas
So the arguments of the gas companies on open access are disingenuous (‘Flare play’, March 2nd).
Rather, this is true of your reporting.
Open access may work in Britain, but in continental Europe, where there are a limited number of gas-merchant companies, it would be a different story.
These firms aggregate demand and buy from a handful of gas producers, which supply nearly half of Europe's gas from beyond mainland Europe, and will supply much more soon.
In this way, favourable long-term contracts are negotiated between supplier and merchant, contracts which benefit consumers both directly and via Europe's trade balance.
Open access would lead to the demise of such long-term contracts.
How could gas companies give any guarantees to gas suppliers, especially on gas volume, if their customers could by-pass them at any time?
Without long-term contracts the chain of confidence of gas production and supply would be broken.
The savings calculated in the EC study which result from open access in Europe are based on improbable assumptions.
An alternative consultants' study calculates losses more realistically at between 600m and 1.8 billion ecus ($740m-2.2 billion).
Brussels PETER CLAUS Eurogas
Feet of clay
‘California uses 35m acre-feet of water a year.
An acre-foot is an acre covered a foot deep in water, or 326,000 American gallons (271,000 imperial gallons).’
If you are going to give quantities in three different units, could at least one of them be metric, please?
San Francisco PETE FERREIRA
The other Cuba
Your knowledge of Cuban history is small (‘Puppet and string-puller’, February 23rd).
You think that Cuba before Castro was decayed and corrupt; that the United States dominated Cuban history, and that the only ruler was Batista.
Batista was evil for Cuba, but in 1944 he permitted free elections and, after the opposition won, the governments were as democratic as in any western country.
Cuba continued its economic progress, was among the top three countries in Latin America, and corruption was no worse than in many developing countries.
During the second Batista dictatorship there was corruption, there was poverty, but no revolution was needed to suppress these.
The Cubans only wanted free elections.
It is deplorable that the Americans took a lot of land cheap from Cubans and Spaniards.
But Cuban investment in Cuba grew from $50m in 1899 to $1.5 billion in 1929; 62% of sugar production was in Cuban hands in 1958, whereas in 1935 they had only 13%.
Above all, the democratic rulers in Cuba stood always in the face of the Americans as any small country should stand in the face of its biggest market and closest neighbour.
As for the ‘moral swamp’, Havana had the same levels of prostitution as London or any big city.
The average Cuban in the United States has better moral values and more love for the family than the average American.
Chicago JOSE TRUJILLO
In ‘Publishing in Cuba’(February 9th) you say that ‘local scientists are trying to fathom out how to turn sugar cane into paper’.
Once sugar has been extracted from the cane, the by-product, bagasse, can indeed be made into paper (or burnt to make steam and power).
During my visits to Cuba I have seen how important for the country's economy and how well managed the bagasse-based paper industry is.
Printing, writing, and tissue papers, corrugated cardboard and wrapping paper are of excellent quality.
The only thing that cannot be managed is the economic manufacture of newsprint.
Draguignan, France SEPPO RAISANEN
Paying for unity
Your article, ‘Is Germany really united?’
(February 23rd), failed to mention one of the most dramatic causes for the lack of western German enthusiasm in the unity question; the federal election campaign last autumn.
The parties of Helmut Kohl's coalition, citing wildly optimistic economic forecasts, promised Ossis (easterners) the moon, yet insisted that the powerful German economy and the unsinkable D-mark would somehow pay for everything.
Warnings from the opposition that the government's ‘No Tax Increases’ slogan was no more than a vote-gathering lie were rebuffed as fear-mongering and, better still, as unpatriotic.
The result?
The clearly necessary tax increases required to pay for unification are now being forced down very unprepared throats.
Mr Kohl's glossy coating of the bitter pill of economic union undoubtedly won him votes, but the coating has already proved to be thin.
Should the pill prove too bitter, it will add considerable strain to already tense east-west relations.
Hamburg NICHOLAS MINDE
Punitive damages
Your article on the American Supreme Court's recent ruling on punitive damages (March 9th) misleads in one respect.
Insurance companies do end up paying most of the punitive damages in the United States, but not because they have sold punitive-damages insurance to businesses.
State law forbids the insurance of punitive damages in much of the country, including California, New York, Illinois and Pennsylvania.
Insurance companies pay most punitive damages because they themselves are the defendants that juries are most likely to punish substantially.
In the most common case, the jury punishes an insurer for egregiously mishandling a health or property claim submitted by its own customer.
The recent Supreme Court decision involves just such a case.
Ann Arbor, Michigan KENT SYVERUD
Not a ghost of a chance
‘Caruso would give concerts in New York's Yankee Stadium…
’(March 9th).
A neat trick.
Caruso died in 1921.
Yankee Stadium was built in 1922.
Canberra S.P.K. BROWN
BOOKS AND ARTS
Early capitalism
The sculptor and the banker
MOUNTAINS OF DEBT.
By Michael Veseth.
OUP; 246 pages; £24 and $29.95
FLORENCE, the city state of Michelangelo and Leonardo, also nurtured a phenomenon that was equally lasting: the system of production and trade that in a more developed form became known as capitalism.
In the Florence of the 1420s, says Michael Veseth, an American professor of economics, he would have been ‘pretty much at home’ with the institutions dealing with business and government finance.
Florence created the first income tax, complete with personal exemptions and dodges.
It also thought up the idea of converting public debt into more or less permanent debt at fixed interest, the system known as funding.
The natural resources of Florence were no more than the four elements available to all simple communities since antiquity: earth, air, water and fire.
Mr Veseth notes that it was the ‘fifth element’, the creative spark, that made Florence rich, commercially and artistically.
The essence of the fifth element, he says, was probably the same for Bardi the banker as for the sculptor of David.
When the spark died, the economy declined, and so did the quality of art.
In his refreshing book Mr Veseth looks at Victorian Britain, which improved on Florence's commercial ideas, particularly public debt, and also went into decline; and at present-day America, which is deeply in debt but might, he argues, avoid decline if it takes brave decisions.
He does not pursue into modern times his lively thought about the connection between commerce and art; wisely, perhaps.
The Pre-Raphaelites may do for the Victorians.
But the fifth element that motivated Wall Street appears to have come up only with Norman Rockwell and Jackson Pollock.
British history
Dithering to Damascus
‘THE HOLY FOX’: A BIOGRAPHY OF LORD HALIFAX.
By Andrew Roberts.
Weidenfeld and Nicolson; 308 pages; £25
APPEASEMENT is one of those supercharged words, like terrorism and fascism, whose use in any argument is the verbal equivalent of going nuclear.
It is particularly potent for Britons.
As the shameful precursor to the glory of 1940 and the Dunkirk spirit, it is an essential part of the national myth.
Without it, would Margaret Thatcher have been so determined, last August, that Saddam Hussein had to be humbled?
After Chamberlain himself, Lord Halifax has always been painted (not least by that famous amateur painter, Churchill) as the high priest of appeasement.
The intensely religious former viceroy of India and wartime ambassador to Washington has had a bad write-up.
His involvement in peace-feelers after the German invasion of France has been portrayed as verging on treason.
Yet Halifax was within a whisker of becoming Britain's wartime leader and, as this new study makes clear, was central in turning the Chamberlain government away from appeasement and towards war preparations.
Certainly, he was blind to the true nature of Hitler and Nazism until the autumn of 1938.
He announced at the beginning of that year that ‘if Hitler had worn a dhoti he could have mistaken his mystical approach to life for that of Mr Gandhi’.
He made clear to Hitler that Britain would not fight to uphold the Versailles treaty and, for far too long, held to the hope that the Third Reich's territorial ambitions would cease after it had vacuumed up all ethnic Germans.
He was ready to hand over African colonies to appease Hitler.
He tried (with some success) to censor anti-Nazi sentiments in the British media.
These acts were shameful.
Yet his new biographer, Andrew Roberts, demonstrates (with the aid of much newly-available archive material) that once he realised his hopes of avoiding war by being nice to Hitler were doomed and dangerous, Halifax was just as relentless in his anti-appeasement stance.
The almost Damascene conversion came literally overnight on September 24th–25th 1938, according to this account, after the German rejection of the Anglo-French plan for dismembering Czechoslovakia.
From then on, Halifax stood for rearmament, new military strategies and political unity ahead of the coming war.
Appeasement caused by blindness was followed by delaying tactics and doublespeak intended to buy time.
Britain had been unable to protect Czechoslovakia or Poland in 1938–39, and every month before a possible invasion meant more aircraft, guns and ships.
Halifax strung along various minor European royals, sub-statesmen and Italian go-betweens who offered an ‘honourable peace’.
If this was treason then Churchill, who approved of the tactic, was a traitor too.
Halifax, however, was always more equivocal; he was trying as late as the battle for France to keep the option of peace talks open, if they could preserve the independence of the British Empire.
Mr Roberts's narrative account of the crucial months grips and convinces.
He acquits, with only moderate difficulty, Halifax of many sins commonly attributed to him.
His account of Halifax's great service to his country — when he stood aside from the offer of the wartime premiership, leaving it for Churchill (then regarded as an unstable gangster by Chamberlainite Tories) is considerably more convincing than Churchill's own highly-coloured account.
But beyond that, Halifax emerges from these friendly pages as just the cold, compromising nobleman of legend.
The more Mr Roberts strains to show his charming side, the less convincing he seems.
Halifax was a snob; was not a true democrat; did ludicrously misunderstand Hitler; and dithered when decisiveness was needed most.
The appeasement myth was right in this respect: Halifax would have been a disaster for Britain.
For realising it himself, he deserves some thanks.
Black film directors
That Hollywood shuffle
NEW YORK
POLICE are at war with a gang of drug dealers; the dealers transform a huge Harlem apartment building into a crack factory that throws the city into a state of Boschian depravity.
This is ‘New Jack City’, a film that contains good-looking street-smart cops and villains, violence, sex and even a final triumph of good over evil.
In its first weekend it took in $7m.
Seats were so scarce that people killed each other to get them.
Mortified, producers and director put out a statement insisting that their film, despite its brutality, showed ‘positive role models’.
The words are revealing; for this is a black film, not only with a mostly black cast but also with a black director, Mario Van Peebles.
Mr Peebles is best known as a film and television actor.
Inexperienced as well as black, he would have stood no chance of a studio contract as recently as five years ago.
Times have changed.
The 1991 season promises at least seven big-studio releases by black directors, more than in the past ten years.
Robert Townsend (‘Hollywood Shuffle’) and Spike Lee (‘Do the Right Thing’) both have new films coming.
Mr Lee, to add to his swagger, has also been hired to lecture on film at Harvard.
Already highly successful in popular music, dance and commercial television, blacks have found the movies a tougher nut to crack.
The cost of film-making is only part of it.
From the industry's earliest days, blacks in American films were routinely typecast as servants, childlike entertainers or sexual aggressors; in D.W. Griffith's silent classic, ‘Birth of a Nation’, the Ku Klux Klan was presented as the saviour of the postbellum South.
Yet as early as this blacks were also making their own films: ‘race films’, shown in all-black theatres during the years of segregation.
Today's new generation of black directors has been spurred on by two particular success stories.
One is the popularity of performers such as Richard Pryor and Eddie Murphy, whose films have unprecedented appeal for whites as well as blacks.
The other is the story of Melvin Van Peebles, father of Mario.
Van Peebles père soured on Hollywood after directing the now-classic comedy ‘Watermelon Man’(1969), about a suburban businessman who wakes up one morning to find himself black.
He followed that with ‘Sweet Sweetback's Baadasses Song,’ the crudely made, picaresque saga of a sexually defiant rebel, starring himself, which he distributed to theatres in black neighbourhoods.
It made a fortune and spawned an almost decade-long string of Hollywood imitations, the ‘blacksploitation’ films, built around the exploits of virile leading men.
Following the example of Mr Lee's low-budget hit, ‘She's Gotta Have It’, young black directors began making small independent films, some of which earned national distribution deals only after their directors sweated to get the films made.
The stories are familiar enough.
Mr Townsend financed ‘Hollywood Shuffle,’ about a black actor in Hollywood, on credit-card cash advances.
Charles Lane's first feature, ‘Sidewalk Stories’, was a silent black-and-white film shot on the cold streets of New York during two weeks in February, when Mr Lane's actor friends had no other work.
Those ordeals, however, taught some young blacks how to make cheap films that looked expensive.
Most black directors' budgets are pegged at around $7m, compared with the $25m-40m spent on the average Hollywood film.
(Mr Lee's new film ‘Jungle Fever’, an exception, is said to have cost around $19m.)
Black films remain small beer; they are doing little to shape the movie business.
A black-owned film studio is still a distant dream, and the Hollywood studios have yet to experience their first black-directed box-office failure, which will test their willingness to entrust big budgets to black directors.
The most likely development is that studios will imitate the music business and create separate divisions devoted to films for black audiences, where black producers who know their market best will determine what films are made.
The result may transform black American films into a two-tier system, with commercially successful directors on top and independent film-makers at the bottom, scrambling for scarce money.
So what's new?
Islanders all
A BOOK of great beauty, Jonathan Kingdon's ISLAND AFRICA* is ostensibly about why certain animals and plants live in certain parts of that continent.
But scientists are impressed by the way Mr Kingdon has identified the sequence of evolutionary accidents that led to Africa's strange mosaic of rich ecosystems; and conservationists find in it a way to explain rarity and extinction.
Most people will simply revel in the pictures.
Mr Kingdon can draw anything, from a diagram of a skinned agwantibo to a magical collage of Namaqua flowers.
This is a book that marries the old tradition of the explorer-naturalist with that of a modern scientist.
Mr Kingdon, who has lived in Africa all his life when not teaching zoology and art at Oxford, can exemplify any point he makes with an anecdote and a case history: from beetles in Namibia to monkeys in Zaire, chameleons in Cameroon or giant groundsels on Mount Kenya.
His breadth of knowledge is amazing enough.
But his ability to capture, in four little sketches in the margin, the way a flying squirrel prepares to leap from a tree, is astounding.
The theme of his book is that Africa, to an ecologist, is like an archipelago of overlapping islands.
There are the great islands of savannah and veld in East and South Africa, the little islands of mountain forests from Cameroon to Kilimanjaro, island-like lakes from Malawi to Turkana, islands of rain forest from Liberia to Uganda, real islands off the coast from Sao Tome to the Seychelles and man-made islands of conservation, from the Kruger to the Serengeti.
Islands are where species form, as populations that are isolated from each other by the intervening space begin to diverge.
And thence begins the ecological richness of Africa.
The seers
LONELY HEARTS OF THE COSMOS.
By Dennis Overbye.
Harper Collins; 432 pages; $25.
Macmillan; £17.50
ASTRONOMERS, by the nature of their art, seem otherworldly.
While mundane scientists poke and prod at nature with the tools of experiment, astronomers on their mountains simply observe her, in all her heavenly glory.
Of all these seers, those with access to the greatest mysteries are the cosmologists.
Not content with stars and galaxies, they try to understand the whole universe, its provenance and fate.
Like Moses, they climb their mountains alone, communing with creation if not the creator.
They bring back down the laws of nature, if not of God himself.
If all this sounds rather mythic, it is because it is a myth.
Astronomy may be a calling; it is also a day-to-day job (albeit done at night).
Astronomers may travel into the depths of space and time, but on their return they must still convince their colleagues of the truth of what they saw.
They have to compete for telescope time, to make sure that no one beats them to crucial measurements.
They have to fight for their theories, and face failure when they fall — for no science is written on tablets of stone.
It is this tension between the grandiose themes of cosmology and its mundane workings that sits at the heart of Dennis Overbye's superb book.
Mr Overbye chooses to begin and end his 50-year review of these fascinating realms with Allan Sandage, the anointed successor to Edwin Hubble, the man who, in the late 1920s, first convinced his peers that the universe was expanding.
Hubble found that the starlight of distant galaxies was ‘Doppler shifted’ along the spectrum so that they appear red, which means they are receding.
The redder the light, the farther and faster the galaxy.
Dr Sandage has spent much of his life as the custodian of Hubble's legacy, trying to show how that relative redness can be turned into an absolute distance.
It is a monumental task, performed through thousands upon thousands of  finicky observations and measurements.
It has embroiled Dr Sandage in such controversy that at times he has almost completely withdrawn from the world.
Since Dr Sandage embarked on his quest, the world of cosmology has changed radically.
When astronomical cosmologists started to make interesting noises about the extreme heat and density of the Big Bang, the moment of creation that set Hubble's expansion off, other physicists began to take notice.
The big bang was an interesting place — a lot of people wanted to play there.
Physicists started working on theories to explain the early universe: what particles populated it, what properties it bequeathed to the present.
These were bright young theorists, not seasoned observers.
Previous generations had dined in black ties in the panelled dining rooms of observatories that were male preserves; the new breed ate ‘primeval pizza’ in basements around physics labs.
Under the influence of these ideas, and the technological advances that have come with them, cosmology has changed.
New instruments, especially the electronic detectors that collect light so much more efficiently and less fussily than the old emulsion plates, have removed some of the art from observing.
Today's organised and systematic searches of the skies record far more red-shifts in a year or so than Dr Sandage has measured in his life — and have, in doing so, found strange currents, superimposed on the overall expansion, in which galaxies flow like twigs on a stream.
Mr Overbye describes the changes in theory and observation accurately, engagingly and enthusiastically, though his prose is occasionally Doppler-shifted towards the purple as he dashes from subject to subject.
But he also allows time for reflection, which brings the book a sense of perspective that most popularisations lack.
The reader is always aware that although he knows and mostly likes the people he is writing about, he is not necessarily taken in by their ideas.
Mr Overbye does not accept that theories currently in vogue are necessarily true.
And even if they are, he does not feel bound to like them.
Talking of ‘inflation’— a neat theoretical idea of exponential growth in the early history of the universe that disposed of a lot of problems in the marriage between theoretical physics and cosmology — he refuses to subscribe to the overwhelming enthusiasm with which many scientists discuss the subject:
When I contemplated this great vista, I despaired.
Inflation seemed like a pyrrhic victory, almost a tease.
It made the universe more savage and unknowable than I had ever dreamed…
What could we know about the greater universe?
The same process that guaranteed that our own cosy little universe was smooth and safe also guaranteed that everything interesting and fundamental was swept hopelessly, permanently out of reach.
Some may think that a mere journalist has no right to hold views about such things.
But it is by mixing the personal and the cosmic in his reporting, just as the scientists mix them in their lives, that Mr Overbye has managed to write such a good book.
The Lydian hoard
And so to court
NEW YORK
ANY day now, the Turkish government will pit its strength in court against New York's mighty Metropolitan Museum of Art.
At issue is whether a foreign country can identify and successfully demand the repatriation of antiquities that it admits it did not even know existed until they turned up in a museum's collection.
Turkey has an excuse for its ignorance: the objects, it says, were looted from tombs where they had lain undisturbed for 2,500 years.
In bringing the case, the Turkish government is presenting itself as a great ally of archaeologists.
It maintains that they can only benefit if it secures the return to Turkey of the so-called Lydian hoard: Lydian, Archaemenid Persian and other Anatolian artefacts dating back to 600–500 BC which, it contends, were looted in 1960–66 from tombs in the Ushak region of Turkey.
If they win, the Turks say that art dealers and museums will have to exercise far more care in future over the provenance of antiquities they acquire.
This, in turn, will make it harder for diggers to profit from the crude — and illegal — looting of ancient sites.
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s many of Turkey's 3,000 archaeological sites were pillaged, including sacred tombs.
Thousands of objects were smuggled out of the country.
The Metropolitan's first move in this case was to invoke the statute of limitations to block Turkey's demand for the return of antiquities acquired by the museum through gifts and purchases about 20 years ago.
This tactical defence has been weakened by a ruling made recently in another case, where the Guggenheim Museum was seeking the return of a stolen Chagall painting from a private collector.
Like the Metropolitan, the collector made her purchase in good faith, never suspecting that the painting was stolen.
The court decided that victims of art thefts should be protected against the usual requirement in civil cases that the owner must make some effort to recover stolen goods within three years; it ruled that the clock does not start ticking for the statute of limitations until the victim locates the stolen artworks and asks for their return.
The Turkish government has hired two top lawyers to represent it: Harry Rand and Lawrence Kaye of the Park Avenue law firm of Herrick, Feinstein.
They have vigorously contested in court the Metropolitan's assertion that the Turkish government was tardy in pursuing its claim.
Turkey's experts, they said, needed the co-operation of the Metropolitan to be able to ascertain whether the objects formed part of the Lydian hoard.
Far from co-operating, however, the Metropolitan sought to ‘mislead, confuse and divert’ investigators by, for instance, labelling objects from the Lydian hoard ‘East Greek Treasures’.
The State Department's legal adviser on cultural matters, Ely Maurer, will not discuss the Lydian hoard.
But he makes no secret of his pleasure over the ruling in the Guggenheim case.
The United States government is embarrassed by the way Americans have recently extorted money from foreign governments for looted artworks.
Mr Maurer cites the deal announced in January that allowed the Texan heirs of an American soldier to collect $2.75m from Germany for the return of stolen medieval artefacts known as the Quedlinburg treasures.
Klaus Maurice, the secretary-general of the German quasi-governmental agency that negotiated the deal, said at the time: ‘If we had pursued the lawsuit in Dallas, the legal fees would have greatly exceeded the amount we agreed to pay.’
The State Department is pleased the Turkish government is not letting the legal costs deter it from pursuing its claim to the Lydian hoard.
The case promises to make murky laws clearer in the world's largest art market — to the benefit of all honest people in the art world, as well as to archaeologists.
It's tough
PARIS
COMICAL’ and ‘absurd’was how Jean-Paul Rappeneau greeted the news that the Oscar for the best foreign film had gone not to his ‘Cyrano de Bergerac’, which had received five nominations, but to a Turkish-speaking Swiss film, ‘Journey of Hope’.
‘What do you expect?’ sighed the culture minister, Jack Lang, illogically: ‘America is interested only in America.’
‘Cyrano’ won a paltry Oscar for best costumes.
The biggest disillusionment, however, came from the way some American journalists have been roughing up Gérard Depardieu, the larger-than-screen hero of ‘Cyrano’.
Mr Depardieu had been nominated for an Oscar.
If he lost out to Jeremy Irons, his fans said, it was because he was the victim of a feminist-puritanical cabal.
Bulky as a lumberjack, Mr Depardieu has a Falstaffian gusto for life.
In Claude Berri's latest film, ‘Uranus’, he knocks back a whole bottle of wine without pausing for breath; although he insists that it was merely coloured water, his fans believe otherwise.
Mr Depardieu also delights in adding lurid colour to his teenage days on the streets of Châteauroux.
He sought shelter at night with prostitutes, and earned money in various unlawful ways.
When his home town made him an ‘honoured citizen’ some years ago, he reminded friends that ‘they used to fling me in jail’.
He has dismissed as ‘dirtying, disgusting and unfair’ charges in Time and the Washington Post that he took part in a gang rape at the age of nine.
That is the kind of exploit he might well claim after a drink or two, expecting his audience first to gasp, then to roar with laughter.
Unfortunately, Americans appear to have no sense of the Gallic tradition of ribald humour that goes back to Rabelais.
In France, his fans prefer to dwell on Mr Depardieu's street-to-screen success story.
He has now appeared in 60-odd films.
His roles range from transvestites to teenage murderers, though some viewers complain that, whatever the film, he is always playing himself: massive, extravagant, scruffy-haired.
Directors confess to a moment of panic when, as one puts it, ‘he rushes onto the set like a bull’.
Yet another, Bertrand Blier, senses that behind the clowning ‘there is a terrible sense of anguish.’
When he recently received a César, France's answer to the Oscars, Mr Depardieu lumbered up to the stage, giggled as if half-drunk and whispered ‘It's tough being alive and lonely’.
‘Actors,’ he once said, ‘are rather like gangsters: people on the edge of society, ruthless people who suffer.’
At 42, he has discovered that success has a bitter taste, too.
But, though Oscarless, he is delighting American audiences with his boorish manner and fractured English in Peter Weir's ‘Green Card’.
It will take more than a few scandal-mongers to sink him.
AMERICAN SURVEY
Wild food
They're only mushrooms
BOYNE CITY, MICHIGAN
Looking for an unusual spring holiday?
Try morel hunting in Michigan
IT IS an unusually warm Saturday morning in early May as the crowd begins to gather in Boyne City.
This hamlet in northern Michigan is the Hollywood stereotype of a sleepy little town, but on this particular morning tension crackles in the air: everyone is waiting for the start of the day's big event.
Suddenly the siren on the fire truck begins to wail, and a caravan of cars winds its way out towards the edge of town.
At a place known in advance only to a few, the motorcade comes to a halt.
‘Go,’ the starter shouts, and 200 people dash into the woods.
After almost an hour, the members of Nancy Weber's group are ready to turn back.
Their feet are sore and their bags are empty.
‘Let's take a look over this one last hill,’ she pleads, climbing the ridge.
The woman leading the group spots a stand of dead apple trees.
Letting out a shriek, she races towards them and thumps down on the ground.
‘They're mine,’ she says, wrapping her arms around a clump of morel mushrooms.
It is every man for himself in Boyne City's National Mushroom Championship, a race to collect the most morels.
‘During the contest, it's fair to tackle someone if necessary; you do whatever it takes,’ says Stan Boris, a Charlevoix picker who has won 11 of the past 14 championships.
For the fungally uninformed, morels are the most prized of the world's mushrooms.
Jimmy Schmidt, the nationally renowned chef and owner of Detroit's Rattlesnake Club, considers them part of ‘a holy trinity…caviar, morel mushrooms and truffles.’
(Truffles are fungi but not mushrooms.)
They can be stuffed and souffléd, stirred into soups and baked with Brie.
But to most morel fanatics the best way to serve them up is sautéd in butter with a hint of salt and fresh ground pepper.
Taming the wild ones
The taste is good enough to send half a million people a year squirrelling around in the woods of northern Michigan, in search of something that is often no more than a couple of inches high and is usually hidden under a thick pile of forest-floor debris.
You can easily spot morel-mushroom hunters.
They walk like Groucho Marx.
Novices usually try to make friends with old hands, but that is not always easy.
Larry Lonik, author of ‘The Curious Morel’, tells the tale of a man in Williamsburg who knew a special spot: ‘People would try to follow him, but he'd just sit down under a tree and wait them out.
His son-in-law, on the old man's deathbed, asked where the spot was and he wouldn't tell him.
They found the spot several years later.’
According to some tourism officials, morel hunters pump more money into Michigan's economy than all the duck- and deer-hunters combined.
Joe Breidenstein says that last year he organised ‘morel weekends’ for 220 families.
There are annual morel festivals in four Michigan towns.
In Meswick hunters can find lodging in the Mushroom Cap Motel and tip back a few beers at the Mushroom Bar at the end of a long day's tramp.
Other locals supplement their regular incomes by collecting, then selling, morels to the tourists.
Fresh-picked morels can go for up to $25 a pound; dried, for $15–20 an ounce.
With that kind of price tag, it is not surprising that a long string of American entrepreneurs — including even Thomas Jefferson — have tried to find a way to cultivate various Morchella species.
Until four years ago, all attempts had failed.
But then the secret of growing morels was unlocked by a company called Neogen in East Lansing, Michigan.
The Neogen people are as tight-lipped about the process as soldiers about the location of nuclear weapons.
The process is now licensed to Morel Mountain, a subsidiary of Domino's Pizza.
They are supplying about 150 pounds of fresh morels a week to customers around the country.
Eventually they hope to quadruple production.
When the cultivation process was first announced, many were the sceptics who did not believe that farmed morels would ever be able to match those from the wild.
But ‘the taste is as good as natural,’ insists Mr Lonik, who also wears the hat of Morel Mountain marketing director.
For one thing, he says, ‘we can pick them at the peak of flavour maturity.
Our commercial mushrooms have no dirt, no bugs, no bits or pieces, no little growing things at the bottom of the box.’
Morels are not unique to Michigan.
In Europe a closely related species, also called the morel, is equally prized by gourmets.
American morels can be found all along the Canadian border.
Even parts of Ohio and California can provide a field day for patient pickers.
But Michigan is, by all accounts, the home of the best.
An apology
LOS ANGELES
ALONG with many other newspapers, we may have given the impression that California was suffering from a five-year drought (‘The other desert war’, February 16th).
We may have further suggested that a droplet of rain falling on southern California was as likely as a sincere comment at the Oscars — and that young Californian children would probably never see a cloud in their lifetime.
We now realise that these claims are totally unfounded.
Soon after our article (perhaps as a direct result of it), it began to rain — and has barely stopped since.
San Diego has now had twice as much rain this year as in the whole of a normal year.
We hereby admit that California is, in fact, a lush paradise, where it is perfectly sensible to grow crops such as rice and alfalfa with subsidised water.
We deeply regret suggesting that farmers, who use around four-fifths of the available water, should be bullied into trading their cheap water with the cities.
In our defence we would say that the state's water supplies are still only around half of what is normal at this time of year, and that many Californians, currently refilling their swimming pools and reflooding their orange groves, may live to regret it.
In the meantime we offer our apologies to Neptune, Boreas and Thor, and have agreed to pay a substantial sum in damages should they care to collect it.
Action replay
DALLAS
MUCH as Dallas would like to wipe the assassination of John Kennedy from its memory, it cannot.
Oliver Stone is the latest to stir things up, as he prepares to begin filming ‘JFK’ in April.
The film director is pursuing the style of his earlier films, about the Vietnam war and about a pop group called the Doors.
He wants access to the sniper's perch on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository, from which the fatal shots were fired.
But the Dallas county commission, which owns the building, denied his request after a highly charged debate in which the director was labelled a provocateur.
Mr Stone's co-producer accused the commission of censorship.
It offered the seventh floor as a compromise, saying the film-maker was ‘lucky to get that’.
A recent survey by James Pennebaker, a Dallas psychologist, found people split into two camps: 1963 residents, who want to forget, and more recent arrivals and the young, for whom the assassination is ancient history.
Mr Stone's film is certainly not dreaded by all.
Hundreds donned their full early-1960s gear, or paraded in their cars, in the hope of being cast as extras in the film.
This image-conscious city got some relief from being the place where Kennedy was killed as a result of ‘Dallas’, a television series glorifying the pluck and greed of the oil patch.
But reminders, often bizarre, that November 22nd 1963 marked Dallas as ‘the city of hate’ crop up frequently.
There was the son of a Dallas police officer who held a press conference last autumn to ‘confess’ that his dead father was the ‘second gunman’some believe fired at the president from a grassy knoll.
Next came a court battle in which Earl Ruby won control of the gun that his brother Jack used to kill Lee Harvey Oswald, two days after the assassin's arrest.
Eight conspiracy theories about the killing are given considerable space in a museum housed on the sixth floor of the School Book Depository, called simply The Sixth Floor.
The commissioners said they denied Mr Stone's request to use this floor for fear of disrupting museum visitors.
The building stood empty for 25 years, and was nearly torn down.
For years the city's leaders resisted putting a museum in it.
Now The Sixth Floor contains a glass-encased sniper's corner, a photograph of the Kennedy clan, and a framed anti-Kennedy newspaper advertisement sponsored by an oil tycoon, H.L. Hunt, and other prominent Dallas businessmen.
Savings and Loans
Building on the rubble
DALLAS
COULD something good emerge from the multi-billion-dollar disaster known as the S&L bail-out?
Consider the conjunction of two events.
Home ownership in America is falling for the first time since the Depression, just as the savings-and-loan collapse has made the government the largest single owner of property after foreclosing on bankrupt thrifts.
In 1989 Congress put two and two together, in a programme to sell the government's houses to the poor.
Representative Henry Gonzalez, the chairman of the House Banking Committee, thought somebody should benefit from the S&L collapse.
Mr Gonzalez, who represents the modest Hispanic city of San Antonio, Texas, shepherded the affordable-housing programme through Congress as part of the S&L bail-out.
Now he is unhappy with the way the programme is working.
Under the affordable-housing programme, houses valued at under $67,500 and apartment complexes are held off the open market for 90 days after a thrift is seized by the government.
During that time, the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC), the agency created to liquidate thrifts, must offer the properties to local housing agencies or poor people.
They include people like the Wisdom family of Dallas, who bought a two-storey, red-brick house from the RTC for $60,000.
Up to then, Mr Wisdom's income as a construction supervisor had been too small to buy a house for his family of five.
The abandoned house they bought needs repairs, but the agency helped to pay for some of the necessary work.
But for every house sold from the agency's inventory — 2,728 by the end of last year — two more were not.
Some 2,600 houses have already passed the 90-day limit without offers, making them available for sale to any buyer.
After a disappointing first round of sales in Texas, where half of the affordable housing is located, the agency extended its offer and advertised a sealed-bid auction to drum up interest.
The auction produced 642 bids on 217 houses, and no bids on 371 houses.
Housing activists argue the agency could sell more houses if it were more adept at reaching its target market.
Poor buyers need to be coaxed and coddled, they say, and they are not in the habit of visiting estate agents.
Yet the RTC is relying only on estate agents to sell its houses.
The Association for Community Reform Now (ACORN), a national non-profit housing group, is pressing the agency to try something new — like hiring them.
ACORN sued the government last autumn for failure to do things required by the affordable-housing law.
The settlement will probably name ACORN as a clearing-house for properties.
It comes only after the group's members in Chicago broke into boarded-up houses and occupied them.
The slow pace of sales under the affordable-housing programme cannot be ascribed only to the cumbersome RTC bureaucracy.
A more fundamental problem is that the agency is being asked by Congress to do two diametrically opposed things.
Selling houses to the poor may not be compatible with minimising the losses to taxpayers, which requires selling assets at the best price available.
Peter Monroe, president of the RTC's supervisory board, said in a recent interview that he has got ‘a pretty clear message from Congress’ that he is not running a social service.
Mr Monroe said the agency would do nothing about reports that investors in Texas and Arizona were buying apartments owned by failed thrifts before the 90-day period was up.
The rules do permit the RTC to give away worthless properties to housing groups to use as shelters for the homeless.
A few have been turned over to groups in Arkansas, Florida and Texas.
By the time the agency finishes its massive job, it could have a lot more worthless property on its hands.
Water
River rivalry
ATLANTA
THE Chattahoochee river seems tranquil enough as it meanders 385 miles from north Georgia's mountains past Atlanta, along the Alabama border and across the Florida Panhandle, finally spilling into the Gulf of Mexico.
Yet this gentle river, plied by suburban canoeists and pumped by farmers into peanut fields, has become a battle-zone in a three-state water war.
Georgia is feuding with Florida and Alabama over who has rights to the Chattahoochee (its name means ‘painted rock’ in Cherokee).
Atlanta, Georgia's capital, draws about 70% of its drinking water from the river.
Last summer Atlanta proposed taking twice as much — up to 529m gallons a day — from the Chattahoochee and Lake Sidney Lanier to quench suburban growth over the next 20 years.
Alabama filed a federal lawsuit to block the plan, saying development along its eastern border would suffer if Atlanta took so much water.
Florida protested that lower river levels might upset the delicate ecology of Apalachicola bay, and sink the area's oyster industry.
Without more water, Georgians reply, their state will have to restrict growth, costing it 680,000 jobs and $127 billion in wages by 2010.
The lawsuit has been delayed since September, when the three states vowed to reach an out-of-court compromise.
But closed-door negotiations have yielded little more than words.
Some Georgian officials suspect that Alabama is deviously trying to steal development away from Atlanta by turning off the city's tap.
One threatened to call out the National Guard to defend Atlanta's water rights.
The question at the heart of the dispute is who owns a waterway that begins in one state but flows into others.
Georgia insists the Chattahoochee belongs to it, because the headwaters are within its boundaries.
Alabama and Florida reply that it is a resource to be shared by all three.
The issue rarely surfaced in the showery south-east until a string of droughts in the 1980s.
Water was so scarce that lawn-sprinkling in the suburbs became a criminal offence.
The Chattahoochee was too shallow to keep barges afloat in the navigable waterway south of Atlanta.
Although rainfall has now returned to normal, Georgia's leaders remain keenly conscious that water is a scarce commodity, to be carefully managed.
They have devised a new plan calling for a dozen man-made lakes to store rain and to render the Atlanta region ‘drought-proof’ for the next half-century.
That, too, is raising the neighbours' ire.
Political and business interests in Alabama have flocked to public hearings by the bus-load, angrily saying that the reservoir system will diminish the quality and quantity of water flowing into their state.
They vow to fight the system in court, if necessary.
If in doubt, pass the buck.
Georgia, Alabama and Florida agree on one point.
The Army Corps of Engineers, which manages the Chattahoochee river system, should conduct a $1m, five-year study of the region's long-term water needs.
And a judge may have to sort out the immediate squabble.
William Sumption, director of a private water-development group in Alabama, says: ‘It seems we may need Daddy to tell us where the toys are on the floor, and how to share them.’
William Reilly's green precision weapons
AS A paid-up green, William Reilly has not always looked comfortable in the Bush administration.
George Bush chose him to run the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at a time when he still thought he could co-opt and not alienate the green lobby.
Mr Reilly, a veteran conservationist, scored early by helping to push through the first revision of the clean-air law in 13 years.
Since then he has been repeatedly outmanoeuvred.
He lost battles with the chief of staff, John Sununu, over global warming and wetland preservation.
His relations with the budget director, Richard Darman, especially over energy policy, are appalling — Mr Darman calls him a ‘global rock star’.
When Congress last year held up legislation to give the EPA cabinet status, wanted by Mr Bush, some people saw the vengeful hand of Mr Darman at work.
Mr Reilly has now embarked on a job which even the cynical Mr Darman should applaud.
He is trying to use risk assessment and economics — grubby workman's tools that most greens are too fastidious to touch — to redirect both the EPA's priorities and its approach to regulation.
For all the Reaganite vilification heaped on it, the EPA grew, prospered and regulated mightily in the 1980s.
But its efforts were, in the words of a recent scientific report commissioned by Mr Reilly, ‘inconsistent, unco-ordinated and…less effective than they could have been.’
Too much attention was paid to low-damage but high-publicity cases like oil spills and the famous toxic waste in Love Canal, not enough to habitat loss and global warming.
Much of the clean-air act is aimed at acid rain, which a giant official study has concluded is virtually a non-problem.
A telling sign of misplaced priorities, in the eyes of many critics, is the EPA's concentration on health.
Something like two-thirds of the agency's staff members work on health-related, not environmental, rules.
At times it has behaved more like a cancer-prevention than an environmental agency, making such scientifically dubious decisions as wanting to remove asbestos from school buildings and to ban substances with a microscopically small risk of causing cancer.
Only 2–3% of cancers are caused by man-made things anyway.
Does this over-enthusiasm matter?
Mr Reilly says yes, for two reasons.
One is that environmental protection is too expensive to indulge in without thought of costs and benefits.
It will soon take more than 2.5% of America's GNP just to comply with existing rules.
But the bigger point is that pursuing wrong priorities discredits greenery as a whole — just when it needs friends to defend it from hard-pressed businessmen and rabid deregulators.
Mr Reilly says he wants to stop being reactive.
He would rather list the EPA's concerns in order of priority, so that the agency can ‘take aim before we open fire’.
Because it has followed public opinion in the past, the EPA has always taken the view that governments are there to stop people having to run risks, however small.
Hence, for instance, some of the more onerous provisions of the clean-air act that will produce doubtful benefits at huge cost.
The EPA has an enormous education job on its hands, which should be directed at green enthusiasts and sceptics alike.
Identifying priorities is only a start.
The next task is to tackle them in the most sensible way.
Above all, this means using the economic incentives offered by the market, not regulations to ‘command and control’ things.
The Bush administration is proud of the pioneering use of emissions-trading in the clean-air act, which it hopes will cut sulphur-dioxide output for just over half the cost of equivalent regulation.
But that did not originate at the EPA.
The EPA exists to regulate things, not to see the market do the job for it.
Mr Reilly will have to make his own bureaucracy reform itself.
Even the greenest greens are coming to accept market forces (and the value of a growing economy) as a help in cleaning up the environment.
Eastern Europe has shown that non-market economies with slow growth can pollute the environment more than most.
But, to be really effective, Mr Reilly's enthusiasm needs stretching.
He could start with the federal government itself.
The defence and energy departments, impervious to markets, are among the country's biggest polluters.
And there is a dreadful stew of federal subsidies and tax breaks (for such things as logging in Alaska, irrigation in California, grazing on federal land in Nevada) that actually subsidise those engaged in making the environment worse.
A dose of market reality for get-the-government-off-our-backs westerners could benefit the environment — and save the taxpayer money.
Taxophobia
The best economic incentive to achieve environmental goals is often a tax, for it brings home to consumers the external cost of their consumption without clumsily trying to regulate it away.
Yet the government has always found it safer to regulate companies than to tax consumers, and Mr Bush is especially averse to taxes.
Though he is too politically cautious to admit it in public, Mr Reilly knows he needs taxes as a weapon in the environmental arsenal, even if they are disguised under another label.
Watch for two tests in the coming months.
One is the revision of the clean-water act, which will be ineffective unless it includes taxes or fees on the use of pesticides and fertilisers that leach into rivers.
The second will come over fuel-economy standards.
Congress and the administration may go for a sharp rise in the average miles per gallon required of car makers, instead of the much more efficient solution of higher petrol taxes.
Mr Reilly may bask in the credibility he has established as Mr Bush's green man, even without being in the cabinet.
But his biggest fights are yet to come.
Missouri
A rising reverend
KANSAS CITY, MISSOURI
AS THE song from ‘Oklahoma!’ would have it, everything's up to date in Kansas City.
The latest sign of modernity is the election of the city's first black mayor, Emanuel Cleaver, on March 26th.
Mr Cleaver's victory over his fellow city-council member, Bob Lewellen, in a non-partisan run-off election, was not the first for a black politician in this predominantly white city.
Alan Wheat has been Kansas City's congressman since 1982.
The run-off election for mayor was, remarkably enough, marked by quiet debate on the issues.
Neither candidate took a party line and neither raised race.
Mr Cleaver, who is 46, is an ordained Methodist minister, who was ordered by his bishop in 1983 to choose between the ministry and politics (he donated most of his council salary to charity).
He is typical of the moderate blacks now being elected in many states.
He tends to be less radical and confrontational than the most nationally prominent black politician, the Rev Jesse Jackson, and more willing to work with the establishment to achieve his goals.
Mr Cleaver was endorsed by the Kansas City Star, as well as by other mainstream organisations including a group of black Republicans.
Although no one would claim that Kansas City is now a model of racial harmony, it does make a sharp contrast to St Louis, Missouri's other main city.
There, politics and politicians frequently divide along racial lines.
The city's mayor, Vincent Schoemel, who is white, is constantly squabbling with its leading black  politician , the comptroller, Virvus Jones.
On April 2nd voters in St Louis will choose between two slates of candidates for the city's school board.
One slate of two blacks and two whites, backed by the city establishment, is facing a slate which includes white supremacists linked to David Duke, a Louisiana politician and former Ku Klux Klansman.
They are campaigning against the city's controversial school-desegregation programme, which involves busing pupils.
If elected, the anti-busing slate would join five like-minded school-board members elected earlier, giving the faction control of the board.
The prospect of their victory has prompted the federal judge overseeing the school-desegregation plan publicly to warn the candidates not to make promises he will not allow them to keep.
A Euro jigsaw puzzle for George Bush to solve
WASHINGTON, DC
WITH a good deal of head-scratching, with a shuffle here and a waffle there, America's diplomats are trying to decide what the country's European policy should be.
They are not finding it easy.
In 1989 and 1990 America's goals for Europe could be simply stated.
They were, first, to encourage the Soviet withdrawal from Eastern Europe; and, second, once the pace of that withdrawal had become apparent, to assist in the birth of a united Germany, firmly anchored to the western alliance.
As the Americans saw it, both goals required them to reassure those parties who felt nervous about what was going on.
That meant, above all, that America would signal to the Soviet Union that it had no intention of rubbing Moscow's nose in its defeat.
It also meant reassuring West European countries worried about a unified Germany that America intended to maintain troops at the heart of the continent.
This reassurance, though commonly assumed to be directed at the British, was almost equally directed at Europe's smaller countries.
One Washington ambassador of a small West European country says that America kept his government more closely informed of the progress of the ‘two-plus-four’ talks on German unity than did the West Germans, French or British.
That was as far as the Washington consensus on European policy went.
There were always some in the State Department who thought the policy might be pushed a little further: who thought that a unified Germany might become a big partner for America in the same way as is (say some) Japan.
But others doubted whether that would happen, and events from the middle of 1990 have broadly proved the sceptics right.
Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl was unable or unwilling to deliver what the Americans thought he had promised at the Houston summit it last July — political muscle to make progress on farm-reform at the GATT talks.
And Germany's self-absorption with unity meant that its response to the Gulf challenge was feebler than the Germanophiles would have wished.
It is nevertheless significant that, however much anti-German growling there has been on Capitol Hill since the invasion of Kuwait, little has been heard within the administration.
From the president down, the policymakers have always appreciated that Germany was bound to go through a period of introversion.
The administration was, however, disturbed by the angst-ridden quality of German policy during the autumn.
It was a bit cross (and told the Germans so) when Germany seemed to think it could have a debate about whether Turkey, a NATO member, was entitled to the benefits of the same collective security which Germany has enjoyed for more than four decades.
But there never was a threat to a new German-American special relationship, since there never was such a special relationship to begin with.
America's reminder to Germany of the value of NATO is one piece of a jigsaw puzzle that is growing more difficult to solve.
In place of the easy verities of a year and a half ago, America now has to cope with a Europe — both east and west — in a state of flux.
In the east, the new democracies are trying to modernise their economies; in the west, the countries of the European Community are considering the scope and shape of a common foreign policy — and therefore, unavoidably, common defence and security policies as well.
Not all Americans enjoy what they see, at either end of the continent.
The Bush administration has always liked to say that Eastern Europe holds a special place in its heart; Americans love the praise heaped on them in Washington when East European heroes like Lech Walesa and Vaclav Havel come to call.
When Mr Walesa was in Washington last week, George Bush took the opportunity to forgive an additional $800m of Poland's debt to America (it has now forgiven 70% of it).
And the administration is worried about the possible break-up of Yugoslavia, a state some Americans like to think they invented.
Champion of the east
But the administration is far from sure that Western Europe shares its love for the new democracies of the east or its concern for Yugoslavia.
One senior State Department official has said privately that West European countries treat East European ones with ‘contempt’.
America believes that the future prosperity and security of Eastern Europe are nothing like guaranteed.
That is one reason it is so keen that East European products, especially its competitive farm products, should have free access to West European markets.
Increasingly, however, some in the administration think that trade will not be enough to anchor Eastern Europe to the prosperous West — which means that policy-makers are considering the ticklish question of the future of the European Community.
Americans are scrupulously careful to say nothing on the record about enlargement of the Community: that, they say, is a matter for the Europeans.
In private, however, the view is gaining ground that eventual membership of the Community by those East European countries that want to join it would be a good idea.
Here is one place where America's concern with Eastern Europe bumps up against the Community's own deliberations.
Another such bump comes over the future of NATO.
American officials say that, after a year's careful thought, the new democracies of Eastern Europe have come to the conclusion that NATO is a splendid thing: a watchdog against any future Soviet attempt to re-establish hegemony over Eastern and Central Europe (see page 47).
The Americans are telling East Europeans that they should not think they can join NATO — that would break the ‘don't gloat’ rule — and they do not mean to imply, either, that NATO's security perimeter has been extended to the Soviet-Polish border.
But at the same time their concern with Eastern Europe is one more reason that they do not want West Europeans to do anything that weakens NATO.
That is why some Americans have been bothered by suggestions from Paris, Bonn and Brussels that (in the words of Jacques Delors, speaking in London on March 7th) the Western European Union (WEU) should be ‘the melting pot for a European defence embedded in the Community, the second pillar of the Atlantic alliance’.
Norway and Turkey — from America's viewpoint, NATO members vital to containing the Soviet Union — are not members of the WEU.
France is a member of the WEU but not of NATO's military organisation.
Both French and European Community officials making their springtime visits to Washington have been anxious to dispel American anxieties.
One senior official of the European Commission said recently that, had there been a common Community defence policy, it would have committed forces to the Gulf.
The British, who have less grandiose plans for the WEU as a ‘bridge’ between the Community and NATO, doubt that.
So the stakes are high.
But American policy is nothing like formed, which explains European complaints that they hear different things from different Americans.
European diplomats say that Reginald Bartholomew, the under-secretary of state for security assistance, has warned them against doing anything with the WEU that undermines NATO or freezes out the Americans from security talks at which they think they are entitled to be present.
Yet, according to French sources, when François Mitterrand complained about the tone of Mr Bartholomew's warnings at his recent meeting with President Bush on Martinique, the American president did not know what had been going on.
European policy has not yet recaptured the attention of Mr Bush, still preoccupied with the Gulf.
Some time this year, it will have to.
ASIA
Japan, Gorbachev and the price of peace
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
BUYING territory rather than seizing it has honourable precedents among nations.
The Americans bought Louisiana from the French and Alaska from the Russians.
The case of four islands in the Kuriles is a bit different.
They were part of Japan until Russia occupied them at the end of the second world war, and the Japanese feel they are justified in wanting them back.
But, as with Louisiana and Alaska, it looks as though money will settle the matter.
Japan plans to offer the Soviet Union a deal worth $26 billion for the islands.
To make the offer especially palatable it proposes to accept two now and the other two later.
The exchange would be spread over five years.
Previously Japan has demanded that all four be handed over together.
It says something for the delicacy of the proposal that it comes not from the Japanese government, but from the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
The party's secretary-general, Ichiro Ozawa, was in Moscow on March 25th to make the final preparations for Mikhail Gorbachev's visit to Japan starting on April 16th.
While there, he spent two hours outlining the new Japanese thinking to the Soviet president.
By all accounts, the Soviet Union sees the bullying Mr Ozawa — the power behind Toshiki Kaifu's government — as someone it can do business with.
Even so, the official response from Moscow so far has been muted.
Hints have been dropped that the two smaller islands, Shikotan and the Habomai rocks, might be returned — in line with the pledge that the Soviet Union made in 1956 but later withdrew.
More promising hints about the islands are expected from the Soviet foreign minister, Alexander Bessmertnykh, who was due in Tokyo on March 29th to agree on Mr Gorbachev's itinerary.
Few people in Japan expect Mr Gorbachev to make more than a few diplomatic utterances about the islands while in Tokyo.
But at least the new developments should ease the diplomatic impasse that has kept relations between Japan and the Soviet Union frozen for 46 years.
Japan's stance over what it calls its Northern Territories has been that there can be no peace treaty between the two countries until all four of the islands (Etorofu, Kunashiri, Shikotan and Habomai) are returned.
Only then will Japan consider granting aid to the Soviet Union.
Only then, too, will Japanese business have the confidence to invest heavily in joint ventures to help the Soviet Union develop the mineral treasures of Siberia.
Included in the deal would be $4 billion worth of emergency loans from the Export-Import Bank of Japan to help provide the Soviet Union with consumer goods.
These loans would be granted quickly.
A further $4 billion would be made available for reimbursing the Soviet Union for moving its citizens off the islands, withdrawing the troops stationed there, and paying compensation for the loss of property.
The Japanese government would also guarantee an additional $8 billion of private-sector loans, mainly for oil and gas projects in Sakhalin.
And a final $10 billion would be offered at low interest rates as part of a long-term economic plan to help the Soviet Union build some decent factories and roads and exploit its natural resources.
Officials in the Liberal Democratic Party have spent months building a consensus for the plan, both within the sceptical foreign ministry and among businessmen, who are even more dubious.
Japanese businessmen have horror stories about joint ventures in the Soviet Union.
Most have grown tired of trying to deal with rigid management, the country's continually changing laws and the ban on repatriating rouble profits.
The Soviet Union has stopped paying its bills.
Japanese trading companies are owed nearly $400m for exports and cannot get an answer about when they might be paid.
Trade between Japan and the Soviet Union slipped 3% last year to a tiny $5.9 billion.
The islands deal has been approved by two of Japan's most influential businessmen, Gaishi Hiraiwa, chairman of the Keidanren (Federation of Economic Organisations), and Rokuro Ishikawa, chairman of the Japan Chamber of Commerce.
Without their approval, the government would be powerless to act.
The message sent to Moscow was thus unambiguous: do the diplomatic deal and Japanese businessmen will come knocking on the door again.
Mr Gorbachev would like them to do a great deal more.
He is expected to use his address to the Diet (parliament) during his visit — the first by a Soviet head of state — to try to get a commitment from both the Japanese government and its businessmen to back a hoary old proposal: the formation of an economic group among the countries surrounding the Japan Sea, that is, the Soviet Union, the two Koreas and Japan.
Dog-eared it may be, but the idea is being given a new lease of life by the rapprochement between the Soviet Union and South Korea, the thaw in relations between Japan and North Korea, and now a likely peace treaty between Japan and the Soviet Union.
But China, Taiwan and the ASEAN countries, as well as Japan, are leery about so exclusive a grouping.
Polite noises are all that Mr Kaifu and his colleagues would prefer to make about the ‘Japan Sea development zone’.
But they are aware, too, that the stakes involved in Mr Gorbachev's visit are uncommonly high.
Their names will be in Japanese history books if they can persuade the Soviet leader to hand back the islands.
If the matter is badly handled, Mr Kaifu's reputation, already in question, could be ruined.
Having taken the initiative on the Northern Territories, officials of the ruling party are worried that they may not get all the co-operation they need from the civil service.
What if the Soviet negotiators are baiting a bear trap for Japan's amateur statesmen — just as the North Koreans did last autumn?
At that time the Japanese foreign ministry distanced itself from the Liberal Democrats' mission to Pyongyang organised by the party's strongman, Shin Kanemaru.
The civil servants watched with barely concealed glee as the ruling party became embarrassed when the North Koreans demanded compensation not only for Japan's colonial rule but also for all the years since.
Mr Kanemaru's reputation took a dive from which it has not recovered.
The party is hoping that, this time, the $26 billion bribe is big enough to do the trick.
After all, Louisiana went for Dollars15m and Alaska fetched only $7.2m — about 2 cents an acre.
Pakistan
Running to market
FROM OUR PAKISTAN CORRESPONDENT
FOR a man running a leisurely sort of country, Nawaz Sharif has moved with astonishing speed.
Three months after becoming prime minister, he is already putting in place a vast programme to privatise the state-owned businesses that have been a drag on the country since they were nationalised by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in the early 1970s.
Mr Sharif's urgency is understandable.
Pakistan's economy has suffered from losing cheap Kuwaiti oil and American aid, which has been suspended as a result of America's suspicion of Pakistan's nuclear-weapons programme.
It also has a deeper problem: fiscal indiscipline, manifested in a budget deficit running at 7% of GDP.
Privatisation might help fix some of the economy's ills; but it is already bringing problems as well.
The prime minister's economic programme includes deregulating the foreign capital market, privatising 115 state-owned businesses — including the banks — within a year, and encouraging private investment in transport, communications and energy.
Exchange controls are already being eased: Pakistanis can now operate foreign-currency accounts in local banks with no questions asked.
Privatisation has begun.
Most state industries have lost money for decades.
One study estimates that in 1987 the combined assets of all public-sector companies had a net return of 0.14%.
Sartaj Aziz, the finance minister, says he wants to ‘cut his losses of $1 billion every year’.
Two years ago Benazir Bhutto was thinking along the same lines.
But she was stalled by opposition from labour groups affiliated to her party.
The new prime minister, a businessman, is not so constrained; and his moves have won him plaudits from his private-sector friends.
They complain that the state's domination of the economy has been suffocating: public investment has risen to 8.5% of GDP compared with private investment of 6.5%.
But putting the policy into practice may not be easy.
The government has made a mess of its showpiece, the privatisation of the profitable Muslim Commercial Bank.
The government rejected the highest offer, fudged the auction rules, then accepted a revised offer from the third-highest bidder, who was given 26% of the bank's shares.
Rivals got a stay order from the courts, though after a backroom deal in mid-March the government got its way.
Accusations of political favouritism abound, and some mud has stuck on the prime minister.
Labour is causing trouble, too.
Some 300,000 people work in state-owned enterprises, and many owe their jobs to political patronage.
Industrial unrest is likely.
The government hopes that the sale of a chunk of its $30 billion assets will help refill its depleted treasury.
But some people worry that the private sector does not have enough cash to mop up much of this vast sale, while others fear that the government may become so involved with selling the state's assets that it forgets about the pressing problem of widening its tax base.
Although servicing the deficit takes up nearly 30% of government spending, fewer than 0.1% of Pakistanis pay direct taxes.
Agriculture (26% of GDP, compared with 24% for industry) is not taxed.
Fiscal reformers — including members of the present government — have argued for years that it should be.
But now that it is in power, and dependent on an assembly made up largely of landowners, the government seems to find that option less attractive.
Happy families
FROM OUR DELHI  CORRESPONDENT 
INDIA'S population is 844m and expanding by almost 18m a year, according to a census published this week.
This is alarming, except by African standards: India's growth rate of 2.22% a year is far exceeded by Africa's 3.2%.
India spends $400m a year on birth control, much of which is wasted.
Sterilisation is undergone mainly by older people who have had families.
Those who have the operation get a 100-rupee ($5) reward.
Small families are commonest in the cities.
There health care is available and people can generally find some cash.
Moreover, city Indians do not feel they need lots of children to look after them when they are old.
Literacy seems to be a factor in keeping the family to a manageable size.
In India as a whole literacy is 52%.
But in the southern state of Kerala, where literacy exceeds 90%, the population growth is only 1.2% a year.
A breather
THE drawbacks of smoking are barely noticed in Asia.
Chinese, Indians and Malays puff away to the delight of cigarette manufacturers.
In Taiwan, though, which likes to keep up with the West, there is a growing feeling that smoking should not be encouraged.
The government has started an advertising campaign that will draw attention to health hazards.
Soldiers will no longer be given free cigarettes.
Smoking has been a useful earner for the government.
Its Tobacco and Wine Monopoly Bureau received $1.6m in taxes in 1988.
No matter: as evidence of its sincerity to try to improve the health of the Taiwanese, the government has decided to change the name of the cigarette that has 90% of the market.
It is called Long Life.
India
In the money, sort of FROM OUR DELHI CORRESPONDENT
BEING very poor is customary in India.
But it appears to be getting less so, if government figures are to be believed.
A new survey says, rather precisely, that the proportion of Indians below the poverty line fell from 48.3% in 1977–78 to 29.2% in 1987–88.
Since India's population grew by nearly a quarter over that period, this means that about 80m people managed to clamber above the poverty line in a decade.
The government gets its data from a national survey conducted every five years.
The poverty line is put at consumption per person of about $11 a month, just about conceivable in India though it may sound impossibly low to a westerner.
That still leaves at least 250m Indians living in abject poverty, but at least life appears to be getting a little better for the rest.
There are several reasons for the improvement.
During the 1980s, although the population grew by more than 2% a year (see box), real GNP grew by nearly 6%, well up from the 3.5% a year in the first three decades of independence.
This was thanks in part to the gradual liberalisation of the economy.
Though India still fails to reach anything like its potential for growth, trickle-down may be working.
Anti-poverty programmes have helped.
One of them provides income-earning assets to families: sewing machines, for example.
These schemes are notorious for corruption, but something has got through to the poor.
Increasing urbanisation has led to higher incomes.
The proportion of the population dependent on agriculture stayed unchanged at around 70% for several decades, but is now falling.
The remittance economy is growing.
Migrants to towns send money home to relations.
Migrants to the Gulf and Britain send home more.
Several decades of education, including technical education, have had an impact on productivity.
The liberalisation of the economy has helped technocrats to start hundreds of new industries.
Perhaps the most convincing indication of a dent in poverty is marketing information showing that the boom in consumer durables in the 1980s was by no means limited to the top 10% of the population.
The bottom 60% bought 33% of the wristwatches sold in India, 22% of the small black-and-white televisions, 46% of the bicycles and 36% of the radios.
People in the countryside now buy 72% of the radios and 45% of the motorcycles that are sold.
If indeed poverty is less pervasive, why are so few people saying so?
The non-Congress political parties do not want Rajiv Gandhi to get any credit for it.
Many academics and journalists who gave warning that liberalisation and the Congress Party culture were fattening the rich at the expense of the poor are understandably silent.
As for Mr Gandhi, he does say occasionally that his government reduced poverty, but does not press the point.
The state apparatus has become so corrupt and exploitative that the common man sees it as an enemy.
Those rising above the poverty line think they have succeeded in spite of the government.
If a villager migrates to Bombay and makes a living as a hawker, he probably has to bribe a cop to stay in business and pay off the local mafia don.
If he is better off, he is unlikely to thank Mr Gandhi.
She shall return
IT LOOKS as though Imelda Marcos will be allowed back into the Philippines.
The question is when.
The president, Cory Aquino, confirmed weeks of rumour on March 21st when she said that the ban on Mrs Marcos would be lifted so that she could go on trial in Manila, but only when the government had decided what to charge her with.
The Philippines has been wondering what to do about Mrs Marcos ever since she fled to Hawaii with her husband Ferdinand when he was deposed by a revolt in 1986.
When Ferdinand died in 1989 Mrs Marcos seemed to be the only link to the billions of dollars that the Philippines claims the Marcos family stole during his presidency.
Some $350m is said to be in Swiss banks.
The Swiss Supreme Court says that any money will be released to the Philippine government only after a number of conditions have been met.
One condition is that Mrs Marcos must be charged by the end of this year.
A government lawyer has said that charges will be filed in four or five months.
But the government is not having Mrs Marcos back yet.
Last week the Philippine consulate in New York refused her application for a passport.
Were it not for the prospect of seizing the Swiss money, it is doubtful whether the Philippines would be ready to allow Mrs Marcos home this year or any other year.
Marcos is still a powerful name in the Philippines.
Mrs Marcos has gained in stature during her exile.
No one sneers about her weakness for shoes these days.
That, anyway, was a piece of propaganda by the Aquino government.
The story that she has no artistic taste was shown to be a lie in January when a collection of her old-master paintings sold well at Christie's in New York.
She put on a brave show when she was tried in New York last year in connection with some property deals.
Mrs Marcos was found not guilty in New York.
Supposing she were found not guilty in Manila on whatever charges the government brought against her?
Heavens, as a free woman, she might even run for president in 1992.
China
Three hours with Li Peng
FROM OUR BEIJING CORRESPONDENT
IT IS not easy to feel sorry for China's prime minister, Li Peng.
He tends to look either smug or surly, and he will long be associated with the Tiananmen Square massacre of June 1989.
But in Beijing on March 25th, as he plodded through a three-hour speech at the opening session of China's annual parliament, the National People's Congress, some at least of the 3,000 delegates must have felt a twinge of sympathy.
Mr Li was faced with the task of trying to make sense of China's eighth five-year plan and a ten-year ‘development strategy’.
At the same time he had to sound confident about the ultimate triumph of socialism, against all the evidence that it has failed.
And at his back are China's octogenarian power-brokers, biding their time before throwing him to the wolves.
The new economic programmes are muddled compromises between the ambitions of growth-seeking reformers in the coastal provinces and the desperate efforts by Beijing's central planners to keep a grip on the economy.
Over the next decade GDP growth is supposed to average 6%.
This compares with an average of 9% achieved in the 1980s, and is lower than reformist economists and provincial leaders had hoped.
Defending the modest target, Mr Li said, ‘An excessively high growth rate is liable to end up destabilising the economy.’
The government remains fearful of a recurrence of the overheating and inflation of late 1988, which led to an austerity programme still notionally in force.
Looking back on that period, Mr Li lamented, ‘Some sectors of the economy were so decentralised that the state's ability to exercise macro-control was weakened.’
That is the nub of the problem.
The ten-year programme represents not so much a strategy for growth; it is more a guess at the government's ability to rein in the booming provinces of the southern coast and the Yangtze delta.
There, where ‘the state's ability to exercise macro-control’ is already tenuous, the economy is working reasonably well.
Where the state's control is stronger, the economy is a disaster.
At least a third of state-owned enterprises, still the backbone of the economy, are losing money.
As a result, the government's budget deficit has ballooned, to 15 billion yuan ($2.9 billion) in 1990.
Disregarding China's quaint practice of counting disbursed government borrowings as revenue, the true deficit reached 48 billion yuan last year, up 35% on the previous year.
The amount of money forked out in subsidies to loss-making state enterprises was 57 billion yuan.
Presenting his budget this week, the finance minister, Wang Bingqian, used his favourite word for the third year running to describe the state of the public purse: ‘grim’.
He moaned, with justification, that ‘People all…wonder why the financial picture is becoming more and more serious.’
Then he put his finger on the reason: ‘State finance was required to…safeguard overall political and social stability.’
Li Peng listened.
But a fear of mass urban unemployment grips the prime minister even more powerfully than that of inflation.
So Mr Li made it clear that the state will go on bailing out the inefficient state-owned juggernauts, as well as subsidising a range of things from rice to city rents.
Mr Li was more confident when he turned to politics.
China has been cheered up by the difficulties the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe face as they try to change their old communist ways.
The lesson for China was clear.
Mr Li was in full cry with warnings against the plots of the ‘hegemonists’(that is, the Americans) to effect a ‘peaceful evolution’ to capitalism in China.
‘Socialist China will stand rock solid in the east,’ he said.
‘We must uphold the people's democratic dictatorship.’
The ghosts of Chairman Mao and Uncle Joe must have nodded in agreement.
This year's parliament is intended to include the final rites over the 1989 protests as the judiciary reports on its recent ‘successes’ in jailing the leaders of the demonstrations.
Mr Li's future still depends on public amnesia about the massacre.
Two pairs of hands were missing from the dutiful applause that greeted his speech.
China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, did not deign to put in an appearance.
But behind the scenes the 86-year-old reformer is believed to be working to bring his economic programme back to life.
His ousted protégé, the former party chief Zhao Ziyang, sacked in June 1989 for supporting some of the demands of the protesting students, remains a delegate to parliament.
But, as last year, he has ‘asked for leave’, say officials.
To condemn him too publicly would reopen wounds within the party.
So Mr Zhao, it seems, is to remain in political purgatory, from where he will continue to haunt Li Peng's dreams of stability.
INTERNATIONAL
Mali and Benin
Dying dinosaurs
EXTINCTION is bound to hurt somebody.
In Mali last week a monster in the throes of death sent a squad of victims ahead to await his ghost.
At the orders of Moussa Traoré, who was a lieutenant when he took over Mali's government in 1968, soldiers fired on rioting crowds.
The army said that, in three days, it had killed 27 people; diplomats said that well over 100 had died, and that was just in the capital, Bamako.
The army decided enough was enough: the generals arrested Mr Traoré and said they would move towards elections.
In Benin, meanwhile, another veteran dictator was showing that there is a better way out.
Mathieu Kérékou was a colonel when he took power in 1972 in what was then Dahomey.
He has ruled autocratically ever since, helped by handouts and guidance from France, and with French soldiers in the background.
His economic failure has been less forgivable than Mr Traoré's: Benin is more fertile and has a better-educated population than Mali.
But in the manner of his going Mr Kérékou wins hands down.
He organised a presidential election in the first round of which, on March 10th, he was beaten into second place by his prime minister, Nicéphore Soglo.
Neither man won an outright majority.
In the run-off poll on March 24th Mr Soglo won two-thirds of the vote, and will now become president.
Like so many of the men now rising to leadership in poor countries, he has done a stint at the World Bank, and is regarded as capable.
But even an angel would have trouble to better people's lives and calm the rivalry between the peoples of the south (where Mr Soglo comes from) and the Muslims of the dry north (Mr Kérékou's people).
France did its bit for Mali's transition.
French businessmen no longer lobby for special privileges in African ex-colonies now almost worthless as producers or customers.
French officials realise that the way they have subsidised Africans is the wrong one.
West African currencies, because of their rigid link to the French franc, are tied through the European Monetary System to the German mark, so have been heavily — and damagingly — upvalued against the American dollar.
Above all, France's rulers acknowledge the folly of propping up incompetent dictators.
Last June President François Mitterrand told the assembled autocrats of French-speaking Africa that their countries should become more democratic.
Some, including Mr Kérékou, acted on that.
The rulers of Chad, Togo and Mali boldly disagreed; so did the Americans' friend, King Hassan of Morocco.
In Mali Mr Mitterrand's injunction was greeted with joy by the educated: the lawyers, teachers and civil servants fed up with Mr Traoré's arbitrary and impoverishing misrule.
He merely tightened the screws.
The result was mass disorder, attacks by masterless mobs on anything that stood for authority or wealth, and the army's brutal reaction.
With luck, Africa's anti-democrats will learn the lesson of his fall, and choose Benin's better way.
South Africa
In play again
FROM OUR SOUTH AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
AN HONOURABLE return to international sport is within South Africa's reach.
The country's athletes have been excluded from the Olympic Games since 1960, because of apartheid.
The organisers of other international sports followed the Olympic lead.
Thanks in part to the sportsmen's pressure, much has changed in South Africa.
A committee of the International Olympics Committee (IOC) has been to see if the changes qualify the country for readmission.
On March 25th it met President F.W. de Klerk, who promised that racially discriminatory laws would be off the statute book by the end of June.
The IOC's director-general, François Carrard, praised the president.
The first condition for South Africa's return to the Olympics was that apartheid laws should be eradicated; it looks as though that will be met.
The Olympic officials also require integration between South Africa's quarrelsome and sometimes racially based sporting administrative bodies, and the assent of the Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa.
That body's president has welcomed the formation of the National Olympic Committee of South Africa (NOCSA), representing all sorts of rival sporting associations, whose chairman, Sam Ramsamy — a veteran campaigner for the sports boycott — now wants to get South Africans back into international competition.
NOCSA has to hold its fractious members together, and sustain the boycott until the apartheid laws are gone.
One of its constituents, the Confederation of South African Sport, dominated by whites, sometimes threatens to break the boycott by hiring foreign celebrities for local tours.
On the field, the racial barriers are coming down.
Soccer, followed passionately by blacks, is regulated by a single football association.
Athletics is not far behind.
The two controlling bodies for cricket are on the point of unifying.
Even in rugby, the Afrikaners' passion, the formation of a single non-racial administrative body is imminent; the octogenarian rugby boss, Danie Craven, has long thought it a game for robust men of all races, and in 1988 angered Mr de Klerk by sending an emissary to contact, among others, the African National Congress — one of whose leaders is now working to dismantle the boycott.
Amid the ironies, black South Africans remember that the Olympic boycott began in horrified reaction to the massacre of March 1960, in Sharpeville, when the police shot 69 unarmed black people dead and wounded many more.
On March 24th, in the township of Daveyton, the police shot at least 12 black people dead.
In a separate episode on March 26th at least 15 people died in intra-black fighting.
Colombia
Cooling it
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN BOGOTA
POLITICS in Colombia has long been violent but boring.
Liberals and Conservatives fought over and then shared power, serving in each other 's governments.
Opponents of the two great parties were either forced into, or chose, the mountains and jungles as guerrillas.
In recent months an open, multi-party system has begun to emerge.
Violence continues, from left-wing guerrillas, right-wing ‘social cleansing’ squads who murder even children, and from cocaine gangsters.
But politics has come alive.
South America's most rigid political system is heading for a stirring, if risky, conflict of powers.
The issue is a seemingly dull one — constitutional reform.
But the winner should be democracy and, perhaps, eventually, peace.
In December Colombians elected a constituent assembly charged with rewriting the 1986 constitution.
After 15 years in which a corrupt and self-serving Congress had failed to reform either itself or the constitution, the assembly's job is to give the country modern democratic institutions that encourage greater voting participation.
Many people, starting with President Cesar Gaviria, a Liberal, see this as vital to persuade Colombians that change can come through votes rather than bullets.
The assembly itself is proof of this.
Its 70 members have been elected under new, fairer rules.
The result is that no party has a majority.
Liberals and Conservatives are balanced by M-19 (a former guerrilla movement that is evolving into a social democratic coalition), and by the National Salvation Movement, a dissident Conservative group.
Minority representatives, including two Indians, have seven seats; three other guerrilla movements have been given seats in return for disarming.
Pessimists see this fragmentation as a recipe for disaster, particularly since the Supreme Court ruled that the assembly is sovereign and can decide what it likes.
President Gaviria has found that he wields little power even over the 24 members from his balkanised Liberal Party.
Earlier this month they decided to give their ‘full support’ to the government's own constitutional blueprint, while ‘preserving ideological independence’.
What that meant became clear when Horacio Serpa, the Liberal who is one of the assembly's three co-chairmen, came up with 15 constitutional drafts of his own.
Mr Gaviria has sensibly decided to operate at arm's length, seeking influence through private meetings with all sides.
He appears content to be the father, rather than the designer, of the new constitution.
The assembly divided itself into five committees and 26 sub-committees to dissect the 131 draft proposals it has received.
But though there is plenty of scope for debate over the details, such as whether God should appear in the preamble, there is consensus on many bigger points.
Congress will be reformed, abolishing its patronage and powers to vote under-the-table payments to its members.
New electoral rules will mean that at least part of Congress will be chosen by voters from all over the country, undermining the power of regional party bosses.
There will be stricter limits on the state-of-siege powers that have been used by all governments for the past 40 years.
Changes in the system of justice are likely to be introduced in cases involving organised crime, to speed trials and strengthen Colombia's impotent courts.
To entrench these reforms, a majority in the assembly wants to dissolve Congress and call fresh elections.
The left-wingers of M-19, with (by coincidence) 19 assembly seats, have a particular interest in this.
Elected last March only days after M-19 laid down its arms, the 312 members of Congress include just one representative of the movement.
By contrast, the Liberals are not amused.
They won 61% of the vote for Congress in March, but only 27% in December (when far fewer people turned out to vote for the assembly).
Liberal leaders last week accused the assemblymen of plotting a coup d'état of ‘unforeseeable consequences’.
‘A dog that barks doesn't bite,’ replied Antonio Navarro, the leader of M-19.
He is confident that the government and the army will accept what the assembly decides.
This is likely to include a constitutional ban on the extradition of cocaine traffickers — the issue at the heart of Colombia's domestic drugs war.
An attempt to include such a ban sank the last effort at constitutional reform, made by Congress in 1989.
This time the government has little choice but to accept.
Mr Gaviria is personally popular, and his own job is not questioned by the assembly.
The only victors in a head-on clash between president and assembly would be the hardliners on both sides — the dinosaurs in Congress, and the two largest guerrilla groups, the FARC and the ELN.
They have exposed the army's weaknesses with a three-month campaign of economic sabotage, and show little interest in a government offer of talks that might allow them to join the assembly.
Public opinion in Colombia is overwhelmingly hostile to extradition.
Mr Gaviria is trying to do without it anyway.
He wants cocaine traffickers tried in Colombia, by strengthened courts.
In January five ‘faceless’ courts with 82 selected judges were set up.
They will try cases on paper, anonymously, to stop intimidation.
At the same time the government has offered reduced sentences and a promise not to extradite traffickers who surrender and confess.
This has coaxed the three Ochoa brothers, who run a blue-chip Medellin cocaine business, to give themselves up.
But the man the government wants most, Pablo Escobar, is still on the run, holding two prominent journalists hostage.
He seems to want the policemen who are pursuing him sacked (for ‘human-rights violations’ against his hired killers), and a cast-iron pardon from the assembly.
That might give Mr Gaviria real problems.
Palestinians in Kuwait
Revenge is blind
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN KUWAIT CITY
KUWAIT will not be at peace until Saddam Hussein is removed,’ says a Kuwaiti army lieutenant.
There is shooting almost daily in the capital as roaming snipers attack military checkpoints; small-arms fire only, say the authorities.
But a car bomb is reported to have gone off in the Palestinian quarter of the city and a police station has been blown up (the interior ministry says by an accidental explosion).
The Palestinians are blamed, plus any Iraqi soldiers who may still be lurking around the place.
Also blamed are other Arabs — Lebanese, Sudanese, Yemenis and Jordanians — who were brought in by the Iraqis to help police Kuwait.
Such recriminations are fatal in a place where more than half the residents are not Kuwaiti.
The disorder is made worse by antagonism between the Kuwaitis who stayed and those who left.
The Kuwaitis who stayed, and claim to have resisted the Iraqi occupation, are growing impatient with the soldiers who waited in Saudi Arabia until the American-led offensive recaptured their country.
Some of them feel they have been by-passed in the new security structure that is being set up with American advice; American officers are present at most police briefings.
But the resistance people, allowed to keep the arms they took from the Iraqis, have their own network in the police and the army.
House-to-house searches have ceased, at least for the moment, but the arrests continue.
Last week some 20 Iraqi soldiers and Palestinians were rounded up.
There have been reports of torture.
Some, but only some, members of the resistance distinguish between the Palestinians who were brought in by the Iraqis to do a bit of their dirty work, and Kuwait's large and long-established Palestinian population.
Some Palestinians worked with the resistance; one woman was tortured and killed for luring Iraqi officers into places where hit-teams could attack them.
Others are ready to say that they were better off when Kuwait was Iraq's 19th province.
A widow with two children points out that the Iraqis doubled her welfare cheque; now it has stopped altogether.
For a time after liberation the Palestinians got no food or fuel rations.
There is still talk of a mass expulsion of Palestinians.
The martial-law administrator, Crown Prince Saad, says that nobody will be expelled unless he or she is known to have collaborated with the Iraqis.
On one Kuwaiti count there were 20,000 collaborators.
Give a little, take a lot
FROM OUR NEW YORK CORRESPONDENT
IRAQ'S ambassador to the United Nations has said that his country is ready to return the $1 billion in gold and currency it looted from Kuwait.
But there is no word that Saddam Hussein is ready to return to his own people the $10 billion he is accused of looting from them by skimming Iraq's oil revenue for the past ten years and taking kickbacks from foreign contractors.
The allegations of personal profiteering by Mr Hussein and his family arose from a Kuwaiti-commissioned investigation into Iraq's assets by Kroll Associates, a New York firm of financial gumshoes.
The Kuwaitis wanted to know if Iraq had assets that had escaped the freeze imposed in August.
Kroll said that it had detected $2.4 billion in Iraqi-controlled deposits at some 50 banks.
These deposits, made by various people and companies, were under the control of the Hussein family; Saddam's half-brother, Barzan, is said to have run the operation.
The Kroll investigation also found that over the past ten years some $10 billion had either been salted away in banks or used to buy shares of western companies.
Kroll estimates that shareholdings controlled by Mr Hussein are worth at least $1 billion: not bad for one man's retirement savings.
The money came from skimming 5% of the $200 billion Iraq earned from its oil since 1981, from taking a 2.5% kickback from contracts with Japanese companies, and from working a scam on letters of credit with other foreign contractors.
The largest Saddam-controlled holding is allegedly the 8.4% stake held by Montana Management in Hachette, a French publishing firm.
Mr Hussein is also said to have an indirect stake in Matra, a French arms company (which is also a shareholder in Hachette), and in Germany's Daimler-Benz.
Hachette says that Montana was a passive minority investor about which it knew no more than it had been told by Montana's Swiss lawyer: that it represented investors from several Gulf countries.
Montana is a Panama-based holding company with Iraqi directors.
Iraq's shareholdings in America seem to have been restricted to a machine-tool firm in Ohio and an engineering consultancy in California.
Both companies are thought by western intelligence to be part of Iraq's international arms-procurement network and both have links with Anees Wadi, a suspected Iraqi agent who was expelled from Britain last year.
If confirmed, these revelations make a bit of a mockery of the financial sanctions imposed on Iraq in August.
At the time it was insisted that virtually all Iraqi and Kuwaiti money in the West had been identified and frozen.
But billions of dollars seem to have eluded the financial dragnet.
This raises troubling questions.
Western efforts to keep criminal money out of the banking system are based on the premise that banks can identify their customers, even when they act through nominees.
If Mr Hussein slipped by, so can others.
Turkey and the Kurds
Trying to please
FROM OUR TURKEY CORRESPONDENT
OZAL'S magnanimity has shamed us.’
Words of praise for Turkey's president do not come easily from the guerrilla warriors of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
But their leader, Abdullah Ocalan, is now transmitting messages from PKK headquarters — no longer a camp in the Syrian Bekaa Valley but an apartment in a Damascus suburb — that are not dissimilar from those coming from ministries in Ankara.
What is Turgut Ozal up to?
Until lately, Turkey's worst fear was thought to be a vacuum in northern Iraq, leaving room for an autonomous Kurdish entity — which, in its turn, would be a beacon for the separatist movement on Turkish soil.
American officials assured Turkey during the Gulf war that the United States would not even contact the Kurdish opposition in Iraq.
After the war was over, Mr Ozal let it be known that Turkey itself had held talks with Iraqi Kurds, including Jalal Talabani, the leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and a critic of Mr Ocalan's extremism.
Mr Talabani is said to have reassured his hosts that autonomy was the limit of his ambitions.
He seems to have been told that, though Turkey remained opposed to an independent state in northern Iraq, it supported some restoration of Kurdish rights.
The trouble is that the country where the Kurds have fewest rights is Turkey.
To counter this, Mr Ozal is pressing for a modest change that would allow Turkey's Kurds the right to speak their own language.
His parliamentary supporters have reacted with an inventive set of procedural obstructions, but Mr Ozal continues to press for further constitutional amendments — one of whose side-effects would be to allow publications and possibly broadcasting in Kurdish.
Even the opposition, whose platform Mr Ozal appears to have mounted, accuses him of recklessness.
Mr Ozal may now be rivalling the PKK (as violent in its tactics as are the soldiers sent to crush it) for popularity among the 12m Turks who claim some ethnic Kurdish connection.
Only a fraction of these Kurds have any confidence in an independent Kurdish state, but Turkey has previously denied them even cultural freedom.
Mr Ozal may believe that an established Kurdish group in northern Iraq might help to control the more radical PKK.
This would be more convincing if some deal could be struck with Syria, which gives the PKK money, arms and sanctuary.
In Washington this week Mr Ozal made it clear that he does not want either a Kurdish state or a divided Iraq.
The public softening of Turkey's attitude towards the Kurds may, in the end, be less a change in policy than recognition of the difficulties in controlling what happens across the border in northern Iraq.
Turkey has neither cause, nor sufficient lack of sense, to want to become militarily involved.
But it can at least hope it will not be handicapped by its inability to control events on its own side of the frontier.
One more try
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN ARBIL
THE rumble of gunfire echoes across emerald hills.
Helicopter gunships can be seen attacking Kurdish positions near Mosul to the west.
The Iraqi army is trying to crush the rebellion.
But in Arbil, in the heart of rebel-held territory, the Kurdish guerrillas exude confidence.
Every northern town, they say, is under their control except Mosul, which they claim to have surrounded.
They have pushed south to within 100 miles of Baghdad, and talk optimistically of marching on the capital.
Masoud Barzani, the leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party, claims, against the evidence, that if his men took Mosul the road to Baghdad would be wide open.
The rebels say they have captured 30,000 of the government's men.
Two small groups of captives were shown to reporters in Zakho and Dahuk.
Some said they were glad to be out of the fighting: ‘We are not prisoners, we are guests,’ in the words of one.
In Zakho a peshmerga commander paraded defectors, mostly Kurds.
One, who said he was an intelligence officer in the Republican Guard, volunteered that ‘many people have tried to kill Saddam.’
The peshmerga have dealt harshly with some supporters of the regime.
In a village near Dahuk they executed 17 Baath Party officials.
This ruthlessness may be foolish, discouraging officials and army officers from defecting.
Most of the guerrillas seem to have joined the rebellion during the past three weeks.
Men aged 60 are fighting alongside young boys.
They are not short of weapons and ammunition.
They have Soviet-made rifles, mortars and rocket-propelled grenades, and they have captured tanks, guns and armoured personnel carriers from the Iraqi army — though how many of these are usable, and how many of the Kurds can drive them, is not clear.
Mr Barzani says the fall of Saddam Hussein is merely a matter of time.
But Mr Hussein is far from giving up, and the Kurds, his victims in the past, may become victims again.
United Nations
Peacefire
THE five permanent members of the Security Council have approved a draft resolution for a ceasefire in the Gulf War that defines a victor's peace.
It calls on Iraq to accept the 1963 border with Kuwait and threatens it with ‘all necessary means’— diplomatic jargon for war — if this is breached.
The Americans kept the United Nations at arm's length during the fighting of the war.
Now, it seems, UN observers will police the border.
This will not be all the UN is called on to do.
The resolution demands the destruction of Iraq's chemical and biological weapons, and the handing over of weapons-grade nuclear material to the International Energy Agency.
The UN is also being asked to garner Iraq's oil revenues and use a portion to pay compensation for the damage done during the occupation of Kuwait and the war that followed.
Setting up a mechanism for this would fall to the secretary-general.
Unenthusiastic about the entire Gulf episode, he is not thrilled at this unprecedented task but he must obey the Security Council.
To earn money that would then be taken away to pay reparations, Iraq must be allowed to export oil.
Once it agrees to the other two bits of the resolution, the sanctions committee (which has overseen the embargo since August) would lift the export ban.
The ban on imports would remain.
The French among others worried about who would be paid first, Iraq's pre-war creditors or those damaged by the war.
A way round has been suggested: oil sales would pay pre-war creditors; Iraq's frozen assets would compensate for war damage.
Iraqis meanwhile suffer.
At the request of a UN under-secretary-general, Martti Ahtisaari, who had just visited Iraq, the sanctions committee decided last week to let Iraq buy food for hungry people and generators to work sewage plants.
Under the resolution, the sanctions committee would review matters every two months and let Iraq import more if ‘humanitarian’ need required.
Iraq would pay for this from oil earnings after reparations were paid.
Some non-permanent members of the Council complain that imposing a punitive peace should not be the job of the UN.
But the expectation is that the resolution will pass, more or less as drafted.
Oil pollution
Local troubles
BLAZING oil wells and a huge oil slick are emblems of the destruction that is a part of war.
Yet, for all the suffering they will cause in Kuwait — killing people as well as thousands of animals — such pollution is not a catastrophe on a planetary scale, as some had predicted.
Mercifully, the Asian monsoon, and most of the marine life of the Gulf, are expected to emerge unscathed.
According to Kuwait's oil industry, up to 6m barrels of oil are burning every day, four times the country's pre-war production.
About 650 wells are on fire.
Many of those in the neutral zone between Saudi Arabia and Kuwait (where the oil pressure is low) have already burnt out, others will soon do so.
The 500 wells in Kuwait's northern fields would burn indefinitely, but for the efforts of the fire fighters, who will shortly begin the task, lasting one or two years, of extinguishing them.
The plume of smoke from these fires now covers about 15,000 square kilometres (5,800 square miles) and has drifted as far as Iran.
Near the burning oil fields its effects are marked: the temperature has fallen by 10–20 degreesC (18–36 degreesF), the light is only 1% of normal.
Although the soot is harmless, acid rain, unburnt hydrocarbons and diminished sunlight will affect plants and animals.
People living in Kuwait will be exposed to smog and pollution as severe as in any industrial town in the 1950s.
Those who used to live near the oil wells, in Ahmadi, will probably desert their houses.
But the contamination is local: beyond 200km (125 miles), its effects are negligible.
The plume of smoke is safely confined to the lower atmosphere, which means that it is soon mixed with fresh air and removed from the sky by rain.
If the smoke had climbed to the upper atmosphere, it could have remained airborne for months, travelling much farther and possibly affecting the world's weather patterns.
The computer model at Britain's Meteorological Office predicts that the fires' effect on this year's monsoon will probably not stand out against the monsoon's annual variations.
Although more oil is ablaze than was first thought, there is less oil at sea.
Recent estimates of the size of the slick put it at 2.5m-3m barrels of oil, not the 7m-barrel monster that had been feared.
According to the Cambridge-based World Conservation Monitoring Centre, almost all of this oil has already been washed ashore or is in the shallows along 200km of Saudi coast; it has not moved down to the southern Gulf, where most of the turtles and dugongs live.
Even so, 10,000–20,000 birds have perished.
Latin American integration
Getting together
BRIGHT economic schemes have a habit of not working in South America.
Begun in the 1960s, a Latin American Free Trade Association and a Central American Common Market petered out.
Undeterred, the presidents of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay are trying again.
On March 26th in Asuncion, the Paraguayan capital, they signed up for a four-nation Southern Cone Common Market by the end of 1994.
The geography is right.
The idea might even work.
The plan is to create a market of 190m people, accounting for more than half the GDP of Latin America and the Caribbean.
If it works, it will attract foreign investment.
There will be economies of scale.
Competition will help to keep inflation down.
Export-led growth will — if it works — be boosted by a tariff-cutting programme due to start in June; after Brazil and Argentina began gingerly reducing their tariffs in 1987, trade between them increased from $1.35 billion that year to $2 billion in 1990.
The new scheme provides that, by December 31st 1994, the four countries are to share a common external tariff, with free movement of goods and services among themselves.
This is a race; in Europe it will have taken 35 years from the signing of the Treaty of Rome to attain the European Community's planned single market in 1992.
Barring coups, the four Southern Cone presidents will all still be in office in 1994, and have set themselves a target that is also a spur.
The biggest difference between their economies, and the hardest to even out, is inflation.
Brazil's rate last year was 1,800%, Argentina's 1,344%, Uruguay's 129% and Paraguay's about 40%.
Co-ordination of economic policies is far away.
Argentina is moving faster than Brazil in removing barriers to trade and investment.
Uruguay's economy is fairly open.
Paraguay's is open wide, with smuggling its biggest earner, so people have much to lose if the incentive to smuggle is reduced by tariff reductions.
But all four presidents are committed to cutting fiscal deficits, privatisation and policies dear to the IMF.
Fernando Collor of Brazil, who went off the rails last month by ordering a doomed price freeze, still proclaims himself a free-marketeer.
Carlos Menem of Argentina is hell-bent on freeing trade.
Andres Rodriguez of Paraguay has signed up with the IMF.
Luis Lacalle of Uruguay, tenaciously liberal, dreams of making his small country the region's Switzerland.
The United States administration is closely watching the response to President Bush's call for tariff freedom throughout the Americas.
Carla Hills, his trade representative, who knows an export market when she sees one, is negotiating the framework for a free-trade agreement with the four, who together may be strong enough to strike a tough bargain.
The Maghreb
Whatever he did, they love him
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN RABAT AND TUNIS
MILLIONS of Tunisians, Algerians and Moroccans first heard the news of Iraq's defeat from foreign radio stations.
It surprised most of them.
They had preferred to believe their own state-controlled media, which had predicted an Iraqi victory.
They had been swift to support Saddam Hussein.
Some believed his claim that the invasion of Kuwait was the first step towards the liberation of Palestine, and/or a blow in favour of the Arab poor (of which the Maghreb has its share).
Others applauded him for standing up to America.
Now that the truth of Iraq's defeat is sinking in, and their former hero is seen to have feet of clay, some Maghrebis are turning their frustration not against him but against the West.
Angry students have burnt the Stars and Stripes, the Tricolor and the Union Jack on the streets of Algiers.
They see the war as an unequal contest between a 30-nation coalition and a lone Arab country, the purpose of which was to destroy the only Arab state capable of standing up to Israel.
Others ask why the West responded to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait while failing to do anything about Israel's occupation of Arab land.
Some reserve a special anger for France, the Maghreb's former colonial power, because of what they see as a betrayal of its politique Arabe.
Distant though it is from the Gulf, the Maghreb has been deeply affected by the war.
The governments in Tunis, Algiers and Rabat fear that new frustrations will inflame their countries' economic problems.
All three countries were already in a deep recession last summer, which the war has made worse.
Officials fear that opposition groups, especially Islamic fundamentalists, will exploit the crisis to increase their influence and, indeed, several opposition leaders have quickly realised that political capital can be made by following the public mood.
In Algeria the main Islamic party, the Islamic Salvation Front, FIS, smoothly switched support from Saudi Arabia (a generous benefactor) to Iraq.
The FIS, which won most votes in the local elections in June 1990, hopes to profit later this year when some 40 parties take part in the country's (and the Arab world's) first fully democratic parliamentary election.
If the fundamentalist factions drop their differences to form a coalition, they could sweep the board: a prospect dreaded by many Algerians who do not want to emerge from long years of joyless socialism only to face even more joyless Islamic militancy.
King Hassan of Morocco repaid old debts to the Gulf states by sending 1,500 troops to defend Saudi Arabia.
But the opposition parties demanded their return, and the king had to promise that they would not be used except defensively, not even to eject Iraq from Kuwait.
The tensions generated by the Gulf war have not caused as much unrest as December's strikes and riots.
But there could be more trouble if the king does not open up the political system or do something about the great disparities of wealth.
In Tunisia, in many ways the most developed and westernised of the North African countries, the government itself took a pro-Iraqi line.
It is therefore losing American aid and, probably, Saudi subsidies.
President Ben Ali has called for austerity.
But the Tunisian opposition has not fared well, either.
The main (though illegal) Islamic party has been split by the Gulf war.
Its exiled leader, Rachid Ghannouchi, came out strongly in favour of Iraq, and some of its more extreme members attacked the offices of the ruling Democratic Constitutional Rally.
But its three top officials inside Tunisia, including its deputy leader, Abdelfattah Mourou, who has close links with Saudi Arabia, condemned the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
The government jailed 100 or so of the party's leading members on charges ranging from graffiti-writing to incitement of violence.
Mr Mourou, whose efforts to reassure Tunisians of his party's moderate aims have earned him the nickname ‘Mr Valium’, has now suspended the party's operations.
That may lead to a new, quieter Islamic party under his leadership.
The Kurds' bid for freedom
SADDAM HUSSEIN'S defeat has given Iraq's Kurds an unprecedented chance to win the autonomy — or independence — they have long sought.
The Iraqi army is demoralised; Iran is ready to be helpful; Turkey is less unfriendly than in the past.
In the first few days of the revolt the Kurds' peshmerga guerrillas ousted the army, secret police and Baath Party — the three pillars of Mr Hussein's regime — from most of Iraqi Kurdistan, including the oil city of Kirkuk.
Thousands of members of the jash, the pro-government Kurdish militia, swapped sides.
The rebels captured the headquarters of Iraq's 1st and 5th Army Corps — getting hold of heavy armour they had never before had.
How long can they keep this up?
The civil war could well swing the other way now that Mr Hussein, having crushed the rising in the Shia south, is unleashing the full force of his Republican Guards upon the Kurds.
The Kurds are still in with a chance.
But their best opportunity for independence came, and went, soon after the first world war, when Britain and France were carving up the defunct Ottoman empire.
At first the allies decided that the Kurds and the Armenians should be given states of their own in what is now eastern Turkey.
The 1920 Treaty of Sèvres provided for this, and for the Kurdish vilayets, or provinces, of Kirkuk and Mosul to join ‘Kurdistan’, if they wanted to.
But Sèvres was rejected by the Turkish nationalist leader, Kemal Ataturk, and was superseded by the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.
Plans for a Kurdish state vanished.
The vilayets of Mosul and Kirkuk were annexed, together with their oil wealth, by Britain in 1925 to the newly-created Arab state of Iraq.
For the Kurds this was a tragedy.
Before the war they were split between two empires: Ottoman and Persian After 1925 they were split between four states: Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria (there are also a few Kurds in the Soviet Union).
They may be the fourth largest national group in the Middle East, after the Arabs, Persians and Turks, but their hope of an independent Kurdistan appears to have vanished.
At best, Kurds are discriminated against; at worst , repressed.
In Turkey they are not officially recognised as a distinct ethnic group but called ‘mountain Turks’(see story on next page).
In Iran they have cultural rights, but their attempt to win autonomy after the 1979 revolution was crushed by Iran's Revolutionary Guards.
In Iraq the government failed to deliver the autonomy it promised in 1970, and punished the Kurds after their rebellions in 1974–75 and 1986–88 with executions, mass deportations and the demolition of thousands of villages.
The Kurds' efforts to improve their lot have been blocked by their own tribal and ideological divisions, and by international indifference to their cause.
They have gone some way to healing their internal rifts.
Iraq's half-dozen Kurdish parties stopped fighting each other in 1987 to form the Kurdistan Democratic Front, committed to democracy for Iraq and autonomy for Kurdistan.
Only the PKK in Turkey still demands independence.
Now, in northern Iraq, the Kurds' worst fear is that history may repeat itself.
EUROPE
Those who live in the grey area look for a gleam in the west
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN WARSAW, PRAGUE AND BUDAPEST
ONE advantage for small countries in large empires is that they do not have to think up a defence policy: their armies do what they are told.
Now that Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland have their independence back, they must look after their security for themselves.
After 40-odd years of dependence, the change is daunting.
Since dropping communism, they have gone through three stages in thinking about security.
First, people humming Beethoven's ninth symphony looked forward to peace and joy as Soviet soldiers withdrew and democracy took root.
This happy mood lasted roughly until last autumn.
As heads cleared, it was seen that dangers remained: a potential flood of refugees from the Soviet Union or the Balkans, the internal tensions of poverty and ethnic division, the giant still next door.
By January, Soviet troops had cracked down in Lithuania, Soviet troop withdrawals from central Europe had ominously stopped.
This unnerved the three countries and confirmed their instinct to look westward.
But their economies are too backward for membership of the European Community.
Neither are their armies about to join NATO.
Their Soviet-made weapons do not fit with the West's.
More to the point, the West thinks that pushing NATO's frontier to the Soviet border would, at the moment, help just the wrong people in Moscow.
Nerves have since steadied.
Not content with the military winding-up of the Warsaw Pact this month, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary now want its political skeleton to be dismantled.
They would also like the old democracies to look upon their young ones with a more compassionate eye.
They do not expect security guarantees.
They will not wear their knuckles out knocking at the West's door, so long as they feel it will be opened to them before too long.
In the meantime, they are learning to live in what the Poles call a ‘grey area’, the Czechoslovaks and Hungarians a ‘vacuum’.
The first thing the three must do is disentangle themselves from the past.
This means bidding Soviet troops adieu, working out new treaties of good neighbourliness with the Soviet Union, and turning their own soldiers into national armies rather than Soviet appendages.
In Czechoslovakia the last Soviet tank moved out this week.
In Hungary the last combat units are due out on March 31st.
Support troops are to be out of both countries by the end of June.
The Poles wanted all Soviet troops out before 1992.
As the Soviet army in Germany has to cross Poland to get home (unless it goes by sea), the Poles have asked for compensation for the trouble this causes.
In reply, Soviet generals grumbled that Kutuzov's troops on their return from the Napoleonic wars did not have to pay for forage as they crossed what is now Poland; the Poles, they said, were showing scant gratitude for their liberation in 1945.
But tempers have cooled.
Poland's foreign minister, Krzysztof Skubiszewski, hopes that a deadline for final Soviet withdrawal can be fixed soon, and that big combat units will begin leaving this spring.
To speed their return, the Poles suggest their workmen might build housing for them at home — with German money.
The new treaties with the Soviet Union also pose problems.
At last, the three countries are negotiating as fully sovereign states.
Hungary's draft treaty is typical.
Each country promises not to threaten the other's interests.
Yet the Soviet Union is still trying to define Hungary's security interests by insisting that it must stay neutral, or something close to that, for the treaty's 20-year life.
As for‘de-Sovietising’ their armed forces, the three are drawing up new tous-azimuths defence policies, which identify no single enemy.
Civilians are taking charge of the soldiers.
Hungary and Czechoslovakia already have civilian ministers, and Poland will soon.
Senior officers in all three countries have almost all been trained in the Soviet Union.
Except for those deeply discredited, few are being purged.
Change will be gradual.
But already there are contacts with western staff officers.
Hungarians have begun to train at Sandhurst, Britain's main officer-training college.
As cogs in the Soviet military machine, the three countries' armies used to sit mainly near their western borders.
Where cost permits, some units are now being shifted eastward.
All three countries would like smaller armies with better weapons, manned more by professionals and less by conscripts.
They all want to shop around for new western weapons, and are exploring joint-purchasing schemes to cut the cost.
But it is bound to be expensive, and defence budgets are being cut.
A half-recruit, half-volunteer army is years away, reckons the Hungarian defence minister, Lajos Fur.
By themselves, there is not much these countries could do to stop a determined assault by one of their big neighbours.
On the other hand they are too exposed to allow themselves the Costa Rican solution of doing without armies altogether.
Jiri Dienstbier, Czechoslovakia's foreign minister, thinks the purely military element in their security is small.
‘Military doctrine?’ he asks with a laugh.
‘It makes sense for the United States.
But for Czechoslovakia?’
Yet he accepts that these countries need small, defensively equipped armies that could make a potential attacker think twice.
They want ties that link them more to each other— through mutual defence pacts — and to the West, if it can be done without infuriating the Soviet Union.
That includes ties to the European Community, the Council of Europe and one day perhaps even the Western European Union, if not NATO itself.
They all like the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, while accepting its limitations.
They favour regional groups such as the Pentagonale (Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy and Yugoslavia), which Poland would like to make a hexagon.
Leaders of Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary met at Visegrad in Hungary on February 15th to promote co-operation on these issues.
Flimsy as each thread may seem, such a network, they hope, can start to bind the three peoples together, and link them to other European countries whose help might gradually reduce their sense of insecurity.
It could help to tie down east-central Europe's old western bugbear, Germany.
It could even be a restraint on a democratic Soviet Union, as President Havel of Czechoslovakia suggested at NATO last week.
Even a conservative restoration in the Soviet Union would not bring back communist rule to these countries, they believe.
But they keep Soviet might in mind, however remote the threat now seems.
With exuberant lack of tact, Mr Dienstbier says, ‘From NATO we want to know that, if we were threatened, we'd be treated at least as Kuwait, if necessary.’
Soviet Union
Undermined
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
WE MUST stage a really hefty strike in order to get the system changed.’
Thus a Soviet coal miner on his union's attempt to do what Solidarity did in Poland — bring the Communist government down.
A quarter of the country's coal miners have been on strike for three weeks demanding the resignation of President Mikhail Gorbachev, the dissolution of the Soviet parliament and the transfer of power to the Federation Council, composed of the elected leaders of the 15 republics.
So sweeping are these demands, however, that they might be met only if large numbers of other workers support them, or if the miners bring the Soviet economy to a halt.
Neither seems likely.
The coal strike alone will not cause the economic disaster that the Soviet government is pretending it will.
Coal is used for only three purposes: heating houses, generating electricity and making steel.
Of these, steel making has been worst hit.
Soviet steel mills need 346,000 tonnes of coking coal a day but are getting only 200,000.
Coke reserves are said to have dwindled to only 700,000 tonnes — two days' supply.
That might suggest impending disaster.
But few miners believe these figures (given by the metallurgy minister); if they were true, more than the 19 steel mills closed so far would have been affected.
Metal-making industries have undoubtedly been hit hard.
But coal accounts for only 19% of Soviet energy production.
So the strike, which has reduced total coal output by less than a third, will reduce all energy supplies by only 6%.
Damaging, but hardly economy-halting.
The miners have also failed to win the kind of support from other workers necessary to bring the government down.
True, railway workers in Moscow and air-traffic controllers have voiced support.
Russia's independent Union of Drivers has sent trucks to the coal fields to distribute the food donations that have poured in from all over the country.
But this is far from decisive.
Things may change after April 2nd, when retail prices are to rise by 60%, though most workers are too afraid of plunging the country into chaos to give the miners whole-hearted support by staging their own strikes.
Still, the strike is significant.
It has already lasted longer than the one two years ago, a tribute to the organisational powers of the independent miners' union, which unites the various strike committees that sprang up in 1989.
The union has managed to keep the strike going even though Siberian miners are pressing for political changes only, while miners in the Ukraine, where living conditions are particularly wretched, also want large wage rises.
When the Soviet parliament invoked emergency laws to postpone the strike for two months, the union refused to call it off — in effect, daring the government to end it by force.
The strike is also a vivid demonstration of the problems facing both Mr Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin.
The Soviet president was able to end the strike of 1989 by posing as the miners' ally.
This time he is the target of their action, while the miners are repeating virtually word for word the demands Mr Yeltsin made in a television broadcast two weeks before the strike began.
But Mr Yeltsin himself has been unable to give the miners public support because their strike threatens Russia's stubborn attempts to plough its lonely furrow of economic reform.
Indeed, the only politician to emerge from the strike with his credibility strengthened has been the president of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbaev, who was able to persuade local miners to return to work, promising better conditions and his support for their demands.
Budapest 10, Warsaw 1
FROM OUR WARSAW CORRESPONDENT
BUDAPEST
WITH so many western companies, consultants, bankers, venture capitalists and others setting up offices there, Budapest's telephone directory cannot keep up.
A whole new service industry — office design — has sprung up in the city, and the demand for furniture, secretaries and commercial space has pushed up prices.
The rent of an office in central Budapest (£42, or $75, per square foot per year, according to a recent survey*) is higher than in Vienna.
In Warsaw, meanwhile, office rents first rose in anticipation of a similar flood from the West and then fell when the westerners failed to appear.
Some furniture is available (IKEA, a Swedish firm, has opened up nearby) but the supply of English-speaking secretaries exceeds demand, so their salaries stay around $400 a month.
Westerners come and go, crowding into the Marriott, Warsaw's only top-class hotel, but few bother to set up shop.
So while Budapest feels like a gold-rush town, Warsaw remains sleepy.
Why?
Both countries have embarked on serious reform.
Hungary has some advantages for investors (reforms began earlier, laws are better, debt is being paid), but Poland, with 36m people to Hungary's 10m, offers a far bigger future market.
The answer, businessmen say, lies in the living conditions.
It is hard to pay people enough to get them to live in Warsaw.
Nazi soldiers burnt the city to the ground in 1944, and it had the bad luck to be rebuilt, for the most part, by tasteless Stalinists.
Public transport now barely exists, the streets are filled with pot-holes.
Winters are grey, summers are hazy with pollution and the telephones are getting worse not better.
Some have suggested that, to attract foreign investment to Poland, the country's capital should be moved to Cracow.
Budapest, by contrast, benefits from crumbling but attractive architecture, and has dozens of new expense-account-friendly restaurants that happily take credit cards.
The climate is Balkan rather than north European; springtime is lovely.
It is possible, more or less, to make a long-distance telephone call.
One businessman from Chicago, in Budapest for three years, describes his ‘unbelievable luck’ in landing a job there.
A western management consultancy reports that one of its employees has already defected to a Hungarian company.
Such are the whims of westerners.
But the results show in the statistics: more than $1 billion invested in Hungary last year, less than $100m in Poland.
Well-laid plans are all very well, but things beyond the control of economists or politicians can make one country's reform happen faster than another's.
Reforming Eastern Europe
Dismal science
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN PRAGUE
NOT so long ago, Polish, Czechoslovak and Hungarian reformers met one another at secret border meeting points, carrying  sheaves of hand-typed documents.
These days they meet at conferences like one this week in Prague, sponsored by the Institute for Policy Research and the Centre for Institutional Reform and the Informal Sector.
This one was more highbrow than most, bringing together economists from all over Eastern Europe and the West as well.
Astonishingly, they all more or less agreed on broad policy.
No one much disputes the idea that reform will have to involve deregulation, demonopolisation, a tight monetary policy and, above all, fast privatisation.
Anyone who so much as hints at a ‘third way’ between communism and capitalism is considered naive; there is simply no time to try more experiments.
The economists agree that reforms should happen as fast as they are technically possible, whether ordinary citizens want it that way or not.
But the economists differ on the details.
Arguments rage over privatisation.
The Czechoslovak voucher scheme, which will apportion shares in state enterprises to the general public, was received with scepticism by the Poles (who want to do the same thing a different way) and with disdain by the Hungarians (who think state enterprises should simply be sold).
Many disagree about the sequence of reforms.
The Hungarians have put privatisation and foreign-trade liberalisation before currency convertibility; the Poles have done it the other way round.
Western economists tend to talk at length about theory; the easterners are mainly interested in practice.
This division closely mirrors the one between ‘regional specialists’ and other economists, many of whom have marked the way from Latin America to Eastern Europe with a trail of academic papers.
The ‘regional specialists’ gently remind their colleagues about the non-economic factors which affect economic reform: hostility towards western investment, popular reactions to price rises, the difficulty of changing management behaviour overnight.
The economists even argue over what to call the region.
‘Eastern Europe’ sounds as if it might include the unreforming Soviet Union.
‘Central Europe’ is too vague and precious.
One suggestion was FSEs (formerly socialist economies) or a variant, HSEs (historically socialist economies).
ECE (East Central Europe) was proposed, along with EME (emerging market economies).
No one hit upon a neater, nobler solution: the fast-reforming economies of Europe, or the FREE.
The balance of European power
FROM OUR BRUSSELS CORRESPONDENT
HE last time that the European Community tried to create a ‘political union’, 30 years ago, it all ended in tears.
General de Gaulle's plan foundered on Dutch fears that the new body would threaten Community institutions.
The same Franco-Dutch argument has become pivotal in the current inter-governmental conference on political union.
The 1985 Single European Act shifted the balance of power away from governments towards the European Commission.
More majority voting in the Council of Ministers made it harder for members to block laws; that strengthened the hand of the commission, which has the sole right to propose laws.
The European Parliament gained certain rights of amendment.
Now the balance is swinging back.
Jacques Delors, the commission's president, sees the commission's monopoly of initiative as the foundation of its power; it obliges the commission to lead.
But governments now believe that if they are to tackle new subjects at a European level they must tighten their control.
In foreign and security policy, and in interior-ministry collaboration, the commission will have no monopoly of proposal; nor will it have much say in carrying out policy.
For economic and monetary union (EMU), the commission is desperate to have the sole right of proposal in exchange-rate decisions and in policing macro-economic policy.
It will be humbled, and may even find that the EC monetary committee — which consists of mere central-bank and finance-ministry officials — will usurp its preparatory role for meetings of finance ministers.
The parliament faces a lowly consultative role in EMU and in foreign policy but will pick up new powers in normal EC business.
The European Council, the periodic summits of EC leaders, will be the real winner.
Most countries (including Germany and Britain) broadly back a French model that resembles the façade of a Greek temple.
The entablature, the European Council, straddles a series of pillars: the old EC, the new EMU, foreign and security policy, and interior-ministry co-operation.
The whole edifice will be known as the ‘European Union’(a term to note if you want to shine at dinner parties).
The Treaty of Rome will cover only the EC; the other pillars will be governed by new treaties.
The European Council began to meet in 1974, at the prompting of France, which wanted the EC to have a guiding authority similar to the French presidency's.
The new treaties will define that role and extend it.
In foreign and security policy the European Council will, like the French presidency, decide as well as guide; it will have links with the Western European Union, a defence pact of nine Community members.
France would give the European Council a secretariat.
Only Holland bluntly opposes this French design.
The Dutch foreign minister, Hans Van den Broek, sees it as a step back to ‘inter-governmentalism’— where the European Parliament does not count and where a weakened commission cannot stop little countries getting clobbered by big ones.
He also worries that any EC role in defence could weaken NATO.
The French sneer that, because Mr Van den Broek gets on badly with his prime minister, Ruud Lubbers, he cannot bear to see the summiteers running the show.
But Mr Van den Broek's concerns are based on deep-rooted principles that stretch back 30 years.
In February 1961 de Gaulle appointed a diplomat, Christian Fouchet, to chair a committee of EC governments on political union.
The ‘Fouchet plan’ that ensued called for a summit every four months; for foreign, defence and education ministers to meet regularly; and for a special secretariat.
In March 1962 the draft treaty was about to be signed by all six countries, when, at the last moment, de Gaulle changed the text.
Out went references to the Atlantic alliance and to ‘respect’ for the existing communities (economic, atomic, and coal and steel).
De Gaulle added economic policy to the goals of political union, which seemed to menace those communities.
Holland refused to sign, fearing that de Gaulle had a hidden agenda for the new body to rival NATO, to deter British entry, to undermine the communities and to enshrine their domination by France and Germany.
The Dutch were probably right, to judge from a handwritten note de Gaulle gave Chancellor Konrad Adenauer at that time: ‘The supernational organisms of the six, which tend inevitably and abusively to become irresponsible superstates, will be reformed, subordinated to governments and used for the normal tasks of the council and technical business.’
Strains of that thinking can be seen today in France's wish that the commission and the parliament should not become too powerful.
But Gaullists and Thatcherites should not get too excited.
President Mitterrand does not see the European Council, as de Gaulle saw the Fouchet plan, as a means of stalling European integration.
France stresses that, because the European Council has the people with clout, it can propel the Community forwards — as in Brussels in 1988, when it settled budget rows, and in Rome last October, when it gave the conference on EMU a mandate.
The European Council already has a life of its own that can act against national interests.
It generally works by consensus, so a country can veto its conclusions.
But in practice, if most countries want to go ahead with something, they may well ignore a lone dissenter.
The Rome conclusions on EMU are now viewed as a quasi-treaty — although Britain never signed them.
Mr Delors should not lament too loudly.
Although the balance of power is shifting against the commission, in absolute terms it will gain power.
The EC will extend its sway and decide more by majority voting.
In the new domains such as foreign policy, the commission will for the first time have a right to propose.
And the president already has a seat at the future high table, the European Council.
The new design for NATO
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN BRUSSELS
FOR two years NATO has been fretting about its new place in the world, if any, after the fading of the Soviet danger, if fade it does.
The alliance is now nearing a series of big decisions.
Work is progressing on a study that will affect the security policies of western countries for years to come.
France recently decided to take part in all of the study's three stages.
This will make agreement more difficult, but far more valuable when it comes.
NATO's permanent council is carrying out part one, on politics.
Part two, a study of a new strategy, is the responsibility of a group under Michael Legge, a Briton who serves as assistant secretary-general for policy and plans.
Part three, on new military arrangements, is the work of the military committee, the highest military body in the alliance.
At first it was hoped that the study could be ready this spring.
Now the goal is to complete it in time for an autumn summit.
In an ideal world the political framework and the broad strategy should have come first; then the military men would have designed a plan to fit them.
But the generals could not afford to wait, and started work well before they could get any useful political guidance.
They have been trying to design a new force structure that would both live within the expected budget cuts and be capable of responding effectively to all imaginable crises.
The large forces that most NATO countries fielded to guard the alliance against the Warsaw Pact provided enough flexibility to deal with most crises outside Europe, such as the Gulf war.
But, with sharply reduced forces, this flexibility will no longer come naturally.
It must be planned.
The details of NATO's new look are not yet settled, but the general shape is already clear.
In place of the ‘layer cake’ of eight allied army corps lined up along what used to be West Germany's eastern border, there will be maybe half as many.
Most will be farther back, although there may be some ‘guard formations’, perhaps a German corps, well forward.
The one American corps (down from the two that were there before the Gulf war) and a couple of German ones will probably remain national formations.
But one or two others will be multinational corps made up of three of four national divisions.
Some units will be maintained at full strength; others will rely on large numbers of reserves.
At least one high-readiness multinational corps is expected to be a rapid-deployment force that could be sent from central Europe to keep the peace or do battle elsewhere.
The whole corps would not necessarily go.
Any of its elements could be sent as part of a package, shaped either to the military job that needed doing or to the political reality of which countries were willing to join in.
It could go as a joint European-American force, or as a purely European one.
All NATO members now broadly accept that the alliance will continue to be their main defence against a threat to Western Europe; that its integrated military command will still control any military operations there; and that its commander will continue to be an American.
This will help towards satisfying one of the main goals of the new strategy: to maintain American troops and interest in Europe.
But the study must also decide on NATO's attitude towards other sorts of troubles, known collectively (if a trifle inaccurately) as ‘out-of-area’ conflicts.
There are three main sorts to worry about: disturbances in Eastern Europe; attacks on NATO countries from outside the old Warsaw Pact area (say, an attack on Turkey by Iraq); and, knottiest of all, conflicts such as the Gulf war, which fall outside the NATO treaty.
Much will depend on the role France is prepared to play.
There is little possibility of France rejoining the alliance's integrated military command, which it left in 1966; that would be a French political retreat.
If France moves towards greater participation in NATO, it must come into something new.
So the search is on for an acceptable new arrangement for increased French involvement in the military affairs of the alliance.
Some sort of association of the Western European Union (WEU) with NATO now seems part of the answer.
One idea is to set up alternative decision-making processes for ‘out-of-area’ operations.
The allies could decide which of these to use in a given crisis.
For example, the nine-member WEU (perhaps with the other five European NATO members sitting as observers) could decide on the operation of a European Reaction Force, at least part of which might be drawn from forces committed to NATO.
But the NATO council would deal with any use of a purely NATO Reaction Force.
The trick is to find a way of giving the Europeans enough of a feeling that they can pursue security policies of their own without at the same time forming a European defence association that would drive the Americans away.
A tall order, but the price of failure could be the end of collective security for the West.
Italy
March hare
FROM OUR ROME CORRESPONDENT
WHEN Italy's President Francesco Cossiga was first elected in 1985, he compared his largely ceremonial job to that of an English monarch.
‘My prerogatives’, he said with a touch of pride, ‘are similar to those of the Queen of England.’
Picture the public stupor were the queen to indulge in a 40-minute televised monologue, as Mr Cossiga did last week, in which she claimed the right to dissolve parliament, ‘even against parliament's will’.
Is Italy's president, as L'Espresso suggested earlier this month, ‘out of control?’
Mr Cossiga's televised remarks, in which he announced that he had no intention of accepting a cabinet reshuffle and might even call an early election, caused a political storm.
The prime minister, Giulio Andreotti, who was away at the time, was welcomed home on Monday March 25th by headlines announcing a showdown with Mr Cossiga.
By Tuesday it was all over.
After an hour-long meeting in the presidential palace, a hangdog Mr Cossiga announced that he and Mr Andreotti were in full agreement.
Mr Cossiga's televised outburst was the latest in a series of controversial incidents.
A year ago, having for the previous five years been one of the quietest incumbents of the Quirinale Palace, Mr Cossiga announced his intention ‘to shake a few pebbles out of my shoes’.
In September he startled Italians by lashing out at one of Sicily's most popular fighters against the Mafia, Leoluca Orlando, an ex-mayor of Palermo, who was guilty in Mr Cossiga's mind of damaging the Christian Democratic Party.
(Mr Orlando soon left it in order to found a new movement of his own.)
Then the leaders of the Lombard League, a new party that raked in millions of votes from frustrated northern Italians in regional elections last year, were branded men of ‘criminal, foolish and shameful’ political design.
Earlier this month Mr Cossiga publicly hurled the epithet ‘son of a…’ at a British journalist who described Italy's military contribution to the Gulf war as a ‘token force’.
Pleas in the press for more presidential self-control have only exacerbated an increasingly tormented Mr Cossiga, who seems to see plots on all sides.
He reacts strongly to any suggestion — and there have been several over recent months — that his emotional ups and downs are part of a manic-depressive syndrome.
Mr Cossiga is particularly sensitive on one score: his own part, as junior minister of defence, in setting up the secret counter-insurgency network known as Gladio.
Fearing that any investigation into this anti-communist network might be a prelude to his own eviction from the presidential palace, Mr Cossiga has tried to fight off all attempts to question him about Gladio.
The president is fond of repeating that the members of Gladio were ‘patriots’.
His more startling assertion in a long television interview last week that some members of the banned P2 masonic lodge were also ‘patriots’ brought Mr Cossiga within a hair's breadth of provoking a constitutional crisis.
During an improvised press conference last Saturday he complained, in a highly emotional manner, of an overpowering sense of political isolation before going on to suggest he might force an early election.
Although Mr Cossiga has now backed down, it was his most serious mishap to date.
He has said he is determined to remain in office until his term expires in July 1992, but Mr Andreotti's wobbly five-party government may find it ever harder to coexist with such a tempestuous president.
Bettino Craxi, whose Socialist Party is Mr Andreotti's Christian Democratic Party's main partner in government, has already upped the stakes.
A mere reshuffle, he says, is not enough.
He wants a new government, possibly with constitutional reform at the top of its agenda — including a blueprint for a stronger presidency, a job Mr Craxi wants.
BRITAIN
Tough at the top
With opinion polls showing a Labour revival, John Major faced his roughest ride since becoming prime minister.
Commons debates on the budget, poll-tax changes and a no-confidence motion allowed Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, to exploit Tory divisions and a gathering sense of public disillusionment with Mr Major's cabinet.
The prime minister's fourth-term vision failed to excite the party faithful at the Conservative Central Council meeting in Southport.
John Major juggled a pledge to privatise the rail and coal industries with plans for a citizens' charter to guarantee public services.
Nigel Lawson, a former chancellor, suggested that the government's indecision over the poll tax called into question its ability to govern.
The government was threatening to spawn a ‘son of poll tax’, he said.
A furious John Major hit back by telling MPs that his government had done the things Mr Lawson had wanted but failed to do.
Clean breaks
Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland secretary, told the Commons that formal Ulster talks could now go ahead between nationalists, Unionists and the British and Irish governments.
Mr Brooke said Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, was debarred from participation by its support for violence.
The Labour Party unveiled plans for a women's ministry, which would have a seat in the cabinet.
The ministry's brief would be to ‘make sure women's voices are heard loud and clear in the very centre of power’.
Unlike over the past 11 years, say.
The current-account deficit narrowed to £192m ($377m) in February, thanks to falling imports and rising invisible exports.
Brace yourself and chuck them out, urged National Tie Week.
According to the Guild of British Tie Makers, men form ‘strong emotional bonds’ with their ties and hang on to them, hoping they will come back into fashion.
Financial matters
Two men who helped George Blake, a Soviet spy, to escape from prison in 1966 could become the first British authors in recent history to have royalties seized by the courts.
They have written a book about the escape, but now face trial.
A High Court judge said they would earn nothing from the book, if convicted.
Derek Hatton, Liverpool council's former deputy leader, was charged with conspiracy to defraud the city's ratepayers.
Police investigating council property deals raided the offices of Wimpey, a construction group.
Wimpey is challenging the removal of documents.
Women have been left behind in the struggle for pay equality, said a report by the Equal Opportunities Commission.
Their average earnings have stayed at two-thirds of men's for the past decade, with employers segregating the sexes in job grades, said the commission.
The ‘very seed corn’ of Britain's science base was being threatened by panic cash cuts forced on research councils, said a House of Lords committee report.
The government announced a pilot scheme to issue 45,000 training vouchers in 11 areas.
The vouchers will be worth £1,000 or more, depending on the youngster's requirements.
They will be issued by Training and Enterprise Councils to school-leavers, who will present them to employers offering training or to training centres.
Cruel blows
The poor are getting poorer no matter what the government says, said a report from Bristol University.
The study claims that the real incomes of the poorest 20% of the population fell by an average of £160 ($275) in 1979–89.
New crime figures for England and Wales confirmed 1990 as the worst year on record, with recorded crimes up 17% to more than 4m.
The biggest rise was in property-related crime, especially burglary and car-theft.
A march through central London to mark the anniversary of last year's poll-tax riot passed off peacefully.
Disappointed protesters complained that the government had reformed the tax just to spite them.
Rover's return
Living out of a suitcase away from home and family has become one of the main causes of stress among businessmen, concluded a survey by the Confederation of British Industry.
The Kennel Club launched a health-care plan to allow dog owners to get cheap hi-tech treatments like cancer therapy and cataract surgery for their pedigree pooches.
The glad tidings coincided with news of the first dog, a spaniel, to be fitted with a cardiac pacemaker.
BRITAIN
God appears in Knightsbridge
A BIBLE'S throw from Harrods, guitar-strummed folk songs waft out of a church.
The congregation sways, hands aloft.
American Pentecostalism has travelled a long way from its roots in the southern states.
At Holy Trinity, Brompton, all four priests are Old Etonians, one of the churchwardens is a former private secretary of Margaret Thatcher's, and it is not unknown for members of the congregation to go on to a wedding reception in St James's Palace.
At the end of one recent service, a message from a clairvoyant told of three men suffering from chest pains; not three but four sufferers stepped up to the altar to be healed.
A prayer was said for Iraqi soldiers, that they might die with the name of Jesus on their lips and be saved from eternal damnation.
Somebody stood up to give a spontaneous and emotional ‘prophecy’.
Speaking in tongues, as the disciples did at the original Pentecost, is said to be commonplace.
Much of this new energy is imported: Holy Trinity follows the ideas of a Californian preacher called John Wimber, a man with no formal theological training who leads a body called the Renewal Movement.
But a native evangelism is also flourishing.
George Carey, installed as Archbishop of Canterbury on March 27th, belongs to that wing of the Church of England.
His interpretation of the New Testament's essentials is literal: ‘I believe’, he says, ‘that Jesus was crucified, buried and that his cold, dead body was raised alive by God.’
He has been friendly with Holy Trinity's vicar since teaching him at theological college in Durham.
The Church of England has declared the 1990s to be the Decade of Evangelism; but some people think evangelism is already doing too well.
Attendance at traditional churches declined by 9% between 1979 and 1989, but the guitar-strummers' numbers are swelling.
Not only is fundamentalism growing fast outside the Church of England — attendance at the independent churches that practise this sort of Christianity increased from 44,000 in 1979 to 108,000 in 1989 — but there is also a boom inside the Church of England itself, at places like Holy Trinity.
Holy Trinity's young recruits are put on a ten-week course, followed by a residential weekend concentrating on ‘the person and work of the Holy Spirit’.
The time and dedication demanded do not seem to put people off: the course is so popular that it has had to shift from a country house to a conference centre on an industrial estate in the Midlands.
Activism works.
Until recently, one of Holy Trinity's neighbouring churches was closed, and two others looked like going under.
Since 1985, when this team started its evangelising, they have been filling up; congregations sometimes top 1,000.
Not everybody is in tune with the guitar-strummers.
Some Church of England traditionalists feel ill at ease among the open-necked shirts.
The church's numerous middle-of-the-roaders are concerned: although the charismatic movement tends to be pro-women (the new Archbishop of Canterbury got into trouble for saying it was a ‘heresy’ to suggest that women should not conduct services), it is also anti-abortion, anti-homosexual and preoccupied with the devil.
Satan must be pleased to be so fashionable again.
Health-service reforms
Watered-down medicine
A year ago, the proposed health-service reforms were plainly losing the government almost as much support as the poll tax.
On April 1st they will be implemented.
Why has the row gone away?
THE biggest shake-up in the national health service since its foundation in 1948 is about to take effect.
Health authorities will now start buying health care from a range of competing providers.
Hospitals that have chosen to opt out of health-authority control and become self-governing will start running their own affairs.
General practitioners (GPs) who want to run their own budgets will be able to do so.
When this scheme was unveiled, it terrified laymen (including many Tory MPs) almost as much as it infuriated doctors.
It lopped points off the government's rating in the opinion polls.
The Labour Party had a merry time playing up the problems and piling up the votes.
But the launch is not being heralded by strikes in the hospitals or protests in the streets.
Labour will limit its protests to the predictable press conferences.
And the mighty British Medical Association (BMA), whose harrumphing once looked like destroying the programme, has been reduced to squabbling about doctors' terms of employment.
Margaret Thatcher deserves some of the credit for this sudden silence: in her last cabinet reshuffle she replaced the pugnacious Kenneth Clarke with the patrician William Waldegrave.
Mr Clarke made no secret of his contempt for the BMA: Mr Waldegrave is a regular visitor to its palatial headquarters.
Mr Waldegrave told doctors what they wanted to hear: they were doing a wonderful job and the NHS was not being turned into a tawdry commercial business.
But the greatest contribution Mrs Thatcher made to selling the reforms was to lose the Tory leadership.
Mr Waldegrave admits that this has made his job a lot easier.
Every speech John Major makes about improving the public services and creating a social-market economy helps to comfort nervous voters.
Mr Major does not look like a prime minister with a secret agenda up his sleeve.
He even uses the NHS himself, unlike his combative predecessor.
So far the Labour Party has given Mr Waldegrave a remarkably easy ride.
(He has much more to fear from the Thatcherite rump, which has nicknamed him ‘our flexible friend’.)
Labour strategists claim their recent silence has been deliberate: they do not want to divert public attention from the poll-tax pantomime.
There are more solid reasons, though.
The Labour Party is paying the price for over-stating the case against the reforms.
Robin Cook, the shadow health minister, insisted that the Tories were preparing to dismantle the NHS.
Old ladies worried that hospitals would be either closed down or privatised.
But on April 1st the worriers will find that the NHS is still firmly in the public sector — financed from taxation and free at the point of delivery.
Mr Cook may prefer silence to eating his words.
What of the BMA?
Last year it mounted a formidable campaign against the reforms: posters mocked Mr Clarke for ignoring medical advice, and leaflets in every surgery criticised the government for undermining the NHS.
Today the BMA's grumbles are muted.
It claims that it is as unhappy as ever with the reforms: the NHS is still short of cash and the reforms are much too bureaucratic.
It has simply changed its strategy, abandoning tub-thumping for negotiation.
The truth is that a triumphant BMA is gloating.
The reforms have been diluted.
The government has backed down on performance-related contracts: doctors in inner-city areas will have to meet lower targets to win their bonuses.
At first the health authorities will have to place their contracts where they have placed them in the past.
Opted-out hospitals will not be able to borrow on the capital markets or pay junior staff more than other hospitals.
In the first year, GP budget-holders will have to return some of their savings if their budgets prove too generous.
The London regions have temporarily been exempted from plans to finance all health authorities on the basis of the size and health of their populations — the idea at the heart of the reforms.
These days the buzz phrases in the Department of Health are equal access for everybody and winning more resources.
The health service may have acquired a new set of Thatcherite clothes: the bulky form beneath is still that of Nye Bevan.
Rifkind tries to build a model railway
The government thinks it can see how to sell the railways piecemeal to the private sector.
It is less clear how to introduce real competition
JOHN MAJOR is determined to sell British Rail.
He said so again on March 23rd.
But his Privatisation Express has many features that are lurchingly familiar to the average London commuter.
It is running late; it is overcrowded (with expert consultants); and the public is being given no information about its route.
Things had been moving so slowly in recent months that some Conservative MPs, like Robert Adley, the railway buff who chairs the Tories' backbench transport committee, were convinced that privatisation was about to be dropped altogether.
But the prospect of an early general election has concentrated minds.
A committee of three ministers — Roger Freeman (transport), Francis Maude (Treasury) and John Redwood (trade and industry)— has been working on the railway sell-off; and the group drafting the Tory election manifesto has been trying to distil the trio's ideas into an appetising few paragraphs.
Mr Freeman told the Commons on March 13th that no conclusions have yet been reached about the ‘timing or method’ of privatisation; but his boss at the transport department, Malcolm Rifkind, has already rejected some ideas.
Against the advice of BR's senior managers, he has decided not to sell BR in a single lump.
He fears this would merely create a private-sector monopoly and would not improve the service.
Mr Rifkind is also opposed to a scheme for selling BR in seven regional packages, originally canvassed by the Centre for Policy Studies as a romantic way of returning to the pre-1948 system.
Mr Rifkind believes it would be foolish to split BR by region when the present management has split it by business; besides, the government would have to subsidise all the privatised regions, since none of them makes money.
The current thinking is to sell off freight services first.
Freight, already profitable, should boom as (a) road congestion rises;(b) the opening of the Channel tunnel cuts the cost of trans-Europe rail trips; and (c) new technology makes it easier to switch piggy-back trailers between lorries and trains.
BR has been slow to exploit the opportunities now opening up.
Only last year it suddenly shut its Speedlink service for individual wagonloads of freight.
Too many of its customers, from the newspaper industry to the Post Office, have been shifting to lorries because rail is unreliable.
Richard Hope, the editor of Railway Gazette, says that ‘the railways are failing and failing badly, especially in international freight.’
Private companies have already shown they can do better.
A quarrying firm in the West Country, Foster Yeoman, now runs 35 private trains a week to deliver its stone.
It uses a BR crew.
Another firm, Tiger Rail, is bidding to run three trains a week to carry china clay from Cornwall to Scotland.
And Charterail, a private company in which BR has a 25% share, has developed a fast-growing national business by offering a door-to-door lorry-and-train service.
Passenger services will be trickier to privatise, both because they are less profitable and because, unlike wagons, passengers have votes.
Inter-City, the next candidate for privatisation, makes money, so it should not be too hard to find a buyer.
But Regional Railways — with 47% of the network and £500m ($875m) annual subsidy — will be much tougher to market.
Mr Rifkind's inclination is to split it up and offer it for tender, perhaps line by line, in the way that provincial bus services have been deregulated.
Bidders would be guaranteed a public subsidy, but would have to compete on price and quality.
Companies that were awarded routes might have the right to run services for, say ten years, before their franchise would be put up for sale again, like ITV companies.
A snag is that breaking up the network into such small pieces might produce large diseconomies of scale in buying rolling-stock.
Network South-East, the London commuter system, remains a headache.
The government wanted to stop subsidising it by the end of 1991–92, but has now given up that idea.
Ministers also accept that it would be difficult to allow competing services into each London rail terminal.
Instead, they hope to divide the network into several sub-regional groups in the hope that, say, Marylebone commuter trains would compete with Waterloo trains by a mysterious process known in Whitehall as ‘emulation’: Waterloo commuters, envying the breakfasts served on Marylebone trains, might perhaps demand fatter sausages.
Many other questions remain unanswered.
The first is whether ownership of the national track should be split off from the running of services, as recommended by Kenneth Irvine of the Adam Smith Institute.
Such a split should clarify the distribution of costs and make it easier for competing train services to run on the same track.
Opponents point out that competing services ran on Britain's first railway, the Stockton-Darlington line, opened in 1825, but were abandoned as impractical after 1830.
Still, the idea is now gaining respectability.
The European Commission last year proposed that all EC railways should separate track operation from running services, in the hope that it would then be easier to open up national railways to outside competition.
And Sweden successfully split its railway track from services in 1988.
Mr Rifkind is lukewarm about the idea.
He fears that a private-sector British track-owner would be a monopolist with little incentive to be efficient.
Besides, as BR executives cogently argue, the quality of the track and the services that run on it are increasingly linked.
The next advance in signalling will be the introduction of computers-in-the-cab.
Would that count as a track cost or a running cost?
Some Tories fondly imagine that privatisation will eliminate the need to subsidise the railways.
Not so.
Although the public subsidy has been halved in the past ten years, the growth of passenger traffic has stalled with the recession.
Meanwhile property sales are in the doldrums, and the government has reneged on its agreement to let BR raise commuters' rail fares by a real 3.5% a year.
On top of this BR now has to find an extra £100m a year to pay for an unnecessarily large safety programme, one result of the Clapham rail crash.
With these developments, BR reckons it may need an extra £300m from the government to balance its books for 1990–91.
The case for privatising British Rail has little to do with saving money: private companies will probably have to waste even more on safety to avoid charges of putting profits before lives.
Nor is the sale of BR's divisions likely to raise much for the Treasury.
Although its assets are notionally worth £10 billion, their market value as a going concern must be far less.
Rather, the best argument for privatisation is that it would allow the railways to expand their services.
Investment would no longer be subject to an annual ceiling set by the Treasury (which, for example, is currently stopping BR buying up-to-date Networker trains to help relieve congestion on lines in Kent).
Innovation would be encouraged; new lines might be opened more readily.
Above all, privatisation ought to oblige staff to start serving passengers better.
Although BR is belatedly training its staff to do just that, it is unlikely to have much effect.
In a privatised railway, the staff could be as customer-minded as the cabin crews of British Airways have become, perhaps with encouragement from profit-linked bonuses.
And the cosy civil-service culture of the railway, where poor managers are never sacked, could be turned upside down.
BR has indeed become more commercial over the past decade.
Its subsidies are now tiny by comparison with Europe (Italy subsidises 91% of the cost of its rail commuters, Britain less than 10%); its trains are faster than every national service apart from France and Japan.
And it is even becoming reliable: 90% of BR's commuter trains arrive within five minutes of schedule, against only 65% in Germany.
But privatisation offers the best hope of producing even bigger gains in the years ahead.
Labour can win
THESE have been feverish, unhappy days for John Major.
Few of his ministers are saying, even in private, that they expect him to lose the next election.
Economic recovery will save the day, as inflation tumbles later this year, they assure one another.
But there is a nervousness about, a fit of the jitters that means the Easter holiday comes just in time.
The overt problem has been, as usual, the poll tax.
Michael Heseltine's ungainly hybrid replacement received a poor reception from Tory activists gathered at Southport last weekend.
Ministers gave different interpretations of the hybrid.
Mr Major made a wooden speech.
Poor polls, one showing Labour ahead by six points, were followed by an attack by a former chancellor, Nigel Lawson, who questioned the government's ability to govern.
All quite predictable, say the Tory optimists.
Since the poll-tax disaster broke, the government has been — as one cabinet minister puts it — retreating from Moscow under hostile fire.
Mr Heseltine, seen by many Tory faithful as Margaret Thatcher's assassin, was never going to get a good reception in his first post-coup party speech.
‘He was standing there with the blood still on his cuffs,’ one MP explained.
Give it a few months, goes the cheery Tory argument.
By then the party's wounds will have healed.
The voters will be delighted with their lower poll-tax bills; falling interest rates will be delivering cheaper mortgages.
And if not in June, victory will arrive in the autumn, or in 1992, instead.
(The Tories' computer has produced a range of later options.
An election announcement in Mr Major's speech to the Conservative conference on October 11th, followed by a November 7th poll, is a popular one.)
Perhaps.
But not all economists think late 1991 and early 1992 will be a time of milk and honey.
Unemployment may still be rising quite sharply; underlying inflation will not be much lower than it is now; sterling may need to be supported by a rise in interest rates.
Two recent reports from UBS Phillips & Drew and Midland Montagu both plump for an early election, largely on economic grounds.
So the argument that Mr Major needs only to wait for the inevitable victory, after the inevitable economic recovery, should be taken with a fistful of salt.
And there is more to politics than economics.
People may vote with one hand on their wallets, but their guesses about future prosperity are tangled up with judgments of the competing politicians.
These judgments are always crude, occasionally wrong.
Caricatures tend to be sketched early, and then to stick.
For years, Neil Kinnock was seen by voters as kind but incompetent.
It has taken the Tories' current enthusiasm for copying Labour policies — and this week's signal from the Bank of England that it favours a form of credit controls — to start to blur that image.
Mrs Thatcher's withering contempt was far more damaging.
Now Mr Kinnock is trying for revenge, using the poll-tax confusion to portray Mr Major as a wimpish ditherer, or a dithering wimp.
This is not (only) vulgar abuse.
It is the lethal essence of the political art.
If it works, Mr Major has had it.
Mr Kinnock's caricature was coloured in by Mr Lawson.
He quoted a former French Radical prime minister, Pierre Mendès-France, ‘who said that ‘to govern was to choose'.
I agree with that.
To appear to be unable to choose is to appear to be unable to govern.’
To the extent that Mr Lawson was criticising the ‘son of poll-tax’ announced by Mr Heseltine, he was quite right.
Given the choice of a property tax or a modified poll tax — either of them offensive to a large swathe of Tory MPs, both of them defensible — Mr Major chose a bit of both.
The expensive, complex hybrid will come unstuck.
But Mr Lawson must have known that the timing of his words meant he was going much further than that.
Mr Major was being attacked by Labour as innately incompetent to lead.
By seeming to agree, Mr Lawson knifed his one-time Treasury assistant in the back.
Why?
Jealousy?
Or did Mr Lawson simply let his natural rudeness get the better of his judgment?
And the man is rude: in the same debate, he was questioned by John Townend, a Tory MP who, while not exactly Socrates in a suit, is a perfectly amiable cove.
Mr Lawson responded pleasantly: ‘I am glad that my honourable friend raised that issue because, although it is an absurdity, it is believed by many people other than my honourable friend, who understandably picks up things that he hears other people say.’
The dithering charge is mostly unfair.
Mr Major has taken plenty of decisions — Norman Lamont's budget was full of bold strokes.
But the local-tax fudge is dangerous because it concentrates attention on a great dilemma facing Mr Major: how do you lead a party that has just overthrown Margaret Thatcher?
If Mr Major had tried to copy her whip-cracking style, he would have failed.
He would have been acting out of character and trying on something his party had wearied of.
But as the Tory wagon-train breaks away from Mrs Thatcher's trail, Mr Major's gentler style inevitably means slacker reins.
Meanwhile, every Tory has a subtly different view about how sharp is the angle of divergence, so emphasising the impression of drift.
Small wonder some MPs ask: where is the party being driven?
Or even: is anyone driving at all?
One wry Tory, using a different metaphor, asks: ‘Whose is the hand on the hand on the tiller?’
(His answer is that the unseen hand belongs not to Adam Smith's market forces but to Chris Patten, the leftish party chairman.
That is hardly an answer that helps Mr Major.)
Part of the truth is that Mr Major is dog-tired, physically drained after his wisdom-tooth infection, the leadership campaign, the Gulf war, the poll-tax furore.
For those who wish to see, there are signs of a distinctive Major philosophy — some of it Thatcherite, some of it Labourish.
Given enough time, he can pull his party together.
He will be perkier, and more impressive, after a short break.
But time is limited.
Tory Central Office knows it needs to win back hundreds of thousands of skilled working-class voters who are no longer sure quite what (or who) the Conservative Party is for.
These were the people who deserted Labour in the 1980s and became Thatcher supporters, but were never Tories.
They owe Mr Major no automatic allegiance.
This week it is suddenly plain.
Yes, the Conservatives can lose.
Yes, Labour can win.
Eyebrow-raiser
THE governor of the Bank of England is living dangerously.
On March 21st Robin Leigh-Pemberton said he was confident that the Bank would eventually be independent of political control.
Only a few days later, in evidence to a parliamentary committee, he had the temerity to recommend controls on mortgage lending — in direct conflict with present government policy.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton reckons such controls might help to prevent another explosion in house prices and borrowing as interest rates fall.
Much of Britain's current economic mess is due to the surge in home borrowing in the late 1980s, much of which was spent on things other than houses.
The Bank of England's latest Quarterly Bulletin says Britain's system of housing finance is the least regulated in Europe.
Nowhere else, for example, can home-buyers borrow 100% of the purchase price.
The Labour Party has pledged that, if elected, it will introduce credit controls as an alternative to high interest rates.
While the party's definition of ‘credit controls’ is vague, it clearly has in mind reserve requirements on banks.
Without exchange controls, goes the standard retort, commercial customers could easily dodge such controls by borrowing from abroad.
This, though, hardly applies to the home-loans market.
Several economists in the City reckon that controls on mortgages (not their own, of course) would be helpful, and that leakages would be small.
But limiting the size of a loan — to, say, a certain percentage of the value of a house or a multiple of the borrower's income — would mainly curb the borrowing by first-time buyers.
Better by far to tackle equity withdrawal on big loans, where better-off house-buyers borrow £20,000 more than they need for a house-purchase, to buy that flashy car they have always wanted.
But how to do it?
Perhaps John Major, already well into the habit of stealing Labour's clothes, will come up with the right formula.
He ruled out credit controls when he was chancellor of the exchequer — but he also attacked the banks, in his 1990 budget, for their carefree personal lending.
He also threatened to impose guidelines, unless they took voluntary action.
They have been warned.
Horse racing
Looking for a better bet
As the flat season begins and politicians think about reforming racing, the toffs of the turf are whinnying and stamping their feet.
Ignore them
THE bookmaking barons like to be called Alfie or Len; the people who run the Jockey Club, racing's official regulator, prefer glossier titles.
Both camps have long been bound together by a shared interest in the punter's pound.
Now they are scrapping over the same pound — and over the betting levy, which the Horserace Betting Levy Board redistributes from punters to those who run the racing business.
Recently, some members of the Jockey Club have been throwing insults at the big commercial bookmakers and the state-run betting system, known as the Tote.
By earning millions from racing and giving pennies back, says the Jockey Club, the bookmakers are sucking the sport dry.
In reply, the bookies wonder whether managing a whelk stall might be a better-sized challenge for the Jockey Club's skills.
There is a particular reason for the current shouting-match.
Throughout the winter and into the spring, the home-affairs committee of the House of Commons has been discussing the future of the levy.
As the Jockey Club sees it, British racing is in terminal decline.
Racehorse owners recoup just a fifth of their costs, on average.
So they are quitting, along with breeders, in unprecedented numbers.
Trainers by the dozen are being forced to sell their stables.
The only thing that can save the sport in the country where it was born is a large injection of prize money.
Economic consultants are now being hired — by the Jockey Club and the influential Marquis of Zetland, for instance— to point out the obvious: British prize money is pretty paltry by international standards.
In Britain the average prize money per flat race last year was £7,700 ($13,000); in Hong Kong £17,000 and in Japan an extraordinary £66,000.
Through the levy, gamblers in Britain paid 0.9% on their bets, or £40m, to racing in 1990; in France, through the state-owned bookmaker, they paid five times that rate.
The solution, claim racing's blue-blooded interests, is to force the punter to pay more, either through a monopoly tote (the Marquis's wish) or a higher levy (the Jockey Club's).
That way, the Earl of Glenleisure and Johnny Stockbroker would be better kept in oats.
And more money might trickle down (they maintain, rather improbably) to those 50-year-old wage-slaves called stable-lads, who cost so much less to keep than the nags they look after.
Horse racing's decline was deepened by last year's collapse in bloodstock values.
Yearling sales brought in a third less than 1989's £70m.
But that decline came hard on the heels of the mid-1980s, when prices rose to absurd heights.
It has been accentuated by the Gulf war: Arab princes, not wishing to parade their sybaritic ways too openly these days, have vanished from the auction ring.
British owners used to blame the princes for making racing prohibitively expensive; now they blame them for making it prohibitively cheap.
Everybody is protesting too much.
The sport is actually in reasonable health.
Between 1980 and 1990 the average attendance at Britain's 67 racecourses grew from 4,600 to 4,900; the number of owners from 16,400 to 18,000; and the number of racehorses in training from 10,650 to nearly 13,000.
Betting turnover doubled, to £4.5 billion.
The average levy per horse rose from £1,640 to £2,700.
The average subsidy paid from the levy cash for each race meeting doubled, to £34,000.
A windfall of an annual £8m from satellite-television royalties dropped into racing's lap.
True, betting turnover is now set to shrink in real terms this year, and the levy with it.
In March the Levy Board said it would cut its contributions to prize money by a tenth.
Yet less subsidy is precisely what racing needs.
For the subsidy has encouraged amateurish management and an uncommercial approach.
Too many racecourses offer stale sausage rolls and queues for the Portaloo.
After 240 years, the Jockey Club has just got its first chief executive.
On course for the future?
It is a remarkable sign of mollycoddling that racing has kept its levy at all.
The levy probably survived because Margaret Thatcher — unlike the 19th-century Earl of Rosebery, who said he would rather win the Derby (he did that twice) than be prime minister (once, briefly)— was uninterested in racing.
Her first home secretary, William (now Lord) Whitelaw, was not one to draw her attention to it.
Though they resent it, Britain's biggest off-course bookmakers — Ladbroke, Coral and William Hill — all agree on the benefits of a levy.
Up to a point, the more money that racecourses spend, the more exciting the races, the more punters therefore spend, and so on.
The trouble is that the levy is an unsatisfactory mechanism for allocating cash.
Racecourses, in an effort to win more of the levy pot, lay on too many races with too few horses.
Gamblers disdain four-horse races.
If the parliamentary committee wishes to see Britain's racing transformed, it should forget about tampering with the levy rate.
Instead, it should recommend privatising the Tote — a state-owned hangover from the times before commercial betting was legal — and reforming the laws on gambling.
Since betting was legalised 30 years ago, bookmakers have not been allowed to do anything that might ‘stimulate’ a punter to bet.
By law, therefore, bookies' offices have to be seedy reminders of the 1960s — an outrageous imposition when, for many, the Saturday punt is the week's intellectual activity.
Bookmakers should be able to offer the service any way people want it — with pubs, cocktail bars or five-star restaurants attached.
The racing industry could help itself by improving what its new management consultants have taught it to call the ‘product’.
Sunday racing would do wonders; but when a bill to allow this came to a crucial vote in the House of Lords three years ago, the Jockey Club's then senior steward, Lord Fairhaven, did not bother to attend.
Even without Sunday racing, the sport could do much to make itself more interesting.
It could, for instance, spend more money on lowly flat races and less on the grander occasions, like the Derby, where the winner is anyway rewarded by high bloodstock values.
It could auction the on-course bookmaking pitches to the highest bidders, instead of charging an annual £10 fee that costs £20 to collect.
And it could move two of the biggest races of the flat and jumping seasons, the Derby and the Cheltenham Gold Cup, from their hallowed mid-week slots to a Saturday.
That move alone would be worth around £2m.
BUSINESS
Jack Welch reinvents General Electric — again
NEW YORK
On April 1st Jack Welch completes ten years as head of General Electric.
One of the most controversial — and praised — bosses in American industry, he now wants to make his firm ‘boundary-less’.
It will not be easy
THOUGH frequently touted as one of America's best managers, Jack Welch bristles at the word ‘manager’.
He prefers ‘leader’: a chief executive who provides vision and values.
For Mr Welch the difference is crucial.
He thinks most businesses are over-managed and under-led.
Generally people know more about their own jobs than their bosses do, he says.
The best thing managers can do is get out of their way.
Do not be tempted to dismiss such corporate homilies as boardroom hokum.
GE's record in the ten years since this restless Irish-American became the company's chief executive at the early age of 45 is impressive, especially considering GE's size and diversity.
Under Mr Welch's stewardship sales have increased from $26.8 billion in 1980, the year before he took over, to $58.4 billion in 1990, an annual growth rate of over 8% and a third better than inflation.
Profits in the same period have grown by 11% a year, from $1.5 billion to $4.3 billion.
The workforce has been slashed from 410,000 to below 300,000.
Return on equity has averaged nearly 19% a year.
After moulding GE so decisively, Mr Welch is determined to transform its culture and organisation into what he awkwardly describes as a ‘boundary-less’ company.
Mr Welch wants GE to be an enterprise where:(a) internal divisions blur, and everybody works as a team;(b) suppliers and customers are partners;(c) there is no segregation between foreign and domestic operations, and each GE business is just as much at home in South Korea and Paris, France, as it is in South Carolina and Paris, Texas.
Such a transformation may prove far more difficult to achieve than the chopping and changing of the past decade.
Despite its success, even Mr Welch's decisive restructuring has suffered lots of setbacks.
His purchase of Kidder Peabody soured when the New York investment bank's top deal-maker was jailed for insider trading.
Faulty compressors in GE's refrigerators cost the company $300m in extra warranty costs.
Mr Welch geared up the company's locomotive-manufacturing business for a much-ballyhooed revival in American railways that never happened.
His incursion into the sale of automated equipment to factories cost GE huge sums of money.
Nevertheless, Mr Welch is routinely cited as one of America's best businessmen, mainly because he has kept GE's huge juggernaut performing well while others have foundered.
Equally remarkable, Mr Welch has won his kudos not by turning around a firm in trouble but by matching the performance of his predecessor, Reginald Jones, who doubled sales and tripled profits in eight years.
Like all bosses of conglomerates, Mr Welch likes to call his firm something different.
GE, he says, represents ‘integrated diversity’.
Whatever the euphemism, GE is a classic conglomerate.
Its 13 main business lines, each large enough to be a Fortune-500 company, have about as much in common as ice cream and cement.
They stretch from aero-engines and power stations to the NBC national-television network to electric lighting to plastics to medical-diagnostic gadgets through to a huge near-bank, General Electric Financial Services.
The challenge for the chief executive of such a sprawling firm is to introduce a clear sense of direction and to get sales and profits to grow faster than the American, and preferably the world, economy.
Mr Welch earned his nickname ‘Neutron Jack’ when he committed GE to stick only with businesses that were number one or number two in their markets: a policy since copied by Siemens of Germany and Electrolux of Sweden, among others.
Those businesses that did not meet this exacting standard would, vowed Mr Welch, be ‘fixed, closed or sold’.
He has been as good as his word.
In the first Welch decade, GE sold $10 billion-worth of companies and bought $25 billion-worth.
It stopped making television sets.
It pulled out of mining and consumer electronics, and moved into medical equipment.
Big purchases included RCA (an entertainment group, one of whose subsidiaries was NBC), Kidder Peabody and, more recently, the Borg-Warner chemicals business and Hungary's Tungsram lighting company.
In knocking these businesses together and into shape, Mr Welch raised GE's annual growth rate in labour productivity from 1.9% in his first five years to 4.4% in his second five years by axing whole layers of managers as well as tens of thousands of factory and clerical jobs.
This has traumatised a company that traditionally gave its employees an implicit job-for-life promise.
And it has earned Mr Welch a reputation for arrogance and ruthlessness that he finds embarrassing.
GE, he insists, is ‘hard-headed but warm-hearted’, offering redundant employees job-placement help and retraining as well as generous severance benefits.
Though tinkering will continue, everybody at GE is relieved that massive restructuring seems to be over.
However, if the determined Mr Welch gets his way, building the boundary-less company could make the 1990s just as traumatic.
Internally, GE has already done much to dismantle the bureaucratic command-and-control systems that beset so many of America's big businesses.
Acting in line with his belief that ‘the people who are closest to the work really do know it better’, Mr Welch came up two years ago with an anti-bureaucratic device called ‘the work-out.’
At work-outs, people who often have no occasion to speak to one another during the day — hourly workers, salaried managers and union leaders — are summoned to the corporate equivalent of a New England town meeting.
The pioneering work-outs quickly developed into savage attacks on the worst examples of corporate bureaucracy — ten signatures on a minor requisition, artificial dress codes.
Managers were encouraged by corporate head office to eradicate such excesses at the work-outs, not to refer them to committees or put them through the proper channels.
This ploy was supposed to increase confidence in the system.
It did.
Once employees are satisfied that work-outs are not mere talking shops, they are eager to suggest ways their jobs can be done better.
GE welders, for instance, won permission to select and order the machines they use — purchasing decisions once reserved for the company's white-collared engineers.
So far, so good — but also so limited.
Mr Welch's other ‘boundary-less’ goals will be harder to achieve: partnership with customers and suppliers, and a truly global business.
GE's customers seem happy enough, but some suppliers, when guaranteed anonymity, say they are not.
They tell such horror stories as GE putting up sales teams from competing suppliers in the same hotel and then moving from room to room asking each supplier to think about reducing its bid for the contract.
Suppliers grumble that GE keeps their margins on contracts so thin that they have to cut corners to fulfil them.
This may fatten GE's profits but it sits oddly with talk about a partnership with suppliers.
Globally, GE has yet to tailor itself to fit its ambitions.
The company's overwhelmingly American board of directors and senior management still suffer from a not-invented-here arrogance.
Far from addressing such insularity, the work-out system as initially conceived tended to reinforce the parochialism of GE's managers by making them even more introspective.
The corrective that Mr Welch has prescribed is bold enough to suggest that his second decade as chief executive could be as radical as the first.
To supplement work-outs, he has come up with a global best-practices programme.
GE scours the world for companies which are better than GE itself at some specific aspect of business and then asks to pick their brains.
In return GE promises to share with them the knowledge it gains — in effect, to provide management-consultancy services for free.
Only businesses that are direct competitors are excluded.
Some companies GE has approached have said no; others have insisted on anonymity.
Most are flattered to be asked.
GE has gone to Ford for ideas on new-product development and employee involvement; to Hewlett Packard for ideas on partnership with suppliers and quality improvement; to Digital Equipment for ideas on asset management; to American Express for ideas on customer satisfaction; to Honda for ideas on product development.
The squad of operating managers that GE sends to each model company is kept small — typically no more than ten people per visit.
The case studies they produce later form part of the curriculum at Crotonville, the company's management-development school a few miles up on the Hudson river from New York.
A big snag remains.
The best-practices approach cannot address weaknesses until GE is ready to acknowledge them.
The uniformity of its top executives is the crucial case in point.
Mr Welch quickly acknowledges that GE has put up a sorry performance in having only four women among its 120 top people.
He is determined to find better ways to recruit and develop talented women.
Yet when he and other top men at GE are asked why the company has only one foreigner on its 19-member board of directors, they insist that this is no obstacle to making the company truly global.
Instead they tick off the names of influential foreigners in GE's hierarchy and cite the company's large international sales and profit figures.
They kid themselves.
Most GE managers are Americans who have spent nearly all their working lives with the company.
The figures on international operations are less impressively global on closer examination: GE's international revenues of $15.4 billion in 1990 turn out to include $6 billion of direct exports from the United States.
About 21% of the company's 298,000 employees work outside the United States (compared with 45% of IBM's 374,000 and 49% of Ford's 367,000).
Some GE businesses, like aero-engines and plastics, have always had a global outlook.
Others are developing one.
GE Lighting, Thomas Edison's 112-year-old business, was almost totally American until it acquired a majority stake in Hungary's Tungsram 15 months ago.
With the recent purchase of the lighting interests of Britain's Thorn EMI, it has increased its share of the European market tenfold, from 2% to 20%.
Other businesses remain as parochial as ever: appliances and broadcasting, for instance.
In other words, GE's global performance is patchy at best.
For the company to realise its ambitions, and to become a truly boundary-less organisation, Mr Welch will have to heed his own oft-quoted advice.
Face reality, even when doing so is painful.
Japan's aircraft makers
Out in the cold
TOKYO
JUST a year ago Japan's aircraft makers were confidently planning to grab 10% of the world market for commercial jets by 2000, twice their current share.
After decades of trying to become big competitors, they were determined to learn as much as they could as suppliers to America's Boeing, the world's biggest civil-aircraft maker, and then to stand on their own.
But Japanese companies' business with Boeing is now under threat, forcing them to rethink their strategy.
Some are even chasing orders from Airbus, Boeing's European rival.
With fewer defence contracts around, American aircraft manufacturers such as Rockwell and McDonnell Douglas have been pressing Boeing to redirect subcontracting work towards them and away from the Japanese.
Given America's recession, Japanese suppliers assume they will lose new orders to American rivals for political and protective reasons.
Another setback for Japan's aircraft makers is the coming gap in military orders at home.
Production of the Japanese industry's two principal profit earners — the F-15J fighter and the P-3C anti-submarine aircraft, both built under licence from the United States — will peter out in a few years' time.
After that there are no plans to build new aircraft except for the controversial FSX, a new support-fighter based on the American F-16 that Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is developing with General Dynamics of the United States.
Even the FSX has been plagued by delays, most of them political.
The first prototype is not expected to be airborne until 1998.
Until production on the FSX builds up, Japanese plane makers are going to be short of work.
Industry analysts at Crédit Suisse in Tokyo expect the military side of the aircraft business in Japan to stagnate between now and 1995.
A third problem for Japan's airframe firms is their failure to become full partners in Boeing's 777 project in 1990.
Boeing did offer Japan's big three airframe makers (Mitsubishi, Kawasaki and Fuji Heavy Industries) a chance to learn some of the tricks about selling big commercial jets — but at a price.
The Japanese firms have to share in more of the risk than they did as suppliers for Boeing's 767 model and yet will have only what is politely termed ‘project status’— ie, they will be contractors who can make suggestions but have little real clout.
Small wonder that Japan's aircraft industry is trying to reduce its dependence on Boeing.
Kawasaki Heavy Industries recently won an order from British Aerospace to supply skin panels for the A321 Airbus, Japan's first big order from the Airbus consortium.
Sumitomo Precision Products, a Japanese supplier of hydraulic pumps and propellers, also grabbed an Airbus contract for landing-gear parts from Britain's Dowty group.
Japan's leading textile maker, Toray Industries, is supplying carbon-fibre components to Airbus Industrie as well.
Meanwhile, the government is prodding Japan's aircraft firms to collaborate with more foreigners.
The Concorde-replacement project being promoted by the Society of Japanese Aerospace Companies, for instance, brings together nine manufacturers in six countries.
Such projects may be pie-in-the-sky, but at least they enable Japan's fledgling plane makers to rub shoulders with firms from Europe and the United States.
In one sense, though, Japan's aircraft makers are in a stronger position than many of their more experienced rivals abroad.
For them aircraft represent only a small part of their huge engineering and shipbuilding businesses.
And all of them are making so much money these days out of replacing the world's ageing fleet of oil tankers that they can accept losses on their aircraft business in order to keep their foot in the door for the day, however distant, when they can compete with their own aeroplane.
Europe's energy monopolies
What, me compete?
ANYTHING that pleases consumers, entrepreneurs, environmentalists and free-marketeers shines like a good deed in a murky world.
When it emanates from the European Commission in Brussels and casts confusion among Europe's biggest monopolists, puzzlement is added to dazzlement.
If the competition commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan, has his way, there may soon be an end to the state energy monopolies that dominate electricity and gas production in the European Community (EC).
In a surprisingly bold move, Sir Leon is threatening court action by June against governments in ten countries (only Germany and Belgium escape) on the grounds that their state energy monopolies distort cross-border competition in contravention of the EC's founding Treaty of Rome.
Sir Leon's goal is a single market in electricity and gas across Europe.
That, in turn, is supposed to reduce prices.
In a free market, polluting coal-fired power stations and unpopular nuclear ones should be less competitive because of rising environmental costs.
With luck they will be replaced by small, efficient gas-burning power stations built by new entrants to Europe's energy business.
Europe currently produces three-quarters of its electric power from nuclear and coal-fired power plants.
Expansion of either now faces fierce opposition from environmentalists.
So exploiting the capacity of existing stations has become a priority.
If peaks and troughs were traded more efficiently — ie, if stations could buy power from others when local demand is high, and sell to others when it is low — their theoretical 12% capacity margin might cope with further demand growth for years to come.
But that requires a real single market.
Formally, the road to a single energy market started with a directive last year that compelled countries to let electricity or gas pass through their grids or pipelines in transit from one neighbouring country to another.
But this common-carrier principle has produced little such trade because negotiations were soon bogged down in technical committees full of engineers from the very monopolies that stood most to lose from cross-border competition.
Now Sir Leon is determined to compel governments to open up their energy markets to supplies from other EC countries, even if the internal-distribution monopolies remain untouched.
Dismantling these will be the commission's next move.
Meanwhile, removing barriers to cross-border electricity and gas trade should start eroding the monopolies from within and benefiting consumers immediately.
The common-carrier directive on its own had a big flaw: it encouraged the flow of subsidised energy from one country to another.
So France, which built far too much nuclear capacity with cheap government-backed loans, exports electricity to Britain and Italy at absurdly low rates.
With international competition and new entrants, national monopolies such as France's will at least have to come clean about costs and pricing if only to prove that they are not breaching the Rome treaty's clauses against unfair competition.
Meanwhile state-owned energy monopolies have come up with their own solution to generating more electricity without angering local environmentalists: moving their power stations to Eastern Europe.
ENEL, Italy's electricity monopoly, is planning to build a 13,000MW gas-fired station in the Soviet Union: a quarter of the output will be sold to Italy.
EDF, France's electricity monopoly, and Framatome, its state-controlled nuclear-reactor builder, are using German and Italian money to build two 900MW nuclear plants in Hungary.
The Germans and Italians will be repaid in electricity.
Neat: the rich West gets the power; the poor East gets the power stations.
In America this ploy is known as the California syndrome, after the hypocrites who invented out-of-state nuclear power.
Brazil's coffee industry
Brewing a quota
IF THE members of the OPEC oil cartel think times are tough, they should consider the plight of coffee producers.
After their system of export quotas broke down in 1989, world coffee prices almost halved.
Many producers are eager to cobble together another market-sharing cartel, but so far have failed to recruit Brazil, the Saudi Arabia of the world coffee-market with a share just over 20%.
They may be about to get their way.
On March 21st Brazil's economics ministry stopped issuing permission to export the country's coffee, causing uproar at home, turmoil in the international coffee market and an insider-trading scandal that could prove embarrassing for the government of President Fernando Collor de Mello.
The economics ministry has kept mum about why it made its decision so abruptly, but most in the industry assume it is a first step towards rejoining an international quota system.
The move will not halt Brazilian exports immediately, because many exporters have received registration for shipments abroad up to a year in advance.
Brazil's experience of the free market has not been happy.
In 1987, two years before the coffee cartel collapsed following arguments over quota allocations, the country had enjoyed a record crop of 43m bags (a bag is 60kg).
World exports that year were 70m bags — of which Brazil's quota was only 16.5m bags, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit, a sister company of The Economist.
Without the restriction of a coffee agreement, Brazil had thought that it would be better able to increase its exports and regain its former market share.
In fact the abolition of quotas seems to have cost Brazil about $1 billion in lost revenues — though this is difficult to judge, because Brazilian production also dropped precipitously as poor weather, soil conditions and falling world prices cut output in marginal areas.
Nevertheless, some Brazilian coffee exporters have done well after being liberated from bureaucratic controls, which means that Brazil's coffee industry is now divided on what the country's next move should be.
In any case, restive exporters are unlikely to let the government maintain its ban on new exports for long.
Unfortunately for Brazil, even if the economics ministry succeeds in uniting the country's industry behind quotas, there will be  plenty of arguing before any international system can be set up.
With $1.5 billion of coffee exports last year, Colombia's share overtook Brazil's for the first time.
Other Latin American producers will also be reluctant to cut recently expanded exports to restore Brazil's earlier quota.
The high-quality arabica beans which they grow have become more popular than the robusta variety grown in Africa and, to some extent, in Brazil.
Oddly, consuming countries are also members of the International Coffee Organisation, which policed the old cartel.
They saw the cartel as a necessary evil to make the market less volatile and to restrain producers themselves from trying to corner the market in coffee futures.
Getting both producers and consumers to agree to any new set of quotas is likely to take months, perhaps years, of haggling — one reason why coffee prices fell back within hours after jumping 15% on the news of Brazil's ban on new exports.
There is no shortage of coffee.
Nevertheless that blip was long enough for someone to make a tidy profit.
The daily volume of coffee-futures contracts on the Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange in New York leapt from 8,000 on a typical day to 15,000 on the day before the ban.
American officials are investigating whether there was any insider trading.
Brazil's eventual choice is clear, if unpalatable: either forgo a quota system which could help raise and stabilise prices, or enter the quota system but formally give up market share to other producers.
The entertainment industry
Not so thrilling
LOS ANGELES
BILLY CRYSTAL introduced this year's Oscars by reflecting that ‘no Americans are fighting anywhere in the world — except at Paramount.’
For all its claims to have put its house in order, America's second-biggest export industry refuses to grow up.
Last week Frank Mancuso, Paramount's long-serving studio chief, left the company and promptly issued a writ claiming $45m in damages.
Martin Davis, Paramount's autocratic chairman, had appointed Stanley Jaffe as chief operating officer without first consulting Mr Mancuso.
How rude.
Such boardroom pique may not be unique to Hollywood, though it is characteristic of the shenanigans that have always plagued the entertainment industry.
What makes this behaviour more worrying is the fact that the industry is now dominated by recently-assembled global media conglomerates or big electronics firms who can ill afford it.
Japan's Matsushita and Sony have each invested more than $5 billion over the past few years in America's entertainment business, while Time and Warner have merged in the belief that big companies can best exploit a proliferating array of new media.
Unfortunately such empire-builders seem to have overlooked the fact that selling the same names and images a thousand different ways also hands unprecedented power to film and pop stars, whose soaring demands have sent movie and recording costs spiralling.
Last year the average cost of making a picture rose 15%, to $26.8m; and the cost of releasing it rose 25%, to $11.6m.
Despite lots of talk about cutting costs, each of the top studios currently has at least one money-losing blockbuster on its books.
The most startling example is ‘Batman’, one of the most successful films in recent years, which has made a loss (see table) according to a recently leaked profit-and-loss statement.
How could this happen?
Part of the answer lies in the $112m listed as ‘negative and advances’.
This includes the actual production cost of the movie (probably around $50m) and advances under ‘gross profit’ participation clauses awarded to ‘talent’, such as Jack Nicholson who, perhaps appropriately, played a villain called ‘The Joker’.
These clauses give the talent a percentage of the movie's gross receipts.
Often these percentages rise along with the film's revenues.
As a result, Mr Nicholson himself may have received more than $50m.
Even so, Warner may have made a ‘profit’ out of the film after all, by charging itself a huge distribution fee.
Film actors are not the only ones getting vastly rich: some pop stars command sums that would have been unthinkable only a decade ago.
In 1977 the music industry gaped when Prince received $1m to make three albums for Warner Brothers.
This month Janet Jackson signed a deal with Virgin Records to make the same amount of music for more than $30m.
And on March 20th her brother Michael completed his long-running negotiations with Sony.
The details of the contract remain secret, but industry insiders speculate that Mr Jackson will receive more than $110m for six records.
Both Virgin and Sony are taking big gambles on the Jacksons.
In Janet's case, the success of her two latest albums, which sold a combined total of 14m copies, are no guarantee of future hits.
Even the biggest stars rarely sell 6m copies (as Janet must do if Virgin is to make a profit) for more than a couple of records.
But it is Michael Jackson's deal which may set precedents the music business will later regret.
As part of a sweeping agreement, Mr Jackson will do more than make music for Sony; he will also run his own record label, Nation Records, under the auspices of a new media company, the Jackson Entertainment Complex, a 50–50 joint venture with Sony Software.
And he will appear in at least one feature film for Columbia, which Sony owns.
As a singer, Mr Jackson is a certifiable megastar.
Though he has not released a record in five years, his success in the 1980s was astronomical: his three solo albums sold more than 75m copies altogether, his two home-videos 1m each.
But there is no evidence that Mr Jackson's popularity can be extended to other media, such as film.
Efforts at turning him into a sort of global brand — a line of shoes for L.A. Gear, toys called ‘Michael Jackson's Pets’— have failed miserably.
And the idea of this odd man, his chimpanzee and oxygen tent in tow, running a business is bizarre.
Magazine publishing
Rich and titled
EVEN nerds can read.
America's computer buffs spent $110m last year buying magazines about their machines, and computer makers another $670m advertising in them.
One of the publishers most successful at catering for this hunger for information is International Data Group (IDG), a firm that has grown big by breaking many of the management rules cherished by other big publishers.
Founded in 1967 by Patrick McGovern, a market-researcher, IDG has grown with the industry it covers.
Today the company boasts 150 titles in 49 different countries, each dealing with a slightly different aspect of the computer trade.
Last year IDG reported $431m in sales net of commissions to its ad-space salesmen, and made after-tax profits of $25m.
Remarkably, Mr McGovern has never had to sell equity in his firm to outside investors, though he has given away nearly 30% to motivate employees.
Mr McGovern also claims to be free of the banks, never having incurred much long-term debt.
How did he do it?
By staying decentralised, and by starting most new magazines cheaply in-house, rather than by acquiring them, which is what most publishers do if they want to grow quickly.
‘We think small is beautiful.
If people have total control over their business they will have the best possible emotional involvement,’ he says.
IDG is divided into 78 business units, each turning over about $6m a year.
The company as a whole employs 3,800 people, but only 22 of them are at corporate headquarters in Boston.
Every month each unit manager receives a report on how all the other units are doing.
Each unit is ranked according to profitability and profit growth, which helps spur competition between IDG managers and — with any luck — encourages them to learn from each other.
Units have lots of independence.
After being hired ‘I sat here for five weeks waiting for a telephone call,’ says Terry Chellew, the boss of IDG's British magazines.
But decentralisation ‘only works as long as you have got the right management team in locally,’ he admits.
His predecessor's pet title, Computer News, closed after running up big losses.
Although only financial control is centralised, IDG reaps some advantages from being a global group.
Articles can be shared by publications in different countries.
‘People are very cautious in their own country about talking to the press.
But then they fly off to Stockholm and have a couple of drinks.
They're amazed that what they thought was a quiet little Swedish story appears round the world the next day,’ says Mr McGovern.
Fewer will be amazed if Mr McGovern keeps bragging.
Despite its undoubted success, IDG has lost parts of its core home market for many of the same reasons it has succeeded abroad.
America's two most popular PC magazines, PC Magazine and PC Week, are both owned by a rival, Ziff Communications.
IDG never spent the money necessary to make InfoWorld, IDG's biggest PC title, competitive, claims one former employee.
According to Communications Trends, a market-research firm, Ziff held 37% of the American market for computer magazines in 1990, up from 34% the previous year.
IDG's share has stuck at 27%.
In order to expand away from America's competitive magazine market, Mr McGovern has started spending his money in some new, riskier ways.
In 1990 he launched ten titles in Eastern Europe and Russia.
This year he plans still more.
Last April he spent $25m purchasing a small chain of PC-training schools in America.
Computer-training is a fast-growing market, but a very different one from publishing.
Like most successful independent entrepreneurs, Mr McGovern loves talking big about his company.
In 1987 he predicted that IDG's sales would reach $1 billion in 1990.
Now the $1 billion goal has shifted to 1993 and he talks of $5 billion by 2000.
Again, like most successful entrepreneurs, he knows the value of showmanship.
Employees' Christmas bonuses are handed out personally.
At a managers' jamboree in Beijing, he dressed up as Confucius.
In Boston he was Benjamin Franklin.
To his senior executives' chagrin, Mr McGovern always flies economy class and is proud of it.
Maybe so, but he splashes out when he gets there.
The Economist interviewed him in a chintzy suite at Claridge's.
Tycoonski
WARSAW
CONTRARY to popular belief, not all Poles are penniless factory workers perpetually on strike.
Wprost, a Polish weekly, recently published a list of the 100 wealthiest Poles, revealing who managed to make money and how during 45 years of Communist rule.
Topping the list is Barbara Piasecka-Johnson, who does not really count: she inherited her $550m fortune from her husband, chairman of America's Johnson and Johnson company, whom she met while working as a maid in his house.
At number two is Wojciech Fibak, who turned his professional-tennis earnings into a $50m property empire and a unique collection of 19th-century Polish art.
The real entrepreneurs begin at number three with Piotr Buchner, who is the co-owner of import-export firms in Poland, Britain, Switzerland and Panama, and number four, Aleksander Gawronik, a former money changer and self-made banker.
He founded the Bank Poznanski, one of Poland's first private banks, and now estimates his monthly income at several hundred thousand dollars.
Sixth on the list is Henryk Stoklosa, a senator whose fortune comes from an animal-waste-rendering business which has an estimated monthly turnover of $2m.
In numbers seven, 13 and 66 are a clothing-manufacturer, Leonard Prasniewski (who is said to fly to his summer home by helicopter); Mieczyslaw Wilczek, a meat-packer; and an ex-bureaucrat, Ireneusz Sekula.
All are currently co-owners of a mysterious consulting firm called Pol-Nippon, a Polish-Japanese joint venture that, among other things, is bidding to build a refinery and port near Gdansk.
Mr Wilczek was best known as minister of industry under Poland's last Communist government.
Mr Sekula is best remembered as vice-premier in the same government.
Both still have close ties to Poland's old Communist Party, as do most of the other top 100.
Many of those engaged in ‘export’ were cheating customs regulations; many of those involved in ‘trading’were cheating state companies.
One who does not have ties to the old regime is ninth on the list: Janusz Lekszton, a 29-year-old Gdynia-based entrepreneur whose firm, EL-GAZ, produces gas stoves, pipes and other building materials.
Mr Lekszton's future plans include a private television station and an airline.
Other brave souls fought regulations and anti-capitalist prejudice to produce wire, cosmetics, costume jewellery, doors and windows, spectacle frames, potato crisps — all cheap consumer products which big state companies overlooked or made badly.
There is one media mogul: number 92, Joanna Stolarska, publisher of the Polish edition of Playboy.
Presumably for tax reasons, most refused to list their incomes and the magazine compiled its list with educated guesses, as Forbes and Fortune do with their much longer, global rich-lists.
But the Polish 100 are getting richer.
When asked what cars they preferred to drive, most named Mercedes and BMW, with one or two expressing a fondness for private aircraft.
Tricks of the trade
The huge current-account imbalances of the 1980s are disappearing fast.
Good news?
Maybe.
But be warned: trade flows are less and less useful as indicators of economic performance
BOTH America and Britain will probably run current-account surpluses in one of the next few months.
A couple of years ago this would have sounded like fiction; soon it may be fact.
America is likely to have a current-account surplus in the first or second quarter of this year, thanks to the $40 billion-50 billion promised by foreign governments to help pay for the cost of the Gulf war.
These payments are included in official transfers in its invisibles balance.
America's visible-trade balance is also shrinking, so some forecasters are expecting a current-account deficit as small as $20 billion-30 billion (0.3% of GNP) for 1991 as a whole.
Meanwhile, Britain's current-account deficit of £20 billion ($31 billion, or 3.6% of GDP) in 1989 fell to an annual rate of only £4.1 billion in the six months to February, and the odd monthly surplus may soon appear.
Germany's current account, which shifted into deficit in January, is also likely to be near balance for the year as a whole, while Japan's current-account surplus is now running at a quarter of its 1986 level.
Indeed, the average current-account balance (ignoring whether the balance is a surplus or deficit) of the big seven industrial economies is forecast to fall to only 0.6% of their collective GNP this year, down from a peak of 3.0% in 1986.
Economists and politicians are already celebrating the disappearance of these huge external imbalances — even those who only a few years ago claimed that current-account deficits did not matter.
The shrinking of trade imbalances is welcome, not least because a smaller American deficit and a smaller Japanese surplus will still the clamour of protectionists.
But the fact remains that current-account balances are becoming less and less helpful as a guide to economic performance, let alone as a goal for economic policy.
Current-account imbalances caused fewer headaches than many economists predicted in the 1980s.
This was partly because the increasing integration of world capital markets has made it easier to finance current-account deficits.
When exchange rates were fixed and capital movements were restricted, a current-account deficit was financed mainly by running down limited foreign-exchange reserves.
Today, with highly mobile international capital, large deficits can be sustained for much longer.
But financial liberalisation and the greater integration of the world economy have not only made current-account deficits easier to sustain; they have also made trade flows less useful as an indicator of national competitiveness.
As a result of the expansion in foreign direct investment, trade deficits are no longer purely national concepts: a large chunk of a country's exports and imports may be accounted for by foreign firms with bases there.
The gross outflow of direct investment abroad by the five big OECD economies increased sevenfold between 1983 and 1989.
One of the driving forces behind this recent expansion is the growth of services.
Unlike goods, many services, such as hotels and restaurants, cannot be traded; instead, companies have to establish businesses abroad.
Foreign direct investment by manufacturers has also grown rapidly over the past decade as firms chased lower costs, moved closer to their markets and tried to dodge protectionist barriers.
Today a car manufacturer might make engines in one country, steering wheels in another and then assemble the car in a third.
This integration of production across national borders tends to increase the overall volume of world trade because a good changes hands at various levels of production and not just at the final stage.
In a book published last year by the Royal Institute of International Affairs, ‘Global Companies and Public Policy’, DeAnne Julius estimated that trade between firms and their overseas affiliates accounts for more than half of all trade between OECD countries.
A third of America's exports go to American-owned firms abroad.
Another third is accounted for by the goods shipped by foreign firms in America to their home country.
There is another way in which trade figures today mean less than they once did.
Firms can choose to supply an overseas market either by exporting to it or by locating production there.
Locally produced sales by American firms in Japan, however, do not count as exports, nor do their local purchases of inputs count as imports.
But from the firm's point of view the local sales of a subsidiary are as much foreign sales as any export is.
On this basis, Ms Julius reckons that the total foreign sales of American companies are five times the value of their recorded exports.
And 11 of the 12 biggest OECD countries sell more in America through foreign subsidiaries based there than through exports.
If America's ‘trade’ balance is measured on the basis of nationality of ownership rather than residency (ie, adding the sales, net of local purchases, of overseas subsidiaries to the recorded trade balance and deducting all intra-firm flows to avoid double counting), then in 1986 America's recorded visible-trade deficit of $144 billion is transformed into a $57 billion surplus.
Doing the same calculations today would probably give America the world's biggest trade surplus.
Now that capital and entrepreneurship are free to cross borders, the old trade measures may conceal as much as they reveal.
National competitiveness — if that is defined as the ability of a country's firms to compete in world markets, whether through export or overseas production — may be more important, at least to businessmen.
The more a nation's companies locate factories abroad, the smaller will be that country's recorded exports, yet its manufacturers may still be expanding their share of world markets.
Whether this is a better measure of national competitiveness is still unclear.
It would find few backers among politicians worried about jobs and living standards rather than market share.
Foreign direct investment will go on growing, and probably faster than trade.
In which case, international rules on competition policy and direct investment will start to replace trade policy as the most contentious areas of economic relations.
Come back, Waltons
NEW YORK
MORALISTS may bemoan the decline of the traditional American family.
But the companies that sell consumer goods in America feel real grief at its passing.
They can no longer rely on conventional market research to predict accurately the spending habits of ageing baby boomers or their children.
This has huge commercial consequences: household-related spending accounts for 20% of America's GNP.
According to figures from the Census Bureau, among all households the share of traditional homes (a married couple with one child younger than 18 living at home) has declined from 40% in 1970 to 26% last year.
But the reason that market researchers have been thrown a baby-boomerang by this goes beyond rising divorce rates and smaller families.
Fewer Americans are marrying at all, according to Dick Hokenson, a demographer at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, a New York stockbroker.
He reckons that 20% of the baby-boom generation will never marry.
The figure for all preceding generations is 6%.
Who knows what the next generation will do?
As a result, becoming an adult and setting up a household no longer mean the same thing.
Yet a surprisingly large proportion of market research is still based on the spending patterns of the baby boomers' parents, and so implicitly assumes that they are all but identical.
This is plainly wrong, though no one is sure just how wrong.
Try selling nappies and dogfood to someone who lives alone and never intends to have a baby or a dog.
FINANCE
Japanese property
Still shaky
TOKYO
HOPES are growing among policy makers, bankers and developers that Japan's property market is bottoming out.
The Bank of Japan even cites this sanguine view as a reason not to be pushed into a premature easing of monetary policy.
It is the celebrations that are premature.
Continuing monetary tightness is squeezing property speculators.
In February every measure of the money supply slowed.
The most important, M2 plus certificates of deposit, grew by 5.5%, year-on-year, down from 11.8% as lately as October.
That suggests that a credit crunch is taking place, especially since banks are still under orders from the central bank not to increase lending to property companies beyond the overall rate of loan growth, which has itself been restricted since October.
Property companies became hooked on borrowing in recent years.
In five years to last September, Japan's 50 biggest increased their borrowing by 330% to ¥14 trillion ($10 billion), according to a new survey by Tokyo Shoko Research.
Most worrying are smaller companies which borrowed heavily but do not have big banks behind them.
An extreme example is MDI, a quoted housing developer whose borrowing rose 23-fold in those five years.
The combination of tight money and high debt is causing more than token distress.
Bankruptcies, mostly property-related, totalled ¥931 billion in the first two months of 1991, and the total will rise in the new financial year, starting April 1st, as banks pull the plug on other overborrowed customers.
The banks have been holding off up till now, because they did not want loan losses further to dent their earnings, already hit by the stockmarket fall, in the current financial year.
Japanese banks have great flexibility in this: they do not have to declare loans non-performing until after a year of non-payment of interest (as against 90 days in America).
A growing number of companies are already publicly known to be distress sellers of property.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd has compiled from media reports alone a list of would-be sellers of around ¥1 trillion worth.
They include Azabu Group, which plans to sell 60 properties worth around ¥200 billion by the end of June; Itoman, a trading company which hopes to sell and lease back its Osaka headquarters for ¥80 billion as a first step towards paying off its debt of ¥1.3 trillion, much of it owed to Sumitomo Bank; and MDI, which wants to unload ¥50 billion out of ¥150 billion worth of residential property that it holds for development.
A total of ¥1 trillion may seem puny in a property market which is valued, in theory, at ¥2,000 trillion.
But such sales are important: property bulls have always argued that prices cannot fall because there are hardly ever any transactions.
And the figure includes only those companies that have publicly admitted their readiness to sell.
The real amount for sale is probably several times higher.
The weakest sector is the residential-apartment market, where price discounting and subsidised financing are on the increase.
Recruit Cosmos, once the centre of a political scandal, has through its finance affiliate been lending money to would-be buyers of its flats at only 0.6% annual interest for the first five years.
In January, for the first time since April 1985, fewer than 50% of new apartments in the greater Tokyo area were sold; Daikyo, Japan's leading apartment-block developer, had a nationwide sales rate of only 47%.
The real picture is even worse, since 10% of contracted sales fall through, as buyers pull out because they are nervous or cannot get the finance.
Meanwhile, plenty of new flats are being built and coming on to the market: developers have rushed to get their projects completed in the hope of selling before demand dried up.
Conditions are firmer in the office market, where rents and values are underpinned by a vacancy rate of just 0.2% in the central business district of Tokyo.
Whether this will persist is another matter.
A survey late last year by Mori Building, a big development company, calculated that 85m square feet (7.9m square metres) of office space is scheduled to be built — in large blocks alone — in the 23 wards of Tokyo over the next five years, 87% more than was completed in the past five.
Optimists say that fast-multiplying electronic equipment rather than people will take up the space.
Even if this is true, it cannot last.
Companies will start start moving their back offices from central Tokyo to cheaper areas.
The nearly completed World Business Garden building in Chiba, 30 minutes by train from central Tokyo, offers ultra-modern office space at a monthly rent of ¥5,000 per square metre ($40 a year per square foot) one-sixth of rents in Tokyo's prime office buildings.
Swiss stockmarkets
Joining the world
GENEVA
AT LONG last there are moves afoot in Switzerland to give stockmarket investors a better deal.
They come not a moment too soon, if Switzerland is to preserve its position as a front-ranking international financial centre.
For years investors have complained that the Swiss markets are too fragmented, too illiquid, too opaque and too expensive.
That did not matter much when rich foreigners used Switzerland simply as a safe home for their money.
Now that trading counts for more, it matters a lot.
Some 30–40% of the share capital of listed Swiss companies is owned by foreigners.
Swiss pension funds and insurance companies, meanwhile, own little.
Swiss moneymen say that, to persuade these conservative institutions to step up share buying, reforms are essential.
The stockmarkets are already changing.
Under pressure to cut costs, the big banks that dominate Swiss securities trading were no longer prepared to deal at seven regional exchanges, each with its own rules, regulations and supervisory body (or none).
By mid-1991, the banks have announced, they will take all securities trading to the three biggest exchanges: Zurich and — well behind — Geneva and Basle.The exchange in Lausanne closed in January; Neuchâtel and St Gallen follow on March 31st.
In June Berne will swap its traditional open-outcry system for telephone trading; but now that the big banks will no longer deal there in stocks quoted elsewhere, its future looks dim.
The Basle exchange too, with a turnover only a seventh that of Zurich, may not survive in the longer term if Swiss Bank Corporation, its biggest trader, decides to pull out.
Unification of the Swiss markets will become a practical possibility next year, when the three main bourses jointly introduce a fully computerised trading system.
This is due to start with bonds by mid-1992 and with the most widely traded equities perhaps a few months later.
Enthusiasts, pointing to the success of Switzerland's three-year-old electronic futures and options exchange, SOFFEX, say the SFr35m ($24m) project is essential to cut dealing costs, improve reporting of transactions and boost turnover.
But they admit that far more important will be a proposed new law on market supervision and investor protection, the first draft of which is expected in late spring.
It will provide a national regulatory system and a regulatory body to replace those of individual cantons.
A group of experts commissioned by the finance ministry is thought to have recommended much self-regulation, as in London.
But there is already a head of steam in parliament to make the proposed voluntary takeover code legally binding.
The planned rules would also cover reporting of trades, regulate brokers and other intermediaries, oblige quoted companies to provide better information and provide the beginnings of a system of investor protection.
Moneymen hope that parliament will act faster on this than it has on company-law reform.
Plans to revise that law, which dates from 1936, have been discussed for decades, and have been before legislators for eight years.
The law, framed to ward off takeovers from Nazi Germany, allows companies to refuse share registration, and so voting rights, to anyone they do not like — aggressive foreigners, for example.
The resulting tiered share structure, with some shares open only to Swiss, and bearer shares or other instruments for outsiders, has limited the market and depressed prices.
The immunity of Swiss companies to unfriendly or foreign takeovers came in for a pounding in 1988 after Nestlé took over Rowntree, a British confectioner, causing noisy British complaints about the lack of reciprocal opportunities.
Switzerland's parliamentarians, who until then had favoured continuing restrictions on foreigners, hastily changed their minds.
That year Nestlé — which accounts for a tenth of the Swiss stockmarket — opened its register to overseas investors, and a number of other companies have followed suit.
A new law, expected to be in force by 1993, would allow companies to restrict individual shareholdings to a given percentage, but would bar non-registration of shareholdings unless the company otherwise could not continue normal operations.
That is a reference to the ‘Lex Friedrich’ on foreign landholding.
Companies with a lot of land — notably insurance companies — have to show they are at least two-thirds Swiss-owned.
Bankers and others are already campaigning for relaxation of this law, to allow foreign investment in such Swiss companies.
Companies will also be under pressure not to apply narrow limits on shareholdings.
Nestlé's 3% limit sounds low, but to reach it you would have to put $600m into Nestlé shares.
Smaller companies would be well advised to be more flexible if they want to attract pension-fund investment.
Hopes of attracting institutional cash have also been raised by a law limiting the proportion of assets that pension funds and insurance companies can hold in land, but increasing what they can hold in shares from 30% to 50%.
The institutions say they intend to raise the equity weighting in their portfolios from under 10% to perhaps 15% by the mid-1990s.
This could mean an extra SFr6 billion a year going into shares, says Bank Vontobel in Zurich.
But so far there has been little sign of it.
The key to winning institutional investment may lie elsewhere, in a revision of the hated stamp duty of up to 3% on securities transactions.
The finance minister, Otto Stich, reluctant to lose the SFr2 billion of revenue the tax brings in, is not being helpful.
He is prepared to drop the tax only on bond transactions between foreigners, and even then only if he can replace the lost revenue by introducing a broadly based value-added tax.
This unpopular idea goes to popular vote on June 2nd, under Switzerland's direct democracy.
Moneymen are not banking on the outcome.
European pension funds
Outside the cocoon
BRUSSELS
THE single market in Europe's financial services is supposed to come into being at the end of 1992.
The European Commission, busy with banking, investment services and insurance, has now realised, late in the day, that as long as 700 billion ecus-worth ($850 billion) of pension-fund assets remain wrapped in national rules, single the market cannot be.
Most EC governments restrict pension funds' freedom to invest as they choose.
Any such limits (beyond those of essential prudence) are in breach of the directive on free movement of capital, which came into force last July.
They still abound.
Portuguese and Danish funds may not invest in other countries.
Italian funds cannot hold more than 20% of their money in private companies.
No more than 5% of a German fund's assets can be in overseas bonds.
Belgian funds must put 15% of their technical reserves into Belgian government bonds.
As for management, Spain and Portugal exclude foreign firms.
Next month the commission plans to publish two draft directives on this topic.
The first will aim to remove restrictions on where the funds can invest, and who can manage them.
The second will seek to allow people to subscribe to pension funds in countries other than the one in which they live.
At present, a multinational company cannot run just one fund for all its staff; an employee moving from Britain to Spain has to join a different fund.
Other countries will smell British self-interest in these directives, and not just because Sir Leon Brittan is the commissioner who dreamed them up.
Freeing the pensions market will benefit firms with knowledge of international markets and fund management — notably, firms in London.
Since — outside the public sector, or some industry-wide schemes — only Britain offers ‘portable’ pensions, carried by employees from job to job, British pension funds can expect to win recruits from other countries.
They have, in any case, an appealing track record: their annual average return in the 1980s was (in dollars) 14%, compared to 9% for Belgian funds and 8% for those in Holland.
The Community's pension funds are already concentrated in Britain and Holland: pension-fund assets in Holland are equivalent to 81% of local GDP; in Britain, 55%; in Germany, 6%; in France and Belgium, 2%.
Most French and German employees contribute to schemes which do not involve invested funds, and so will not be covered by any EC directives.
Many French companies run ‘pay-as-you-go’ schemes, financing pensions from current contributions.
German companies typically hang on to employees' contributions and write pension liabilities on to their balance sheets.
Even among funded schemes there are wide variations.
British funds favour higher-risk assets such as equities.
Those in mainland Europe lean to bonds, loans and mortgages.
Thus German funds — some conventional funds do exist there — hold 35% of their assets in loans.
British funds have 86% of their assets in marketable securities, those in Germany 44%.
Of Sir Leon's aims, the hardest to realise will be to give people the right to join a foreign fund.
The directive will require mutual recognition of the various regulatory systems, and lay down general principles for national supervisors.
Funds will need ‘sufficient’ assets to meet liabilities, and be ‘sufficiently’diversified and ‘sufficiently’liquid.
There will also be rules to limit the amount that a fund can invest in its sponsoring company.
The directive will try to bridge differences in national tax and labour laws.
In a Spanish fund, more than half the members of its decision-making board must be employee representatives.
Britain has no such rule.
No pan-European fund could respect all 12 of the EC's current labour laws.
The directive will seek to compromise, saying, perhaps, that employee representatives should make up half the board.
British employers will no doubt object.
Tax will be an even tougher nut.
Some countries give tax relief on contributions to pension funds, others on benefits.
The directive will not require a unified tax system, but will insist that governments recognise certain national forms of fund as equivalent for tax purposes — so that, for instance , the British government would give relief on a British resident's contribution to a fund abroad.
Since tax questions have to be settled by unanimity in the Council of Ministers, the directive on pension-fund membership is promised a slow passage.
Pension-fund investment and management should prove easier.
Yet, although that directive will need only a qualified majority vote, it is unlikely to whisk through the council.
Governments will dread the prospect of funds shifting capital abroad.
Although it has few pension funds, France will be especially suspicious of liberalisation.
Any change elsewhere will intensify the debate in France on whether pay-as-you-go gives pensioners a good deal.
Were French employees to shift their contributions into conventional funds, today's pensioners would suffer and the government might have to step in.
The thought that the City of London is likely to gain most will not increase French enthusiasm.
Credit-rating agencies
Beyond the second opinion
THESE are the best of times for Moody's and Standard & Poor's (S&P), the two American companies that dominate the world business of rating government and corporate debt.
They earn their bread reckoning up for investors the risk of default.
When defaults proliferate, as they do during and after recessions, the two firms wield enormous clout in financial markets.
Their duopoly is not secure.
Their chief American competitors, Fitch and Duff & Phelps, are redoubling efforts to win business.
In Europe, where credit ratings are not yet universal, the two face competition from IBCA, a decade-old specialist in bank credit.
Investment banks too are starting to publish opinions on credit, just as they do on equities.
But no one is about to oust Moody's and S&P as market leaders.
Several trends have boosted the credit-raters' importance:
Recession.
The world's economic downturn has triggered a rash of defaults in commercial paper and long-term debt, particularly by unrated issuers.
In 1990, Moody's reckons, companies defaulted on $22 billion of bonds, the highest nominal figure in 20 years.
That has prompted investors to demand ratings from more issuers of debt and to take the ratings more seriously.
Cross-border finance.
Not long ago European companies could issue paper on the strength of their names alone; domestic investors would buy, believing that famous companies do not go bust.
Now some have — and foreign investors, less credulous anyway, are more needed than they used to be.
Less known companies certainly will not get cash from them without ratings, preferably from the two top firms.
Financial innovation.
Asset-backed debt, hybrid securities and the like are not new, but they are appearing more often.
Banks are issuing a stream of securities backed by mortgages, credit-card receivables and other assets stripped off their balance sheets.
The rating of such ‘structured financings’ is the fastest-growing segment of the raters' business.
Regulation.
Regulators are increasingly relying on ratings to measure and control risks undertaken by the institutions they oversee.
America's Securities and Exchange Commission, for example, recently restricted money-market funds' investments in low-rated commercial paper.
Normally issuers invite, and pay, the agencies to rate their debt (though Moody's, to the irritation of more than one issuer, has sometimes rated debt uninvited).
They are often aghast at the results.
At worst, a poor rating can put a company out of business.
At the least it is likely to drive up the cost of borrowing.
That happened in February when S&P and Moody's downgraded some of Chrysler's debt.
The American car maker had guaranteed an issue of $1.1 billion of debt with interest rates linked to its credit ratings.
When the ratings fell, its interest bill jumped by $38m a year.
Upgraded companies, rare these days, can save correspondingly.
The markets' obsession with credit ratings has spawned a sideline for investment banks: advising clients how to spruce up their presentations to the rating agencies.
Poor ratings are especially bad for banks and other financial companies.
Because of their low ratings, some of America's biggest banks pay more for short- and long-term funds than do their industrial customers.
They can no longer lend at a profit to well rated corporate borrowers.
The business goes to stronger banks.
Issuers wish Moody's and S&P were not so powerful: more competition among credit-raters might limit the damage caused by one bad rating.
Institutional investors, the main users of the ratings, share that wish.
The head of bond research at one large American institution calls the concentration of power in Moody's and S&P dangerous.
Both do a good job, he says, but ‘I would rather see more judgments out there in the market.’
Some investors complain that Moody's and S&P were slow to recognise the financial deterioration of American banks and of certain state governments.
Some think the agencies' analysts risk becoming too friendly with the companies they rate.
More cogently, some observe that these analysts track the credit quality of up to 35 companies apiece, and are paid significantly less than equity analysts on Wall Street.
The second-tier agencies hope to exploit these feelings.
Duff & Phelps, a Chicago-based company, recently merged with a competitor, and now claims to rate nearly three-quarters of corporate bonds publicly issued in America.
Fitch was acquired by new owners in 1989 and promptly raided senior executives from Moody's and S&P.
In Europe, IBCA recently began rating debt issued by British industrial companies.
Robin Monro-Davies, its chief, says IBCA intends to become a full-fledged rater of European debt.
With only 26 analysts, mostly banking specialists, it still has far to go.
Some second-tier agencies have adopted a kind of ratings machismo that promises investors harsher verdicts than those handed down by Moody's and S&P.
Fitch recently published tough criteria for rating bond insurers, companies that use their financial clout to secure triple-A ratings for bonds issued by local governments and other issuers.
Fitch reckons that not all bond insurers deserve the top rating; those that do, it believes, suffer because investors do not trust the triple-As assigned to the insured debt by Moody's and S&P.
The agency plans to assign its own ratings to bond insurers.
Moody's and S&P try to stay above this fray.
The principles of credit rating are immutable, they insist; their credit opinions are never swayed by the judgments of others.
This is hard to believe, but impossible to disprove.
Yet the top two do not feel as smug as they may sound.
Investors say both have improved their services since they started to face serious competition.
And though Moody's and S&P rate nearly all big debt issues in America, they are not taking Europe for granted.
S&P has expanded largely through joint ventures and acquisitions.
It owns half of a French rating agency, ADEF, and all of Nordisk, a Swedish firm.
Its overseas staff has risen three-fold in the past five years, to 75 analysts.
Moody's says a quarter of its staff is non-American.
It rates four-fifths of Euro-commercial paper and two-thirds of longer-term Eurobonds.
Competitors could challenge Moody's and S&P more easily if the two leaders made more mistakes.
They do not make many.
In 20 years only one company with an investment-grade rating from Moody's has defaulted on long-term debt — Manville, a single-A company that went bankrupt voluntarily to protect itself from asbestosis lawsuits.
A New Zealand finance company, DFC, defaulted on its commercial paper in 1989 while still carrying a prime rating by S&P.
The agency says it relied on a government commitment to provide liquidity, but the government reneged.
Moody's and S&P sell reams of information on the companies they rate, but say little about themselves.
Though the collapse of the junk-bond market cut business in 1990, both agencies make money.
But, both being owned by larger companies — Moody's by Dun & Bradstreet, S&P by a publishing firm, McGraw-Hill — they need not disclose their financial details, and do not.
Lucky folk, they do not need credit ratings.
Regional, but less super
NEW YORK
WHO in his right mind would want an American bank anyway?
Banking profitability — not to mention a good many banks — has collapsed over the past decade.
Last year one in seven of the country's more than 12,000 banks was unprofitable, and one in four of the 49 biggest.
This year does not promise to bring much improvement.
For the 11 big money-centre banks whose statistics Salomon Brothers records, return on assets fell in 1990 to about 0.3%.
If there is any silver lining to their dark cloud, it is the dubious one that the super-regional banks — for most of the 1980s the successes of American banking — also are on their way down (or, like Bank of New England, out).
While, as the chart shows, the money-centre ones appear in the autumn of 1990 to have touched bottom and to be on the way up again.
Among 24 regional banks, 11 managed an acceptable return on assets of more than 1% in 1989, and on equity of at least 15%.
This year just five did so.
The recession on the east coast has taken a heavy toll of banks there.
All banks are suffering from a mounting pile of bad loans, especially against property, and the slowing of commercial lending.
The regional ones seem just to have hit the trouble later.
Over the year the total of their non-performing loans rose by 32%, against 26% for the money-centre banks.
Write-offs also rose faster at the regionals than at the money-centre banks.
The other vital factor for banks' profitability in today's harsh climate is cost control.
Here the regionals started with the advantage of not being as bloated as the big banks in the first place, and most of them have stayed that way.
But they too have been losing this battle.
For the money-centre banks, non-interest expenses as a percentage of operating revenue had reached 75% by the end of the fourth quarter of last year, against 70% one year before.
For the regional banks the ratio increased from 64% to 68% over the same period.
In the longer term, the best of the regional banks, such as Banc One (based in Columbus, Ohio), First Wachovia (North Carolina) and NBD Bancorp (Michigan), ought to prosper.
Regionals tend to have natural franchises and are likely to get the best pickings of whatever expanded powers commercial banks may get out of the pending reform of the financial system, once Congress gets round to letting it happen.
They are also starting to attract some of the best young talent away from the money-centre banks — and good brains allied to the skills of good management are almost as scarce as profits in America's banking parlours these days.
Junk bonds twitching in the morgue
America's junk-bond market refuses to die, though some of the returning life in it may be strictly temporary
FOR a supposed corpse, America's junk-bond market has developed an unnerving habit of sporadically twitching into life.
Prices perk up, trading volume revives and stories of return from the grave are polished up.
Yet the promised resurrection of the $200 billion-plus market has never quite happened.
The current convulsions began a year ago.
They halted as the invasion of Kuwait brought home fears of recession.
Now they have started again, as investors convince themselves that the worst of the recession is over; as some junk-bond issuers take advantage of falling interest rates and the stockmarket rally to refinance their debt more cheaply or turn it into equity; and as bond-raiders speculate in distressed companies that they think may restructure themselves or be taken over.
The yield to maturity on the active-issues index of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, a Wall Street brokerage, fell below 19% last month for the first time since September.
But this remains an erratic market.
Among the big gainers, Tonka's 16.5% 1997 bond, Macy's 14.5% 1998, Southland's 14.5% 1995 and RJR Nabisco's 17% 2007 have all seen their price rise by half or more this year.
The rise in the Tonka bond was helped by a takeover bid from another toymaker, Hasbro.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich and Morningstar Foods were two other junk issuers who attracted similar bids from firms looking for cheap assets.
This has led vulture-investors to the bonds of other prospective bid victims such as USG, a building-materials group, American Standard, which makes plumbing fixtures, or Burlington Industries, a textiles firm.
None of this is for the faint-hearted.
Eastern Airlines, long a takeover candidate, found itself in bankruptcy, not the arms of a suitor.
And taking over debt is harder than taking over equity.
It needs the near-unanimous assent of holders.
Some have learned to play hard-to-get.
This can quickly turn into a game of bluff.
Among half a dozen debt restructurings called off last year were those of Southland and Insilco.
Both later filed for Chapter 11 protection.
Issuers are increasingly seeking pre-packed bankruptcies as part and parcel of restructurings, to deal with awkward bond-holders.
Another stimulus to the market has come from issuers buying back bonds, to retire the debt entirely or swap it for new equity.
Though such a swap is a better deal for a company's bond-holders than for shareholders, shareholders have been prepared to accept the dilution, reckoning that cutting debt more than offsets it.
When McCaw Cellular Communications announced it was to swap $600m of its junk bonds for stock, the price of the bonds shot up.
RJR Nabisco's plans to buy back $1.5 billion of its debt were received in much the same way.
The vultures have been buying up other bonds likely to be similarly treated.
They include bonds of Dr Pepper, a soft-drinks maker, Duracell Holdings, which makes batteries, and the Time Warner entertainment group.
Only a few junk-bond issuers will be able to use debt-for-equity swaps.
There has to be an underlying business attractive to equity investors.
A rising equity market helps.
Otherwise, junk issuers wanting to cut their debt might have to resort to the bankruptcy courts to encourage their debt-holders to accept stock.
If the current pace of repurchases is sustained, more than $10 billion of bonds could vanish this year.
Last year repurchases totalled $7 billion, among total subtractions from the market of $13 billion.
This was more than offset by $22 billion of additions, half from ‘fallen angels’, formerly investment-grade debt downgraded to junk during the year.
True new issues amounted to a mere $1.2 billion, against $24 billion in 1989 — the last year before Drexel Burnham Lambert, nurturer of the market, went under.
Despite the recent activity in the secondary market, many of the factors that caused the contraction in the primary market last year remain in evidence.
They continue to be sources of selling pressure.
The weakness of the economy still makes it harder for companies to service their debt.
The rating agencies continue to downgrade bonds.
Defaults continue to rise.
Last year they doubled to $18 billion, including Campeau and Continental Airlines.
With big increases in the numbers of bonds falling due over the next three years, defaults seem sure to rise further.
Regulators are still trying to get tougher about the junk in financial institutions' portfolios.
The biggest holders are insurance companies.
They hold almost a third of junk bonds outstanding.
The industry is split over whether to set itself a 20% or 35% ceiling on the percentage of assets that junk bonds can account for.
Some states are imposing their own more restrictive caps.
The Resolution Trust Corporation, the federal agency that takes over bust thrifts, also has a multi-billion junk-bond portfolio that came with its dilapidated charges.
It has sold some $3 billion of junk bonds.
Some congressmen are pushing it to sell the rest as fast as it can.
The agency wants to keep them as collateral for a securitisation package it plans to sell later this year.
And it does not want to knock the stuffing out of a fragile market.
The junk-bond industry has been indulging in some quasi-securitisation of its own.
Salomon reckons that last year $2.3 billion-worth of junk bonds were re-packaged as collateralised bond obligations (CBOs), and that currently up to $1 billion-worth are being touted to investors.
If CBOs can be developed as a market, junk bondsters hope that it would provide a new source of demand.
Another twitch.
Sid's mini-flutter
OVER a quarter of British adults — 11m of them — own shares, says a new survey done for the Treasury and the London stock exchange.
In 1983 the total was only 2m.
But the habit is barely skin-deep.
The startling rise is mostly due to the privatisations of state companies, boosted with high-profile advertising and low share prices.
Over 6m first-time shareholders — the admen's ‘Sid’, the character who bought British Gas — got their shares in one of the state sell-offs.
Buying these shares was good news.
If Sid put £100 ($175) into each of the big privatisations and sold his shares on the first day of trading — as many such investors did — he would (before expenses) have got back an extra 41%.
Yet patience would have paid still better.
If Sid chose to hang on, he could now sell his shares for around 85% more than he paid — a far better deal than he would have got buying the market as a whole.
If he had put a second £100 into the FT-SE index each time he bought from the state, the resulting shares would now be worth only a little over a third more than he paid.
Should Sid still hang on?
Well, the market will probably be up a year from now, and if he holds shares in all the ex-state companies (36, less two taken over) his risks are tolerably spread, with worthy water companies balancing clouded bits of aerospace.
All he need fear is a general postponement of Britain's economic recovery.
The real Sid, though, is not like that.
On any risk analysis, he should sell and run back to his building society: over half of Britain's 11m shareholders own shares in only one company, three-quarters in one or two.
Still, many of these Sids can surely afford such a flutter on the stockmarket: one quarter of the 11m own shares worth less than £500 — $875 or, more simply, in any currency, peanuts.
Santander and First Fidelity
Into the breach
ARE European banks about to invade America — again?
On March 19th Banco de Santander, Spain's brightest bank, bought a stake in First Fidelity, a bank with $28 billion of assets and 550 branches in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
The sirens that drew Santander into America's shattered banking market could tempt other European banks as well.
For Santander, First Fidelity is a bargain on two counts.
Even after this year's vigorous rally in their share prices, American banks are cheap by historical standards.
Santander paid $220m for its 13% stake in First Fidelity (and for an option to raise the stake to 23%), roughly the same amount as the stake's book value.
Britain's National Westminster, by contrast, paid 2.4 times book value for its ill-fated venture into New Jersey.
What makes First Fidelity look even cheaper is the weakness of America's dollar.
In peseta terms, the cost of American assets has fallen by about 5% in the past year.
Even if First Fidelity's shares stagnate, Santander can expect to make a profit on a recovery of the dollar alone.
Still, Santander is brave to sail through shoals that nearly wrecked other foreign venturers.
NatWest's American subsidiary lost $350m in 1990, mostly on making loans to shaky companies; its chief executive has just quit.
Marine Midland, a subsidiary of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, lost $300m last year for the same reason.
Because it owns First New Hampshire Bank, Bank of Ireland took a bath in New England, America's most depressed banking market.
First Fidelity, at least, is on the way up.
Its new chairman, Tony Terracciano, cleaned up the balance sheet last year by taking a special $300m provision.
That means Santander should not have to worry about the dud property loans plaguing other banks in the region.
The bank also slashed non-interest costs from 70% of income to 60% in 1990.
It now feels healthy enough to expand.
In February First Fidelity bought $2.5 billion of deposits and 48 branches from a bust savings bank in New Jersey.
Armed with new capital from Santander, it can expand further.
James McDermott, president of a bank-share specialist, Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, expects First Fidelity to look for branches and banks in Connecticut and upstate New York.
That will make other capital-rich European banks envious.
Several have been window-shopping, mostly in recession-blighted regions where banks can be bought cheaply.
France's state-owned Banque Nationale de Paris briefly considered buying parts of Bank of New England, which went bust earlier this year.
Bank of Scotland was a disappointed bidder for two Texas banks.
Royal Bank of Scotland pulled out of negotiations to buy Bank Worcester, in Massachusetts, at the end of 1990.
Jealous of Santander's alliance, other European banks will be tempted to forge their own ties with well-managed, expansion-minded American banks.
Their envy would be misplaced, argues Christopher Wheeler, an analyst at Lehman Brothers in London.
Santander, he says, ‘has no business’ investing in American banks.
It is earning a healthy 20% return on capital on banking in Spain, its home market.
Unless First Fidelity beats that (few American banks do), the investment will prove a waste of shareholders' money.
And where is the synergy?
Financial products manufactured in Spain are unlikely to sell in suburban New Jersey.
First Fidelity and Santander talk of using each other 's networks to offer trade financing to their customers.
But that, the American bank admits, is not the primary reason for the tie-up.
Emilio Botin, Santander's chairman, asserts that the First Fidelity stake ‘fits perfectly’ with Santander's other American alliances, a small shareholding in a financial group, Kemper, and a co-operation agreement with an insurer, Metropolitan Life.
How?
First Fidelity does not plan to sell MetLife insurance through its branches, even if the law is changed to allow it.
Equally puzzling is Santander's promise not to take majority control of First Fidelity.
That makes the investment look like little more than a punt on First Fidelity's shares — a profitable punt, perhaps, but a punt nonetheless.
After a history of foreign misadventures, other European banks should think twice before they follow Banco de Santander into America's treacherous banking market.
A job for Atlas and Hercules combined
WASHINGTON, DC
The World Bank has too many people costing too much and working in the wrong place.
It also has a new president.
So?
THE World Bank that Mr [Lewis]Preston takes over’, crooned the Washington Post a week ago, ‘is in sound condition.’
Financially maybe, otherwise not.
Insiders admit that by both external and internal measures, it has failed badly during the 1980s to live up to its promise.
Notably it did not respond coherently to the third world's debt burden, and to ten years of stalled poor-country growth, probably because it did not overhaul its own ponderous bureaucracy.
A retired chairman of J.P.
Morgan, Mr Preston, the bank's new president, will need all his organisational skills if (rightly) he decides in September to make that bureaucracy his first target.
What it needs is some Herculean stable-cleaning.
His predecessor, Barber Conable, who retires after five years in the seat, understood the size of that task when he arrived.
But he used the wrong tools.
In theory, he sacked thousands of staff.
But he then told each layer of management to appoint the layer below it.
They duly reappointed old friends, and the Bank's already notable tendency to fiefs and feudalism was reinforced.
Mr Conable therefore hands over a 6,000-strong Bank with annual staff costs of over $900m, $150,000 a head, bloated by perks such as first-class air travel.
On top of this, add 1,000 consultants, hired to do the work which the bank is — let us pretend — too understaffed or overworked to do for it itself.
The figures are absurd.
So is the concentration in Washington.
Only one-tenth of the staff work in poor countries.
When World Bankers do visit those countries, unco-ordinated teams fall over each other.
Czechoslovakia's finance ministry, for instance, is in despair these days as ten separate teams, each with a score of staff, crawl around its country.
Lack of direction led to meandering aims at the World Bank during the 1980s.
True, during his tenure Mr Conable quickly identified a number of themes — notably the environment and the role of women — that are now becoming central to development policy.
Yet only recently has he been affirming what he sees as the Bank's main job: to attack outright poverty — measured, for instance, in crude terms of calorific intake.
That ought to have been the World Bank's priority all along.
That it was not is largely due to the Bank's over-chummy relationship with client-country governments.
Economic orthodoxy over the past decade has rightly stressed the role of the private sector in development.
The Bank readily accepts this.
Yet in practice it has strengthened some countries' public sectors at the expense of their private ones.
Its lending has reinforced India's inept socialist policies.
In Colombia industries have been kept in the public sector just to get World Bank finance.
Some insiders argue that the Bank is ill-adapted to encourage private enterprise, because its articles of agreement forbid it to lend to the private sector.
These people, as well as America's Treasury, argue for changes to the articles.
Others say the best way to get private sectors working is to reform the public sector: the World Bank can use its clout with poor countries to insist on structural reforms when it lends them money.
A bit late: the bank's growth in lending, and therefore its leverage, except in a few countries like China, Vietnam and Argentina, is likely to slow in the coming years.
The conflict between public and private sectors is affecting relations between different bits of the World Bank group.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Bank's private-sector arm, can make loans to the private sector as well as equity investments.
There are celebrated examples of bad communication between the Bank and the IFC; and the sides have confused clients by offering different prices for the same services.
A wide-ranging review (dread words) is now going on to resolve the conflicts.
It is more than just goodwill that rests on the outcome.
The IFC badly wants to double its capital with an injection of $1.3 billion from its government shareholders.
America's Treasury is blocking the move.
It thinks that even the IFC, particularly in the area of privatisation, is not adventurous enough.
It also wants the IFC to be less transaction-hungry and to talk more to governments about policy.
Since that would mean that the World Bank would talk less to governments, one of the Treasury's main reasons for bullying the IFC is in order to get at the Bank.
This is the world into which Mr Preston steps.
He is a man used to having his orders carried out, and there is no doubt that he has the toughness needed for cleaning out the bank.
An east-coast patrician in the style with which George Bush feels comfortable, he will also not flinch at meeting the rich heads of poor states.
In taking the job, Mr Preston, who two years ago insisted that J.P.
Morgan shake the dust of third-world debt from its feet (it made provisions against its entire exposure), now shows commendable sympathy for the world's ill-fed poor.
There's the rub.
The World Bank presidency has a habit of surrounding its occupants with a warm, well-meaning aura.
More than at any time in his 64 years, Mr Preston now needs his cool, commercial banker's brain.
And no sympathy at all for the well-fed hordes who stand in what should be his way.
AMERICA'S BLACKS
A world apart
America is riding high on a wave of post-Gulf confidence, but one part of the country is still missing out: the poverty-ridden ghettos where millions of black Americans live.
George Bush cannot afford to ignore them
ABSORB these figures about America's cities.
Nearly half of black teenagers in the city of Chicago fail to graduate from high school.
In Washington, DC, in 1989 nearly four times as many black men were jailed in the district's prison as graduated from its public schools; the leading cause of death among young black men is murder.
In the country as a whole a staggering two-thirds of black babies are born to unmarried mothers; 43% of black children are, by government criteria, born poor; many do not live to see their first birthday.
Last year's unemployment rate among blacks was 10.5%, more than twice that for whites.
Sealed off in inner-city ghettos, by-passed by fly-over freeways, black America is suffering out of sight.
Has America turned its back on its inner-city blacks?
Not all of them: a black middle class has mushroomed, from about one in ten blacks in 1960 to more than a third today.
But a scissors effect is cutting through America's blacks (see chart on next page).
Measured by the government's official poverty line — which counts as poor a family of four with an income below $12,675, in 1989 dollars — the proportion of blacks stuck at the bottom has refused to budge from around a third for the past 20 years, compared with a tenth of all whites.
The plight of inner-city blacks affects the whole of America.
The cost of the welfare system has skyrocketed: spending on all federal programmes more than tripled between 1965 and 1987, from $141 billion to $520 billion (in 1988 dollars).
During the rest of the 1990s the number of youngsters entering the workforce each year will be smaller than at any time since the second world war; but two-fifths will be from minorities, mostly Hispanics and blacks.
Corporate America is starting to wake up to all this.
Last year a group of 45 Fortune 500 chief executives and university presidents, known as the Business-Higher Education Forum, published a report saying that the country could not ignore the growing isolation of its inner-city minorities.
The authors, Steven Mason, president of the Mead Corporation, and Clifton Wharton, chairman of TIAA-CREF, the nation's largest private pension fund, say: ‘The population as a whole is ageing, the growth of the workforce is slowing, and the twin burdens of greater productivity and supporting an ageing population will fall mostly on younger workers…
Our society cannot afford to lose a single one of its young people.’
True, not all the inner-city poor are black: on the west coast many are Mexican; in New York lots are Puerto Rican.
But wholly disproportionate numbers are black, and stuck in the nastiest parts of the most dangerous cities: Washington, DC, is over 70% black; Detroit 63%.
It is difficult to tease apart the chiefly race-caused problems from those caused by inner-city economics.
But policies intended for the poor in general, which are politically more acceptable than those designed for specific racial groups, will aim at a big section of blacks too.
Can't work, won't work
When Americans talk about an ‘underclass’ in their cities, they do not simply mean the poor; they mean poor but healthy young people who cannot or will not, but anyway do not, get a job.
The images are vivid: an unmarried mother who lives off welfare cheques; a young man who drifts from girlfriend to girlfriend, selling drugs to get by.
Estimates of the size of this underclass vary hugely from about 5% to 50% of all the poor — 2m-15m people, of whom some two-thirds are black, a tenth Hispanic.
Liberals tend to stress the ‘cannot’ work.
Smoke-stack industry jobs that used to pay a decent wage have been wiped out.
Twenty years ago mid-western steel workers could earn $20 an hour; today, it is hard to find replacement jobs in the service industries that offer $6–7 an hour.
In real terms, median black family income in the mid-west has fallen by nearly a third in the past 20 years, from $24,690 to $17,400.
For many young blacks, the only jobs that offer a secure future and steady income are in the armed forces.
Conservatives tend to stress the ‘will not’: jobs exist, but people do not take them; jobs do not pay enough, or people do not try hard enough to find them.
Even with the country in recession, suburban papers are filled with wanted ads for waitresses, cleaners and cooks.
The view is widespread: a recent poll by the National Opinion Research Centre showed that 78% of whites think blacks are more likely than whites to ‘prefer to live off welfare’.
The truth lies somewhere in between.
Hamburger-flipping jobs (‘McJobs’) that pay the minimum wage ($3.80 an hour in 1990) are fine for teenagers, but not for parents trying to support a family.
Inner-city blacks often see better-paid jobs as beyond their reach: they ask for too many qualifications, they are too far away, there is nobody to look after the children.
A hand up, not a hand-out
What irks conservatives most is their belief not only that inner-city blacks are unwilling to take jobs, but that the government pays to keep them unwilling.
The welfare system, runs this view, makes things worse because it discourages people from working and rewards undesirable behaviour.
The welfare hand-out that pains critics most is that given to poor, unmarried mothers: Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC).
One of the most eloquent critics has been a conservative writer, Charles Murray.
He argues that, in seeking to protect children from poverty, AFDC has eased the financial strain of raising children alone; so more women do so.
His evidence: more and more babies were born to unmarried women during the past 30 years — which is when social-welfare spending shot up.
His prescription: abolish welfare.
Mr Murray's argument does not fit the facts.
First, there is no evidence that in states where AFDC payments are generous more children are born outside marriage.
Second, the lion's share of increased welfare spending since the 1960s has been on programmes most people approve of: social security (pensions) financed by tax on earnings, and medical insurance for old people (Medicare).
Spending on AFDC, in real terms, fell by nearly a fifth between 1975 and 1989 — the period that saw the biggest growth in illegitimate births.
It is even harder to blame an over-generous welfare system for joblessness among young men.
In America, unlike Europe, youngsters who have not paid unemployment contributions cannot claim welfare at all.
Many survive by ‘hustling’: doing odd jobs here and there, often illegally.
The perverse result, in many poor neighbourhoods, is that a young man lives off his mother's or pregnant girlfriend's welfare cheques, or both.
Going out with girls who have babies is good news; the more girlfriends the better.
On Chicago's south side the day the monthly cheque arrives is nicknamed ‘mother's day’, because that is when absent sons and husbands turn up.
So Mr Murray's criticism does have an important grain of truth in it.
Although AFDC is not generous, it may still be attractive.
In 1989, in a state with average AFDC payments, a single woman with two children who took a job at the minimum wage (then $3.35 an hour) would earn a paltry $33 more each month than if she did not work at all and stayed on welfare.
Research by David Ellwood, at Harvard University, shows that the surest way for a woman to escape poverty, and get off welfare, is not to work but to get married.
Mr Murray's solution is drastic.
A more measured response is not to abandon welfare but to shift the carrots: make welfare reward work.
In current White-House-speak: give people a hand up, not a hand-out.
If benefits were not deducted when mothers worked, they would not discourage working; if some benefits were available only for working mothers (child care, for instance), they would encourage it.
Liberals and conservatives are beginning to find common ground on one point: welfare should be strictly temporary — a transition back to work.
After the 1988 Family Support Act, states must help to provide one year of child care for mothers who leave welfare for a job or training.
Nursery education for poor children, like Head Start, undoubtedly improves later school performance.
What about young men (and young women without babies)?
Unlike Europe, America is against welfare payments available to everybody without a job, even those who have never worked.
Instead, policy concentrates on making work pay.
Some suggest tinkering with the tax system: raise the ceiling for tax-free earnings, or boost the earned-income tax credit for low-earners.
Others would like the minimum wage raised.
However, since young men are largely excluded from welfare benefits, they are best helped by programmes other than welfare reform.
Those mean streets
Five o'clock at State Street station, in downtown Chicago, and the platforms groan with homeward-bound commuters, wrapped up against the winter frost.
Peer more closely at the faces: on one side, heading south, all are black; on the other, heading north, nearly all are white.
According to one 1989 study, Chicago is the most racially segregated city in America, just beating Cleveland and Detroit.
Ending legal segregation has not been enough to end segregation itself.
Rich blacks have indeed moved out of the ghettos; but estate agents, anxious to protect property prices, still steer even rich blacks away from the nicest, lily-white suburbs.
For poor blacks, without money to move, living in an inner-city ghetto can mean days without seeing a white face.
The scale of segregation stuns: Chicago's black south side covers 50 square miles — bigger than the whole of Paris within the périphérique.
This separation breeds prejudice; worse, it isolates young blacks from the white world that will judge them when they leave school.
No amount of insisting that black fashion, black history and black speech are as valid as white alters the fact that to get a decent job means to work where being able to ‘act white’ pays.
As one suburban employer in Chicago, whose staff deal with clients in the office, comments: ‘I just can't afford to take on somebody who says the plural of ‘woman’ is ‘womans’.’
It is not getting better: a recent study of 60 cities showed that black and white speech patterns are drifting further apart.
According to William Julius Wilson, of the University of Chicago, himself black, poor blacks are even more isolated because any rich blacks who can get out do so.
Gone are the movie-halls and lawyers' offices on Chicago's south side, once the ritzier part of town for blacks.
Shabby brick apartments stretch for block after block, dotted with little more than the odd liquor store, fried-chicken shack and cheque-cashing shop, well buttoned up with wire mesh and bullet-proof glass.
Policemen patrol only in cars.
Poor neighbourhoods, argues Mr Wilson, have lost great numbers of working people who used to set examples to local children.
Work habits (such as waking up every day to an alarm clock) that often flow over into responsible social attitudes (such as being a good father) are not being learnt.
It is hard for black youngsters, growing up in poor areas where few people have jobs, to see that ‘making it’ requires hard work and discipline.
Those who do ‘make it’ and can afford the status symbols — the heavy gold chains, the Nike trainers — are drug dealers; and, in Chicago, most drug traffic is controlled by gangs.
Along with rap artists and basketball players, these are the black men the black boys look up to.
Jobs, too, have left the ghettos; new jobs now grow quickest in the (white) suburbs.
Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission reckons that jobs in Du Page county, suburban Chicago, will grow by a whopping 120% between 1980 and 2010; in the city of Chicago, by a measly 6%.
Most programmes that try to move people and jobs have little success.
Enterprise zones — which seduce businesses into poor areas with attractive tax breaks — are currently back in vogue at the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.
But experience shows that few companies will budge without vast incentives; most firms recruit few local people; some leave when tax holidays end; and zones work only when there are few of them in any one area.
Moving people has also been tried, for instance by giving housing subsidies to poor people so that they can move out of inner-city slums and rent new homes in the suburbs.
Research shows this can nudge up work rates; but, like busing schoolchildren from black to white areas, it can be political dynamite.
There are few votes to be won in the rich white suburbs by promising to move poor blacks there.
One logical fix to this geographical mis-match is for inner-city blacks to commute out from the ghettos to the suburbs.
The snag is getting there: public transport often links up white suburbs with the city centre, but not with poor black segments in between.
And few ghetto blacks have cars.
An answer from the private sector: ‘dedicated’ bus routes.
Suburban Job-Link, a Chicago employment agency, runs buses from North Lawndale, the city's poorest neighbourhood, where the unemployment rate runs above 20%, out to three western suburbs, where it barely hits 5%.
Costs are split between employers and workers; over 600 people travel each day; most work in light-manufacturing jobs, not services; and each earns an average hourly wage above $6 — nearly twice the minimum wage.
Similar private bus services operate in a dozen cities.
The public sector could take note.
From the bottom up
One of the more curious recent products of the Bush administration has been the hyping up of a new anti-poverty idea in terms that sound more like black radicalism of the 1960s.
The buzzword is ‘empowerment’: let people manage their own affairs.
It suits the right: it encourages individual responsibility.
It suits the left: it hands over control to local people.
What does it mean?
A lot of words, and a few concrete proposals.
The driving force behind empowerment is Jack Kemp, secretary of housing and urban development.
Mr Kemp has been trying for several years to prod the White House into launching a serious anti-poverty programme.
Last autumn he won round one when President Bush appointed him to lead a cabinet ‘empowerment task force’, told to come up with specific proposals.
Take decisions away from bureaucracies and give them to people: that is the principle.
The practice is to let parents choose freely their children's schools, let people buy their own homes, let public-housing tenants run their own estates.
Admirable goals; but with only a modest prospect of helping inner-city blacks.
Critics say Mr Kemp is an Alice in Wonderland.
Buying a house is not high on many poor blacks' shopping lists.
Successful tenant-management, like the running of Kenilworth-Parkside, a housing project in Washington, DC, and one of Mr Kemp's favourite examples, depends heavily on finding dedicated organisers.
If empowerment means anything, it is economic: empowerment to escape poverty.
The classic route, proved time and again by waves of immigrants, is education.
America is failing its blacks nowhere more than in its schools.
In poor black areas it is common for half the class to fail to graduate (which, in America, means merely failing to stay in school until you are 18 — there is no national exam for school-leavers).
But no amount of tinkering with parental choice or national testing alters one main problem: many young black children do not even turn up to classes.
They cannot see the point.
They are distracted by the glamour and excitement of drugs and gangs; they get little discipline at home; they fail to connect getting a good job with finishing high school.
Larry Hawkins, president of Chicago's Institute for Athletics and Education, thinks he has an answer: stop battering on a closed door, and try an open one.
If the one thing that inner-city black children will go to school for is sport, use it to keep them there.
‘It is not sport for sport's sake,’ says Mr Hawkins, who is an ex-Harlem-Globetrotter, ‘but a way of imposing a structure on undisciplined lives: in a sports team they turn up regularly, on time, in uniform, and train hard.
This habit spills over into their schoolwork.’
He and his colleagues coach competitive basketball in schools across the city.
They also act as mentors to the children, discussing the pressures of drugs and gangs, and how to cope with schoolwork.
The results are persuasive: those who take part regularly in his sports programmes at school are only one-third as likely to drop out as those who don't.
For the droppers-out, there is little choice but to spend more on training.
Federal employment and training programmes were sliced in half during the 1980s, from $12.8 billion to $5.6 billion, in real terms.
If the will fails
For all the talk, dishing out control to individuals has its limits.
One example: black churches, which organise services from financial credit to remedial education, carry enormous influence in poor black neighbourhoods, and offer the kinds of local leadership that Mr Kemp so much wants to nurture.
More than three-quarters of black Americans belong to a church, and nearly half go to church every week.
But if the state supported church groups it would provoke a constitutional row, because the constitution separates church and state.
Another example: the empowerment that cities crave is a share of the taxes raised in their rich suburbs.
Suburban schools gleam with modern gadgetry, while inner-city schools lack basic text books.
But a proposal to re-draw the tax-boundary line between them would win little favour in the rich suburbs.
The slums in America's great cities are shameful.
They are a damning indictment of the richest country in the world.
The problems that fester in them are not peripheral: they constitute America's main domestic challenge today.
The nation now has a quarter of a century's worth of anti-poverty experiments to draw on.
That poverty persists despite these efforts is less a reason to give up than a reason to learn from what works and what does not.
George Bush could now cash in on the country's post-war confidence by launching another war on the black home-front.
America cannot afford to let down its blacks for much longer.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The Baltimore affair
Ignoble
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
WHEN it was published in a journal called Cell in April 1986, ‘Altered Repertoire of Endogenous Immunoglobulin Gene Expression in Transgenic Mice Containing a Rearranged Mu Heavy Chain Gene’ did not seem to be the stuff of history.
It was not.
It offered evidence for a theory of the immune system about which most researchers were curious but sceptical.
The findings could not be repeated and the theory died.
But the paper lived on — in congressional hearings, in national newspapers and in heated disputes wherever two or more scientists were gathered together.
After five years of controversy it is about to be laid to rest.
And the corpse stinks.
In a report to be published shortly, the Office of Scientific Integrity of the National Institutes of Health (which paid for the research reported in the paper) concludes that key data for the paper were faked.
This is naughty, but not earth-shaking.
It happens.
What is more disturbing is how long it can take to uncover such things when big reputations are at stake.
The Cell paper had six authors.
One was Thereza Imanishi-Kari, who was then an immunologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
It is her work which has been the target of investigations by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and a House subcommittee chaired by Congressman John Dingell, and of less formal inquiries at MIT and Tufts University Medical School, in Boston, where she now works.
Another author was David Baltimore, a Nobel prize-winner who is now president of Rockefeller University.
Dr Baltimore's scientific work and contribution to the paper have never been questioned.
But the case is widely referred to as ‘the Baltimore affair’ because of the surprising lengths to which he has gone to defend Dr Imanishi-Kari.
It was a researcher in Dr Imanishi-Kari's laboratory, Margot O'Toole, who first questioned the paper.
She was puzzled by her inability to repeat its results and even more puzzled by the data that purported to support them.
But in the early summer of 1986 review panels at MIT and at Tufts (which was in the process of hiring Dr Imanishi-Kari) both concluded that the paper's main finding was not affected by Dr O'Toole's criticisms and that no published corrections were required.
Dr Baltimore said the same thing — and repeated it in an article published in the summer of 1989, arguing that ‘the errors that have been identified in the Cell paper were inconsequential to the conclusions.’
Most people who were not immunologists quite reasonably believed him.
According to Dr O'Toole, Dr Baltimore told her in 1986 that she could write a letter to Cell about it, but that he would publish a rejoinder.
In the summer of 1986 Dr Imanishi-Kari asked Dr O'Toole to leave the laboratory at Tufts where they both then worked.
She has been unable to get an academic job since; she did not get a job in science until 1990, when she was hired by Genetics Institute, a biotechnology company founded by one of her few supporters, Mark Ptashne of Harvard.
The NIH report, noting that Dr O'Toole ‘suffered substantially for the simple act of raising questions about the accuracy of a scientific paper’, describes her actions as ‘heroic in many respects’.
It is less enamoured of Dr Baltimore's role.
Even after an earlier NIH panel found ‘significant errors of misstatement and omission’ in the paper, he called for ‘all scientists’to support Dr Imanishi-Kari.
The statements of Dr Baltimore's which the NIH's Office of Scientific Integrity finds ‘most deeply troubling’ were made to the NIH last year.
They concern data which were not published in the original paper, but which Dr Imanishi-Kari gave to an NIH panel in order to support her published claims against Dr O'Toole's criticisms.
One panel member said that they had been ready to ‘throw out’ the whole study until the notebook with this new data was produced.
The panel asked for the new data to be published as a correction to the original paper.
This was Dr Baltimore's comment to the NIH:
In my mind you can make up anything you want in your notebooks, but you can't call it fraud if it wasn't published.
Now, you managed to trick us into publishing — sort of tricked Thereza — into publishing a few numbers and now you're going to go back and see if you can produce those as fraud.
Last week, when drafts of the latest NIH report began to circulate, Dr Baltimore finally asked for the Cell paper to be retracted.
Anti-ulcer drugs
Too much acid
GOTHENBURG
IN THE world of pharmaceuticals it is not only marketing men who go for the hard sell.
Scientists also seem to.
Glaxo, the world's second-largest drugs firm, makes half of its sales from ranitidine, an ulcer cure which, under the brand name of Zantac, is the world's top-selling drug.
The drug now faces its first serious contender in omeprazole, made by Astra, a Swedish firm.
Glaxo's scientists say omeprazole should be used sparingly because it might cause cancer; Astra believes its drug is no more dangerous than ranitidine and has worked hard to prove it.
A battle royal is under way.
In 1990 sales of omeprazole reached $400m.
Astra wants more and hopes to convince regulators in America that its drug is safe for widespread use (most other countries have already waved it through).
In May 1990 an advisory committee of America's Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said omeprazole could be used to treat all duodenal ulcers, not just those which cause severe gut conditions.
But the FDA has not yet given this approval.
In the early 1980s Astra suspended clinical trials of omeprazole when it was found that high doses of the drug caused cancer of the stomach lining in rats.
By 1985 Astra said it had found out why, and that the problem would not affect people.
Anti-ulcer drugs work by reducing the concentration of gastric acids that destroy the gut.
Ranitidine binds to H2-receptors in the gut wall, preventing a natural body-chemical, histamine, from binding to them (such drugs are known as H2-antagonists).
Histamine triggers acid production in cells.
Other cells, apart from those carrying H2-receptors, also produce gut acid.
Omeprazole works differently, inhibiting the enzyme that pumps acid out of gut cells regardless of what stimulates acid production.
However, when acid-levels in the gut are low, a hormone known as gastrin is released; this induces an abnormal growth of stomach cells.
Because it is so good at suppressing acid, omeprazole acts as a powerful boost to gastrin production.
Fortunately increased gastrin production does not seem to cause any untoward effects on people.
At low doses of omeprazole doctors believe they can avoid any danger of cancer.
The H2-antagonists have had their own complications.
Two were abandoned in the mid-1980s when they were discovered to cause cancer in rats.
Last year Astra revealed the results of a two-year study it had conducted on ranitidine; at high doses it promoted cancers in the stomach.
It says Glaxo failed to spot this in its animal studies.
Glaxo rightly points out that Astra used very high levels of ranitidine, several hundred times the normal human intake and far greater than the doses of omeprazole Astra fed to rats.
Astra refuses to conduct further rat studies with lower doses of ranitidine, saying that this is Glaxo's job.
Glaxo has not produced any data about the effect of ranitidine on rats using Astra's methods, but says there is no evidence that ranitidine promotes the formation of dangerous levels of gastrin at therapeutic doses.
In February 1990 Glaxo published a letter in the Lancet claiming that omeprazole was also capable of damaging DNA and hence causing cancer, based on a newly developed test.
Rats are first dosed with drugs, the surface layer of their stomach linings removed and the rate of DNA synthesis is estimated.
Loxtidine (one of the H2-antagonists dropped in the early 1980s) was given a clean bill of health by the same test.
As a result of these findings Glaxo stopped clinical trials comparing ranitidine with omeprazole for ethical reasons.
In the same issue of the Lancet, Astra replied that Glaxo's new test was scientifically unsound because it did not account for normal cell division (which would also stimulate DNA synthesis).
Glaxo believed it was unnecessary to do this because cells sitting on the inner surface of the gut wall do not divide.
But since the gut wall undulates, it is easy to contaminate the sample with cells from just below the surface, which do.
Astra then quickly arranged a meeting with top gastroenterologists in London in April 1990 at which Glaxo was denounced.
It seems Glaxo omitted to say in its letter that at higher doses omeprazole did not stimulate DNA synthesis excessively.
Glaxo acknowledges the omission, but says at higher doses known cancer-causing agents do not promote DNA synthesis.
Earlier this year Chie Furihata and her colleagues at the Institute of Medical Science at the University of Tokyo published findings supporting Glaxo's thesis.
She, however, also added chemicals which inhibit normal cell division.
Omeprazole again failed the test.
Astra says her methods do not fully exclude the possibility of normal DNA replication and cannot repeat her results.
There the debate stands, for now.
The cost of such wrangling is huge.
Astra does not expect to make a profit on omeprazole for a few years yet, and — unfortunately for Astra — Glaxo has the resources to continue the scientific tussle.
Weighing up the neutrino
The little neutrino could cause big problems for the physicists' picture of the universe
IMAGINE light deprived of its ability to illuminate and you get a fair idea of the insubstantiality of neutrinos.
They do almost nothing — they can pass through planets without noticing them — and weigh almost nothing.
At least, present theories do not say they should weigh anything, and observation has suggested that if they do weigh something, it is next to nothing.
But recent experiments have called that finding, and much else, into question.
In laboratories in Canada, California and England, observations of heavy neutrinos are causing gentlemanly but intense controversy.
Neutrinos are born in nuclear decays, typically in beta decay: one of the neutrons in an atomic nucleus turns into a proton, giving off an electron in the process.
Some of the energy given off is carried away by the electron, which is detectable, some by the neutrino, which is not.
The amount of energy carried by the electrons is thought to be spread smoothly across a spectrum.
However in 1985 John Simpson, of the University of Guelph, in Ontario, Canada, found a kink in his measurements of the beta-decay spectrum of tritium (a radioactive form of hydrogen).
In this line of work, both energies and masses are expressed in electron volts (Einstein showed that masses could be considered as energies).
A neutron weighs about 1 billion eV: an electron weighs 500,000 eV (which can be written as 500 keV, where 1 keV is 1,000 eV).
Neutrinos are thought to weigh less than 20 eV, if anything.
Dr Simpson found that the spectrum's shape changed at an energy about 17 keV below that of the most energetic electrons emitted by tritium, which led him to suggest that there might be an extra component to beta decay.
Although most of the time the energy not carried by the electron was taken away by an everyday massless neutrino, sometimes it was carried by a neutrino that weighed a comparatively large 17 keV.
If the electron did not leave behind enough energy to give the neutrino its mass, then that extra type of decay involving fat neutrinos would not happen.
Hence the kink: above it, no heavy neutrinos are ever given off.
Below it, they are.
Dr Simpson's results were immediately pounced upon and found wanting by other groups, who used a different type of instrument and saw no effect.
Working with a graduate student, Andrew Himes, Dr Simpson decided he had overestimated the number of fat neutrinos, but that he still saw them, both when repeating his work on tritium and when looking at the beta decays of sulphur.
The two also produced criticisms of the experiments that saw nothing.
Still, since only one group saw anything, and half a dozen could find nothing, nobody felt obliged to take the 17 keV neutrino too seriously.
Last year, though, a group led by Eric Norman at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in California declared that it had seen evidence for a 17 keV neutrino in radioactive decays of carbon-14.
Their evidence was a bit messy, but it breathed new life into the debate.
Then Dr Himes and Nick Jelley, with whom he is now working in Oxford, repeated Dr Simpson's sulphur experiment with a more carefully conceived piece of apparatus and new calculations about sources of error.
Early this year they announced that they had found the 17 keV neutrino again, with a far greater degree of sensitivity than any previous experiment.
A heavy scene
There are two reasons why Dr Himes and Dr Jelley have not convinced the world that Dr Simpson was right.
One is to do with equipment.
All the experiments in which the neutrino has been seen used solid-state detectors — crystals of silicon and lithium or of germanium — to measure the electron-energy spectrum.
It is also possible to measure the energy of electrons using a more tried and tested type of instrument called a magnetic spectrometer.
The no-neutrino results have been achieved using magnetic spectrometers.
So it is not implausible for critics to say that the solid-state detectors are unreliable and somehow bring about a sharp distortion in the spectra.
Nobody has convincingly worked out how such a distortion might occur, but the notion that odd things can happen in the solid state is firmly entrenched in many minds.
The problems encountered when making a 17 keV neutrino fit with what is known about the universe are the second reason for scepticism.
The ‘standard model’ of particle physics, which explains everything seen until now by particle experimenters, contains three generations of subatomic particles.
Each generation has four members: two quarks, an electron-like particle and a neutrino.
The neutrino normally given off in beta decay is a first-generation neutrino, and called an ‘electron neutrino’.
Theory allows that if any of the neutrinos have mass then neutrinos of one generation can find themselves turning into neutrinos of another generation.
The way to make sense of the 17 keV neutrino is to make it a mixture of an electron neutrino and a third-generation ‘tau neutrino’— with the mass provided by the tau neutrino.
But one cannot just say that the tau neutrino is heavy and leave it at that.
Theories about how particles come to have mass work only for particles that can spin in two different ways — clockwise and anticlockwise.
Massless electron neutrinos spin only one way: if you could see one coming towards you, it would always appear to be spinning clockwise.
But a 17 keV neutrino would have to be able to spin both ways.
So suppose that the tau neutrino comes in two forms — right- and left-handed — while its first- and second-generation cousins do not.
This is not an elegant solution.
It means the standard theory of the fundamental force underlying beta decay, the weak interaction, will need something of an overhaul.
Inelegance is not the only problem: the 17 keV neutrino does not fit happily into the big bang.
The calculations that describe how the chemical elements were cooked up in the turmoil of creation say that there were three types of neutrino around to help things on their way.
A right-handed form of the tau neutrino would bring the number up to four, which is too many.
Those theorists trying to repair the weak interaction should be able to fix it so that the right-handed tau neutrino is much less likely to interact with other matter than the left-handed one is, and thus stays aloof during the big bang.
But appease the cosmologists and the astrophysicists start to worry.
In 1987 detectors in Japan and America picked up a ten-second burst of neutrinos from the collapse of a giant star.
The burst took ten seconds because a dying star's core is so dense that even neutrinos bang into things on their way out.
If electron neutrinos can turn into yet-more-aloof right-handed tau neutrinos, though, they can get straight out without hitting anything.
They would stream from the core unhindered, in well under the ten seconds observed.
There is also the problem of the neutrino mass.
The number of tau neutrinos created in the big bang can be worked out; if they did not decay into other particles, and weighed 17 keV, then the universe would be more than 200 times heavier than it appears — so heavy that it would have collapsed in on itself in a big crunch eons ago.
That means the heavy neutrinos must decay into something far less massive, quite quickly.
And they must do it without letting off any light, or the sky would be aglow with the death throes of neutrinos to this day.
There is a way to make neutrinos decay without producing light — you can achieve almost anything in this sort of physics, as long as you are willing to do nasty things to pretty theories — but it involves conjuring up yet another new particle.
A sensible theorist's approach is to hope that the fat neutrino goes away.
But will it?
Dr Jelley and Dr Himes have been making measurements of the beta decay of radioactive nickel (nickel was used in the magnetic-spectrometer experiment most widely respected, one done at Canada's Chalk River national laboratory).
They have not finished analysing their data and getting it ready; still, their current bullishness about their earlier result is not that of people who already know their next experiment to have failed.
Many other experiments are planned, or in progress.
The experiment that Dr Himes and Dr Jelley seem to acknowledge as a potential make-or-break is one being planned by another Oxford physicist, David Wark, who will use a particularly well-understood and trusted magnetic spectrometer at Britain's national physical laboratory.
Under the experimental onslaught being marshalled, most expect the 17 keV neutrino to wither and die.
But if Dr Wark's experiment finds it, or if any respectable magnetic spectrometer defects to the heavy-neutrino camp, then the fax machines of the physicists' world will be clogged with ideas.
Why things have mass is one of the great questions; why things are arranged in generations is one of the others.
Massless electron neutrinos playing at being heavy tau neutrinos might help solve either or both.
Imaginations fettered by today's highly successful orthodoxy will break free.
As the universe changes, so does the way that physics gets done.
If the 17 keV neutrino were proved to exist, far more detailed surveys of beta decay would start to pin down its properties and to look for others.
If such a revolution comes about, there will doubtless be a role for the huge accelerators physicists have built to construct and test the standard model over the past few decades.
But for a while, the frontier of experimental physics will be open to anyone with a fax machine, an electronic mail-box and a reasonably good university laboratory.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Cross-border checks
Private detectives employed by the Kuwaiti government claim to have discovered that Saddam Hussein has hidden assets in more than 40 banks around the world, $2.4 billion of which are not frozen by UN sanctions.
Kroll Associates of New York said around $10 billion of Iraq's $200 billion oil revenues had been skimmed off in 1979–89.
A network of Iraqi front companies owns around $1 billion of shares in European countries, including an 8.4% stake worth FFr357m ($62m) in France's Hachette, the world's sixth-largest publishing company.
Despite an official ban, from 1982 to 1989 West German companies supplied Iraq with arms and the technology to help make nuclear weapons, poison gas, and missiles, in all worth around DM1 billion ($600m).
Embarrassed, Germany promises to tighten trading laws.
After years of haggling with EC regulatory authorities, Monsanto's hormone drug BST, which boosts milk yields, was cleared for use within the EC.
Brazil suspended export registrations for its coffee.
London futures prices rose 15% to £670 ($1,170) a tonne, but fell within hours: coffee is plentiful and a new international deal on export quotas is a long way off.
Heavy trading in New York before Brazil made its announcement smelt like insider trading.
Money in mind
Having abolished its formal queue in September 1989, the Bank of England is operating an informal ‘calendar’ for rights issues.
Bass made the largest call this month.
The brewer hopes to raise £558m ($976m).
The District Court in Topeka, Kansas, fined James and Linda Newton $75,000 for spreading false and malicious statements associating Procter & Gamble with satanism, one more in a long line of lawsuits the company has filed.
In the past ten years P&G has dealt with 150,000 letters and telephone-calls about satanism and soap powder.
Britain's debt-crippled Saatchi & Saatchi won shareholder approval for a £225m ($395m) rescue package.
Earlier, the advertising group had announced a pre-tax loss of £5.2m ($10.1m) for the final quarter of 1990.
Britain's National Westminster Bank tightened the reins at its American firm Natwest Bancorp, in a bid to control its losses, which reached $352m last year, mainly because of bad company loans.
It has replaced Bill Knowles, head of Bancorp for ten years, with a Natwest career man, John Tugwell.
Resolution Trust Corp, the agency cleaning up America's savings and loan mess, is to sell 215 more S&Ls, with assets totalling $38 billion, by September 30th.
For FFr100m ($17.5m), American Express has bought a 2% stake in Club Méditerranée, a French group that ranks third among European tour operators, and runs holiday villages in exotic places.
Meanwhile, Amex's chairman, James Robinson, took an $800,000 cut in pay last year because of poor profits, leaving him with a miserly $1,798,077.
The boss of Salomon Inc, John Gutfreund, also took a pay cut, down to $2.26m, reflecting the investment bank's 36% drop in net income.
But with record pre-tax earnings of $492m in 1990, Salomon's Phibro Energy subsidiary was able to hand over $20m to its boss, Andrew Hall.
On line
IBM and AT&T, America's behemoth computer and telephone companies, announced they are adapting their network-management systems so that customers can connect them more easily.
Smaller communications companies are likely to have to follow the new standard.
Europe's biggest joint semiconductor research programme, JESSI, booted ICL out of three of the five projects in which it was taking part.
Fujitsu of Japan bought 80% of Britain's biggest computer maker last year.
Groupe Bull, France's state-owned computer firm, announced pre-tax losses for 1990 of over FFr6 billion ($1 billion).
About half the loss resulted from operations, half from restructuring.
The previous day Bull took out a newspaper advertisement promising to do better in future.
After his Mirror Group Newspapers is floated in April, Robert Maxwell is stepping down as chairman of Maxwell Communication Corporation, and making his son Kevin chief executive.
Maxwell senior wants to concentrate on bringing his new purchase, the New York Daily News, back to life.
Motoring costs
France's state-owned car maker, Renault, suffered an 87% plunge in profits last year, to a net FFr1.21 billion ($196m) from FFr9.29 billion in 1989.
A 1.3% decline in European car sales worsened a slip in Renault's market share from 10.4% to 9.9%.
The firm even lost ground in France and Spain, its stronghold markets.
The total cost to car makers of employing labour is lowest in Britain, at $15.80 an hour.
Socialist Sweden came out at a hefty $27.10.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
Australia's GNP grew by 0.6% in 1990, after falling by 0.7% in the year to the third quarter.
The improvement was helped by a tax change that inflated gold exports.
Australia's economy still looks shaky: industrial production fell by 1.5% in the year to January, the seventh consecutive month of year-on-year decline.
Sweden's GNP fell by 0.5% in 1990; the last fall was in the year to the first quarter of 1987.
Belgium's industrial output rose by 5% in the year to November, the same as in October but up from 3.5% in November 1989.
PRICES AND WAGES
Britain's consumer-price inflation slowed only slightly to 8.9% in the year to February; food prices rose sharply in the month because of bad weather.
Canada's consumer prices were unchanged in February, slowing annual growth to 6.2%.
In the same month France's consumer-price inflation stayed at 3.5%.
Belgium's wholesale prices were unchanged in January compared with a year ago.
Italy's rose by 8.1% in the year to December.
UNLEADED PETROL
Even green western Germany has been put to shame by Japan's and America's commitment to lead-free petrol.
Japanese refiners stopped producing leaded petrol in December 1987.
Americans have almost worked through the gasand lead-guzzling Cadillacs of the 1970s.
Yet Europe is growing greener.
Lead emissions from British vehicles fell by more than half between 1975 and 1988.
New EC legislation means that, from 1993, all new cars must be fitted with catalytic converters, which cannot tolerate lead.
By 2000 the great majority of cars will run on unleaded fuel.
Spain has plenty of catching up to do.
But the real villains are the Luxembourgers and Italians who stubbornly continue to buy leaded petrol, even though many of their petrol stations offer the cleaner alternative.
EXPORTS
Growth in the volume of world merchandise trade slowed last year to 5%, down from 7% in 1989.
Officials at the GATT predict a further slowdown in 1991.
But the value of world trade grew by 13% in 1990, to a new record of $3.5 trillion.
Helped (a lot) by the dollar and (a little ) by unification, Germany again became the world's biggest exporter, elbowing America out of the top slot after just one year.
Had Germany been unified in 1989, it would have stayed top.
Exports from third-placed Japan were also up — but only by 4.5%.
Eastern Europe stirred: Poland's exports to the European Community rose by 40% in 1990, and Hungary's by 28%, but the Soviet Union's exports fell by 5.5% to $103 billion.
Exports from developing countries as a whole were up by 13% in 1990.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
World wheat production is forecast to fall by 40m tonnes in 1991–92, to 555m tonnes, according to the International Wheat Council.
This season's record output has been the result of exceptional weather and yields.
The projected fall next season, beginning July, is based on reduced planting and normal yields.
The wheat crop in the United States will be 17% lower, while output in the Soviet Union will fall 14%.
World wheat consumption is forecast to stagnate at 570m tonnes.
Demand in developing countries is limited by a shortage of cash and by plentiful rice supplies.
As stocks fall, wheat prices should regain their usual premium over maize, reducing the amount of wheat used in animal feed.
FOREIGN RESERVES
Last week's box on official reserves was mugged by statistical gremlins, making a nonsense of some of the numbers.
Sorry.
This week's chart shows the correct figures.
Japan (not the United States, as suggested last week) still boasts the world's biggest official foreign reserves: at the end of January it had some $79 billion-worth (including foreign currency, SDRs and its reserve position at the IMF, but excluding gold).
But Japan's reserves have fallen by almost a fifth since the end of 1988.
Over the same period America's reserves have doubled, to $74 billion, to put it in second place; back in 1988 it was in only sixth place.
All the European countries in the chart except Britain now have fatter official reserves than in 1988.
The only developing country with large foreign reserves is Taiwan, in third place.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
Britain's current-account deficit shrank to £192m ($377m) in February; the 12-month visible-trade deficit fell below $30 billion for the first time since mid-1988.
In the year to February France's visible-trade deficit stood at $11.2 billion.
In trade-weighted terms the dollar rose by 1.1%, the yen rose 1.2% and the D-mark fell 0.8%.
WORLD BOURSES
Most stockmarkets lost ground after their recent gains.
London fell by 2.4% and New York by 2.2%.
Frankfurt dropped by 3.3%, thanks to fears of higher interest rates and a downturn in the bond market.
Johannesburg hit a record high, ending 0.2% up.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
Britain's prime-lending rate was cut by 0.5% shortly after the budget, to 13.5%, down from 15% in February.
America's narrow-money supply grew by 4.4% in the year to February, up from 3.9% in the year to January.
Its broad money grew by 2.2%.