

The Heritage
THE woods seem but just freed from the horror of primeval sea, if that is not primeval sea washing their bases.
Capella hangs low, pale, large, moist and trembling almost engulfed between two horn of the wood upon the headland, the frailest beacon of hope, still fluttering from the storm out of which the land is emerging.
Then, or at home looking at a map of Britain, the West calls, out of Wiltshire and out of Cornwall and Devon beyond, out of Monmouth and Glamorgan and Gower and Caermarthen, with a voice of dead Townsends, Eastaways, Thomases, Phillipses, Treharnes, Marendaz, sea men and mountain men.
Westward, for men of this island, lies the sea; westward are the great hills.
In a mere map the west of Britain is fascinating.
The great features of that map, which make it something more than a picture to be imperfectly copied by laborious childish pens, are the great promontories of Caernarvon, of Pembroke, of Gower and of Cornwall, jutting out into the western sea, like the features of a grim large face, such a face as is carved on a ship's prow….
To the eyes of a child they stand for adventure.
They are lean and worn and scarred with the strife and watching.
Then gradually into the mind of the child comes the story that justifies and, still more, inspires and seems to explain those westward-pointing promontories.
For, out towards them continually have the conquered races of the world retreated, and their settlements give those corners a strangeness and a charm to our fantastic sympathies.
Out from them conquerors in their turn have gone to found a legend like the Welsh Madoc, an empire like the men of Devon.
The blood of conquered and conqueror is in our veins, and it flushes the cheek at the sight or thought of the west.
Each man of us is as ancient and complicated, as lofty-spired and as deep-vaulted as cathedrals and castles of old, and in those lands our crypts and dark foundations are dimly remembered.
Edward Thomas wrote these words in 1908, at a period of comparative ease and tranquillity, when he had gone about the South Country these twenty years and more on foot, especially in Kent between Maidstone and Ashford and round Penshurst, in Surrey between London, Guildford and Horley, in Hampshire round Petersfield, in Wiltshire between Wootton Bassett, Swindon and Savernake.
The people are almost foreign to me, the more so because country people have not yet been thrown into quite the same confusion as townspeople, and therefore look awkwardly upon those who are not in trade — writing is an unskilled labour and not a trade — not on the land, and not idle….
Yet is this country, though I am mainly Welsh, a kind of home, as I think it is more than any other to those modern people who belong nowhere.
…These are the ‘home’ counties.
A man can hide away in them.
The people are not hospitable, but the land is.
This concern with his own roots was a frequent preoccupation in his writing.
In spite of the touches of mystification he employed in many autobiographical references scattered through twenty years of publishing, it is possible to detect the complicated temperament he had inherited.
But this is only one side of the picture.
In verse and prose he was hell-bent on facing himself when things were out of joint; the scalpel-probe is counterbalanced by the unlearned, incurious manner in which he found deepest ease and joy out of doors — a way of healing he had discovered early in life, although he did not consider himself a naturalist.
Philip Edward Thomas was born in London on 3 March 1878 at 10 Upper Lansdowne Road North, now 14 Lansdowne Gardens, just off South Lambeth Road, where his parents occupied rooms let by a Mrs Legge.
It was their first London home after their marriage in Wales some time in 1874–5.
His father, Philip Henry Thomas, had distinguished himself in a Civil Service Examination (Executive Branch) and had been posted to a staff clerkship for light railways and tramways at the Board of Trade.
According to family tradition, Mr Thomas (1854–1920) had once been a pupil-teacher in his home town of Tredegar, a flourishing iron and coal community.
The poet's grandfather, Henry Thomas, was a fitter by trade and followed a typical path of migration in the early nineteenth century.
Like many Welshmen in and around the Neath and Swansea valleys, he had made his way from the more rural communities of West Glamorganshire and Carmarthenshire, up the valleys towards Brecon, and then moved eastwards towards the concentration of new industries at Dowlais, Merthyr, Rhymney, Tredegar, Beaufort, Ebbw Vale, and Pontypool.
From this area, at the heads of the East Glamorgan and West Monmouthshire valleys, some moved later southwards towards Newport.
This first wave of West Walians to the new industrial areas of north-eastern South Wales brought a distinctive radical, nonconformist, and Welsh-speaking element to a pastoral community that had remained largely conservative and unchanged from the late seventeenth century and was slowly losing the old Welsh language — rapidly so in Monmouthshire — and along with it any acute sense of separate national identity.
The racial mixture was soon to be sharpened, as the mid-century railway boom got under way, by new waves of immigrants from Ireland, the Forest of Dean, Herefordshire, and Somerset, but already the social, political, and religious pattern of the new South Wales and the eastern valleys of Monmouthshire had been firmly set for another century.
Henry Thomas and his son, Philip Henry, were probably Welsh speakers who both married women from Gwent.
The poet's paternal grandmother, Rachel Phillips, was a native of Abertillery (or Blaenau Gwent) where a native Welsh tradition had survived, as it had in the Tredegar of her youth.
She eventually carried the Welsh language with her, later in life, to the clannish Welsh community that developed around the Great Western Railway works in Swindon.
For Henry Thomas had left Tredegar for railway employment in Swindon and one of his sons, the Uncle Harry who features in the Swindon holidays described so lovingly in The Childhood of Edward Thomas , was a fitter at the Swindon GWR works until he set sail for South Africa in 1891.
The poet never knew his grandfather, who ‘had long been dead’ when Edward first visited his father's mother at Swindon in 1888.
The Eastaway and Treharne names still retained in the Thomas family indicate that originally the family came from the coastal region of Glamorgan between Neath and Gower.
Cross-channel traffic between South Wales and the coast from Weston to Ilfracombe, with settlement of Somerset and Devon families along the Welsh coast, is attested in the parish records that survive from the seventeenth century.
The use of ‘Treharne Thomas’ as a family name was preserved in the Pontardulais cousins with whom Edward spent his Oxford long vacations.
They too were a family of skilled craftsmen and, like so many of the first two generations of South Wales industrial settlers, retained a small interest in country matters, raising pigs and often keeping a pony or two on the outskirts of their villages.
Little is known about Philip Henry Thomas's life and career before he settled down in Lambeth with his Newport-born wife Elizabeth, grand-daughter of Alderman William Townsend (1795–1877) on her father's side and a sea-captain named Marendaz on her mother's side.
In his Edward Thomas (1937), Judge Robert P. Eckert — who corresponded frequently with the poet's maternal aunt, Margaret Townsend, and his youngest brother, Julian — describes the father as a ‘practical, self-made man…a short, stocky welshman, a dark, good-looking man’.
Margaret Townsend had spend some time helping her sister with the large growing family, especially during the frequent pregnancies, and she had lived with the poet's mother in Stow Hill, Newport, until the move to London.
Margaret certainly visited ‘Edwy’(the family name for the poet) at Oxford and corresponded with him subsequently from the USA until his death.
She probably supplied the adjective ‘practical’ for Eckert.
I was once told that Philip Henry Thomas, while preparing himself for the Civil Service examination, had followed his period as a pupil-teacher with a post connected with the railways which were expanding rapidly in industrial South Wales in the 1860s and 1870s.
His third son, Theodore, eventually became technical head of London Transport; Ernest, the second son, trained to become an art teacher but spent most of his life in industrial design and advertising; the poet, too, possessed strong, capable, craftsman's hands and the poet's daughter, Myfanwy, still treasures many examples of her father's skill as a carpenter and metal worker.
Her brother, Merfyn, began training with his uncle as a motor engineer and eventually became a technical journalist.
In the half-fictional The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans , and in the pruned record of The Childhood , Thomas has left detailed accounts of his extending interest in ‘Butterflies, Moths and Pigeons’, in fishing, in birdnesting of all kinds, with the skills and making of implements that accompanied these activities.
It is surprising how little the poet's father shared in these games and sports, which could have helped form a natural bridge of intimacy with his six sons as they began to go their several ways.
The father's preparation for the Civil Service Examination — probably as rigorous an academic test as the external London matriculation examinations of the first forty years of this century — had given him command of three languages, Latin, French, and German, and a powerful interest in political and philosophical topics.
His impact on one side of the new society he had entered in the Battersea district is recorded in an obituary tribute in the Clapham Observer, Tooting and Balham Times of Friday 24 December 1920:
By the death, at the age of 66, of Mr. Philip Henry Thomas which took place after a long illness, on Saturday the 18th instant, at his residence at 13 Rusham Road, Battersea loses a citizen who has been active for 40 years in championing the cause of Liberalism in this borough….
Coming to London as a young clerk attached to the Board of Trade, it was not long before he began to take an interest in political affairs, and his remarkable gift for public speaking was developed at the old Battersea Parliament, to which belonged many men who have since played important roles in public life…including Stanley (now Lord) Buckmaster, John Burns and Horatio Bottomley….
Although invited by the Liberal Party to be their candidate for the Clapham Division 20 years ago or more,[he]was unable to accept the invitation, and contented himself with speaking for the Liberal or Progressive candidate at every available opportunity in many elections.
On his retirement from the Civil Service six years ago…he became President of the Clapham Liberal Association, and at the General Election of 1916 was the chosen parliamentary candidate for the new constituency of South Battersea where he put up a strong fight against odds for what he firmly and honestly believed to be the tight.
He lost two sons in the Great War….
Besides his political activities Mr. Thomas also found time for lecturing on literary, philosophical and ethical subjects in many parts of the country, and at one time he lectured almost every Sunday in the Town Hall for the Battersea Ethical Society.
He was a brilliant speaker and lecturer.
Latterly he became prominent in Positivist circles and occupied until recently the pulpit at the little-known Church of Humanity in Holborn.
His sympathies were also with the poor and the oppressed, and in him Democracy has lost an intellectual, enlightened and patriotic advocate of England's faith, honour and advancement.
When Edward was two, and a second child was expected, Mr Thomas moved house (the number cannot now be traced) to Wakehurst Road, one of the rows of recently built small houses parallel to Battersea Rise and between Clapham and Wandsworth commons.
There Ernest, Theodore, and Reginald were born within six years, but Edward's recollections of this time are sketchy.
Before his tenth birthday, with another child (Oscar) on the way, the family moved yet again to 61 Shelgate Road, a much larger detached house four streets nearer to Battersea Rise and Wandsworth Common.
Near to a school and a cemetery and with an older house (with its orchard and coachhouse) at the end of the road, this spacious house remained Edward's home until he left Oxford.
His father was now well-established in his career and though never affluent they were comfortably off.
Edward recalls his earliest years at Wakehurst Road: I have only one clear early glimpse of my father — darting out of the house in his slippers and chasing and catching a big boy who had bullied me.
He was eloquent, confident, black-haired, brown-eyed, all that my mother was not.
By glimpses I learnt with awe and astonishment that he had once been of my age.
…I can hear but never see him telling me for the tenth or hundredth time the story of the Wiltshire moonrakers…and many another comic tale or rhyme.
…[My parents]were sober reverent people without a creed, though their disbelief in Hell and the Devil almost amounted to a creed.
My father and I made merry over the Devil and the folly of believing in him as we supposed many did.
He used to try different chapels or different preachers, sometimes taking me with him, more especially when he had become an almost weekly attendant at a Unitarian Chapel….
Chapel and Sunday-school were to me cruel ceremonious punishments for the freedom of Monday to Saturday….
The best of life was passed out of the house and out of school.
Otherwise, in these early years before the age of twelve, the references to his father are few and nebulous: ‘My mother played the piano a little; my father sang ‘Bonny Mary of Argyle’ to her accompaniment.’
‘The pleasure of being top, and nothing else, except the interest of my father, made me do such homework as I did in the evenings….
My father made me attend evening lectures for a time on sound, light, and heat — with no effect.’
A little later, two references uncover a less severe view of P. H. T. After a talk with his mother about misuse of pocket-money, in order to buy new pigeons, ‘I confessed.
My father spoke to me angrily.
As I hated anger and blame, I became wretched.
The result was that very soon indeed afterwards my father came with a very sad but kind face in to the room where I sat alone and told me he was sure I should not do that sort of thing again.
His shaking hands with me made me feel half hero, half saint.
Naturally I did not do quite that sort of thing again.’
Edward entered Battersea Grammar School as a ‘free scholar’.
One master earned respect and obedience without fear from nearly all his class, by being a just, quiet, serious man, even of speech and kindly….
With slow wrinkling his stiff face relaxed now and then into a feminine tender smile.
After a time I found myself frequently addressing him as ‘Father’, so naturally did he touch the gentle docile side of me.
The one time I ever cried in school was when he blamed me with a severity that seemed to hurt him….
My father probably went over the [Shakespeare]plays with me when I was doing my home-work, but his taste was for directly elevating philanthropic and progressive literature.
Or was it only with a view to inspiring a love of virtue that he read ‘Abou Ben Adhem’ and how he ‘loved his fellow men.’
There follows an account of Edward's slight involvement in his father's political activities, especially his schoolboy advocacy during the Home Rule election when his ‘enthusiasm pleased my father’.
But from the same Grammar School period Edward recalls in detail ‘the Sunday dinner anger, which became almost a regular thing,, with the boys tittering and refusing to discuss the topic of the morning's sermon until they received a lecture or abuse from their father, at this ‘almost the only meal as a rule which the whole family had together’.
Philip Henry expected a late-Victorian respectable pattern of behaviour from his sons.
Edward, school apart, was living a much more exciting life at the ramshackle, free-and-easy household of a friend, and exploring the common around his home in ever-increasing circles in the company of a few youths of similar tastes.
The qualities of independence, singularity of viewpoint, and readiness to move far afield in pursuit of his inner wishes (a characteristic of his father's early career) were beginning to appear in the son.
Three of Edward's brothers (Ernest, Theodore, and Julian) recorded brief memories of their eldest brother in 1947.
They recall his taste for long walks of twenty to twenty-five miles in rural settings away from Battersea, his passion for fishing in ponds and canals, and his accurate enlightening knowledge of birds, trees, insects, and flowers.
Their recollections also emphasize his aloofness, shyness, sudden love of fun, and self-contained nature.
They give no sense of a close-knit family unit, but they make it quite clear that when Edward writes of adventures in and around London commons, or at Swindon, the word ‘we’ invariably includes one of them.
He was diffident — unlike Ernest who was good at all games — and preoccupied with his country pursuits, but they found him companionable; himself capable of long hours of solitude, he could always find acquaintances ready to share his company for a time; but only a few dedicated companions shared his exacting singleminded concentration on these occupations.
He has recalled drily that as a schoolboy he found it easy to get his own way.
His own statements, supported by his brothers', disclose a resilient, self-reliant nature counterbalancing his sensitive response to the natural world.
Photographs and recollections confirm that in features and colouring he resembled his mother.
She was hesitant, shy, reserved, ‘more than pretty’ in the eyes of the ‘eldest son she loved best of her many sons’.
The Childhood , with its insistence on only those memories that could be recalled clearly, supports Eckert's belief that there was a silent but complete understanding between them:
My mother I can hardly see save as she is now while I am writing.
[In 1913.]
I cannot see her but I can summon up her presence.
She is plainest to me not quite dressed, in white bodice and petticoat, her arms and shoulders rounded and creamy smooth.
My affection for her was leavened with lesser likings and with admiration.
I liked the scent of her fresh warm skin and supposed it unique.
Her straight nose and chin made a profile that for years formed my standard.
No hair was so beautiful to me as hers was, light golden hair, long and rippling.
Her singing at fall of night, especially if we were alone together, soothed and fascinated me, as though it had been divine, at once the mightiest and the softest sound in the world.
Usually perhaps there was a servant, but my mother did everything for us ii the house, made many of our clothes and mended them, prepared and gave us food, tended us when sick, comforted us when cold, disappointed, or sorrowful.
The one terrible thing I witnessed as a small child was my mother suddenly rising from the dining-table with face tortured and crying, ‘I am going to die’.
My father took her on his knee and soothed her….
For her younger sister I felt a similar affection and admiration.
…She sang livelier songs, e.g. from Patience , than my mother ever did.
But she did not know our ways and her complaints or corrections were harsh by comparison with my mother's.
The Thomas household had five sons by the time Edward was ten years old.
Welsh servants aid mother's helps came aid went, aid some he ‘admired aid enjoyed admiring for their sweet looks or language or presence.
The only woman I had anything to do with regularly was my mother, aid except at meals aid bed time I did not see much even of my mother.
Occasionally we played cards or draughts together ii the evening.’
On Sunday, sitting between his father aid mother ii the Unitarian chapel, he only knew that where people were sad and solemn I was overcome, half-suffocated by the sadness aid the solemnity.
What was read aid preached was to me airy nothing.
I knew of no virtues except truthfulness, obedience, self-sacrifice, total abstinence from alcoholic drinks….
As for self-sacrifice it was mostly incredible.
But I liked to please my mother and keep undisturbed the love that was between us.
I sometimes did little unexpected kid things out of my tenderness for her, and was always glad to be the one to take up tea for her if she was unwell, and so on, or to help her with the housework when she was servantless.
…My mother never attempted to add to the religion of the chapel.
On the contrary she roused my indignation at the two conspicuously Christian aunts who had made her childhood in that dark house at Newport miserable.
If she or I had taken more trouble I might have been convinced that all religious people were cruel hypocrites.
The Childhood makes only three other references to his mother.
One is a brief account of the birth at home of the sixth son, Julian: the others refer to her active role as intermediary between the sons and the father.
One passage, when Edward was a scholar at Battersea Grammar School, sums up the general atmosphere of 61 Shelgate Road, as the poet recalled it twenty years later:
We had very few visitors, none to turn us inside out.
Once a lady aid a daughter, remote cousins or friends of friends, came, and the girl left me with a yearning heart for some days and a curiosity for years like my curiosity about the lost childish books.
Christmas was eagerly awaited for, but the day itself meant chiefly watching for the postman, disappointment, chapel, a heavy dinner and crackers, some squabbling comparisons of our presents, tea…supper…
The disappointment is vivid yet of the Christmas day when the postman arrived at last, hours late, and brought me only a long narrow box of crackers.
We children gave no presents to one another or to our parents: we were content to send out a few picture cards paid for by our parents, to people who would send us cards.
The faculty for ceremony or festival was not in any of us.
Our boy friends seldom came to the house.
Nor were we very anxious that they should, knowing that we should be constrained by the presence of father or mother.
For we had one way at home, another abroad.
He had severely limited the scope of his autobiography: ‘I depict not what I was but what I see when I look back’, he told Eleanor Farjeon.
The Childhood , perhaps, gives too joyless a picture of the tendrils of home that Thomas brought with him from boyhood.
In his sixteenth year he had the confidence to begin to write descriptive nature essays for publication in journals and newspapers.
In this he was encouraged by the Unitarian minister Mr Tarrant and a new friend, the literary critic James Ashcroft Noble.
Such tangible paid recognition of Edward's literary interests gained the approval of his father, who had himself remained a dedicated, aloof, self-improving student at home while his sons gave full rein to their athletic, roaming, rumbustious interests ‘abroad’.
Mr Thomas wished his sons to enjoy the best education he could provide, partly as a means of fulfilling their intellectual potential, but even more as a necessary upward step on the social-economic scale.
Edward recalls this attitude clearly among the Swindon-Welsh cronies of his paternal grandmother: ‘They used to remark how well my father was doing, my grandfather who had long been dead having only been a fitter’.
The fear of a ‘few stern five minutes’ with his father, who wanted him to leave Battersea Grammar School for the neighbouring public school St. Paul's, and had arranged for him to have special lessons in Latin verse and in Greek, kept him steadily at school work, although he knew he ‘could do better at lessons if I wished’.
His vital interest was exploring the countryside with his school friend Arthur Hardy, as he records it in A Sportsman's Tale : ‘We had spent the best ten years of life together and after that saw one another about twice a year…
Most of those ten years which had bound us together were spent out of doors.’
They had first met on a school paperchase when they strayed off course and returned late after nightfall.
From that year onward we two went through most of the stages into which the ordinary man's love of Nature is divided.
First the wild unconscious play when we hardly distinguished between the open fields and the neighbourhood of towns except that we preferred the fields.
Then, very soon, the hunting stage when we deliberately played at savages.
Then the time of collecting eggs, flowers and insects, of stuffing birds and animals.
And not long before we left school, the poetical stage when we read poetry out of doors, or rather I did, while he listened.
There was not a poet's emotion which we did not heartily believe ourselves to share, evoked by the poem but not imitated from it.
What had come to the poets in their most serene or passionate moments we glided into as easily as we gathered flowers for Maud or Blanche or Mabel, as we lay in the grass with our eyes divided between the books, the land and the clouds.
From the hundreds of volumes at home, including Shakespeare, Chaucer, Spenser, Shelley, Keats, Byron, Tennyson, and Browning, the boys were encouraged to learn selected poems for recitation; but Edward does not record where he had found and read Darwin's Descent of Man and books of travel, sport, and natural history, especially the many copious draughts of Richard Jefferies.
It seems safe to assume that Jefferies, like Waterton, Buckland, Wallace, and Charles Kingsley, would have been on his father's shelf.
Mr Thomas was a Comtean Positivist.
The gilt-edged selection from Tennyson into which he dipped, before reading him more extensively (around his fifteenth year), belonged to his mother.
Edward's early memories are softer in tone when they describe his visits with her to relations in the Welsh Border counties and especially to Herefordshire.
From The Childhood , and even more from some conversations I recorded with the poet's second cousin (T. Trehame Thomas) in 1966–7, there are hints that Mrs Thomas's family proudly preserved the memory of Alderman Townsend and his descendants: the Tedmans at a vicarage in Much Birch, near Hereford; another great-uncle at Limpley Stoke near Bath with an interest in the development of Edward's French grammar; and many more who had either been abroad and returned to moderate affluence in the Border counties (according to Mr T. T. Thomas's recollections) or had settled abroad in Africa or in the USA, like Edward's aunt Margaret.
She had received a sound enough education to act as a governess to children with parents overseas and, later, as a secretary-companion to American ladies.
There are substantial hints that if paternal family experience encouraged Edward to extend his interests, both in preparing for a career and in his natural history pursuits, along practical and fact-gathering lines, the subtler influence of his mother and her family gave approval to the sudden spurt of interest in the affective literature of Richard Jefferies and, even more, to the reading of poetry for its own sake.
When he wrote The Childhood at the age of thirty-five, Thomas associated this sudden interest in poetry with a sex-stirred liking for a ‘tall thin freckled girl of about my own age with good rather large features, dark hair and grey eyes, and an austere expression’.
The double-sided nature of the sixteen-year-old boy who arrived in the History Eighth at St. Paul's among a group of conventionally well-educated youths two years his senior — who seemed to him grimly earnest and thinking only of work and success and speaking in more re fined voices than he was used to — is clearly shown by Thomas's two attempts at writing fiction,The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans (1913) dedicated to ‘My Father and my Mother’ with its epigraph from Hardy, ‘But now — O never again’, and an unpublished work of ‘Fiction’(his title) which he abandoned in the early summer of 1914.
The novel is a curious mixture of autobiography, fantasy, speculation about poetry, and Welsh legends (modelled obliquely on the Arabian Night)that begins as a ‘story of Balham and of a family dwelling in Balham who were more Welsh tlian Balhamilish’.
Initially it gives a fairly accurate account of the Jones family who are described briefly in The Childhood .
This factual structure is intermingled with anecdotal family memories of the once popular London Welsh poet Lewis Morris, with some echoes of the people who encouraged Edward in his earliest published writings, and with an even more substantial use of Welsh and Swindon topics now missing from the numerous notebooks.
The tone of the descriptions and conversations of Mr Morgan of Abercorran House and his curiously assorted friends (Aurelius, Mr Torrance and Mr Stodham) is cheerfully loving in its recall of the London commons and the Wiltshire and Welsh countryside upon which Edward was to draw for much inner satisfaction throughout his adult life.
Equally necessary to the book's structure is the character of the housekeeper Ann, a straightforward transfer of Edward's own mother into the world of the kitchens of his cousins in Pontardulais with their attractive young women and idealized Welsh ‘Mams’.
Ann stands for all the women of common-sense, warm affection, and practical piety that Edward repeatedly attempted to sketch realistically or to record in dream-like settings in his essays and sketches.
She supplies the book's hasty conclusion after the death at Lydiard Constantine of Philip — a partial picture of one side of the Battersea Grammar School Edward: At this point the people of Abercorran House — even Jessie and Aurelius- and the dogs that stretched out in death like blessedness under the sun, and the pigeons that courted and were courted in the yard and on the roof, all suddenly retreat from me when I come to that Spring in memory; a haze of ghostly, shimmering silver veils them; without Philip they are as people in a story whose existence I cannot prove.
The very house has gone.
The elms of the Wilderness have made coffins, if they were not too old.
Where is the pond and its lilies?
They are no dimmer than the spirits of men and children.
But there is always Ann.
Ann, in 1913, would have been the same age as Edward's mother and, from family hearsay, Ann's sentiments resemble closely the practical, optimistic piety of Mary Elizabeth Thomas.
The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans is in no way a conventional novel.
As far as one can tell from his letters, he was pleased with it although it did not sell.
The book adds a distinctive, more cheerful gloss to the boyhood and early youth of a precocious young writer who later, on his own testimony, suffered bouts of depression of different degrees of intensity from the age of sixteen onwards.
Gradually, in the novel, the friends of the Morgans grew up and ‘acquired preferences which were not easily to be adapted to that sunny, untidy house…
They said it was different: but they were wrong; it was they themselves were different, the Morgans never changed.
In this way young men of the neighbourhood discovered that they were no longer boys.
They could no longer put up with that careless hullabaloo of lazy, cheerful people, they took offence at the laziness, or else at the cheerfulness.’
We are left in no doubt that the author, from first to last, approves the viewpoint of the people of Abercorran House.
The additional Celtic (and gypsy-like) lore he draws upon to fill out a flimsy plot is firmly placed within the suburban London life between Clapham Junction and Richmond Park.
The one exception is the final chapter, ‘The Poet's Spring at Lydiard Constantine’.
Writing this from the standpoint of the narrator (Arthur) looking back to the sixteenth (and last) year of Philip, the youngest child of the Morgan household, we are told that Arthur kept a diary of that year — as indeed Edward had kept such a diary and later printed it in The Woodland Life .
Again, in reference to Philip's new-found love of poetry and Shelley, driving out his old enthusiasm for birdnesting, Arthur states ‘I have beside me the book which taught Philip this sad bliss, this wisdom.
The fly-leaves are entirely covered by copies in his handwriting of the best-loved poems and passages [of Shelley].’
This notebook survives and its dated notes can be checked against Arthur's account of the spring spent at Lydiard Constantine.
In the novel, Philip became ill and was left behind there to die while Arthur returned to London and began a new course of study.
Philip died and was buried at Lydiard Constantine, near Swindon.
In some obscure way Thomas recognized (in 1913) that his decision to become a writer at the age of sixteen closed the door on a career that would have pleased his father.
There are no overt clues to help us.
The nearest we get is Helen Thomas's introduction to the 1932 edition of The South Country about the life he had chosen, oft en suffering ‘despair and humiliation’, but always finding in the country ‘the comfort he so passionately sought’.
The eighty notebooks in the Berg Collection refer to a process of discovery, loss, and rediscovery throughout his writing life.
But there is no unequivocal statement as to why or how his life took a firm direction at this time.
Philip, perhaps, stands in part for his earlier carefree schoolboy self between the age of eleven and fifteen — the ‘foolish years’ was his later name for them.
The open nature of this schoolboy Philip Edward Thomas, with his ready absorption in the Morgans' sporting activities, held some charm for the disappointed middle-aged writer.
The positive outlook of the Morgan family — based on a real-life family — is present even in the mysterious final chapter, with its faint suggestion of the Arabian Nights:
We were not merely ready to welcome strange things when we had walked half a mile up a lane and met no man, but we were in a gracious condition for receiving whatever might fall to us.
We did not go in search of miracles, we invited them to come to us.
What was familiar to others was never, on that account, tedious or contemptible to us.
I remember that when Philip and I first made our way through London to a shop which was depicted in an advertisement, in spite of the crowds on either hand all along our route, in spite of the full directions of our elders, we were as much elated by our achievement as if it had been an arduous discovery made after a journey in a desert.
In our elation there was some suspicion that our experience had been secret, adventurous, and unique.
As to the crowd, we glided through it as angels might.
Sometimes in our rare London travels we had a glimpse of a side street, a row of silent houses all combined as it were into one gray palace, a dark doorway, a gorgeous window, a surprising man disappearing…
We looked, and though we never said so, we believed that we alone had seen these things, that they had never been seen before.
We should not have expected to see them there if we went again.
Many and many a time have we looked, have I alone in more recent years looked, for certain things thus revealed to us in passing.
In his recall of clearly remembered events in The Childhood Thomas was determined not to be led astray by reverie and adult speculation.
His method was to include the remembrance of moods and apprehensions as well as images and incidents.
In these autobiographical investigations, he seems to follow an aim he had noticed in L'Intelligence des Fleurs where, at times, Maeterlinck ‘seems to be striving to look at scientific facts in a poetical manner….
He advocates the instinct, the imagination, the unconsciousness, by means of the intelligence which he esteems so far beneath them….
His detached, even, and quite uncontroversial manner makes him a valuable auxiliary of liberal thought.’
Thomas presents his own pre-adolescent boyhood in a similar spirit.
The boy's hedonistic love of naturalist pursuits is linked to a sense of oneness and wonder, if only at rare recorded moments.
The significance of such insights was reinforced later by his reading of Jefferies' Amateur Poacher and The Story of My Heart .
Holidays spent in Swindon or Wales, a time of freedom from the severities of classroom timetables and disciplines, gave opportunities for naturalistic pursuits in a setting more favourable even than the widening circle of his weekend and holiday explorations of London and Surrey commons with Arthur Hardy or his own brothers, themselves an essential escape from domesticity, homework and discipline.
Swindon and, by extension, the Jefferies country around Coate won a permanent place in Thomas's life because of the indissoluble friendship that developed between him and the old man called ‘Dad’ Uzzell.
Here was a character, like his Uncle Harry, who offered a way of life quite different from the one Mr Thomas hoped to provide for his six sons.
Dad Uzzell appears in many guises in Thomas's stories, and travel books; parts of him — and stories told by him — are an important strand in some of the wayfaring characters found in the pre-enlistment poems.
In As It Was Helen has left her own warm-hearted account of the ‘tiny honeymoon’ she and Edward stole and spent in ‘the cottage of his old gamekeeper friend’Dad and his wife Granny.
But in the Colbeck Collection there is a manuscript of about 2,300 words which Edward wrote in 1895; it is corrected in his much later I handwriting and is entitled ‘Dad’.
The following extracts from it, written before Edward had met Helen Noble but after he had left St. Paul's catches the effect the old man had upon the young would-be writer:
We were roach fishing, larking about perhaps more than anything else, and could catch nothing; you see it was a scorching day and the water bright and clear as crystal.
Suddenly with a tremendous stroke an old man close by threw a tiny fish up in the air and down it fell.
It was Dad….
Then we had a little talk, but it did not end there.
Chance acquaintance like this ripened into friendship.
We found he had a whole store of out of door knowledge which he was quite ready to impart.
In spite of his clothes — what difference did clothes ever make in a good strong man — he looked a finely made fellow, and we became secretly his admirers.
No man at his age ever had a straighter back, that we were sure of, straight and strong, it was as the ground ash stick he always carried.
His clear steel blue eyes looked you full in the face without a spark of insolence.
It was a kind intelligent eye too, though he could twist a rabbit's neck on occasion with the nonchalance of a professional poacher.
Time had left few furrows on that bull strong face, sunburnt like his sinewy neck….
He used to tell us with a sparkle of pride of enormous weights lifted by him in his youth, and of fights where he felled a man like a bullock.
Recalling the mad days of youth in fact, a fierceness almost brutal, showed itself, and destroyed the symmetry of his face.
In such moments he was not himself, for age had quelled the turbulent spirit, and tamed what must have been a fierce temper indeed….
But in knowledge of nature beyond that required in poaching — which is very considerable — Dad was even more erudite.
He had climbed trees for the blue hawk's nest, and knew its eggs and their markings; the hawfinch, that parrot of the woods with its strange cry and saucer nest, was common in his time.
He knew exactly where to look for the nest of any bird we were likely to come across and by certain local circumstances was unerringly guided to a nest hidden deep perhaps in a thorn bush….
One failing he had in common with most labourers on the soil, much inaccuracy in bird nomenclature.
Thus he thought there were two distinct birds, chaffinch and pie finch, and yet called them indiscriminately twinks or pinks!…
Bird notes, not songs, he could emulate to the life, and had I believe made use of this faculty in trapping birds.
The hollow note of the bullfinch that is almost ventriloquial in its effect, came as easily from his lips as the chuckle of a jackdaw or the chiding of a sparrow hawk at its prey.
I remember being highly amused at his rendering of a young rook's cry whilst gobbling a worm: it was perfectly true to nature….
Such were only a few of the multitude of his accomplishments.
By pointing out a flower or describing a rarity he could make a walk supremely interesting and was indeed a charming companion on any expedition in the fields.
There was not a herb or flowering plant of any sort to be met on our walks that he did not know, and hardly one that was not invaluable as a remedy for some complaint.
He certainly had no intention of allowing the old lore concerning herbs to die out.
Dried specimens of any sort were always kept by him and roots of many more.
Such knowledge as he was full of is fast decaying and it is interesting to come across this old exponent of time-honoured homely skill.
He might have made a doctor as well as a poacher….
In modem history as it affected his class he was well informed as ever, and had a memory overflowing with detail.
He was bitter against the Church and State though a more truly orthodox man never breathed, and insisted that there was a separate system of law for rich and poor.
When bread was a shilling a loaf and men earned less than ten shillings from a long week's work, his father or some other relation was among the most bitterly rebellious against a system that could tolerate such things.
Every man poached then, and his family with the rest.
He remembers hearing it said that each man in one gang at least vowed to kill or disable the keepers if they attempted to thwart their attacks on the game.
It was a wild time, and even the old women were poachers, he said, with the aid of a harmless looking dog that barked only when they reached the cottage with a fresh killed rabbit.
Latterly Dad had sobered much when he was no longer able to perform his old feats of strength and daring.
To make amends perhaps for the past he had turned tee-totaller and finally Salvationist.
It was a strange step from poacher to street comer preacher, but was doubtless sincere.
He was loud against ‘these new religions’; his woodland life and really intense sympathy with Nature could not overcome his adherence to traditional views of religion.
Dad Uzzell, as much as the writer Ashcroft Noble, was a powerful formative influence on Thomas in the eighteen months between his abandoning St. Paul's and entering Oxford.
Edward, according to his younger brother's memories, had always shown a rebellious independence of spirit against domestic or external authority.
The example of Dad Uzzell was before him for the rest of his life.
This self-confessedly wilful boy always contrived to have a great deal of his own way and seemed able to follow his bent whenever the weather permitted.
In the long darker evenings, school and home life brought together (however unwillingly at first) the complementary joys of reading and the learning of languages, which led in late adolescence to a much-praised gift for descriptive writing based on his explorations and observations of the natural world.
He was establishing a pattern of behaviour that with minimal alterations was to become essential to his habitual well-being: long walks with a selected companion, in place of the organized games and sports of boyhood and middle-school days; the acquisition of semi-rural skills — fishing, bird nesting, skinning pelts, skilful carpentry, well-arranged collecting of eggs and butterflies and specimens; and, always, the adventure of trespass and unusual exploration that was, in some frenetic way, aimed at the rapid expansion of suburban villa London into older, more rural surrounding communities.
As his own prose essays on ‘Nature’ were being admired by the adolescent girls in the Young People's Guild at the Unitarian chapel, and approved by the minister, by his father and by Ashcroft Noble, and eventually published in sectarian and national journals, Edward discovered the English poets, first slowly under imposition and then, in a rush, in his father's wide-ranging library.
This boy, in spite of a studious shyness with most adults and many girls, had somehow acquired a self-confidence based, not so much on achievement in games or school work, but on a sense of the rightness of what he was doing with his own free time.
As he explored Merton, Wimbledon, or south and east of South Croydon with Arthur Hardy, ‘We had no single definite object now that no eggs were to be found.
Talking, and looking at the earth and the sky, we just walked about until it was dark.
Students we were not: nothing was pursued to the uttermost.
We merely became accustomed to the general life of the common birds and animals, and to the appearances of trees and clouds and everything upon the surface that showed itself to the naked eye’.
He wrote the last words of The Amateur Poacher — a gospel, an incantation — as an epigraph on all his own books.
His self-assurance comes out now in his attitude to school work: ‘I did not like not being able to answer a question, particularly if another boy could’.
Edward learned his lessons quickly, but he was never happy in the various schools to which his father sent him.
Probably he resented and resisted the thrust of his father's ambition for all his sons, but especially for Edwy, the eldest, so obviously gift ed with the academic ability for professional or ‘establishment’ success.
(Unfortunately, there is no hint of the conversations that took place at this time between Lloyd George and Mr Thomas as they took their daily morning walk ‘across the park’ from the underground station at Westminster.)
While Edward kept himself out of trouble with parents and schoolmasters without extending himself, he never, not even at St. Paul's, acquired the social ease of his schoolfellows.
The History Eighth, which had assimilated G. K. Chesterton and E. C. Bentley immediately before Thomas's short stay there, could not quite swallow him, nor he them.
A public school was more alien to his nature than his father realized: this son was not cut out for a smooth ascent of the ladder of preferment.
The ‘foolish years’ as a Battersea Grammar school boy confirmed certain attitudes that Edward Thomas never abandoned and that he passed on to his children.
He held on to his love of unregimented activity in the open air, away from encroaching London suburbia, and he cherished a sense of belonging to another country — Cambria or Gwalia, Glamorgan or Gwent — in addition to the still strange city he was slowly beginning to explore along both banks of the Thames.
This dual heritage sharpened the sense of himself as a fused centre between the dream world of a long-vanished civilization and the natural world he observed scientifically.
Supported by a work ethic to which his father gave eloquent support in lectures and in writing, he acquired imperceptibly habits of concentrated intellectual enquiry.
From his mother, and her more easy-going and less consciously nonconformist relations, he found sanctions for that profound exploration of sensations that were given early expression in his gift for ‘composition’.
His sense of the long, mixed past of his own family, and the need to rebel against the purpose — if not the pattern — of his upbringing, left him neither passionately involved in everyday things, nor yet coldly indifferent to the other people.
The persona of ‘the Watcher’, which dominates his best writing, was already being formed: his way forward lay somewhere between social openness and egotistical restlessness.
He makes the point in The Childhood , as he describes his half-holiday explorations with Arthur Hardy: ‘We merely became accustomed to the general life of the common birds and animals’.
These purposeful wanderings in nearby London commons were the nearest he could come to the idealized world he had found in The Amateur Poacher .
‘What I liked in the books was the free open-air life, the spice of illegality and daring, roguish characters — the opportunities so far exceeding my own, the gun, the great pond, the country home, the apparently endless leisure — the glorious moments that one could always recapture by opening the Poacher —and the tinge of sadness here and there as in the picture of the old moucher perishing in his sleep by the lime kiln, and the heron flying over in the morning indifferent.’
These experiences he could share with Dad Uzzell, but not with his own father.
Following his nature, and before his sixteenth birthday, Edward Thomas had somehow combined a love of nature and of literature, twin aspects of realized contemplation that were to characterize his life as a writer of prose and verse.
St. Paul's and Helen Noble
SEEN through the Willow-tree’ was the title given by Edward Thomas to an unpublished, corrected, but incomplete essay dated 24 December 1902.
Underneath he added ‘which would be a good title for my next book or for all my work’.
The essay evokes the second phase of his life between his fifteen months at St. Paul's School from January 1894 until Easter 1895, his courtship and marriage to Helen Noble, his three years at Oxford from October 1897 to June 1900, his year as a poverty stricken journalist in London, and his determined move to Bearsted in September in 1901:
There is a willow before my house.
It is covered in ivy by day and by night in mystery and when I lie in bed I see men and women through it passing by.
I see it fantastically in the pages of books I read and in a true sense I see life through the leaves of the willow tree.
It is I suppose an ordinary willow.
In summer it is not so dense but that I can find the blackbird wherever it sings among its branches and not in Winter so agile but that its changing patterns are conspicuous against the sky, its sound an appreciable susurration using the harp strings of the wind.
And always in its straight bole I have a stop watch to tell me whether the slowest clouds are sliding and at what a pace a storm is travelling.
From my childhood days it was little more than a map, a puzzling weaver, a many tailed whip in the hands of the north wind.
On its bush I once traced a gracious face that soothed some half-controlled tears, and once a leer that agitated some nervous mood of loneliness.
But the leer and the face have gone.
Nor has anything quite so definite taken their place.
How often I have watched, nay studied it, and wasted more honest words upon it than I can [on]most men!…
I have hinted that the dawn has many times come to me through the leaves of the willow, but it is less the tree itself nowadays that transmits things seen to my mind — than something of which the willow is a visible type.
I saw once the head of a dear friend among the leaves and was less astonished at what first seemed an apparition than by his disentangling himself and in the flesh bidding his good morning, so accustomed was I to looking for my thoughts and news among the leaves.
Men and books I see through Nature in the first place…
Edward Thomas's fifteen months at St. Paul's helped to shape the early pattern of his life as a writer: I was considered to excel in this form of rhetoric.
So seriously, too, did I take myself in it, that from the time I was sixteen I found myself hardly letting a week pass without writing one or two descriptions — of a man, or a place, or a walk — in a manner largely founded on Jefferies' Amateur Poacher , Kingsley's Prose Idylls , and Mr. Francis A. Knight's weekly contributions to the Daily News , but doubtless with tones supplied also by Shelley and Keats, and later on by Ruskin, De Quincey, Pater, and Sir Thomas Browne…
While I was afflicted with serious English composition and English literature, I was reading Scott, Fenimore Cooper, Henty, and the travellers, because I loved them; I was also thinking and talking in a manner which owed little to those dignified exercises, though the day was to come when I spoke very much as I wrote…
There is no doubt that my masters often lent me dignity and subtlety altogether beyond my needs.
(‘How I Began’, January 1913.)
When Edward Thomas entered the History Eighth at St. Paul's in January 1894, he was at least seventeen months younger than the seven pupils who had joined the class in the previous July or September and who were to leave it the following June.
We have reports of his school progress for the two half-years ending July 1894 and December 1894 (he left school at Easter 1895 before the July report).
The reports by his form master R. F. Cholmeley are in typical school-report phraseology:
July 1894.
Latin — Much to learn: starts a long way behind the rest:— works well.
French — Weak as yet.
Divinity and English Literature — very fair Mathematics — Weak.
Map Drawing — Very Fair.
General Remarks — Does his work very steadily; backward in languages, but gets on.
I wish he seemed to take more interest in life generally.
December 1894.
Classics –Backward; improves, Greek very little.
French — knows little, improving.
Mathematics — Fair, making some progress.
Drawing — Good.
General Remarks : I should say quite the ablest in the form considering his age.
He has no taste for languages, but his history is very good.
I wish he were a more sociable person.
Both reports square with the poet's clinical memory later in The Childhood .
He felt isolated.
He travelled to and from home alone, and soon he decided to eat a few buns in the classroom while reading Jefferies, or else to have lunch outside school.
He was not asked to play games because he was excessively shy and unaccustomed to Rugby football, although he had played soccer and cricket at Battersea Grammar School, but without the distinction of his second brother Ernest.
No one at St. Paul's shared his interest in natural history and ‘the naturalists, whom these boys knew nothing of.
‘'What are you reading, Thomas?’ asked one of the boys who already wore a scholar's gown.
‘The Gamekeeper at Home’, said I. ‘The gamekeeper's place is in the woods,’ said he.
And I kept silence, not venturing to remark that the woods were his home.’
Often, a victim of his paralysing shyness, he walked along the far side of the Thames, ‘sometimes in such wretchedness that I wanted to drown myself.
He realized that his own interests were not favoured at school by boys or masters:
I felt unimportant, isolated, out of place, and only not despised because I was utterly unnoticed….
I had now a faint ambition, both definite and indefinite, to do something in connection with learning or literature.
My father wished me to try for a history scholarship and I occasionally read as hard as it was possible to do without any interest in history beyond the attempt to memorize facts….
I never had any grounds for differing from the historian I had last read.
The other boys either had enormous appetites for books of many kinds, or they had native wit.
I seemed to have nothing.
But when the two scholars had gone up to(Oxford, ‘I began to be near the top of the form…but still everything at school was an aimless task performed to the letter only.
It cost me many night-hours the more because I was reading of one thing and thinking of another.’
He had failed to gain a scholarship to St. Paul's and one assumes that his father decided that his son's lack of ambition and apparent aimlessness about a career did not justify the money spent on a schooling that should naturally lead to Oxford or Cambridge, and thereafter to the Civil Service.
After fifteen months Edward left St. Paul's on the tacit understanding that he would read at home for the competitive administration examinations of the Civil Service.
Edward Thomas's own narrative of his public-school days is substantiated by memoirs collected in the late 1940s by Rowland Watson and partially supported by reading between the lines of the ‘Fiction’ which Thomas abandoned in 1914.
In 1945, Lucian Oldershaw, with E. C. Bentley a member of the History Eighth at St Paul's when it was first created in July 1893, recalled Thomas at school and during his early days at Oxford:
Thomas was two years younger than I and I never met him till the year I left St. Paul's School (1894).
The meeting to me was memorable.
It took place at the house of my friend R E. Vernede, himself a poet of some promise and a novelist of some performance who was also killed in the ‘14–18’ war.
We had talked books and Thomas and I left together and went on talking books.
We walked for hours about the streets of Notting Hill and talked and talked.
What we talked about (it was mainly the classical poetry of the eighteenth century!) did not seem to matter much.
I felt we were communing with something deeper than words.
I felt something of the same awe and excitement I had experienced four years before when tramping round and round Warwick Gardens with Chesterton, debating the execution of Charles I. Here was someone who ought to have been a member of the Society that G. K. C. had dominated at St. Paul's from 1891 to 1893.
When we parted about.
midnight, physically tired but spiritually exalted, I found myself quoting what I could recall of Keats' sonnet, a new planet had swum into my ken.
I feel today the excitement of that encounter almost as keenly as I did when it took place over fifty years ago.
Despite its eulogistic tone Oldershaw's memory seems more credible than E. C. Bentley's half-humorous, half-invented sketch of Thomas aged sixteen during his first half-year at St. Paul's: ‘It was Walker [Frederick Walker, the High Master]too, who had made this possible by clearing the ‘History Eighth’, the first recruits to which included my friend Oldershaw and myself, soon to be joined by an exceptionally reserved and quiet boy who usually had in his pocket a rat or so, and a few snakes, which he would shut in his desk with books, and occasionally peep at stealthily — Edward Thomas the poet.’
Few Pauline contemporaries noticed the change in Thomas from an animal carefreeness into the youth who ‘had quite a number of temptations to print, and at the age of fifteen easily gave way’.
Mr. Tarrant, the minister of the Unitarian church which the Thomas family now attended regularly, had encouraged Edward in his outdoor tastes with much kindness and persuaded the editor of a children's paper to print his early holiday-task descriptions of country walks: But like all other grown-up people he inspired me with discomfort, strangeness, a desire to escape…
However, I think the minister had something to do with the essays I wrote and the natural history notes I kept day by day besides the almost daily entries in a general diary…
My father wanted me to go on to a Public School and I received special lessons in Latin Verse and in Greek..
[My father]used to talk to me of books and take me to lectures.
At Kelmscott House I heard Grant Allen recommending State endowment of literary genius: I saw William Morris and I was pleased and awed.
But nothing I ever heard at home attracts me to literature or the arts.
One significant external event which placed the attraction of a literary career before the young essayist was the minister's decision to introduce Mr and Mrs Philip Henry Thomas to the family of James Ashcroft Noble, the critic and journalist.
Noble had returned in 1894 from Liverpool to London and, after some months attending the fashionable Bloomsbury Square chapel where Stopford Brooke preached to a large intellectual gathering, had decided to join the Unitarian chapel close to their new suburban home at 6 Patten Road, Wandsworth Common.
Mr Tarrant — kindly portrayed in The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans as Mr Stodham — later introduced Edward to Mr Noble (the father of his future wife) who was slowly dying of a malignant, tubercular throat disease but was still actively engaged as ‘Paul Pelican’, an influential journalist and critic.
Frequent visits to the Noble home, across Wandsworth Common, began in early April 1895 before Edward celebrated his release from St. Paul's with a three-day walk from London to Marlborough in order to spend the summer term with his paternal grandmother at Swindon.
From there he made frequent visits to Jefferies' Coate Farm and Reservoir, to well-off Townsend cousins in Clifton, and to the neighbouring Downs.
He returned to Surrey on 21 July 1895.
Apart from a family holiday at Eastbourne during the last fortnight in August, he remained at Battersea Rise until he revisited his relations at Swindon from 15 February to 28 March 1896, when he broke off his stay in order to visit Mr Noble.
But Noble was in the last week of his life, and proved too ill to see his favourite pupil or to hear read the letter of sympathy and comfort which Edward had sent him.
The 1895 visit to Swindon, in place of the summer term at St. Paul's, repeats an earlier pattern in Edward's life between schools before he won a scholarship to Battersea Grammar School and while his youngest brother Julian was born into the already over-crowded house at 61 Shelgate Road.
Then he caught glimpses of the freer way of life of his father's bachelor brother and, as he explored and fished along the canal, got to know Dad Uzzell who remained a surrogate father-figure for the rest of Edward's life.
But during this 1895 Swindon visit Edward kept the detailed diary of ‘Field Notes’ that was later incorporated into The Wood-land Life .
His articles on ‘Nature’ topics, too, had begun to appear in the various journals where Noble had influence,New Age , the Speaker , and the Globe .
Probably the idea of collecting the articles and publishing a book with Mr Noble's own publishers, Blackwoods, was beginning to take shape even before Easter 1895.
Certainly Edward's last (and only surviving) letter to the critic suggests that the period of mentorship had lasted for a reasonable time, probably at least a year.
It records, too, the young pupil's development from an observer — of plants, birds, trees and animals — into a detached recorder of what he had seen.
(‘Your good influence and help has sometimes draw me from the enwrapping pleasure of scenes which before held me alone with them. ')
After the August family holiday at Eastbourne, ‘Edwy’ became a frequent welcome visitor to Mr Noble's friendly house.
The father found him a ready substitute for his own dead infant son, Philip, and often called the young writer ‘Phil’.
The mother, who attracted and welcomed happy young men to the house, was a little put out by Edwy's rather shy and serious manner.
The elder Noble daughter, Irene, was already launched on her own secretarial career and, at this time, was a close friend of the writer, Richard le Gallienne, a protegé of her father.
The youngest daughter Mary, a gifted academic in later life, was still at one of the Girls' Public School Trust schools at Wimbledon, and the only son, Lancelot, was at Merchant Taylors' School.
Helen, the second daughter, had left the Wimbledon school when she was sixteen and was at home helping her mother to run the house and, as his fatal illness developed, to assist in nursing her father, to whom she was particularly close.
As the friendship between father and youth developed, Helen frequently ran from the kitchen to open the door to him and occasionally saw him out.
For Ashcroft Noble had never forbidden his study to children, and Helen later recalled seeing Edward at the end of a visit still standing by a bookcase and reluctant to leave.
After one such visit she insisted on a chaste goodbye kiss.
Her father encouraged Edward to take the freedom- and country-loving Helen on one of his famous long walks in and around London and Surrey commons.
Eventually, after one false start, when Edward assumed (wrongly) that Helen would not come, they set off in late November '95 for a short walk to Wimbledon, followed four days later by a trip to Croydon.
Thereafter Helen frequently walked to meet him or to accompany him on his return home across Wandsworth Common and on January 1896 they had their first long walk to Richmond.
In the Diary included in The Woodland Life Edward notes under 7 January 1896: ‘Year opens mild, with the happy songs of blackbird and thrush thick in the woods; green shoots rising everywhere; all life is quick and glad; the fallow deer idle in the tempered sun under the oaks at Richmond, or sip the water through budding buttercups and weeds.
Wood-pigeons crowd to the oaks at sundown, chattering loudly’.
In his notebook under 9 January is the single phrase ‘Richmond w.
HN.’
Before he left for his six weeks stay in Swindon that spring he had first called her ‘sweet’, she recalled four months later, ‘in the little passage, near the willows, near the farm’ on Wandsworth Common.
They corresponded regularly while he was away, although her mother had forbidden it.
Arthur Hardy, Edward's close Battersea school friend and constant country companion, was a welcome visitor to 6 Patten Road.
He acted as go-between postman, and from time to time he walked with Helen across and around the Common and talked to her a great deal about Edward.
Helen believed that their acquaintance would ripen into a warm friendship, equalling her affection for Jane Aldis, but did not believe that she and Edward could ever fall in love, so convinced was she of her own ‘ordinariness’.
Arthur assured her she was ‘quite decent’ and that Edward would stick to her.
Helen, however, was still imprisoned in the fears and longings that had marked her life during the first years of puberty and was obsessed with the idea that she would never marry and have children.
In six letters from Swindon Edward poured out to her his hopes, his feelings, and his frustrations, and sent poems addressed to her.
A week after Edward's return from Swindon in March 1896 Mr Noble died.
Edward's parents sent their condolences, attended the ceremony at chapel and graveside, and Mrs Thomas visited the widow.
Edward, too, was a frequent and welcome visitor, for Mrs Noble, and her children, were fully aware of his special place in Ashcroft Noble's affection.
Mrs Noble gave Helen, as a keepsake, Edward's last letter to her father.
Helen and Edward now met frequently on the Common, and she visited her father's grave with him as he tended it with wild flowers.
After a fortnight's visit with her mother to her aunt Mrs Poole at Ramsgate, Helen decided that she must earn some money and, if possible, live away from home where her mother's grief-stricken restrictions and excessive dependency — so she thought — would curtail that freedom of action and expression in which her father had encouraged her.
Apparently, too, Mrs Noble was becoming dubious about the friendship with Edward and the consequences that might follow the hasty pell-mell nature of her second daughter.
The Nobles were not well off, and Helen's departure as a nursemaid to the Webbs at 9 Lancaster Place, Cliftonville, Margate, seemed a welcome relief to the widow.
Edward was still living at home, preparing without a coach for the Civil Service examination.
He was equally busy with his nature walks (frequently with Arthur Hardy), writing papers for acceptance or rejection by the Globe , the Academy and the Speaker (earning 22&½ guineas by June), but, most significantly of all, as he later obliquely confessed in ‘How I Began’, writing almost daily letters to Helen.
Their fiercely preserved notion of honest, controlled friendship had moved sharply into an expression of mutual love — symbolized, as Helen insisted in all this early correspondence, by the purity and truthfulness of their 26 Edward Thomas kisses.
In deference to her mother's prudent requests Helen had asked him to write only one letter a week.
None of Edward's have survived, but to judge from the cross-references in the forty-five extant replies from Helen — which Edward preserved carefully and in order for the rest of his life — he wrote about sixty between 15 May and 27 July 1896.
The intensity of their love, and their readiness to speak to each other directly from the heart, fed rapidly on this period of enforced absence, made tolerable — and enhanced — by the writing of letters.
(It was a pattern that repeated itself, and Helen oft en recognized its therapeutic value for herself and Edward at moments of difficulty throughout their married life.)
During the month after her father's death each of them had discovered the need to explore hitherto suppressed areas of feeling and half-knowledge that stood between them and a clearer knowledge of the selves they were now fully determined to offer to each other.
For Edward it was the third of many stages on his career as a writer:
Myself and English, as she is taught in schools, came to a conflict and gradually to a more and more friendly agreement through the necessity of writing long letters daily to one who was neither a schoolboy nor an elder, the subject of the letters being matters concerning nobody else in the world.
Now it was that I had a chance of discarding or of adapting to my own purpose the fine words and infinite variety of constructions which I had formerly admired from afar off and imitated in fairly cold blood.
There was little cold blood about the topics discussed in these Margate letters.
Edward was eager to see and to understand the precise nature and functioning of female anatomy and physiology; Helen, with equal insistence on their purity of motive and the intense trust in him that love had given her, was surprised by joy, sustained by daydreams of their future Eden together, and fired by his frank letters with their confessions of his adolescent fight against erections, nocturnal emissions, and occasional masturbation.
She gave him all that she knew — chiefly from conversations with her close friend, Jane Aldis, and from a small book on physiology belonging to her father which she read secretly until it was removed.
They believed in exact equality between man and woman.
They showed little regard for the ceremony of church weddings, although they both hoped to find some form of acceptable New Testament-based belief for themselves without benefit of clergy; they believed, in Lamarckian fashion, that the physical match and spiritual preparation of parents would ensure a ‘better’ offspring, as one essential step to a better world.
Edward, a great believer in cold baths and the restorative power of long walks (of between 25 and 50 miles), began to use dumb-bells in order to tone up his body and produce more muscles.
Helen used some of her earnings to hire a bathing machine and develop her swimming.
Above all she sought — and hoped — to prepare herself in every way for modern motherhood, free of the restrictions that had marked her own unhappy upbringing.
Under Edward's direction she shared his reading: some Shelley, some Byron, Milton, more Wordsworth, Ruskin, Carlyle and always, Jefferies.
(Helen introduced him to The Story of My Heart.)
She sympathized with and approved of, if never quite comprehended, Edward's intense love of the special happiness that he found in the heart of the country when absorbed with his rare intensity in sights, sounds, and scents.
He sent her some of his notes of what he had seen in their walks and frequently let her see his ‘papers’ before they were copied out for the editors.
She sent him one long descriptive prose account, but kept her own poems to herself This exploratory phase of their amorous correspondence was interrupted on 23 June.
Edward and Arthur Hardy were spending a short farm holiday at Horsmonden, a 2½ hour train journey away from Margate.
Helen got away for one day and they spent nine hours together in the open air.
She had set off from Margate before eight o'clock and for a short time she fell asleep in his arms.
They picnicked, and explored the countryside not too far from Lambkin Farm, still quite unaware of the passionate natures they kept in check.
(‘To lie innocently then with you seems my ideal for the present’, Helen wrote in August.)
They must have talked long and hard about their future, and from now on Helen believed that other people would probably regard them as being ‘engaged’— a term she hated because of the overtones of male dominance and female sexual ignorance that went with it.
When she returned to Margate after 10.30 that night she found a letter from Edward, posted before they had met, awaiting her.
She assured him that his apprehensions about her travelling late at night were quite unfounded: she and her sisters had been allowed to travel about unaccompanied in Southport and London since the age of twelve or thirteen.
Until Helen spent a week at home in early October, they did not meet again for four months; and when the Webb family were at Rotherfield for two months in August and September, there are no letters or notebooks to fill the gap.
Except for a few letters from Helen to Jane Aldis, there is nothing until January 1897.
Edward returned to his ‘little study at home’ and, with her encouragement, began serious study for the Civil Service examination.
She knew that he ‘ought always to live in the country; and someday you will with me’; for the present, she encouraged him to carry out his father's plans.
‘Be brave and strong at your work, dear.
I mean your examination work, for in your other work you need no encouragement, for you like it so much as it is yourself finding expression in words.’
She hopes (‘in a money sense’) that he will ‘get the Civil Service post: Nice to have a little money to spare above the necessaries of life.’
(A wry comment from two young people who sometimes had to delay posting letters until they could find a few pennies for stamps.)
‘When I first knew you, you would have been full of despair and melancholy at the thought of clerical life, but now though there is a faint hint of it you are full of hope and joy.’
She asks him to recognize his father's wisdom in trying to encourage him to work for a steady position and shares his anxiety about delays with Blackwoods, over the publication of The Woodland Life .
Impulsive by nature and eager to experience fully the love that she knows will be hers for life, Helen is scrupulous in her demands on his friendship and earnest in her desire to learn by his side.
The ‘H. T.’ who wrote As It Was and World Without End can be heard just beneath the surface of these youthful letters written nearly thirty years before.
While Helen's day was filled by the demands of her young charges and the vain attempts of Mrs Webb to train her in some orderliness in domestic affairs, Edward continued to tend her father's grave.
He was still a favourite with her sisters and brother and he was Helen's principal source of news about her home.
His moods, as reflected in her letters, remained volatile and while he continued his triple tasks — preparation for the examination, deciding the final shape of his first book, and producing a spate of articles, many of which were published — there are continuous references in her letters to his indifferent health and to his repeated determination to live chastely with her until circumstances alter.
The pattern of their future life together was already taking shape.
Helen believed unshakeably in his genius and was determined to enable him to realize his potential as a writer — a poet, like Shelley, she believed at this rime — without sacrificing her own strong desire for freedom of independent action, untrammelled by the stuffy conventions of the elders she suspected of hypocrisy.
She wished to offer herself in complete love, without demanding in return any limit to his interest in other people.
So convinced was she that ‘Love conquers all, that she was prepared at all times to forgo conventional ties if they interfered with his development.
Her faith in him was severely tested later, especially in 1908 and again in 1913; but she drew on deep reservoirs of resilience until the anxieties of his last year as a soldier began to sap her energies as housekeeper, mother, and gardener.
Although he made a huge bonfire of his papers and correspondence in 1916, and kept it going for a few days, Edward preserved all her letters along with his notebooks.
They were part of the story of his heart and, re-read now, one recognizes that the Helen Noble of these letters is incorporated in part into the texture of poems like ‘After you speak’ and ‘And you, Helen’:
I would give you back yourself,
And power to discriminate
What you want and want it not too late,…
And myself, too, if I could find
Where it lay hidden and it proved kind.
Her letters, like his own comment in 1913 on his letters to her, suggest that at eighteen he had begun for her eyes alone the long process of self-discovery with assured confidence of her support.
The following extracts from one letter portray the Helen recalled by Eleanor Farjeon in 1958: ‘Of her he said: ‘During the nine months before her baby is born, her face is one perpetual smile.
My wife could be the happiest woman on earth — and I won't let her.’
He said she wrote better letters than any woman he knew —‘only it is a different letter each time you read it.’
I have said nothing of your letter.
What indeed can I say.
All the most lovely words of love and passion could not express one tenth of what I feel for you.
And your letter is you…
You have my soul now, all my thoughts are yours; only a short time before you can have all of me, even my poor body which I now strive to make purer and better, healthier and stronger for that time.
but before that time comes we must often be together.
If possible we must spend that time at Coate [where Edward then was], and now I long to go to Horsmonden, for every place where you have lived and been happy, is to me dearer than any others.
And yet, though I feel so sure that we shall spend a lovely but short time together somewhere alone, yet when I think calmly I grow despairing, for if I went to stay with you, anywhere in the same house and alone, nothing would induce mother to believe me really innocent and pure in heart.
It would break her heart.
And it is not that she knows me to be bad or weak, or you either, but her conventional mind could not grasp that a thing so often impure, can be made absolutely and perfectly pure.
Yet somehow we must do it…
What an exquisite verse from Shelley you quoted.
It makes me long for a complete collection so that I might read on, especially the verse you mention but do not quote.
Do you know sweetheart I have often wondered since I knew about things whether a brother or sister ever did love with such a love as ours.
Oh I used to think ‘how beautiful’ if such a thing were possible, but I had no idea that such love was thought vile.
It seems so natural and pure, so perfect.
It is too pure for this impure world, therefore they condemn it as vile.
Tell me more of it…
I must say my thoughts to you.
Did you know I feel that if I thought (and if you ever did, I should know it as soon as the thought had crossed your brain) you doubted my perfect love, truth, sincerity and striving for goodness, I must indeed give up all the good I have gained, and gain daily, by your love and mine.
I should become bad, selfish, a curse to myself and to all who knew me.
Life for me would be empty and not life, a mere dragging on of weary time, perhaps not that.
I feel like a wretched bird here, taken from its loved mate and caged, trying to sing cheerfully to its poor lonely loved one, but failing fearfully….
I had your last dear letter this morning (Tuesday), and I feel after your loving, passionate one how mine must seem cold.
Yet the words you will not count.
Only see me as I write this, throbbing with love and passion, yearning to kiss you, to talk with you.
And now I have a terrible thing to tell you.
Mrs Webb has never paid me.
My money was due on the 11th, and when I have posted this, my last stamp will be spent, and I shall have to wait 'till she remembers.
So this will have to be my last letter rill then….
Dearest heart, sweetest one, lover so good and pure, think when indeed we shall both caress a little soul, a little body, ours to love, to form, to live for and love.
When each day shall add strength to its limbs, and its love.
When its fairness of mind and body shall be our aim in life, when its beauty shall be our pride our joy.
Just yours and mine, no one  else's .
There shall be no shadowy third.
We will teach it to be pure as we count pure, not the vile purity of the world.
We will teach it to have all beauty, we will teach it that love is the most beautiful thing, and never need wax cold, as years go by.
We will teach it to love as we its parents purely everlasting .
What a future!
How sublime, and to you it is as beautiful as to me, else all its beauty would be gone.
And now I must say goodbye….
P.S. Tell me more of the brother and sister of sweet Shelley.
I must save up for all of him.
Browning too I want, and Keats.
Helen spoke on to the page, indiscriminately, in ink, in pencil, in her bedroom, out on the park seat while her charges slept, or on the beach after bathing.
She keeps nothing hidden from Edward, so confident is she of his love and so secure in her belief in the future that lies before them, unconventional and home-based:
I think I must have suffered as you before I knew of things relating to sex.
I am now nineteen and until I was seventeen I was ignorant as any babe.
But my ignorance was not only mental torture, but my body seemed to suffer the intensest agony.
And when I first got an inkling the little was far worse than none, and I became melancholy and miserable.
Neither father nor mother had ever breathed a word, and my first knowledge was thrust upon me — by happening to read quite unwittingly a pamphlet — it was by Stead, exposing and giving such ghastly details of prostitution…
It pleases me very much here.
I have three little girls aged 8, 6 and 4, and one boy of seven, and they bath and dress together.
They sleep in the same room with each other, and look beautiful when I am putting them to bed, jumping and hopping about quite naked, rejoicing in the freedom of no clothes.
And it makes me wish that it could always be so.
But when they get a little older, they will cover their bodies up and the boy shall never again see his sisters' beauty.
O! how wicked it all is, how far from any beauty or ideal.
I remember once when I was a very little girl.
We were living at Southport and we were being bathed by mother before the kitchen fire, and I was getting undressed and being helped with the buttons by the housemaid.
And when it came to the last garment, I pulled that off as well, glad as children always are, and I hope always will to be undressed and free, and stood in what Janet calls ‘birthday clothes’.
And I remember to this day, though I was so small, that mother was very angry with me, for unclothing myself before the servant, who was a very nice girl who had been with us for a long time.
And that is how children are brought up….
I know plenty of girls who do not know what marriage means until the bond is sealed and there is no escape.
Then the facts are burst upon them, and they shrink from their husbands in loathing and horror.
Oh Lord!
What horrors and impurities and wickedness exist under convention's cloak.
At 12 my children shall be told simply and truthfully and clearly what their infant minds can well grasp.
The rest a little later.
I have suffered too much to let my children face the same suffering….
In all you say about parents and children living in sweet sympathy and perfect knowledge of each other, in freedom of speech, comrades, friends confiding in each other , telling all and being listened to, and taught, in all this I entirely and wholly agree.
That kind of family life is the ideal, the only real family life, the one to which I aspire….
Again I agree with you when you say that equality of husband and wife is an absolute necessity to the well-being of the family….
The kind of modesty Tennyson speaks of I hate.
It means nothing, it shows nothing, except sometimes betrays its very vileness it would hide.
Do you know one of the very first things I noticed and liked in you, was the way you shook one's hand, and looked straight at one as you said goodbye.
The ‘step demure’ and ‘downward lids’offend me, and never bring me a sense of virtue…
I am not really a coward or even a ‘nervous’ person.
Solitude, darkness, or the horrible crowd which one sees always in such places as this never make me the least afraid….
Even in little things we agree.
I have always hated that vulgar pomp with which the rite of marriage is coupled.
It jars against all my ideas of decency, I should hate it.
Mother and father were married without any of that kind of thing.
Edward's preservation of these letters uncover the debt he owed to Helen who brought his idealistic, passionate nature — with its violent occasional swings of mood — into closer contact with her own dreams and desires for fulfilment of her love, in perfect sexual freedom between them, leading to motherhood.
She tells him all and, one assumes from hints and a few quotations in her letters, he does the same to her.
As she uncovered herself to him —‘for I love, and there is no loneliness, no misery, no doubt and ignorance, no hoping for that which seems vain as there used to be, but never will be again’— one glimpses the ideal that enabled her to accept without question the life that lay before them.
Later, in 1908, they had to plan once again how to combine their joint ideal of a free domestic relationship with the solitude that Edward's nature demanded as a price to be paid for his self-discovery as a writer.
Even now, at eighteen, he suspected the dark recesses within some of his moods, so unlike his usual shy, yet company-loving, social manner.
Helen was confident that her love would remove all doubts: ‘I do not ‘darkly feel’ what it is I love in you.
I know it is all of you, body and soul…there is nothing dim or mysterious in our love that we cannot fathom or understand., It was a creed she held tenaciously — sometimes blindly — to the end of her life.
‘How I began’
IN his last letter to Ashcroft Noble, Edward tried to express his thanks to the dying man for the new direction he had given to his life:
I would try and tell you what I have been thinking; though I once told you I cried because I was incapable of thought….
Your good influence and help has sometimes drawn me from the enwrapping pleasure of scenes which before held me alone with them…
You had made ways clear which before had been dark or fearful with doubt…
You have brought life where there was uncertainty…perhaps in part you have made me know myself, understood before by you.
Already, in March 1896 it would seem, Thomas had decided on a career as a writer.
Seventeen years later, in ‘How I Began, he reflected on the process with controlled detachment:
With short intervals, from [eight or nine]onwards I was a writer by choice.
I began several diaries, carrying on the entries in some of them as far as February.
By the time I was fourteen or fifteen, I did more; I kept a more or less daily record of notable events…they were above syntax and indifferent to dignity…
I was obliged to write essays…where I gave myself up to an almost purely artistic rendering of such facts as I remembered, and such opinions as I could concoct by the help of memory, fancy, and the radical and the free-thinking influence of home…
I virtually neglected in my writing the feelings that belonged to my own nature and my own times of life — an irreparable loss, whether great or not.
Later in his article, he pinpoints ‘the necessity of writing long letters daily’ to Helen as the beginning of his departure from nature descriptions — initially written as talks to be given to the Young People's Guild at the Unitarian chapel — or his dignified school essays.
The letters gave him the chance of ‘discarding or of adapting to my own purpose the fine words and infinite variety of constructions which I had formerly admired from afar and imitated in fairly cold blood.’
These early letters to Helen are now lost and are merely reflected in her long replies from Margate and Rotherfield.
Undoubtedly they were chiefly concerned with the ‘feelings that belonged to his own nature,.
They accept that he is to become a writer and a poet.
His autobiography — from birth to his entry into St. Paul's and now known as The sources throw light on the youthful nature journalist who became Edward Thomas, prose writer, literary critic, and poet.
One is his novel,The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans ; the other, an incomplete work entitled Fiction which Thomas conceived as a continuation of his Childhood autobiography.
It was written rapidly (and compulsively) in early 1914, in an attic room in Selsfield House with some resemblance to his own study bedroom at 61 Shelgate Road where his writing began and where Helen later gave birth to his son.
He abandoned it after Robert Frost had read the entire work, approving the Childhood section but condemning the Fiction as too introspective.
The unguarded nature of the latter, which was never worked over by Thomas, provides occasional glimpses of the youth who left St. Paul's after his seventeenth birthday in order to achieve a twofold purpose: ostensibly to please his father by attending a few practical evening classes and in the day by preparing himself for some form of Civil Service clerical post, while privately, he sought the freedom of a young nature-writer who was determined to collect his papers into a book.
This decision to live by his writing was a necessary element in a personality that established firm contours quite early.
How did this early decision come about?
The Fiction records part of the rapid maturing, although his growing friendship with Helen Noble lies outside it.
The story is carefully dated to support the ‘fiction’ that the narrator had left grammar school and entered the Civil Service between April 1894 and January 1895.
(Helen and Edward began their acquaintance in the autumn of 1895.)
It is almost as if Thomas was trying to create, in fiction, an alternative pattern his life might have followed.
Biographical reconstruction based on Thomas's tales and sketches can be a mistaken exercise.
His imagination rested firmly on observed fact and carefully preserved records: his extant notebooks abound in transcriptions of scenes and encounters, interlarded with direct quotations from ordinary speech.
(One notable relic is the second volume (Men) of a two-volume group entitled Things and Men : it is full of snippets of conversation and descriptions spread over the period 1897 to 1910, frequently used in his books and papers in order to restrain his fancy and keep his feet firmly on the ground.)
Those who know Thomas well, like W. H. Hudson, were convinced that all his fictitious characters were dominated by recognizable traits of Thomas himself.
They could hear him speak unequivocally through his characters.
Yet in his Edward Thomas , R.P. Eckert argues that the young Edward had explored the Surrey and Wiltshire countryside in solitude with a fantasy companion called Philip who later reappeared as ‘The Other Man’ in In Pursuit of Spring and, even more noticeably, in Thomas's early poem The Other .
Eckert did not know the real Arthur Hardy's share in these juvenile expeditions, nor had he seen the then unpublished A Sportman's Tale which amplifies the sustained friendship between these two Battersea Grammar School pupils.
The fictional Philip — in The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans — was a compound creation based partly on Ashcroft Noble's long-dead infant son, also named Philip.
The imagined Philip ceases to exist at the time of the older critic's death; the real tribute to Mr Noble was Thomas's finest book, inscribed to his memory.
Ashcroft Noble was part-owner of the three weeklies that published his ‘Paul Pelican’ articles and accepted Thomas's early essays; and he was also connected with the Edinburgh firm of Blackwood that was to publish those essays in book form.
How reliable, as an autobiographical source, is The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans ?
It certainly draws heavily upon Thomas's memories of people and incidents from his youth and early student days and many similarities exist between the bookish Mr Torrance and Mr Noble.
The narrator (of the Morgans)is called Arthur and it is Arthur who survives the death of Philip and goes on to become a writer of some undefined kind on the model of David Copperfield and Great Expectations .
The places inhabited by these characters are drawn directly from Edward's first-hand observations around Wandsworth, and on holidays spent in Wiltshire and West Wales.
The world of this novel is as much his country as the wild, half-derelict countrified pockets around the rapidly developing suburbia of Wimbledon, Kensington, and Battersea which the fictitious Philip and Arthur explored as thoroughly as the real Arthur Hardy and Edward had explored the parts of London commons which they called ‘Our Country’.
Edward's second and third brothers, Ernest and Theodore, have recorded how occasionally they too shared these nature explorations and fishing expeditions in the London woodlands and around Swindon.
Their memories emphasise his intrepid, iconoclastic, and freedom-loving wilfulness.
Ernest wrote:
The only time we really spent together was in the summer holidays…with our grandmother at Swindon.
We went fishing in the Wilts. and Berks.
Canal, but sometimes on blazing afternoons, we would trespass in the fields and search for eggs.
A branch of one tree hung out over a pond ending in a spray of twigs resting on the water.
And there, was a moor-hen's nest and eggs.
Edwy was out on the branch almost within reach of the eggs when we were caught redhanded by the farmer on horseback…
The matter was settled by our father with a donation of 5s. to the local hospital.
Theodore recorded:
For one of so gentle a character he could be extraordinarily defiant of gamekeepers, and threatening letters to my father passed on to him with added threats were not of the slightest avail.
He did no wilful damage but regarded himself as entitled to go where he wished for the purpose in his mind without regard to the rights of ownership and the alleged presence of man traps and spring guns.
He was scornful of the latter….
I met him returning from one of the Penn ponds with the largest pike of the year swinging by his side and a look of sheer elation on his face.
He would be about 16 years old then but his sources of pleasure changed little with advancing years though his opportunities became less….
A large fish on his or my line was always an occasion for excitement for Edwy and he would jump into the water with his gaff if he thought it the only way to land it.
Weather was no deterrent for him and was never allowed to interfere with his plans….
On his best days Edwy was a good companion because of his immense knowledge of country sights and sounds.
Even on his worst (silent) days he was easily stirred by the song of a human or a bird, by the laugh of a woodpecker, the bark of a pheasant, the sight of a rare butterfly, or the bark of a fox in the darkness — with his easy and melodious way of putting over his knowledge…
There was companionship in his silence because it was born of a deep reserve which required help at times to find expression.
Throughout his life Edward had a passion for solitary swimming, often for an hour at a time, in the sea at Felpham in Sussex, in the small lakes in the Black Mountains, or the larger ones in the Lake District.
Silent and solitary he often was, as Eckert knew from the evidence of Margaret Townsend, Thomas's aunt, but he was eager at all times to share his country knowledge with young people.
Children particularly who knew him well, and spent time in his company, invariably recall his ease of manner with them and his absorption in their pursuits.
Edward was born on the third of March, and the advent of spring is a constant theme, and symbol of renewal, in everything he has written.
The fictional Eastertide death of Philip at Lydiard Constantine (in Swindon), leaving the narrator to continue the kind of life that Thomas himself followed in his preparation for matriculation at Oxford in October 1897, reads like a youthful reaction to the actual death of Ashcroft Noble on Good Friday 1896.
It is as though Edward, in 1896, had abandoned the career ‘as Philip’ which Noble had made smooth fur him as readily as, seventeen years later, he allowed the fictional Philip to die.
In real life, Edward returned unexpectedly from Swindon to visit the Noble household and, though unable to see his dying mentor, became a support to Mrs Noble and her daughters, while his friendship with Helen grew into love.
She was determined to leave home; Edward, according to one of Helen's letters to Janet Aldis, ‘haring’ his father who still wished his son to enter the Civil Service in spite of the modest success of his articles and the prospect of a first book being published.
The sudden death of Philip in the novel is one of the few references in Thomas's work traceable to the impact of the elder critic's death upon him and the Part it played in hardening his determination to become a writer.
As he says in the Childhood , he had his full share of determined wilfulness to follow his bent.
Apart from the stray references to external events in the letters between Helen and Edward, the incomplete Fiction is a fuller guide to the decisions Thomas was making between Easter 1895 and the summer of 1896 than reinterpretation of the Morgans novel.
The plan of his outward life and activities is succinctly given in the Diary that forms the last third of The Woodland Life .
The fiction was planned in three or four parts and I assume that most of the first and second parts was incorporated into The Childhood , the initial manuscript of which is in a notebook identical with the extant one,fiction II ‘begun 12. iii.
14 Part II begins p. 86’.
The preceding twenty-five pages describe a long walk taken by Philip Parrish (in his thirteenth year) with his uncle Richard.
It includes a first glimpse of Stonehenge and their eventual arrival at the home of another widowed uncle, Mr Morgan, who lives at Jefferies farm with his daughter Catherine.
She resembles closely the ‘buxom Welsh cousin named Florence, who was probably eight or nine years my senior’, so described in The Childhood , with whom he spent ‘the most blissful hours’ in country walks from his grandmother's Swindon home to Shaw or Lydiard when he was ten or eleven.
‘I suppose I had a sort of unfettered adoration for her without knowing it.
I never saw her after that summer.’
Uncle Richard resembles Edward's Uncle Harry and has not a little of Dad Uzzell in his make-up, too.
In the Fiction , before he and his uncle arrive at the farm, Philip the narrator describes the image of Catherine that remained from the earlier encounter:
I wish I could say exactly what I saw.
Paint it I cannot because I am not a painter.
I could not even give instructions to a painter.
Neither do I believe that a painter could have painted it — had he seen what I saw.
She was beautiful.
She had dark but glowing brown hair.
I had not yet decided whether her eyes were grey or hazel.
Yes! she was beautiful but above all she was blessed and kind and sweet, and I never thought of her as beautiful.
It was her face chiefly that I saw brightening and fading away in my mind's eye.
Or perhaps I ought to say it was her spirit, since it resembled not at all any portrait that could have been painted.
And this spirit brought with it a suggestion rather than the clear outline and colour of the mayblossom dress.
I saw what she was — what she was to me — not what she seemed or would have appeared to be in a photograph or common portrait.
For it was not pure ocular seeing, or I should have seen her as a girl of the age which I have now reached.
She was not that.
She was not of any age but an immortal loveliness.
The eyes alone could never have given me so profound a sense of Spring, of Maytime and the blossoming of hawthorn upon the heaths and wild cherry at the border of the beech copses.
More often than not the face peered at me through leaves.
When faintest it was a face imagined among flames.
The story paints an idyllic picture of many meetings and walks between the lad and Catherine before he and Uncle Richard resume their walk and return home, after a brief visit to Philip's brothers who are orphaned and live elsewhere.
There follows a winter of adolescent wretchedness and, as Part III of the fiction begins, the narrator describes its surviving effect on him still, almost twenty years later in 1914:
I think now that her predominance has done in justice to lesser things in my life, as indeed it may still do.
I fear it is even now doing so.
It is urging me on over the years bidding me neglect those that were without Cathenne, where as I set out to tell the story of my life, the dull with the bright, the gray with the green, all the Sundays Mondays and Tuesdays of it at least sufficiently to suggest them.
Moreover if I were to fly there what should I do but renew sorrows and incur perhaps insupportable difficulties in attempting to record them.
Yet I must still think it my duty, without reconsidering whether or not it be worthwhile, to continue this plain record of what (I know) need not have been plain but for the accident that I am a niggler without impulse, not an imaginative artist.
When I get out of my train at Victoria and look about me at the other two hundred — mostly strangers, not least so those whose names as early schoolfellows dawn on me when they disappeared,— I sometimes think that one or two of us ought to speak out instead of just voting and making a remark in the complaint book once or twice a year and writing to a newspaper less often.
Therefore I will continue.
When Edward Thomas decided to send The Childhood to Eleanor Farjeon for typing, he declared it impossible to recapture precisely ‘what he was’ as a youth.
The fiction , however, reads like an attempt to break out of this self-imposed restriction.
Its genesis perhaps was the unsuccessful attempt by Thomas and his walking companion Jesse Berridge, on the journey that became In Pursuit of Spring , to collaborate on a fiction that would include a passionate youthful love, courtship, and marriage.
There is no evidence among manuscripts and notebooks to decide this point.
Undoubtedly, in March 1914, nine days after his thirty-seventh birthday, at one of the lowest ebbs in his fortune (but soon after he had received a grant from the Royal Literary Fund), Thomas speculated in fictional form upon another path his life might have taken if he had left grammar school at sixteen and followed his father's plan of a career in the Civil Service.
The narrator of the Fiction , Philip Parrish, is an orphan living with his uncle but with many brothers scattered elsewhere.
He has an uncle called Mr Morgan who lives somewhere in Wiltshire and an aunt in Salisbury.
The story of Part III begins in a London suburb after he leaves grammar school and goes to evening classes:
From that school of mingled games, friendliness and lessons I went with but a short pause to one where lessons were business, and a very serious business indeed since most of the scholars had already begun to work in offices and came here in the evenings to qualify themselves to earn more money and more leisure.
In the pause I studied by myself first at home, then at my aunt's home at Salisbury.
There it was that I really began to read.
As he explores the poetry of Byron at Salisbury he works hard at his arithmetic and English composition until he is ‘chosen as fit to enter the Civil Service, to hold for the rest of my active life time the pen that is mightier (when you get a good one) than the sword (when you get a bad one).’
The remaining five pages of the manuscript give a dispiriting account of the office life he leads, the sonnets he writes, the girls and prostitutes he sees but does not meet.
Some of these pages round off the last bits of The Childhood after he had sent the bulk of it, with Frost's approval, to Eleanor Farjeon for typing.
The Fiction was his last attempt at personal writing in 1914 before he decided, by whatever hidden processes, that the best solution to his apparent obsession with introspection and self-analysis was to cross over into the world of poetry, with its quite different but equally stringent laws and regulations.
The Fiction , like In Pursuit of Spring , unveils areas of experience that he felt compelled to probe, in order to retain his dignity.
The three following quotations, taken from Part II of the manuscript, recover a few hitherto unsuspected facets of Thomas the young pre-Oxford writer.
One refers to his fourteenth year, a little later than the visit to Catherine at Jefferies farm, when he had changed greatly.
I had become a good and conscientious boy.
Sometimes I used actually to go to a church in my religion, not to one peopled by a clergyman, choir boys, bald old men, and ladies with feathers in their hats, but to an empty church.
I know that I went there when the change I have spoken of must have been already complete.
My uncle in the evening had read aloud something where the line was quoted The child is father to the man and these words insinuated themselves not into the stony ground and thistles of my mind but into the dark rich soil that brings forth a hundred fold.
The first result was a dream that very night.
In my dream I flew through a twilight until I reached a forest of enormous trees.
Here I alighted and began to walk into the wood in search of something.
Seeking without knowing what and going deeper into the forest, I noticed that I was not alone.
Other boys and girls were flitting hither and thither among the trees, singly, without a word or a sign of communication with one another.
A few were older, many were younger, than I. Some like myself were looking about them.
Others had found what they sought.
These, when I passed them, I saw to be sitting or kneeling beside cradles, rocking them, or singing, or gazing intently.
The children were very much like the angels of resurrection which I had seen over tombs.
What was inside the cradles at first sight terrified me.
Several that I saw were very old, bearded, emaciated and grim and deathlike, instead of babies, grown men.
All were asleep.
I was, however, soon relieved.
‘The child is father to the man’ said one of the tenders of cradles in a pause in his song.
Instantly I understood everything.
These were children tending the men and old men to whom they were fathers.
I was a father.
What I was in search of was my son.
After some wandering among nurseless cradles I recognized him by some unsuspected instinct — a pallid moustached old baby.
I bent down to look more closely.
With a scream I hid my eyes.
All had been in vain.
My son was dead.
And here ended the dream, but not the growth of that seed sown by Wordsworth's poem…
He then relates hearing the ringing of a church bell, dressing quickly, racing towards the nearest church which was shut, not a sound:
I laughed and awoke.
It was a dream, but the disappointment and dreariness remained with me.
The words ‘The child is father to the man’, had haunted me all the morning.
Beginning by a fantastic attempt to construct pedigrees where sons were their own fathers, I became gradually so involved that I remember wondering if God the Father were in truth only the child that grew up into Jesus Christ.
That afternoon I meant to search the Bible for information, though I knew little of it.
Every room in the house contained some form of Bible and I took up a large ancient looking one and opened it as if it had been a door into a cave.
What I saw and read was ‘Our Father which art in Heaven’.
I read no more.
My curiosity had ceased, swallowed up by a kind of dreamy awe which from that day increased in me very greatly.
All that was necessary to bring it on in more or less its full force was the sight of the Bible, its cover or open page, or its mere name, or the sight of a church, or the sound of any bell ringing solemnly, from Big Ben down to the bell of the Sunday muffin men.
The next extract refers to a period in Salisbury when Philip Parrish works eight hours a day in preparation for his Civil Service examination without too many lapses into dreaming.
He closes his book at seven and goes walking and then reads.
Although ‘Milton and Wordsworth exalted me’, he eventually buys a complete Byron for two shillings and reads Childe Harold .
I actually wanted someone to share the excruciating sad pleasure I got from some of the words….
Once I had desired a world made good and right and pure, as I conceived, by a Liberal statesman benevolent and omnipotent.
Now I was in a perfect world of ocean, mountains and great waters, of mighty men mightily acting or speaking, Napoleon and Byron himself.
I had discovered that without which life must be worse than death.
From that day onwards I was alive.
I knew happiness.
As I came down into Salisbury that day I knew for the first time that I had been happy.
I used the word happy, repeating it to myself through the streets.
When I came to the Market Cross I stopped.
I had forgotten my way and had to look all round me slowly until I recognized the street which I had used a hundred times before.
The fact is that I had never seen it, or known what I was seeing, until that day:…
Above all the people were strange.
The faces of all, of men more than women, and of dark men particularly, puzzled and fascinated and alarmed me.
I saw eyes as unkindly as stuffed fox's.
What must some of those mouths have said or done!
There was something cabalistic about the bandy legs of a road sweeper, who stood with his back to me leaning on his outstretched broom as on a catamaran while he lit his pipe….
One beautiful face in a shop brought into my mind an undraped statue I had seen somewhere and we blushed together.
And I believed that to others I who looked thus strangely upon them, I also was strange.
A feeling that I was horribly conspicuous made me wish to hide myself.
For the people were no longer a negatively friendly element which the individual slid into and out of….
Perhaps I discerned something they had in common, but what I saw chiefly was that they were different from me.
I was alone.
I knew that I was alone, and I found myself saying over my name to myself to intensify my individuality to bring about a conviction that though alone I was strong.
Thenceforward I was always wanting to take the joys of solitude and of society in their extreme forms, and was alternatively miserable from the lack of company or the presence of uncongenial company.
I remember how both feelings entered into me in the course of one evening….
I walked into the town feeling like a pirate or Border robber descending upon capon-fed middlemen, moneylenders, retired or expecting to retire.
But with the first dazzle of the lights all was changed.
I was depressed.
I had no magic that could open to me any one of those dark doors, lighted windows.
I was alone and I hated it.
I wanted men, yet I looked into the faces and with hatred.
The third section describes Parrish's success in the Civil Service examination and his growing disillusionment with his fellows and the vacuity of their leisure hours:
On hearing that I had a place among successful candidates I was excited with pleasure.
I had won a race; I had gratified my aunt and uncle.
Above all I was pleased to have assured myself an income exceeding that on which some men had written great poetry, others had done great deeds, many had been free and happy.
That I did not care about my work was, I thought, an outrage.
It could not get hold of me and stifle me; for it would employ only my hands and a certain section of my knowledge; the rest of me would be free: after office hours my escape would be absolute; and then the holidays would enable me, according to my powers and my wishes, to live another life as different as that of Jekyll from that of Hyde.
I did not find, however, among my colleagues many who were conceivably poets, heroes, or exceptionally free men in their holidays and spare time….
Already I think I found it painful to see so much vacuity without leisure, indolence without refinement.
The young men of my own age twirling their canes, pushing into one another sideways, tilting one another 's hats, made me angry — was it because they at least had achieved contentment, and I only contempt?
There was no misbehaviour.
Every one else was virtually a special constable.
…The women were better.
They always had to be constrained in public, Sundays or not; and if anything they were less so on Sunday, when sometimes their clothes were pretty, and at least were seldom black, navy blue or grey as the men's were invariably….
I no longer saw them, indeed, as legless beings on self moving pedestals as I had done at Salisbury but from being so constantly restricted in movement it seemed that they must be incapable of movement.
Perpendicular without intermission, taking steps of the same length at the same intervals, their arms hanging useless and helpless they were no better than trussed chickens but for their faces which, even in repose, suggested movement no less than a bird's wings….
Was I really different?
Why could I never go about arm in arm with two or three others and stare at girls?
But I could not be content just to walk alongside a pretty one and hear her giggling.
In fact the whole scene of bare common and compact streets looked hopelessly inadequate for two sexes of a race that had produced Byron's poetry and might again do something like it.
I was writing sonnets myself, but that did not satisfy me.
I looked round for a living man to admire and follow.
I used to remember that…and there the fiction ends.
The Fiction adds a little to one's understanding of what he was becoming in the eighteen months immediately before his courtship of Helen Noble.
His passion for his cousin prefigures many subsequent unfulfilled arousals later in his life exactly as, in moments of heightened sensibility, he reveals an almost Puritan recoil from any way of life that was not earnest, spiritually fruitful, and socially useful.
Yet he was not a prig.
The Fiction captures an iron determination to undertake the hard work necessary to realize his own ideals.
It suggests, too, the knife-edge path traversed by the adult writer between his overpowering response to physical and natural beauty and the self-defeating sense of unworthiness that he normally characterises, and displays, as a hampering shyness, a fear of rejection.
In most of his literary reviewing, the fineness of his critical discrimination and the clarity with which he expresses it draws fruitfully on this special shyness.
He refused to be dogmatic, occasionally wrote a modest puff for a friend, was incapable of brashness, and in judgement of people and books had the ability to suspend belief and disbelief.
This last quality — encouraged by Ashcroft Noble — he had learned to recognize in himself during the period of growth between the boy naturalist of The Childhood and the much-sought-after undergraduate writer of Lincoln College who breathes freely through the ornate pages of his own Oxford .
Is the Fiction too slight a foundation to build on for some understanding of these intermediate years?
Fortunately, in addition to Helen Thomas's absorbing, unselfconscious account of their courtship and the first years of their marriage, letters still survive which chart the growth of love.
Here, in sequence, are quotations from Helen's letters to Janet Aldis: Do you remember Janet?, when I saw you last I told you of a plan I had made, regarding the boy who father is taking up, and who writes Nature sketches.
I think it will succeed although it will take ages, for he is fearfully shy, and I am likewise affected.
He wants a girl friend and I want a boy friend, and as I like him (or at least what I know of him) and I think he likes me, I think it would be good for both of us if we could be friends.
I wonder if we shall.
(2 January 1896.)
I and the Thomas boy are very slowly making way.
He wrote and asked father if I might go out with him on one of his long walks.
To my surprise he said I might.
So I was in a great state of elation.
But to my disappointment Edward never turned up for me.
And when he came last night and was asked the reason, he said he never dreamed I would be allowed to come.
But he is going to take me some day this week to some lovely woods he knows.
Last night I was in a furious rage because Edward asked me to go to his home this afternoon, and he would show me some flowers and nests he thought I would like to see.
So I gladly consented.
But that little plan was soon put a stop to, for mother would not let me go by myself, and there was nobody to go with me.
Did you ever hear such awful tommyrot in your life?
I call it very wrong.
Mother says What would Mrs. Thomas think?
I say if she thought till she was tired, she could not possibly think of any wrong….
Isn't it simply ludicrous?
Here I am eighteen years old, and in a great state of elation because I was going out with a boy.
It is disgusting and immoral and a disgrace.
Why we may go walks together, and not go to his house where there is all his family I simply cannot imagine.
It is too deep for me…
I am going to ask Edward what his views on the subject will be.
I rather think he will be very broadminded.
He looked awfully amazed when mother said I could not go with him to see his books.
(6 January 1896.)
Your remarks about Edward pleased too.
Whatever made you think that the idea — of course quite impossible, though for the sake of argument we will not imagine it so — myself and Edward going away together was simply unconventional.
Nothing was further from my thoughts; my reason would be simply enjoyment, and if it was the most commonplace thing to do my delight would not be decreased one bit.
The novelty or improperness of the idea is not its alarm…
You scoff at me and my ‘one ’ man friend, you who have so many, but dear girl I have learnt more in the short time of my friendship with Edward, more of the world, of men as distinct from women, and man as an individual than in all my life I have learnt before.
You and Osman, you and the Fry, though you have told me of your perfect freedom and exchange of ideas etc. were never freer than Edward and I. Sometimes I wonder that I can speak to him as I do, never before having known a boy, and having only you at times to ‘let out, on.
Already this freedom has benefited him, and when I know of the good I have done him, I feel that freedom is the only way to greater purity…
All this is feeble no doubt, my words I mean.
I only wish I had the power of putting down my thoughts in clear and sensible language.
(27 July 1896.)
These quotations — and many more letters to Edward — amplify, in their chatty, less intense manner, the picture of early courtship recalled by Helen in 1924–6 in As It Was and World Without End .
Edward acknowledges her effect on him in a letter — one of numerous happy, affectionate letters to ‘My dearest Friend’— from his lodgings at 113 Cowley Road, Oxford, 29 January 1898 (the third of his letters to her after his return to Oxford for the Lent Term): Take care of yourself my dearest friend.
I often fear for you in many ways, quite unreasonably it may be.
Don't go about much; no late returning in crowded streets from Earl's Court or elsewhere; no dissipating jabber and smoking and drinking with the Andrews [where Helen was employed].
By the way, do you drink wine when I am not here ?
I would much rather you did not.
Probably you do not care enough for it to create a liking and a need, which we shall never be able to satisfy nevertheless, avoid it unless principle and pleasure and interest all advise it.
— It is my great resting place, that you are well: truly it is more than health to me, and gives me an untroubled fancy which is good for my work and my temper.
Tell me therefore of it, little one.
Even if I seem often cold in my letters and not noticing your words.
I have not often coldness with you, sweet heart; yet I often feel that you teach me to love you.
You remember, how once in my self-unconfidence, I asked you to take care of me until my age settled into true understanding of love?
But I do love without limit or doubt, you only, your body and spirit and memory.
After Edward arrived in Oxford in October 1897, the regular correspondence between him and Helen gives a fairly full picture of his life until he and Helen and their eight-month-old son, Merfyn, settled temporarily in lodgings, first at Atheldene Road, Earlsfield and then, nearer to both their parental homes, at 7 Nightingale Parade, Balham.
This same period is also covered by a series of long letters from Edward to Harry Hooton, an older man who had married Janet Aldis and, increasingly, by correspondence between Edward and Ian MacAlister, who became one of Edward's staunchest friends.
(There are, too, some revealing letters from Helen to MacAlister.)
But there are few definite sources for Thomas's activities — and even less for his thoughts, opinions, and attitudes — during the period between 30 March 1896, the end of his nature diary (the appendix to The Woodland Life ), and his entry into Oxford.
Helen Thomas's As It Was is a principal source.
The brief memories written for R. L. Watson in the late 1940s by the poet's second and third brothers say nothing about this period.
Some of the experiences drawn upon in the Fiction belong to the blank period between October 1896 and January 1897, for which no letters from Edward and Helen survive.
When the correspondence resumes in January 1897, the change of mood is evident from a letter Helen sent to Janet Aldis the previous November from Margate:
This letter is going to be devoted to my affairs in connection with Edward…the other day he asked me if I thought you would care to go for a walk into the country somewhere.
I said I was sure you would, and gave him your address…
He would not care to take you home to his house to tea, he hates his father so, but I suggested both going to our place, you will do this won't you?
The little mother [Mrs Noble]would be so glad to see you both…
He may be shy at first, but after a while he will get over that: he is not half so shy as he was, of course not.
The dear boy is very passionate, and his love for me making life now utterly happy, at the same time fills me with a sense of great responsibility.
But the happiness would not be so intense were this feeling absent.
Mother and lots of other people would say we were too young to love truly, they would have us wait for our ‘years of discretion’; at what age one is supposed to be abnormally discreet I do not know, all I know is that I have not arrived there yet, and I hope I never will.
I do not believe that youth is incapable of true and lasting love…
I, since the time when I first became morally certain I was in love, seem to have grown years older…
There is a purpose in living now, a sense of good in living which I did not know before.
I suppose we are what is called engaged, though it is different somehow.
We at first wanted to know each other, then knowing became friends, and every day as our knowledge increased, greater liking, deeper sympathy, and so on to love and feeling our love, knowing it to be true, pure, and everlasting; then the desire for the perfect life of unity, and then of giving the world the benefit of our love by a little child.
And so for that time we live now, both of us, and we are perfectly happy, and the waiting is not weary, but good and happy for us both.
We are young and youth is said to be fickle, mutable, and we have both looked at the possibility of ourselves not being exceptions to that supposed rule.
We cannot imagine it, yet it is possible, and if such a change did come to one of us, there would be pain for both and merely afterwards friendship…
Edward never proposed to me, I never ‘accepted’ him, yet here we are just as much engaged and much more so than lovers of whom I have read.
This love was the outcome of our friendship, just as our friendship was the outcome of our acquaintance; there was no break only a very gradual difference.
I can hardly remember the first time I felt that we loved each other.
It was all perfectly beautifully natural, like the blossoming of a flower.
Helen's mother wished her daughter to return home from the Webb family.
There is a hint that the older people generally frowned on meetings between Edward and Helen similar to their innocent day at Horsmonden.
Helen was planning to leave Mrs Webb — now safely delivered of her next child — and to seek employment in London and live at home.
There was talk of sending Edward for a short health-restoring visit to Swindon.
Having opened negotiations with the publishers Blackwood after Mr Noble's death and having agreed to their request that he should supplement his choice of eleven country essays with a diary of his observations ‘in English fields and woods’ from 1 April 1895 to 30 March 1896, he was busy reading the final proofs of The Woodland Life .
The nature of his ill health is undisclosed but his ‘wild discontent’ was finally healed by two events.
The first was Helen's return to 6 Patten Road for a ten-day holiday before she began work in London as governess to Horst, the young son of M. and Mme Roman who lived at the Hotel Metropole.
The second, referred to obscurely in Helen's last letter from Margate, was Mr Thomas's decision that Edward should not take up a Civil Service post, but instead prepare himself for an Oxford entrance scholarship.
Probably Edward, like Parrish in the fiction , had done extremely well in the Civil Service examination and this evidence of his academic ability, together with the favourable critical reception of The Woodland Life , convinced his father that Edward was now worthy of financial support.
There is no firm evidence either way.
Helen never intended her As It Was to be an accurate account of their young lives, and there are no letters because they met often.
From February '97 onwards Helen is helping him to buy some newly needed textbooks.
In April, while on a protracted stay with Janet's parents in Walsall, she complains of his extremely hard work, and in early May she first states that he is working for Oxford entrance.
By now a new restriction had been placed on their friendship by both parents.
Helen's new employers departed mysteriously and suddenly, and Helen was sent to Rugby almost at once to help Mrs Sery, an ‘excitable, merry French Woman’, with her young son.
She stayed a week and then joined Janet Aldis for an indefinite visit at her parents' home in Walsall, where Mr Aldis was a housemaster at Queen Mary's School.
Returning Edward the proofs of his book, Helen commented: ‘This has indeed been a fair spring for us, though they had made it a winter.
Poor fools, how can Winter come, when we love.’
When she arrived at Walsall, she informed Edward that Mrs Noble, after sending her earlier a ‘vulgar and jeering’ letter in which ‘She does her best to make me doubt you’, had forbidden them to meet or correspond until Helen reached years of discretion — her twenty-first birthday on 11 July 1898.
Helen regretted giving her consent, because she intended to see Edward and to write to him.
She hated even more the absence of honest dealing with her mother.
Eventually she gave her mother an undertaking for a limited period and hoped Edward would agree.
‘We must hope before you go to Oxford mother will have relented enough at any rate to make writing to you possible.’
Edward agreed.
He had often, in their earlier correspondence, spoken of a test or ideal that he wished to impose on himself as a rein on his passionate temperament and his over-eager response to physical beauty and joy.
He explained to Helen the painful discomfort of his frequent erections while they walked together and his determination to avoid masturbation.
The absence of any letters between them from mid July until October suggests that they deliberately refrained from regular letter writing for a time.
After early May, Mrs Noble relented to some extent.
Helen was called home to help her sister, Irene, in her employment and during this ten-week secretarial stint she and Edward met frequently on the Common as Helen returned from her work.
But difficulties were placed in their way.
Helen, having once given her word, was uneasy about their infrequent meetings and pleaded with him to support her resolve:
We both have work to do, we each have a duty, yours your work, mine to help my Mother, and surely our love will help us more than anything to do well.
And our love does not depend on anything, though for years we saw nothing of each other, still we should love.
And I feel if now we deny ourselves our greatest delight and say our love alone shall make us strong, our strength shall not depend on anything but our love then indeed I think we shall be creating an independence of each other, which can only make our binding sympathy more perfect…. for the present, for the 14 months before I am 21 then I have after much real thought, much consideration decided that it would be best for both of us to be separated…
I have not a strong mind, or will, nor am I unselfish, and so knowing well my faults I ask you to help me.
Consider it all well, look into yourself, and tell me soon how you feel.
Write to me that is best…
Come here to see me if you will; mother asks you, and I want you, but it is for you to come or not as you feel best, or as you like.
Edward accepted the immediate need to support Helen's decision and maintain Mrs Noble's good opinion of him.
A few hasty notes in July show that he continued to visit 6 Patten Road, and occasionally to have dinner there, until their separation became a reality, when Helen took up a resident post as governess with the Wards, at 33 Bath Road, Bedford and Edward spent August with his father's relations at 17 Woodville Street, Pontardulais, while his younger brothers became pupils at a small denominational school in Ammanford.
In September, when Edward had any spare time and Helen was free from work, they met frequently at the National Gallery, where they examined minutely Greek male and female statues, or at Janet's lodgings.
Mindful of the gaps in his reading, and aware of the range of books in Mr Noble's library now denied to him, Edward and Helen scoured the second-hand bookshops for bargains and texts necessary for his matriculation test in October.
The serious business of gaining an Oxford scholarship and some measure of financial independence had begun and, for a time, gave Edward the drive necessary to matriculate easily as a non-collegiate student at Oxford, to live in lodgings there, and to attend a full course of lectures to prepare himself for an entrance scholarship to Balliol, Merton, or Lincoln.
The self-discipline and lessened dependence on each other that Helen had hoped for had had some effect on Edward, as his first letter to Helen from his Oxford lodgings shows:
My dearest friend, As yet I can do little more than write comfortable letters containing matter of fact and ordinary news.
For I have so far lived almost wholly the outer life which is so distressing to think of and to endure.
Never, perhaps, have I so lived for such a long time together.
The cause of it is evident enough: such a call on my brains merely; and of my brains, only that portion which says one and one made three, says how do you do, says I will now dine.
But it is evident it will soon alter.
When I am settled, there is no reason why my life should not be as placid, and there is much reason why it should be far more placid, than at home.
Until then I wait.
Until then my writing to you, my own sweet little one, must taste even as harsh as my conversation and look now are…
I cannot even tell you how my work will be though I know very certainly that it will demand long attention if I am to pass Responsions and get a scholarship.
Therefore you will understand short rare letters.
(17 October 1897.)
The period of epistolary self-restraint lasted until the beginning of 1898.
The schoolboy writer of nature articles had found a new purpose around which to weave his dreams of a future with his ‘anemone maiden,.
As his own free reading expanded, with greater leisure and the wealth of Mr Noble's books, he had begun to match his nature writings against the ideal world of the nineteenth-century English poets.
In one notebook (dated 24 April to 22 June 1897) he had first written an essay on the ‘London Night’ and then wrote across it,
This is a mere exhibition of my inability to write plain prose, and more terribly, my impotence…
Now I am off to write my sonorous senselessness in prose.
I wonder shall I ever delight, touch, or interest one human soul that is strange to me?
That vanity about captivating girls with my account of the wild flower is long past.
With all my heart I hope for the failure of that first book — no, volume, of mine, from beginning to end not trash, but heartless pretence.
Do they prate of observation ?
My dull eyes were better out, than thus to walk through life, a sort of inferior lynx, a moral mole, or bat.
Such self-disgust appeared to have physical causes or manifestations: a pattern that was to repeat itself at irregular intervals for the next twenty years.
In an earlier notebook, dated 10 March '97, he recorded: My limbs fall in, tremble, yield, I am a wreck, even of what I was last Spring.
Today I started under a rainbow, towards one of those western panoramas of pure cloud that rest there in vain, but could not reach.
It is hard.
For the spirit still is bright and swift, the eye capable of all delight; but what can that avail, when I cannot, here, in the street, submit to my impulse or sensation, but must be a creature of body, where the body is all, the spirit in subjection to it?
If I look up to the blue sky, as yet I must when it is blue and bright suddenly, it is in spite of the heavy limb and relaxing back that will drag me down or cause me to hasten home.
Already, at the age of nineteen, he was experiencing the morbidity which occasionally harassed him and which he described sixteen years later in a chapter on the ‘character’ of Keats:
He was himself the first discoverer of that ‘morbidity of temperament’.
That he did discover it, that he had a wonderful self-knowledge — not mere self-analysis — calm and penetrating, never coldly submissive, is a proof that it was not the whole truth.
The morbidity was the occasional overbalancing of his intense sympathy, his greatest passive power….
He was for ‘a delicious diligent indolence’, for a passiveness allowing the intellectual powers to come very gradually to ripeness.
When he was in a room with people, unless he was following a definite thought, he was so open to their influence that the identity of everyone pressed on him and annihilated him:…
At one time he left off animal food, as he said, that his ‘teeming brain’ might not be in a greater mist than was natural to it.
And there seems no doubt that this intense life of the mind often reached a point either of aching or of languor.
The word ‘ache’ is one of his constant, significant words.
This perceptive study makes it clear that Thomas refused to accept the ‘morbidity of temperament’ as the only key to understanding the man.
There is so much of Keats that he admired — his pugnacity, his social concern, his gusto, his direct presentation of the moment's phases of mind and moods of temperament — that one becomes aware of the impress of Thomas's own mind and experience through his comments on Keats: ‘Because he was then in the midst of his greatest period, and had to find vent for the pressure of poetry within him, he had to live away from Fanny Brawne, at Shanklin and Winchester: had he been near her long, at this time, love and poetry together, not to speak of the ‘hateful literary chit-chat’ of Hampstead, would have been insupportable.
When he wrote verses directly to her he proved it.’
Keats was written rapidly at Selsfield House in 1913 some months before he began his work there on the Childhood and the Fiction .
Reliving Keats, love for Fanny Brawne, Thomas (away from home and family) was tapping the subterranean channels of his own courtship and early days as a writer.
Except in his early letters to Helen, his reticence about his passionate courtship is almost complete — a fact that may explain, if not excuse, the coldness with which many of his friends and family received Helen's slightly idealized accounts of their life together in As It Was and World Without End .
His yearning letters to her from Wales and Oxford corroborate amply her direct narrative of their passionate, loving sexuality.
She remembered incidents vividly and, when she wrote her books, she had their letters to each other and all his notebooks (most of which are now in the Berg Collection), carefully dated between November '95 and June '97.
The first four are mainly nature observations similar to the Diary printed in The Woodland Life .
They record on 9 January 1896, ‘Richmond with HN’ and that 1896 ‘opened mild with song of Robin and blithe-heart Blackbird’, that in April and early May he was ‘at Surrey’and the next month he paid visits to Chipstead and Horsmonden.
He noted his reading and his earnings: ‘Thoreau I am now reading with interest and pleasure.
‘There can be no very black melancholy to him who lives in the midst of Nature and has his senses still.’
(Walden ).’
Typically, he notes a list of payments received for journalism, in the first half of 1896:Globe — 4 guineas for 4 items;Speaker — £14.15.0 for 7 items; and New Age five at 10/6 each.
The fourth and fifth notebook record an extended period (13 June to 14 November 1896) spent successively at London, Horsmonden, Mumbles, Langland Bay, Carswell Bay, Bishopston, and Pwll Du [Gower], and then September spent at Pontardulais.
On his return to London he makes the following comment on the period 8 to 14 November, presumably spent with Helen Noble: ‘The holiest and best of pleasures.
It cannot be forgotten or surpassed though gone for ever.
All life quickens.
Mine most of all.
Why should I not be proud.
But I must be.
This heat makes me so.
Envy and lust and wrong cannot reach such moods.’
Thomas discussed the relationship between love and poetry much later in Feminine Influence on the Poet : ‘The love-poem is not for the beloved, for it is not worthy, as it is the least thing that is given to her, and none knows this better than she unless it be the lover….
It may open with desire of woman, but it ends with unexpected consolation or with another desire not of woman.’
He recalls, without explicit statement (though their letters affirm it), the way in which he and Helen interwove poetry with their own voyages of mutual discovery: We treat them [poems]as parts written for ourselves to act, in the spirit, as they were written by the poet, in the spirit.
There is much of the poetry of Shelley and of Spenser, for example, written since they knew a woman, which has no mention of woman, and yet is full of love and fit to awaken and to satisfy love….
At this time when youth is most exultant, this poetry is thumbed night and day; a page is opened at random, as Virgil used to be, for a word big with fate.
This is still (in 1910) the unmistakable voice of his early letters to Helen: it confirms the ‘David’ portrayed in As It Was .
During their courtship they believed that his true future was to be a poet.
Like his father, Edward was a born teacher, and he guided Helen's reading further into his own thorough knowledge of Wordsworth, Shelley, and Byron.
Apart from Dickens, their prose reading reflected the radical attitudes of their Unitarian upbringing: Hazlitt, Carlyle, Cobbett, Ruskin, and William Morris besides numerous progressive pamphlets.
The influence of Pater — which lies beneath Edward's undergraduate article on the ‘Frontiers of English Prose’ with its carefully argued refusal to draw distinctions between prose and poetry — developed during his first non-collegiate year at Oxford.
Six months before he sat his Final Schools examination, he recorded the change he had observed in ‘My Writing — it seems daily to become poorer though my mind is slowly growing.
My letters perhaps improve $these were chiefly those sent to Helen, Harry Hooton and Ian MacAlister], and perhaps indicate the line of my future efforts.
But as it is I feel before the world as Sidney before Stella (Sonnet L)
So that I cannot choose but write my mind,
And cannot choose but put out what I write.’
This twin need to find adequate expression for his own nature, and to share it with others, remained constant for the rest of his life.
The Long Green Day: Oxford 1897–1898
‘IN Oxford nothing is the creation of one man or one year’; the subtle blend of antiquity and urgent immediate concerns masks the change that nine (or twelve) short terms can make upon the most transient undergraduate.
Edward Thomas was no exception to his own precept.
A month before he went up in 1897 his father's first cousin (and namesake) had been struck by the lad's awkward manners, silent gaucherie, unsuitable dress, and down-covered chin; three years later Edward returned the visit in a colours blazer, accompanied by his wife and his eight-months-old son.
He was now an Oxford graduate with a second class Honours degree awarded in the History schools, who had published a series of papers in London journals during his Oxford career.
These were obvious external changes.
The less apparent development of character and literary ambition seems adequately chronicled in numerous surviving letters to Helen Noble and to Harry Hooton, soon to be the husband of Janet Aldis.
Edward early knew the deficiency of his letters to Hooton: ‘It is a weariness to fumble for truth and completeness, and after all to feel the failure at both.
Living words alone could speak plain.
Truly my living words could vindicate me; ask Helen, if they would not., The necessary complement to the epistolary picture of his Oxford life is his own book Oxford , published three years after he came down.
There his intense affection for the place, its people, its buildings and its surrounding countryside still shines clearly, although Thomas's Oxford is grossly distorted for us today.
Some time ago…in a high attic I heard once again the laud or summons or complaint of bells….
Once again I felt the mysterious pleasure of being in an elevated Oxford chamber at night, among cloud and star,— so that I seemed to join in the inevitable motion of the planets,— and as I saw the sea of roofs and horned turrets and spires I knew that, although architecture is a dead language, here at least it speaks strongly and clearly, pompous as Latin, subtle as Greek.
No one can walk much in the Oxford country without becoming a Pantheist.
…Everywhere the fancy, unaided by earlier fancies, sets to work very busily in these fields.
I have on several afternoons gone some way towards the beginning of a new mythology, which might in a thousand years puzzle the Germans.
The shadowy, half-apprehended faces of new deities float before my eyes, and I have wondered whether Apollo and Diana are not immortal presences wheresoever there are awful trees and alternating spaces of cool or sunlit lawn….
Often I saw a clean-limbed beech, pale and slender, yet firm in its loftiness, that shook delicately arched branches at the top, and below held out an arm on which a form of schoolboys might have sat,— rising out of fine grass and printing its perfect outlines on the sky,— and I could fancy it enjoyed a life of pleasure that was health, beauty that was strength, thought that was repose.
From his digs at 113 Cowley Road, Thomas wrote his first letter to Harry Hooton: ‘My dear Mr. Hooton, I matriculated today before the Vice-Chancellor of the University, and, in consequence, I am left a little freer of time and heart: for until then, I feared failure in what turned out to be the easy matric. exam., and worked to the exclusion of almost all else: which is the explanation of time and heart.’
It was the formal beginning of a lifelong friendship with ‘someone more sure and staid’, eight years his senior.
During his first term at Oxford Hooton received long letters on a wide range of topics.
They uncover the gap left in Thomas's intellectual development by the death of Ashcroft Noble and his own sense of the inadequacy of his preparation for the nine terms spent at University between October 1897 and his final viva voce examination in July 1900.
‘You will purge me and my mood, as my Pater used to purge my writing of its excess….
Restless that I am, I often pray that someone would cage and rule me entirely.
Just as, in writing, I think little men should be bound to mere journeyman work.
.. I have changed out of the paternal democracy into a conservatism that believes in Caesar, Pope and the fierce God of Battles — almost.’
Many more revelations and assertions were to follow.
He spent the first three terms as a non-collegiate student (a ‘tosher’), preparing himself for Responsions by means of three hours' daily tuition directed towards entrance scholarships to Balliol in November and Merton in January (which he failed to win), and then to Lincoln College, which he won easily in March 1898 because of the mature quality of his style and approach in the general essay paper.
He had failed Responsions twice, in December and April before the Lincoln examination and he knew that if he did not pass in June his Oxford career, in spite of his entrance scholarship, would end abruptly.
Edward overworked in his lonely digs —‘the first time I ever truly worked’— and in these early letters to Hooton he discovered new qualities in his nature.
(‘Would you believe me if I called myself a Puritan?
I admire the Puritan and Puritanism; and so far, my maidenly debauchery of habit still leaves me a Puritan in life.
This, however, becomes sheer self-description.’)
He passed Responsions that June and began to look forward to the payments he would get for his journalism — especially for his ‘prose poems’ in the Speaker .
He and Helen were planning to save money for their future life together.
Six papers had been accepted for publication during his first Oxford year, but he was as little pleased with them as with The Woodland Life : ‘I am impatient to get to Lincoln College’ he wrote to Hooton.
‘One thing I hope to get there — religion.
I find such a need of that, as an informing spirit in all r do and am.
If I can be serious enough, I hope to find satisfaction in the Church of England: it will be my fault if I don't.
I want, as Milton says in those pathetic closing lines of his Epic, ‘a place of rest’…1 am too doubtful about my own writing to think of making an effort towards completing another volume.
I shall wait.
Perhaps some good will come of rivalry and comparisons — if there is any for me — at College.
I hope so.
I have need of such comparison, otherwise my writing is of a hothouse type.’
At the end of July, with Responsions successfully behind him as well as a happy celebratory birthday outing for Helen spent with Harry and Janet, Edward was still as hesitant as in his early letters to Hooton: ‘May I bring a paper in manuscript and talk it over with you?
I am so discontented with my work.
Other people's approbation and censure is all insipid and uncritical, so does not help; and I have no ground for confidence in myself.
Without my capacity for perseverance in such work as mere dictionary reading, I should despair.
I am constantly called a fool, because I have not that literary indigestion which throws up what it feeds on, every week or so.’
He had come a long way, he believed, since the Speaker paper (October 1897), ‘Shadows of the Hills’.
An evocation of his previous summer holiday in Pontardulais, it was the first of many papers about the half-fantasy Malory-like character of a knight called Basil of the Woods or the Knight Solitary: ‘all very sublime but a little uninteresting to everyone but myself.
As a child of 16, I was supposed to have some gift of description; now I have not a particle of descriptive power….
It all rests upon a possible impressionableness in me, and relies a good deal on mystery or mist., The allegory in ‘Shadows of the Hills’ is crystal-clear, in spite of the involved style: ‘For Nature took him and held him fast like a jealous lover…
But he might not always meet her calling or her waiting, for men, too, were bidding him to the sound of axe and plough and sword.’
Thomas found himself ill-equipped to answer this bidding call effectively: This doubt of myself is the more powerful, because I see how all along my senses are so powerful.
Everything affects my senses and thereby my soul; nothing my mind, and thereby my soul.
I am impressed like a child by grand size, grand sound, vastness in anything, infinity: that sums me up.
I am like the cow at the sea shore, bound by the motion of the waves.
I am like the child spell-bound by the accumulated powers of the night,— darkness, the sound of silence, loneliness, infinite possibility, all mingled in a vast horror.
That is what touches me.
In my affections it was the same.
I do not mean a sexual strength — of that I have little — but a union of all my senses simply carries me past all reflection, sometimes into a beautiful ease, sometimes into filth and futility…but always I am passive.
Open to all the influences of Nature and man, but giving little: running like a senseless stream…
Ala I want my writing to be is modest, restrained, colourful, truthful….
For me, I think the last paragraph in my paper in the Speaker of the week before last [‘Shadows of the Hills’]was pretty good; but it ought to be in verse.
It is a sort of Addendum to Wordsworth's ‘Ode’— but very erratic and only half true.
He was still writing verses but, according to Hooton's notes, he abandoned them at the end of this year under the influence of Pater.
In these letters to Harry he frequently mentions his excessive response to beauty in men, women, and children.
He had discussed it often with Helen and both had agreed that such frankness was a necessary act of truth-telling between them.
Even if their love were to die, nothing should disturb their friendship.
A letter to Hooton, describing an early November Sunday walk in uncongenial company, introduces the topic naturally and typically:
The only alleviating point in the walk was the number of pretty women and girls; so as I delight in looking at such, I very rudely looked into the eyes of those that passed.
And I never want really to go beyond looking at them….
It always has been so with me, and will be.
Also, in my thought it is neither vulgar nor stupid.
— I get an extraordinary pleasure thus.
And let me explain what I meant by that silly passage in my last letter, about expensively dressed girls.
It was this.
My cousins are rather wealthy, and so wear rich dresses, which
I am never tired of hearing — oh, those sounding silks, so uncomfortable, so gorgeous.
Yet I like comfortable dresses, too: why not?
All I don't like is, rags, ill taste, ill-shapes….
My feeling for girls has still the same nervous reverence of childhood or earliest boyhood, rather increased if anything, and only too excessive to be chivalrous.
In my childish days I remember I used to fear to touch the little girls' sleeves; so it is now.
If I retain any true innocence it is here.
Impulses of attraction towards beautiful forms or faces troubled him frequently for the next two years at Oxford.
He saw no inconsistency between such temporary infatuations and the matrimonial ideal he presented now to Hooton, as he had already discussed it with Helen: ‘I am not at all sure that there is anywhere a loftier, while there could be no sweeter, perfection than that of a household’.
Helen, too, was frequently informed of his over-readiness to fall in love with an attractive outward appearance, even as he constantly restated his heavy dependence upon his engrossed love for her:
We men, we know not what loftiness we might reach if only for a few small hours we could by carefulness of life, morally and physically so exact ourselves that scarce any utmost purity of air were too perfect for us.
Perfect we cannot be, either by accident or ignorance (like your sweet ignorance, little one), or by strenuous effort; but we can be so near perfection that, from our present and ordinary level, that nearness would seem perfection itself.
Sweetheart you can almost do this.
You can.
Nevertheless do not tell me of it, even to confirm me; for it is what we cannot analyse or arrange, any more than the rich simplicity of childhood.
His letters to Helen range freely, without the stilted asides of his early long letters to Hooton.
They are a genuine substitute for the talk and shared companionship that was missing from his first year at Oxford.
For during this first term the long regular letters to Harry Hooton appear to be a substitute for letters to Helen and a roundabout way of informing her of his progress.
Mrs Noble, he said, thought him completely immoral and his own parents were chary of allowing Helen to visit him in his study bedroom at Shelgate Road as she used to do, although, he informed Harry, ‘Mother knows Helen so well and likes her so much.’
One of Mr Thomas's conditions, supported by Mrs Noble, was that Edward and Helen should not correspond when he left for Oxford, and they agreed to this for the first term.
They made plans to meet in Harry's room sometimes dating the Christmas Vacation which Edward devoted to intense preparations for an entrance scholarship to Merton and continuous work at Latin and Mathematics for Responsions.
Besides he read Meredith, Hardy, Pater, Jefferies, some Flaubert (‘for my French is fairly good’), and began a more careful study of German.
When he and Helen could spend time alone, their passionate unconsummated loving convinced him that but for the ‘rich simplicity of childhood’ that characterized her, her ‘capacity for content’, her ‘virginity of sentiment and soul’, their love-making would be dangerous, ‘if my nature were more masculine and daring’.
The consistency of her love still surprised him.
He was consumed with desire for the possession to come and whenever he could he tried to add to the 45/ in the Post Office Savings Bank so that they could spend some time away together with Dad Uzzell.
She, he found, ‘though bold, how modest…just as when first I kissed at your sweet asking, little one, by the winter gorse’.
‘I seem to expect the whole happiness and sweetness to come from you’, he wrote as he warned Helen that she should find a real need for patience with him.
Already, after a few months' acquaintance, he complained to Harry of ‘this hideous analysis which so masters me’ and he tried to express Helen's profound effect upon him: ‘I always wonder when I look at her or think of her.
I don't know why — or care.
But I always wonder, as if a film had been taken from my eyes and I saw new worlds.’
As always in his letters (even to Helen) self-scrutiny creeps in — one aspect of the puritan streak he recognized in his own nature:
How vain I feel is an attempt for me with all my weight of immorality and worry and dull (not bad) health to sweeten you who are so pure and without care and of bright health.
Ignoble creature that I am!
Yes, sweetheart, I feel it in several ways; by contrast, for example, with my idyllic dreaming of two or three years ago; there is a change.
Not a change of nature, I hope, and believe: still, a development as the World calls it, though I can not think it is development for the better.
My youth flies from me, so.
No more can I find, if not content, yet a gorgeous enjoyment, in mere dreams, where men have no past.
As to dreams, day dreams, not only do they no longer impose upon me an innocent belief, but they become less glorious, less real, less natural, and less frequent.
This I perceive plainly.
And you?
It must be that you also perceive it.
Surely you see a difference between me, who wrote long, incoherent, and enthusiastic letters, enjoyed perfectly the songs of birds and the sight of a sundown, believed in the possibility of perfect happiness, perfect beauty, perfect purity, and a perfect world, all perfected, too, by that thing Nature which was so real to me; a difference between me then and thus, and what I am now, dull unenthusiastic, unimaginative, but more coherent and prudent, though still imprudent enough to write such things as that Sonnet, which even you esteem bad, I think….
One other thought I will write…you are even now as you were, and ever must be, beautiful, pure and passionate.
I say this last, only because it is at the bottom of my mind, deep hid and permanent, not because it is least.
As the Lent term progressed, besides his letters to Helen and Harry (containing verses, some of which survive) and his quick recovery from his failure to gain an entrance scholarship to Merton, he had renewed an acquaintance with MacAlister — an old Pauline friend — who visited him each Sunday.
Although feeling hard-pressed by the prospect of Responsions (for four days) followed a week later by the Lincoln entrance examination, he became more confident of a future life as an Oxford student and eager to extend his male friendships and meet the challenge of competition from his equals and betters.
Between the two examinations he spent a few necessary days of recuperation at Swindon, spending some time with Dad Uzzell.
The letter quoted above was begun at Didcot Station, then continued at his Cowley Road digs, and rounded off at the end of the first day of the Scholarship exam after six hours of hard writing.
Were he to fail he would be ashamed to show his face at home ‘because all failure is probably due to my own indolence and lacking self-control to help myself out of day-dreaming.’
After a request for stamps, he describes a few enjoyable, healthy hours out of doors walking with Dad from ten to three without a rest: We met a country girl, pale faced, delicate, tall, wrapped up to her neck in winter clothes & feeling cold in spite of all; her eyes were timid & weak; evidently she was suffering as girls do, & was going out to get the fresh air.
She hardly dared answer the old man's ‘Good Morning’; and as for me, I expect she was afraid of me.
I had such queer desires to speak to her, to give her my flowers, to kiss her hand, but did not of course, partly from cowardice, partly because she, however innocent, would probably be afraid; and the old man was there, too.
But how I longed to be gallant, as they say; to ask her if I might kiss her on both cheeks if I gave her my two violets.
Silly that I am!
But I am at least honest in this.
All simple & partly lovely women attract me, & not merely attract me, but I want to be something to them.
Not a dangerous disposition I think; though it might be if my nature were more masculine & daring.
Why!
I should have been as timid as the girl herself, if she had looked at me!
You are not angry or jealous, are you?
I could excuse you if you were, too.
Tell me if you think it bad.
For you know I often wonder what sort of morality it is that keeps men from anything but superficial intercourse with any woman but their wives: yet I hate adultery & all the intermediate stages; and what men of free habits in this way I have known, I have detested.
Suffice it, that I had a few moments of fanciful pleasure.
I ran back half a mile of road to get a glimpse of her in the distance, though we had passed her half an hour before, & of course she was out of sight on the Downs.
She was not at all good-looking, or graceful, or winning, but a mere maiden; possibly not even a country girl, but a London servant at the great house of Burdcrop nearby.
His letters from Oxford in his third term, after gaining the Lincoln History Exhibition, are much shorter, less introspective, and full of details about his writing, his plans for the future, his increased reading but, above all, his growing friendship with MacAlister who felt that ‘his intimate outpouring to me was something of a comfort to him’.
They talked endlessly at MacAlister's rooms in Merton, where Thomas could also measure himself against two further acquaintances, Fyffe and Wharton.
At last he began to sense that when he entered Lincoln he would keep his end up in spite of the sketchy nature of his post — Pauline preparation for the Oxford Final History Honours School.
MacAlister summed up his special quality: ‘While I knew more in my narrowly specialised subjects, he was far above me intellectually and in general maturity of mind.’
It was a quality often recalled by Oxford contemporaries.
‘Three of us were elected to Exhibitions at the same time, and I recall the maturity of his literary powers as contrasted with the callow essays we had to take up to Owen M. Edwards each week.’
(Norman G. Brett James, later Bursar at Lincoln.)
MacAlister proved an ideal walking companion on the weekends as they explored Bagley Wood, Godstow Nunnery, the elmy hills of Cumnor and Radbrook, the churchyard at Hinksey with its elms against the sunset.
Everywhere, Thomas later recalled, ‘a suspected presence of a hidden melodist, as a conversation ‘would grow and blossom between Headington and Wheatley or Osney and Eaton.’
His briefer letters to Harry Hooton — avoiding those ‘terrible letters I used to throw at you last term as it might be from the fruitless monotony of this place’— now explain his reading.
As yet he had not succumbed completely to the seductive prose of Pater and was reading the ‘artificial but interesting Marius ’ side by side with Scott, Meredith, Hardy's Jude , and Flaubert's letters.
He was attracted to the latter's extravagant precepts on style, in contrast to Pater: ‘What a small man Pater is.
He is always talking about style: he has yet words of the absurdest that occur in every page, bland, delicate, dainty; one blushes to read them.’
Thomas could now look back on the papers he had begun, or completed and sold in his first two terms, as ‘vain stuff’ but he continued to write verses, which were sent to Harry and Helen.
He detected a slackening off in his examination work, once he had gained his Exhibition —‘a moral weakness, neglect of order in my work and play’; often these ‘moods’ sent him back to his digs almost beside himself.
The only cure for the ‘silliness of his brain’ was to return to reading, or to write an article.
He read Johnson's Dictionary because he felt (from Flaubert) that he needed ‘a scientific and accurate vocabulary’ and, when further stimulated by Marius , he asked Helen to read his recent papers aloud to discover if the ‘sounds jar’.
To her he confessed that he hoped residence at Lincoln would banish his ‘moods’ and in the same letter he reflected on his own mother's ‘love and uncertainty, in her melancholy unconfident way’.
Above all, despite frequent irritation with Helen over trivial expenses and her unbusinesslike attitude to her wages, he relied heavily on her temper, ‘her genius for joy’, to help him break free of these moods.
He is ‘loyal only to Nature in a vague way’; he reads obscene books and then worries at frequent seminal emissions.
‘My nature is fickle — a little insane — and entirely barren in soul, and in these ‘moods of distrust’ he needs her love.
‘How utterly you love life.
Nothing lies hidden in you.’
As the term draws to an end, his desire for her dominates his letters.
He faces their need to use contraceptive devices, but is ignorant of the facts.
(‘This century, thinks too much, certainly talks too much, of love.
Human beings need many things as well as love, if not more. ')
When Edward invited Harry to Oxford for Eights Week he informed him of his expectations from Lincoln College.
In such moments of confession he frequently strikes a prophetic note about his future life as a writer.
There is no hint that he would ever abandon his decision to earn his living as a writer.
On this he was adamant and unswerving, however much his father might extol the supreme chance at Oxford to make contacts for a future career, as yet undefined.
Edward's first year at Oxford, with its long hours of set daily lectures and prepared reading, its loneliness punctuated by long walks, longer letters, and occasional forays in search of new friendships, formed a gentle transition from the two years of freedom he had enjoyed, since leaving St. Paul's, towards the severer demands that family and social demands were to make upon him.
Here were the seeds of inner conflict that were never completely resolved and here, too, especially in his next five terms of collegiate life, Oxford offered him opportunities of escape from the worries of ordinary living.
His letters to Helen, in particular, uncover the head for business, the punctilious sense of irritable rightness, and the concomitant sudden bouts of self-distrust that marched alongside his desire for an extended life of idealized perfection, similar to the intense moments of joyful peace he had discovered for himself during walks.
He finds his own words for the mood in a letter to Helen on 6 May '98: ‘I am glad my unkind letter allowed you nevertheless to write me so sweet a reply, and besides, to be so sweet tempered, and, as I hope, unhurt save for a moment.
It was of course not anger.
Did I use the word?
It was irritation, doubtless the result of some ill doing or extravagance on my own part, making me hate to see its image elsewhere.
Yet, as I said, you are not extravagant, I am.
That is enough.’
The unkind letter he refers to gives an informed introduction to their subsequent life together and is here given in full with its immediate predecessor.
Together they form the best picture of their love as Edward described it to Harry before his life at Lincoln began: ‘For some reason or another we are happier now than ever before.
It is a happiness so mild and cool that it is like a kind of saintliness after passion: yet it is not satiety…for if she has any unhealth, it is from me; and that more of her lips than in her heart.’
113 Cowley Road.
2. v. '98.
The little blue flower, ‘robin-run-in-the-hedge’, which probably looked like violet on the first, distant glance, is ground ivy .
My dearest friend, And did you have a happy May day?
With all the flowers- and the birds- and the presence of the Sea, the purity & brightness of your own heart could surely take a day nearly perfect.
I only hope it did not rain, as, for most of the daylight, it did here.
Night at any rate you had fine, as we had, with a high clear moon & just a few stars lost here & there among folds of cloud.
So I am desiring, though not more than half expecting, a letter tomorrow morning to hear how you spend your day, &, because you were certainly happy, in what ways you directed your happiness.
A thousand pities that the child who was probably with you is not something nearer perfection!
And I reflect that if you remember to post early, the letter will come here by the first post!
I spent a crowded lonely day.
It was so funny — as I walked along, rather disconsolate in the rain, at midday, I suddenly recollected it was Mayday, & knowing I ought to be bright & rejoicing I forthwith was so, at least for a time.
You with a mind full only of natural & unembarrassing thoughts, & of me, probably awoke early and remembered & rejoiced; perhaps you had even prepared for it, & went happy walks, singing, garlanded.
I am almost glad I was not there, lest I should have spoiled your tranquillity.
It would have been a richer joy — but, indeed, as I so often tell you, I delight to picture you in a childlike serenity.
I hope it was yours.
With all the crowding work, and a little pleasure, too, I would have written to you yesterday, only I partly feared to, because I had a proposal to make, which it would have been unseemly to make the apparent cause of my haste.
It was this — you have now, or should have, at least a sovereign left out of your monthly pay & what survived of the 15/ from the Bank; so is it not best to send it all to me at once?
Your expenses, beyond stamps, which I can provide for you, will be nothing, I suppose, at Sandgate — no railway fares, & c & c .
If this seems well-& why not?— pray send at one;.
Only, by the way, I see a large number of Scotts here, uniform with yours & mine, at only 1/ each, yet quite clean & good, & not incomplete like those in bookseller's row; of which, would you care for me to buy one or two — Ivanhoe, Nigel & c ?
I wish I could buy them myself, & had hoped to; but the Speaker rejection makes it impracticable.
By the way I shall send another paper to Perris at the end of the week.
Shall I send this old friend (or enemy)?
You see it is much altered, filed and shaped.
Please return it at once, or when sending the postal order.
As to the one I sent in before, it was written so quickly, that it could not be good.
Perhaps I shall never rewrite it.
It is all obscure, & not purposely either.
By the way also, I have begun the Tristran & Isould story, today, after much hesitation, with a snatch of talk between Kheydius & Palomides.
I hope I shall be able to compress it sufficiently.
You do seem to be fortunate in going to Sandgate.
What a place it is!
Here I see few flowers, save such as water bubbles, though the fields & country generally are the richest I have ever seen.
I fancy you like a queen — a princess rather — in all those flowers.
Would that I were fit to woo you as what you seem & are, sweet heart!
Now goodbye! do I not seem happy, or at least sordidly content?
Never mind!
You will kiss me, or I will kiss you.
Sweet little one, I hope you are beautiful now.
Goodbye.
In life I am your truest fondest friend Edward, and you ever my own sweet little one Helen, anemone maiden.
Goodbye, sweet heart.
Does this reach you as you come down from bed?
I hope you are well & looking forward to the sunshine.
Goodbye.
4. v. '98
I have no stamps at all, nor money, here.
If you could send one soon, I should be glad.
It was very mean of me, I know, after the sweet beginning of your letter & the pleasure I had from it, to be very angry at the end.
Not only mean; perhaps it was utterly baseless.
But unless you spent a lot on flowers and balls for the children and on Mary's birthday present, considering that you had our 15/ and some 5/ or more yes more of your own a month ago, on which no calls but fares need have been made, to which was added about 30/ (or more?) lately, and from it all not 30/ was spent on the dress, you should have a sovereign left: add to this the wages of this month to come, and there should remain, after 35/ to the spectacle man, fully a sovereign, which, considering our needs for the future & also your promises, nay, certainties, at which I laughed, should go to the bank.
A pretty sentence indeed! but my feathery head is blazing with the stupidity of all this together with my own unamiability and ungentleness of behaviour.
I can not help it.
I am certain of my facts & calculations; so there are but two alternatives: either you have spent, not extravagantly, since you are not extravagant, but sillily & thoughtlessly, which really is far worse.
What your present needs are, is another thing, but surely 10/ should cover them.
I won't write a word more now, but go to my work, cool down, go out, and in the evening post this letter with proofs of my regret, though not recantation, and also proofs of some joy or success I may have this afternoon in fields now rejoicing in sunshine after rain,— to delight my own sweet little one, too tolerant, too childishly submissive, not by nature, which would be weak , but by love for me, which is strength .
Goodbye, little one.
I hope you are only passingly depressed by my letter & that what I can write later on will erect your spirits.
In fact I wrote a song yesterday & if you are good you shall have it, supposing you care.
Believe me, to conclude, tho' I have no business head, for large & lengthy affairs, I am keen enough in figures & small matters, & always was; so that I can not be disputed.
If you think me wrong, it simply means you have, as I used to say, let money ‘slip through your hands’: and remember we cannot afford to despise money.
As you do, very beautifully & genuinely, I know & delight to reflect.
Later I did manage to get out, immediately after dinner, & fortunately, for now I am back, it rains hard, as it has done every day now for a week.
Yet it is very beautiful rain, at least in the country, clear, sweet, musical, with a bright sky usually overhead, & oftentimes a rainbow.
I think I am in a kinder mood now, and my only worry is that dullness and thickness of brain which I think I have often mentioned before.
I fancy it comes from over reading, so I do as little as I can.
My relief is a pipe — really it is a relief.
just now, for instance, I could not sit & do nothing, since that only irritates my brain; & it was then only my pipe that enabled me comfortably to read Rousseau's ‘Julie; or the New Heloise’.
That is a book you must often have heard of — a series of letters between two lovers; Julie and Saint-Preux.
They are very pretty, but somewhat ludicrously sentimental; that is, when one reflects that it was Rousseau that wrote them.
I suppose you know the old story — French of the 12th century — about Heloise and Abelard and their strange love?
By the way, after writing to you on Sunday, the mood came, and I wrote the story of Kheydius, 12 close pages, straight off, almost satisfactorily, too.
It will take me a long time to correct & copy, though: when I have done so, of course you shall have it.
I am pleased with what you say of ‘The Time after Anemone’.
You prove to me that it gives just the very impression I desired.
As to the song I talked of — Here it is.
If you can see my meaning, it is well.
The thing has little music & little choiceness of words, but I fancied at the time it was genuine enough.
I can not ask you to judge .
But is it better than the verses beginning ‘Cottage on the Wye’?
(1) Weary of April's
over-sweet-Anemone &
Marigold — I turned my feet
To her the meek and bold.
(2)‘Let me but speak to thee, or thou
To me, unhastily, of naught:
Of love not now,’
I moaned with heart distraught.
(3) Wistfully smiling, then, she stept
To lift me with love's best, though
Looked not, but wept
And cared not to reply.
(4) Repose restored, oh! cruel
bliss — To her sweet toil she rose and
wove — Ah! bitter 'tis (or ) And would not kiss.)
We cannot always love.
One merit it has — each verse is exactly the same in metre & accent.
But here I am talking blissfully about myself in the old fashion!
And can you pardon me for coming to such a conclusion as that in the last line of my verses?
I think it is very true.
Now I think I must run away.
I will post this at once so that you will have it by tomorrow's first post.
I hope it will not prove an utterly hateful letter.
Goodbye, sweetheart.
The sun shines without rain once more.
Will you kiss me, or will you be unkind just a little while?
Tell me.
In life I am your truest friend Edward, and you ever my own sweet little one Helen, my anemone maid, and dearest friend.
Sweet heart, goodbye’.
Edward approached his third attempt to pass Responsions in a confident and relaxed mood.
As he ‘crammed’ his Latin and algebra, he read Don Quixote and Boccaccvo and set aside time to read twenty pages of Goethe and twenty pages of Malory daily.
But a week before the examination he became restless and peevish.
He told Helen he must have gone off his head: he had written three lots of verses in one week (including the one on Old Margaret and Headington Hill printed in Collected Poems , p. 458).
His confidence was justified and in mid June he is home at 61 Shelgate Road and their correspondence becomes a thin trickle of notes and letter-cards as they make arrangements to meet when Helen was free from her work.
Although he had passed Responsions and had few debts at Oxford except for books, his father was already apprehensive about the cost of an Oxford education, with Ernest in his final year of training to be an art-teacher and Reggie with a consuming passion for Shakespeare and the stage, and no other interest.
Dory had already begun his motor-engineering apprenticeship, but Oscar and the young Julian, like Reggie, had still to be provided for.
Mr Thomas, as so often before, turned to his relatives for help.
Edward and Reggie were to spend six weeks or so with his cousins in Pontardulais, while Ernest and Oscar stayed with relations in Cwmavon.
There were plans for the younger children to join Watcyn Wyn's private academy (for ministerial candidates and others) at Ammanford where the Welsh preacher-bard Gwili (the Revd John Jenkins, later Principal of the Baptist Theological College at Banger and Archdruid of the Gorsedd of the Welsh National Eisteddfod) was a tutor.
He and Edward became close friends with a shared interest in poetry, nature-study, fishing, and the classics.
Edward was glad to escape from Shelgate Road: his father seemed to undermine his self-confidence and made him out to be ‘several kinds of fool’.
At the home of his paternal uncle he was very much at home.
His aunt had little or no English and Edward the merest smattering of a few isolated Welsh phrases.
She hoped he would study regularly in the small front parlour —‘the best room’— but he preferred the roomy kitchen with its large table, coal-fired oven, and brass furnishing around the hearth and the hobs and the mantlepiece.
This was the hub of her universe and here the family assembled after a day's work, in the coal-mine or (like Edward's beautiful elder female cousin) the local tinworks.
Supper was the banquet time for married children and their families.
In the mornings he worked in the kitchen while his aunt baked or cooked or sewed; here in the evenings he absorbed the sense of the impact of new industries on an older more settled way of life which, much later, found its way into the stories and sketches of his best Welsh work,Rest and Unrest and Light and Twilight .
Increasingly during the next fifteen years the triangle formed by Swansea, Pontardulais, and Ammanford — with the fr owning eminence of Carreg Cennen Castle in the distance — provided him with a retreat and a source of healing as he faltered towards his final realization as a poet.
Apart from their long walks and interminable conversations and evening singsong, or their expeditions to ancient monuments, he and Gwili and his cousins assisted with the harvest, binding sheaves and even mowing bracken with a scythe.
Assured by Helen that their new way of making love brought no ill effects for her (‘Happy and bountiful Helen’) he wishes her to understand his satisfaction away from her: ‘You would laugh to know what my amusements are!— mere jests of the slightest character; rough simple ways; and very little thought.
It is certainly good for me physically, though I am a little dubious about its ultimate good.
They are too lenient: that makes it flattering.
Believe me, these scrappy notes do not represent my feeling which is deep, continuous, and steady.’
He seemed to live his life throughout the summer on two levels: with Gwili and in his own writing and deeper probes into Pater's works he was moving towards the standpoint of his article ‘The Frontiers of English Prose’(in Literature , September 1899), that a ‘most noticeable fact is the apparent destruction of the boundaries between poetry and prose, and between verse and prose….
Poetry had been too long and too harshly divided from prose.’
As far as I can discover, except for the rough translation of a poem by Watcyn Wyn in his Wales (1905), there is no further mention of verse of any kind in Edward Thomas's letters after this Long Vacation.
This absorption into a different community, quite other than anything he had experienced since childhood, into which he had the natural right of entry accorded by his Welsh cousins because of the tie of blood, required a few more Long Vacation visits before he could articulate its meaning for his own mature intellectual development.
Gwili tried to interpret for him the power of Welsh literature and especially the ‘renaissance’ of modern Welsh poetry of which he was himself a part, but Edward had only a smattering of Welsh and, judging from rough translations of folksongs and simple lyrics, he was disinclined to carry his studies further.
In September he recorded a very detached impression of his stay: ‘The Welsh see so clearly, so abundantly, filling every space of air with a lovely form in firm white.
Why don't they carve like Greeks?
Instead, their poetry, prose and verse is full of pictures., He proved much more responsive to Welsh songs and music and, as Gwili's elder sister sang for him and showed a strong interest in him, he assures Helen that he is ‘a very harmless fool’ and that his known views on promiscuity and marriage have not changed.
Although he had kept up his reading — particularly in Greek and French — and written some stories for the Speaker , he believed his intellect had been let sleep.
If he was ever to be an artist, he should strive for more balance.
‘I wish my sight were not so powerful and so cunning….
Time always mellows my impressions, if they are not at all strong.’
Early in September the four Thomas brothers were told to make ready for the journey home, where Ernest had to re-sit for his Teacher's Certificate, and Edward was left with scarcely a month to reassure Helen of his faithfulness and to make his final preparations before beginning his historical studies with Owen M. Edwards.
He approached his first term at Lincoln College ‘fairly well & in exceedingly good temper…
Human beings have never touched me so nearly as now when ‘Nature’ was so close: I think, too, I never before struck such firm roots into human hearts’.
His Welsh cousins and their friends flattered and cosseted him; he was treated as a gentleman-scholar, sharing much of the natural respect of late nineteenth-century Wales for the scholar-preacher-bard, of which his new friend, Gwili, the theologian-bard, was an excellent example.
Edward knew he was being pampered and, in his letters to Helen about his friendship with Gwili's sister, he confessed that ‘in fact it was partly you that I saw when I held her: I hope I shall never forget her; then I shall feel that it is possible to love another even though I am all and ever yours, little one.
But I won't reason on it.’
After his return to London from Pontardulais, Edward and Helen were finding it more difficult than ever to contain their desire for complete sexual union.
Before he had gone to Wales, her employers had allowed him to visit Helen in her own room.
She was already twenty-one and their self-imposed tests of constraint were severely strained.
After their first post-Wales reunion, on the evening of 19 September '98, he wrote to her fearfully about the results of their intimacy:
Dearest friend — Let me know soon if you are quite well, and tell me just how you are feeling.
For I think you cannot help pondering on our meeting last night.
And quite rightly.
You, poor little one, were the victim of a pure overwhelming desire, and I of a smaller desire by no means pure; and I feel much more abject than if that desire had been satisfied.
I was trying to think in the correct way about right and wrong as I travelled home last night.
Of course all kinds of schemes came — we would read stiffly together etc.
Somehow I feel as if it were purer — certainly it would be honester- ‘to do the thing we fear’.
But nothing of course would induce me to make a miserable thing out of you and a fool of myself.
Could we not find out some means?
You understand.
He confesses he hasn't the face to make enquiries about methods and means of contraception, even in the most indirect way.
Nothing came of his enquiries and the first ten days of October passed uneventfully with his praise of Helen's ‘lovely portion of that maidenliness which you shall never lose’.
He settled down again to work (‘lessons and literature’), with some hours spent at Wimbledon with Arthur Hardy ‘in the warmth and strange visible light of the late afternoon’, and enjoyed the kindness around Which I never felt so much as of late, when it looked as if I was soon to cast it away with such apparent rudeness’.
He was well received by Mrs Noble and her daughter Mary, and he planned to visit Mr Tarrant, the Unitarian minister, before spending the evening with Harry Hooton.
He assured Helen, ‘I did not know I loved you so tenderly until this trial, sweetheart’.
Before he left for Lincoln College on 14 October '98, Helen was peremptorily given a week's notice by Mrs Andrews who had secretly been reading Edward's letters and now accused Helen of ‘illicit connexion’ with him.
Helen cheerfully returned home, but apprehensive about the effect of this ‘ghastly suspicion’ on her hysterical mother.
Edward sent to Mrs Andrews ‘a short note, fulfilling the two duties, of thanks for her past undoubted kindness, and of a request for a ‘character’(virtually) when you leave.
The note is formal and discreet, I think.
As far as I see, all is well: you at any rate are serene….
Until we meet, I remain silent — just a little excited, but still secure on what I know .’
Helen worked out her last week's notice in utter loneliness with the sympathetic support of Janet and Harry Hooton and the staunch championship of Mrs Beatrice Logan who had offered Helen employment with her.
Edward, now in Oxford, felt obliged to write home to his mother with full details of the affair and for the next fortnight pondered the steps he should take.
‘Is it any good to write to a Solicitor?’ he asked Hooton.
‘As for me, I can only shrink and plan a slinking away out of sight, since I love life too much to die.’
Soon this mood of despair evaporated under the influence of serene letters from Helen, who flourished among the intimate circle of artistic Bohemian young people — including the poet Charles Dalmon and the actor Franklin Dyall — who lived in Hammersmith and spent a great deal of time at Mrs Logan's large house which had been furnished and decorated in William Morris style.
Looking back later, Helen recalled three things about this new life, so different from the unhappy days when she and Edward discovered that his passionate letters to her were being read by Mrs Andrews: ‘The beauty of it delighted me, and I thought it the perfect setting for these people with their freedom of manner and thought….
I look back upon this household as having been — after [Edward]— the strongest influence in my life.
[He]used to make fun of their serious cults of puritry and freedom and nakedness….
They regarded no convention, and I did not see till later that their unconvention was almost as intolerant as my parents, convention., Helen stayed with Mrs Logan — who was awaiting a divorce — dating Edward's first year at Lincoln.
She was now a companion and friend rather than a nursemaid and domestic servant; she prepared herself to run her own household and developed her skills as a needlewoman.
Most of all she found there strong support for the mutually independent role of husband and wife that she and Edward had developed over two years of frustration and parental disapproval.
Her love for Edward was constant and rocklike: she matured during these months, but she did not change.
Like Edward she knew the ‘reason why we don't marry is not our immaturity but impecuniousness’.