

COMMON LAW AND EQUITY
Equity and morality
Apart from Common Law and Statute Law, the most important department of our legal system is Equity.
We sometimes use the term ‘equity’, or words corresponding to it, in popular language as if it was something altogether outside law.
We speak of a judgement in a particular case or of a rule laid down in a judgement as being undoubtedly according to law, but as being ‘unfair’ or ‘unjust’or ‘inequitable’.
In cases of this sort we are really passing a moral judgement upon the law.
Such a moral judgement in no way affects the law.
It may be a reason why the law should be altered by statute; it does not prevent it from being law, or affect its operation, as long as no alteration in the law is made by statute.
But when a modern lawyer uses the terms ‘law’ and ‘equity’he does not mean to say that equity is not law.
He is speaking really of two different kinds of law — the Common Law on the one side, the rules of Equity on the other — which are equally law.
They are rules which are not merely morally but legally binding: they are enforced by the courts.
The relation between law and equity
The distinction between law and equity occurs in other systems.
Thus the ius honorarium , developed by the praetor's edict, played a vital part in the development of Roman Law.
But while in Rome ius honorarium was administered in the same courts as the ius civile , in England law and equity, until the judicature Act 1873 came into effect in 1875, were administered in different courts.
These two sets of rules, though distinct, must not be looked upon as two co-ordinate and independent systems.
On the contrary, the rules of Equity are only a sort of supplement or appendix to the Common Law; they assume its existence but they add something further.
In this way Equity is an addendum to the Common Law.
Further, the rules of Equity, though they did not contradict the rules of Common Law, in effect and in practice produced a result opposed to that which would have been produced if the Common Law rules had remained alone.
A Common Law right was practically, though not theoretically, nullified by the existence of a countervailing equitable right.
In this sense we may speak of a ‘conflict or variance’ between the rules of Law and the rules of Equity, in the language of section 25 (sub-section 11) of the judicature Act 1873 (now replaced by section 49 of the Supreme Court Act 1981).
Though since the judicature Act came into force in 1875 the rules of Common Law and Equity are recognized and administered in the same court, yet they still remain distinct bodies of law, governed largely by different principles.
In order to ascertain the rights to which any given set of facts give rise, we must always ask  what is the rule of Common Law? what difference (if any) is made in the working of this rule by the existence of some rule of Equity applying to the case?
Like the Common Law, the rules of Equity are judicial law, i.e. to find them we must look in the first instances to the decisions of the judges who have administered Equity.
But some branches of Equity, like some branches of the Common Law, have been restated with amendments and additions in codifying Acts, such as the Partnership Act 1890.
History
At the end of the thirteenth century we find three great courts definitely established: King's Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer.
All are King's Courts, as opposed to the Communal Courts of counties and hundreds, Lord's Courts, or Ecclesiastical Courts.
Each has its proper sphere, but in course of time each of them extends its jurisdiction, so that the same matters may often be dealt with indifferently by any one of them.
All these three administer substantially the same law, which, by the time of Edward I, is already called Common Law, because it is a law common to the whole of England; and it is becoming a fairly definite body of rules, capable of growth and expansion in various directions, but still with well-marked boundaries which cannot be transgressed.
These courts continued to exist till 1875, and are known as the Common Law Courts.
Standing outside these courts is the Chancellor.
He is not originally a judge, nor has he a court.
He is the head of a great Government office — what may be called the secretarial office; he is ‘the King's Secretary of State for all departments’; whatever writing has to be done in the King's name is done by the Chancellor or through him and his officers.
In one way the Chancellor is already brought into relation with the administration of justice, though not so as to enable him to modify the law at his pleasure.
The writs, i.e. the King's commands that a person shall appear in one of the King's Courts in answer to a claim, are issued in his name, as they still are today, and are issued from his office.
Many writs are already framed and well recognized to meet the cases that usually arise; you can have them for the asking, if you pay the fee.
The question whether a man who considers himself wronged has a claim which he can make good will depend on the answer to the question: Is there a writ to meet his case or, if there is not one, can one be framed which the King's Courts will hold good?
The Chancery, i.e. the Chancellor's office, has a power (Statute of Westminster II 1285) of framing new writs in cansimili casu — i.e. to meet new cases sufficiently like those for which writs already exist — and new writs are from time to time framed.
But here the Common Law Courts manage to get the last word; for they acquired the power, in the fifteenth century, to decide whether the writ is good or not, and if not, the fact that the plaintiff has got the writ will not help him.
In deciding whether a writ is good or not the judges will be guided by the already accepted Common Law principles.
Now it will sometimes happen that the working of the law and procedure of the Common Law Courts will result in particular cases in injustice and hardship.
We might feel inclined to say: Well, that is a pity, but it would be a greater evil to interfere; it would be worse to make the law uncertain than to leave a particular hardship unredressed.
That was not the way that our ancestors looked at the matter.
Law and morality were not yet clearly distinguished, nor could one even say that the whole of law or justice was to be found in any one court; the Ecclesiastical Courts, and Local Courts of many different kinds, administered a justice which was not the justice of the Common Law Courts; so the thought was natural that even the King's justice was not exhausted in the power conferred on his courts.
A reserve of justice remained with the King, and so those who could not get relief in the King's ordinary courts might, with some hope of success, petition the King and his Council for redress, if not as a matter of right at least as a favour.
These petitions in practice were referred to the Chancellor, who was the chief minister and secretary and the most learned member of the King's Council.
In course of time these petitions came to be addressed direct to the Chancellor himself.
Putting aside what does not concern us here, cases where the petitioner asked for redress against the King himself, we may note two kinds of cases where this extraordinary relief is asked for:
where the petitioner has suffered an undoubted legal wrong — been assaulted and beaten, or turned out of his property, but for some reason cannot get redress, because he is poor and his opponent is rich and powerful, because juries are corrupt or timid.
In this class of cases redress was given in the Middle Ages sometimes by the King's Council and sometimes by the Chancellor.
In the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries this jurisdiction was abandoned by the Chancellor and passed to the Court of Star Chamber.
When the Court was abolished in 1641 the Common Law Courts had become strong enough to give adequate redress.
Cases of transactions which give, at any rate, a moral right, but a right which the Common Law Courts cannot or will not protect.
In particular we find the cases of what are called ‘uses’ or trusts — transactions whereby a man legally transfers land to another, but with an understanding that the transferee will hold it for the benefit of the former, or for the benefit of those whom he will name in his will.
The Common Law has already very strict notions as to the kinds of rights in land which it will protect, and the methods of transfer which it will allow.
Uses and trusts the Common Law will not recognize; wills of land, it has decided, are void (unless established by local custom — it was not till 1540 that a statute was passed giving power to leave land by will).
But the practice of creating these uses and trusts was popular and was growing, and the absence of all legal protection for them was a great hardship.
So we find, by the end of the fourteenth century, that persons are directing petitions to the Chancellor, claiming that they have at least a moral right to the benefit of these uses, and begging him to give them help against the legal owner who is setting up his Common Law rights against them.
Now the Chancellor is at this time usually an ecclesiastic, commonly a bishop, and, as such, interested in, and, at least in his own opinion, a good judge of questions of morality or ‘conscience’.
He is commonly spoken of as the keeper of the King's conscience.
What can he do to help the humble supplicant ?
He cannot interfere directly with the proceedings of the Common Law Courts; he cannot issue a new writ which will have much chance of being held good by those courts.
But he can do this: he considers the petition, or Bill, as it is called; if he thinks there is anything in the case, he issues a writ which requires the person complained against to appear, not in a Common Law Court, but before himself, and answer the petition on oath.
The writ is called a subpoena , because it requires him to appear upon pain of forfeiting a sum of money.
When the defendant comes before the Chancellor, he will have to answer the Bill on oath.
This is very different from the Common Law procedure, which will never compel, or even allow (at that time), one of the parties to an action to give evidence; but it is a procedure, and the only procedure, which is suitable for trying such questions as uses and trusts, for which no open public acts, no formal documents may be available as evidence.
So, too, the Chancellor tries the whole case himself; he does not — as must be done in Common Law cases — send it to be tried by a jury.
It is true that in later times particular questions arising in a case before him, suitable for trial by jury, are sometimes directed by the Chancellor to be so tried.
Suppose now that the Chancellor has decided in favour of the petitioner, and has held that the land which legally belongs to the defendant ought to belong, or, ‘in conscience’, in equity, morally, does belong to the petitioner.
What will he do?
He cannot reverse the rule of Common Law; he cannot interfere — at least directly — with proceedings in the Common Law Court; he cannot say that the legal owner is not the legal owner.
What he can do is to say that the legal owner cannot in conscience, in equity, make use of his Common Law right for his own benefit; he must use it for the benefit of the man for whom he holds it in trust.
He does not stop at saying so.
He can, if the legal owner will not act as equity and conscience dictate, punish him, if necessary, by putting him in prison.
He can even indirectly, but effectively, interfere with the legal owner's attempts to enforce his legal rights by action in the Common Law Courts.
He cannot forbid the Common Law Courts to try an action; but he can forbid a man to bring it, or to go on with it, or to take advantage of the judgement which he has got, and can put him in prison if he does not obey.
He has the less scruple in issuing such orders because he can say that he is really doing what is in the man's own highest interest.
If he is doing what is against conscience, he is injuring his soul — remember that the Chancellor is an ecclesiastic — and it is better that he should be prevented from inflicting such injury on himself.
This sort of interference, which had started as a matter of special favour in special cases, gradually becomes a regular practice.
It becomes popular; uses and trusts become part of the ordinary machinery by which people deal with their property; they even lend themselves to abuse, which has to be checked by Acts of Parliament in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries.
The Chancellor develops what in effect is, and comes to be known as, a court — the Court of Chancery.
And then that general principle of Equity, which began as the mere application of moral sense to particular cases, develops into more and more definite rules.
If a Chancellor has decided that certain conduct in one case is against conscience, he is likely to decide that similar conduct is against conscience in another: the chances are that another Chancellor will decide the same.
You get what in reality is a new set of rules of law — rules which you can rely on as likely or certain to be applied uniformly in the future.
And you get a new set of rights — rights which can be enforced in the Chancellor's Court side by side with the Common Law rights, which alone can be enforced in the Common Law Courts, the former in effect, though not in theory, overriding the latter.
You even get to think of two sorts of ownership.
From saying that a thing ought to belong to a man, that it ought to be used for his benefit, you come to saying that it actually is his, ‘in equity’ or ‘in conscience’.
A few points in the development of Equity may be here noted.
In 1535 Henry VIII struck a blow at uses in the Statute of Uses.
The King's main object in forcing the Act through Parliament was to regain the revenue from the perquisites enjoyed by a feudal lord and paid or owed by his tenants, known as the incidents of feudal tenure which had been depleted by the practice of conveying land to uses (see below, Chapter 5).
The statute enacted that where A was  seised (i.e. possessed) of a freehold interest in land, to the passive use that he allow B to enjoy the land, B's equitable interest should be turned into a legal interest.
The result was that in these cases the separation between legal and equitable ownership ceased.
But this separation still continued in the cases to which the statute did not apply — e.g. if the trustee had active duties to perform, or if he was possessed, not of a freehold, but of chattels real or personal to another's use.
Moreover the effect of the statute, in preventing the separation between legal and equitable estates in the cases to which it applied, was nullified in the latter half of the seventeenth century by the decision of the Chancery to protect trusts declared upon the uses which the statute had turned into legal estates.
If X gave land to A to the use of B, B got the legal estate by the Statute of Uses; but if X gave land unto and to the use of B in trust for C, B was the legal owner of the land and C the equitable owner.
Thus, under the name of trusts, equitable rights in land grew up again and flourished.
From the Reformation onwards the Chancellor was usually a layman: Bishop Williams under James I and Charles I was the last clerical Chancellor.
Again the Chancellor comes to be usually a lawyer: Lord Shaftesbury under Charles II was the last Chancellor who had never been a practising lawyer.
All this tends to create a more definitely legal character for the rules of Equity.
Meanwhile Equity is adding new fields of jurisdiction.
In the sixteenth century and the beginning of the seventeenth,fraud and accident — especially the accidental loss of a document — are regarded as matters peculiarly appropriate for relief in a Court of Equity — matters which a Common Law Court cannot sufficiently deal with.
Mortgages form a special subject which the Chancellor deals with.
A man borrows money and transfers his land to the creditor, making the creditor legally owner.
He promises to pay on a definite date.
If he keeps his promise, his land is to be returned to him; if not, it is to belong to the creditor for ever.
Suppose by mistake or accident he fails to repay on the day named, is it fair that he should be held to the terms of the deed?
Equity says no, and soon goes so far as to lay down a rule that a mortgage is a mere security for money, and something quite different from a genuine transfer of the ownership.
The debtor remains in a sense owner; he has a new sort of equitable ownership, ‘an equity of redemption’, which he is only to lose after the court has given him ample opportunity to repay, and it becomes plain to the court that he cannot or will not pay.
In the seventeenth century the Chancery had to struggle for its independence against the Common Law Courts.
They resented the way in which the Chancellor interfered — in effect though not in theory — with their judgements, by prohibiting the man who was successful at Common Law from putting them into force.
A great quarrel broke out between Chief justice Coke and Lord Ellesmere, the Chancellor: it was decided by King James I in favour of the latter.
Under the Commonwealth there were proposals for reforming, and even abolishing, the Chancery.
Its extraordinary jurisdiction in civil matters was compared with the extraordinary jurisdiction of the now defunct Star Chamber in criminal matters.
These proposals came to nothing.
Somewhat similar proposals at the time of the Revolution of 1688, for subjecting the Chancery to the control of the Common Law Courts, were rejected.
It was clear that Chancery was doing work which the Common Law Courts could not or would not do, and without which men's rights could not be sufficiently protected.
Equity had come to stay as part of the law of the land.
The work increases.
The Master of the Rolls, who is originally a very subordinate officer, with charge of the documents of the court, comes to be at the end of the seventeenth century a judge who can hear Equity cases, though there is an appeal from him to the Chancellor.
For a long time these two between them do most of the Equity work, though the Court of Exchequer has also developed an Equity jurisdiction, an ‘Equity side’, which, however, is handed over to Chancery in 1842: it is now administered by the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court.
The work of the court was too much for the judges; and this cause of delay was aggravated by the dilatory character of the procedure, and by the time which some of the Chancellors took to consider their decisions.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century we find Lord Eldon sometimes keeping a case for ten years to think over, and not delivering judgement till perhaps most of the parties were dead and most of the property had gone in costs.
Early in the nineteenth century additional judges, called Vice-Chancellors, were appointed — first one, later three; and a Court of Appeal in Chancery, intermediate between the Vice-Chancellors and the House of Lords, was established in 1851.
The old dilator procedure was reformed in 1852.
The Chancellor gradually retired from acting as judge of first instance, and reserved himself for the Court of Appeal in Chancery and for the House of Lords.
Finally, the judicature Acts in 1873–5 abolish the old Court of Chancery, as they abolish the Common Law Courts and certain other courts, and establish a new court — the High Court of justice — which has all the powers of a Court of Common Law and a Court of Equity, and in which both sets of rules, the rules of Law and the rules of Equity, are administered; but in which, if there is ‘conflict or variance’ between them, the rules of Equity are to prevail.
The court has now three divisions: a Queen's Bench Division, a Chancery Division, and a Family Division (successor to the probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division, of which something will be said in Chapter 3).
The Queen's Bench and Chancery Divisions are no longer distinct courts, though, as a matter of working convenience, matters which involve mainly the Common Law come before the Queen's Bench; those which largely involve Equity come before the Chancery Division.
But there is no hard and fast line: a plaintiff will often have a choice in which division he will start his action, and the rules of Law and Equity are equally applied in both.
The main spheres of modern equity
Before discussing the effect which the judicature Acts have had in combining Law and Equity in one court, it will be convenient to note some of the branches of Law in which Equity has made important additions to the Common Law and done work which the Common Law could or did not do.
First in the law of property.
The trust is still with us.
We make settlements by which we provide that property shall devolve from one person to another within the limits which the law allows, e.g. to a man, then to his wife, then to be divided among his children.
Before 1926, if we were dealing with real property in the strict sense, i.e. freeholds and copyholds, it is true that the trust was not necessary.
Common Law allowed us to cut up a freehold estate into successive estates, each recognized by Common Law.
But we shall see that, since 1925, this is not possible (see p. 86), so that the only way in which future interests in any kind of property can be created is through the machinery of a trust.
So with mortgages.
Till 1926 we had not invented a way of mortgaging property without creating equitable interests.
Before 1926, either the debtor conveyed the legal right to a mortgagee, and retained an equitable interest — the ‘Equity of Redemption’— or else he retained the legal right himself, and gave an equitable interest to the lender, as by a deposit of title-deeds.
The latter form of mortgage is still possible; but, instead of the former, a form of mortgage has been invented under which both mortgagor and mortgagee take legal estates (see pp. 96–9).
Very characteristic in connection with these equitable interests is the doctrine of notice, or, more fully, the doctrine that an equitable interest is good against everyone who gets hold of the property, unless he has the legal ownership and acquired the property for value without notice, i.e. without knowledge of, and without reason to suspect, the existence of the equitable interest.
At the present day, however, the rights of the purchaser of the legal estate for value without notice are diminished by the Land Charges Act 1972, which has in certain cases prevented such a purchaser from defeating the rights of the equitable owners, by enabling certain rights in the land to be registered, and providing that registration is equivalent to notice.
Common Law knows next to nothing of notice.
At Common Law either you have got no rights at all, or you have rights which are good against everyone, notice or no notice.
That doctrine of notice has got into the Common Law in one or two places, e.g. in the law about the sale of goods in market overt, and in the law of negotiable instruments; but, broadly speaking, whenever you have got rights which depend upon notice, you may be pretty sure that you are in the sphere of Equity.
Then as regards contracts.
Notice, first, the doctrine of undue influence.
Common Law treated a contract as voidable if made under duress, i.e. threats of violence to life or limb; it took no account of more subtle forms of pressure — the unfair advantage taken of a man in distressed circumstances, the influence exercised in certain relations, such as that of a guardian and his former ward, or solicitor and client.
But Equity treated such pressure as a ground for holding the transaction voidable.
It would not allow it to be enforced against the promisor; and if property had been transferred, the recipient was treated as holding it for the benefit of the person who had parted with it, and as bound to restore it.
So in the case of fraud and misrepresentation Equity interfered, though Common Law took account of them too.
It is not clear that the rules in Common Law and Equity were quite the same on these subjects; but, at any rate, Equity had a special protection for the party who had suffered.
Common Law might enable the defrauded party to resist an action brought against him on the contract; Equity could order the document to be handed up and destroyed or cancelled.
That might be a necessary protection in order, e.g., to prevent a cheque obtained by fraud from getting into the hands of an innocent holder, who would be in better position than the original party to the fraud.
So, too, Equity might order a document executed under a mistake to be rectified; Common Law would at most treat it as void.
Then there are the rules about time and penalties.
Common Law would treat a provision in a contract as to time as being ‘of the essence of the contract’, meaning that if a certain act was not done by one party within a certain stipulated time, he should lose all rights under the contract; Equity treated such a provision in general as not being of the essence of the contract, but as giving a right only to damages.
Again, where a contract provides, e.g., that A shall pay £100 on 1 January next, and if he does not do so, shall pay £200, Equity would not allow the £200 to be claimed, but treated it only as a security for the £100 with interest.
The equitable rules about penalties were, however, to a large extent already introduced into the Common Law Courts by statutes passed at the end of the seventeenth and early in the eighteenth century.
Again, we have the rules about the assignment of rights under contract.
A owes money to B. Common Law regards this as purely a relation between A and B. B agrees with C that C shall have the right to claim the debt from A. Common Law pays no attention, C cannot claim the debt.
The most that can be done is that B may allow C to use his name to claim the money.
But Equity treats the debt as transferable.
It will compel B to let C make the legal claim in his name; in the last resort it might allow C to take proceedings in Equity in his own name against A. Thus it came to be said that ‘in Equity debts and choses in action are assignable’.
Further, we must notice the law about married women.
Common Law put the wife, both as regards rights and liabilities, in a very subordinate position to her husband.
Her tangible movable goods simply became her husband's property.
Debts due to her might be collected by the husband; and if that was done, of course the money was his.
If he did not collect it, and the wife survived him, the claim for the debt remained hers.
Her freehold and copyhold land, it is true, remained her own; but the husband had the enjoyment of it at least during the continuance of the marriage.
Neither could dispose of the inheritance without the consent of the other.
Leaseholds were in a position very much like debts.
The husband had a right to dispose of them for his own benefit while he lived, and his wife had no power of disposition during that time, though, if she survived him, and they had not been disposed of, they would be hers again.
Further, no married woman could make a will without her husband's consent, nor (with trifling exceptions) make any contract, except as agent either for her husband or for some other person: it would have been absurd to let her contract when she had no free property out of which she could pay.
But then about the end of the seventeenth century Equity invented the separate use for married women.
Property might be given to a trustee upon trust for the separate use of the married woman, free from the control and liabilities of her husband.
Now, if it had simply been given to the woman, Common Law would have said, ‘We can pay no attention to this separate use.
If it is the woman's, it comes under the husband's control, in spite of anything you say to the contrary.’
But then the property was not given to her; it was given on the face of it to the trustee.
Common Law could not prevent the trustee employing it for the wife's benefit, and Equity would compel him to do so.
And then Equity went one step further.
Suppose a man knows nothing of trusts and trustees, but has heard something of the separate use, leaves property — say £1,000 — to his married daughter ‘for her separate use’.
The husband pounces on it; the Common Law makes it his.
But Equity will not be balked.
True, the £1,000 belongs to the husband at law — there is no denying it; but Equity will compel him to apply it for the wife's benefit.
Has not the testator, in fact, declared a trust in saying ‘for her separate use’?
Nothing easier than to turn the husband into a trustee for his own wife.
And so this property held for the wife's separate use comes to be her ‘separate estate’ in Equity.
Equity treats her as if she was the unmarried owner of it; it lets her dispose of it as she pleases in her lifetime, it lets her leave it by will, it even lets her make contracts which can be enforced against it, and against it only.
And then Equity gets afraid of what it has done.
If the wife can so easily dispose of this property, it may be that her husband will coax or bully her into parting with it to him or to his creditors, and so it allows her a privilege which no other grown-up person of sound mind in the country can enjoy.
The will or settlement may impose the restraint on anticipation.
In that case, no act of the married woman is to affect her right to the capital or future income of the property.
It is just because the whole of this institution of married women's property existed in Equity only that Equity could mould the institution just as it pleased.
Thus it was through Equity that a married woman acquired a limited and special capacity to own property and to make contracts.
We shall see that in the nineteenth century this limited and special capacity was extended with some modifications to all married women (see pp. 50–4); but that in 1935 it was swept away, and married women were given the same capacity to own property and make contracts as a man.
And then, finally, look at what Equity can do for the successful plaintiff — the ‘remedy’, the ‘relief’ which it can give him.
With few exceptions the only thing that Common Law can do is to give him money compensation.
If you have been wrongfully turned out of your land, then, it is true, Common Law will put you back into possession; but this is practically the only exception from the rule that the Common Law remedy for every wrong and every breach of contract is damages .
With the one exception mentioned, Common Law will not order a defendant to do anything except pay money.
It is a much easier order to enforce.
It is easier to say whether a man has paid the money or not than to say whether he has complied with other orders; and if he fails to pay, it is easy to get the money by selling his goods, if he has any.
But it is not always satisfactory to the plaintiff.
It may not be money that he wants; and even if he would be satisfied with money, it may be very hard to say what would be a fair compensation for his loss, and a jury may not be the most suitable body for assessing it.
Suppose a contract for the sale of land; the seller refuses to perform it.
In the eye of the Common Law there is plenty of land as good elsewhere; but the purchaser has set his heart on just this piece of land, and damages (even if liberally assessed, which is not always the case) are not what he wants.
Or suppose the purchaser backs out.
It may be of vital importance to the seller to get the money instead of the land; but he will rarely succeed in getting more than his out-of-pocket expenses.
Or suppose, again, that your neighbour has agreed with you that he will not open a public house or carry on a school of music next door, and does and threatens to continue doing one or the other; or that you have a right to light for your windows, and he threatens to erect a building within three feet of them.
In all such cases you may not be satisfied to receive even large damages for the wrong done; and what the amount of damages is to be may be very uncertain.
At any rate, if damages are the only thing to be got, your wealthy neighbour might buy the right to annoy you.
It was to meet cases of this kind that Equity invented the great remedies of specific performance and injunction : specific performance to compel a man actually to do what he has promised — to give you the land in return for the money, to pay you the purchase money in return for the land; injunction to forbid him to do what he has promised not to do or what he has no right to do — to forbid him to open the public house or the music-school, to forbid him to build so as to block up your light, even to compel him to pull down the objectionable wall; the last sort of injunction is called mandatory .
The effect of the Judicature Acts
Now, what have the judicature Acts 1873 and 1875 done?
It may be noted that these acts were replaced by the Supreme Court of judicature (Consolidation) Act 1925, which has itself now been replaced by the Supreme Court Act 1981 and by certain provisions in the Limitation Act 1980 (consolidating earlier Limitation Acts).
They have established a single court with all the powers both of a Court of Law and a Court of Equity.
The distribution of work between the divisions of that court is only a matter of convenience; the Queen's Bench Division can never say ‘here a matter of Equity is involved; we cannot decide it’, or the Chancery Division ‘this is a question of Common Law; you ought to have gone to a Common Law Court’.
At the worst the plaintiff who starts in the wrong division will be removed to another division, and may have to pay the expenses, if any, incurred by his mistake; but he cannot fail altogether for his mistake.
Multiplicity of proceedings is avoided.
Suppose a dispute about a piece of land.
A is the legal owner; B has an equitable claim.
Under the old system A takes proceedings in the Common Law Courts to establish his rights; B has no legal defence; he must go to the Court of Chancery to get, among other things, an injunction to forbid A to go on.
Under the Judicature Acts no injunction can be granted by one division of the court against proceedings in another division; but in every branch of the court an equitable right may be directly asserted and may be pleaded as a defence to a legal claim.
So, again, suppose A is blocking up B's light.
Under the old system B might have had to bring two actions against A: in the Common Law Courts to get damages, in the Chancery to get an injunction to forbid the continuance of the building.
He can now get both in the same action, because the same court can both give damages and also grant an injunction.
Or suppose that A has broken his contract to sell land to B; here, again, B might have had to bring one action in a Common Law Court for damages, and another in the Chancery to compel specific performance.
Or, again, A has a purely legal claim against B; but in order to prove his case he wants to make B disclose facts or documents which support A's claims.
There A would have had to take proceedings for ‘discovery’ against B in Chancery to get the disclosure, and another action in the Common Law Courts for his actual claim.
He now brings an action in the High Court, in the course of which he gets an order for discovery, B is compelled to disclose the documents which he has that support A's case, and A may be allowed to administer interrogatories to B — questions in writing which B must answer also in writing but upon oath.
On the other hand, the old Chancery practice which compelled B to go through the whole of A's story and give an answer upon oath to everything said in it has disappeared; the evidence in the ordinary course is given viva voce in court when the trial comes on.
The Acts introduced a whole code of procedure, the Rules of the Supreme Court, which in various ways assimilated the Common Law and the Equity procedure, taking the good points of both.
The 25th section of the Act of 1873 dealt specially with a number of points in which there was a difference between Law and Equity, of which the following may here be mentioned:
Mortgages.
Common Law treated the mortgagee as the owner of the land in case of the ordinary legal mortgage; Equity treated the mortgagor as still being in a sense owner.
It is true that it would not prevent the mortgagee taking possession, though it made his position in some degree uncomfortable if he did take possession.
But suppose that, as usually happens, the mortgagor is left in possession, and that a stranger turns him out, or tries to do so.
Common Law found a difficulty in protecting him against the stranger.
The mortgagee would have to be joined as plaintiff.
The Judicature Act decided that as against a stranger the mortgagor in possession must be treated as owner.
He can sue in his own name.
We shall see that the Law of Property Act 1925 has changed the form of the ordinary legal mortgage (see pp. 96–9).
But the same rules as before are applicable to a mortgagee who takes possession, and to a mortgagor who is in possession.
Assignment of debts and choses in action.
Here you remember that Common Law would not recognize the assignment; Equity in effect would, by compelling the assignor to lend the use of his name to the assignee for the purpose of suing the debtor, or, in the last resort, allowing the assignee to sue directly against the debtor, but requiring him, as a rule, to make the assignor a defendant.
Here the Judicature Act made a definite alteration in the law.
It left the old equitable assignment untouched, and it may be used still.
But it created a new kind of assignment, which was a legal assignment in the sense that the assignee might sue directly in his own name without making the assignor a party; but it made certain special requirements:
the assignment must be absolute, it must be in writing, notice in writing to the debtor is required.
(This series of provisions in the Judicature Act is repealed and substantially re-enacted in section 136 of the Law of property Act 1925.)
None of these requirements applies to an equitable assignment, but priority as between two assignees of the same debt depends on priority of notice to the debtor, and for this purpose an unwritten notice is unavailing.
On the other hand, the new kind of assignment resembles the equitable assignment in being subject to equities, i.e. to claims or defences which the debtor or other person might have set up against the assignor.
The rules of Equity as to stipulations about time and other provisions which would not be held by Equity to be of the essence of the contract, are to prevail in all cases.
Finally, the 25th section (now substantially re-enacted by section 49 of the Supreme Court Act 1981) contains a general provision that in all other matters where there is a conflict or variance between the rules of Law and the rules of Equity the latter are to prevail.
This last provision looks so sweeping that there is a danger of supposing that it has swept away all difference between legal and equitable rights.
That would be a great mistake.
One might imagine, for instance, that it has turned equitable estates and rights into legal estates and rights.
That is not so.
The great characteristic of equitable estates, namely that they will be destroyed if the legal estate gets into the hands of a purchaser for value without notice, still holds good.
A is a trustee of property for B, i.e. A has a legal right which he is bound to use for B's benefit; B is said to have an equitable right to it or an equitable estate in it.
Since the Judicature Act, just as much as before it, if A sells the property to C, who knows nothing of the trust, and transfers the legal ownership to him, B's rights to the property are destroyed; he can only look to A for compensation for the breach of trust.
Or, again, one might suppose that this section has extended equitable doctrines to cases to which Equity did not apply them, because they formerly never came into a Court of Equity.
One might suppose that since they now come into a court with an equitable jurisdiction, the equitable doctrine must be applied.
We shall see that Law drew a clear distinction between innocent and fraudulent misrepresentation.
The latter was regarded as a tort, for which an action for damages was available.
But damages could not normally be obtained for an innocent misrepresentation.
Equity regarded the distinction as of less importance, in the sense that if a representation were untrue, whether to the knowledge of its maker or not, and were a material factor in inducing another party to enter into a contract with him, that party was entitled to rescind the contract if he were plaintiff, or resist specific performance if he were defendant.
The passage of the judicature Act tempted some people to think that damages might now be obtained for innocent misrepresentation.
But the impression was soon shown to be erroneous.
Apart from fraud, and certain exceptional cases, damages could be obtained only if the representation were fundamental, so as to constitute a condition, or must be ranked as a warranty, collateral to the main contract, such as a statement concerning the soundness of a horse.
However, the Law Reform Committee in 1962 recommended that courts should be permitted to award damages, at their discretion, in all cases involving innocent misrepresentation.
This was substantially enacted by the Misrepresentation Act 1967 (see also pp. 124–5), and now the court may treat a contract as still subsisting despite the existence of innocent misrepresentation, and award damages to the injured party, instead of rescinding the contract.
The general result of the fusion of Law and Equity has been, then, not to alter substantive law, but rather to alter and simplify the procedure.
In order to find out what the substantive law is, we must still go back to the time when Law and Equity were administered in different courts; we may still have to picture to ourselves distinct proceedings taken about the same matter in those courts, and work out the result of those separate proceedings.
Yet signs are not wanting that the mental effort of doing so is one which will become more and more difficult as the memory of the distinct courts of Law and Equity dies out; and perhaps already the unified jurisdiction of the High Court, and the statutes which have codified certain branches of Common Law and Equity, have produced some results which could hardly have been given by any combination of proceedings in the separate courts, or by the development of the law solely by means of cases decided in them.
OTHER BODIES OF ENGLISH LAW
There are three other main bodies of English law: probate, Divorce, and Admiralty, which were developed in jurisdictions distinct from the Common Law Courts and the Court of Chancery.
It is not intended in this book to deal specially with the law administered in the modern Restrictive practices Court, Employment Appeal Tribunal, or other specialist tribunals.)
In these other bodies of law we see more influence of foreign law than elsewhere in our legal system.
The church courts
From William the Conqueror onwards the Church Courts are separated from the Lay Courts: the Bishop has his court; the Archbishop a superior or prerogative court; from him before the Reformation there is an appeal to the pope.
The law of these courts is the Church or Canon Law — the Common Law of the Western Church.
That law was formed by ecclesiastical lawyers who knew the Roman Law.
It was first systematized by Gratian of Bologna in the twelfth century.
It was the law of the Church in England, as in other parts of Western Europe, though within limits local and provincial variations were possible.
Though these courts were in no sense treated as subordinate by the King's Courts, the latter would issue prohibitions to prevent them from dealing with matters that did not concern them.
But the scope of their actual and proper jurisdiction was large.
With a great part of the matters with which they dealt we have not much concern.
Their exclusive claim to punish clergymen for ordinary offences has long since disappeared; the power to try and punish laymen for immorality has become practically obsolete; their jurisdiction over the matters of ritual, and ecclesiastical offences of clergymen, such as heresy, still remains and is still exercised by them.
In the struggle between them and the King's Courts for jurisdiction over ecclesiastical property — the right to present a clergyman to a living, for instance— the King's Courts were successful at an early time in getting and keeping the jurisdiction in their own hands.
But in two matters which concern primarily what we should consider the civil rights of everyone, the Church Courts long retained their jurisdiction: the disposition of the goods of the dead, and questions of marriage and divorce.
Probate and administration
As regards the real estate of the deceased, it is settled by the end of the thirteenth century that he can make no will, except where there is a local custom to that effect.
But as regards his goods and chattels, which include his leaseholds, it is early admitted that he has at least a limited power to dispose by will — limited because his wife and children may have rights which he cannot override.
These restrictions on testation had disappeared over the greater part of England early in the fourteenth century, but they survived in the province of York till 1692, in Wales till 1696, and in London till 1724.
If he makes no will we can hardly say that there is in early times any common law as to how his goods shall be divided; much or all will depend on local custom.
The Common Law takes little interest in the goods, which are of far less importance, and especially of far less public importance, than the land.
Now the Church has a definite interest in the goods of the deceased.
The religious belief of the time requires at least a substantial part of his property to be devoted to the good of his soul.
If he makes a will, as most men do, it is almost certain that he will set apart a considerable proportion for the saying of masses; if he should neglect to do so, and in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries it is regarded as almost a sin to die without making a will, the Church ought to make the provision which he has failed to make for his soul.
Thus the Church Courts assume a jurisdiction over dead men's goods.
If there is a will — and wills at that time are very easy to make, mere word of mouth is sufficient — the Bishop's Court is the proper place in which it must be proved; the Bishop's Court will see that the executor carries out his duties properly.
If there is no will, then the Bishop will take charge of the goods that the deceased leaves, and make a suitable disposition of them.
The Bishop seems to have had a wide discretion, which was not always well exercised.
Two statutes provided a remedy.
In 1285 the ‘Ordinary’, i.e. the ecclesiastical superior who has the jurisdiction, is required by statute to pay the debts of the intestate, just as the executor (i.e. the person appointed by the will to carry out the will) is required to pay them.
In 1357 he is required by statute to entrust the administration of the property to the near relations of the deceased.
This statute originated the office of administrator .
The administrator is the person who, in the absence of an executor, must deal with the deceased's property, pay his debts, and make a proper division among those entitled.
He receives what are called letters of administration , which give him the title to the property; even where there is a will, but no executor is appointed, there must be a grant of letters of administration cum testamento annexo , ‘with the will attached’.
It is true that the Ecclesiastical Court is not the only one which deals with the goods of dead men; the executor or administrator may have to sue in the Common Law Courts to recover the claims or property of the deceased, and the deceased's creditors can sue him there.
But neither the Ecclesiastical Courts nor the Common Law Courts are well adapted to settle the numerous conflicting rights of creditors, legatees, and next of kin; trusts are often involved, and during the last two centuries the most effectual and usual method of asserting a claim to or against the estate of a deceased person is to get the estate administered in Chancery.
That court tells the executor or administrator what to do, or takes the whole estate under its charge and distributes it.
But all this supposes that there is already a will proved, or letters of administration granted by the Ecclesiastical Court.
Without probate of the will or letters of administration, neither executor nor administrator can take any steps in any other court of law, for the executor's proof of his title, and the administrator's title itself, can only be given by the Ecclesiastical Court.
That court keeps the key which unlocks the estate.
The Reformation left the jurisdiction untouched; and it lasted into the middle of the nineteenth century.
There were as many Probate Courts as there were dioceses, in addition to the Prerogative Courts of the two Archbishops, and a number of courts in places called Peculiars, places outside a bishop's jurisdiction, and under a special ecclesiastical jurisdiction of their own.
The appropriate court was usually the court of the diocese in which the deceased's property happened to be; if there was property in several dioceses, it was necessary to apply to the prerogative Court.
The records of these numerous courts were often badly kept, and there might be damage or loss of the original wills which the courts kept under their custody.
In 1857 the whole of the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Courts in Probate and Administration was taken away and was vested in a new court — the Court of Probate.
The Statutes of Distribution 1670 and 1685 established a code for the distribution of the property of intestate persons modelled largely on Roman law.
But till 1857 this code was subject to local customs in the province of York, in Wales, and in London which gave different rights to the wife and children.
We shall see that since 1925 this code is now replaced by a new scheme of intestate succession, which applies to all the property of a deceased person (see pp. 111–13).
Marriage and divorce
This also, from an early time in the Middle Ages, fell largely into the hands of the Ecclesiastical Courts.
They assume a jurisdiction to declare whether a marriage has taken place or not, whether there is any impediment which makes it void or voidable.
Questions of legitimacy may also be decided by them.
They grant also what is called a divorce a mensa et thoro , or rather what we should call a judicial separation, i.e. they release the parties from the duty of living together on grounds of cruelty or misconduct; but a divorce in the modern sense, which allows the parties to marry again, is not recognized by the medieval church in the case of any marriage which is originally valid.
After the Reformation it looks for a moment as if the Ecclesiastical Courts would allow even a divorce in the modern sense; but the attempt fails, and the only way of getting a complete dissolution of marriage is by special Act of Parliament (and so the law remained, for persons domiciled in Northern Ireland, up to 1939).
This Divorce Act was only allowed after proceedings had been taken both in the Ecclesiastical Courts for separation, and in the Common Law Courts for damages.
The expense of the combined proceedings was enormous, and made divorce a luxury of the very rich.
Here again, in 1857, statute took away the whole of the matrimonial jurisdiction from the Ecclesiastical Courts and vested it in a new court, the Divorce Court, which was enabled to do not only everything that the Ecclesiastical Court could have done, but also what previously needed the combined efforts of the Ecclesiastical Courts, the Common Law Courts, and an Act of Parliament.
Admiralty
The Middle Ages knew a number of courts with a maritime jurisdiction, which were mainly local courts, e.g. the court of the Cinque ports.
They knew also a Law Merchant which was different from the Common Law and had an international character, a law founded on the commercial customs of merchants and seafaring men of all nations.
It, too, was administered in local courts held in fairs and towns.
Gradually these courts decayed, partly owing to the jealousy of the Common Law Courts, which interfered with them and extended their own jurisdiction.
In the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the Law Merchant, apart from maritime law and prize law (see p. 40), was absorbed into the Common Law; thus the law of such matters as Bills of Exchange came to be part of the law of the land, and came to have a specially English character.
On the Continent mercantile law is still regarded as something separate from the ordinary law.
The Admiral, whose office dates from the end of the thirteenth century, has at first no jurisdiction apart from the discipline of the fleet, but in the course of the fourteenth century we find him assuming a jurisdiction to punish crimes, such as piracy, committed at sea, as well as a civil jurisdiction over shipping and commercial matters.
The law and procedure of his court have an international rather than a purely English character; it administers a law which is to be found in the medieval maritime codes, such as the Laws of Oleron and the so-called Law of Rhodes; in the background, as a supplementary law, is the Civil or Roman law.
Its procedure is that of Roman law: the parties can be examined on oath.
But the Admiralty Court also suffers from the jealousy of the Common Law.
Its criminal jurisdiction is, in the sixteenth century, vested in a set of commissioners welcome in practice to be invariably judges of the Common Law Courts.
Its civil jurisdiction was encroached upon, as contracts made and wrongs done abroad or at sea were brought within the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts by fictions, such as the pretence that such towns as Bordeaux were within the area of, say, Cheapside, so that many international commercial transactions were considered to be purely municipal.
Prohibitions were issued to prevent the Admiralty from dealing with any case that the Common Law Courts could deal with.
The result of this struggle, which lasted through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, was to confine the court to a very limited jurisdiction, dealing with purely maritime matters, such as salvage and damage by collision at sea.
It still retained such jurisdiction, and received some increase and confirmation of it, in the nineteenth century.
The Maritime Law which it administered — though it gradually became more English and less international — still retained a peculiar character.
For instance, the rule of contributory negligence applicable to collisions at sea differed from that established by the common law of tort.
Under the Common Law, proof that the plaintiff had been guilty of contributory negligence, and that he had the ‘last opportunity’ of avoiding the accident, entirely deprived him of his remedy.
(This rule has, as we shall see, been altered by the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945; see p. 138.)
Maritime Law divided the loss, at first equally, but now, under the Maritime Conventions Acts 1911, in proportion, as far as possible, to the degree of fault.
The Admiralty had from the first a ‘prize’ jurisdiction, i.e. a jurisdiction to determine all questions as to the ownership of ships and goods captured at sea by a belligerent.
The leading principles of prize law were settled by Lord Stowell during the Napoleonic wars; and they were the basis of the prize law which was applied in the 1914–18 and 1939–45 wars.
The modern Courts
The Acts of 1857 which established the probate and Divorce Courts provided that the ordinary judge of these courts might be the same person as the Admiralty judge.
Thus it was a natural step that in 1875 the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty jurisdictions should be entrusted to a single division of the High Court.
However the disparity between the three jurisdictions became marked in the course of the present century, and a reorganization was brought about by the Administration of Justice Act 1970.
The Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division was abolished and a new Family Division of the High Court put in its place.
This new Division deals with Divorce and other aspects of family law, as well as non-contentious probate, while contentious Probate is now assigned to the Chancery Division, and Admiralty matters to the Queen's Bench Division.
PERSONS AND PERSONAL RELATIONS
Unborn persons
Even before birth a human being is not without legal recognition, for the antenatal life is protected by the Infant Life Preservation Act 1929.
The Irish courts have held that a child which was born deformed in consequence of an injury to its mother, caused by the fault of a railway company on whose line she was travelling, could not recover damages; but the decision turned on the view that the company, not having means of knowledge of its presence, owed no duty towards it.
In England, however, the birth of many children suffering from deformities caused by their mothers having taken the new drug thalidomide prescribed by doctors during their pregnancy resulted in the enactment of the Congenital Disabilities (Civil Liability) Act 1976.
Under this Act a child born alive, but suffering from a physical or mental defect as a result of something which happened before its birth, has a right of action for damages if the defendant would also have been liable in tort for what occurred to the parent if sued in time.
In the law of property, a child conceived, but not yet born, will be treated as born, at any rate where it is for its advantage that it should be so treated.
For instance, even a bequest to persons ‘born previously to the date of my will’ will include a person born within due time afterwards.
But if the child is never born alive, things will remain as if it had never existed.
Further, by wills and settlements, provision may be made for those who may come into existence at a future time, subject to the rule against perpetuities, which forbids any disposition which is not certain to take effect (if it takes effect at all) within lives in being and twenty-one years afterwards; but a life in being includes a person en ventre sa mere at the time when the will or settlement takes effect.
(Certain detailed modifications of the effect of the rule against perpetuities are now enacted by the Perpetuities and Accumulations Act 1964.)
Infants
At birth a child enters the condition of infancy — a condition which ceases at the age of 18 years, or rather, at the first moment of the day preceding the eighteenth birthday.
In what follows the term ‘infant’ will be used in its strict sense of a person who is in the condition of infancy as above defined.
It would be a mistake to regard the condition of infancy as one of uniform incapacity throughout and for all purposes.
In Criminal Law the material periods are those up to 10 and between 10 and 14 years.
A child under 10 incurs no criminal liability for its acts; a child over 9, but under 14, incurs no such liability, unless it is shown that it had sufficient capacity to know that its act was wrong.
A person above the age of 13, though under 18, does not differ in general as regards criminal liability from a person of full age, though modern legislation has made special provision for the trial and punishment of persons under 17.
The Marriage Act 1949 provides that a marriage between persons either of whom is under the age of 16 is void.
Marriages of persons over that age, but under 18, are completely valid; and the only check on such marriages without the consent of parents or guardians is the difficulty of getting them celebrated by the clergyman or proper officer without making a false declaration, which involves penal consequences.
There is no general rule which exempts infants from liability for ‘tort’, i.e. civil injury other than breach of contract or trust.
An infant who damages another by carelessly running into him on his bicycle is liable just as a person of full age would be.
practically, the liability is not often of much value to the injured person, for the infant probably has no property available to satisfy it, and his parents are not liable for his acts.
In two ways, however, the liability of an infant for civil wrongs is restricted.
It sometimes happens that the wrong is so closely connected with a contract that the enforcement of liability for the wrong would in effect amount to an enforcement of the contract.
Suppose that an infant who has hired a horse injures it by careless riding.
In such a case an adult might be held liable either for breach of his contract to use proper care or for a wrong independent of the contract; an infant has been held not to be liable at all.
Again, some wrongs, such as fraud, in their essence involve a guilty state of mind, and in such cases the extreme youth of the wrongdoer may be inconsistent with the existence of such a state of mind.
It is in respect of property and contract that the incapacity of infancy has its most general operation.
This incapacity is a one-sided one.
Property (other than a legal estate in land) may be transferred, and binding promises may be made to an infant, but in general he is unable to make a binding disposition of his property or to make binding promises to others.
As regards property, it should be noticed that law and practice, to a large extent, make it unlikely that property of any considerable value will come into the direct ownership of an infant.
When property passes on death, it will go in the first instance to the executor appointed by will, or the administrator appointed by the court, who are charged with the duty of dealing with it and transferring it to the persons entitled (see p. 114).
Similarly, under the settlements which people of property commonly make, the property will be in the hands of trustees.
The infant cannot give a receipt which executors, administrators or trustees can safely take.
They must therefore retain the property to which an infant is entitled till he attains full age, and meanwhile deal with it under the directions of the will or settlement or under the orders of the court.
But if the trust has been created after 1925, the Trustee Act 1925 gives power to the trustees to apply the property for the maintenance and advancement of the infant.
In some cases trustees may relieve themselves by transferring it into the control of the court.
Where an infant actually has in his hands tangible movable property, it would seem that he has a power of disposing of it, of which the limits — if such there are — have not been determined.
It cannot be supposed, for instance, that a sale by a normal infant of his own books or minor personal effects could (in the absence of fraud or unfair dealing) be called in question.
It is clear that a payment made by him for goods bought is binding, though payment could not have been enforced against him.
A gift of a large sum of money by an infant was after his death held valid.
But the bulk of ‘property’, in the modern sense of the word, is not of this kind.
Equitable estates in land, which are the only interests in land which infants can now have, can only be disposed of by writing; and a writing or a sealed writing is necessary to the transfer of such things as stocks and shares, claims against debtors, and interests in property held by others upon trust.
In all such cases the rule would seem to apply that the infant's acts are ‘voidable’; they become binding on him only if, after attaining full age, he fails within a reasonable time to repudiate them.
The rule has been relaxed so as to enable infants to make a binding settlement of their property upon marriage, but only with the sanction of the court.
Except soldiers and airmen when on active service and mariners while at sea, no infant can dispose of his property by will.
But in some cases a person of the age of 16 can make what is in effect equivalent to a disposition by will: a member of a Trade Union or Friendly Society may, for instance, at that age nominate in writing a person to receive moneys payable on his death by the Union or Society.
The contracts of an infant are at Common Law voidable.
But in this connection the word ‘voidable’ has two senses.
In the case of contracts creating continuing or recurrent liabilities incident to the disposition or holding of property, such as a settlement or a leasehold tenancy, the infant, on attaining full age, becomes bound unless within a reasonable time he takes steps to repudiate liability.
In all other cases — as, for instance, a sale of goods or a contract for services or a loan of money — the contract was voidable in the sense that the infant would not, on attaining full age, become liable unless he took steps to ratify it.
As regards this latter class of contracts, the Infants' Relief Act 1874 very much altered the law.
Contracts for the loan of money and supply of goods to infants and ‘accounts stated’ with infants were made altogether void, while the possibility of ratification was taken away from all those contracts which required ratification to make them binding upon him after attaining full age; and even a new promise to perform the contract, whether made upon a fresh consideration or not, could not be enforced by action.
These provisions gave rise to uncertainty largely because the courts showed a marked reluctance to interpret them according to the ordinary meaning of such words as ‘void, and they also gave rise to injustice because under the Common Law an infant could still sue an adult upon a contract unenforceable against himself and incapable of ratification by him.
To the general invalidity of infants' contracts the Common Law recognized the exceptions of contracts for necessaries and contracts for the infants' benefit, and these exceptions are not affected by statute.
Contracts for necessaries include contracts for such goods, lodging, and instruction as are reasonably necessary for the infant, having regard to his station in life and his needs at the time of the contract.
The party who supplies the infant does so at his peril; it will not avail him that he did not know that he was dealing with an infant, or that he thought that his position in life was such as to make the goods necessary, or that he did not know that the infant was already sufficiently supplied.
Of contracts for the benefit of the infant, so far as they do not coincide with contracts for necessaries, a contract for the employment of the infant, where his position in life makes employment desirable for him, is a typical case.
The unsatisfactory state of the law resulting from the Infants' Relief Act 1874 has now been remedied by the Minors' Contracts Act 1987, which is based upon recommendations of the Law Commission.
The 1987 Act restores the Common Law principle to contracts for the loan of money and supply of goods to infants, and to accounts stated with infants, so that they are now voidable (but not void) or unenforceable against them.
On attaining majority, or within a reasonable time thereafter, an infant may ratify a contract which is otherwise unenforceable against him or voidable at his option, and he can do this by unilateral act.
Furthermore, any new agreement entered into on majority whereby the infant undertakes to repay a loan advanced during minority is valid.
A guarantee of a minor's contractual obligation is also enforceable against the guarantor even if the infant's contractual obligation is unenforceable.
Finally, the 1987 Act provides that where a minor has acquired property under a contract which is unenforceable against him, or which he has repudiated on the grounds of minority, he may be required by the court, when it thinks it ‘just and equitable’ to do so, to return the property, or else property representing that which he has acquired (without prejudice to any other remedy available to the plaintiff).
In this way an infant may be compelled to provide restitution for property unfairly obtained.
Parents and guardians
In some systems of law the disability of persons under full age is helped out by the powers of the parent or guardian, who can represent the child, and, by acting on his behalf or giving concurrence to his acts, can make dispositions of his property and contracts binding on him.
Of such an institution we see but the rudiments or isolated survivals in English law.
Our medieval law of guardianship was concerned mainly with infants who were heirs of land; and though the ‘guardian in socage’— the nearest relation of the infant to whom the infant's land cannot descend — has not been abolished, the practice of settlement and of appointing trustees in whom the land, or at least powers over it, are vested, renders rare the occasions on which the very limited powers of such or any kind of guardians can be exercised over an infant's land.
At the present day they have no powers over the infant's land.
A conveyance to an infant does not vest the legal estate in him, but operates only as an agreement to execute a settlement in his favour.
This means that the grantor must execute a principal vesting deed and trust instrument, holding the land meanwhile as trustee for the infant.
If land is given to an infant by will or conveyed to him on an intestacy the legal estate vests in the representatives of the deceased who hold it in trust for the infant.
Over other property of an infant, neither parents nor guardians have now — if they ever had — any effective powers, except such as a will or settlement or an order of the court may give them; they cannot, for instance, give a valid receipt for a legacy or money payable to the child.
For purposes of litigation, it is true, an infant can and must be represented by an adult, who will be called ‘the next friend’ of an infant plaintiff, the ‘guardian ad litem ’of an infant defendant; but such a next friend or guardian represents the infant only for the purposes of the particular lawsuit, and is not necessarily, though he is commonly, the infant's parent or general guardian.
Broadly speaking, then, the powers and duties of parents and guardians relate not to property, but to the care and custody of the infant's person.
Under the Guardianship of Minors Act 1971, as amended by the Guardianship Act 1973 and the Domestic Proceedings and Magistrates' Courts Act 1978, both father and mother are equally entitled to the care and custody of the infant; and in case of a dispute between them the court must, in coming to a decision, regard only the welfare of the infant.
Furthermore, the Child Abduction Act 1984 makes it an offence for any parent or guardian to take or send a child out of the United Kingdom without the consent of any other person who is a parent or guardian of the child.
Under the Social Security Act 1971, a man is liable to maintain his wife and children, including those of whom he has been adjudged the putative father, and a woman is liable to maintain her husband and children.
Neither father nor mother can deprive themselves of their rights, except in the case of a separation agreement between husband and wife; and even such an agreement will not be enforced by the court if the court considers it not to be for the child's benefit.
On the death of father or mother the guardianship devolves on the surviving spouse; but either can by deed or will appoint guardians to act with the survivor.
The court has always had power to take a child out of the custody of a parent or guardian in cases of misconduct or unfitness, and in such cases, or in the absence of any lawful guardian, to appoint a suitable person as guardian.
Thus in a case in 1969, where the 10-year-old child born in England of Spanish parents had been very unhappy during the seventeen months he had spent with them in Spain, and had then lived happily for several years with foster parents and their six children in England, the court refused to make an order that care and control should be granted to the parents, one of whom was in poor health.
Expert evidence was given to the effect that the chances of the child adjusting to a new life in Spain were very slim, and that failure to adjust would have very serious consequences on the child's development.
The court held that the rule that the welfare of the child is to be the first and paramount consideration applies not only to disputes between parents, but also to a dispute between parents and a third party.
Similarly, a parent or guardian may apply to have an infant made a ward of court if such an order would protect the infant's property from his own possible rash activities.
A ward of court cannot be taken out of the jurisdiction of the court, nor can any change be made in his or her position in life, without leave of the court.
Thus to marry such a ward without the consent of the court is punishable as a contempt of court.
The court's powers in regard to the protection and custody of children are constantly revised by Parliament, as for example in the substantial Family Law Act 1986 and the Children Act 1989.
The powers of parents and guardians include the power of administering reasonable punishment, and such a power may be delegated by them to others, such as schoolmasters, under whose control the child is placed.
Legitimacy
Broadly speaking, one may say that every child is legitimate which is born during the continuance of a marriage or within due time afterwards.
The presumption that the husband is the father of his wife's children is one that can be overthrown only by evidence of the most cogent, even though not of the most direct, kind.
Until recently there were several legal disadvantages for anyone born illegitimate, though a series of statutes progressively reduced their number, and the Law Commission recommended the total abolition of the concept of illegitimacy.
Now at last this has been achieved, first in Scotland by the Law Reform (Parent and Child)(Scotland) Act 1986, and then in England and Wales by the Family Law Reform Act 1987, with the result that in law there is now no distinction made between those born in and those born out of wedlock.
Thus illegitimacy is no longer taken into consideration in determining the rights of succession of an illegitimate person, or the rights of succession to his estate, or the rights of succession traced through an illegitimate relationship.
Again, illegitimate relations are included among the dependants who are entitled to claim compensation for the death of a person caused by an accident at work.
Adoption
Until 1926 English law did not recognize the institution of adoption.
An Act passed in that year gave power to the court to make an adoption order.
On the order being made, all the rights, duties, and obligations of the parents or guardians of the adopted child are extinguished, and these rights, duties, and obligations vest in the adopter.
If a husband and wife are the adopters they have the same rights as against one another, and as against the adopted child, as if they were the child's natural father and mother.
By an Act of 1934 an adopted child acquires the same rights as a natural child to benefits under what was then the Workmen's Compensation Act 1925 (this Act is now replaced by the Social Security Act 1975).
By the Adoption Act 1958, property of adopter and adoptee is to devolve in all respects as if the adoptee were the child of the adopter, born in lawful wedlock.
Finally, the Adoption Act 1968 extends the powers of courts in the United Kingdom over adoption, and enables effect to be given in the United Kingdom to adoptions made in other countries; and the Adoption Act 1976 consolidates all the earlier enactments relating to adoption.
The adopter must fulfil one of the following requirements: be over 21; or  be the parent of the adoptee, where the other natural parent is dead, or cannot be found, or there is some other reason justifying the exclusion of the other natural parent.
If a sole adopter is a male he cannot adopt a female, unless the court is satisfied that there are special circumstances which justify the adoption.
Except under special circumstances the parents, guardians, or persons liable to contribute to the support of the child must give their consent to the adoption.
The court must be satisfied that all persons whose consent is required understand the legal effect of the adoption.
It must also be satisfied that the adopter has not received nor agreed to receive, and that no person has made or given or agreed to make or give to the adopter, any payment in consideration of the adoption, except such as the court may sanction.
Other conditions may be imposed by the court as it sees fit.
Married women
Women, though at one time excluded from most public functions, were never by reason merely of their sex in a substantially different position from men as regards criminal liability, property and contract, if we except the rule (now nearly obsolete) which prefers males to females in the succession to real estate on intestacy.
A married woman, on the other hand, had at Common Law a very peculiar status involving both disabilities and privileges.
The Criminal Justice Act 1925 abolished the presumption that an offence committed by a wife in the presence of her husband is committed under his coercion.
But the rigour of the criminal law is relaxed in her favour by the provision of the same Act that, on a charge against her for any offence, other than treason or murder, it is a good defence to prove that the offence was committed in the presence of and under the coercion of her husband.
She does not become criminally liable merely by assisting her husband to escape punishment for a crime which she knows him to have committed; and it is only within certain limits that husband and wife are competent, and within narrower limits that they are compellable, to give evidence against one another, in criminal proceedings.
Under the Law Reform (Husband and Wife) Act 1962, husband and wife, subject to certain discretionary powers of the court, can sue each other.
An account has already been given of the proprietary and contractual disabilities of married women at Common Law and the creation by the Court of Chancery of an equitable separate estate which a married woman could freely deal with and bind by her contracts, so far as no restraint on anticipation had been imposed, and which, in any case, she could dispose of by will.
But this equitable separate estate existed only where it was created by a will or settlement, or in the comparatively rare cases where the Court of Chancery exercised its jurisdiction to compel a husband to make a settlement upon his wife.
Married women of the classes in which settlements and elaborately drawn wills were unknown thus remained subject to the Common Law.
When the Legislature determined to reform the Common Law rules two courses were open to it.
It could either provide that all married women should hold their property as their separate property — thus giving to all married women the right to dispose of their property and to make contracts binding it which formerly could only be given to them by a will or a settlement; or it could adopt the more straightforward course of making the capacity of a married woman to own property, make contracts, and incur liability for torts the same as that of a man.
In 1882 the Legislature took the first of these courses.
As a result of the Married Women's Property Act 1882, and later Acts, the capacity of a married woman to own property, to make contracts, and to incur liability for torts was different from that of a man.
Her property was her separate property (that is, separate from her husband, so that only a married woman could have such property), and, by means of a settlement, she could be restrained from anticipating it.
By her contracts or her torts she could bind only her separate property.
She could not bind herself personally, with the result that she could not be made a bankrupt, unless she was carrying on a trade.
But in 1935 the Legislature decided to take the second and more straightforward course.
By part I of the Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935, a married woman was put into the same position as a man with respect to her proprietary and contractual capacity, and, except in relation to her husband, with respect to her liability for torts.
Existing restraints upon anticipation were preserved, but even these were swept away by the Married Women (Restraint upon Anticipation) Act 1964.
And, by the Married Women's Property Act 1964, any money derived by a wife from an allowance made by her husband for housekeeping purposes, or any property acquired out of it, is deemed, in the absence of any agreement between them to the contrary, to belong in equal shares to the husband and wife.
The Law Commission has proposed that property (other than land, insurance policies and annuities, or property bought or transferred for business purposes) bought by either spouse for their joint use and benefit should automatically belong to both unless they agree to the contrary; and legislation to this effect is awaited.
The Matrimonial Homes Act 1967 (as amended by the Matrimonial Homes and Property Act 1981) gives a spouse who is in occupation of the matrimonial home, but does not occupy it by virtue of an estate, interest, contract, or statute, protection against eviction from the dwelling without the necessity of obtaining leave of the court.
If such a spouse is not in occupation, he or she may enter and occupy the home with leave of the court.
These rights are called ‘rights of occupation’, and where the leave of the court is necessary the court may make such orders as it thinks just and reasonable having regard to the conduct of the spouses, their needs and financial resources, the needs of the children, and all other circumstances.
Rights of occupation normally only continue during the subsistence of the marriage and the existence of the other spouse's estate or interest in the home, and they amount to a charge on the other spouse's estate or interest.
In the last few years the courts have contrived in effect to extend the substance of a right of occupation to a mistress who has lived on an originally permanent basis with a man, but who has now lost her partner either through death or as a result of some form of desertion.
In one case, decided in 1975, Lord Justice James commented: ‘The popular meaning of ‘family’ in 1975 would, according to the answer of the ordinary man, include this woman as a member of the man's family.’
And in another case, decided in the same year, the Court of Appeal held that a mistress was entitled to a beneficial interest in the house she had shared with her lover even though he had left it to marry another woman.
It is small wonder that the practice has grown up in recent years of referring, however inaccurately, to a mistress as a ‘common law wife’.
By the Domestic Violence and Matrimonial proceedings Act 1976, protection against eviction from the dwelling a mistress has shared with her lover was introduced, and a host of cases decided under the Act have proved the efficacy of this enactment to safeguard a woman's residential rights, often against physical violence by her former partner.
The husband will be presumed, in the ordinary case where husband and wife live together, and she orders goods to meet the household needs, to have authorized her to pledge his credit for that purpose, unless he has supplied her with sufficient ready money.
But there is no general rule that the husband is liable for his wife's debts.
The husband may, for instance, decide that the needs of the household shall be provided for by a housekeeper, and that the wife shall have no authority to contract on his behalf.
And the shopkeeper who supplies goods to a married woman without inquiry is not entitled to assume that she has her husband's authority.
It is only when the husband, by meeting the liabilities which his wife has incurred (whether for necessaries or not) to a particular tradesman, has ‘held her out’ as his agent, that the tradesman is entitled to hold the husband liable until he has received notice to the contrary.
The notice sometimes published in the papers to the effect that Mr Smith will no longer be liable for his wife's debts has a much more limited operation than is generally supposed.
It is unnecessary as regards persons whom the husband has not by his previous conduct induced to look to him for payment; it is ineffectual as regards those who do not happen to see the advertisement.
Another risk run by the shopkeeper who deals with a married woman is that he may find that, though she has property, her husband is insolvent.
In such a case, if the wife contracted as agent for her husband, and disclosed that fact to the shop, she incurs no personal liability.
Liabilities for contracts and torts incurred by a married woman before marriage are binding on her, and also on her husband to the extent of any property which he may have acquired from her, as under a marriage settlement.
Torts committed by the wife during marriage render her liable, but, since 1935, impose no liability on her husband unless he has authorized or ratified them.
It can be seen that by piecemeal legislation great strides have been made towards equality between the sexes as regards legal status, rights and liabilities.
Though total equality might be hard to achieve because of the biological differences between the sexes, the legislation has perhaps been rounded of by the Equal Pay Act 1970 and the Sex Discrimination Acts 1975 and 1986.
Under these Acts, and with only minor exceptions, employers, educational establishments, and those who provide goods, facilities and services to the public (e.g. banks, building societies, finance houses, and landlords) commit a civil offence if they do not provide men and women with the same opportunities and services.
An Equal Opportunities Commission, set up by the 1975 Act, oversees the working of the Acts: it may conduct formal investigations, and seek to enforce the law by civil proceedings.
Marriage and divorce
Historically there seems to be no doubt that the English Common Law required nothing for the celebration of a marriage beyond the declared agreement of the parties, which might take the form either of a declaration of present intention, or of a promise to marry followed by actual union.
This was the general law of Western Europe in the Middle Ages.
The House of Lords, however, in the nineteenth century decided in an Irish case that the Common Law had always required the presence of an ordained clergyman.
The question is now for England an academic one; for statutes, ranging from 1753 to 1986, have prescribed the formalities necessary for a valid marriage.
A marriage must be celebrated either in the presence of a clergyman of the Church of England, or (since 1836) of a Registrar of Marriages, or (since 1898) of an ‘authorized person’, who is usually the minister authorized by the trustees of a Nonconformist place of worship.
Two other persons must be present as witnesses.
The celebration must take place between the hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m., and must be preceded by a publication of banns or the obtaining of a Registrar's certificate or a Bishop's or Registrar's licence, and unless a special licence is obtained from the Archbishop of Canterbury, must take place in a recognized place of worship or Registrar's office situate in the district in which one at least of the parties resides.
Special provisions have been made for death-bed marriages, marriages at home for the housebound, marriages in prisons, hospitals and places of residential care for disabled people, and for the celebration of the marriages of members of the naval, military, and air forces and their daughters in chapels licensed by the Admiralty Board or by a Secretary of State.
The marriages of Jews and of members of the Society of Friends are exempt from these provisions, and may be celebrated according to the rules of these religious bodies.
In any case provision is made for preserving a record of every marriage celebrated in the country.
The law concerning nullity and divorce has been considerably reformed in recent years, and is now mostly governed by the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.
A failure to conform to the legal requirements in contracting a marriage will render that marriage void.
A marriage is also void on the ground of nearness of relationship if it is entered into  between ascendants and descendants, e.g. parent and child, grandparent and grandchild,
between brother and sister, uncle and niece, nephew and aunt,
between persons who, by reason of the previous marriage of one of them, are related in a way corresponding to one of the relationships above mentioned.
Under this third prohibition, therefore, a marriage between a stepson and his stepmother was void, but the Marriage (prohibited Degrees of Relationship) Act 1986 has provided an exception.
Now a man may marry his stepmother or stepdaughter, or a woman her stepfather or stepson, provided that the younger person is aged at least 21 and has not at any time before reaching the age of 18 lived as a child of the family of the older person.
The same Act permits marriages between in-laws, subject to the same provisos, and also provided that the former spouses have died.
By a series of Acts ranging from 1907 to 1960 exceptions had already been made permitting a man to marry his deceased or divorced wife's sister or half-sister, his niece by marriage or his aunt by marriage; and a woman may marry her deceased or divorced husband's brother or half-brother.
Under the Adoption Act 1976, a marriage between a child and one who has once adopted it is prohibited, but not a marriage between the adoptee and one of the adopter's own children.
But the relations by blood or marriage of a wife are not regarded as being related to the relations of her husband: thus if A and B are two brothers and C and D two sisters, the marriage of A with C will be no bar to the marriage of B and D.
A marriage celebrated between two persons, one of whom is at the time validly married, is in any case void; and any person knowingly entering into such a marriage is guilty of bigamy.
The following are also void: marriages between parties who are not respectively male and female; marriages between persons, either of whom is under the age of 16 (see p. 43); and a polygamous marriage entered into outside England and Wales, if either party was at the time domiciled in England and Wales (for domicile, see pp. 61–3).
In 1985 however, the Law Commission did recommend that a marriage entered into by a man or woman domiciled in England and Wales should not be invalid merely because it is entered into under a law which permits polygamy, provided that neither party is already married.
If remains to be seen whether this will be implemented.
The law of nullity covers not only cases where the purported marriage was void, but also those where the marriage, though initially valid, is voidable, and thus may be set aside.
A marriage is so voidable if it has not been consummated because of the incapacity of either party, or because of one party's wilful refusal to consummate it; if the marriage was entered into without the consent of either party (e.g. by reason of duress, mistake, or unsound mind); if at the time of the marriage one party was suffering from mental disorder of such a kind as to render him or her unfitted for marriage, or from venereal disease; or if the wife was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some other person than her husband.
Nullity of marriage must be carefully distinguished from divorce.
The effect of a decree of nullity, broadly speaking, is that the marriage is treated as if it had never existed.
A petition for divorce, however, postulates the existence of a valid marriage, which the court is asked to terminate.
Divorce of this kind was first introduced into English law by the Matrimonial Causes Act 1857, and from then until 1969 it was based upon the doctrine that some matrimonial offence (such as adultery or desertion) must have been committed by one spouse before the other could obtain relief.
A break with this doctrine was made by the Divorce Reform Act 1969, now replaced by the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, as amended in 1984, and the present position is that the sole ground on which a petition for divorce may be presented is that the marriage has broken down irretrievably.
Such a petition may not, without the special leave of the court, be presented until one year has elapsed since the marriage.
Some link with the doctrine of the matrimonial offence has been retained by the further provision that the court may not decide that a marriage has broken down irretrievably unless the petitioner can establish one or more of the five following circumstances:
that the respondent has committed adultery, and the petitioner finds it intolerable to live with the respondent;
that the respondent has behaved in such a way that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with him (or her);
that the respondent has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of at least two years preceding the presentation of the petition;
that the parties have lived apart for a continuous period of at least two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition, and the respondent consents to a decree being granted; or
that the parties have lived apart for a continuous period of at least five years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.
The behaviour alleged under –above would amount to a matrimonial offence, while the circumstances covered by  amount to the first recognition in England of a right of divorce by mutual consent.
Absence for seven years, coupled with the fact that a petitioner has no reason to believe that his or her spouse is alive, will enable him or her to ask the court to make a declaration that death is presumed and that the marriage is dissolved.
Although divorce is now much easier to obtain than ever before, legislation has since 1963 encouraged efforts at reconciliation.
A petitioner's solicitor must now certify that he has discussed the question of reconciliation with his client, and suggested the names of suitably qualified people to help.
Furthermore, resumption of cohabitation for any period up to six months is not in itself to be taken to condone the behaviour of the spouse which gives rise to the ground for divorce.
A judicial separation may be obtained upon proof of any one of the five bases for divorce mentioned above, save that there is no need to prove that the marriage has broken down irretrievably.
This does not, like a divorce, enable the parties to marry again, but it releases them in other respects from the duties of married life.
Upon a decree for dissolution of a marriage or judicial separation, the court may make orders for the custody, maintenance, and education of the children, for financial provision to be made for the wife, and for varying marriage settlements.
Separation and maintenance orders can also be obtained from magistrates' courts.
The recent reform of the grounds for divorce has been mirrored as regards proceedings in magistrates' courts by the Domestic Proceedings and Magistrates' Courts Act 1978, a statute enacted as the result of recommendations made by the Law Commission.
Magistrates' orders may now be obtained on four grounds:
that the respondent has failed to provide reasonable maintenance for the applicant;
that the respondent has failed to provide, or make a proper contribution towards, reasonable maintenance for any child of the family;
that the respondent has behaved in such a way that the applicant cannot reasonably be expected to live with the respondent; or
that the respondent has deserted the petitioner.
The fact that divorce is in many cases equally desired by both parties makes it probable that there may in fact be some collusion between them.
Collusion, which used to be a bar to divorce, is no longer prohibited, and indeed a Committee chaired by Mrs Justice Booth recommended in 1985 that the parties should in future be entitled to file joint petitions for divorce.
But sometimes material facts are suppressed, or on the other hand one party may petition for divorce without the other party being aware of the proceedings.
For this reason an interval of six weeks elapses between the decree nisi , which is made upon the hearing of the case, and the decree absolute, which finally dissolves the marriage and enables the parties to marry again, though the court has power to expedite the decree absolute in a suitable case.
During this interval any person may intervene to show cause, on the ground of, e.g., the suppression of material facts, why the decree should not be made absolute, and a public officer, the Queen's Proctor, is especially charged with the duty of intervening.
Insanity
The nature and degree of insanity which will afford a defence to a criminal charge has from time to time been a matter of considerable discussion.
Where the defence arises our courts will act upon the so-called ‘M'Naghten’ rules, propounded by the judges in response to questions addressed to them by the House of Lords.
An accused person is presumed to be sane, until he can prove the contrary.
He will be criminally liable unless he was so insane as either ‘not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing’, or ‘not to know that what he was doing was against the law’.
If he committed the crime under an insane delusion, his liability depends on the question whether he would have been liable had the facts been as he imagined them to be.
But uncontrollable impulse, caused by mental defect, is not at present accepted as exempting from criminal liability, except that it may serve to reduce murder to manslaughter (see pp. 167–8).
When a jury is satisfied that the act was committed, but that at the time the accused was so insane as not to be legally responsible, it brings in a special verdict of ‘not guilty by reason of insanity’, though the accused is then ordered to be detained during the ‘Queen's pleasure’.
Detention (at Broadmoor) is usually lifelong, and for this reason insanity is not often pleaded, except very occasionally as a defence to a prosecution for murder.
But even in murder cases it is now far more favourable to the accused for him to plead instead diminished responsibility, and for most practical purposes this defence has replaced that of insanity in criminal law.
As regards civil rights and liabilities, insanity has a very restricted operation.
A marriage contracted by a person so insane at the time as not to appreciate the nature of the obligations of the married state may be set aside at the suit of either party.
The marriage of a person who has been judicially declared insane is totally void, and the same is said to be true of any disposition of property made by such a person.
In general, however, the contract of a mentally disordered person is fully binding on him unless the other party was aware that he was so insane as not to understand the nature of the transaction.
If these conditions are satisfied, the party suffering from mental disorders, on recovering his sanity, or those entitled to act on his behalf, may repudiate or confirm and enforce the contract.
A person who is mentally disordered appears to be liable for wrongs, unless his disorder excludes some specific state of mind which forms an essential part of the wrong.
Drunkenness due to one's own fault is in itself no defence to a criminal charge; and this is probably true also of drunkenness not due to one's own fault — though no doubt the fact that it was not due to one's own fault would be a ground for mitigation of punishment.
In all cases drunkenness may be material as showing that the accused had not the intention which forms part of the essence of the crime charged.
Mental disease caused by drunkenness is in criminal law treated as on the same footing with insanity.
In the matter of contract, drunkenness is regarded as having the same effect as insanity.
The crown and its servants
The Queen, in her private capacity, is incapable of incurring liability, and no proceedings by way of action or prosecution can be taken against her.
Government Departments can, however, under the Crown Proceedings Act 1947, be sued  for the recovery of property, for breach of an ordinary commercial contract, but not for that of a contract of service, a contract dependent upon a future grant of money by parliament, nor, it seems, one in which the Crown purports to fetter its own future executive action, or  for a tort.
Servants of the Crown, from the highest executive, administrative, or military officers downwards, enjoy no general immunity for their public acts from either civil or criminal proceedings; and the command of a superior, even the command of the Queen, is no defence to any such proceedings.
It is, of course, true that such officers in many cases have powers which enable them to do lawfully what a private person might not do, but the question whether their acts are justified by their powers must be decided in proceedings before the ordinary courts.
A servant of the Crown is not himself liable for contracts made by him on behalf of the Crown, nor is he liable as a principal for the acts or defaults of his subordinates unless expressly authorized or subsequently ratified by him.
judges enjoy an almost complete immunity in respect of acts — even corrupt and malicious acts, happily rare in our history — done by them in their judicial capacity.
A judge of an inferior court, in order to entitle himself to this immunity, must, however, show that in reality, or at any rate upon the facts disclosed to him, he had jurisdiction in the matter in question.
Foreign sovereigns and the ambassadors of foreign states are immune from the jurisdiction of the English courts unless they voluntarily submit themselves to it, but the actual extent of the immunity is not free from doubt.
Nationality and domicile
Aliens, i.e. those who are not British citizens, are excluded from public office and public functions such as the parliamentary franchise.
They have no enforceable right to enter British territory, and in some cases the Government is authorized by Statute to exclude and even expel them from the United Kingdom.
Some provisions of the criminal law apply only to British citizens; an alien cannot own a British ship or a share in one; and some other disabilities have been imposed by Statute, especially on former enemy aliens.
But in general the position of an alien in private law does not differ substantially from that of a British citizen.
The rule forbidding an alien to hold English land was abrogated in 1870.
A radical change in the law relating to British nationality was effected by the British Nationality Act 1948.
This reflected the conception of common citizenship between the various parts of the British Commonwealth.
The essence of the scheme was that British nationality in the United Kingdom was achieved through citizenship of the United Kingdom and Colonies.
This citizenship was attained  by birth in the United Kingdom, by descent, by registration,
by naturalization, or  by incorporation of territory.
However the weight of immigration to the United Kingdom of men and women from other Commonwealth territories, whether dependent or independent, necessitated a further change in 1981.
The British Nationality Act 1981, which currently governs this topic, is based upon the aim, seen in many other countries, of making a person's nationality or citizenship accord with the country with which he is most really connected.
Under the Act, which now replaces that of 1948, British citizenship is restricted to those with close personal connections with the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
A child born in the United Kingdom will be a British citizen if the father or mother is a British citizen or settled in the United Kingdom in the sense of being entitled to stay indefinitely.
Children born in the United Kingdom to students, visitors or illegal immigrants no longer automatically acquire British citizenship at birth, but they will still be able to register as British citizens if either parent later becomes a citizen or settles in the United Kingdom, or if the child has spent the first ten years of its life in the country.
A child born abroad will be a British citizen by descent if either the father or mother was born or adopted in the United Kingdom or acquired citizenship by registration or naturalization.
There are provisions for registration as British citizens of other children who do not automatically gain British citizenship by descent provided that there is some parental or grandparental link with the United Kingdom.
There is also provision for the gaining of citizenship by naturalization by the Home Secretary.
An alien woman does not, as formerly, assume British citizenship automatically on marriage to a British citizen.
Conversely a woman who is a British citizen does not automatically lose her British citizenship on marriage with an alien.
Loss of citizenship may be brought about in three ways, naturalization in a foreign country, in case of double citizenship, declaration of renunciation of British citizenship, revocation of a certificate of naturalization.
More important for most purposes of private law than citizenship is domicile.
The question, for instance, whether the goods of a person who dies intestate ought to be divided among his relations according to the rules of English or of some foreign law, will be decided by an English court, not according to the citizenship, but according to the domicile of the deceased at the time of his death.
A person's domicile is the country which is in fact or in the eye of the law his permanent home for the time being.
Seeing that our law refuses to contemplate the possibility of any person either being without a domicile or having more than one domicile, the rules on this subject are not only intricate but highly artificial.
In 1987 the Jaw Commission recommended some radical change and simplification, but this has not yet been adopted.
For the present we may note that every person is considered to start life with a ‘domicile or origin’, which will be, as a rule, the domicile of his father at the time of his birth; and that this domicile of origin continues until it is shown that some other domicile has been acquired, and is restored whenever an acquired domicile is lost without the acquisition of another.
Formerly the domicile of a wife was necessarily the same as that of her husband, but under the Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1973 the wife's dependent domicile was abolished: now her domicile is determined according to the same rules as for a single person.
The substitution of citizenship for domicile in cases like that mentioned, after the manner of the law of some foreign countries, even if desirable on general grounds, would not solve the questions which arise when the laws of different parts of the same national territory, e.g. of England and Scotland, or of two states of the United States of America, come into competition.
It is obvious that a pretty problem arises when the test of domicile refers the English courts to the law of a country which applies the test of citizenship and it happens that the citizenship of the person in question was British.
Corporations
Bodies or groups of human beings may have legally recognized rights and duties, which cannot be treated as the rights and duties of the members.
Such bodies are known as corporations, or (to distinguish them from the corporations sole, to be mentioned later) corporations aggregate.
The marks of a corporation are: perpetual succession, i.e. the death or withdrawal of members, or the addition of new members from time to time, does not impair the continuity and identity of the body: ‘in like manner’, as Blackstone says, ‘the river Thames is still the same river, though the parts which comprise it are changing every instant'; the use of a common seal as evidence of at least the more formal acts of the corporation; and  the capacity to sue and be sued by its corporate name.
The legal recognition of corporate character may be obtained either by a charter from the Crown, as in the case of most of our older corporations, like the Hudson's Bay Company, some universities and their colleges, as well as of some more recent ones; or directly by means of an incorporating Act of parliament, as in the case of certain public utilities; or indirectly through an Act of Parliament like the Companies Act 1948 (which has been amended by several later Acts of the same name, and consolidated by the Companies Act 1985), which offers corporate character to any number of persons (usually not less than seven) associated for a lawful object, who are willing to comply with the statutory requirements as to registration and otherwise.
As a being capable of having legal rights and liabilities, a corporation is a person in the eye of the law.
So far as English lawyers have theorized about the nature of corporate personality at all, they at one time for the most part accepted the doctrine of the Canon Law, that such personality is a mere fiction of the law with no basis in fact.
But this doctrine has been largely supplanted by a later doctrine that such personality is real, and is analogous to the personality of individuals.
It is impossible here to enter into the details of this controversy, but it may be noticed that
the ‘fiction theory’ must remain unsatisfactory unless it can explain what are the real facts in terms of individual rights and duties which underlie the fiction, and this it seems unable to do.
It does not seem possible to explain away the legal rights and duties of a body as being merely the rights and duties of the individuals composing it; and
the notion of a corporate personality is not confined to law.
We habitually think of the actions of nations and of societies as distinct from the actions of the individuals composing them, and we attribute moral qualities to such actions, and moral rights and duties to nations and societies.
In fact it is impossible to deny the reality of the life and personality of many various groups and societies.
It is because the State has recognized this fact that the law has insisted that, for a legal life and personality, these groups and societies must get the authority of the State, and submit to its conditions.
The reason for this insistence is obvious.
As Burke said, ‘Liberty when men act in bodies is power’.
The State can never be indifferent to the creation of a power or powers which may rival its own.
The legal capacity of corporations differs in some respects from that of individuals, partly from the nature of the case, partly as a consequence of the fact that their personality is an artificial one.
It is obvious, for instance, that they cannot enter into family relations.
Their amenability to the criminal law can never be the same as that of natural persons, though this has been increased by the powers conferred on judges and magistrates, by the Criminal Justice Act 1948, to impose a fine instead of imprisonment.
On the other hand, a corporation can own property; it can acquire rights and make itself liable under a contract; it can be a trustee; it can incur civil liability for wrongful acts, and even for those which involve a definite state of mind like fraud or malice.
For the making of contracts by a corporation the Common Law required a document under the corporation's common seal, except in matters of trifling importance or daily necessary occurrence.
Even apart from such exceptions, however, a contract not made in the required form, but completely performed on one side, might be enforced.
The Common Law rule was partly destroyed by the Companies Acts, and, under the Corporate Bodies’ Contracts Act 1960, contracts can now be made on behalf of all corporations in the same way as between private persons.
Under the doctrine of ultra vires , there is a limit in point of substance on the transactions into which a corporation may enter.
A Common Law corporation (i.e. one created by Charter from the Crown) is, it is true, presumed to have the contractual capacity of an individual.
Prima facie such a corporation has the power to do with its property all such acts as an ordinary person can do, and to bind itself to such contracts as an ordinary person can bind himself to.
Even if the Charter should contain restrictions on its freedom of action, acts transgressing such restrictions are probably not void, though they may be a ground for revoking the Charter.
But a corporation created by or in pursuance of an Act of Parliament is subject to the rule that it has only such powers as are expressly conferred, or are necessarily or reasonably incident to the fulfilment of the purposes for which it is established.
Acts done in excess of such powers are legally void, and will if necessary be restrained by the courts.
Thus a company directly created by special Act of Parliament will be restricted to acts necessary or reasonably incident to the objects specified in the Act.
Yet one of the alterations effected in English law by the European Communities Act 1972 is that a person in good faith will not be prejudiced by any ultra vires transactions of a company, provided that the transaction was authorized by the company's directors.
It is therefore not unlikely that before long Parliament may abolish the ultra vires rule in company law altogether.
In any case a company formed under the Companies Act has a considerable power of altering the objects stated in the Memorandum of Association which is signed by its first members at the formation of the company, subject to the power of the holders of fifteen per cent of its shares or debentures to apply to the court to cancel an alteration.
This power may serve a number of purposes.
It may prevent extraordinary powers, like that of compulsorily acquiring land, from being abused for unauthorized purposes; it may prevent a corporation, constituted for purposes of public utility, from endangering those purposes by engaging in other activities; it may protect the creditors of a company from the dissipation of the company's capital, to which alone, in the case of a limited company, they can look for payment, and the members from seeing their contributions applied to purposes for which they did not bargain.
The Companies Act 1967, now consolidated in the Act of 1985, considerably strengthens the controls over the auditing of company accounts and the form of directors’ reports.
Among the matters which now have to be disclosed are directors’ share dealings in their companies, and the amount of any contributions to political causes.
In addition to corporations aggregate, English law attributes a continuous legal personality under the name of ‘corporations sole’ to the Queen, and to the successive holders of certain offices, especially the holders of ecclesiastical offices, such as bishops, and rectors and vicars of parishes.
The conception, however, as applied to the Queen, and to these ecclesiastical persons, has not, for historical reasons, produced satisfactory results.
But it is a useful conception; and it has been applied by Statute to some public officers, such as certain Ministers and the Official Solicitor.
Societies and institutions
There are no prohibitions against the formation of associations or societies for any lawful object — religious, social, political, philanthropic, or the like.
The law does not, however, regard such societies (unless formally incorporated) as having any corporate personality; it sees only individuals, owning property, it may be, in common, with rights and duties towards each other flowing from the contract, or rather series of contracts, to be found in the society's rules; for on every change in the membership a new contract must be implied.
Such contract or contracts may be varied if, and only if, the rules so provide, by a majority of the members or by a specified majority.
The common property, if it is more than mere cash in hand or at the bank, will be vested in trustees who must deal with it in accordance with the rules or with any trust expressly declared, and it can be made liable for obligations incurred by, or on behalf of, the society.
But no liability for tort can be enforced against a Trade Union for acts done in contemplation or furtherance of a specific trade dispute (within strict limits), and possibly not against other unincorporated societies.
Where the objects of the society are charitable in the legal sense, which includes the relief of poverty, the advancement of education or religion, and other purposes beneficial to the community, formalities prescribed by older statutes have been abolished by the Charities Act 1960, which, however, provides for compulsory registration of all charities not especially exempted.
If the objects of the society are not charitable, the rule against perpetuities (see p. 42), from which charities, provided that they are to begin within the perpetuity period, are exempt, will make void any gift of property by way of permanent endowment, whether made by will or otherwise; but there is nothing to prevent gifts or bequests from being made to a non-charitable society in such terms that it can, at any time, dispose of the capital at its pleasure.
The rules of a society and the trusts which bind its property will, in many cases, fetter its freedom of action and the application of its property, in a way very similar to the restrictions which the doctrine of ultra vires imposes on a corporation; and in the case of some unincorporated societies, such as registered Trade Unions and Friendly Societies, which have received a peculiar status by Statute, the rule of ultra vires has been held directly applicable.
But, subject to considerable restrictions on the furtherance of political objects, a Trade Union is empowered by Statute since 1913 to devote its funds to any lawful objects authorized by its rules for the time being.
Some systems of law recognize as legal persons, not only corporations, but institutions, such as hospitals or places of education; but this conception is unknown to our law.
We either treat as a corporation a group of persons — usually the governing body of the institution, though it may include individuals who are beneficiaries and have no share in the government (for instance, the scholars of a college)— or else the property of the institution must be vested in a number of individual trustees, who are bound to apply and deal with it for the purposes of the institution.
Agency and partnership
Agency may be regarded as an extension of legal personality.
Not only in law, but in ordinary life, we look upon an act done by one man in pursuance of another's orders as done by the person who gives the order.
Moreover, there seems to be nothing artificial in principle in holding the acts of an employee done in the course of his employment as equivalent to the acts of the employer.
These principles, are, however, applied in different degrees in the respective spheres of Criminal and Civil Law.
A man is not punishable for a serious crime committed by another unless he has actually instigated the commission of a crime, and then he will be punishable though the crime committed may differ in some degree from that which he instigated.
It may be noted that in Criminal Law anyone who aids, counsels, or procures the commission of an offence is liable to be tried and punished in the same way as if he were a principal offender.
But in the case of minor offences, and especially statutory offences, which are anti-social rather than immoral, a man may be punished even for the unauthorized act or default of one in his employment.
In the case of wrongful acts, which involve civil liability apart from breach of contract or trust, a distinction is drawn between a servant and an independent contractor.
A servant is one over whom the employer reserves the control and direction of the mode in which the work is to be done.
The master is liable for wrongful acts and defaults of his servant — though they may be unauthorized or even forbidden by him — so long as they are done within the scope of the employment.
An omnibus company was held liable for the act of one of its drivers, who overturned a rival omnibus while racing with it and obstructing it, although directions had been issued to the driver forbidding such conduct.
The independent contractor is one who has agreed to do a piece of work, but is to be left free to choose his own method of doing it.
In such cases the employer is not liable in general for any wrong which consists in the improper carrying out of such work, though he will, of course, be liable if unlawful acts are done which he has actually authorized.
Contracts made by any agent in pursuance of the principal's instructions are binding on, and operate for the benefit of, the latter.
Further, the employment of an agent may be such as to give him an authority to contract on behalf of his principal generally with regard to a wider or narrower class of affairs; and as between the principal and third parties such authority cannot be limited by restrictions imposed by the principal, but not known to third parties.
The fact that a person is acting under the instructions or on behalf of another is no defence to civil or criminal proceedings brought against the agent for tort or crime.
On the other hand, an agent acquires no rights under contracts made by him on behalf of his principal; and where the existence of the principal is known to those contracting with the agent, the latter, as a rule, incurs no liability for such contracts.
Where the principal's existence is undisclosed, the other contracting party, on discovering it, has an option whether he will hold agent or principal liable.
When a person purports to act on behalf of another, but without his authority, the latter may subsequently ratify the act of the former, and thereby draw to himself both the benefit of, and the liability for, the act.
But if there is no such ratification, the agent will be liable to those who contract on the faith of the authority which he professes to have.
No special form is necessary for the appointment of an agent, except that an agent who is to execute documents under seal in the name of his principal must be appointed by a ‘power of attorney’, which is itself a document under seal.
Revocation by the principal, his death, and in some cases his insanity, put an end to the agent's authority, though in general a revocation will be inoperative as against those to whom the principal has held out the agent as having authority, and who have no notice of the revocation.
Moreover, modern legislation has made possible (within limits) the creation of an irrevocable power of attorney, so that even knowledge of the principal's death or insanity will not affect the validity of acts done under it.
An agent must not, without his principal's knowledge and consent, receive any reward or commission from those with whom he deals on his principal's behalf, or derive any profit from transactions entered into on the principal's behalf beyond the remuneration agreed upon.
Both civil and criminal liability are incurred by the corrupt giving or receiving of such commission.
In partnership, which is ‘the relation which subsists between persons carrying on a business in common with a view of profit’, every partner is an agent of the firm and of the other partners for the purpose of the business of the partnership.
A firm is not in England a legal personality distinct from its members, though in Scotland a firm is a legal person distinct from the partners of whom it is composed (partnership Act 1890, s. 4 ).
In an ordinary partnership each of the partners is liable without limit for all the debts and obligations of the firm.
The severity of this rule has been the more acutely felt because the existence of a partnership, which needs no special form for its creation, has often been inferred — less often, it is true, in recent years than formerly — from the fact of the receipt by a person of a share of the profits of a business.
Since 1907 the law has permitted the formation of ‘limited partnerships’, which must be registered and must consist of at least one general partner, who is liable without limit, and of one or more limited partners, each of whom is not liable beyond the amount contributed by him on entering into the partnership.
A limited partner is forbidden, on pain of rendering his liability unlimited, to take any part in the management of the business, and has no power to bind the firm.
But limited partnerships are rare, private companies, which were sanctioned the next year by the Companies Act 198, having proved more popular.
No partnership, whether limited or unlimited, may consist of more than twenty persons.
Enemy status
In time of war, persons for the time being residing or doing business in an enemy country, whatever their nationality or domicile, are disabled from suing in the English Courts; but, if sued here, they will so far as possible be given an opportunity of defending themselves.
Every communication for commercial or other purposes, by those in this country, with such persons or bodies is a criminal offence (‘trading with the enemy'), unless licensed by the Crown.
Any contract or transaction, the formation or execution of which involves such communication, is (or, if made before the war, becomes) void.
PROPERTY
The conception of property
There is, perhaps, nothing more difficult than to give a precise and consistent meaning to the word ‘property’.
The word ‘estate’ is often used to denote the whole of a man's proprietary rights, more especially after his death.
This sense of the word ‘estate’ must not be confused with the special meaning which it has in regard to interests in land (see p. 78).
When we speak of a man of property, we may think, perhaps, in one of two ways.
First, we may think of the traditional or even oldfashioned type of man with tangible material things which belong to him — land and houses, horses and cattle, furniture and jewellery and pictures — things which he may use or destroy (so far as that is physically possible); from which he may exclude others; which he may sell or give away or bequeath; which, if he has made no disposition of them, will pass on his death to persons related to him.
Alternatively we may think of the more modern figure of a man whose wealth lies in his investments in stocks and shares.
Whichever type of man we think of, we may find it difficult to say whether by ‘property’ we mean the things themselves or the aggregate of rights which are exercised over them.
To confine the word to either sense would hardly be possible without pedantry; though, on the one hand, we may agree that a thing which has no owner — a rare event in a civilized country, except in the case of a few things, like wild animals at large— is not property, and, on the other, we may often avoid confusion by using the word ‘ownership’ for the most extensive right which a man can have over material things.
But, further, we shall find that our conception of property relates to many things which are not tangible or material.
Our man of property may be an author or a patentee, and we shall hardly be able to say that his copyright or patentright is not part of his property, or even to avoid speaking of his ownership of the copyright or patent.
He will have debtors: his bank is a debtor to him for the amount standing to his credit; his investments of money are claims to receive payment from the State or from corporations or individuals.
Such debts and claims are not rights over any specific tangible objects; they are mere rights against the State or the corporation or the person liable to pay.
Yet these rights are transferable, and will pass on his death to his representatives.
We cannot exclude them from our notion of property or deny that in a sense, at any rate, he is the owner of them.
On the other hand, his ‘property’ clearly does not include all his rights.
To say nothing of his general right of liberty or reputation, his rights as a husband or a parent are not proprietary rights, nor is his right to recover damages for personal injury or defamation; but we may include among proprietary rights the right to recover damages though unliquidated (i.e. of uncertain amount until settled by a judge or jury) for breach of contract, or, probably, even for injury to his property.
Generally speaking, we shall include under the notion of a man's property in its widest sense all rights which are capable of being transferred to others, of being made available for payment of his debts, or of passing to his representatives on his death.
Ownership and possession
Turning to rights over tangible things, we must notice the distinction between ownership and possession.
The owner of a thing is the person who has, in the fullest degree, those rights of use and enjoyment, of destruction, and of disposition, which have been mentioned above — subject, of course, to the general rules of law which protect the rights of others, to certain limited rights which he or his predecessors may have created in favour of others, and, in the case of land, to rules imposed by statute under which local and other authorities may purchase property compulsorily.
The owner of a firearm is none the less owner because the law prohibits him from discharging it in a public highway; the owner of a field does not cease to be owner because the public or a neighbour has the right to use a footpath across it.
The essence of ownership, then, is that it is a right or an aggregate of rights.
Possession, on the other hand, is primarily a matter of fact.
If the owner of a watch is robbed of it by a thief, the owner's rights as rights remain intact; the thief acquires no right to the watch as against the owner.
But the owner's possession, and with it his actual power to exercise his rights, is for the time being gone; he must recover the watch — as he may even lawfully do by his own act — before he can be said to be again in possession of it.
So, too, the owner of land may be out of possession, and another without right may be in possession.
In this case the forcible retaking of possession is prohibited under penalties by statute; but the retaking, though punishable, is none the less effective to restore the possession.
The cases of the thief and the squatter have been taken as the clearest instances of possession acquired without any right whatever.
But possession may be lawfully acquired, and yet be unaccompanied by ownership.
An owner who delivers a car or a bicycle by way of loan or hire to another parts with the possession to him, but does not cease to be owner.
The same is true of one who delivers articles to another in order that the latter may bestow his labour upon them.
Such voluntary transfers of possession are called bailment, and the person who so acquires possession is a bailee of the goods.
In none of these cases do we think of the owner as having parted with the right of ownership, though it may be that the contract between the parties creates rights in favour of the bailee which the owner cannot use his right of ownership to override.
If we try to analyse the conception of possession, we find two elements.
In the first place, it involves some actual power of control over the thing possessed.
In the second place, it involves some intention to maintain that control on the part of the possessor.
The nature and extent of the control and intention necessary to constitute possession will vary with the circumstances, and particularly with the character of the thing of which the possession is in question.
possession of a house, for instance, will be evidenced by acts different from those which would suffice for possession of a strip of waste land.
The occupier of a private house (but not the owner of a house who had never entered into possession of it) would probably be considered to be in possession of anything placed or left in it — at any rate unless it was concealed — while the occupier of a shop has been held not to be in possession of a thing dropped in a part of the shop to which the public had access.
By a somewhat artificial rule, a servant who receives a thing from his master for the master's use is deemed not to be in possession of it, though the contrary is true where he receives it from a stranger for the master's use.
So far we have thought of ownership and possession as sharply distinguished — the one a matter of right, the other of fact.
Nevertheless, possession is a fact which has an enormous legal significance, a fact to which legal rights are attached.
In the first place, actual possession is evidence of ownership, and, except in cases where ownership is based on a system of public registration, it is hard to see how any ownership can be proved, otherwise than by going back to some prior possession.
If A claims the ownership of land by reason of B's bequest or sale to him, this only raises the question, On what is B's ownership based? and ultimately we shall have to rest content with saying that the root of A's title is the possession of some predecessor, X. Such evidence, however, is not conclusive.
The presumption of ownership which follows from A's or X's possession may, for instance, be rebutted by a rival claimant, Y, who can show that he or his predecessor was in possession, and that A or X wrongfully dispossessed him.
In the second place, possession is not merely evidence of ownership, but (subject to the rights of the owner) is itself and for its own sake entitled to legal protection.
If A has been disturbed in his possession by a trespass committed by B, or even if B has deprived A of possession, A's claim to legal protection or redress against B cannot be met by B's plea that C and not A is the true owner.
The finder of goods is entitled — except only against one who can show himself to be the owner — to legal protection against all the world.
Nor is this right of the possessor based on any responsibility on his part to the owner.
The Postmaster-General (later the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications) was held entitled to recover damages for the loss of the mails destroyed by the fault of a colliding ship, though he was not the owner and disclaimed all responsibility to the owners for the loss.
This right to redress which the law confers on the possessor is independent of, and at least as old as, if not older than, the legal protection given to the owner.
The possessor's right is even spoken of as a ‘special property’, in contradistinction to the ‘general property’ of the owner.
It is a right which he may transfer, and which on his death will pass under his will or according to the rules of intestacy.
Lastly, we may notice that even a wrongful possession, if continued for a certain length of time, matures into what may be, for practical purposes, indistinguishable from ownership.
A wrongful possession of land for twelve years, or of goods for six years, destroys not only the former owner's right to recover the land or goods by action, but also his title; and so the possessor has the best of titles known to the law — a possession which no one can dispute.
Real property and personal property
Between the ownership of land and of goods every system of law must needs draw distinctions, which are founded on the nature of the subject matter.
But the distinctions drawn by English law were, till the passing of the Property Acts, which came into force on 1 January 1926, founded, not so much on the nature of the subject matter, as upon the historical accidents in the development of the English law of property.
Property was divided into the two categories of real property and personal property; and personal property was divided into two categories of chattels real and chattels personal.
Real property included most of the interests in land recognized by the law, and other rights, such as easements and profits (see p. 82), annexed to the land.
This property was called ‘real’ because, from the first, it was recoverable specifically by a real action.
In fact anything thus recoverable was real property.
property thus recoverable developed a set of legal characteristics which caused it to differ considerably from property which was recoverable only by a personal action; and so, though the real actions have long been abolished, and for a still longer time disused, the differences between real and personal property survived.
Not all the interests in land known to the law were included in the category of real property.
Interests in land for a term of years (leaseholds) were originally regarded, not as interests in the land, but as contractual rights.
The lessee was protected, not by a real action, but by a personal action against his lessor, in which he could recover, not the land itself, but only damages to the breach of his landlord's contract to allow him the use of the land.
Hence his interest is personal property, and is classed as a chattel, though, by reason of its close relation to real property, it is distinguished as a chattel real.
Leaseholders long since obtained remedies for the specific recovery of their land: and those remedies were in fact far superior to the old real actions.
But because these interests in land were protected by personal and not by the real actions, they developed a set of legal characteristics which caused them to differ from the interests classed as real property.
Notable differences were to be found in the rules as to succession on intestacy and in the variety of estates and interests which could be created in these two kinds of property.
All property other than real property and chattels real is classed as chattels personal.
Chattels personal consist either of tangible goods, or of intangible rights such as patents, or stocks and shares.
They differ from real property in two main respects.
First, chattels personal can be owned, while real property is held mediately or immediately of the Queen.
Secondly, until 1926, at law (as opposed to equity) no limited interests in chattels personal could be created — the notion of estates had no application to chattels personal till the Law of Property Act 1925 made it possible to create an entailed interest in them.
In this respect equity differed from the common law.
We shall see that it was always possible to settle chattels personal upon trusts for various persons with limited interests (see pp. 86–7, 101–5).
Tenure
In the medieval period, it was a very significant legal commonplace that full ownership of land was possible for no person save the King.
Those commonly called landowners were regarded as ‘holding’ their land, by various forms of ‘tenure’, of the King.
Of these the most honourable, but at the same time the most burdensome, was tenure by knight service, which involved many irksome ‘incidents’(see Chapter 2, note 2).
The incidents of  socage tenure consisted of fixed, and nominal, agricultural services.
By the Statute of Tenures 1660, all free tenures (with insignificant exceptions) were converted into  socage .
Though 1660 marked the end of feudalism in its political aspect, in the sphere of private law it continued to cause many difficulties, which were not removed until 1925.
One practical Mark of its survival was the doctrine of escheat.
If a socage tenant died without heirs and intestate, his land escheated, i.e. went back to the lord of whom it was held, who in practically all cases had come to be the King.
A statute called Quia Emptores (1290) had enacted that whenever a tenant alienated his land for an estate in fee simple, the alienee should hold, not of the alienor, but of the alienor's lord.
The long-term result of this statute was that practically all land held by free tenure had come to be held of the King.
Escheat was swept away, together with the old law of intestate succession, by the new scheme introduced by the Administration of Estates Act 1925.
Estates in possession
The different types of tenure marked out the leading characteristics of the different forms of land holding known to the law; but they told us nothing of the nature and incidents of the various interests which those who held by these tenures might have in the land.
It is this question of the nature and incidents of these interests which we must now consider.
The word used by English law to denote the tenant's interest in the land is the word ‘estate’.
An estate is a portion of the ownership of the land, more or less limited in time.
This limitation in time is most clearly seen in the case of a life estate, whether it be an estate held for the life of the tenant, or what is called an estate pur autre vie , one held for the life or lives of some other person or persons.
The holder of such an estate in land is, like an owner, entitled to the possession, use, and enjoyment of the land, and he can dispose of his interest; but at the death of the person by whose life the extent of his estate is measured, the estate comes to an end, and nothing passes from the holder.
Even the holder's enjoyment is restricted (unless he be declared ‘unimpeachable for waste') by consideration for the rights of those who have subsequent estates in the land.
He must not diminish the capital value of the land by the commission of acts called ‘waste’, such as cutting timber or opening mines.
At the other end of the scale we have the estate in fee simple.
Such an estate is practically equivalent to ownership.
It confers full rights of possession and enjoyment (unrestricted by any rules as to waste) and full rights of disposition whether during the tenant's lifetime or by his wife.
If he dies intestate, the land will pass to his relations entitled in that event (see pp. 112–13 for the modern law on this subject).
Only in the event of his death intestate and without relations so entitled, will the estate come to an end, and the land pass to the Crown.
The limit in time is here practically non-existent.
Intermediate between the life estate and the estate in fee simple is the estate tail.
The tenant in tail has full rights of possession and enjoyment without regard to waste.
Nor does the estate come to an end with the tenant's death: it passes to his heirs, but only to a limited class of heirs, ‘the heirs of his body’, that is, his descendants.
(For the rules of inheritance for ascertaining the heir, see pp. 111–13.)
The line of descent may be further restricted by making the estate an estate in tail-male, i.e. one descendible only to males and only in the male line, or conceivably (though in practice this appears never to be done) in tall-female descendible only to and through females.
There is even an estate known as an estate in ‘special tail’, inheritable only by the issue of the tenant by a certain wife or husband.
In the latter case, if the wife or husband dies without issue the tenant is said to be tenant in tail, ‘after possibility of issue extinct’, and his rights are substantially no greater than those of a tenant for life.
Before 1926 a tenant in tail had no power to dispose of his estate by will; but a tenant in tail in possession could in his lifetime, and still can, bar the entail by a deed, i.e. he can turn it into a fee simple estate.
If his estate is not in possession, e.g. if it is limited to A for life and then to B in tail, A is the ‘Protector of the settlement’, and B cannot bar the entail without A's consent.
We shall see that, since 1 January 1926, the only one of these estates which survives as a legal estate is the estate in fee simple.
The others exist only as equitable interests.
Their incidents are similar to the incidents of the old legal estates, though certain important changes have been introduced (see p. 86–7).
Estates in futuro 
Before 1 January 1926 there were three main varieties of legal estates in futuro .
Reversions and remainders .
An estate for life was less than an estate tail, and both were smaller than a fee simple.
Suppose now that a tenant in fee simple granted the land to another to hold for life or in tall.
If he did nothing more he would still retain his fee simple, but he would have deprived himself of the right to present possession and enjoyment of the land; his estate would become a future estate, which would again become a present estate, an ‘estate in possession’, only when the smaller estate, the ‘particular estate’ which had been carved out of it, came to an end.
For the time being, what was left to him was called a reversion.
Further, he might by the same instrument grant a present estate, say for life, to A, followed by an estate for life or in tail to B, and, if he wished, as many further particular estates (for life or in tail) to other persons successively as he pleased, ending up, if he thought fit, with an estate in fee simple to some person named.
Each of these future estates was called a remainder.
No reversion or remainder, however, could be placed after a fee simple.
Each of these future estates, though it gave no present right to possession or enjoyment, was treated as something already in existence, which could be disposed of and would descend (so far as it is inheritable) just like a present estate.
If, for instance, A was tenant for life and B tenant in fee simple in reversion or remainder, B's death before A's would not destroy the estate in fee simple, but B's heir, or the person to whom B had conveyed it by deed, or left it by will, was entitled to come in on A's death.
So again, if A was tenant in tail, and B tenant in fee simple in reversion, the failure of A's issue at his death, or at any later time, would vest the fee simple in possession in whatever person then represented B. In such cases ownership, we may say, was cut up into lengths called estates.
None of the holders of an estate, except the tenant in fee simple when in possession, was fully owner, but each as he came into possession was a ‘limited’ owner.
Shifting and springing uses .
We have seen that, if A held land to the use of B, the Statute of Uses turned B's equitable estate into a legal estate (see p. 23).
Now it was possible for a settlor who conveyed land to A to direct him to hold to the use of B; and then to direct that, on the happening of an event, e.g. B's marriage, B's use should shift to C. This use in favour of C was a shifting use.
Or the settlor could direct that in a certain event a new use should spring up in D's favour.
This use in favour of D was a springing use.
When the use in favour of C or D arose, C or D's uses were turned into legal estates by the Statute of Uses.
Executory devises .
The Statute of Wills 1540 gave testators power to create future legal estates by their wills.
These estates were known as executory devises.
We shall see that since 1 January 1926 none of these future legal estates can be created, but that similar results can be effected by the creation of future equitable interests through the medium of a trust.
Co-ownership
Co-ownership entitles two or more persons concurrently to the possession and enjoyment of the same land.
Before 1 January 1926 it could take three forms: coparcenary, or tenancy in common, or joint tenancy.
Coparcenary existed if a person died intestate leaving two or more females as his heirs.
They took the land as coparceners.
When two or more persons took as tenants in common, the share of each was treated as a separate item of property which could not only be transferred by him in his lifetime, but which would pass on his death to his representatives.
In the case of joint tenancy, on the other hand, the rights of each (except the last survivor) are extinguished by his death so as to increase the interest of the survivor or survivors.
A joint tenant might, however, transfer his interest in his lifetime (though not by will); and such a transfer would, before 1 January 1926, have had the effect of making the transferee a tenant in common with the other or others, though the others continued as between themselves to be joint tenants.
Any one of a number of co-owners was entitled to have the property ‘partitioned’, i.e. divided, or at any rate to have the property sold and his share paid out to him.
Where a number of trustees are appointed they are always made joint tenants, in order that, on the death of one, the whole property may be vested in the survivors; but in other cases joint tenancy is inconvenient and rarely occurs.
We shall see that since 1 January 1926 the only one of these three forms of co-ownership which exists as a legal estate is joint tenancy (see p. 87); but that both coparcenary and tenancy in common exist as equitable estates.
Both ownership in common and joint ownership may exist in the case of chattels personal as well as in the case of land.
Other interests in land
Besides the interests in land which are known as estates, and which, when they are present estates, give a right to possession of the land, English law, like other systems, recognizes rights of a more restricted kind.
Among these we may notice easements , such as rights of way, rights of light, rights to take water or to discharge water over the land of another.
A true easement must always be ‘appurtenant’ to a piece of land.
An individual cannot, for instance, as such have a right of way over my land, but only as owner of some adjacent piece of land.
Rights similar to easements may, however, exist in favour of the public, e.g. a public high-way; or in favour of a limited class — e.g. the fishermen of a village may by custom have the right to dry their nets on a piece of land, the inhabitants of a village may have a right to use the village green for purposes of recreation.
Profits à prendre are rights to take things of value (other than water) from land, such as the right of common pasture, or rights of fishery (commoners, it should be noticed, are not owners of the common).
Such rights, though commonly appendant or appurtenant to land — there is little practical difference between the two phrases — are not necessarily so.
They may exist in favour of individuals, and in some cases in favour of a limited class, but, with the exception of the public right of fishing in tidal water, they cannot exist in favour of the public at large.
The effect of long-continued possession of land in extinguishing adverse rights, and so converting the possession into what is indistinguishable from ownership, has already been referred to (see p. 76).
Different in theory, but similar in effect, are the provisions of the Prescription Act 1832, under which rights to easements and profits à prendre may be established by reason of enjoyment for a period of not less than twenty years in the one case, and not less than thirty in the other.
Special rules as to the acquisition of public rights of way by lapse of time have been made by the Rights of Way Act 1932.
A rentcharge is the right to receive an annual sum out of the income of land, usually in perpetuity, and to distrain if the payments are in arrear; the owner of the land is also personally liable to pay, and further remedies against the land have been given by statute.
In some parts of the country it has been the practice to sell freehold land for building, and to take the price in the form of a perpetual rentcharge created by the purchaser; this practice took the place of the more common building lease.
The Rentcharges Act 1977 prohibited the creation of further rent-charges, and provided also for the extinguishment of all existing rentcharges at the end of sixty years starting on 22 July 1977, or on the date the rentcharge first became payable, whichever is later.
Alternatively a rentcharge may, under the 1977 Act, be bought out by a lump sum payment.
The right to take tithes, i.e. a share of the produce of the land in kind, originally vested only in ecclesiastical persons and bodies, was at the Reformation transferred in many cases to laymen, though tithes continued to form the most important kind of ecclesiastical endowment.
Under the legislation of the nineteenth century tithes were commuted into tithe rentcharge, an annual sum varying with the price of corn.
In 1936 tithe rentcharge was abolished.
Tithe owners were compensated by the issue to them of redemption stock charged on the Consolidated Fund, and land charged with tithe was charged instead with redemption annuities payable to the Crown.
Such redemption annuities were originally intended to be payable till 1996, but they were ended by the Finance Act 1977, and the final payments (of double the normal sum) were made on 1 October 1977.
The rights of presentation to livings in the Church of England, known as advowsons, which are often in the hands of laymen, are also regarded as interests in land.
But the effect of a Measure of the Church Assembly of 1923 has been to render advowsons virtually inalienable, except in the case of a sale of land to which an advowson is appendant.
Chattels real
The most important class of chattels real are leasehold estates.
A leasehold estate is measured by a fixed period of time; it is often called a term of years, though a tenancy for weeks or months is equally a leasehold.
There is no superior limit; a term of 1,000 or 10,000 years (such terms actually occur) is still a leasehold.
Nor does a term cease to be a leasehold because it is determinable by an event which may happen, or which is certain to happen, within the term — e.g. if A holds land for 99 years or for 999 years, ‘if he shall so long live’, he is still a leaseholder, though it is nearly or quite certain that he will not outlive the term.
A freeholder may grant a lease of any duration, though unless he is a tenant in fee simple, or the lease is made under the powers given by the Settled Land Acts, the lease will fail when the lessor dies.
A leaseholder (unless prohibited by his own lease) can himself grant a lease for any term less than that which he holds; a grant for an equal or greater term would be merely a transfer of his own interest.
Between the grantor of a leasehold and the tenant (lessor and lessee) there is a relation of tenure, and while the lease subsists the lessor has a reversion.
The most important incident of the reversion is the lessor's right to the rent reserved by the lease, generally substantial and often equal to the full annual value of the property.
This right he can enforce not only by action, but also by a form of self-help known as distress, the seizure of any goods, whether belonging to the tenant or a stranger, which may be found on the premises.
Originally this was merely a method of putting pressure upon the tenant, but the distrainer has had, since the end of the seventeenth century, a power to sell the goods and so pay himself, the surplus (if any) going to the owner.
Legislation has largely restricted the right to distrain goods found upon the premises but not belonging to the tenant.
The rights and duties of the leasehold tenant are, as a rule, explicitly provided for by the terms of the lease, which will contain covenants such as those relating to payment of rent, repair, cultivation, and building, or forbidding the carrying on of certain trades.
Such covenants, so far as they relate to the premises leased, are binding on and enforceable by assignees both of lessor and lessee.
The lessor is usually further protected by a proviso allowing him to re-enter and put an end to the lease in the event of the tenant's failure to pay rent or observe the other covenants.
A proviso for re-entry in the event of the tenant's assigning or underletting the premises without the lessor's consent was sometimes enforced in the most oppressive way; but, under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1927, a proviso that the consent is not to be unreasonably withheld is implied; and in this case, and in other cases, with one or two exceptions, the courts have power to give relief to the tenant.
Moreover, in most cases, the right to re-enter cannot be exercised until the tenant has been given an opportunity of making good the breach of covenant.
At the end of the lease the tenant must yield up the premises, together with all buildings, fixtures, trees, and plants thereon, including even what he has himself added; but to some extent this rule is relaxed in favour of trade and agricultural fixtures; and a right to remove tenants’ fixtures may be given by the terms of the lease.
Under the Agricultural Holdings Act 1948, tenants of agricultural land, and under the Landlord and Tenant Acts 1927 and 1954, other lessees, are entitled to claim compensation from their landlords for many improvements made by them, and also, in some cases, compensation for the disturbance by reason of notices to quit.
Recent legislation has had some effect in keeping rents within reasonable bounds, and in providing security of tenure for tenants against landlords; and under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1987 many residential tenants now have a right of first refusal where the landlord proposes to dispose of his interest in the property.
A special form of leasehold is the tenancy from year to year, which continues until notice to put an end to it is given by either party.
In ordinary cases the notice must be a six months’ notice, ending with a completed year, but in the case of agricultural tenancies the Agricultural Holdings Act 1923 requires a full year's notice.
Another variant is the shorthold tenancy, created by the Housing Act 1980, whereby the lessor and lessee agree to a fixed-term letting of a period not less than one and not more than five years certain, carrying with it automatic security of tenure for the period agreed.
Closely akin to leaseholds, and like them classed as personal interests in land, are tenancies at will and at sufferance.
The former is a tenancy made by the agreement of the parties on the terms that either may put an end to it at any moment at the shortest notice; the latter arises where a tenant whose interest has expired continues in possession without the landlord either assenting or dissenting.
The Leasehold Reform Act 1967 for the first time introduces leasehold enfranchisement, whereby a lessee is entitled to compel his lessor to sell him the freehold upon payment of compensation on a scale fixed by the Act.
by no means all leases come under these provisions.
For a tenant to claim the benefits of the Act he must show that his tenancy is of a house, that it was originally granted for more than twenty-one years, that the rent payable is less than two-thirds of its rateable value, and that the rateable value is itself not in excess of certain modest limits.
A side effect of the Act, however, has been that many owners of leasehold property no longer regard such investments as sound and they have voluntarily negotiated the sale of freeholds even where the property concerned did not fall within the provisions of the 1967 Act.
The Property Acts
The three main objects of these Acts are,
to get rid of the artificial distinctions which the historical development of the law had drawn between land and movable property — leaving only those distinctions which are due to the natural qualities of these two forms of property;
to assimilate the law relating to chattels real and real property, and, so far as this is possible, the law relating to land and movable property; and
to simplify and cheapen dealings in land.
The principal changes in the law by which the framers of these Acts have sought to effect these objects can be summarized as follows:
One of the leading differences between real and personal property was their devolution on intestacy.
The Administration of Estates Act 1925 has, as we shall see, provided a uniform scheme of intestate succession for all kinds of property.
Similarly, if a man died without heirs and intestate, the process by which the land devolved to the Crown was different.
Real property escheated to the Crown: personal property devolved on the Crown as bona vacantia .
Escheat has been abolished, and all property in such a case devolves on the Crown as bona vacantia .
The abolition of escheat has meant the abolition of the last of the practical consequences of free tenure.
Tenure is now only important as between a lessor for a term of years and his lessee.
Great simplifications have been made in the law as to estates and interests in land, with the result that the law of property has been made very much more uniform.
The Law of Property Act 1925 reduces the number of legal estates in the land to two — a fee simple absolute in possession, and a term of years absolute.
The estate of the tenant from year to year is included in the term of years absolute; and the interests of a tenant at will and at sufferance are still recognized.
The other estates exist, but as equitable, not as legal, interests.
Estates tail, which formerly could only be created out of freeholds, can now, as equitable interests, be created out of any kind of property; they are known as ‘entailed interests’, and can be barred not only inter vivos by a deed, but also by a will, provided that the tenant in tail's interest is in possession, and provided that he specifically refers in his will to the entailed property or the instrument creating it.
The Statute of Uses has been repealed; and future legal estates in real property cannot now be created.
Such estates can now only be created as equitable interests by means of the machinery of a trust.
This has always been the only way in which future interests in personal property can be created.
The result is that future estates and interests in all kinds of property are now assimilated.
Legal tenancy in common gave rise to great difficulties in the tracing of titles to land, because it was necessary to investigate separately the title of each tenant.
It is therefore abolished as a legal estate.
When formerly two or more persons would have taken as legal tenants in common, they take now as joint tenants on trust for the tenants in common ; and no severance of this legal joint tenancy by alienation or otherwise is allowed.
Owing to the changes made in the law of intestate succession (see pp. 111–13), coparcenary can exist only in the case of an entailed interest.
For a long period real property was only liable to certain of the debts of its deceased owner: chattels real and personal were always liable to all the debts of a deceased person which survived his death.
Even when real property was made liable to all these debts, it was made liable by a different process and in a different order from personal property.
The Administration of Estates Act 1925 has provided a uniform method for the administration of all the property of a deceased person.
Conveyances of land
From a very early period the courts have been opposed to restrictions upon the free alienation of land.
In the thirteenth century they got rid of old restrictions which fettered the freedom of alienation in the interest of lords or heirs.
The Statute of Quia Emptores 1290 gave free power of alienation inter vivos to all tenants in fee simple; and the effect of the Statute of Wills 1540 and the Statute of Tenures 1660 was to give a free power of testamentary disposition.
We have seen that the rule against perpetuities is designed to regulate or to prevent practices which would restrict the free alienation of land.
It follows that the law which regulates the modes in which landowners can exercise this power of alienation — the law of conveyancing — has always been an important part of the land law.
It has had a long and complicated history; but, at the present day, the form required by law for the creation and transfer of estates and interests in land is both uniform and simple.
Generally speaking, one may say that apart from dispositions by will, a deed, i.e. a sealed writing, is necessary, though leases in possession for not more than three years at the best rent obtainable without taking a premium may still be made without a deed or even by word of mouth.
But an agreement evidenced by writing and for value, to confer an interest in land, is specifically enforceable in equity, and an attempted disposition for value by unsealed writing will be treated as equivalent to such an agreement.
Moreover, even at common law a lease which ought to be made by deed but is not will not completely fail of effect, if possession is taken and rent paid under it; the tenant will be treated as tenant from year to year upon the terms of the lease so far as they are applicable to such a tenancy.
The trouble and expense involved in all dealings with land is still very great in the absence of any general provision for preserving any public record of title.
Upon a sale of land the purchaser is normally entitled to have produced to him and to investigate the deeds recording previous transactions in the land going back for fifteen years (Law of Property Act 1969: formerly the period was thirty years); and though this period is sometimes reduced by agreement, the shortening of the period throws a risk on the purchaser, who is not only bound by all legal interests in the land which actually exist whether he discovers them or not, but also by all equitable interests which he would have discovered if he had insisted on an investigation for the longer period.
Obviously no purchaser can, without expert assistance, make the investigation, of which the result will depend on the effect of numerous technical documents, such as settlements and mortgages.
Supposing that the result of the investigation is satisfactory, and the purchase is completed, a subsequent purchaser must again go through the whole process; the results of each investigation are practically thrown away for the future.
To do away with the evils of this system, as well as to guard against dangers of fraud and forgery, a Land Registry was established by the Land Transfer Act 1875, which was amended and extended by the Land Transfer Act 1897, both Acts being repealed and replaced by the Land Registration Acts 1925–1988.
The ideal of land registration is that a government office, after investigating the title, enters the applicant upon the register as owner, and furnishes him with a certificate in accordance with the entry; the entry is conclusive as to his right, and no further investigation of the previous title can subsequently be necessary.
At ever subsequent dealing with the land a new entry must be inserted on the certificate.
One may compare such a public certification of the title with the stamp on a coin, which attests the genuineness of the metal, whereas the system of private investigation of title is as if a man was obliged to employ an expert analyst to test the genuineness of the coins which might be tendered to him.
Such a system of registration has been found to work well in other countries, and there can be no doubt that it can, and will, be made universal with us.
Though we have not yet attained a full system of compulsory registration, we may be said to be moving, surely and at an increasing pace, in that direction.
Registration was made compulsory under the Act of 1897 in the Counties of London and Middlesex — now Greater London, as provided by the London Government Act 1963.
The Land Registration Act 1925 exhibited an intelligible reluctance to hurry extension to other parts of the country until sufficient time had elapsed for testing the general effects of the property legislation of 1925.
This period was fixed at ten years, and so it became possible, after the beginning of 1936, to extend compulsory registration to any county in England and Wales.
Extension is now going forward on a large scale, delays being due partly to the necessity of thorough surveys, partly to the shortage of skilled staff.
The compulsory system now covers virtually all built-up areas, and about 90 percent of the total population of England and Wales.
Since 1988 the register of title has been open to inspection by the general public.
parallel with this registration, under the Commons Registration Act 1965, the registration of common land and rights of common has now been completed.
Settlements
The way in which wealthy Englishmen have dealt with their capital has changed greatly in the last hundred years or so.
At the beginning of the Victorian era, family property usually meant land.
The concern of the wealthy landowner was to continue as long as possible the wealth and social status of the family.
The law relating to family settlements was therefore concerned with the ways in which limited interests could be created in favour of various members of the family, stretching out as far as possible into the future.
What had to be watched therefore was the perpetuity rule.
There was no thought in those days of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue or of inheritance tax.
With the increase of industry and commerce in the nineteenth century, and especially with the development of joint stock companies with limited liability, investment in money rather than in land became the most convenient and popular form.
Essentially such investments were of two types: either in fixed-interest securities, mainly Government stocks, or in stocks and shares of public companies on the Stock Exchange.
Government stocks were safer.
Interest payments were assured.
And, above all to the Victorians, the capital was secure.
The pound sterling maintained a steady value during the Victorian era, and in the then current atmosphere of British security and superiority the possibility of any erosion of the value of the pound was unthinkable.
On the other hand, investment in shares of public companies quoted on the Stock Exchange (‘equities') introduced the risk of dependence upon the fortunes of the company selected.
There were bad times as well as good.
Investment in equities involved risk.
Such investments were not therefore available to trustees, without specific authorization.
But large fortunes were made this way.
The capitalist system needed investment of private capital to make it grow.
It is only since 1945 that the inevitable inflation of the currency has led investors to think that ‘equities’ are safer than gilts; for they maintain a value even if the value of the currency deteriorates.
And it is only in the slump of 1929–33, and more recently in 1973–5, 1987, and 1989, that catastrophic falls in Stock Exchange values have shown the true vulnerability of equities.
At the time of writing the investor may often be uncertain where to turn.
In the last twenty years there have been times when he would have done better to return to investment in land.
The development of the money economy and the decrease in the status attached to ownership of land led to change in the form of family settlements.
No longer is the settlor trying to retain the family mansion and parkland in the family for ever.
He is trying to establish and retain a block of capital available for the members of his family for as long as he can do so.
And now the main enemy is not the perpetuity rule, but fiscal legislation.
It is no good to tie up the property by a series of limited interests for as long as the law will allow, if the bulk of the capital will have disappeared to the Revenue authorities in the meantime.
The main problem of the present-day settlor is so to draft the limitations of the settlement as to attract the least amount of income tax and inheritance tax.
To achieve this end, a wide and detailed knowledge of fiscal legislation and tax-planning technique is required.
Only the most general comments will be made here.
In order to understand the changes which have taken place in the practice relating to family settlements since the Victorian days, a brief description will follow, first of the standard form of eighteenth-century settlement of land, and then an outline of a modern tax-saving settlement.
Settlements of land .
We have seen that landowners have from early times sought methods of retaining their land in the family.
It must be protected against spendthrift or incompetent successors, against creditors and moneylenders, against improvident sales, and, until the Forfeiture Act 1870, against forfeiture for treason.
These objectives could be achieved by ensuring that no member of the family is ever capable of alienating the fee simple.
A series of limited interests makes the alienation of the land very difficult, and, if skilfully done, impossible.
The most sophisticated method of tying up land in strict settlement developed in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Possession of the land was to follow the normal order of succession to land, as would a hereditary title if one existed in the family.
Provision needed to be made for dowager widows, and for younger sons and for daughters, and perhaps for other persons.
All this could be done by giving a life estate to the head of the family; with the remainder to his sons successively in tail-male, with remainder to the daughters in tail, subject to a rentcharge in favour of the life tenant's widow upon his death, and in favour of any other persons desired to be benefited; and with power to the trustees to create long leases in the property for the purpose of charging the lease in order to provide portions for younger sons and daughters who did not inherit the land.
Thus the property was tied up for a generation.
Upon the death of the life tenant, his eldest son, the remainderman, would then be tenant in tail in possession.
He would be able, provided that he was of age, to bar the entail and dispose of the fee simple.
In order to avoid this situation, the practice was to effect a resettlement each generation.
This was done upon the eldest son attaining the age of 21 years.
He then became able to bar the entail, but, being tenant in tail remainder only, he could only effect a total bar by disentailing with the consent of his father, the tenant in possession.
By an arrangement between father and son, a disentailment could be effected; but not so as to alienate the fee; rather to reduce the son's interest to a life estate in remainder, with remainder to his issue successively in tail.
He could be compensated by an annuity charged upon the land.
The limitations are then to the father for life, remainder to the son for life, remainder to the son's issue successively in tail, and subject to terms concerning rentcharges and portions as desired.
The land is then tied up for another generation.
This procedure, carried out each generation, could tie up the land indefinitely.
The system was not obnoxious to the perpetuity rule, because each settlement and resettlement was designed to comply with the rule, and the perpetuity period began afresh from the time of each resettlement.
The industrial and commercial expansion of the nineteenth century required land to be available for development.
Profits were available for landowners who were willing to develop the land by opening coal-mines, building factories, or developing in other ways.
It was not possible to raise the necessary capital, or to sell or grant a long lease to developers, where the only marketable title was the life estate of the head of the family.
This would be the situation pending a resettlement.
It was in the interest of the public and of the landowners to make land freely alienable.
This was effected by the Settled Land Acts 1882 and 1925.
The problem, in short, was to find a system where the landowner could continue to create all the beneficial interests he wished in favour of members of the family, and, at the same time, would be able to deal with the land, by sale, long lease, or mortgage, as if he were a sole owner.
The dilemma was solved by the principle of over-reaching.
The Settled Land Act 1882 provided that the tenant for life should have power to sell, grant leases, or mortgage the land, giving to the purchaser, lessee, or mortgagee a title free from the beneficial interests under the settlement.
Capital money was, however, always to be paid, not to the life tenant, but to trustees, who were to hold the money upon the same trusts as those upon which the land had been held.
Thus, on sale, the purchaser got a clear title from the tenant for life, free from the limitations of the settlement.
The beneficiaries lost their interests in (say) £100,000 worth of land, but received exactly the same interests in £100,000 of money.
The transaction is regarded as a change of investment.
The policy was continued, with a number of amendments, in the 1925 legislation.
Thus all land, however tied up it may be by complex entails and other interests, has since 1882 been alienable by the tenant for life under his statutory powers.
Much the same result could be achieved by creating a trust for sale of the land; that is to say, by conveying the land to trustees upon trust to sell, and to hold the income of the land until sale, and the proceeds of sale, upon trust for beneficiaries in any desired order.
Here the over-reaching principle is clear.
The beneficial interests are attached to the proceeds of sale.
And, further, the equitable doctrine of Conversion operates, treating as done that which ought to be done, to effect a notional conversion in equity of the land into the proceeds of sale.
Since 1925 the same interests can be created in personalty as in realty, and all the beneficial interests which can be created under a settlement can similarly be created behind a trust for sale.
We have seen that settled land is always alienable by the tenant for life.
He sells or retains as he thinks fit.
Under a trust for sale the trustees obviously can sell, and they are given by statute a discretionary power to retain.
Thus, the two procedures are alternative methods of creating settlements of land.
The trust for sale has the enormous advantage of being available also for trusts of personalty, or of mixed land and personalty, and is also more convenient for creating discretionary trusts, which of course have no life tenant.
The strict settlement method is rarely used at the present day.
But many older titles are still dependent upon an understanding of its conveyancing procedures.
Modern Settlements .
A modern settlement, which will usually be of personalty or of mixed fund of land and personalty, will be designed so as to attract the lowest possible tax liability.
The income of a trust is liable to income tax at the rate applicable to the beneficiary to whom the income is paid.
Thus, lower rates will be payable if the income is paid to beneficiaries with low incomes.
Capital gains tax is payable by the trustees when investments are sold, or when the trust is terminated in whole or in part, and a beneficiary becomes entitled absolutely against the trustees to some property within the settlement.
Inheritance tax is payable on property which passes on a death, other than from a husband to a wife or vice versa.
Property passing on a death is defined in the Finance Act 1894, as amended by the Finance Act 1969, and includes: property owned absolutely by the deceased, property given away by the deceased within seven years of death, and property in which the deceased owned a limited interest within seven years of his death.
Thus, on the death of a life tenant, the property passes and inheritance tax becomes payable upon the capital value of the fund in which the deceased held his interest.
For the purpose of establishing the rate at which inheritance tax is payable, all property (with certain exceptions) passing on the death is aggregated together.
It will be obvious that the old-fashioned strict settlement, containing a series of life and other limited interests, is poorly designed for inheritance tax purposes.
In order, therefore, to avoid inheritance tax, the settlor should make the settlement seven years before his death, and the settlement should be designed to benefit the beneficiaries without giving limited interests to them.
These requirements were substantially met before 1969 by the creation of discretionary trusts, by which property is given to trustees upon trust to apply the income on capital in favour of such one or more members of a group of beneficiaries as the trustees shall in their absolute discretion determine.
None of the beneficiaries has any interest in the property — except in respect of income on capital actually paid to him.
Until 1969 no property passed upon the death of a member of a class of beneficiaries under a discretionary trust, and no estate duty (the precursor of inheritance tax) was therefore payable for the duration of the trust.
This was too wide a loophole for the tax planners: no wonder inheritance tax is called a voluntary tax.
The Finance Act 1969 provided, in effect, that on the death of a beneficiary what in 1974 became capital transfer tax, and by the Finance Act 1986 inheritance tax, should be payable upon the proportion of the capital which corresponded to the proportion of the income which the deceased had received within a certain period before his death (usually seven years).
payments of capital do not attract inheritance tax liability, except in so far as income earned by the fund has not been paid out.
To the extent that income has been retained, payments out are treated as income.
Thus discretionary trusts have lost many of their fiscal advantages.
Their flexibility, however, enables the trustees to make payments in a manner most suited to all the circumstances, including especially the needs of individual beneficiaries and the fiscal situation.
It is not possible here to say more about the different types of trust which are commonly created at the present time, nor of the powers and duties of the trustees, nor of the methods of administration.
Specialist books on these topics need to be consulted.
A wide variety of choice of settlement is available.
The individual settlor must express his wishes to his legal advisors, and they will recommend the most appropriate type of trust to meet the particular situation.
The main point to understand here is that different types of trust are designed to meet different situations.
The past century has seen the standard form of family trust change from the old strict settlement based on successive limited interests and designed to keep specific land in the family, to the discretionary trust of personalty designed to give no interest to anybody for inheritance tax purposes.
No one can say what the next century will bring.
Most recently the Law Commission in 1989 recommended replacement of the dual system of trusts for sale and Settled Land Act settlements by a new trust machinery applicable to all trusts of land.
Trustees would hold the legal estate on trust with a power (though not a duty) to sell and a power to retain.
As at present, they would be able to overreach equitable interests; and the Law Commission considers that the simplicity of such a new system would outweigh any possible disadvantages.
It remains to be seen whether this suggestion will become law, but the only really confident prediction must be that so long as capitalism remains, trusts will continue to change and develop so as to meet changes in social conditions and the tax structure.
Mortgages of land
We have seen that, under the ordinary form of a mortgage of freehold land used before the property Acts, the legal estate was conveyed to the mortgagee, so that at law he became the owner of the property; but that the mortgagor was treated by equity as the owner — he had an equity of redemption, which was an equitable estate in the land; and he could only be deprived of his equity of redemption in certain defined ways, e.g. by foreclosure or sale.
To permit this method of mortgaging land to continue would have been quite contrary to the policy of the Property Acts, which is that the owner of property shall be able to convey to a purchaser a good legal title free from all equities affecting that property.
The real owner, the mortgagor, could not convey any legal title because he had none; and the legal owner, the mortgagee, could only convey a title subject to the mortgagor's equity of redemption.
For this reason the Property Acts have revolutionized the modes of creating mortgages and some of their legal effects.
A legal mortgage can now be effected in one of two ways:
The mortgagor demises the land to the mortgagee for a term of years absolute, subject to a proviso that the term shall cease when the mortgagor repays the loan.
If the mortgagor is a lessee for years he effects the mortgage by a sub-lease.
A second legal mortgage can be created by leasing the land to the second mortgagee for a term longer by at least one day than the term limited to the first mortgagee.
The mortgagor creates by deed a legal charge upon the land.
Both these methods of creating a mortgage give the mortgagee a legal interest in the land.
Other methods can be used if it is desired to give him only an equitable interest in the land.
Thus if A borrows money from B, and deposits with B the title-deeds of his land as security for the loan, B has an equitable mortgage on A's land.
In the case of such deposits the rule that writing is required for the creation of interests in land is dispensed with.
Whether a mortgage is legal or equitable, the mortgagee can enforce his security by applying to the court for an order for foreclosure.
Upon proof of the mortgage the court will make an order for foreclosure nisi , under which an officer of the court is directed to find what is due for principal, interest, and costs, and the mortgagor is ordered to pay within six months from the time when the amount is certified.
If he fails to do so, the mortgagee will be entitled to an order of foreclosure absolute, the effect of which will be to vest the mortgaged property in him absolutely, but at the same time to prevent him — even if the property should prove insufficient — from claiming payment from the mortgagor, except upon terms of giving him a fresh right to redeem.
As an alternative to foreclosure, the court may direct a sale of the property, and this may be fairer to both parties, since any surplus upon such sale will belong to the mortgagor, while the mortgagee may still sue for any deficiency.
In order to redeem, the mortgagor must give six months’ notice or pay six months’interest.
He may apply to the court if his right to redeem is disputed.
Without any application to the court, the mortgagee, if his mortgage is a conveyance of the legal estate or ownership, may take possession; but this course is hazardous, since he may be called upon in a redemption action to account strictly not only for profits actually received by him, but also for those which he might but for his default have received, and all such profits, so far as they exceed the interest due for the time being, must be set off against the principal.
A mortgage may contain a clause giving the mortgagee a power of sale, and such a power (subject to certain conditions) is now implied in ever mortgage made by deed.
If the power is exercised, the proceeds are applicable in the same way as the proceeds of a sale ordered by the court, and the mortgagor will remain liable to pay any deficiency.
A power for the mortgagee to appoint a receiver who will collect the rents and profits is also now implied in mortgages by deed.
To appoint a receiver is more convenient for the mortgagee than taking possession.
Since the receiver is the mortgagor's agent, the mortgagee is not responsible for the receiver's acts and defaults; and any surplus beyond the outgoings (including the receiver's remuneration) and the interest due, must be paid over to the mortgagor, and will not go in reduction of the principal.
Mortgagor and mortgagee have each, while in possession, considerable powers of leasing land mortgaged by deed, unless, in the case of the mortgagor, the deed excludes them.
The changes made in the form of a mortgage have led to great changes in the law as to the priority of successive mortgages on the same land.
In outline the modern rules are as follows: Mortgagees, whether legal or equitable, of a legal estate, rank according to the date at which they have registered their charges under the Land Charges Act 1972.
But this rule is not so simple as at first sight it looks, for it means, not that priority is gained by registration, but that it is lost through failure to register.
If any mortgage, other than a mortgage accompanied by transfer of the title-deeds, is unregistered, it is void as against a subsequent mortgagee, whether he registers his mortgage or not.
A mortgagee who takes the title-deeds cannot register, and his position as against that of a mortgagee whose mortgage is registrable and registered is at present, for lack of judicial decision, merely conjectural.
The better opinion is that the pre-1926 priorities of the legal over the equitable estate, and of the earlier in time over the later, still apply, except in so far as they are abrogated by the provisions of the 1925 legislation.
In certain cases, a prior mortgagee may make further advances to the mortgagor which will rank in priority to subsequent mortgages.
If he had no notice of a subsequent mortgage when he made his further advances — but registration of a subsequent mortgage is equivalent to notice.
If the prior mortgage was made expressly to secure a current account or other further advances, and further advances are made by the prior mortgagee, he can hold the land as security for both the original loan and the further advances, unless he had notice of a subsequent mortgage — registration (except in certain special cases) is not equivalent to notice.
If the mortgage deed imposes an obligation on the mortgagee to make further advances he gets priority for these advances even though he had notice of a subsequent mortgage.
If the mortgage is a mortgage of the equitable estate, the priority of successive mortgagees depends upon the order in which they give written notice to the trustees or other persons holding the legal estate.
This rule, which was formerly applicable only to equitable interests in choses in action and personal trust funds, now applies to equitable interests in all kinds of property.
Goods
The transfer of goods is most commonly made by merely handing them over, and such a transfer is equally effectual whether the transfer is for value or by way of gift.
An unconditional contract of sale of goods which are specific and ready for deliver is sufficient to transfer the ownership without any delivery.
When goods are on board ship, the indorsement and delivery of the bill of lading (which is an acknowledgement of receipt of the goods given by the master of the ship) transfers the ownership.
Further, goods may be transferred without delivery by deed, and where the transaction is for value even by writing without seal.
Such deeds or instruments as a rule require for their validity to be registered under the Bills of Sale Acts (1878 and 1882), which have been passed to prevent persons from obtaining credit by continuing to remain in possession of goods when they have secretly transferred their interest in them to others.
In recent years the courts have frequently granted an injunction to restrain a defendant to a civil action from disposing of any of his assets, or removing them from the jurisdiction of the court.
A bill of sale is commonly used as a means of mortgaging goods (see p. 105), but it may also be used as an out-and-out conveyance.
The property in British ships can only be transferred by means of a bill of sale which is registered in the shipping register.
There are a few exceptions to the general rule that no one can make a transfer of goods who is not the owner.
A person who receives current coins for value and in good faith, and a purchaser of goods in open market (‘market overt') in good faith, acquires a good right even from a thief.
So, too, the Factors Act 1889 protects persons who receive goods in good Kith and for value from a mercantile agent to whom goods have been entrusted by the owner for the purpose of being sold or pledged.
Intangible personal property
A patent is the exclusive right granted by the Crown of ‘using, exercising, and vending’ an invention.
Such grants are based on the Statute of Monopolies 1623, which, while in general prohibiting the grant of monopolies, made an exception in favour of patents ‘for the term of fourteen years or under for the sole working or making of any manner of new manufactures within the realm to the true and first inventor or inventors of such manufactures, which others at the time of making such letters patent and grants shall not use’.
The validity of a patent still turns mainly upon the question whether it complies with this enactment.
The term of the grant is sixteen years, but where it appears that a patentee has been insufficiently remunerated, the Court may extend the term for a period not exceeding five, or, in an exceptional case, ten years.
As a condition of obtaining the patent, the applicant must furnish a specification (which in all ordinary cases is open to public inspection), showing the nature of his invention and the method of carrying it into effect.
A register of patents is kept at the patent Office, and assignments and licences to use patents must be entered upon it.
In some cases a patentee can be compelled to grant a licence to use his patent on reasonable terms.
Copyright, which under the Copyright Act 1956 extends to every original literary, dramatic, musical, and artistic work, including photographs, sculpture, and architecture, means the sole right of producing or reproducing the work in any material form, and of performing, or in the case of a lecture, delivering, it in public; it includes the sole right of translation and of converting a dramatic into a non-dramatic work, and vice versa , and of making gramophone records, movie films, and similar devices for the mechanical performance of the work.
As a rule the right is first vested in the author, and continues for fifty years after his death; but in the case of photographs and gramophone records the original owner of the negative or plate is treated as the author, and the right lasts for fifty years from the time when the negative or plate was made.
The right is personal property, and passes upon the death of the owner to the persons named in his will or entitled upon his intestacy.
It is assignable in writing by the owner during his lifetime; but in spite of any assignment or agreement made by the author, it will revert to his representatives twenty-five years after his death.
The right to registered trade marks grew out of the rules of common law and equity, under which a trader who passed off his goods upon the public as those of another was held liable to damages and an injunction at the suit of the latter.
These rules still exist (see pp. 146–8), but they have been supplemented by statutory provisions which enable a trader to acquire by registration at the Patent Office the exclusive right to use a distinctive trade mark in connection with his goods.
Words (other than invented words, e. g. ‘tabloid') which directly refer to the character or quality of the goods, and names of places, cannot be so appropriated.
The right to a trade mark can be assigned only in connection with the goodwill of the business concerned in the goods for which it has been registered, and comes to an end with that goodwill.
The transfer of interests in the National Debt and public funds and in the debts of municipal and other public authorities, and of debentures, stocks, and shares in companies, is governed by numerous statutes.
Such interests cannot be transferred without writing, and in most cases a deed is required; in any case the transfer is not complete except by entry in the books of the Bank of England or of the body or company concerned.
Something has already been said as to the assignment of ordinary debts and ‘choses in action'; and the law relating to negotiable instruments — bills of exchange, cheques, and promissory notes — will be dealt with in the next chapter.
Trusts
The reader who has followed what was said in the second chapter will already have appreciated the nature of the trust, one of the most characteristic institutions of English Law, and its enormous importance as a part of our law of property.
The importance of trusts has been greatly increased by the property Acts, because, as we have seen, it is only by means of the trusts that future interests in land can now be created (see p. 87).
Except that trusts of land must be created by writing, a trust may be created by any sufficient expression of intention to create it, whether the legal ownership is transferred to another to hold as trustee or remains with the creator of the trust, who in that case will himself be the trustee.
(It may be noted that equitable rights may themselves form the subject of a trust.
A, who has an interest in property held by B upon trust for him, may hold that interest upon trust for D, or transfer it to C upon trust for D.) If, however, an attempt is made to create a trust by transfer to a trustee, but the transfer itself fails from a defect in form — where land, for instance, is transferred by unsealed writing, or the transfer of shares in a company has not obtained some necessary consent of the Treasury — the trust also will fall, unless the transaction is one made for value, a term which includes settlements or agreements for settlement in consideration of a contemplated marriage, but not of one already celebrated.
So too an attempt to make a direct gift, which fails because the proper method of transfer is not employed, will not take effect as a trust.
On the other hand, a trust will not fail because the intended trustee refuses to undertake it, or, in the case of a trust created by will, dies before the testator.
A disposition, as distinct from creation, of a trust, whatever its subject-matter, must be in writing, and the term ‘disposition’ includes a mandate by the beneficiary to his trustee to hold it on behalf of someone else.
Trusts arise not only by a direct expression of intention but also by an inference or implication which may or may not correspond to any actual intention.
Thus an agreement for the sale of land makes the vendor a trustee, subject to the payment of the purchase money, for the purchaser.
Upon a bequest to a trustee upon trust for a beneficiary who predeceases the testator, the trustee will hold the property for the benefit of the testator's representatives.
A gratuitous transfer of property into the joint names of himself and another will be presumed to be made upon trust for the person transferring, unless there is something to show that a benefit to the transferee was intended; such intention will be presumed where the transfer is made by a father to his child.
Again, a person who acquires property for his own benefit by taking advantage of his position as trustee will be treated as holding it for the benefit of those entitled under the trust.
When all the possible beneficiaries are of full age and under no disability (such as that of an infant or lunatic), they may put an end to the trust by requiring the trustee to transfer the property to them or to dispose of it according to their directions; and this is so in spite of any direction to the contrary in the settlement, such as a direction that payment is not to be made to a beneficiary till he reaches the age of 25.
The duties of a trustee may be indefinitely varied by the terms of the instrument which creates the trust, and may range from a mere duty to make a legal conveyance to the beneficiary at his request, and in the meantime to permit him to possess and enjoy the property, to extensive and onerous duties of management, sale, investment, and application of capital and income.
Apart from certain exceptional cases, a trustee is entitled to no remuneration for his trouble, unless the terms of the trust so direct, and is liable not only for dishonest dealing with the trust property, but for all loss due either to non-observance of the directions in the settlement and the general rules of law, or to failure on his part to act up to the high standard of care which equity and statute law require of him.
The range of permissible investments, for instance, is defined by statute in so far as the settlement makes no provision; but, even within the limits of investment allowed by statute or settlement, a trustee may incur liability by want of due care in exercising his discretion.
Any failure of duty in a trustee, however innocent morally, is a breach of trust.
In practice, however, and especially in the matter of investments, the older picture of an inexorable equity exercising unrelenting vigilance over the trustee's conduct is passing.
It would be impossible to persuade anyone to act as trustee unless the discretion entrusted to him were very liberally conferred, and it is now possible for a trustee to delegate to an agent, not merely pieces of business requiring especial skill, but the whole business of the trust, and escape liability so long as he acts in good faith.
In cases of doubt, a trustee may protect himself by obtaining, at the cost of the trust property, the direction of the court, and the Trustee Act 1925, s. 61, had enabled the court to relieve a trustee, who has acted honestly and reasonably and ought fairly to be excused, from liability for breach of trust.
The Variation of Trusts Act 1958 gives the court wide powers to vary trusts and sanction dealings with trust property in the interests of beneficiaries.
Upon the death or retirement of a trustee, the surviving trustees have, in the absence of any provision in the settlement, the power of appointing another in his place.
The court also has a power to appoint new trustees and to remove a trustee for unfitness or misconduct.
The rights of the beneficiaries under a trust, as has already been seen, are interests in property closely analogous to legal interests, and but little inferior to them in security.
Not only do they hold good against the trustee himself, and against his creditors during his life-time and his representatives after his death, but also against all to whom he may have transferred the property, and who cannot show that they acquired it for value and without notice of the trust.
Even where a trustee has misappropriated trust property the fund may still preserve its identity, and, so long as it can be identified, the rights of the beneficiaries will attach to the fund into whatever form it may have been converted by him.
If he has used it to swell his bank balance, it will be presumed that, in drawing on that balance, he has drawn out his own money before touching trust money; if he has made an investment with trust money — even an investment which is itself a breach of trust — that investment is still trust property, to which the trustees’ creditors have no claim.
We have seen that the difficulty of obtaining the gratuitous services of suitable persons to act as trustees has necessarily led to the practice of reposing an ever wider range of discretion in those who can only thus be persuaded to act.
The present danger is perhaps not so much that an honest trustee may be unfairly penalized as that a dishonest trustee may with impunity inflict loss on the beneficiaries.
The provision sometimes inserted in a settlement for giving remuneration to a professional man who is one of the trustees is open to considerable objection since it may give him an interest in incurring expense, and will, in any case, tend to make the other trustees leave the management mainly in his hands.
An Act of 1906 instituted the office of public Trustee.
This officer may be appointed trustee under any will or settlement, either as a mere ‘custodian’ trustee, in whom the ownership of the trust property is vested, leaving the active duties to other trustees; or as an ordinary trustee, with powers and duties of management.
Fees in proportion to the value are payable in respect of all property in the hands of the public Trustee; but his remuneration, like that of other Government servants, is a fixed salary.
The Consolidated Fund of the United Kingdom is liable to the beneficiaries for the acts and defaults of the Public Trustee and his subordinates.
In recent years, however, the Public Trustee has only had a small and declining proportion of the total work of trusteeship and executorship (see p. 114), and in 1972 a Committee of Enquiry recommended that no new work should be taken on, and that the office be wound up and merged with that of the Official Solicitor.
But this recommendation, accepted by the Government at the time, was later rejected by the Government in 1974.
The Public Trustee's office therefore continues to discharge the work it retains, though the volume of this work is still declining, and the administration of the office was in 1988 combined with that of the Official Solicitor.
Mortgages and pledges of personalty
Mortgages can be made of chattels personal as well as of land.
A mortgage of debts and of equitable interests in personalty can be made in the form of a conveyance by the mortgagor to the mortgagee with a proviso for redemption.
The priority of successive mortgagees depends on the date when the mortgagee gives notice to the debtor or trustee.
Mortgages of shares are usually made by depositing the share certificate with the lender.
This, like a deposit of title-deeds in the case of land (see p. 97), creates an equitable mortgage.
Priority, as between successive mortgagees of shares, is determined by the date at which the mortgages were effected, as a company is under no obligation to accept notices by mortgagees.
A mortgage of tangible property is made by a deed, which is called a Bill of Sale; and, under the Bills of Sale Act 1882 (as modified by the Consumer Credit Act 1974), it must be in the form given in the schedule to the latter Act, and attested and registered as required by that Act.
It cannot be given in consideration of any sum under £30.
The priority of successive mortgagees depends upon the order in which successive Bills of Sale are registered.
The Bills of Sale Acts do not apply to documents accompanying transactions in which the possession of the chattels passes.
Therefore they do not apply to pledges.
A pledge is a security upon goods created by the actual transfer of the possession of the goods themselves, or of such documents of title to goods as bills of lading, but without the conveyance of any legal ownership.
A pledge carries with it a power of sale, but there is nothing corresponding to foreclosure.
The business of pawnbrokers, which consists in lending money upon pledges of goods, is the subject of special statutory regulation.
Liens
The term lien is used in different senses.
A common law or possessory lien is the right to retain goods, money, or documents which are in one's possession until payment of some claim due from the owner.
It commonly arises in respect of services rendered in relation to the property, as in the case of the carriage of goods; but in some cases, like those of a solicitor and banker, the lien may be asserted in respect of the general balance due from the customer.
An innkeeper has a lien for his charges upon the traveller's goods brought to the inn, and, contrary to the usual rule, has by statute been given a power of sale over such goods.
Liens of this kind, being mere rights of retention, are lost as soon as possession is given up.
The equitable lien of the vendor of land, who has conveyed the property without receiving payment of the purchase money, is quite independent of possession, and gives a right to have the property sold under an order of the court.
Maritime liens upon ships and cargoes are also in the nature of mortgages or charges independent of possession.
They arise in respect of damage done by collision, and upon advances of money or the rendering of services, such as salvage, in times of emergency.
Inasmuch as the later advance or service is beneficial to the holder of an earlier lien, it will, as a rule, rank in priority to it.
Execution and bankruptcy
When judgement has been obtained against a man in respect of any debt or liability, it will be enforced, if need be, by execution, i.e. the court will make an order, under which a sufficient part of the debtor's property is seized and sold or otherwise made available for payment.
At one time execution might be made against the debtor's person, and he could be kept in prison indefinitely in default of payment.
Since 1869 imprisonment for debt has been rare, and by the Administration of justice Act 1970 it has been completely abolished, and replaced by the remedy of attachment of earnings, i.e. a procedure whereby a portion of the debtor's earnings may be directed by the court to be paid direct to the creditor.
When a person's property is insufficient for payment of his debts, it would obviously be unfair that the creditors who first obtain judgement and execution should be paid in full, leaving nothing to those who may try to enforce their claims later; nor is it desirable that a man should indefinitely remain under a load of debts which (it may be through no fault of his own) he is unable to meet.
This is the justification of the law of bankruptcy, originally applicable only to traders, but now, with few exceptions, to all insolvent persons.
A corporation cannot be made bankrupt; but a company formed under the Companies Act 1985 or similar earlier Acts can be wound up, and its property distributed, according to rules similar to those applicable to bankruptcy.
The debtor or a creditor presents his petition to the Bankruptcy Court of the district in which the debtor resides or carries on business — in London, the High Court; elsewhere, normally one of the County Courts.
An act of bankruptcy must be proved, and under this term are included various acts, which show the debtor's insolvency or his intention to delay or defraud his creditors.
If this is proved, the court makes a preliminary order, called a ‘receiving order’, which protects the debtor's property and prevents creditors from suing him without the leave of the court.
The debtor may then (with the court's approval) make a composition or scheme of arrangement with his creditors; but if this is not done he will be adjudicated bankrupt, and the whole of his property (not including property of which he is himself a trustee, or — up to the value of £250 — the tools of his trade and the necessary clothing and bedding of himself and his family) will vest in the ‘official receiver’(a public officer) or some other trustee, and become divisible among his creditors who prove their debts.
Previously the limit was £20, but it was raised to £250 by the Insolvency Act 1976, now replaced by the consolidating Insolvency Act 1986.
Rates and taxes, wages of clerks and servants, and some other claims are, within limits, paid in preference to others, and the rights of secured creditors, such as mortgagees, are not prejudiced by the bankruptcy; but in general the distribution will be made rateably.
Voluntary settlements (in particular family settlements made after marriage) are set aside by a bankruptcy if made within two years before; and even if made within ten years before, unless it is shown that at the time the bankrupt was able to meet his liabilities without the settled property.
At any time after adjudication a bankrupt may apply to the court for his discharge, which, if granted, will enable him to start again, stripped of his property, but (with certain exceptions) free from any claim which might have been proved against him in the bankruptcy.
But the discharge may be refused or postponed if he has been guilty of certain offences or misconduct in connection with the bankruptcy, or if his assets are insufficient for the payment of 50p in the £, unless this is shown not to be due to the debtor's fault.
Wills
A testator had, before 13 July 1939, an unlimited power of disposition by will over all his proprietary rights which survive him, including, since 1925, an entailed interest in possession.
But on and after that date the Inheritance (Family Provision) Act 1938 gives to the dependants of a testator, and the Intestates’ Estates Act 1952 gives to those of an intestate, power to apply to the court for a reasonable maintenance out of the estate, if such is not provided by the will, or the law of intestacy, or the combined operation of will and law where the intestacy was only partial.
The 1938 Act was repealed and replaced by the Inheritance (provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975, which increases the range of dependants who may apply for provision on death and gives the court wider powers than previously existed so that it can make whatever type of order may be most appropriate in the circumstances.
Dependants are defined in the 1975 Act as a wife or husband; a former spouse who has not remarried; a child of the deceased (including an illegitimate or adopted child); a person who was treated by the deceased as a child of the family in relation to any marriage of the deceased (e.g. a child of the deceased's wife by a former marriage); and any other person who was being wholly or partly maintained by the deceased immediately before his death.
To qualify in this last category a dependant need not have been related to the deceased, and thus a mistress would be included.
Furthermore there is no qualifying period during which the applicant must have received maintenance from the deceased.
‘Maintained’ means that the deceased was making a substantial contribution in money or money's worth towards the reasonable needs of the applicant, and he did not receive full valuable consideration for this: thus food and shelter are included in the definition.
The court may attach to its grant such conditions as it sees fit.
The maintenance ordered may be in the form of a lump sum, by way of periodical payments of income, or by transfer or settlement of specific property, or the variation of a settlement.
Such payments to a spouse will normally end if he or she remarries, but the original provisions in the 1938 Act excluding a child from further benefit on attaining the age of majority or on marriage have been repealed by the 1975 Act.
The court must take into consideration the nature of the testator's property, the pecuniary position of the dependant, his or her conduct to the testator, and any other relevant circumstance, and the testator's reasons for the dispositions made by him in his will.
For the making of a will compliance with the following formalities is now necessary:
The will must be in writing.
It must be signed by the testator or by some person in his presence and by his express direction.
The signature must be made or acknowledged by the testator in the presence of two or more witnesses, both present at the same time.
The witnesses must attest and sign the will in the testator's presence, or acknowledge their signatures in his presence.
A soldier or airman on active service, or mariner at sea, can make an informal will, even by word of mouth, which will be valid provided that his communication to his audience was not a mere statement, but a request to him to see his intention carried out.
The Administration of justice Act 1982 also sets out the form of an international will recognized as formally valid in all countries subscribing to the Convention on International Wills.
Any legacy or benefit given by the will to a witness or to a witness's wife or husband was formerly void, though the will as a whole was unaffected.
But the Wills Act 1968 provides that if a will is already duly executed with two other qualified witnesses, the attestation of any person who would have been caught by this rule must be disregarded.
A testator can revoke his will at any time during his life.
But breach of a contract not to revoke it will subject his estate to a claim for damages.
Furthermore, if two parties (usually, but not necessarily, husband and wife) make ‘mutual wills’, with identical ultimate beneficiaries, the death of one of the parties without alteration of his will may have the effect of binding the survivor to make no alteration, in the sense that a trust will arise, under which the terms of the will must be fulfilled.
A will is revoked
by the marriage of the testator, unless it appears from the will that at the time it was made the testator was expecting to be married to a particular person, and that he intended that the will (or a particular disposition in the will) should not be revoked by that marriage, and that marriage takes place.
By the making of a new will or of a codicil or other writing executed with the same formalities as a will, so far as such later document is inconsistent with the will.
A codicil is really a supplementary will, and is generally used for making some alteration in a will without revoking it as a whole.
By burning, tearing, or otherwise destroying a will, if this is done by the testator or any person in his presence and by his direction with the intention of revolting it.
A complete and intentional obliteration of a will or any part of it, so that what was written can no longer be seen, amounts to a revocation of what is obliterated; but merely striking words through with a pen or altering them has no effect, unless the cancellation or alteration is signed by the testator and attested by two witnesses like a new will.
Where, after a testator has made a will, his marriage is dissolved or annulled, the will takes effect as if any appointment of the former spouse as an executor were omitted, and any devise or bequest to such former spouse lapses.
The accidental loss or destruction of a will has no effect upon its validity, and its contents may be proved by the production of copies or drafts, or even by the recollection of persons who have seen it or heard it read.
Bequests of real estate are technically known as devises, bequests of personalty as legacies.
A legacy may be specific, i.e. given in terms which show that a particular thing and no other is meant (e.g. ‘my only gold watch’, ‘my Oxford City stock').
A legacy which earmarks, not a particular thing, but a particular fund or collection out of which it is to come (e.g. ‘one of my three violins') is called demonstrative.
A legacy which earmarks neither thing nor collection (e.g. ‘a violin’, ‘£500') is called general.
A bequest of the surplus is called residuary.
A specific bequest will fail, if the testator parts with the thing before death.
But a demonstrative legacy, if the fund out of which it is to come ceases to exist before the death, becomes payable as a general legacy.
Devises are of two kinds only, specific and residuary.
The interests of all persons who take under a will can take effect only after payment of the debts of the deceased.
Under the Administration of Estates Act 1925, real and personal estates are equally liable to the payment of these debts.
Under the Administration of justice Act 1982, where a will contains a devise or bequest to a child or remoter descendant of the testator, and the intended beneficiary dies before the testator, leaving issue who are living at the time of the testator's death, then, unless a contrary intention appears in the will, the devise or bequest passes to the issue living at the testator's death.
For the purposes of this provision, such issue include illegitimate children and any persons conceived before the testator's death and born living thereafter.
When a bequest fails through the death of the person for whom it was intended, and does not pass under a residuary bequest, as must necessarily be the case if the bequest which falls is itself residuary, the property will be dealt with as upon an intestacy.
Intestacy
Before 1926, when a person died wholly or partly intestate, the distribution of his property differed widely according as it was real or personal estate.
The real estate descended to the heir in accordance with rules laid down by statutes of 1833 and 1859.
The personal estate was distributed in accordance with rules laid down by the Statutes of Distribution of Charles II's and James II's reigns.
The Administration of Estates Act 1925 has repealed the Statutes of Distribution altogether, and has confined the operation of the statutes of 1833 and 1859 to three specific cases.
This Act has been further amended by the Family Provision Act 1966.
Apart from these cases, the entire property, other than that in which the deceased's interest ceased at his death, is held by the executors or administrators on trust for sale, in the first instance for the payment of his debts, and then for distribution as laid down in the Intestates’ Estates Act 1952, which has replaced the relevant provisions of the Act of 1925.
Since, however, cases concerning property which has devolved according to those provisions will for many years continue to come before the courts, they are summarized in a note at the end of the book.
The present rules are:
Rights of surviving spouse .
He or she takes —
All the personal chattels (that is chattels such as furniture, motor cars, and articles of household or personal use or ornament, but not chattels used for business purposes).
If there is issue, £75,000, free of inheritance tax.
If there is no issue, £125,000, free of inheritance tax.
If there is issue, a life interest in half the remaining estate, which may, at his or her option, be redeemed for a capital payment.
The other half, and the reversion in the first half, are held on the ‘statutory trusts’ for the issue.
If there is no issue, but there are parents, or, failing them, brothers and sisters of the whole blood, then the spouse takes half the remaining estate absolutely, the other half going to parents, or being held on the ‘statutory trusts’ for brothers and sisters, as the case may be.
The claims of the spouse override absolutely those of all relations remoter than those mentioned in .
Where part of the estate consisted of a ‘matrimonial home’, i.e. a house in which the surviving spouse was resident at the time of the death, the spouse may normally require the representatives to appropriate the deceased's interest in the house in or towards the satisfaction of his or her absolute interest in the estate.
The phrase ‘statutory trusts’ calls for some explanation.
The term ‘issue’ includes not only children, but also the children of children who have predeceased the intestate.
The scheme is that these take an ‘absolutely vested interest’ only on the attainment of 18 years or marriage.
Until then, the property is held in trust for them.
Should a child die before attaining an absolutely vested interest, his interest passes on to those next entitled, that is to say, other children, a parent, brothers and sisters of the whole blood, a surviving spouse, or remoter relatives if there is no surviving spouse.
The personal representatives have the powers to maintain and advance children given to trustees by the Trustee Act 1925.
In order to equal the shares of the children, any sum paid by the intestate to a child by way of advancement or on the marriage of the child must be brought into account.
An advancement means a sum of money paid to a child to start him in business or to make a permanent provision for him; it does not include casual payments given as a present or to help to tide over temporary difficulties.
The interests of the children, if there is no surviving spouse, absolutely override those of any other relatives.
Under the Children Act 1975 an adopted child has the same right to succeed on the intestacy of his adoptive parent as any other child born to that parent.
Rights of parents .
Where there are no issue and no surviving spouse, the parents, if both are alive, take the property in equal shares.
If only one is alive, that parent takes all.
Rights of brothers and sisters of the whole blood .
If spouse, issue, and parents are all lacking, the property is held on the statutory trusts for brothers and sisters of the whole blood, or the children of deceased members of that class.
Rights of remoter relatives .
It must be emphasized that relatives remoter than parents, or brothers or sisters of the whole blood, and children of such brothers and sisters deceased, can succeed to no part whatever of the estate, if there is a surviving spouse.
If there is no spouse, they take in the following order, brothers and sisters of the half blood; grandparents in equal shares; uncles and aunts, who are brothers and sisters of the whole blood of a parent of the intestate; uncles and aunts who are brothers or sisters of the half blood of a parent of the intestate.
Class  take the property absolutely.
In the case of Classes ,, and  the property is held on the statutory trusts, as in the case of issue.
Thus, just as grandchildren can take, so can nephews and nieces and first cousins.
But in the case of these classes, the rule relating to the bringing into account of advances does not apply.
Executors and administrators
Even if a will does not give property to trustees, the property, whether real or personal, does not go directly to those for whose benefit it is given, nor does property passing on intestacy go directly to those entitled under the rules above stated.
It vests in the first instance in ‘personal representatives’, namely the executor appointed by the will, or where there is no will or no executor appointed under the will, in the administrator — usually a person interested in the property — appointed by the court.
The public Trustee may be appointed as executor or administrator (but see pp. 104–5).
The executor or administrator, whose duties in many ways resemble those of a trustee, must in the first instance discharge the funeral expenses, the cost (including the payment of inheritance tax) of obtaining probate of the will or ‘letters of administration’, and the debts of the deceased.
It is only after these claims are discharged that the executor or administrator will transfer the property to those entitled; or, if the property is settled by will and the executor is not himself trustee, to trustees for them.
In many cases, as where the persons entitled are not of age, or not yet in existence, or not to be found, an executor or administrator will have to retain the property in his hands for a considerable time, though he may sometimes relieve himself by a payment or transfer into court, and in any case he can obtain the direction of the courts when doubts arise as to the proper course which he should take.