

SUN, RAIN AND SPEED
1976: the year of the drought, of cricket fields that turned brown or white through the absence of water, and of Tony Greig's announcement that his team were going to make the West Indies grovel.
It was not one of the shrewdest remarks ever made.
A few months earlier, West Indies had encountered any number of problems in Australia and had lost the series 5–1; they had then beaten India 2–1 at home, the last match being won when no fewer than five Indians were unable to bat in the second innings.
England had lost two series to Australia and looked a fairly ordinary outfit; despite their experience in Australia, West Indies looked to have the better all-round team, and Greig's ‘forecast’ seemed altogether ill-advised.
Presumably he intended it to fire up his own team, but predictably it did just that to the opposition.
It was, though, a gesture that was pretty much in character, for he never lacked confidence from the moment he scored 156 in his first county match for Sussex.
Almost six feet eight inches (2 metres) tall, he seemed larger than life in most of his actions, blond, handsome, with great charisma that was much better suited to the Test arena than to the county grind; a Test batting average of 40 compared to a career average of 31 shows this perfectly.
In his maiden Test in 1972, he top-scored in both innings and took five wickets, an all-round performance he was able to sustain for the whole of his Test career of 58 consecutive matches, scoring almost 3,600 runs with eight centuries and taking 141 wickets at 32 with fast-medium (or, as in 1973–4 when he had an outstanding series, off-spin) bowling.
Strong and brave — his 110 against Lillee and Thomson on an uneven Brisbane pitch in 1974–5 was an innings of real courage — he loved to drive off the front foot, could hit the ball vast distances and was very much a crowd-pleaser.
There were one or two controversial incidents, such as the Kallicharran run-out, over the years, but it was generally agreed that these arose from misplaced exuberance rather than any darker motives; and despite his South African origins, there were few complaints when he replaced Denness as captain in 1975.
After the battering the team had taken in Australia, he realized that the first job was to restore morale, and he did manage to instil some of his own determination into his players.
There was a warmth and a charm about him that made for easy relations with most people, even the press, and they helped him build up the confidence that was needed all round.
He was unfortunate to come up against West Indies, playing four fast bowlers for the first time, when he was still an inexperienced leader and the memory of Lillee and Thomson was still raw.
Perhaps if he had met them after the confidence gained by a successful tour of India in 1976–7, when his captaincy was much praised, the story might have been different.
In this 1976 series he was still unsure of himself tactically, gave the impression that he had little plan of campaign thought out, and often seemed to be changing his bowling and field settings more on a whim than on a good tactical basis.
Yet after the success in India, it appeared that the job was his for the foreseeable future — only for the news to break at the beginning of the 1977 season that, when in Australia for the Centenary Test, he had used his position to recruit players to Kerry Packer's World Series Cricket.
The outrage was enormous, he was stripped of the captaincy and, although he played in the Tests of that year, his career was over.
In retrospect, it seemed almost inevitable that someone as colourful as Greig should find a wholly novel way of bringing about his own downfall.
Tony Greig.
When the stumps only come up to your knees you have to be larger than life.
His opposite number, Clive Lloyd, had already been through the two formative experiences of his captaincy.
During the heavy defeat in Australia he was criticized for not being able to instil spirit into a losing team, and was fully aware of his shortcomings.
But, for one thing, the sheer size of the defeat made him and his players determined that it would never happen again and, for another, the power of Lillee and Thomson made him realize just what a potent weapon a battery of fast bowlers would be.
just a couple of months afterwards, playing India in Trinidad with three spin bowlers in his team, he saw them reach 406 for 4 to win the match, only the second time a team had passed 400 runs to win a Test.
The spinners Padmore, Jumadeen and Imtiaz Ali did the bulk of the bowling and, as far as Lloyd was concerned, it was they who had let him down.
The fact that Holding (who had 6 for 65 in the first innings) and Julien conceded four an over from 34 overs and the spinners only just over two an over from 105 was of less significance than the spinners' inability to bowl batsmen out.
His long-held belief that spinners could not be trusted had been vindicated, and from now on Test cricket would take on a new dimension.
Whether you think that dimension has been for the good of the game will probably depend on your nationality.
Lloyd, a cousin of Lance Gibbs, made his Test debut against India in 1966–7 and scored 82 and 78 not out.
Eighteen years and 110 Tests later he bowed out, with Nemesis unable to resist shaking her fist at him.
In his last Test at Sydney in 1984–5, having wrapped up the series with three victories in the first three games and not having lost for 27 Tests since 1981–2, his team suddenly collapsed to an innings defeat, the architects of which were Bob Holland and Murray Bennett — spinners both.
Clive Lloyd is one of the best-loved cricketers ever to walk on to a field, but after the relentless domination of his four-man pace attack there must have been many people who permitted themselves a smile at the news.
Obviously, the pitch had been prepared for the spinners, but since West Indies had prepared many of their own pitches for their speed merchants they could hardly complain.
Even then, Lloyd went down fighting with 72 in his last innings; it took him to a total of 7,515 runs at 46, with nineteen centuries.
His batting could be awesome in its power.
Six feet five inches (1.9 metres) tall, left-handed, bespectacled, with a loose, ambling walk that always seemed so relaxed, he wielded a three-pound (1.35-kilo) bat with enormous strength and delighted in sending the ball vast distances.
So often there was an explosive quality about his batting which was very difficult to contain, and his driving in particular was magnificent.
David Lloyd, his captain at Lancashire, tells a story that once in a Gillette Cup  match against Gloucestershire at Old Trafford, Clive Lloyd edged a ball from Mike Procter so hard that it went for six.
Procter's anger at this annoyed Lloyd so much that he told his captain he was going to hit him over the pavilion; and he did just that — next ball.
Until his knees failed him and the cartilages were removed, he was also one of the finest of all cover fielders, with electrifying speed and a pin-point throw that seemed barely credible.
After the knee operation he moved to the slips, and of course proved pretty useful there, too.
He had made his debut for Guyana (then British Guiana) in 1963–4 as a nineteen year old, and joined Lancashire in 1968.
The association with Lancashire lasted until 1986 and was always a happy one, for he was enormously popular with the fans and with his team-mates.
His contribution over the years was massive, especially in the one-day competitions, and his loyalty and dedication to his adopted county became legendary.
Off the pitch he gave much time to helping young players, while on it his play was never selfish, always for the team rather than his average; and there were times when he batted in great pain rather than let the side  down.
He even played his part as a support bowler, whose right-arm leg-breaks or medium pace could be quite economical.
The fearsome tale of the gigantic bat, sucking the blood of bowlers and fielders alike.
Clive Lloyd in full flow.
Lloyd's Test career was not quite the succession of personal triumphs that Sobers had enjoyed.
At the end of 1971, playing for a World XI in Australia, he badly injured his back when diving to attempt a catch and spent a month in hospital.
At first it seemed that his career might even be over, but he fought back.
It took a while to establish himself back in the team as his form was poor and he was not originally selected for the visit of the Australians in 1972–3.
When Sobers dropped out with knee trouble, Lloyd took his place, and on his home ground in the fourth Test made 178; thereafter he would miss one or two games through injury but, apart from the Packer hiatus, his position was secure.
It was clear, too, that Kanhai, who had taken over the leadership from Sobers, was coming to the end of his career and that whoever took over from him would have the opportunity for an extended run in the job if he were successful.
Lloyd believed that the lean years at the end of Sobers' tenure were the result of an unprofessional approach, with not enough thought given to the problems; under Kanhai this improved somewhat, but after he had failed to beat Denness's team the job was given to Lloyd.
Since his experience of captaincy was limited, he had not believed he would be appointed; but he had had his hopes, and had thought a lot about the team's problems.
The first priority was to re-establish the team unity that had been allowed to dwindle, with the result that there had been much arguing and bickering The old inter-island rivalries that Worrell had eradicated had surfaced again, and he knew the team would accomplish little until these disappeared.
He asked his players for their loyalty to him, in return for which he would do his best to improve their conditions.
He asked them to adopt a more professional approach, to harden their attitude and not capitulate when things became tough, as they had sometimes been prone to.
He decided that the only way to become the best team in the world was to adopt a killer instinct; to play fairly and sportingly, but to be tough and uncompromising.
He wanted to be a winner rather than a good loser.
Obviously he was then lucky that a lot of outstanding players began to come into the team at the same period, men like Richards, Greenidge, Roberts, Holding, Croft, Garner, and he had material of the highest class on which to work.
But there had been unsuccessful sides in the past that had been packed with outstanding individuals who had not coalesced, or been moulded, into a good team .
The credit for West Indies' world domination from the mid-1970s onwards must lie very largely with Lloyd.
The emphasis on pace bowling meant that he found himself in a rather curious position.
On the one hand, he was loved for his own great ability, his loyalty to his teams, his concern for youngsters and all the other good work he did off the pitch, and for his warm, relaxed character that made him friends in many places.
On the other hand, his determination to win became such that he frequently appeared to condone his fast men bowling in an intimidating fashion, which obviously led to criticism from press and public.
The prime requirement for opposing batsmen became courage rather than skill, and it was all unnecessary since they were such fine bowlers that they could dismiss teams cheaply when bowling in an orthodox manner.
When they gave quite unacceptable displays of dissent, such as Holding kicking down the stumps or Croft deliberately barging into an umpire who had no-balled him, Lloyd did nothing to discipline them in public view.
Then again, his fast-bowling policy, more than any other factor, has hastened the decline of the spinner, a decline that has been hugely to the game's detriment; and with a seemingly inexhaustible supply of young speed men reaching the Test team and creating further successes, there is little sign that the decline might be halted.
One of the attractions of the game has always been its diversity, and, whatever success they bring, a relentless stream of fast bowlers ultimately becomes boring.
By the time of the 1988 tour of England, there were signs that the fans were realizing this, for Test attendances were well down on those of the 1984 tour.
Admittedly, the weather was worse, English fortunes were at a low ebb, and the higher charges may well have deterred many people, especially the Caribbean fans; but one suspects that some thousands of people simply could not face the prospect of yet another day almost entirely given over to fast bowling.
Lloyd captained West Indies 74 times, winning 36 and losing just 12, and he twice won the Prudential World Cup.
He was the most successful Test captain of all time and one of the greatest as well.
He accomplished the most difficult of all sporting tasks: not just taking his team to the top but keeping it there.
If only he could have been just a little less ruthless about it along the way.
Two of the first three games of the 1976 tour were easily won, so that any English optimist who thought that their Australian experiences might have knocked the stuffing out of West Indies had to ponder anew.
After the MCC match there was no longer much reason to hope.
Greenidge and Lloyd top-scored as West Indies declared at 251 for 9, and then Holding, Roberts and Holder, restricted MCC to 197, only Gilliat, the captain, having a substantial knock, and Amiss ducking into a bouncer which left him with four stitches in his scalp.
Injuries to two MCC bowlers helped Richards and Gomes both make centuries, and Lloyd declared at 248 for 3, setting a target of 303.
Then, in Wisden's delightful words, ‘it was the turn of the three pace bowlers to wreak havoc and so produce a feeling of contentment in the minds of their colleagues for the Test series ahead’.
In other words, they bowled them out for 83, Extras top-scoring with 21; since most of the team either were or would be Test players, that feeling of contentment must have seemed well justified.
England sprang a surprise by recalling 45-year-old Brian Close for the first Test at Nottingham.
The centre-piece of the match, though, was a wonderful innings of 232 off just 313 balls by Viv Richards, who was in the middle of his annus mirabilis .
It was his fifth Test century of the year, and he passed 1,000 runs for the year in his eighth match.
With Kallicharran, who made 97, he put on 303 for the third wicket, with some wonderful strokes all round the wicket that culminated in 36 runs off his last 13  balls before holing out on the boundary.
The rest of the wickets fell fairly quickly for a total of 494.
Brearley, on debut, went for nought, but Steele, first with Edrich and then with Woolmer, made a century and took the score to 226 for three.
Then wickets tumbled, and sixteen were still needed to avert the follow-on when the eighth went down; but Old with a bruised wrist, and Snow saw them to safety and the innings made 332.
Brian Close recalled to the colours in 1976 at the age of forty-five.
Murray and Kallicharran watch him play a ball from Julien.
Needing to score quickly, West Indies made 176 at nearly five an over, despite some fine bowling from Snow, when Lloyd declared with five wickets down, setting England the task of surviving for five and a quarter hours or scoring 339 to win.
Brearley stayed for a while but, after Steele failed, Edrich and Close, two experienced old soldiers, came together and stayed together.
In due course, Lloyd conceded the draw and gave the ball  to his batsmen, and the match petered out with England at 156 for 2.
No one was in any doubt who had controlled it.
England then had the best of the Lord's Test; true, West Indies lacked Richards, who was ill, but Edrich was absent too.
Greig won the toss but England then batted poorly, scraping their way to 197 in the first day, although only 80.4 overs were sent down in six hours, Close's 60 being the best effort.
Underwood then had a good day, making 31 and with Old taking the score to 250, then taking 5 for 39 as West Indies were all out for 182.
Only Greenidge and Lloyd kept them afloat as Snow and Underwood bowled really well and the fielders backed them up.
On Saturday morning the gates were closed early with thousands locked out, only for the whole day to be lost to the weather; had just an hour or two's play been possible there would almost certainly have been a result.
As it was, on the fourth day England batted steadily but without much conviction, Steele and Close the top scorers, and were all out on the last morning for 254, leaving West Indies to make 323 runs in a minimum of 294 minutes.
Roberts finished with 10 for 123, and then watched his colleagues make little   attempt at first to get the runs.
Kallicharran took nearly two and a half hours over 34, while Fredericks was grafting away at the other end.
Only when Lloyd came out did the runs begin to flow, but when the final twenty overs began another 154 were still needed.
Lloyd claimed the last half hour, but when he was out at 233 for 4 he indicated that as far as he was concerned that was that.
Greig, characteristically, decided differently and insisted on playing on; two more wickets fell and the match finally ended at 241 for 6 when, with only three balls left, a win became impossible.
The redoubtable David Steele — courage, determination, skill and runs against Lillee and Thomson in 1975 and the West Indies pacemen in 1976.
A brief Test career but a glorious one.
Lord's 1976.
A balletic leap from Alan Knott to dismiss Clive Lloyd.
Before the Old Trafford Test, West Indies had four games and won them all, one of which involved bowling out Yorkshire for 90 when only 110 were wanted to win.
for the Test, Richards and Edrich returned and, with various fast bowlers injured, Mike Selvey was called up for England.
He celebrated by taking a wicket with his sixth ball and two more by the time he had bowled twenty; when Hendrick got Lloyd, West Indies were 26 for 4.
It was up to Greenidge and, apart from being dropped on 26, he did them proud.
King's 32 was the only other score in double figures, while Greenidge's 134 out of 211 represented 63.5 per cent of his team's total, a proportion that has only once been exceeded in all Tests.
England  they achieved this — just.
37 for 2 overnight became 71 all out after eighty-five minutes next morning, with Holding finishing with 5 for 17.
The difference in the bowling attacks then became rather noticeable; by soon after tea on the third day, West Indies had rattled up 411 for 5 when Lloyd declared, with 50 from Fredericks, 135 from Richards, and Greenidge becoming only the second West Indian after Headley to score a century in each innings against England.
Roy Fredericks always favoured the square cut.
Knott and Old watch Pat Pocock receive the treatment at Lord's in 1976.
With a deficit of 552 and thirteen and a quarter hours left, obviously only the weather was going to save England, so there was not the least justification for the barrage of short balls that Holding and Roberts hurled at Edrich and Close.
It was intimidatory bowling of the worst sort against two brave batsmen who, as it turned out, were both playing their last Test innings.
Umpire Alley eventually warned Holding, but there must have been many Lancastrians who were sad to see Lloyd, on his home ground, do nothing about it.
He did admit afterwards that they had been carried away by trying to make a quick breakthrough and had bowled badly, but it still left an unpleasant taste.
On the Monday they showed how easy it was for top-class bowlers to pitch the ball up and get wickets.
Edrich and Close soon went, and on two occasions Roberts found himself on a hat-trick; the second time, Selvey edged to Greenidge at slip — and he dropped  morning was fine and only one more run was added.
The margin of 425 runs was the largest runs victory West Indies have had over England, and for the only time in Test cricket Extras had a bigger match aggregate (44) than any batsman.
It was not felt to be a good idea to mention the word ‘grovel’ in the presence of the England captain, especially as he had scored only 38 runs in five innings.
England press for victory at Lord's in 1976.
Murray refuses to be intimidated by the ring of fielders.
Headingley saw a cracking match, and anyone lucky enough to be there on the first day is unlikely to have forgotten it.
Greenidge and Fredericks immediately laid into the bowlers, bringing up 50 in 8.3 overs, 100 in 18.2 overs, and at lunch after 27 overs they were 147 without loss.
Fredericks reached his hundred soon after, and when he was out Greenidge and Richards took 95 off twelve overs.
Greenidge went for 115, Rowe joined Richards, and at tea the score was 330 for 2.
After tea the batsman continued to play their shots and the runs came, but the ball began to move around and wickets fell, too.
By the close, the score was 437 for 9 from just 83 overs, surely one of the best days of cricket since the war.
The last wicket fell at 450, whereupon England promptly collapsed to 32 for 3.
The infamous barrage of bouncers at Close and Edrich, Old Trafford 1976.
Close sways away from another one from Michael Holding which Murray takes above his head.
Willey and Balderstone, both on debut, stemmed the tide for a while, and then Greig and Knott came together at 169 for 5 with the follow-on a distinct possibility.
They put on 152 before they were separated, first attacking well and then being contained.
When Greig went for 116, Snow supported Knott, who spent over an hour in the nineties before reaching the same score as his captain, and when the tail went quickly the total was 387.
A shower livened up the pitch and the West Indian openers soon fell.
On the Monday morning two more wickets went down and, at 72 for 4, the excitement began to mount.
The crucial innings then came from King, who hammered 50 off 39 balls to help the score to 196; England needed 260 to win, with time not a problem.
Willis's 5 for 42 clearly inspired Roberts, who in his first four overs sent back Steele, Hayes and Balderstone: Woolmer and Willey took the score to 80 before the former departed, and Willey and Greig then looked as though they might turn the  match England's way.
But at 140 Willey went to a superb catch by Roberts, and at the close they were on 146 for 5, needing another 114.
Clearly much would depend on whether Knott could stay with Greig but, after nightwatchman Underwood went, Knott and Snow both followed quickly, all dismissed by Daniel inside four overs.
Greig's response was to throw the bat, and Ward hung on while 46 were added; but, with the score on 204, he was caught behind off Holding and Willis was lbw first ball, leaving Greig unbeaten on 76 and West Indies winners by 55 runs.
Greig was gracious in defeat, saying that their play on the first day deserved every credit.
Headingley 1976.
Holding beat Greig four times in one over and the two faces tell the story.
Greig went on to a century but West Indies won the match.
Alan Knott has been second only to Les Ames as an England wicket-keeper/batsman.
Roy Fredericks's second century helped him pass 500 runs for the series, although Richards and Greenidge still finished above him in the aggregates and averages.
Short, left-handed and aggressive, he was an opener who hit the ball extremely hard, played every shot in the book with great relish and was always looking to attack from the first ball.
Not only the Headingley crowd would testify to this; Lillee, Thomson and their friends saw him reach his century from 71 balls against them in 1975–6, and go on to his highest Test score of 169.
He came into the Guyana team as a 20 year   runs straight away, and remained a permanent fixture.
In all, he played 59 Tests and scored 4,334 runs at 42 with eight centuries, took a handful of very expensive wickets with his left-arm spinners and was a quite brilliant close leg fielder.
He played for Glamorgan in 1971 and 1972 (and briefly the following year before joining the touring party), scoring a thousand runs in both seasons and, with Alan Jones, putting on a county record opening stand of 330 against Northamptonshire in 1972.
Perhaps the best way to describe him is as a typical West Indian batsman, fundamentally very reliable and dependable yet always looking to attack if possible, always full of attractive stroke-play.
He had the occasional run of poor form, but when the runs came they came thick, fast and gloriously.
At Headingley in 1976 Deryck Murray took five catches in the second innings.
Alan Knott was one of them off Wayne Daniel's bowling.
Collis King joins in the appeal.
Headingley 1976 and Gordon Greenidge at second slip practises for the high jump.
In the first picture he catches John Snow off Daniel's bowling and in the second he celebrates as Murray catches Alan Ward off Holding.
Collis King is at first slip.
Four players had especial reason to remember the Oval game: two scored double centuries, one took fourteen wickets and one became the leading Test wicket-keeper.
Lloyd won his fourth toss and, after Greenidge had gone for a duck, Richards shared in three century stands.
Fredericks made 71, and Rowe had reached 70 when he was stumped by  
He might have been small but Roy Fredericks hit the ball exceptionally hard.
Alan Knott is denied the chance to pounce.
Knott, overtaking Godfrey Evans with his 220th dismissal.
By the end of the first day, Richards was on 200 and the score was 373 for 3.
Nothing much changed next morning as 141 were scored, but early in the afternoon Richards was finally out.
291 made off 366 balls, with 38 fours, in just under eight hours does rather speak for itself.
It meant that he had scored 1,710 Test runs in eleven matches in 1976 at an average of 90, still the record aggregate for a calendar year.
Lloyd soon followed for 84, but then King and Murray continued the torment, and, when the declaration came on the second evening, the score was 687 for 8, still the West Indies record against England.
Next day it was a question of who would stay with Amiss, playing his first Test of the summer.
Steele did for a century partnership and then Willey did the same; but when Greig was out near the close of play, with the board on 303 for 5, there was a pitch invasion by, for the most part, West Indian fans.
This caused a delay of nine minutes, but play was able to restart for the last couple of overs.
Most of the wickets had been falling to  
Dennis Amiss on his way to a double century at the Oval in 1976.
Cherish the fact that he is wearing a cap; the days of the anonymous helmet were drawing near.
Holding, and when he finally bowled Amiss for a splendid 203 it was clear that the follow-on would not be avoided.
Knott and Miller, on debut, had a useful stand, but when the innings closed at 435 the deficit was 252.
Daniel, though, was injured and Holding, having taken 8 for 92, clearly deserved a rest, so Lloyd decided to bat again.
Fredericks and Greenidge thought this an excellent idea and hammered 182 in two hours twenty minutes without being separated, by which time England were just demoralized.
They had six hours twenty minutes to survive, but the first hour of the last day saw five wickets crash for 78.
Knott did his best with another fifty but it was all over with eighty minutes to spare; all out 203 and victory by 231 runs.
Holding's figures this time were 6 for 57 for match figures of 14 for 149, the first West Indian to take more than twelve wickets in a Test.
achieved on a batsman's pitch from which no other bowler got any response at all.
He did it in the classic manner, by pitching the ball well up and bowling very, very quickly, and the fact that he needed help from his  colleagues for only two of those wickets shows just how accurate he was.
Tall and slim, without the usual broad shoulders of the pace man, he had excelled at athletics as a youngster, with the result that he was a fast bowler like virtually no other; his approach to the wicket was so soft and silky that he hardly seemed to touch the ground at all, and several umpires said that they were not able to hear him running in.
Until he cut it down in later years, his run-up was extremely long — and his saunter back to his mark extremely slow — but the speed that it generated undoubtedly justified the length, and the grace of it all was an aesthetic delight.
As the years passed, he sacrificed a little speed for greater control, especially of away-swing, but that run-up never for a moment lost its beauty.
‘Whispering Death’.
The superbly smooth delivery of Michael Holding, eye fixed on the spot he is going to hit, head steady as a rock.
A wonderful athlete in action.
His career was not without its less attractive moments, and it is sad that many fans will remember the famous picture in the 1981 Wisden of him kicking down the stumps after having an appeal refused in New Zealand almost as readily as they will recall his wonderful bowling; yet even in dissent he was physically graceful, and the picture is positively balletic.
The fact that he could get such good results by orthodox bowling also left one wondering why he occasionally indulged in a bouncer war, for it obviously did his reputation no good and was not as a rule very productive.
His debut in the disastrous series in Australia was not a happy one, but things improved at home to India and then he really came into his own against England, finishing with 28 wickets at under 13.
By the time he called it a day, he had played in 60 Tests and taken 249 wickets at 23, and like all of his fast-bowling colleagues had benefited from being one of a quartet as he could operate in short spells and rest more often.
Since he did not have the physical strength of most of the others, this was important for him and must have contributed a lot to his effectiveness.
On that basis, then, we have a reason to be glad that Clive Lloyd adapted his strategy of all-out pace, for had he not done so perhaps we would have seen less of one of the most watchable of all bowlers.
Holding's 28 wickets were equalled by Andy Roberts.
The first Antiguan to play Test cricket, Roberts had made his debut during Denness's tour, the first of the unending stream of top-class fast bowlers which has transformed modern cricket.
He played only once in that series but was then brought back for the rubber in India and made a big impact, so that when he had Steele's wicket at Headingley he chalked up his hundredth Test wicket in the record time of two years 144 days.
Tall and strong, with very broad shoulders, he would go on to claim 202 victims at 25 from his 47 Tests, of which 50 came in a dozen games against England.
From a fairly economical run-up he bowled with great pace, usually very  sometimes, as at Old Trafford, he would overdo the bouncers, and he had his share of injured batsmen to his credit — or rather debit.
More often, though, he preferred to pitch the ball up and get his wickets in less intimidating fashion.
He played for Hampshire from 1973 to 1978, had a season with New South Wales, and appeared for Leicestershire between 1981 and 1984.
For Hampshire he had a very successful first full season, taking 119 wickets at only 13 in 1974, and having some good days in limited-overs cricket as well.
Thereafter the relationship became steadily more strained and he left during the 1978 season.
He gained a reputation as the Buster Keaton of the cricket world, a man who rarely seemed to have any expression on his face and who was not one for the excited cavortings that greet the fall of a wicket; yet behind the mask a good deal of thought was given to his bowling, and he was liked and respected by his fellow players.
In 1985 he was awarded the CBE.
During this 1976 tour, West Indies played twenty-six first-class matches and won eighteen of them, losing only to Middlesex, the champions, and T.N. Pearce's XI (which contained eight Middlesex players) at the  
Perfect balance in the leap before the delivery stride.
Andy Roberts set the Caribbean fast bowling conveyor belt in motion.
Scarborough festival when they omitted their leading strike bowlers.
Clearly they were helped by having hardly any matches affected by the weather, but it was still a wonderfully sustained performance.
Perhaps for many of the fans the best moment of all came at the end of the fifth Test, when Tony Greig went out and ‘grovelled’ before them.
Before the teams met again the Great Schism had occurred, as Kerry Packer inserted his spanner into the gently revolving works.
For nine Tests against Australia and India, West Indies were led by Alvin Kallicharran, with some names alongside him which now look very unfamiliar.
England had lost fewer players than most countries to World Series Cricket and had won a number of rubbers as a result but, when the armistice was signed, England's limitations were soon exposed.
To mark the return to normal, a totally abnormal arrangement was made, whereby West Indies and England were both in Australia at the same time, playing alternate Tests against the home team.
Since England lost 3–0 and West Indies won 2–0, there was not much doubt who was Top Team, though, having said that, West Indies then lost a very bad-tempered series in New Zealand, going down by one wicket in the only Test to see a result.
Shortly afterwards, in May 1980, Clive Lloyd and Co. arrived in England with a squad that included Holding, Roberts, Garner, Marshall and Cruft.
There was a spinner in the party, Derek Parry, but needless to say he did not play in any of the Tests.
After the series in Australia, Mike Brearley announced that he would not be able to tour in 1980–1 as he wanted to continue his studies in psychoanalysis, and the England selectors decided to appoint a new captain for the start of the 1980 rubber.
They chose Ian Botham, their young hero — he was then twenty-four — who had already performed great deeds in the twenty-five Tests he had so far played.
The feeling among press and public was that he was too young, too inexperienced, and too much was being asked of him too soon.
Yet he had been Brearley's choice to succeed him, for he had perceived that Botham was an intelligent, tactically aware player and believed that he offered ‘tremendous hope for a new, vital start’.
His initial appointment was for just two Tests, a demonstration of lack of faith that cannot have helped his confidence and seemed to many to be ludicrous.
In the event, his twelve Tests proved a singularly unhappy period as he lost four and drew eight; he insisted that the responsibility did not affect him but his form declined — partly at least through a back injury — and his performances varied from moderate to dismal.
Any present-day fan will be familiar with the Botham story, for it has been told too often to need repeating.
No one would suggest that he rivals Sobers as the greatest of all-rounders, for, although he has taken more wickets, his batting has been much less consistent and his Test average is some twenty-three points lower than Sobers'.
Compared with the other great all-rounders of his time, Imran Khan, Richard Hadlee and Kapil Dev, he is certainly the best batsman and best slip fielder, but Hadlee and Imran are more dangerous bowlers, and much less likely to have a bad day.
Perhaps no player has ever been quite as competitive as Botham, and if his combativeness has led him into trouble off the field it has generally worked in his favour on it — except when he has refused to part with the ball despite not bowling well, or when he has holed out in the deep when a more circumspect approach was required.
As a public figure hero-worshipped by countless youngsters, his drug-taking was a sad business, but few people in any field have ever used their fame better than his long-distance walks which have raised vast sums for charity.
One of his regrets is that in four series against West Indies his record is very ordinary — one innings in which he took eight wickets, but little else of note — and he is aware that not having proved himself against the best team in the world will be held against him when reputations come to be assessed.
His captaincy suffered by having to succeed Brearley, for the Middlesex man's wonderful understanding of the psychological needs of each of his players was something that Botham could never hope to emulate.
By nature he is very much ‘one of the boys’, which must have made it hard to assert himself, he does not find it easy to take advice and is readily upset by criticism.
There were times when his own belief in himself as a great player could backfire on him if he failed to realize that he was having an off day, and he could look stubborn and bloody-minded as a result.
Since he was not a natural captain he had to lead by example, and when the mighty deeds failed to materialize he was very much up against it.
Nor was he helped by being up against the mighty deeds of the West Indies in his first two series, and perhaps if he had been able to cut his teeth on something less difficult the story might have had a happier turn to it.
The story came desperately close to beginning with a victory.
On a Trent Bridge wicket that saw the ball moving around off the seam and in conditions that helped the swing bowlers, Botham won the toss and batted.
Before long England were benefitting from the first of a string of catches dropped by both sides, and their total of 263 was over a hundred more than it would have been had Boycott, Woolmer and Botham not had a second chance.
Botham's 57 was top score, so at least his captaincy got  off to a bright start.
In reply, Greenidge and Richards hammered 88 in even time, but then only Murray made a substantial score, his 64 being joint top with Richards and 41 more than it should have been had a catch been accepted; 308 all out.
By the beginning of the fourth day, England were well placed at 145 for 2, although both Boycott and Woolmer had once again been missed; but they batted slowly and then four wickets fell quickly.
Willey held things together for a while and the total reached 252, helped by no fewer than 52 extras since the ball was moving around so much that Murray had a very hard time behind the stumps.
West Indies had over eight hours to make 208, but on that pitch it never looked easy.
What he lacked in aesthetic grace Bob Willis made up in speed, determination and sheer guts.
Despite appearances, umpire David Constant is not asleep.
Greenidge soon went, leaving Richards to lay into the bowling.
In 56 minutes he made 48 before Botham got him, and by the close of play just 99 were needed with eight wickets left.
Next day Bacchus was caught behind off Hendrick's first ball, and suddenly England began to think they might do it.
Willis had one of his inspired days and, after taking four wickets in the first innings, went one better this time, with 5 for 65.
Kallicharran, Lloyd (with an injured hand), Murray and Marshall all went, and when the seventh wicket fell 28 were still needed.
The crucial moments had occurred earlier, though, when Haynes was twice dropped at slip — first by Tavaré on 23 and then by Hendrick on 49, both fairly straightforward chances.
Haynes was eventually run out for 62 and left the field in tears thinking he had lost his team the match, but by then only three more were needed and Roberts was striking the ball well.
He had been dropped off a hard chance when just twelve were needed, but went on to hit the winning four off Botham, and his eight wickets and two useful knocks earned him the Man of the Match award.
England were left to reflect on one of the game's oldest sayings, the one about catches winning matches.
It is interesting to think that had they snatched — or preferably caught cleanly — that victory, the pattern of English Test cricket might have been changed for years ahead, for, as the other four matches were all drawn, a victorious first series might have given Botham's captaincy the shove it needed to get airborne.
At Lord's, England were almost certainly saved by the weather.
Their innings, though, was marked by a wonderful display from Gooch, his thirty-sixth attempt finally produced a Test century, and it was very much worth waiting for.
His 123 came out of 165 off 162 deliveries in 211 minutes; a few months earlier in Australia he had run himself out on 99 in his desperation to reach the magic figure, but one would never have guessed it from the effortless way he swept there now.
Unfortunately, his teammates did not provide much support; Tavaré managed an incredibly laborious 42 but everyone else failed.
269 did not look anything like enough; and when West Indies reached 260 for 1 it looked positively minute.
For Richards it was another triumph, with 145 coming off just 159 balls, a display even more spectacular than Gooch's — although the Englishman had had to contend with rather more hostile bowling.
Richards also had the benefit of solid support at the other end as Haynes steadily made his way to 184, the highest West Indian innings at Lord's, and with Lloyd chipping in a fifty the total reached 518.
By now it was near the close on the third day; Gooch and Boycott made a confident start, but much of the Monday was lost to rain and the game was then abandoned on the last afternoon with  almost ten hours having been lost.
At 133 for 2, England might have fought back for an honourable draw; or they might not.
The honourable draw had to wait till Old Trafford, although over eleven hours were lost to the weather.
Lloyd won the toss and put England in despite the pitch looking good for runs, and before four o'clock had supervised their dismissal for 150.
Brian Rose was brought in for his first home Test and promised he would attack the bowling; he was as good as his word and made 70, but 33 from Gatting was the only other contribution as the last seven wickets went for 24 in fifty-two minutes.
England soon struck back, though, and had three wickets down for 25, only for Richards to launch into Willis.
65 came from 68 balls, with 53 of them debited to the Warwickshire man.
Time was lost on the first two days and then the Saturday was washed out altogether, so it was Monday before Lloyd was able to complete his first Test hundred at his adopted home, in what many thought would be his last opportunity.
He held the second half of the innings together, passed 5,000 Test runs, and saw the total to 260.
Answers on a postcard to…
Desmond Haynes poses for a ‘supply your own caption’ picture.
Haynes in more familiar pose — on his way to 184 at Lord's in 1980, at the time the highest West Indian Test innings at headquarters.
Faced with a deficit of 110, England actually got their heads down and battled.
Boycott led the way with 86 and everyone made a contribution of sorts, but soon after lunch on the final day they were 290 for 6 and defeat was still possible.
It was Willey, supported by Emburey, who kept it at bay, the final score being 391 for 7; admittedly, Roberts had hardly been able to bowl on the last day, but the home team had shown themselves that they could bat a bit if they tried.
There were times at the Oval when both sides had thoughts of winning; at one point the bookmakers quoted 100 to 1 against a West Indies victory, but a day later they were 5 to 4 when England's Pythonesque second innings was at its nadir.
Their first innings was marked by an over rate of 12.3 an hour against which Gooch scored 83, Rose and Boycott made fifties, Gatting almost did, and with the help of 57 extras the total reached 370.
Once again, the Saturday's play was washed out, but on Monday morning five wickets were down for 100 and, with Lloyd having badly pulled a hamstring while fielding, the follow-on definitely loomed.
It  was Bacchus who saved the day with 61, Marshall and Garner both made forties, and the final total reached 265.
The Oval 1980 saw one of the more remarkable Test scorecards — after being 92 for 9 when Bob Willis joined Peter Willey, the innings was declared on 209 when Willey reached his maiden Test century.
He is congratulated by partner and fans alike.
England then collapsed in wonderfully spectacular fashion; Rose made 41, but until Willis joined Willey everyone else had failed dismally and nine wickets had gone down for 92.
Garner and Croft were by now both injured, but West Indies suddenly found themselves up against some determination.
When Willis came out, England were 197 ahead with 151 minutes and twenty overs left and there cannot have been many who doubted West Indies would win, but with Willis lunging his left leg forward and Willey protecting him from the strike as much as possible, they began to put together a remarkable stand.
By the end of the second Test, Willey's last nine Test innings had produced 90 runs, and, had he been caught when on 13 at Old Trafford, his Test days would almost certainly have been over; as it was, his 62 not out there and his reputation as a battler persuaded the selectors to press on with him, and he justified their faith now.
Their unbeaten stand of 117 was only thirteen away from the England tenth-wicket record when, with Willis on 24, he reached his maiden Test century, Botham declared and the match ended.
From 92 for 9 to 209 for 9 represented one of the oddest innings in Test cricket.
After a fine spring, the summer of 1980 became a big disappointment and the weather reached something of a soggy climax for the fifth Test at Headingley.
After two days of almost non-stop rain, the first day was washed out completely, since the lakes dotted around the ground were not thought to be conducive to good cricket.
Hard work by the ground staff enabled play to begin on Friday afternoon, whereupon Richards, leading West Indies for the first time because of Lloyd's injury, gleefully put England in.
Before long they were 59 for 6; Botham swung the bat for 37 off as many balls, and Bairstow, replacing the runless Knott, made 40 to take the total to 143.
Next day, according to Wisden in poetic mood, ‘thick grey cloud hung sullenly over the ground from start to stumps, creating an atmosphere straight out of Wuthering Heights ’.
In conditions quite alien to them, the West Indies batsmen performed altogether more creditably than their opponents, Greenidge and Haynes producing their best opening stand of the series, 83, and Richards, Kallicharran and Holding all making useful knocks in a score of 245.
When the Monday's play was then completely washed out too, England had to accept that they were not going to square the series and could hope only for another draw.
Gooch became the only player to score a fifty in the match and put on 95 for the first wicket with Boycott, but when the fifth wicket fell just before tea they were only 72  ahead and could still have lost.
Rose had pulled a thigh muscle while fielding but now, batting with a runner, made an unbeaten 43 to steer England to safety.
After having lost over fourteen hours to the weather, the game was called off with the score at 227 for 6 declared, and a series that had promised so much with its exciting start fizzled out meaninglessly, with almost seven of the twenty-five playing days lost.
Botham did not even have much luck with the weather during his captaincy.
years which had seen him play in 62 Tests and make 189 dismissals, at the time the West Indian record by a street.
He was only twenty when he made his debut in England in 1963, promptly setting a West Indian record with 24 dismissals in the series.
If he did not touch such heights again, he remained a thoroughly reliable keeper right to the end, small, neat and quiet, and rarely given to histrionics.
He interrupted his cricketing career to go to Cambridge, whom he captained, and then Nottingham University to take a degree in business studies, playing for the county from 1966 to  
Deryck Murray, fresh from the shower, celebrates his seven victims in the Headingley Test of 1976.
1969 while he was there.
A few years later, between 1972 and 1975, he had a spell with Warwickshire, during which time he returned to the Test team against Australia in 1972–3 — he had played only one other series in the meantime, against England in 1967–8 — and remained a fixture for the rest of the decade.
He was a very handy and determined batsman, good enough to score almost 2,000 Test runs at nearly 23, even opening the batting a few times, and over 13,000 during his career, including 1,000 a season three times.
For much of the 1970s he was Lloyd's vice-captain and led the team once, against Australia in the first match after Packer's ‘circus’ had left town.
He was also a prime mover in the bid to get better pay for West Indian cricketers, putting in much work as the first secretary of the West Indian Players' Association.
Quiet and reserved he may have been, but his determination to succeed has been of great importance to his colleagues, both on and off the field.
Although they had recently lost narrowly to New Zealand, there was no question that West Indies were now the outstanding team in the world, and they were to continue that way throughout the 1980s.
To paraphrase the last chapter of Sellar and Yeatman's classic 1066 And All That , West Indies were thus clearly top nation, and History came to a.
That chapter, incidentally, is entitled ‘A Bad Thing’.
A few months later, England were in the Caribbean for a tour that, in the problems they encountered, lacked only a riot to round it off.
For a start, the weather was atrocious when they most needed to acclimatize, and in their first seven weeks they had only seventeen days of cricket.
Finding decent practice facilities was a constant headache, leading to some crazy situations; in St Vincent, for example, Ken Barrington, the assistant manager, hunted all over for a place for Boycott to practise, and eventually found a piece of flat ground near the airport which had ducks waddling around and a donkey at long leg.
There was the cancellation of the second Test after the Guyanese government decided to deport Robin Jackman because of his South African connections; and then came the real tragedy, when Ken Barrington had a heart attack and died during the third Test in Barbados.
By the end of that Test they were two down with two to play, and it is difficult to think of any England tour where such a low point had been reached.
Yet in the last two Tests they fought back well, with some help from the weather which few could have grudged them, to earn draws, several batsmen contributing excellent fighting innings.
Botham retained  the England captaincy but, although he topped the bowling averages, his form with the bat was wretched.
In contrast Clive Lloyd, back after his injury, had a splendid series with a lowest score of 58 in five innings.
England did actually begin with a victory, Miller and Willey rather unexpectedly bowling out the Young West Indies XI on the last afternoon.
Thereafter rain restricted them to one-day games and half of a four-day game, so they went into the first Test in Trinidad very under-prepared.
It soon showed, even in their team selection, for they left out Gatting and played three spinners.
The start was delayed for three hours partly because the bowlers' run-ups were damp and partly because vandals, protesting about the omission of Deryck Murray, the local captain, had left wet patches on the pitch — and thrown a good few bottles around as well.
With this in mind, Botham chose to field first, only for Greenidge and Haynes to put on 168 for the first wicket.
On the second day, Emburey bowled forty overs for 81 runs and five wickets, but Lloyd, David Murray and Roberts all batted well.
Roberts's fifty included an over from Botham from which he hit twenty-four runs (462660), a new Test record for a six-ball over, and Lloyd finally declared on the third morning at 426 for 9.
The rest day, incidentally, was taken after two days for the lovely Caribbean reason of avoiding a clash with a steel-band festival.
It was Croft who claimed the bowling honours in England's first innings as only Gooch and Gower passed forty in a total of 178.
With time lost to the weather, England were faced with surviving for eight and three-quarter hours to draw the match, but Gooch and Rose fell quickly.
Boycott stayed over five hours for 70 but had no lengthy support, Botham holed out in the deep when his responsibility as captain was to put his head down, and England never looked as though they were going to make it.
Botham's dismissal was the result of fine captaincy by Lloyd, for when it seemed he was going to bat sensibly Lloyd put on Richards, knowing full well Botham would not be able to resist trying to hit his friend out of the ground, and sure enough the sucker punch worked.
Even with more time lost, it was all over before the last hour.
169 all out gave West Indies a win by an innings and 79 runs, the first time they had beaten England by an innings at home since 1934–5; by coincidence, it was the first time an England captain had chosen to field first in the Caribbean since Wyatt did in the same series.
While in Trinidad, Bob Willis had been injured and returned home.
His replacement was Robin Jackman who arrived in Guyana on 23 February, with the Test scheduled to begin on 28 February.
It would seem that the mischief was started by a Jamaican radio commentator, who suggested  that as Jackman had coached in South Africa the Guyanese government was contravening the Gleneagles agreement by admitting him.
The British Minister for Sport, Hector Monro, pointed out that the Gleneagles agreement was irrelevant here as it made no reference to actions by one country against the nationals of another, but on 26 February the British High Commissioner in Georgetown was notified that Jackman's visitor's permit had been withdrawn and he must leave the country.
At the same time, Alan Smith, the England manager, announced that England would not play the second Test as it was ‘no longer possible for the Test team to be chosen without restrictions being imposed’.
The following day, the English party left for Barbados and, after lengthy discussions with representatives of the governments of Barbados, Montserrat, Antigua and Jamaica, the other scheduled venues, it was stated on 4 March that the tour would continue.
Informed sources in the Caribbean thought it likely that the political maneouvrings behind all this were by way of a reprisal for a report by Lord Avebury criticizing Forbes Burnham's ruling party for election-rigging.
The point, though, which takes the whole affair into the realms of the ludicrous is that other members of the England party, such as Boycott and Bairstow, had also played and coached in South Africa but no objection was made to them.
There seems to be no logical reason for ignoring some and then picking on one, but one can only suppose that, having missed, for whatever reason, their first opportunity of causing trouble, the authorities were just glad to get a second chance.
Much sympathy went Jackman's way as many felt that he had been humiliated; and went also to the cricket fans of Guyana, deprived of a Test match and also, because of the weather, of any game against the tourists apart from a one-day international.
On England's next tour in 1985–6, Guyana was carefully omitted from the itinerary, and it would be nine years before they returned — only for the Test to be washed out completely.
There was a warm welcome from the people of Barbados, but their sympathy did not prevent them from preparing a pitch to suit the fast bowlers when the Test took place.
One little piece of history was made when Roland Butcher became the first black man to play for England, and by a neat coincidence it was on the ground just fourteen miles from his birth-place.
He did not have an outstanding game but was given the warmest of receptions by the crowd when he batted and was helped on his way by reassuring words from Desmond Haynes, a fellow Barbadian.
Once again, Botham won the toss and chose to field as the pitch looked as though it would be most lively on the first morning, and for the second  time his decision could not really be criticized.
Jackman had Greenidge caught with his fifth ball in Test cricket, and shortly before lunch the fourth wicket went down for 65.
Gomes, on 7, was bowled by Dilley off one of just two no-balls delivered all day and, on 17, was dropped by Bairstow off a straightforward chance.
He went on to 58, putting on 154 with Lloyd, the captain batting beautifully for a century to take his team out of trouble.
On the second morning, the innings was finished off for 265, only for England to collapse dismally.
Holding started it with a blistering over of flat-out speed that accounted for Boycott, after which no one passed 26 and they were all out for 122, with Croft again the leading wicket-taker.
Late that evening, Ken Barrington suffered a heart attack and died.
It does not take much to imagine the effect of this on a group of already dispirited players, all of whom held him in the warmest affection.
Many a tear was shed that night, and after the minute's silence at the beginning of the next day the play had an unreal feel to it.
It was dominated by a century from Richards, which on the fourth morning he took in explosive style to 182 not out when Lloyd declared on 379 for 7.
Faced with a deficit of 522, Boycott and Gatting fell in successive balls with the score on 2;, Gooch and Gower put on 120, but when Gower went for 54 Gooch found little company.
He completed his century next day but the last wicket fell at 224, leaving West Indies victors by 298 runs.
It all seemed very irrelevant.
Out of these depths the England players fought back well, some of them showing just the qualities that Barrington would have wanted.
Led by Geoff Miller as Botham was attending Viv Richards' wedding — to which fifty people were invited and two thousand turned up — they beat the Leeward Islands and then moved on to Antigua for the inaugural Test at St John's, West Indies' first new Test ground since the opening series of 1929–30.
When they inspected the wicket, they found it being rolled by some prisoners from the local jail, one of whom looked familiar to Boycott.
‘I remember you from seven years ago,’ he said.
‘I'll still be here in ten years,’ replied the man.
‘I'm doing life!’
On what was described as an old-style West Indian pitch, Botham again won the toss and at last chose to bat; a good start was ended when Gooch ran himself out, and soon wickets were tumbling.
135 for 3 became 138 for 6 and the writing was in its usual place on the wall.
Enter Peter Willey, determined to take on the bowlers.
Downton and Emburey kept him company for a while, and when number eleven Dilley joined him he had 69; when Dilley was out for 2 next morning Willey had completed his  century, a splendid 102 not out that took England to 271, Croft finishing with 6 for 74.
West Indies soon lost Haynes, but Richards, on his home ground, and Greenidge set off at an explosive pace with 45 off the first seven overs.
This became slower and slower as the day went on, and although Richards reached his hundred after tea he then scored only three in an hour.
236 for 2 overnight became 296 for 7 next morning as England bowled themselves back into the game, but Lloyd and Garner put on 83 for the eighth wicket and then Holding and Croft an unbeaten 67 for the tenth as the bowlers tired, enabling Lloyd to declare on 468.
With twelve and a half hours left, England were clearly up against it, so when the rain fell on the fourth day they were not too upset.
After having had it ruin so much of their practice time, it seemed only fair that it should come to their aid when they needed it.
Boycott and Gooch then batted steadily for three hours before Gooch departed for 83, after which Gower and Boycott took their team to safety.
Both fell before the end but Boycott had another century under his belt as the score reached 234 for 3.
If the people of Antigua had not seen the victory they wanted, they had at least enjoyed some good fighting cricket.
The Kingston match had a similar pattern, except that England batted first because they had been put in by Lloyd.
The first day belonged very much to Gooch, who made a fine 153 that was to earn him the Man of the Match award.
In support, though, only Boycott reached 40 and the overnight score was 278 for 6; next morning they were all out for just another seven runs.
The last three West Indian wickets were also to fall cheaply, but before that the batsmen had done rather better; Greenidge and Haynes posted another century partnership and Lloyd and Gomes both reached the nineties.
442 all out for a lead of 157, leaving England again with two days to survive.
In an hour they were 32 for 3 and that was clearly that, but now it was Gower's turn for the heroics.
They were lucky to lose almost three hours to rain, but Gower was still there at the end of the last day, having batted seven and three-quarter hours for 154 not out.
He had two principal supporters; Willey made 67 in a stand of 136 for the fourth wicket, but when the sixth wicket fell there were nearly four hours left and the lead was only 58.
The man for the crisis proved to be Downton, who stayed with Gower till the end, which came when Botham declared on 302 for 6; they were helped by Marshall not being able to bowl, but it was still a fine piece of concentration of which Ken Barrington would have been proud.
In the light of what was to happen in the next few years, defeat by just 2–0 may be seen as something of a triumph, especially in view of the two  traumas that occurred.
One man who emerged from the tour with much credit was Alan Smith, the manager, who had been diplomacy personified during the political crisis and sensitive and supportive at the time of Barrington's death.
Of the players, Gooch in particular had had a good tour and was really beginning to fulfil his potential, but the difference between the two bowling attacks seemed just to be increasing.
The home bowler of the series was Colin Croft with twenty-four wickets at under 19, and few English batsmen will have been sorry that he played in only two rubbers against them.
Tall and strong, he was unusual in regularly bowling from wide of the crease, sometimes even so wide that his hand could not be seen against the sightscreen, which obviously caused the batsman trouble.
If this reduced the likelihood of an lbw decision the unfamiliar angle made the batsman's job that much more difficult.
Colin croft — took 8 for 29 against Pakistan in only his second Test, the second-best West Indian Test figures of all.
BLACK WASHES BEST
We now reach the part of this history where English fans, if they can bear to continue, will really need to grit their teeth.
The summer of 1984 was a glorious one, the West Indian team was one of their strongest and had just beaten Australia 3–0; the England team, with some of the top players banned after going to South Africa, was one of their most ordinary and had just lost series to Pakistan and New Zealand for the first time, and it was all rather one-sided.
The tourists lost only one match all season, a one-day international, and England hardly looked convincing in that.
Clive Lloyd still had, it appeared, dozens of ultra-fast bowlers to call on, while England s slender resources were entrusted to the charge of a fellow with blond curly hair and a pleasing batting style.
As a young man, David Gower prophesied that he would be England captain by the age of 25.
He made it, too, taking over against Pakistan in 1982 for one match when Willis was injured — and, given the most toothless of bowling attacks, losing heavily.
In Pakistan in 1983–4 he took over again when Willis had to return home sick and gained two creditable draws, after which he was officially appointed to lead England against the West Indies in 1984, at the age of 27.
With the easy grace and dignity associated with the old amateur tradition there was never any doubt that the job would come to him, and so gifted was he as a batsman that one somehow assumed he would slip easily into it once he had learned the ropes.
The fact that many another highly gifted player has not found captaincy easy tended to be overlooked.
He arrived on the Test arena in memorable style against Pakistan in 1978, hooking his first ball for four with nonchalant ease.
Thereafter he took heed from being dropped once or twice, and soon established a permanent place in the team.
As England's leading batsman of the 1980s he has borne a heavy responsibility and perhaps because of this has never completely fulfilled his potential; few batsmen can have been blessed with so much natural ability, yet he often looks vulnerable until he has settled down and even then has succumbed countless times to an infuriating nibble or waft outside the off stump.
When things are not right he can be   almost static, but when in full flow his grace, elegance and timing have been beautiful to behold.
He is famed for his ‘laid-back’ attitude, his apparent unconcern about his actions both at the crease and at press conferences, and such an easy-going approach led many people to believe that he had little real commitment.
In this they were wrong, for he has shown many times that he can fight as well as anyone.
If as a captain he was not authoritarian enough, that was just not his style; given opposition that were not vastly superior he could lead a team well enough, and chalked up two notable series wins against India and Australia.
His record is singularly unhappy, though, with five victories and eighteen defeats in his thirty-two games in charge, culminating in the ignominy of the 1989 Ashes series.
In anyone's book that is failure of some magnitude, but the fact for English cricket was simply that there were very few players of real Test class around at the time; after all, when Mike Gatting, one of the best of the county captains, got his chance he won only twice in twenty-two Tests.
If David Gower's captaincy against West Indies left something to be desired, his batting has given endless pleasure to millions of people.
The Test series began at Edgbaston as it was to continue — with a thumping.
After half an hour the first English injury occurred, Andy Lloyd going into the record books as the possessor of the briefest of all Test careers.
He ha scored ten in thirty minutes before he was hit on the temple of his helmet by a ball from Marshall that lifted sharply; with his  vision blurred it was several days before he left hospital, and he did not play again all season.
Since he had been hailed as the new John Edrich and had already shown himself capable of taking on that mantle, it was a bad blow for England.
Four more batsmen had departed without the board showing fifty before Botham, dropped before he had scored, chanced his luck for 64, and 33 from Downton helped the score to 191.
Edgbaston 1984 and the shortest career in Test cricket is just ending.
After only half an hour Andy Lloyd was felled by Malcolm Marshall bouncer and played no more that season.
West Indies soon lost their openers, but then Gomes went glory-chasing; with Richards, he put on 206 for the third wicket and, with Lloyd, 124 for the fifth.
By the time the eighth wicket went down the lead was already 264, so perhaps it was unkind of Baptiste and Holding to hammer 150 in 113 minutes for West Indies' ninth wicket record against England.
The final total was 606, scored in only ten hours of excellent batsmanship, although it was widely felt that the England selectors had helped them along by omitting Foster and playing two spinners, Cook and Miller, on a  pitch of low bounce.
England duly subsided a second time, the honours going to Downton who was promoted to open in place of Andy Lloyd and made a solid 56, but wickets fell steadily and 235 all out meant that the victory margin was an innings and 180 runs.
For many people the saddest aspect was the selectors' policy of playing Randall at number three; every fan in the country could have told them that he should have batted down the order and that exposing him so early was almost certain to fail.
There was much wrath that he had been meaninglessly sacrificed and a Test career that had given so much pleasure needlessly brought to a premature end.
Physiotherapist Bernard Thomas tells Lloyd to touch his nose, and it is soon clear that his vision is impaired.
Lord's celebrated its centenary of Test cricket and produced a match worthy of the occasion.
England were put in, but Fowler, with a good fighting hundred, and Broad, with 55 on debut, gave England the rare luxury of a century opening stand.
Unfortunately, the next biggest contributor was Extras, and 286 all out looked very thin; until, that is, I.T.
Botham produced one of his more inspired performances.
He captured three quick wickets before Richards and Lloyd (who passed 7,000 Test runs) steadied the ship, but then had Richards lbw, although umpire Meyer later admitted that he may have made a mistake and had  considered recalling the batsman.
Botham had the first six wickets before Marshall and Baptiste held him up for while, Marshall being lucky not to be on the wrong end of a legendary catch when Don Topley, a groundstaff boy who went on to play for Essex, brilliantly caught him one-handed on the square leg boundary, only to put one foot over the rope.
Even so, Botham took 8 for 103, the second-best return of his Test career, as West Indies were all out for 245.
Viv Richards shows his reaction at Gower's exit as the ritual dance begins.
England's second innings, after three wickets had gone cheaply, centred on Lamb and Botham.
The 128 they made for the fifth wicket actually saw the visitors go on the defensive, although not for long.
Botham went for 81, but with less than an hour left of the fourth day Lamb accepted an offer of bad light, which most people thought was a mistake.
He had been batting steadily and was well set, and since England, 328 ahead with three wickets left, were apparently in control they should have used all the time available to build up their score.
Thus ran the argument.
Instead, he was out first thing next morning for 110 and Gower declared at 300 for 9, leaving West Indies to make 342 in four and a half hours and twenty overs.
It was a perfectly good declaration, but before long the older spectators were recalling Headingley 1948, when Yardley set Australia over 400 to win and Morris and Bradman saw them home.
Now the hero was    
Another version of the ritual dance at the fall of a wicket.
her Milton Small and friends celebrate Gower's exit at Lord's in 1984.
Ian Botham's 4,000 Test run came with this boundary off Marshall at Lord's in 1984.
In the same match he became the first bowler to take eight wickets in an innings in a Test against West Indies in England.
A satisfying way to bring up your double century — Gordon Greenidge hooks Neil Foster off the end of his nose to move from 197 to 203.
His unbeaten 214 at Lord's in 1984 made David Gower's declaration, which had seemed a good one, look rather whimsical.
Larry Gomes contributed 92 not out as he and Greenidge made an undefeated 287, a new second-wicket record by either side in these Tests.
Gordon Greenidge, very ably assisted by Gomes.
How could anyone have guessed that the movement the bowlers had found throughout the game would suddenly disappear?
Yet it did, and the batsmen made the most of the conditions.
Haynes fell with the score on 57, Gomes was missed immediately and Greenidge was missed when he had 110; apart from that it was batsmanship of the highest quality.
When the target was reached with 11.5 overs to spare, Gomes was on 92, while Greenidge, in one of the great pieces of batting, had 214 to his name, the first West Indies double century at Lord's.
It took him just five hours, included 29 fours, and took him past 4,000 Test runs (a milestone Botham had passed earlier in the game).
344 for 1 meant a nine-wicket victory in a match that England had thought they might win.
That proved to be the high point of England's summer.
For a while in the third match at Headingley they were in contention, but the possibility of victory never remotely reappeared.
The first casualty of the match was, for a change, a West Indian fast bowler, when Marshall fractured his left thumb trying to stop a shot from Broad; yet even this worked against England, for it simply inspired him to his best Test figures when he bowled in the second innings.
Once again, the backbone of the innings came from Lamb and Botham, and just before the close on the first day Lamb became the first England batsman since Barrington in 1960 to score centuries in consecutive Test innings against West Indies.
He went first thing next morning, though, and the innings closed on 270 as Holding became the fourth West Indian to take 200 Test wickets.
By the end of the second day the visitors had reached 239 for 7, only Gomes and Lloyd making an impression as Allott, recalled after a two-year absence, headed for his best Test return or 6 for 61.
Near the close, Holding began to lay about him and was dropped off a skyer; next morning he continued in the same vein to ensure his team a first innings lead, and ensure, too, that Bob Willis's Test career would end on an unhappy note as it was he who took most of the stick.
His 59 came off only 55 balls, but when he and then Garner departed, Gomes was apparently stranded on 96 since Marshall was not expected to bat.
Not only did he do so, one-handed, but he scored a four, and allowed Gomes to reach his century.
West Indies reached 302.
When his hand was being plastered up Marshall was advised not to play again for ten days.
Instead he opened the bowling with Garner and soon had a wicket.
Fowler and Gower held him up for a while with 91 for the third wicket, but by the close of play he had two more — including a caught and bowled — and on Monday morning, cutting down his run-up, he polished off the tail to finish with 7 for 53.
It was mightily impressive    bowling by any standards, and with his left hand in plaster it was quite remarkable.
England were all out for 159, leaving West Indies the modest target of 128.
Three years before on this ground, of course, Australia had failed to reach something similar, but now there were 106 on the board before the openers were separated, and there were still eight wickets in hand when the victory came.
It was the first time since 1921 that England had lost the first three Tests of a home rubber.
1984 was Allan Lamb's annus mirabilis,with three centuries against West Indies and one against Sri Lanka.
Here he sends Eldine Baptiste to the rope at Headingley .
Bob Willis's Test career came to a sad end at Headingley in 1984, as Michael Holding hit him for five sixes.
Willis got him in the end, his last Test wicket.
In the same match Malcolm Marshall, having fractured his left thumb, came in to see Larry Gomes, on 96, to his century, and scored a four batting one-handed —— with a straighter bat than some of the Englishmen had shown.
He then took 7 for 53, including a caught and bowled.
Useful commodity, courage.
There cannot have been any English fans who had expected their team to win the series, but the manner in which they were just being steam-rollered seemly scarcely credible.
The worst thing was that it appeared there was nothing they could do to stop it; the players had hardly a shred of belief left in themselves, and Gower was unable to instil any.
And so the procession unfolded.
Like Lord's, Old Trafford was celebrating its centenary of Test cricket, and, as before, Gordon Greenidge marked the occasion by scoring a double century.
The first morning of the match did actually belong to England, West Indies' lunchtime score being 77 for 4; but then Botham bowled poorly, and Greenidge and Dujon accepted this beneficence grate  fully.
Their fifth-wicket stand realized 197 before Dujon went for 101 just before the close, bringing in Winston Davis as nightwatchman, replacing Marshall for his only Test of the series.
Next morning Davis laid about himself for 77, his highest first-class score, Botham again bowling poorly and being punished for it.
In fact, Botham did have an excuse, in that before the match he had received a death threat.
When Greenidge was finally caught behind, he had made 223 in nine and three-quarter hours, a phenomenal effort of concentration on a pitch of uneven bounce, for he gave not one chance throughout.
West Indies reached exactly 500, with Pocock, recalled after a gap of 86 Tests, finishing with four wickets.
Every picture tells a story.
Paul Downton has just failed to reach a snick by Larry Gomes off Derek Pringle, and the response of Botham and Gower says it all.
Gomes went on to an unbeaten century, thanks to Malcolm Marshall.
Fowler and Broad then got off to a good start with 90 for the first wicket before things began to go wrong.
After Fowler went, Davis broke Terry's left arm, the uneven bounce having deceived the batsman, and then once again it was all left to Lamb.
Allott supported him for a while, and at 278 for 7, with Lamb on 98, there seemed a chance that the follow-on might be saved.
Then Pocock and Cowans departed in one over and the   
West Indies take the 1984 series 3–0 after three matches.
One young fan shows the world what he thinks of it.
Like Marshall in the previous Test, Paul Terry came in at Old Trafford in plaster to help a team-mate reach his century.
Allan Lamb duly got there, but Joel Garner produced the perfect yorker to end the innings.
West Indians began to troop off, only for Gower to wave them back since Terry, arm in sling beneath sweater, was returning.
For the second Test running we were treated to the sight of a batsman in plaster coming out to help a colleague reach his hundred, and both were successful.
What was not clear in this case, though, was whether he would attempt to stay there while Lamb got the twenty-three needed to avoid the follow-on.
When Lamb played five balls of an over defensively and then ran two off the last, it was clear that he was just settling for his hundred, and since Terry immediately succumbed Lamb was criticized for exposing him, rather than trying to keep the strike.
He said afterwards that he had understood Terry had come out just to allow him to reach his goal, but it was an unfortunate end to a splendid innings, which made him the first English batsman since Barrington in 1967 to score three consecutive centuries in a series.
The confusion about the ending simply unsettled England even more.
Gower at last reached fifty and finished unbeaten on 57, but wickets tumbled steadily and early on the final morning it was all over.
156 all out gave West Indies victory by an innings and 64 runs, but at least in this instance England were not blasted out.
There was much pleasure that Roger Harper played throughout the series, and here his off-spin received its best reward with 6 for 57.
At Lord's Greenidge had to share the Man of the Match award with Botham, but here there was no question of his undisputed right to it.
The irony for England was that had he decided differently he would have been playing for them rather than against them, for his parents had brought him from Barbados at the age of twelve to live in Reading, and he had played for England schoolboys.
He joined Hampshire in 1970 and a couple of years later the selectors were enquiring after him, but he chose to await his chance with West Indies.
It came in India in 1974–5 when he began with 93 and 107; this proved to be something of a false dawn and he had an unhappy time in Australia in 1975–6, but he worked on his technique and finally established himself in England in 1976 with 592 runs at 65, including a century in each innings on a poor Old Trafford pitch.
Thereafter, he was a fixture in the team apart from the World Series interlude, with these two double centuries in 1984 representing the peak of his career.
For some eight years he opened the innings for Hampshire with the great Barry Richards, a daunting prospect for many a young bowler hoping to establish himself — and many an older one who already had.
When he first came into the Hampshire team, Greenidge's natural inclination   was to attack every ball, and it was Richards more than anyone who taught him restraint, taught him to wait for the bad ball.
Greenidge was happy to admit that playing alongside the South African was ‘an education and an inspiration’, but he also conceded that while they both had many outstanding days individually they did not score as many runs in partnership as they might have done, since they were both attacking players and therefore risk-takers.
Naturally, Greenidge tried to emulate Richards which, when things went well, was fine, but when they did not it meant that, for a while, he gained a reputation for not being over-reliable; perhaps he suffered from trying to hit the ball too hard, for there were plenty of people who felt that he would have been a better player had he not tried to ‘bury the ball into the wall of some distant building’(his own words) at every opportunity.
Yet it was a wonderful pairing, one of the most exciting in the game's history, and it helped Hampshire to the championship in 1973 and the John Player League in 1975 and 1978.
Gordon Greenidge gives a perfect demonstration of the square cut, generating power with the right leg as the body goes to met the ball.
A fielder with any sense would simply get out of the way.
Naturally the passing of the years brought a more responsible approach which made him even more formidable, for he still had all the strokes and all the power but now he was less likely to get out unnecessarily.
He also gained the lovely reputation of being particularly dangerous when he was limping, since an injury to his leg simply made him hit more fours to cut down on the running.
When he was joined in the Test team by Desmond Haynes, one of the most dependable and successful of all opening partnerships was created, and as the senior member in his late twenties Greenidge matured at just the right time.
During England's tour of 1989–90 he celebrated his hundredth Test by scoring his eighteenth century, passing 7,000 runs in the process, and at the end of the series his total stood at 7,134 at an average of 46.
To have continued to be so dependable and at the same time so exciting a batsman for so long, shows him to have been one of the greats of the game.
Before the last Test at the Oval, Gower exhorted his troops to ‘one last, big effort’ to avoid completely ignominy, and for a while it seemed that they might.
After Lloyd chose to bat on a pleasant sunny day, Botham somehow managed to get the ball to swing and took 5 for 72, including his three hundredth wicket in Tests.
West Indies actually succumbed to 70 for 6 and England were cock-a-hoop.
Lloyd spoilt it, of course, with an unbeaten 60 that helped his team to 190 all out, but having dismissed them for their lowest total in years England had to feel confident.
By the close of the first day, though, they had lost Broad, and Pat Pocock, going in as nightwatchman, had told the England physiotherapist Bernard Thomas that he had cleaned his teeth and gargled in case Thomas had to give him    the kiss of life.
Next morning the humour in this wore decidedly thin, as Marshall in particular sent down bouncer after bouncer, unchecked by umpire Constant and apparently unconcerned at the damage he might do — such as badly bruising Fowler's arm and causing him to retire for a while.
Pocock was not spared the treatment, and he and at least three colleagues fell to balls that flew to throat height.
Marshall took 5 for 35 as wickets toppled at regular intervals, and the board reached only 162.
Being a West Indian spinner in recent years hasn't been the safest of occupations, but Roger Harper played throughout the 1984 series.
Ian Botham's 300th Test wicket, the Oval 1984.
Jeff Dujon has tried to take evasive action from a ball that has climbed from just short of a length, but has gloved it.
Chris Tavaré at first slip gets in on a piece of history.
A flicker of hope came when three West Indian wickets went down for 69, but then it was Haynes' turn to come good after a disappointing series.
Supported by Lloyd and then Dujon, he batted for more than seven hours for 125, helping the total to 346 and leaving England ten hours to survive or score 375.
For a while Broad and Tavaré defended well, but then suddenly Holding, for the first time in over a year, decided to go back to his full-length run-up, without even having told Lloyd what he intended to do.
It came like an electric shock.
Broad, Gower and Lamb fell in quick succession and then it was just a case of mopping up.
Botham delayed the inevitable with a fifty, but Holding finished with 5 for 43 and England were all out for 202.
At least defeat by a mere 172 runs represented something of an improvement on earlier games.
The Oval 1984. it might be raining but a ‘blackwash’ is not far away.
There was no doubt, though, that the banner proclaiming ‘Blackwash’ said it all.
From these depths, England went to India and pulled off a remarkable triumph after losing the first Test, and then beat Australia 3–1 in 1985.
After the Oval Test David Gower murmured that West Indies must be ‘quaking in their boots’ at the thought of England's forthcoming visit, a characteristically ironic piece of Gower humour.
Faced by the weakest bowling attack ever to leave Australia, the England batsmen had made hay, none more so than the captain, and some people felt that the confidence this built up would give them a lift in the Caribbean.
Then they awoke, and behold it was a dream.
When Clive Lloyd retired at the end of the 1984–5 tour of Australia, the captaincy passed to Viv Richards.
To an outsider this seemed a quite natural progression, but within the West Indies it was not greeted with unmitigated delight.
Even after so much success, the inter-island rivalries are never far from the surface, and other players had their advocates.
Lloyd's great achievement had been to weld all the factions into a united team, and doubt was expressed that Richards could maintain the unity.
Yet he got off to a good start against New Zealand, and no one in England could have been in any doubt that even without Lloyd around their heroes were in for a tough time.
Viv Richards has been rated the world's number one batsman since 1976 when he scored a record 1,710 Test runs in the year.
Since then, despite having played cricket almost endlessly, he has been astonishingly consistent, averaging over fifty both in Tests and overall.
When he has had quiet periods one simply got the feeling that he was having a rest, a feeling reinforced by his ability to produce a big innings apparently at will, especially on the grand occasion or when his team is struggling.
Fundamentally, he is an orthodox batsman who can be totally unorthodox, the possessor of every stroke in the book and an improviser who can create any number of others.
His speed at getting into position is breath-taking, almost as breathtaking as the power with which he murders the ball.
He walks to the crease with a swagger, totally confident, undoubtedly one of the few batsmen to whom the word ‘Unforgettable’ could be applied without risk of hyperbole.
With his splendid physique and proud, noble head his presence is such as to give him an instant advantage over any bowler, and he has rarely failed to put that advantage to use; spinners in particular have  suffered at his hands, but when he decides that he wants to score runs it is virtually impossible to bowl to him.
From the spectators' viewpoint, not only does he provide wonderful entertainment but he does it without encasing himself in a helmet, now so rare as to be a treat in itself.
Such disdain for something that has become almost universal in the first-class game clearly helps in his psychological battle with the bowlers; disdain is, in fact, an important part of his armoury, combining with his might and skill to cement his authority.
As he is also a useful off-spinner, occasional medium-pacer, and excellent slip fielder, the cumulative result is the most formidable cricketer of the 1970s and '80s.
Strangely, his career began with a considerable upset.
He came from a cricketing family — his father was a leading fast bowler in Antigua — and his great talent was evident very early on, so that he was already popular  with the fans as a youngster.
At the age of seventeen he was playing for Antigua in the Leeward Islands tournament when he was given out caught behind.
He gestured his dissent at this and in no time the crowd were clamouring for the umpire to reverse the decision, which he did.
As a result he was suspended for two years, which of course delayed his entry into first-class cricket; but it taught him a lot.
‘The world's greatest batsman’— Viv Richards demonstrates the on drive.
His Test debut came in the same match as Gordon Greenidge against India in 1973–4, Greenidge totalling 200 runs and Richards 7; in the next game he made 192 not out and was under way.
He made 829 runs in four matches (he missed the Lord's Test through illness) in 1976, which was statistically his best performance, and if he has never made quite so many since that must just be because of the demands, physical and psychological, of playing so much top cricket.
Two of his most memorable innings came in one-day internationals, the 138 not out in the 1979 World Cup final and the 189 not out at Old Trafford in 1984 which single-handedly transformed a desperate situation into a winning one, and which will surely never be forgotten by anyone who saw it.
In 1980–1, in the first Test to be played on his home ground in Antigua, there was never any doubt that he was going to mark the occasion with a century, and, as we shall see, when England returned five years later he marked that occasion in the most spectacular fashion.
At Sydney in 1988 against New South Wales he became the twenty-second batsman and the first West Indian to score a century of centuries.
All of this has been achieved with an inevitability which few batsmen since Bradman have been able to suggest, and in 111 Tests at the end of the 1989–90 series he was just ten runs short of 8,000 at an average of 51.
In 1974, at the age of 22, he joined Somerset, and with Joel Garner was to play a very important part in their one-day successes between 1979 and 1983.
Helped in the crucial early years by Brian Close, his — and Garner's — loyalty to their adopted country became every bit as great as Clive Lloyd's to Lancashire.
His colleague Vic Marks wrote that ‘we willed opposition fast bowlers to bounce him so that we could witness the majesty of his hooking’, and there can be very few batsmen of whom that could be said.
In 1985 his batting reached its peak at Taunton against a Warwickshire team who bowled and fielded well but who could not stop him making 322, the highest first-class innings in England for thirty-six years; after a slightly uncomfortable start, the second and third hundreds came off sixty-seven and sixty-three balls respectively, and only tiredness after a drive from Leeds the evening before caused his downfall.
Thus, the decision by the county at the end of the following season not to re-engage him  and Garner came as an enormous surprise and caused a furore; from the emotional angle it was poor reward for years of devoted service, but rationally, since the opportunity to sign up Martin Crowe of New Zealand, who promised so much, had either to be taken or lost, it was a sensible move.
It is impossible for the outsider to appreciate what this meant to a man as proud as Richards, but it was noticeable that in the Test series against Pakistan and New Zealand which followed his form was very ordinary.
Pride has always been an important part of his make-up.
The usual epithet applied to his bearing is patrician, and his batting, as a matter of course, is liberally endowed with arrogance.
At the wicket he is a Roman general, unquestioning of his own ability to defeat the barbarians; yet because the pride and haughtiness are justified by having repeatedly proved himself to be the best, one cannot resent them, especially since he usually leaves them on the field of combat.
Off the field he is mild-mannered and dismissive of his achievements — though his verbal attack on an English journalist at the end of the 1989–90 tour was fulminating stuff — while at the same time he is intensely proud of his humble background, is very much a man of his people.
He was offered enormous sums to go to South Africa but would never contemplate it; it would have meant a betrayal of everything he stood for, a soul-selling of Faustian proportions.
Instead, he wanted to meet his final challenge, to take over the West Indies captaincy from Lloyd and continue their triumphal march through the record books.
England began their tour in miserable fashion, handing Windward Islands their first ever win over a touring team.
They then lost Gatting, who had been in better form than anyone, in the first one-day international when his nose exploded after coming into contact with a ball from Marshall that he failed to hook.
The optimists tried to suggest that Garner and Holding might be on the wane; the realists knew better.
Home advantage meant that pitches could be prepared especially to suit fast bowlers, and come the first Test in Jamaica it was soon evident this is what had happened.
Matters were not helped by the Sabina Park authorities providing one sightscreen that was too low to be of much use if the bowler was over six feet (1.8 metres) tall, and when England complained after the game against Jamaica the reply was that it could not be raised without obscuring the view of some two hundred people who had already bought tickets.
Admittedly, as the tour went on England did little to help their own cause, but there were all kinds of things workings against them.
The first Test lasted two days and five hours on a pitch that was very  hard, very fast and some way from flat.
It was a happy debut for the latest model to drop off the fast-bowling conveyor belt; Patrick Patterson had played for Lancashire the previous summer without making much impression, but now on his home patch with the sun on his back he hit Test cricket with a bang.
Gooch and Robinson began carefully after Gower won the toss, but then Patterson got Robinson and the collapse was under way.
The best England could offer was 51 from Gooch and 49 from Lamb, and just before tea they were all out for 159.
Greg Thomas came close to a wicket three times in his first over in Test cricket, but Greenidge and Haynes survived to give their usual start before Greenidge had to retire with a cut forehead after mishooking Botham.
That slowed things down a bit and on the second day England made some progress through the wickets.
Greenidge, Gomes and Dujon all made fifties, but Ellison bowled well for 5 for 78, and restricting the total to 307 was hailed as a mini-triumph.
On the first day the West Indian bowlers had been sparing with the bouncer, for on such a pitch there was no need for it.
On the third day there was no such respite, Patterson in particular giving the impression that he knew, and cared, nothing about Law 42 and the intimidatory bowling of fast short-pitched balls.
Only Willey, who seemed to play his best Test innings against West Indian thunderbolts, made a fight of it with 71; Botham hammered a quick 29, but the last wicket went down for 152, leaving West Indies needing five to win.
One yearned for Richards to make the romantics smile by sending in two bowlers to polish them off, reflecting that when Percy Chapman did it with fifteen needed against Australia in 1928–9 (and lost two wickets!),
West Indian Test cricket was just six months old.
What a hope.
Before the second Test in Trinidad, England actually won a one-day international thanks to a superb unbeaten century from Gooch.
In the Test, on a less malign pitch than in Kingston, he was out fourth ball, and three wickets were soon down for 30.
Gower and Lamb both produced sixties and actually managed a century stand, but no other batsman passed eight and the total was no more than 176.
Botham then bowled dismally to allow Greenidge and Haynes to make a good start, after which Richardson clocked up a steady hundred.
Emburey and Edmonds, however, made them work for their runs and took wickets as well, Emburey finishing with 5 for 78.
It was Marshall who took the game right away from England, holding together the tail for 62 not out and stretching the total to 399.
At least England made a slightly more respectable fist of their second innings.
Gooch, Gower and Lamb made forties, only for the ball to  start shooting and wickets to fall.
When the eighth wicket went down England were still nine behind, only for two unlikely heroes to emerge.
Richards took the new ball — which did not shoot — and Ellison and Thomas played quite contentedly for two hours, putting on 72 for the last wicket, a new England record in the West Indies, taking the total to 315.
This left West Indies to make 93, and early on the fifth morning they duly got there, having lost three wickets to Emburey and Edmonds, both of whom bowled well throughout.
The margin was narrower than before; were England turning the corner?
At the end of the second day of the Barbados Test, it seemed that perhaps they had.
After Gower won the toss and put them in, West Indies had a good first day as Haynes made a patient 84 and Richardson his second successive century; 269 for 2 at the close reflected the lack of life that Botham and Thomas had been able to extract from the pitch and the catches that had gone.
Then on the second day, when the pitch should have been easier, only Richards, with 51, looked convincing and the last eight wickets fell steadily.
The total was 418, and there was better still to come from England.
Robinson soon went, but Gooch and Gower batted well and took the overnight score to 110 for 1; only another 119 to avoid the follow-on and clearly England's best day of the series so far.
Soon after two o'clock the next afternoon they were all out for 189, the atmosphere helping the ball to move and swing around.
Fifteen wickets were to go down in all that day, and although Gooch and Robinson made a sound start, once they were separated the procession continued as normal.
They were 132 for 6 at the close and it was clearly time to pray for rain; but it came on the rest day by mistake, and although Emburey and Downton battled for a while, the end was not long delayed.
199 all out meant victory by an innings and 30 runs; it also meant that West Indies had emulated Australia's feat in 1920–1 and 1921 of recording eight successive Test victories over England.
It seemed that only the weather could stop another blackwash.
The fourth Test in Trinidad was simply a repeat of the first.
On a pitch of uneven bounce England were put in and shot out before the end of the day for 200, David Smith, Lamb and Botham the only ones to make an impression.
Next day, Thomas, who had had a good tour so far, bowled poorly and paid the price; Botham, by contrast, had had an awful tour, but now he bowled well and took five wickets as a result.
This did not stop West Indies taking a firm grip on the match, as Greenidge reached 5,000 Test runs and Richards 6,000, warming up for his achievement in the next match with 87. 312 all out was hardly the big total they would have  wanted, but it was quite enough.
Smith, in his second Test, top-scored in the second innings as well as the first, but it was all totally predictable; 150 all out left West Indies 39 to win, and less than six overs sufficed.
As at Kingston, the margin was ten wickets; the only difference was that the match lasted a quarter of an hour less.
Before the last Test it seemed that Gooch would return home, annoyed at an article written about his South African connections by Lester Bird, the Deputy Prime Minister of Antigua, and tired of the hostile receptions he had been getting from press and public.
Only an appeal by Gower to his loyalty persuaded him to stay, and he was to have his best game of the series.
St John's, Antigua did, in fact, see something approaching a Test match, and it was only in the final hour that England lost.
Yet even then they did not play particularly well.
Gower won the toss and inserted West Indies, only for Haynes to hold the innings together as his partners got in and then out.
On the second day, Haynes reached his century and England paid the penalty of having Botham poised one behind Dennis Lillee's 355 Test wickets.
Inevitably, he bowled relentlessly on, never looked like getting anywhere, and the last four wickets put on 183 as Marshall, Harper and Holding enjoyed themselves at almost five an over.
474 set England a stiff target but the pitch was less malicious than the earlier ones and Gooch and Slack put on 127 for the first wicket.
Twice Richards complained about the ball, each time causing a lengthy hold-up to upset the batsmen's concentration, and behaving with such arrogance that after the match he apologized to the umpires for it.
When the openers were parted it was Gower who held the innings together with 90, and thanks to 51 Extras the follow-on target was passed with three wickets in hand, and the total made 310.
By now it was the morning of the fourth day and West Indies had a lead of 164; clearly quick runs were needed to make sure they had plenty of time to bowl England out again.
Haynes and Richardson opened and put on exactly 100, then Richards, on his home ground, marched out, the first time he had batted at number three for some while.
English hearts sank even further than they already were, for it would not have needed a weather forecaster to predict that Hurricane Viv was about to strike.
Fifty minutes later he had 53 from 35 balls, and thirty-one minutes after that, from another 21 balls, he had 103; the fastest century in terms of balls received in the history of Test cricket, 56 balls to Jack Gregory's 67 against South Africa in 1921–2, although Gregory took only 70 minutes while Richards took 81 minutes.
He hit six sixes and seven fours in his hundred, then one more six to take him to 110 before he declared, and the  scribes were simply stuck for superlatives to convey the majesty of it.
The domination of the bowlers was total, put the ball wherever they might.
Most striking of all was the sheer inevitability of it: the game was being played in front of his beloved Antiguans, quick runs were needed, King Viv decided he was going to get them, and that was that.
The declaration at 246 for 2 left England 410 runs behind, with five hours fifty minutes plus the last twenty overs to survive.
Two wickets fell on the fourth evening, but Ellison stayed with Gooch for some time next morning, as did Gower.
Wickets fell during the afternoon and, with the final twenty overs approaching, there were three wickets left and it was up to Gower and Downton.
The captain bad defended solidly for hours, but now Harper got one to bounce and he was caught behind.
That was that, and when the last wicket fell — to a poor piece of umpiring — there were 14.5 overs left, England had 170 and the winning margin was 240 runs.
So it was another blackwash, another disaster, for England.
They went without a hope and they came back, it seemed, without a friend, perilously close to reaching mother-in-law status as the comedians' favourite butt.
There were some valid defences, particularly the poor state of most of the pitches and the injuries to Gatting (having returned from getting his nose repaired he promptly had a thumb broken and played in only the final Test), but some of the criticisms were very valid, too.
Principal among these was their attitude to practice, which was almost entirely voluntary.
It seemed to most onlookers that the first step to take to correct the disparity between the teams was to practise as hard as possible, especially as the West Indians were doing just that themselves; Gower and Tony Brown, the manager, however, enforced no such ruling.
Admittedly, the practice facilities were often poor, but the preference for relaxation as an antidote to the cannon-balls suggested that deep down the fighting spirit was lacking.
With an authoritarian captain to instil some pep into them, a draw or two may have been salvaged and it would have been just another defeat rather than an abject cave-in, but Gower was not able to pick them up.
For all that, the way in which he was publicly rebuked by Peter May, the chairman of Selectors, after returning home, and appointed only for the first Test against India, annoyed many people by its insensitivity and seemed to be about as productive as the shooting of Admiral Byng on his quarterdeck.
It was a sad time for English cricket; sadder still was the tact that, apart from one series, things would simply continue to get ever worse.
For West Indies, two bowlers, Garner and Marshall, shared the honours at the top of the averages with 27 wickets each, Garner's being slightly the less expensive at just 16 apiece.
Joel Garner was, in fact, almost at the end  had begun back in 1976–7 against Pakistan when he made his debut in the same game as Colin Croft.
He was to play 58 Tests in all, taking 259 wickets at just under 21, a lower average than any of the top West Indian bowlers except Marshall.
A clue to his role may be found in the fact that only seven times did he take five wickets in an innings and never once ten in a match.
For most of the time the ‘Big Bird’ preferred to sacrifice the flat-out pace of his team-mates for accuracy and control, taking wickets by making the ball swing and cut, and so in Tests was for some years used as first or second change bowler.
Only with the retirement of Roberts did he get promotion to the new ball, whereupon he stepped up his speed and took 31 wickets against Australia in 1983–4, although he then reduced it again.
His accuracy and stinginess with runs made him almost without equal as a one-day bowler, for he could both contain and attack at the same time since the bounce he got from his great height and the control he had over the ball gave him the extra penetration that brought wickets.
Two of his greatest performances came in 1979, with 5 for 38 in the World Cup final and 6 for 29 in the Gillette final for Somerset, although both times Richards pipped him for the match award.
For such a tall man Joel Garner had a beautiful follow-through with a great deal of athletic grace.
In many ways Garner was the model professional, totally dedicated and loyal to his teams, an intelligent man who gave much thought to his game.
If it is stretching the imagination to describe any West Indian fast bowler as a gentle giant he is nevertheless mild-mannered and easy-going, and it is significant that while the likes of Croft and Marshall were doing unpleasant things to batsmen's heads, the damage that Garner inflicted was mostly confined to arms and hands; obviously any broken bone is bad and obviously he sent down his share of bouncers, but there was never the suggestion that he was using his physical advantages maliciously; six feet eight inches 12 metres) tall and weighing seventeen stones (108 kilograms), the prospect of the carnage he might have caused had he been of an aggressive nature hardly bears thinking about.
As it is, he has gone down as a highly skilled bowler who, because he lacked the flamboyance of some of his colleagues, attracted less attention than many of them; but who consistently, almost stealthily, got on with the job of collecting three or four wickets in innings after innings after innings.
By 1988 West Indies were going through what England had been going through for as long as anyone could remember: a period of transition.
Holding, Garner and Gomes had retired and youngsters such as Ambrose, Hooper, Arthurton and Bishop were on their first tour of England.
At the end of 1987 they had failed to reach the semi-finals of the World Cup and then played two drawn series against India and Pakistan, in the latter case coming close to defeat before squeezing a two-wicket victory to square the rubber.
England's fortunes under Mike Gatting had been varied, losing relentlessly at home, carrying all before them in a triumphal tour of Australia, narrowly losing a World Cup final they should have won and then having their captain, under great provocation, address naughty words to a Pakistani umpire.
Gatting's altercation with Shakoor Rana was to have a considerable effect on the West Indies Test rubber.
When England convincingly won all three one-day games, the country was seized with a spasm of excited optimism.
Had the mighty champions really reached the end of the road?
Was the underdog about to have his day?
When, in the first Test at Trent Bridge, Gooch and Broad put on 125 for the first wicket the smiles were widening all the time; when the last wicket fell with just 245 on the board we knew where we really were.
When a sound start was then followed by a sparkling 80 from Richards, a classical 84 from Hooper and a thumping 72 from Marshall, with even Ambrose making 43, we knew exactly what was what, and when Richards  declared on the fourth evening at 448 for 9, leaving England with a day plus 51 overs to survive, there were probably not many people who thought they would make it.
But the last day belonged to Gooch and Gower, with Gatting also fighting well; Gooch finished with 146 and Gower 88 not out, greatly helped by Marshall having to go off injured.
It was a day to reassure English hearts, for not only was the sequence of defeats brought to an end but the fight was sturdily fought and morale given a welcome boost.
There had not been a crisis for about six months, though, so it was clearly time for one.
The tabloid newspapers decided it was their duty to reveal that Gatting had invited a barmaid to his hotel room during the Test match, and that he and other players had taken part in ‘sex romps’ with girls from the hotel; though how the newshounds, scrabbling around in the bushes outside, could see what was happening in the rooms was not really clear.
Perhaps if it had not been for the Shakoor Rana affair the TCCB might have handled this quietly and sensibly by issuing a non-committal statement and letting the fuss die down.
Instead, they got themselves into a thoroughly embarrassing mess, saying they accepted Gatting's statement that nothing improper had taken place but sacking him all the same.
Since the logic of this eluded most people, it seemed reasonable to conclude that he was belatedly paying the price for arguing with an umpire.
England captains must not do things like that, but they had not been able to sack him at the time because of the provocation he had been under; now that he had stepped out of line again he gave them a heaven-sent opportunity to administer the axe.
The rights and wrongs of it were debated for some time and the feeling seemed to be that the TCCB had come out of it in a worse light than Gatting; as the Melbourne newspaper The Age put it, ‘Gatting, caught rumour, bowled hypocrisy, 0’.
It meant that the Test career of a man aged just 31, who still had a great deal to offer his country, was almost over; true, it would be terminated by his own decision to go to South Africa, but this came about only because of his disillusion with cricket's establishment.
So John Emburey was handed the captaincy that could well have been his years earlier if he had not gone to South Africa in 1982, thereby losing the Middlesex captaincy to Gatting after Mike Brearley retired.
He had been in and out of the England team for ten years and had played 55 Tests, probably the best off-spinner in the world for much of this time.
In the last year or two his wicket-taking ability seemed to have deserted him, and his Test average crept up noticeably, a year later finishing after 60 Tests with 138 wickets at 37.
He became especially good as a one-day containing bowler, playing a big part in his county's successes, and contributing many  useful, if very idiosyncratic, lower middle order runs; while his Test bowling average was declining, his batting figure was improving all the time, and reached a handy 21.
A very thoughtful cricketer, with a much greater knowledge of the game's history than most players, one had the impression that he could have made a fine Test captain had the chance come earlier.
With Gatting dropping out of the Lord's Test at his own request, Emburey could hardly have made a better start.
Richards won the toss and took a long time to decide to bat; when he did so Dilley bowled superbly, and five wickets went down for just 54.
Could this be true?
No, of course not.
Logie, on 10, was dropped at slip and went on to put on 130 for the sixth wicket with Dujon, a crucial stand in view of the end result.
Still, 209 all out seemed a fair performance by England, or it would have done had more of their batsmen scored some runs.
Only Gooch and Gower passed forty, neither by any margin, and, with Marshall taking 6 for 32, the last wicket fell at 165.
Here we go again, said everyone, and they were right; on the first two days there had been plenty of cloud to help the bowlers, but on the Saturday the sun shone and West Indies made the most of it.
Greenidge, hit on the knee, began to limp, so making a century inevitable — and passing 6,000 Test runs in the process — while Richards hammered 72 from eighty balls.
When Hooper went they were 240 for 5 and perhaps just catchable if the rest of the wickets tumbled.
Logie and Dujon, once again, had other ideas, and exceeded their first innings partnership by one run.
It was the first time two West Indian batsmen had made a century stand for the sixth wicket in each innings of a Test and it took the game right away from England; when the last wicket fell, Logie was left unbeaten on 95, the score was 397, and England had to survive for the best part of two days.
Mike Gatting, first of a long line of England captains in 1988.
Thanks to an over rate of 11.2 and the time lost to the weather being made up at the end, that fourth day became the longest in Test history, not finishing until 7.40.
By then England were 214 for 7, only Allan Lamb, desperately needing a big score to stay in the team, having given the scorers much exercise.
Lamb was on 99 and it took him an age next morning to reach the hundred, his first since 1984.
The tail showed more application than the top of the order, and when Lamb was run out for 113 Jarvis and Dilley batted well to put on 53 for the last wicket.
Had England held a few more catches, that could have won them the match; as it was, an all-out total of 307 meant victory for West Indies by 134 runs.
At least the accountants were happy, as for the first time in England match receipts passed the £l million mark.
Just for the record, 77,923 people paid £1,031,262.50; twenty-five years earlier 110,287 people had paid £56,300.
Marshall took 10 for 92 in that match but arrived at Old Trafford for the third Test reportedly with a rib injury.
In a game that went to the fifth day only because many hours were lost to the weather — the actual playing time was two and two-thirds days — one was left wondering what he might have done had he been fully fit.
On the first morning, England crashed to 55 for 4 and there was never any doubt about the result; by the close, it had become 135 all out, and in three overs West Indies batted, two catches were dropped.
Next day, John Childs, nearly 37 and England's oldest Test debutante for over forty years, took a wicket in his third over, but only three were down when the England total was passed.
For the third consecutive innings Dujon featured in a substantial sixth-wicket stand, this time putting on 94 with Harper, and, given the vagaries of the weather, Richards' problem was when to declare.
He did so when play was about to resume after a stoppage early in the last session of the fourth day, with the score 384 for 7, and he could hardly have  timed it more precisely; 60 for 3 overnight, and, as next morning it looked as though it might rain at any time, Marshall decided to polish the rest off quickly.
In just over an hour he took five wickets, Ambrose chipped in with the other two, and England were all out for 93.
One was reminded of some hapless Victorian consumptive, fading away and unable to do anything about it.
Marshall's figures were 7 for 22 off 15.4 overs, giving him a strike rate of a wicket every 26 balls throughout the series.
So West Indies won by an innings and 156 runs; yet had England managed to hold on for just another three or four minutes they would have got a draw, for the heavens opened and further play would have been impossible.
Obviously, they deserved to be beaten out of sight, but since the weather had looked almost certain to save them if someone could have stayed there, the collapse became even more abject.
Before the next match, the selectors debated long and hard over the England captaincy, the problem being that Emburey's form had declined and his place in the team could hardly be justified; their solution was to drop him and appoint Chris Cowdrey in his place, whose enthusiastic style of leadership had taken an ordinary Kent side to the top of the table.
He had played five Tests on the 1984–5 tour of India without any marked success, leaving the impression that he was not quite up to Test standard.
For some people the choice was an imaginative one, for others it was yet another piece of selectoral nonsense, made worse by the fact that he was Peter May's godson.
In the event, the most important repercussion of the appointment was to deprive Kent of the championship, for it proved such a traumatic time for Cowdrey that his team lost their way for a few weeks, and missed the title by just one agonizing point.
Curiously, his father had also been one of three captains in a series against West Indies; he, though, had not suffered the indignity of being refused admission to the car park at the ground because the attendant did not recognize him.
At Headingley, David Gower, thirty-three years old, became the youngest player to reach one hundred Test matches — or, as Don Mosey put it on the radio, he reached his hundredth Test in fewer games than anyone else.
The feat was marked by a drain bursting under the pitch soon after play began and flooding one of the run-ups; inevitably, the umpire concerned was ‘Dickie’ Bird, famed for his wariness about the weather, and now having to contend with water coming from below as well as above.
England were soon losing wickets when play began, four going down for 80; but then Lamb and Robin Smith, on debut, showed what could be done, and on the Friday morning posted a century partnership and looked good for plenty more.
Then tragedy: after a quick run Lamb's right calf  muscle seized up and he had to leave the field — and from 183 for 4 the score suddenly became 185 for 8, then 201 all out.
One's heart bled for Cowdrey, for he looked desperately nervous and soon succumbed without scoring.
The bowlers, though, did well in favourable conditions and, if they had been better supported at slip, could have made a match of it.
As it was, with most of the Saturday lost to rain the total reached 275 thanks to Harper holding the tail together.
Gooch and Curtis made a solid start and the deficit was passed for the loss of just one wicket.
Then the statutory collapse.
Gower needed just two runs to reach 7,000 in his hundredth Test and got them, only to fall immediately to a quite unnecessary flick down the leg side.
Only Lamb, coming in at number eight and hitting fours off one leg, averted total disgrace, 138 all out leaving just 65 needed for victory.
As so often, the openers, this time Haynes and Dujon, had no problems.
The changes that were made for the Oval game took the number of England players used in the series to twenty-three and, as Cowdrey had to withdraw with a bruised foot, Graham Gooch was appointed the fourth captain of the series.
For a couple of days or so England were actually in the match.
Their first innings made only 205, with 57 from Smith and 43 from debutante Bailey (whose reward, after failing in the second innings, was to be dropped against Sri Lanka, one of the most astonishing pieces of selectoral crassness for years); but on the second morning, in real sunshine for about the first time in the rubber, Foster bowled splendidly to decapitate the order.
As at Lord's, it was Logie and Dujon who got the runs, but with Foster taking 5 for 64 they were all out for 183, the first time England had taken a first-innings lead since the Lord's game of 1984.
When Gooch and Curtis opened with 50 one began to wonder — would we see an upset as we had in 1966?
Then Curtis fell, and in quick succession so did Bailey and Smith.
Foster did well as nightwatchman but otherwise only Gooch, in one of his slowest innings, stood firm; he batted over seven hours with the ball moving around awkwardly and had 84 to his name when he was last out, having seen the total to 202.
It set West Indies a target of 225, which everyone knew was about three hundred too low, and inevitably Greenidge and Haynes began with a century partnership.
Gooch damaged a finger as soon as the innings began and had to go to hospital, Pringle taking command; but he could work no miracles and victory was gained for the loss of just two wickets.
For most English people it was just a case of sighing with relief that it was all over.
When Marshall took Curtis's wicket in the second innings he had 35 for the series (the average finishing at 12.65 each), beating Fred Trueman's  much stronger team) and the West Indian record of 33 for most wickets in any Test rubber.
No fewer than 19 of those 35 were taken without assistance from his team-mates, and on average he took a wicket every 35 balls.
His overall strike rate, in fact, is lower than any other major bowler, confirming his position as number one in the world rankings.
Unlike some of his colleagues, he does not have the build or the strength of an American footballer, being under six feet (1.8 metres) tall and weighing twelve stones (76 kilograms).
Instead, he has relied on great fitness and stamina to enable him to keep sprinting in at full pace, and speed of arm and perfect balance to capitalize on the momentum; combined with an unrelenting desire to keep on taking more and more wickets, it has all proved irresistible.
Like Harold Larwood long before him, he used his relative shortness (in fast bowling terms) to make the ball skid through at great pace, always difficult for a batsman to deal with.
Over the years, a good many bouncers have been sent down and several batsmen have been injured, especially around the head; this is because, unlike most of his colleagues, his bouncers usually go through at head height rather than above  it and so are particularly awkward.
Thus, it was rather ironic that in this, his best series, he bowled hardly any; instead, he took his wickets by adapting his bowling to the slow conditions of a rainy summer, reducing his pace a fraction and making the ball move around more.
The destroyer — Malcolm Marshall took 35 wickets in the 1988 series.
His Test debut had come against India in 1978–9 aged only twenty, but, with so many other top bowlers in competition, it was a few years before his place was secure.
Being signed by Hampshire as replacement for Andy Roberts just a few months after his Test debut gave him the chance to impress Clive Lloyd in county matches and in 1982 he really came good with 134 wickets, the best season's haul since the reduction in championship matches in 1969.
This cemented his place in the Test team, although it would be another year or so before he was given the new ball, and then it was just a question of piling up the scalps as the main strike bowler.
By the end of the 1989–90 series against England, he had 329 wickets at under 21, by some way his country's leading bowler.
He also had claims to be considered a genuine all-rounder, having played many attacking innings in the lower middle order.
Of the great West Indian bowlers from Roberts on, he is the most successful, perhaps because, with the exception of Croft, he has been the most difficult to play.
Yet off the pitch he has a reputation as a dressing-room joker, an easy-going character who likes his soul and reggae music and has a smile never far from the surface.
just give him a cricket ball and watch the transformation.
One of West Indies' other heroes of the summer, and much of the decade, was wicket-keeper Jeffrey Dujon, with over 300 runs and twenty dismissals in the rubber.
If he is not the greatest gloveman the game has known, he is a very successful wicket-keeper-batsman; in his first two Tests in Australia in 1981–2 he appeared solely as a batsman before taking over from David Murray, and by the end of the 1989–90 series he had played in 68 Tests, made 223 dismissals (a miserly five stumpings tells a sad tale) and scored almost 3,000 runs at an average of 35 with five centuries.
If some have found his wicket-keeping style too flashy, others see it as artistic; he is a naturally graceful man who would be hard put to look clumsy.
Whatever one's opinion, he has missed remarkably little considering he has had to cope with such an endless barrage of fast bowling.
His batting has been a pleasure to watch, elegant, artistic and poised, strong on both sides of the wicket, equally happy using his feet to the spinners or hooking the fast men.
In 1983 he took over the captaincy of Jamaica when Rowe went to South Africa but found it a difficult business, perhaps because he is too quiet and introspective for cricket leadership.
By and large, the 1980s were a very unhappy time for the England Test team, with only the occasional series victory to relieve the encircling gloom.
This culminated in the misery of the 1989 Ashes rubber, after which the tour of the Caribbean early in 1990 seemed to be about to take its place alongside St Bartholomew's Day, Glencoe and other great massacres of history.
There was much discussion as to who should captain the ship, and when Graham Gooch was appointed anyone of a cynical disposition found it hard to escape the feeling that it was in the hope that, with his South African connections, at least one government would refuse to let him in, thus avoiding another 5–0 blackwash.
By not only relieving David Gower of the captaincy, which was inevitable, but omitting him altogether the selectors provoked an uproar; they came up with a party that had only two specialist openers, an inexperienced middle order, and some fast bowlers who were virtually untried, injury-prone and had a reputation for speed but not accuracy.
The official pronouncement was that they intended to fight fire with fire.
It seemed crazy; suicidal, even.
But in the weeks before they left they worked extremely hard at their fitness, were coached by Geoff Boycott to improve their batting technique, and insisted to the press that people back home in England were going to be pleasantly surprised.
This series, incidentally, was to introduce English fans to Bishop Ambrose, the most quaintly named fast bowler since Lillian Thomson.
Jeff Dujon in action against Worcestershire early in 1984, warming up for a century in the Old Trafford Test.
Gooch was the leading run-scorer in first-class cricket for the 1980s, with over 21,000 at 49, and in view of this his Test record -4,724 runs at just under 37 from 73 Tests before the tour began — is something of a disappointment, and illustrates clearly the difference it makes to a player to belong to a successful side.
Tall and powerful, he is naturally an attacking batsman who loves to play his shots, and his Test average has no doubt suffered from having often had to play defensively to shore up the innings.
For Essex there have been few such problems, and his batting has been, after Keith Fletcher's captaincy, probably the chief reason for their successes.
In 1986 he took over the captaincy from Fletcher and led them to  their third championship in four years, but early in 1987 he suffered a bad loss of form and the team slipped right down the table.
Deciding that captaincy was affecting his batting, he stood down in favour of Fletcher for a season, resuming again in 1989 when the county did well but his own form was fairly ordinary.
His first taste of Test captaincy came at the Oval in 1988; he was unable to stem the West Indian flood, but produced a battling second innings to make a game of it.
He was rewarded with a victory over Sri Lanka, and then chosen to lead the team to India, only for the tour to be cancelled because of the South African connections of himself and several members of the party.
When the Australians arrived in 1989, he seemed scarcely to be considered for the leadership, and appeared to have few advocates beyond the purlieus of Chelmsford and Colchester.
Yet in February 1990 he pulled off one of cricket's all-time miracles.
The creator of the ‘miracle’ at Sabina Park, 1989–90, Graham Gooch has four centuries to his name against West Indies.
Early in the tour one of the fast bowlers, Ricardo Ellcock, had a recurrence of a back injury and went home.
After indifferent form in the early games, the first Test at Sabina Park, where four years earlier they had been annihilated in three days, was upon them.
West Indies had lost only one home Test in the previous decade, and had not lost in Kingston since Australia beat them in 1954–5.
The pitch had recently been relaid and proved itself slow but uneven.
When Richards won the toss he decided, after some thought, to bat, and Greenidge and Haynes were soon strolling along.
They had reached 62 and looked good for 200 when Greenidge played the ball to long leg and, seeing Devon Malcolm fumble his fielding, came back for a second.
Malcolm's throw was superb, thundering into Russell's gloves at the top of the stumps, and Greenidge was on his way.
And then, against tight bowling and good catching, wickets just slipped away.
When Richards was fifth out only 124 were on the board, and immediately after tea the innings collapsed totally.
In six overs Fraser took five wickets for six runs for figures of 5 for 28 off twenty overs, and West Indies were all out for 164.
People listening in England must have thought there was something wrong with their radios.
By the close, England were 80 for 2, and next day came the only big partnership of the match.
Lamb, dropped by Dujon on 30, played splendidly thereafter, putting on 172 for the fourth wicket with Robin Smith, reaching his tenth Test century and fifth against West Indies, and finally falling for 132.
The score was 288 when Smith departed for 57, and if the last wickets did not pile on the pressure they did enough to give England a lead of exactly 200.
It was the third day that clinched it.
Malcolm disposed  of Haynes with a very fast, dipping full toss, and then after Greenidge and Richardson seemed to be settling down, wickets began to go.
Four were down for 112 before Best and Richards took the score to 192.
Then Malcolm bowled Richards, and after Best fell to Small the tail soon went.
240 all out left England just 41 to get after the rest day.
Since Malcolm, a local boy, and Small, Barbados-born, each took four wickets, the joke in England was that ‘our West Indian bowlers are better than your West Indian bowlers’.
During the rest day it rained.
That night it came down in buckets.
The fourth day became one of intense frustration for England as the ground staff, with little of the equipment of their English counterparts, did not fall over themselves to get play started.
By next morning, though, the sun was back and England could be denied no longer.
It took them all of the pre-lunch session to get the runs as Walsh and Bishop made life difficult, and Gooch fell just before the end; but with three balls left before lunch  
‘Our West Indian bowlers are better than your West Indian bowlers.’
Gladstone Small, Barbados-born, had a successful tour in 1989–90.
Larkins drove the winning run and one of the most remarkable Test victories of all had been achieved.
West Indians of a literary turn of mind might have thought of W.B. Yeats: ‘Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.’
Slowly people began to realise it was not a miracle after all, but the reward for an enormous amount of hard work, planning and discipline which ensured they were the fittest and best-prepared England team ever,; a very professional approach which saw them practising endlessly; high-class line and length bowling, backed up by excellent fielding, which had the West Indian batsmen constantly under pressure; sound batsmanship to build on the bowlers' successes; and a crackling team spirit fostered by Gooch which one could not remember seeing in an England team in years.
As the series went on, it became clear that the players would happily follow Gooch through fire, flood, armies of tarantulas or anything else he might choose, if at the end of it there was the chance of winning a Test match.
For a man who always looks so morose when batting —‘I know I look a miserable sod out there, but I can't help it,’ he once said — and whose captaincy had previously seemed rather ordinary, it was a revelation.
No one could have doubted that West Indies would fight back.
Yet England had played so well that, equally, there was no reason to think it would prove to be a flash in the pan.
The series was alight — only for it to be thoroughly dampened in Guyana when relentless rain washed out the second Test completely, for only the fifth time in Test history.
Would this mean that England had lost their momentum?
Not at all.
In Trinidad, West Indies were without Richards and were led for the first time by Desmond Haynes.
Gooch won an important toss, put West Indies in, and before long five wickets were down for 29.
Logie, however, was dropped on 17 and, with Hooper, set about a rescue.
But then more wickets fell, and the eighth was down for 103; only for Logie and Bishop to put on 74 for the ninth wicket, and when Logie was last man out just two short of a well-deserved hundred, the score was 199.
In reply, England, against a very slow over rate, scored just 146 in a slightly shortened day, with Gooch and Larkins putting on a century opening stand.
When they resumed on the third afternoon after time lost for rain, they lost quick wickets, and at 214 for 6 seemed to have wasted the advantage.
Capel and Russell dug in, though, and a total of 288 gave them a handy lead.
The next day belonged to Devon Malcolm, a man who came into the Test team a few months earlier against Australia with a reputation for being able to bowl extremely quickly but rarely accurately, who, with  less than perfect eyesight, was a total rabbit with the bat, and who could be a joke as a fielder.
After Greenidge and Haynes had put on 96 for the first wicket, Fraser had Greenidge lbw; immediately after the interval Haynes hit Malcolm's second ball for four, only for the next ball to leap up at him and give Lamb an easy catch.
Two balls later, Best fell lbw to a shooter, and the next ball clipped Dujon's off-stump.
Three wickets in four balls seemed a pretty good response to the unkind things written about Malcolm in the press.
Richardson and Logie steadied the ship for a while till Malcolm had Logie caught.
At 200 for 6, Malcolm got Moseley and Ambrose ran out Hooper, only to make amends by putting on 34 for the ninth wicket with Bishop which would prove vital.
First thing next morning, Malcolm had Walsh lbw, giving him 6 for 77 and match figures of 10 for 137 and leaving England all day to make 151. just before lunch they were 73 for 1 when it began to rain — hard.
Worse, they had lost Gooch after a ball from Moseley had reared up and struck him on the left hand, breaking a bone, although until the match was over even his team thought it was only bruised.
On that moment England's whole tour turned.
Play resumed just after four o'clock, the pitch having been sweating under the covers in the meantime, and the light decidedly dingy.
Stewart, who had been playing well, hammered his first ball down the throat of third man, and with West Indies taking time-wasting tactics to the extreme — 16.5 overs in around two hours — England did not really have a hope.
Smith and Bailey fell quickly, and when Lamb went with the score on 106 England's last realistic chance went with him.
It all ended in something like farce, with Capel and Russell unsure whether to press on or come off, but there were still 31 to get and the light was wretched when Gooch called them in.
Since there was no sparing of the short-pitched stuff, and no intervention from the umpires, to continue would probably only have resulted in an injury anyway.
It could be argued that had England scored faster on the second day they would have won comfortably, but having controlled the game from the beginning they were desperately unlucky to lose out to the weather; and for the fans listening at home it was especially frustrating that it was a beautiful evening in England.
There was also bad feeling that Haynes had resorted to ‘sledging’ Stewart to upset his concentration, and there would be more bad feeling before long.
Desmond Haynes' first taste of Test captaincy was not a very happy experience, going for a duck in the first innings, dropping a catch and demeaning himself with the sledging as the match slipped away.
It did little for the image of a man who has been part of the backbone of the  team for so long, and was playing in his eighty-seventh Test.
The first came in 1977–8 against Australia and he began with fifties in his first three innings, only to join the Packer brigade and miss out for a couple of years.
Since things returned to normal, he and Gordon Greenidge have formed the most prolific opening partnership Test cricket has known; before the series they had opened the innings over 120 times, about twice as many as any other Test first-wicket partnership, although they had produced only thirteen century partnerships.
Since they are both high-class batsmen this comes as quite a surprise, but looking through the records one sees that one of them has failed fairly often; their strength is that when that has happened the other has usually gone on to a big score, thereby relieving the pressure on the middle order.
Haynes has tended to be the less adventurous of the two and does not quite have his partner's determination to hammer the ball into a distant wall, but before the series began he had 5,340 runs at 41, with twelve centuries, to his name all the same.
England have usually been favoured opponents, and before the series ended he would have two more hundreds against them.
Both sides had injury problems during the series, West Indies missing Logie and Ambrose from the first Test, Richards and Marshall from the second, Best, Marshall and Moseley from the fourth.
England lost their most important batsman and bowler from the last two Tests, for apart from Gooch's broken hand Fraser pulled a rib muscle, and his accuracy was very sorely missed.
Allan Lamb took over the captaincy and did his best, but it soon became clear that without Gooch they were nothing like the same team.
Lamb had taken over the Northamptonshire leadership the previous season and had shown himself enthusiastic if inexperienced, but had then missed a good deal of the season through injury.
A fine attacking batsman, he had been in the England team for much of the time since making his debut in 1982, but after his four centuries in the summer of 1984 he had disappointed too often and his average scarcely reflected his ability — in 57 Tests he had made just over 3,000 runs at 34 before the tour began.
Always the man of action type rather than the deep thinker, he is a captain who leads by example; if he showed himself rather insensitive to the needs of his bowlers, he showed his batsmen just what to do.
David Smith was flown in from England as cover for Gooch, only to have his thumb badly bruised in the one-day international in Barbados and so miss the Bridgetown Test.
Lamb won the toss and chose to field, but although Haynes was soon dismissed there was altogether more resistance from the West Indian batsmen than before.
Lacking Fraser, the English attack found itself being hit around, and in the afternoon Richards  launched into Malcolm, taking 18 off one over.
Yet the bowler could have had him three times, two sixes just clearing the fielder and a top edge over the wicket-keeper falling harmlessly.
Lamb immediately took Malcolm off, which one felt Gooch would not have done, and West Indies built up their innings.
Richards fell on 70 but Best, on his home ground, soldiered on and was rewarded with his first Test century, going on to 164.
A total of 446 gave England plenty to do, and as before it was Lamb and Smith who did the bulk of the work.
193 for the fourth wicket, with Lamb equalling Colin Cowdrey's record of six Test centuries against West Indies, ensured a reasonable score, and 358 all out left them with a fair chance of saving the match.
On the fourth day, England hardly surprisingly, bowled extremely slowly in an effort to delay the declaration.
It was time for Haynes to enjoy himself, though and, aided by some dropped catches, he reached a century as West Indies headed for 267 for 8 declared.
Malcolm, incidentally, after being the man of the match in Trinidad, took 0 for 188 here, partly at least because he persisted in bowling short whereas before he had pitched the ball up.
The feeling was that Richards should have declared before he did as the last hour's batting produced few runs, but when England set about playing out time, Larkins, having gone first ball in the first innings, lasted only one more this time.
This brought in Bailey, who had recorded his own pair in Trinidad.
He had reached six when he played at a ball down the leg side which hit him on the thigh, with the bat some inches away, and was taken by Dujon.
Umpire Barker made no response to the appeal, whereupon Richards — who at slip was in precisely the wrong place to see what had happened — danced down the pitch waving his right hand frantically, giving every appearance that he was about to remonstrate forcefully with the umpire; whereupon Mr Barker raised his finger and Bailey was on his way.
The television replay showed clearly that Bailey had not touched the ball, and from the English point of view it was difficult to escape the feeling that Mr Barker — whose umpiring, and that of his colleagues, had been first-class, with, if anything, England getting the benefit of the doubt in several close decisions — had been pressurized into giving him out.
When Mr Barker heard that Christopher Martin-Jenkins had said in his radio commentary that ‘a very good umpire cracked under pressure’ he denied it and issued a writ against Martin-Jenkins for defamation.
As he suggested that Richards had been less than sporting, Martin-Jenkins found himself banned from the local airwaves and Public Enemy Number One in Barbados; since he is renowned as a courteous, generous-spirited chap, it  brought home to English fans just how fervently Richards is regarded in the Caribbean, although any English supporter who watched the incident on television would have been hard pushed to disagree with Martin-Jenkins's assessment of it.
Richards insisted he was not pressurizing the umpire but doing a celebratory dance, which seemed odd since as the umpire had not raised a finger at the time he had nothing to celebrate.
In the excitement after Bailey's departure, nightwatchman Small also fell, leaving England 15 for 3 overnight, Stewart and Russell at the crease.
The hero next day was Russell, defending for over five hours without giving a chance; not bad for a man whose entry into the Test team was delayed because he supposedly could not bat.
Stewart stayed with him for about an hour and a half and Lamb hung around for a while, but Smith was his main ally and, as the day ebbed away, it seemed as though only the new ball stood between England and a draw.
Sure enough, when Ambrose took it he did for Russell with a shooter and then disposed of the rest.
There was over an hour left when Malcolm came in, and had some of the others defended as well as he did the game might have been saved.
He survived about half that time before Ambrose got him, finishing with 8 for 45; all out 191 meant a win by 164 runs.
The match finished on a Tuesday.
On the Thursday morning another began, everyone having decamped to Antigua.
It was an astonishing piece of planning, especially as the Friday, being Good Friday, was the rest day.
In theory the teams started equal, with everything to play for — but the tide was now running West Indies' way.
Sure enough, after Lamb had won the toss the batsmen got in only to get out, and the innings ended on the second day for 160.
Greenidge, in his hundredth Test, and Haynes then produced an opening stand of 298, beating their own West Indian record by two runs.
On that third morning, though, it had been Haynes who led out the home team, since Richards was in the press box breathing fire at Daily Express journalist James Lawton who had asked him for an explanation of the V-sign he had given to his own crowd.
His outburst, it would seem, was the culmination of much anger at press criticism of West Indian bowling, both the excessive use of bouncers and the slow over rate; but it was an astonishing way for a Test captain to behave, and he apologized to his team for not leading them out.
It cannot have done his concentration any good, for after the Greenidge-Haynes partnership and a knock from Richardson wickets fell rapidly, Richards being caught off Malcolm for just one.
All out 446 meant that England had a lot of batting to do in the last two days, and when Larkins went at the end of the third day to a ball  that he did not see in the shadows, one felt they just were not going to make it.
Sure enough, next day saw a procession, only Lamb and Hussain passing thirty, although Smith batted for an hour with a broken finger and it was revealed that Hussain had been playing for five weeks with a broken bone in his wrist and Lamb had a cracked elbow.
All the same, 154 all out gave West Indies victory by an innings and 32 runs.
If it was a sad end for England, they at least had the knowledge that only the weather deprived them of a draw.
Had Gooch not been injured who knows what would have happened in the last two games; but then, West Indies had their share of injuries, too.
It was also sad that no English spinner had been seen throughout the rubber, and that both sides blatantly and cynically ignored the ruling about bowling 90 overs in a day, so that play just continued until the light faded every day of the series; those two factors left many people fearful for the game's future.
For English fans, though, there was pleasure that their team had begun to show heart and direction and purpose, all of which had been missing since the Ashes tour of 1986–7; while West Indian fans were just happy that their heroes had shown that, after all, W.B. Yeats had got it wrong and the centre could hold.
The steamroller had hit a bump, but for the time being it was back on course.
INSTANT ENTERTAINMENT
A FAMILIAR STORY
When England won the last Test of 1973–4 the teams had met only twice in one-day internationals.
By the time England won another Test they had played a further thirty, plus two that were rain-restricted and one washed out altogether.
Not surprisingly, West Indies dominated these, winning seventeen of the first twenty-two played up to the end of 1985–6.
Then a curious thing happened — England suddenly began to win, with nine of the next ten meetings going their way, and even while their Test form was wretched somehow turned themselves into perhaps the best one-day side in the world.
The danger with this was that the longer it went on the more likely it became that both players and fans would get their priorities wrong, so that the feeling of ‘we may as well concentrate on what we're good at and not bother too much about Tests’ would become steadily more predominant.
There were signs, especially in 1988, that the players appeared to be trying harder in the one-day internationals than in the Tests, and the traditionalists — who of course regard themselves as the real cricket lovers — feared for the future.
Back in 1973 such fears would have seemed absurd.
The first limited-overs international, between Australia and England, had taken place only two years earlier, and the Prudential Trophy had then been introduced with great success in 1972.
Earlier in 1973, the matches against the New Zealanders had been rather an anti-climax to their tour, with the second spoiled by rain, but no one doubted that they were now a permanent addition to the summer.
West Indies had won the three-Test series 2–0, yet so far had never played a one-day international against anyone, so the balance between form and experience seemed a neat one; and so it proved.
The first meeting, at Leeds, was one of the most exciting.
West Indies made a good start and with 132 for 3 at lunch looked ready to blossom.
Then Willis bowled Lloyd, four more wickets fell cheaply — Sobers made a duck in his only one-day international — and the final score was 181.
The England selectors, having said goodbye and thank you to Illingworth, had  appointed Denness captain, and he immediately came good with a steady 66 to hold the innings together.
When he was out England had ten overs to score 39, with five wickets left, and by the beginning of the penultimate over needed just seven with three wickets left.
Then Greig went, having made 48, Hendrick followed next ball, and the last over began with four still required.
Sobers bowled to Willis, was clumped back over his head for two then steered to third man for two, and England were home with three balls to spare.
If the one-day series was then to prove one-sided for years to come, at least it got off to a good start.
There was something of a contrast at the Oval.
In good batting conditions England did not distinguish themselves as 63 from Fletcher was the only substantial knock.
189 was clearly nowhere near enough, and Fredericks alone accounted for 105 of the reply.
With Kallicharran making 53, there were only four more needed when the second wicket fell, and as there were also more than thirteen overs in hand West Indies won the Prudential Trophy on a faster run rate over the two games.
It had not been hard to predict that the Caribbean style of attacking play would be greatly suited to one-day cricket.
The joys — and the financial rewards — of the instant game had not reached the West Indies when Denness led his troops there a few months later and, as the two sides were drawn in separate groups in the 1975 World Cup, it was 1976 before they met again.
Tony Greig had already failed in his attempt to make the West Indies ‘grovel’, and never looked like doing it now.
Indeed, in the first game at Scarborough they lost a wicket first ball and had three down for 23 before Barlow, on his first representative appearance, held the innings together with 80 not out, helping the total to 202.
There was one lovely freak occurrence near the end: Knott played the ball down to fine leg and Holding's throw hit the stumps with Barlow well home, whereupon he called Knott for a second run.
With both batsmen in the middle of the pitch, the ricochet beat Barlow to the bowler's end and broke the stumps there as well; Lloyd appealed, but umpire Jepson gave ‘not out’.
When West Indies batted, Richards was soon laying into them, hammering a six and twenty fours in 119 not out.
No one else scored very many but no one needed to, and there were still six wickets and fourteen overs in hand when King finished things off with a six.
Rain caused delays at Lord's so that the match had to be carried over till Sunday, but it made no difference to Richards.
He fell three short of his century this time, and once again no one else got out of the twenties, but 221 still proved too much for England.
With six wickets going down for  62 they were never in the hunt, but Randall did his best to keep the game alive, supported by Knott and Jackman.
He was to have many fine one-day knocks over the years and now he hit 88; only when he was ninth out was the match definitely lost, West Indies eventually winning by 36 runs.
More rain at Edgbaston washed out the Bank Holiday Monday, and when the game was played on Tuesday afternoon it was limited to 32 overs.
West Indies duly hammered everything in sight.
Richards failed, but Lloyd hit 79 off 57 balls and Greenidge and Rowe made quick forties, taking the total to 223.
England never had a chance; Amiss, Randall and Wood scored a few, but in the end they fell 50 short.
Barlow followed his good first match with two ducks, but one notable thing about the game was the international debut of I.T.
Botham.
He was walloped for 31 for 1 in three overs and scored 20.
The next meeting was in the dramatic setting of the 1979 World Cup Final at Lord's.
Brearley won the toss and put West Indies in, and the England bowlers did well; the fourth wicket went down on 99 and they were clearly on top.
They had not yet got Richards, however, and when Collis King joined him they decided it was time to entertain the crowd.
With Willis having been injured in the semi-final, England had chosen to play an extra batsman, Larkins, and make up their fifth bowler by combining Gooch, Boycott and Larkins, and it proved ill-judged.
Probably they would have lost all the same, but another bowler might have made it much closer.
Richards and King put on 139 for the fifth wicket in just seventy-seven minutes, King annihilating the bowlers to the tune of three sixes and ten fours in his 86, most of them from the three part-time bowlers who conceded, by coincidence, 86 between them.
After King went, Richards reached his century and was on 138 not out at the close, having seen the total to 286.
Inevitably, he won the Man of the Match award.
In reply, Boycott and Brearley put on no less than 129 for the first wicket — jolly good in a Test, but they took thirty-eight overs about it, with Boycott not getting into double figures until the seventeenth over.
With 158 still needed from the last twenty-two overs, the later batsmen never had a chance, perishing quickly is they threw the bat.
Poor Larkins was one of four ducks as Garner took five for 38, and the innings subsided to 194 all out.
Victory by 92 runs meant that Clive Lloyd was holding aloft the Prudential World Cup for the second time.
A few months later, both England and West Indies were in Australia, each playing three alternating Tests against the home team to ‘celebrate’ the armistice drawn up with Kerry Packer.
England lost all three of their Tests and West Indies won two of theirs, but neither side liked the  arrangement of interspersing them with one-day games that were part of the new Benson and Hedges World Series Cup.
Switching between one-day and five-day mode was unpopular with the players, and the new showbiz-style razzmatazz that accompanied the games seemed specifically designed to cater for the drunken yobbos who turned up by the cartload.
The important thing, though, was that they paid their admission fee before they became totally paralytic and abusive; that seemed to be all that really mattered.
The teams played four matches, spread over several weeks, against each of the others, with the top two then going through to a best-of-three final.
England's first game, at Sydney, was also their first under floodlights, and they won it.
Randall and Brearley made a good start, Gower and Willey pressed on well, and at the end of fifty overs they were on 211.
A brief shower reduced West Indies' target to 199 from 47 overs, and Greenidge, Rowe and Kallicharran looked to have this well under control.
Then the wickets went, and Croft, the last batsmen, was left needing to score three  
Collis King — 86 in 77 minutes in the 1979 World Cup Final.
This was one of his three sixes.
Bairstow, back to the boundary — and Botham bowled him.
Any English people in Brisbane had rather less to get excited about.
England made a decent 217, with 68 from Boycott and 59 from Gower; but after Greenidge and Haynes had got half-way to the target, Richards, who had missed the first match, played as only he can.
The second wicket, like the first, produced 109 runs and he made 85 of them off 77 balls.
With Greenidge also on 85 not out, the nine-wicket win was rather comprehensive.
The third match at Melbourne was then completely washed out, but at Adelaide West Indies produced another drubbing.
Richards made another 88, Greenidge and Kallicharran got fifties and 246 was clearly going to be hard for England to beat.
In front of a full house they steadily disintegrated, no one passing 24 as Roberts took 5 for 22. 139 all out left West Indies 107 ahead.
Remarkably, however, England had won all their matches against Australia, and Australia had won three of theirs against  
World Cup Final, 1979.
Richards, croft, Garner, King, Holding, Kallischarran, Lloyd, Murray and Greenidge display the silverware.
West Indies; England therefore finished well clear at the top of the table, with 11 points to West Indies' 7 and Australia's 6.
So it was back to Melbourne for the first of the final matches.
If England had held any one of the three catches they put down they would have won, since the three top-scoring West Indies batsmen all had a ‘life’.
Greenidge was dropped on 6 and made a further 74, Kallicharran on 25 and went on to 42, and King was unbeaten on 31 after giving a chance on 5. 215 was the kind of score to promise a close finish, and Boycott, Willey and Larkins saw them well on the way.
The innings lost momentum when Willey and Larkins were run out in quick succession, and as the final over began 15 were still needed.
Brearley did his best, but four were still needed off the last ball and he could manage only a single.
A two-run defeat seemed set fair to demoralize England, but their batsmen did not do badly in the second game at Sydney.
Boycott's 63 held the innings together, Gooch and Gower got a few, Botham walloped 37 off 39 balls and 208 seemed a reasonable total on a pitch helpful to bowlers.
Yet Greenidge and Haynes found few problems, and when Haynes went Richards merely carried on as before.
He and Greenidge made 119 in 27 overs, and although Richards went near the end for 65 Greenidge remained unbeaten on 98.
An eight-wicket win meant that Lloyd was hoisting yet another trophy to the heavens.
The treadmill ground on.
Another few months and West Indies were back in England for a Test series that lost much of its interest to the weather.
The one-day games were now held before the Test series rather than after, an hors d'oeuvre rather than a stodgy pudding served up when everyone was full, but the first game at Headingley was distinctly uninspiring.
In poor light and on a tricky pitch, West Indies, put in by Botham, had to work hard to reach 198, with 78 from Greenidge the major contribution and Old's figures being a remarkable 11-4-12-2.
Time had been lost to rain and bad light, and by the close England had struggled to 35 for 3; next morning, the conditions were better and Tavaré, on his international debut, reached 82 not out.
The problem was that no one stayed with him, and England subsided to 174 all out.
By contrast, Lord's was actually blessed with sunshine.
Botham again put them in and all the bowlers did well — except him.
Being carted for 71 off his eleven overs allowed West Indies to reach 235, with most of the batsmen making a useful score.
Boycott and Willey opened with 135 off 33 overs, but then the wickets clattered.
It was Botham who redeemed his poor bowling and got the crowd going with 42 not out, hitting the winning four off the third ball of the last over.
This was one of only two  occasions Botham tasted victory as England captain, the other being in a one-day game against Australia a year later, and each time he was there at the death.
West Indies still won the Prudential Trophy on the faster run rate.
At this period the players must have been getting sick of the sight of each other, for just another few months and England were playing their first one-day games in the West Indies.
The opening encounter took them to the small island of St Vincent, where the pitch was some way from international standard.
The home team were without Richards but fielded a young man named Everton Mattis who, on representative debut, accomplished a rare feat: his 62 was more than all the other batsmen put together and, since Haynes got 34, it will be seen that the others had a collective off-day par excellence .
A target of 128 should not have been beyond England, but four wickets went down for 15 and it was left to Gower and Botham to make a game of it.
When Botham was eighth out the score was 114 and there were more than five overs left.
Emburey and Stevenson nudged their singles, but Holding had the last word.
He bowled Emburey at 123, and Old two runs later.
It was the third time in eight games that the margin of victory had been just two runs.
The second one-day game in Guyana was played against a background of uncertainty over whether Robin Jackman was about to be asked to vacate the premises.
England simply never got going.
Only three batsmen got past twenty and none got to thirty, and a total of 137 was clearly a waste of everyone's time.
Greenidge and Richards went cheaply, but only two more wickets were lost in strolling to victory.
Jackman did not play in the match, but no sooner was it over than official statements were buzzing, and cricket was staggering through yet another crisis.
Happily there was now a break of over three years.
Yet little had changed: Richards was still executioner-in-chief and England still seemed mesmerized at the prospect of playing the world champions.
By 1984, the Prudential Trophy had metamorphosed into the Texaco Trophy, and the first game at Old Trafford contained the finest dish ever served up in a one-day international.
Lloyd won the toss and decided to bat, only to see seven wickets crumble for 102.
Richards was not among them.
Baptiste kept him company for a while as he blazed away, but when the ninth wicket fell with the score on 166 and fourteen overs still unused, it seemed that his effort would be in vain.
Holding, though, stood firm, his share of an unbeaten last wicket stand being 12.
Richards's share was rather larger, 93 to be precise, the fourteen overs yielding 106 runs as Richards hammered 21  fours and five sixes — one of them out of the ground — in all, for 189 not out off 170 balls.
He might have been stumped on 44 but that was the only chance he gave.
It was one of the truly marvellous innings, one that no one who saw it could ever forget; since it has been shown on television virtually every time rain has stopped play in any match since, it would be almost impossible to have forgotten it anyway.
Faced with a total of 272, England were simply demoralized.
Lamb made 75 but there was little from anyone else, and the tourists won by 104 runs.
At Trent Bridge, the first part of the story was the same except for one detail — Richards went for just three.
Lloyd made 52 but the rest of the batting disappointed, and, with rain reducing the game to fifty overs each, West Indies managed only 179.
Fowler and Andy Lloyd made a good start, Gower chipped in well, and the rest of the batsmen did enough to see England home by three wickets.
They hardly looked ready to slug it out in a Test series, but at least they had a victory under their belts.
Any euphoria this produced was very short-lived.
At Lord's, Fowler and Lloyd and Gower again made some runs, but it took thirty Extras to help their total to 196.
Their only chance was to get Richards cheaply; instead he made 84 not out off 65 balls, and, with Gomes also getting fifty, the margin was eight wickets.
Another trophy for Clive Lloyd's collection.
During 1985–6 in the Caribbean the script-writer was still West Indian.
The centre-piece of the first mini-drama in Kingston was Mike Gatting's  exploding nose as he missed an attempted hook off Marshall.
Psychologically this did England no good at all, of course , and the batsmen struggled to 145 off 46 overs, the reduction in the number of overs caused by West Indies bowling so slowly.
If any sweat was lost in reaching this target it was not noticeable, and a six-wicket win was duly recorded.
Another victory draws near.
Gower is caught by wicket-keeper Dujon off Roger Harper at Headingley 1984.
Lloyd, Greenidge and Richards close in.
Yet after being annihilated in the first Test, England showed they could still fight.
The one-day game in Trinidad was, according to Wisden ‘described by many as the best one-day international played in the West Indies’, and England won it off the final ball.
Rain reduced it to 37 overs a side and the home team were soon rattling along.
Haynes made 53 and Richardson finished unbeaten on 79, but once again it was Richards who dominated.
Off just 39 balls he made 82 astonishing runs, and the innings closed on 229, setting England a run rate of 6.2 an over.
It proved to be Gooch's day; with Slack he put on 89 for the second wicket in seventeen overs, setting the foundations for the later onslaught.
Yet his partners contributed relatively little as the runs were steadily knocked off and his century was passed; come the last over and nine were needed, and it was a leg-bye off the final delivery that earned England their win.
Gooch finished on 129 not out, made without a chance, a superb innings.
Three days later in the Test he was out fourth ball.
Barbados enjoyed no such entertainment.
Gower put West Indies in and watched them score 249 in 46 overs, thanks in part to a very fast outfield.
Richards was missed when 5 and went on to 62, the same score as Richardson, with all the batsmen making useful contributions.
When England batted, Gooch was given out caught behind and it seemed to dispirit his team-mates; without their hero of the previous game they looked lost, and folded for 114 all out.
At least the crowd went home happy.
Wisden had some strong words to say about the fourth game, back in Trinidad: ‘England put up a performance which exposed to the crowd of 21,000 what depths of incompetence they had reached…after two days off following the Test defeat, the first practice was made optional — and Gower himself was one of the six who failed to attend.’
They made 165 from their 47 overs, with Robinson top-scoring on 55, and Haynes, Richardson and Richards had no trouble in knocking off the runs for the loss of two wickets.
‘England's batting, fielding and — apart from Emburey and Edmonds — their bowling proclaimed the lack of practice and resolve on a slow pitch which, had they been in the right frame of mind, would have given them an even chance of levelling the series,’ asserted Wisden .
In one-day matches England were now just about at rock bottom; within a year they were very much on top.
THE MOTHERLAND STRIKES BACK
Mike Gatting has proved himself an excellent one-day captain, winning several trophies with Middlesex during the 1980s.
He was soon bringing his skills to bear for his country, too, especially in Australia in 1986–7.
Not content with just the interminable Benson and Hedges World Series Cup, the players also had to fit in the Benson and Hedges Challenge between the fourth and fifth Tests, a jamboree dreamed up to latch on to the sporting frenzy which the TV and marketing people had decreed would seize the nation when the America's Cup yacht races were staged off Fremantle.
At least there was no travelling as all the games were played in Perth.
Australia, England, West Indies and Pakistan would play each other mercifully just once, and the two top teams would then meet in a final.
Since Gatting and his troops had retained the Ashes just a few days beforehand, they were ready to take on all comers.
By the time they played West Indies, they had already beaten Australia and West Indies had lost to Pakistan.
England were put in and saw half their wickets fall for 96 in half their overs before they were rescued by 71 from Lamb and 50 from Jack Richards, with the spinners chipping in as well.
228 looked better when three West Indian wickets went for 51 and better still when Richards was caught.
Logie and Dujon were steering the game their way when Dujon was bowled as he stepped back for a cover drive, and that was the turning point.
The rest of the wickets slipped away, 209 all out gave England a win by 19 runs and, as Pakistan had already beaten Australia, ensured that the final would be between them and England.
Good, tight bowling enabled England to do this comfortably, giving them their second trophy in ten days.
There was just time for England and Australia to fit in the final Test before getting on with the serious business — serious to those for whom dollar signs are important — of dashing round the country playing game after game after game of the Benson and Hedges World Series Cup.
Just two days after losing the splendid fifth Test in Sydney, England were in Brisbane playing West Indies, and beating them convincingly.
Moisture in the pitch made the toss an important one, and when Gatting won it the bowlers did their stuff beautifully.
Only Haynes and Logie put up much resistance and 154 all out, with conditions improving all the time, presented England with few problems; had the situation been reversed, one knew that West Indies would have won by eight or nine wickets, but English fans were happy enough to have six still in hand.
The itinerary for this competition appeared to have been worked out with the sole aim of maximizing the profit of the air operators who did the transporting.
Australia, for instance, having finished the Test in Sydney on 15 January, played in Brisbane on 18 January, Melbourne on 20 January, Sydney on 22 January, Adelaide on 25 and 26 January, Sydney on 28 January and so on .
By any stretch of anyone's imagination it was insane and, coming at the end of a tough Test series, it was extremely tiring for the players.
England's second encounter with West Indies was at Adelaide, where they were given a good start of 121 by Broad and Athey.
They capitalized on this well enough by reaching 252 in their fifty overs, and then took two quick wickets when West Indies batted.
In good batting conditions, the English bowlers performed well, and with some good catches being held the innings never really threatened.
When Emburey went through the lower order with four wickets in thirteen balls, England were left winners by 89 runs.
Never before had England beaten West Indies in two consecutive one-day games, let alone three, and West Indies went into the next match at Melbourne, clearly determined that it would not be four.
On an uneven pitch, English wickets were soon tumbling, Broad not helping the cause by running out Lamb.
Only 34 from Emburey gave the bowlers any sort of target to defend, although 147 was obviously nothing like enough.
De Freitas and Small were extremely economical and there were only nine balls left when the total was passed, but with Richards on song — and becoming the first man to score 5,000 runs in one-day internationals — only four wickets went down.
That was as far as their success went, though.
The pitch at Devonport was of more interest to bowlers than batsmen, and only a steady 76 from Broad, with some support from Lamb, gave England a reasonable total of 177.
Normally that should present no problem to the team batting second, but none of them could dominate the bowling and the low total seemed to spur England to some brilliant fielding; when Botham got Gomes and Richards in successive overs, the game moved England's way, and the rest of the wickets drifted away for a total of just 148.
Wisden records that ‘on five of the eight occasions on which Gatting changed the bowling, the man brought on took a wicket in the first over of his spell’.
Such inspiration on the captain's part was to help him towards an OBE, for with England then beating Australia in the first two games of the final, their clean sweep of three trophies out of three was accomplished.
Gatting made the point that they had to win the final two games as after so much cricket they simply did not have the strength left for a third.
It was the most successful tour  England had ever made, all the more satisfying as it began with them being written off as a bunch of no-hopers.
Later the same year, the teams were again in opposition in the 1987 Reliance World Cup staged in India and Pakistan.
Drawn in the same group, they had to play each other twice, and the first game at Gujranwala produced a memorable finish.
The last ten overs of each innings saw over 90 runs scored; West Indies batted first and had made 151 for four from forty overs when Logie and Dujon, and then Harper, swung the bat.
243 looked a useful score from fifty overs.
England began slowly, and then as Gatting and Gooch were accelerating they both fell in quick succession.
Before much longer two more wickets had gone, with the score on 131 for 6 and the game seemingly lost.
But Lamb was still there, and with Emburey and then DeFreitas swinging merrily he brought England back in contention.
With three overs left 35 were still needed; Walsh was duly hammered for 16, all but one to Lamb, but the penultimate over from Patterson yielded only six.
That left 13 from the last; Lamb struck a two and a four, and then Walsh sent down a dreadful ball that shot through for four leg-side wides.
Now thoroughly rattled, he bowled a no-ball, from which Lamb curiously took a single and so lost the strike; but when Walsh now sent down a full toss, Foster gleefully walloped it to the rope and England had won.
A week later, poor Walsh was involved in another traumatic final over as Pakistan despatched him for 14 to win off the final ball.
With Pakistan making the running in the group, the second England-West Indies game was crucial as it virtually assured the winners of a semi-final place.
Having put England in, West Indies then bowled poorly and after 30 overs England were happily placed at 131 for 2.
It was captain Richards who put the brakes on with some neat off-spin, only for the last ten overs to realize another 83.
Gooch was chief hero with 92 and Lamb again showed what a good one-day player he is, but 22 of the total of 269 were wides that West Indies could ill afford.
With West Indies on 147 for 2 and Richards and Richardson in full flow, the game had West Indies' name on it; Richards, with 51 from as many balls, had already struck Hemmings for two sixes, but now the Notts man flighted in a superb ball that deceived him completely and took his off-stump.
It proved the turning-point.
Hemmings took a catch to dismiss Logie, who was beginning to look dangerous, and then the wickets slithered away — including Harper run out by a fine throw from Hemmings, who was having a wonderful time.
Richardson made 93, but with the last six wickets going for just 30 West Indies were all out 235, leaving England winners by 34  runs.
They duly disposed of India in the semi-final, only to lose to Australia in a game they should have won.
It was a good six months before they had to meet again, this time in the Texaco Trophy matches in England.
The home selectors had been ridiculed in the press for the squad they chose, and it hardly seemed a match for the mighty West Indies; yet by steady bowling and sound batting, England won all three games convincingly, and chemists did a good trade in indigestion tablets as much humble pie had to be eaten.
They won by applying themselves to the job in hand and, if they had continued to do the same in the Tests, it might have been an interesting summer.
At Edgbaston, West Indies got off to a good start as the first wicket produced 34 runs in just six overs, but three fell cheaply and it was left to Logie and Hooper to make fifty apiece and give the innings its backbone.
But, on a slow wicket, their partnership of 97 used up 29 overs, and 217 off 55 overs did not look enough.
After a sound start from Gooch and Broad, England's response belonged primarily to Gatting, and his 82 not out saw his team home with six wickets in hand.
The Headingley game was played on an uneven pitch that made batting difficult.
West Indies bowled better this time and at 83 for 5 had England in trouble, with only Gooch having looked confident.
Then Richards chose to bowl himself and Simmons (who had begun with two quick wickets) for a long spell and England were let off the hook, Pringle and Downton putting on 66 in thirteen overs.
The total reached -186, and West Indies never threatened it.
In the face of excellent bowling, wickets fell steadily, and with 31 from Richards the top score they were all out for 139, giving England a 47-run victory.
It was their first series win against West Indies in England.
The pattern of the Lord's match was similar to the first one.
Rain and bad light brought several interruptions, made batting difficult, and took the game into a second day.
With West Indies 125 for 6 off fifty overs at the close of the first day, things looked good for England, but next morning Marshall and Dujon threw the bat and took the total to 178, which in the conditions was not that bad.
But England only had to bat steadily and they were home, and Gooch, Broad, Gatting and Lamb did just that.
Walsh set a record for the most economical bowling in a one-day international between Test-playing countries with just eleven runs off eleven overs, but 21 no-balls and wides sent down by his chums did not help the struggle, especially as Gooch was ‘out’ twice to no-balls.
There were seven wickets and five overs in hand when victory was completed, the word ‘whitewash’ being gleefully bandied about.
Gatting in particular had had a good series, batting well and leading the team excellently; with the first  Test then drawn under his leadership, how different the rest of the summer might have been had he not invited the famous barmaid to his room.
England's resurgence could not last.
In 1989–90, while the Test series was producing surprises, the one-day games reverted to type.
The first two at Port-of-Spain were spoiled by the weather; in the opening one, West Indies had made 208 and England 26 for 1 when the rain came, while the second got no further than West Indies being 13 without loss.
At Kingston, though, after England had won the Test, there was plenty of excitement.
England batted first and, thanks mainly to Lamb and Smith, reached 214.
Yet the bowlers defended well, and only Richardson mastered them so that the closing overs were tense.
Richardson reached his century during which three hard chances were missed, and from Fraser's final ball Bishop needed two to win on fewer wickets lost.
He swung it to the extra-cover boundary and Sabina Park, where everyone had been generous in Test defeat, could not have celebrated more had the World Cup been won.
In Georgetown, things were more one-sided.
On a good pitch, England struggled after Gooch and Larkins had made a solid start, and 188 for 8 was disappointing.
When Haynes and Best put on 113 for the first wicket it all became academic, the main interest being whether Best would get his hundred.
He did, but ran himself out trying to make it 101; still a six-wicket victory all the same.
In Barbados, with Haynes leading West Indies and England led by Lamb, England repeated their Kingston score of 214, though off only 38 overs after morning rain.
As so often on this tour, Rubin Smith and Lamb were the main architects, both playing aggressively after David Smith, flown out to replace the injured Gooch, had hung around for some time to get accustomed to the conditions only to get a bruised thumb in the process.
When Haynes and Richards on played even more aggressively, and then Best joined in again, the game was heading West Indies' way; falling wickets slowed things down, though, and in the and the target was reached with three balls and four wickets to spare.
3–0 to West Indies set the tour back on its path towards normality after the Test aberrations in Jamaica and Trinidad.
SIR FRANK
Of all the wonderful cricketers to come from the West Indies, it is fair to say that five have been of outstanding importance.
George Headley and Learie Constantine were the giants of the early Test years who did most to establish the team; Garfield Sobers was for twenty years the supreme all-rounder of the game's history; Clive Lloyd devised the concept of a quartet of pace bowlers who would carry all relentlessly before them.
Few would argue, though, that the most important person in the history of West Indies cricket was Frank Worrell, for as the first regular black captain it was he who united all the old discordant factions and created one of the most glorious of teams.
He is the central, pivotal figure in the story.
Because of his death, aged just forty-two, he is also thought of as a tragic figure, a man who was unable to fulfil the important public service to his people that seemed to be his destiny.
It is easy to let this feeling of tragedy overshadow his story, but that would be wrong.
He must be celebrated as a superb cricketer and one of the great captains.
He was born in Barbados on 1 August 1924 into a middle-class family, at a time when class boundaries on the island, having been modelled on the English system, were very rigid.
His parents, brother and sister emigrated to the United States when he was a youngster and he was brought up by his grandmother, and it was only the lack of cricket in America which later deterred him from joining them.
Because of the better opportunities in the States emigration from the West Indies was common at this time, and one cannot help wondering how many more outstanding players might have graced their cricket had their parents not left.
By the age of thirteen, Worrell's ability was obvious and, still in short trousers, he was playing top-grade cricket in his school first team, modelling himself on Derek Sealy, who was one of his masters.
Yet he was hardly a budding saint and his success made him unpopular with both masters and boys.
He was regarded as a ‘big-head’, he played truant, got into trouble for telling a lie, and was lectured by the headmaster in front of the whole school because of the complaints there had been about him.
He said this was the worst moment of his life, and the various carpetings he received ultimately  had their effect; years later the memory of them would have a deep effect on his attitude to captaincy.
Worrell must be understood against his political background.
Barbados was British through and through, and one of his friends said of him many years later: ‘He was as English as can be.
He always admired the culture, manners and civilization of the better type of Englishman.’
The class system was inflexible, though, and the white upper classes held the power, both economic and political.
The black middle classes were allowed to become professional people — doctors, lawyers, civil servants, etc. — but that was their limit.
This created the problem that their English-style education taught them liberal principles, while the system then denied them that same liberal advancement to the higher echelons of power and social prestige.
This was more or less the case throughout the West Indies, although attitudes in Barbados were undoubtedly narrower than elsewhere.
It was a system that could not endure, and agitations for  greater democracy grew steadily louder.
As Worrell's career came at the same period, the stature he acquired both as a man and a leader gave added impetus and credibility to the black independence movement, especially as cricket is such an important part of Caribbean life.
Sir Frank Worrell — his captaincy touched even greater heights than his batsmanship.
Early in his career he was thought of primarily as a left-arm spinner, and made his debut for Barbados in 1941–2 as such.
The following season he made 64 not out as nightwatchman against Trinidad, was moved up the order in the second innings, and responded with 188; a year later, in 1943–4, also against Trinidad, he and John Goddard put on an undefeated 502 for the fourth wicket, at the time the third highest partnership in first-class cricket.
Worrell's share was 308, which remained his highest score.
Two more years and, in company with Walcott, he would have the first-class record outright, putting on an unbeaten 574 for the fourth wicket in Port-of-Spain, his contribution this time being 255.
The record was beaten just a year later, but Worrell is still the only batsman to share in two partnerships of over 500 runs in first-class cricket.
By now, though, he was tired of Barbados, particularly its narrowness of spirit; they expressed their appreciation of his runs by refusing to allow him, as a black man, to practise at Kensington Oval, and he believed there were still those who resented his success and thought him the same ‘bighead’ as at school.
In some quarters, of course, he was enormously popular, and it may have been that as a young man in his early twenties he found it difficult to cope with the adulation of the fans.
For various reasons, therefore, he moved to Jamaica and, although he returned to Barbados many times, it was never with any great enthusiasm for the place.
Ultimately, he came to realize that this persecution complex existed only in his own mind, and that his unpopularity in Barbados arose from his walking out on them.
Remarkably, even after he became captain of the Test team, he was booed when he went out to bat at Bridgetown.
Test call-up came during England's 1947–8 tour.
He was chosen for the first match but had to drop out with food poisoning.
In the second Test at Port-of-Spain, he duly became the third ‘W’, Weekes and Walcott having already made their debuts, and scored 97 and 28 not out.
He also showed his inexperience by asking Gerry Gomez, his captain, if he could be substituted so that he could go to the airport to meet his sister.
He was duly reprimanded for his arrogance, providing him years later with another memory that would help make him a sympathetic captain.
The first century was not long delayed, 131 not out in the third Test helping his team to a seven-wicket win, and he ended his first Test series with an average of 147.
Obviously, he was now quite a celebrity, and in 1948 was signed up  by Radcliffe in the Central Lancashire League; he stayed with them until the end of 1952, set batting records which have never been beaten, even by Sobers, and was hugely popular, for his personal qualities as much as his cricketing skills.
Around this time he was a heavy drinker although, as a conscientious professional, he did not let it affect his game.
In the West Indies the incident of wanting to go to the airport, and the fact that he turned up late for matches a number of times, had gained him a reputation for lack of discipline.
The next upset came when he was chosen for the 1948–9 tour of India but asked, as a professional, to be paid £250; the WICBC refused, Worrell declined to back down, and he did not go.
He felt that, with a wife and child to support, he should be paid what he was worth, and he made it clear that he was not prepared to give in when he thought he had a good case.
It was not the last argument he would have with the authorities over pay, though this was the only series he missed for that reason.
(By contrast, he was very generous to people  who had less than he did, and often gave away money and cricket equipment.)
He was delighted, therefore, when the following year he was invited to join a Commonwealth team touring India; feeling he had a point to prove he made plenty of runs, and was invited on two similar tours in the coming years.
On the second of these, the captain, Leslie Ames, was injured for much of the time and Worrell was appointed his deputy.
He took to it like the proverbial fish to water.
The unique phenomenon of the three Ws.
Left to right: Frank Worrell, Clyde Walcott, Everton Weekes.
Just what is it about Barbados that produces so many wonderful cricketers?
The triumphant tour of England in 1950 saw Worrell way out on top of the averages, scoring 539 runs in four matches at almost 90, and making his highest Test score of 261 at Nottingham.
He played in six series against England and only in the last, in 1963, did he fail with the bat; other big scores included 191 not out, again at Nottingham, carrying his bat to help save the third Test of 1957, and 197 not out at Barbados in the first match of 1959–60 again to ensure a draw after a big England  innings.
This latter was, at 682 minutes, the longest Test innings ever played for West Indies, and he had become so becalmed towards the end that his captain declared before he reached his double century.
His overall average against England is a splendid 54.97, with almost 2,000 runs scored in 25 games; before the last series he was even averaging 63, although he was never one to get too bothered about statistics.
That last series cost him a Test average over 50 as he dipped to 49.49, finishing with 3,860 runs from his 51 Tests, with nine centuries.
Six feet (1.8 metres) tall, slim and athletic, his right-handed batting was less ferocious than that of Walcott and Weekes, relying on superb timing and balance, lightning footwork and an uncanny judgement of where the ball was going to pitch.
His coaching had been minimal, but all his strokes came from the textbook and he was never once known to play across the line.
His glory was the late cut, rated by C.L.R. James as ‘one of the great strokes of our time’, but apart from the hook, which he did not play, all the other strokes were there, elegant, graceful, polished, a joy to watch.
He was also the most relaxed of batsmen, often having been asleep in the dressing-room before going out to the middle.
Worrell's grace captured against Warwickshire in 1950.
Hafeez Kardar at gully watches Fred Gardner miss the ball as Worrell scores off the bowling of Charlie Grove.
Don Taylor of New Zealand is at silly mid-on.
Having begun as a left-arm spinner he turned himself into a fast-medium bowler who frequently took the new ball and who at times could be decidedly nippy.
In reality, he was more of a third seamer than a strike bowler, and did the job only in the absence of a faster man, but he once took 6 for 38 in Australia and at Leeds in 1957 had his best Test figures of 7 for 70.
His 69 Test wickets cost 38.72 each, and against England he took 28 wickets at 43 — expensive, but good enough to put him high on the list of all-rounders.
He was also a first-class close fielder, especially in the gully or at short leg, with 43 Test catches to his name.
In October 1956, Worrell joined Manchester University as a mature student to read for a BA in Economics, changing in his second year to a BA Administration, which included social anthropology.
According to his professor, he was thorough and conscientious rather than brilliant, taking his studies very seriously since he wanted both to improve himself and gain a qualification for when he finished playing.
It was during his second year at Manchester that he was offered the West Indies captaincy for the visit by Pakistan, but decided that his studies had to come first; he had a strong sense of predestination and apparently felt that the leadership would be his eventually.
Completing his degree would ensure that he was better equipped to do the job, especially as by studying social anthropology he would be better able to understand his players.
Yet had the visitors been England or Australia he may well not have been able to resist the  temptation, and this was only partly because they were the leading lights in world cricket; there was also the racial aspect, in that he passionately wanted to prove that a team of black players led by a black captain was the equal of, if not better than, the white teams.
No doubt it is difficult for young people now to appreciate the complexities and the rigidities of the social structure in colonial days.
Looking back, it seems remarkable that only in the 1950s did white people come to accept — grudgingly for the most part— that black people did not need white people in positions of authority to lead and guide them.
The situation changed steadily during the 1950s as more and more black men came to high office, and naturally the West Indian people could see no reason why the same should not happen on the cricket field.
Worrell had been vice-captain against England in 1953–4, but when Australia toured a year later the selectors' feet, apparently, had turned cold; Denis Atkinson, who had little captaincy experience, was made Stollmeyer's deputy, and as Stollmeyer then missed three Tests through injury, found himself pitched in at the deep end.
There was little support for the white captain among the black players and the series was disaster.
Yet a year later Atkinson was appointed again — with another white man, Bruce Pairaudeau, as his deputy — to take the team to New Zealand.
Worrell did not go on that tour, but when West Indies went to England in 1957 under Goddard he was annoyed that the vice-captaincy went to Clyde Walcott; Worrell and Walcott, while friends, were never all that close, in fact, whereas Worrell and Weekes were.
When Worrell declined the captaincy after the 1957 tour, it was given to Gerry Alexander and the series against Pakistan was well won.
A year later, as Worrell was still at university, Alexander was appointed to take the team to India and Pakistan, winning the first series but losing the second.
One problem during the tour had centred on the young fast bowler Roy Gilchrist, who had been sent home from India for disciplinary reasons; after the tour, opinion was divided as to whether his misdemeanours should mean the end of his Test career or whether he should be helped back into the fold by someone such as Worrell, whom he worshipped.
In the end, the WICBC's attitude that they could not accept any individual who did not uphold their tradition of sportsmanship prevailed, and Gilchrist played no more Tests.
So far, with Worrell having turned down the chance, no one had been able to complain about the captaincy; but by now Worrell had his degree, was very much available, and Alexander himself expected him to be made captain for the tour by England in 1959–60.
Instead, Alexander was reappointed.
Perhaps it was a show of  support for his disciplining of Gilchrist; perhaps there was the feeling that Worrell had drifted away from the hub of West Indies cricket; or perhaps once again the selectors simply could not bring themselves to appoint a black man.
The belief that Worrell should have been appointed was extremely strong throughout the Caribbean, and it found its expression through C.L.R. James, then editor of the Trinidad newspaper The Nation .
He ran a relentless campaign based on the argument that ‘there was not the slightest shadow of justification for Alexander to be captain of a side in which Frank Worrell was playing’.
He concentrated on the cricketing angle rather than the racial one, emphasizing Worrell's greater experience and status and highlighting the errors of judgement he felt Alexander had made.
He conceded that it was hard on Alexander, and later came to respect him greatly for the way in which he gave Worrell his fullest support as vice-captain.
When the WICBC met to discuss the captaincy for the visit to Australia in 1960–1, it was Alexander himself who pressed Worrell's claims, and in due course the announcement was made that Worrell would lead the team.
Everyone, it seemed, joined in the celebrations.
That tour has, of course, gone down as the most exciting series of the century.
After the drama of the tied first Test, Australia won the second by seven wickets and West Indies the third by 222 runs; as the fourth neared its close, West Indies appeared to have the game in their hands, only for the last Australian pair to survive for an hour and forty minutes and earn a draw; and the final Test was won by Australia with just two wickets left.
Cricket in Australia had been declining in popularity for some years, not helped by an abject England team two seasons before, and the excitement that West Indies generated by their enterprising play was unbounded, culminating in a vast ticker-tape send-off when the tour was over.
Naturally, Richie Benaud and the home players took their full share of the credit, but it was Worrell who was hero number one.
What was it about his captaincy, then, that was so special?
For one thing, he was lucky to have some outstanding players under him, and fortunate, too, in the Board's choice of manager for the tour.
He had grown close to Gerry Gomez since the day he had asked if he could meet his sister at the airport, and they now worked together admirably.
Good public relations were made a priority, so that the atmosphere surrounding the team was always cordial, which obviously had a beneficial effect on the players.
He was determined to be thorough in his preparations, and made sure there were plenty of games before the Tests began so that the players could get used to the conditions.
He also made sure that  all players were kept informed of decisions about team selection, which had not always happened before.
At team meetings anyone was welcome to have his say, thereby building cohesion and a feeling that everyone belonged to the unit.
Discussion was encouraged as much as possible, and from this he learned much about each man.
Younger players in particular were looked after, since not knowing the ropes on a tour has blighted more than one career.
He watched over his players and made sure they knew he was doing so.
He looked carefully for antagonisms and smoothed them out as unobtrusively as possible.
He was a strict disciplinarian whose word was law and, while players could argue with his views and put their own ideas to him freely, he would tolerate no arguing with umpires; when Sobers once disputed an lbw decision he was reprimanded in front of the team.
At the same time, he took great trouble over the team's welfare, even to the extent of helping them when they signed their contracts.
In other words, he combined paternalism, very careful attention to detail, and the traditional values of the English public school.
His players respected and loved him as a result.
They respected him, too, of course, as one of the greatest players since the war, and knew that, as a top-flight batsman and a bowler who could be both slow and fast-medium, he would not be asking them to do things he had not already achieved himself.
He was aware that a captain with a record such as his has a big advantage, since any troops will respond better to a leader they know has been through the fire himself, and so he knew just what he could ask of his bowlers.
For the most part, the fast men were used in short bursts to conserve their strength and responded well to this; but when the occasion demanded, as on the final day at Lord's in 1963, they could keep going for hour after hour just because the captain asked them to.
Hall said afterwards that he had not realized himself capable of such sustained accurate bowling, but kept at it simply because Worrell wanted him to; he also said that he was physically and mentally shattered at the end of it.
Similarly, in the Oval Test, Sobers put in a prodigious spell of bowling, keeping at it because his captain felt he was the right bowler for the situation.
Worrell had achieved any captain's dream of knowing that his players would give their last drop of sweat just for him.
After so many years, there was little about the game that he did not know, and tactically he was a highly skilled operator who, his players knew, would stay calm in a crisis.
Undoubtedly, he was a conservative captain rather than an adventurous one — James records that Worrell once said to him ‘In cricket you leave well alone’, which, James felt, went deep  into his method as a captain — but, for all that, he was not afraid of making changes if he felt they were needed.
A famous one was dropping Ramadhin before the third Test in Australia and replacing him with Gibbs, whose Test career thus far had been fairly ordinary; Gibbs took eight wickets in the match to see his team home and was under way as a real Test bowler.
James gives an account of one of these wickets which shows Worrell's tactical ability.
Chasing 464 in the last innings, O'Neill and Harvey were approaching 200 and looking good.
Harvey, though, was suffering from a pulled muscle in his right leg, which Worrell knew could be a handicap against spinners.
He therefore brought Sobers close in at cover and told Gibbs to flight the ball at Harvey.
Gibbs did so and Harvey went out to drive, but with his injured leg could not get to the pitch and holed out to Sobers.
That was the third wicket down; fifty runs later the match was over, Gibbs having taken 5 for 66.
When he returned from the tour of Australia, Worrell was offered the position of Warden at Irvine Hall, part of the University of the West Indies in Kingston.
This involved helping students with their problems, welfare administration, some tutoring and, in particular, helping in the promotion of sport in the university.
It was strange for him at first but he soon came to enjoy it and did his best to improve the sporting standards and attitudes.
Soon after this, his name was put forward for the Jamaican Senate and he became a member, but although he attended regularly it was not something he took to.
He was altogether too dignified and courteous for the rough and tumble of politics, was not a good debater, and left after less than eighteen months.
In 1964, he moved to Trinidad to become Dean of Students, which was a promotion, at the UWI campus there, continuing the work he had begun in Kingston by stressing to the students the importance of discipline, physical fitness, responsibility and such like — in other words, all the values that had made him such a successful captain.
A year after the Australian tour, India visited West Indies and were annihilated, not helped by losing their captain, Contractor, whose skull was fractured by a ball from Griffith in the match before the third Test.
Worrell averaged 83 with the bat, leading his team to only the fourth 5–0 clean sweep in Test history.
If it was sad that in England in 1963 his form finally drifted away, he did at least give his last fine Test innings, an unbeaten 74, to the Manchester crowd, a happy choice of venue in view of his connection with Radcliffe and the university.
By the end of the tour, his captaincy record was, out of fifteen Tests, nine victories and three defeats, outstanding by any yardstick.
In Australia, he had rejuvenated a sport that had been declining for years; in England, he did exactly the same, leaving  people exhilarated by his team's play wherever they went and creating a great new surge of interest in the game.
The adulation when it was all over was something that had hardly been seen before in England, even on momentous Ashes-winning occasions, and early in 1964 his efforts were rewarded with a knighthood, conferred by the Queen at Buckingham Palace.
At the end of 1966, he was invited by the Indian government to spend six weeks there, visiting universities, watching some of the West Indies tour matches, and receiving an honorary Doctor of Law degree from the University of the Punjab.
As the trip went on he began to feel unwell, and when he left he returned to Kingston, rather than Trinidad, as he knew the hospital staff there.
He was diagnosed as having leukaemia, his wife was called from Trinidad, and when she arrived was told he had no more than six weeks to live.
It was not an uncommon illness in the West Indies at the time, and the variety which Worrell had was particularly virulent.
He knew he was dying and retained his dignity to the end; it came on 13 March 1967, and the cricketing world, quite simply, was devastated.
Flags were lowered, tributes flooded in, memorial services were held, culminating in the first one ever for a cricketer at Westminster Abbey.
It was desperately hard to accept that this serene man, so calm, so dignified, such a majestic cricketer, could have been taken in this way.
He had taken a group of talented individuals and moulded them into a superb team, ridding them of their old factions and weaknesses, and showing the disbelievers that black men were every bit as good as white.
West Indies had had their triumphs before, of course, but now things were different; they were no longer inferior to whites, they were unified, they were strong and the future was theirs.
There would be further set-backs as one lean spell caused the factions to surface again, but now they were truly under way and in due course their supremacy would become complete.
Worrell passionately believed in the unity of the West Indian people, and realized that the foundations of such unity could be laid more readily through cricket than any other means.
It was the richest legacy he could possibly have bequeathed to his people.
AFTERWORD
West Indian cricket has been strong for so long principally because it is looked upon almost as a religion in the Caribbean.
Nowhere else in the world can match the fervour of it.
Children have long played it everywhere, often in dreadful conditions — on the beaches, in the roads, on any bit of rough ground.
The batsmen all attack like Greenidge or Richards, except that they do it virtually all the time and there is little idea of defensive play when the bowling demands it.
The bowling, needless to say, is as fast as possible.
Few of the youngsters will have been to a big match; what they are emulating is what they have seen on television in shop windows and heard on their transistors.
Those transistors are an essential element in West Indian life, keeping everyone who does not have the time or, more likely, the money, to go to a game in touch with what is happening.
When Richards is batting people just stop work and listen.
In England even when Botham was working one of his miracles people at work did not stop; if they did not have a radio they just rang the Test score, on the works phone of course, a bit more frequently.
There is, quite simply, no comparison in the attitudes to the game of British people and Caribbean people.
How an area with such a small population could have produced so many world-class cricketers is beyond the comprehension of most Britons.
Barbados, which even now has little more than a quarter of a million people, has led the way with a roll of honour of mind-boggling proportions.
Trinidad, which now has around a million inhabitants, has also produced far more than its fair share, and it is interesting to note the differences between the two.
In Barbados (and other places such as Jamaica and Antigua), the wickets are fast and so the bowlers have traditionally bowled fast, while the batsmen have looked to attack at every opportunity, to hit the ball as hard and as gleefully as possible.
Trinidad, on the other hand, used matting wickets for decades, producing batsmen who relied on timing and placing for their runs rather than power, men such as Stollmeyer and, more recently, Gomes, who were closer in style to their English opponents than to some of their team-mates.
The bowling has  been more different still; there is a sizeable East Indian population in Trinidad that has produced bowlers with oriental wiles and subtleties unthought-of in Barbados, with Achong and Ramadhin the obvious examples.
There have been exceptions, naturally, such as Learie Constantine and George John, but the differences are broadly true.
There are no comparable differences in Britain, where any kind of player may turn up just about anywhere.
There are signs, though, that cricket may be sliding slowly off its pedestal in the Caribbean.
In the past, there were few other sports apart from football and swimming, and neither of these represented much of a challenge.
Now, as the British influence wanes, it is replaced by an American one; television has brought along the delights of basketball and its popularity has quickly soared.
Easy to play, fast-moving, athletic, it is very much a game for the modern world.
And with the brightest students, who would have gone to Britain until the Thatcher government started charging them substantial fees, now studying in the US, it seems likely that the trend away from cricket to American sports will steadily continue.
Maybe in twenty or thirty years time England will take a Test series off them.
If the last two decades have been just a trifle one-sided, before that the competition was excellent, with first one side holding sway and then the other, which is as it should be.
With the racial differences there have inevitably been problems, such as injudicious behaviour by English tourists, racist taunts by English crowds, touchiness by West Indian officials over imagined slights, and the odd riot or three.
English fans feel that the emphasis on fast bowling in the last fifteen years has been greatly to the game's detriment, leading to the continuing decline of the spinner, a lack of variety, slow over rates, broken bones and a situation where batting is more about courage than skill.
Many English fans even regard West Indian cricket as boring, but it is more impossible to know, as defeat follows defeat follows defeat, to what extent this is an objective judgement or to what extent it is just sour grapes.
There was naturally much rejoicing in Britain that the worm was turning in 1989–90, but there would have been more had there been a spinner or two in the team.
West Indies, for their part, are simply playing their own game and, since it has made them the most powerful team in the world, cannot see why they should deprive themselves of their trump cards just because other countries cannot produce trump cards of their own.
It has long been the case that the fact of winning is far more important than the manner of doing so, and since they have found a winning formula they have a powerful argument for keeping it, especially now that the financial rewards are  considerable.
The whingeing, as they see it, that takes place in the British press angers many West Indians, as Viv Richards demonstrated with his outburst in Antigua during the last Test of 1989–90.
What British people so often fail to understand is that the old inter-island divisions and prejudices that have always dogged Caribbean life are still present, and that a successful cricket team is the one thing that transcends this fragmentation.
Jeffrey Dujon, in an interview for a magazine, summed it up: ‘We're the only example of Caribbean unity that exists, when the team performs we're the only thing the entire Caribbean focuses on.
We're an example of the excellence, as well as the unity, the Caribbean is capable of.’
English cricket does not have this capacity for internal strife in the same way, the periodic Yorkshire blood-lettings being of a different order; but West Indian cricket has grown strong precisely because it has risen above its problems, and on that basis England cannot find the same sort of strength since they do not have the same problems to overcome.
However passionate a follower of England's fortunes might be, it is unlikely he will be able to match the fervour of the average West Indian.
Presumably the well of fast bowlers will one day run dry and then West Indies will have to devise a new strategy; after all, India did not fare too badly in the 1960s and '70s with a quartet of spinners.
By the time that happens, England may have her own supply and the roles may become reversed.
One hopes not; the best series between the two was that of 1963, and in those days cricket teams had a balanced attack.
The game was more enjoyable for everyone that way.
STATISTICAL HIGHLIGHTS OF THE TEST MATCHES