

Backstage by Alex Finer
THE GOOD, THE BAD AND PETER COOK
An East End doctor in distress, wails and walls in South Africa, the funniest people in Britain, and Milan Kundera with a wave
Our cover story this month invites you to meet the one hundred funniest people in Britain.
I start, however, by introducing two other features that will have no one laughing.
In advance of the April 1 reorganization of the National Health Service, the most comprehensive since its foundation in 1948, we publish a disturbing dispatch [The Doctor is Sick, page 100]by David Widgery, a general practitioner in London's East End.
Widgery lives and works in the front line of community medicine, conducting surgeries and home visits in an area of blight.
He details his daily struggle: trying to treat patients as he knows he can, yet unable to find them a hospital bed or specialist referral.
He blames chronic NHS underfunding.
Widgery's eloquent scream of frustration is born of personal experience.
Raised in London, he suffered polio in childhood and endured long spells in hospital.
Without the NHS he would have been a cripple.
He is highly sceptical of the April 1 reforms, convinced they will increase bureaucracy without guaranteeing better patient care.
‘The new arrangements for local health authorities do nothing to ease resource problems,’ he says.
‘In hospitals that ‘opt out’, there may be an increase in cold surgery and cardiovascular medicine for the better off — but it will be to the further detriment of primary care, preventive medicine and local services in poorer areas.’
IN OUR SECOND disturbing dispatch [Apocalypse Now — Now, page 110], novelist Christopher Hope reports from suburban Johannesburg, which he describes as the wall-building capital of the world.
Behind them, housewives now pack .38s in Gucci handbags, learn to train Rottweilers in close attack work and sign up with security firms such as Armed Response.
Christopher Hope grew up a Catholic in Pretoria and went into voluntary exile, aged thirty-one, in 1975.
He says: ‘Change is unstoppable.
Apartheid will be dead, legally speaking, within months.
South Africa is undergoing its own form of perestroika.
‘When travelling in the country, you sense an enormous fear and anger at the present reforms; in well-healed suburbs, there is approval of the reforms but still a great fear of the random violence they have released.’
AS A HEALTHY antidote to our strife-torn, recessionary and under-funded times, we commissioned Kate Garner to photograph the portfolio of comedians in our lead feature [Laughing Through Hard Times, page 56].
What is it about Peter Cook or John Hegley that predisposes me to smile even before they open their mouths?
Kate Garner's brief was to locate the humour in their characters, creating portraits of this select band of people who can trip us into laughter.
Garner knows about the challenge of performance art.
She was half of the dreadlock duo, Haysi Fantayzee, which notched up a couple of Top Twenty hits in the early Eighties: ‘John Wayne is Big Leggy’ and ‘Shinny Shinny’.
Before her brief exposure to pop stardom, she served an apprenticeship to a still-life photographer, and it was to the camera that she eventually returned, specialising in record covers and rock portraits.
BILL BRYSON [Sweden on Two Herrings a Day, page 67]enhances this happier mood with an account of a recent journey to Sweden, retracing the steps he first took as a monoglot student twenty years earlier.
Starting life in Des Moines, Iowa, Bryson made England his base nearly fifteen years ago.
Now, with a backpack on his shoulders and a tight fist on his wallet, Bryson shows first-class fun is available in the hardest of times on the cheapest of tickets.
FURTHER MAINTAINING our promise to publish contemporary writers of quality, we welcome Milan Kundera [The Wave, page 92]to British Esquire.
Born in Czechoslovakia and now teaching in Paris, he receives a fuller introduction on the page by our literary editor, Julian Evans.
In this and throughout the rest of the issue, I wish you good reading.
Alex Finer is the Editor of Esquire 
Encounters with Britain by Lee Eisenberg
WHAT IS EVERYBODY LAUGHING AT?
And among the other questions this month: Is bathroom humour just good clean fun?
Would Britain be better off as a theme park?
That I am living in Britain in the first place has everything to do with the fact that I came here to start the magazine you are reading, a magazine for men.
As the editor in chief of such a magazine, I am obliged to answer a lot of questions about men.
I am, depending on circumstances, called on to analyse and defend them, speak and apologize for them.
People — usually women journalists — are curious to know what makes British men tick, and how they differ from other men.
They want to know whether today's men are better fathers, whether men will ever open up at the breakfast table, whether male impotence is on the rise, whether men suffer from their own form of menopause, whether men will cultivate any interest in pastimes more enlightened than football and snooker.
I don't always know the answers to the questions but I answer them anyway.
In the meantime, I research.
For instance, I eavesdrop on men's mumbles in restaurants, as they work out their seductions or deals.
I watch how they smooth their hair when enter a room.
I note how their shoulders go stiff with tension as they pick out neckties.
I pay attention to their excuses when they're playing golf or fishing.
And for the past few months, I've been reading Viz.
Most of you, I assume, already know what Viz is about.
But in the event you washed ashore even more recently than I, you'll be delighted to know that Viz is about farts, tits and gonads.
A garish and good-natured bi-monthly magazine, it advertises itself as Britain's ‘5TH BEST SELLING MAGAZINE!
And you'll never read a bigger pile of shite’.
Both claims, so far as I know, are true.
Viz, which sells for a pound, consists of cartoons, comic strips and tabloid-style features (‘TRAFFIC WARDENS CAN'T GET IT UP’).
It is a monument to the two subjects that are nearest and dearest to a young teenager's heart: sex and scatology.
If there is a publication anywhere in the world better suited to the twelve-year-old-boy mentality, I can't imagine what it is.
But here is the intriguing part.
I've done some checking around and have found out that it isn't just pubescent, pizza-faced boys who have made the magazine the best-selling pile of shite that it is.
Viz is also read by a broad cross-section of full-grown, British men: lorry drivers, rubbish collectors, yes; but also a goodly number of marketing execs, barristers, teachers, engineers and other respectables.
Apparently they get quite a charge our of Viz's thick-headed puns and lame sexual and excremental allusions which, when they were first heard in burlesque halls a hundred years ago, were already ancient.
Here's a typical example of a Viz comic strip: Dad gets a new putter for Christmas and says (to onlooking wife and guffawing son), ‘Oh!
It's a putter!
My old one is broken, you see…
The end came off when your mother was playing a round with me.
I wouldn't have minded but I couldn't get it in the hole after that.
Hmmm, stainless steel.
I like a good hard shaft…
My balls always take a proper hammering.’
Or, from Viz's phoney letters column, a reader from Dagenham writes: ‘It's true that money can't buy you happiness.
Take the Queen, for example.
She's got seven million quid, and just look at her face.
The miserable old bag.’
Or, from the Viz diary of a made-up Hollywood stunt man: ‘I was asked to stand in for Mel Gibson in Lethal Weapon II, but I turned it down 'cos Patsy Kensit's got tits like fried eggs.’
But hold on, you could be thinking by now, don't impugn all British manhood just because a few sexually (or excrementally) repressed junior accountants get a kick out of shag jokes.
Well, then how do you explain the night I put down a copy of Viz, turned on the telly, and settled in for what I thought would be a programme of smart, irreverent comedy?
The show was called The Mary Whitehouse Experience (which I later learned was in honour of the blue-nose lady who's always sounding off about too much sex in the media).
The Experience consists of four young men who look, talk and act as if they've grown up in good families, graduated from decent schools, and dress as if they shop at just the right places — Paul Smith, say, or Emporio Armani.
They've got asymmetrical haircuts, wire-rimmed specs, an earring or two.
The show is hip and happening, dude: the audience looks as if it has just walked in off the King's Road, the post-modernish set is ultra-cool, the show's titles are dazzling, the best I've seen on British television.
But while these bright young men obviously read the newspapers and present themselves as iconoclastic political and social satirists, guess what most of their humour is about?
That's right!
Sex and excrement!
Specifically, The Mary Whitehouse Experience is an experience in wankers and turds, which are the boys' two favourite words.
Orifice jokes draw gales of laughter from the cultish audience.
Perhaps you heard the hoots and the howls that accompanied the skit about John Major's classless society, in which the Princess of Wales is imagined wearing not a hat but…a…turd…on her head!
Yuk!
Yuk!
Indeed, harmless boys' stuff, is this.
And, I believe, particularly British.
While bathroom humour is certainly not confined to the UK, it certainly seems to thrive here.
In America, for instance, doo-doo jokes have been decidedly out of fashion since the Fifties.
Which is not to say that popular humour in the States is particularly nice: in recent years there has been a great demand for in-your-face racist, ethnic and misogynist stuff, as typified on the respectable side by Jackie Mason and on the unholy by Andrew Dice Clay.
Both of these Brooklyn comics, however, are now growing colder than a rubber chicken.
A new comedy wave, I suppose, is waiting in the wings.
Whatever it will be about, though, it won't be about doo-doo or wieners.
We'll leave that to the over-the-Benny-Hill gang.
SOME WEEKS AGO, I opened the paper and noticed a list of walks that were scheduled to take place in Britain.
Most were rambles through the countryside, but one or two were organized strolls through historical sections of London.
Having nothing better to do on a blustery Sunday, I decided to amble along on one.
I was looking forward to a couple of hours of vigorous strolling in the company of what I assumed would be a garrulous, suitably eccentric English guide.
The walk was scheduled to depart from Green Park Tube, and when I arrived I found a group of thirty or so walkers already tapping their feet.
They were exactly the sort you'd expect to see at this kind of activity: mostly middle-aged or older Americans or Germans in running shoes, with a few earnest Guardian readers thrown in for local colour.
The theme of the walk — which was to take place through the streets of St James's — was ‘royal London’.
Our guide was a tall, bespectacled chap in his late thirties, looking properly Anglo with a tweed cap, and a muffler around his neck.
He took his position just inside the gates of the park, cleared his throat, and, in a booming baritone voice that implied a spell at drama school, started things off by announcing, with practised shrug, that he wasn't British at all, he was a Yank.
And was he ever: his every decibel rang out with the wide-vowelled purity of a native Mid-westerner.
He hailed, in fact, from a small town in Wisconsin.
I sensed a palpable disappointment run through our little platoon of walkers.
I myself was tempted to drop out then and there.
But I decided to give my countryman a chance, not that I'd moved four thousand miles to be shown around London by a fellow American, and a hick from the provinces to boot.
But a good time wasn't to be.
Among the references to the Ritz, for instance, was that Joan Collins was a frequent guest at the hotel, she ‘of Dyenasty, Dinnasty, Dysentery, whatever it's called’.
Then a few moments later he bemoaned — at great length — how London was getting increasingly ‘homogenized and pasteurized’, milking the issue for all it was worth.
In particular, he lamented the passing of the red telephone kiosk (who doesn't?).
Later, as we huddled against the wind behind the Stafford Hotel, he mourned the loss of ancient stables there, which, he assumed, were being turned into ‘very swish’ accommodations.
And so it went: a nice enough American bewailing the passing of London as he wanted it to be.
I couldn't help but think he wanted it to be a theme park.
He longed for London Land, with gas lamps still flickering in the dusk, horse-drawn cabs clattering across the cobblestones, criminals no scarier than little boys scrounging for their supper.
And isn't that what so many of you (the natives) and us (the tourists) want London to be?
Because if London were a theme park there'd be no more hassles about modern architecture, no more palaver about Europe, no more worrying about national health (a theme park with socialized medicine?), no more ugly council estates, no more foreign wars.
It would be just a user-friendly make-believe with only one minor problem: too many turd jokes.
Viz is thick-headed puns and lame sexual and excremental allusions — geddit?
London Land: a lament for the passing of the red telephone kiosk
Man At His Best
The Esquire guide to quality and style
THE KINDEST CUT
Ringside cuts man Danny Holland, the Henry Cooper Gym
He says:
‘The art of patching up a cut fighter is essentially speed.
In the one-minute interval between rounds, you have, at most, forty-five seconds to repair the damage.
It's a simple formula: clean the wound; stem the bleeding with an iced iron; then apply adrenalin, which coagulates the blood.’
They add:
‘Danny had Henry Cooper, one of the worst bleeders in boxing, to deal with,’ says Bobby Neill, who guided Lloyd Honeyghan to his world title.
‘There was very little he could do about the horrendous injuries Cooper suffered in his two fights against Ali, but he saved him on countless other occasions with his quick, methodical work.’
We conclude:
For more than fifty years, Danny Holland has been one of the premier cuts men in boxing.
At eighty-two, he still trains young hopefuls at the Henry Cooper Gym in London's Old Kent Road.
His deftness with something as prosaic as a cotton bud and bottle of adrenalin might not be everybody's idea of art, but is certainly artful.
First-Rate Bang On
Harmony of form and function — the Beosystem 2500
Occupying the increasingly solitary middle ground between the Japanese hi-fi giants and British cottage industries, Bang & Olufsen supplies precision-engineered turntables and valve-driven amplifiers for the price of a small car.
For B&O, form has long been as important as function, allowing it to avoid the open-sandwich school of Danish design.
No brushed aluminium and rosewood here; its stereo systems are designed with graph-paper severity to put across an austere seriousness.
B&O products have redefined consumer electronics.
Most recently, the MX television, which sits unobtrusively on the floor tilting back and forth behind a smoked-glass screen, appeared outlandish at first but was quickly copied by the big manufacturers.
It is, moreover, the only manufacturer to produce fully integrated home systems — allowing you to find out who's ringing your door-bell by switching TV channels, for example.
That linkage technology was one of the factors behind Philips's investment of thirty-six million pounds in the company last year.
Bang & Olufsen's latest launch, the Beosystem 2500 — combining compact disc, cassette player and radio, with two ultra-slim speakers — has broken the industry's conventional vertical configuration for such systems; instead you have a sleek sculptural object you can hang on the wall.
DEYAN SUDJIC 
Photograph by Nigel Parry
Classics
CORDUROY TROUSERS
How to achieve that lived-in, Albert Einstein look
If I had to name the twentieth-century figure who reminds me most of corduroys, it would have to be Albert Einstein.
He wasn't the least bit fashionable, but he certainly had style, the way he shuffled around in sneakers and sweatshirts, hair pointing in all directions, corduroy trousers rumpled and baggy.
What university-educated person cannot recall at least one professor who always wore corduroys?
Corduroy has a lived-in look and demands very little maintenance.
For the first half of this century it was associated with intellectuals, of whom Einstein was the epitome.
Corduroy has never had much cachet, despite the derivation of its name — corde du roi, the king's cord.
Corduroy has always been the poor man's velvet; its pile is made of cotton, rather than silk or satin, and by the eighteenth century it was being worn all over Europe, not by kings, but by working men.
Although we changed its name to corduroy to give it a touch of class, there is no evidence that the French every called it corde du roi or that kings ever wore it.
On the contrary; corduroy and other imitation velvets, like velour and velveteen, were considered all along to be false finery, puffed up and pompous.
They belonged to a category of fabric called fustian (derived from the name of the Egyptian town where it originated), and by Shakespeare's time the very word fustian had become synonymous with bombast and pretentiousness.
Considerable skill was required in the making of corduroy, working-class fabric or not.
Craftsmen painstakingly cut the warp, one rib at a time, with long, knives; then they brushed it to make the pile stand up.
Today, of course, the process is mechanized; four hundred razor-sharp cutting discs slice more than a yard of cloth in one swift pass.
One advantage of corduroy, aside from its warmth and comfort, is the richness it gives colours.
The piled fibres absorb and reflect the light, alternating deep and pale hues and giving the cloth its unique lustre.
Brown, tan and olive are the original, classic corduroy colours, and when I say classic I mean specifically trousers, not jackets and certainly not suits.
A corduroy suit is a contradiction: suits are dressy; corduroy is not.
The width of the wale (ridging) determines the degree of informality.
Wide wales (up to nine ribs an inch) are the most casual; midwales and pinwales (ten to eighteen ribs an inch) are slightly more formal, but it depends on your point of view.
The head of a smart high-street men's shop attempted to tell me why corduroys are superior to blue jeans.
Corduroys, he said, were more refined.
‘The better customer wears corduroys, which we carry; the other wears jeans, which we don't.’
There may be some truth in that, but it sounded like a bit of the old fustian all the same.
John Berendt 
Corde du roi: despite its name, no regal connection for the poor man's velvet
Forty Miles
SOCIAL CLIMBER
The Land Rover Discovery — off-road from Ebbw Vale to Crickhowell
Would I be courageous enough to try it?
That was the great question.
Whether to do the sensible thing — chicken out and run for shelter from the bitter blast of the elements?
Or conquer the fog, the ice, the rocks and the precipitous incline, to emerge triumphant out of the clouds at the summit?
In the Discovery, we had the perfect vehicle for the task.
Born and bred a Land Rover, but crossed with the might and muscle of a Range Rover, it's just the machine for enterprising City types who at the end of the week want to swap Hampstead and Fulham for ambitious adventures to the ends of Britain's motorways.
After depositing my faint-hearted photographer at the foot of the craggy slope, I locked the Discovery's transmission into low-ratio first gear for the steep climb, revved the big V8 engine decisively and gingerly eased out the clutch.
I'd grappled up the slope on foot just before and knew how steep and icy its surface was and which of the bigger rocks had to be dodged because they would foul the car's underside.
I'd also taken stock of just how deep the ravine was a yard or so to my right — on a previous visit to this rocky Brecon summit I'd looked down on a pair of RAF Tornadoes streaking through on a high-adrenalin exercise.
I shifted into second, and the Discovery stormed up the slope with a roar of V8 power, only to slither to a halt halfway up, its front wheels sliding sideways on a sheet of ice and threatening the worst off-road fate of all — to be stuck across a slope.
I had forgotten the Discovery's trump card — its get-you-out-of-trouble differential lock.
A quick sideways prod of the transfer gear-lever was all that I needed to give the big machine the traction of a funicular railway, as if an invisible cable winch was hauling me up.
My reward was a spectacular lunar landscape at the top, accessible, I comforted myself, only to hill-walkers and the most capable of off-road vehicles, such as the Discovery.
A shame, then, that so few of the Discovery's customers are likely ever to make use of these abilities.
Like its big sister, the Range Rover, now twenty-one years old, the Discovery is as much an instrument of upper-crust fashion as a tool for serious cross-country exploits.
But unlike the £30,000 Range Rover, the Discovery is financially more accessible: at £17,300 upwards, it's appreciably cheaper than many of the Japanese intruders it is seeking to chase out.
Yet the Discovery has a classy, Conran-designed interior, excellent seats and ride-comfort and a wonderful, rumbling V8 engine that emits just the same blue-blooded burble as a Range Rover.
Now that fuel injection has been added, there's urgent acceleration on tap, too.
Only three things worried me: the prodigious thirst for fuel, the lack of anti-lock on the brakes and a steering system that combined over-sensitivity with vagueness.
The steering worried me more on Brecon's narrow tracks than it had on the motorway.
But later, as we picked our way along the narrow mountain spine down towards Aberfan, I found the Discovery more reassuring again — its flexibility, its smoothness, its stability, all signs of its good breeding.
The long, fast stretch round to our supper halt at my favourite, the Bear Hotel in Crickhowell, slipped by, hardly noticed; even the long journey home that evening was a doddle.
And that, I reflected on the final leg, enveloped in air-conditioned heat and six-speaker stereo sound, is why the Discovery is so uniquely suited, not only to the rough and tumble of off-road riding, but also to the equal rigours of life in Knightsbridge and Notting Hill Gate.
Basic price for a five-door, V8i Land Rover Discovery is £20,400.
On test, fuel consumption ranged from 10.1 to 18.7 mpg.
Its 3.5 litre injection V8 engine, with 164 brake horsepower, enables it to reach a maximum speed of 105 mph, with acceleration from 0–60 taking 11.2 seconds.
Wading depth is 19.7 inches; maximum gradient is 45 degrees.
Discovery ascending: a sense of innate superiority
Country Matters
LAYING DOWN THE LAWN
The way to achieve that perfect green sward
Making a lawn, as any gardening book or groundsman will tell you, is dead easy.
Dig a patch of ground to a depth of two feet or so, if you are dealing with soil.
If the site is made of builder's rubble, cover it with a foot of topsoil.
Install drains to take the rain off.
Crumble the soil to the consistency of breadcrumbs.
Firm it with a duck-like waddling movement of your hobnailed boots.
Then, using spirit-level and pegs as a builder lays a concrete floor, level it to the flatness of a billiard table.
Mop brow.
Call one of the men advertising turf for sale in the local paper.
If you must.
In correct rural circles, having your lawn turfed is regarded in the same light as wearing made-up bow ties.
To do the job properly, sow seed.
Not just any seed, mind.
Only the finest and wiriest of grasses will do; brown-top bent and ‘Chewing's Fescue’ to form the tufts that give the turf its bounce, and creeping red fescue to knit the whole lot together.
The man in the garden centre will say you want rye grass.
Ignore the swine.
Rye grass is coarse and flat-leaved, and fulfils the same function in a sward as petrol-like grain spirit in cheap Scotch whisky.
Scatter the seed evenly about.
Clap your hands once every five minutes for a fortnight, to keep hungry birds off.
Wait for the green shadow to rise from the brown ground, then get rolling.
We have now arrived at one of the great lawn stories.
An American is standing in an Oxford quadrangle, jaw dropped.
‘What does it take to get grass like this?’ he asks a menial.
‘Good soil,’ he replies.
‘Good seed.
And five 'undred years.’
But, of course, some people do not take lawns seriously.
They do not mow lawns.
Instead they cut grass — nasty coarse stuff — belting over the green in fifth gear, Walkman thundering, leaving pubic tufts in the awkward corner by the concrete nymph, then down to the Beetle for a few lagers.
Purists still demand the long trudge with the Atco cylinder-mower, the old one with the heavy roller and the polished-brass gas tank.
Sure, you can hook a roller up behind your Mountfield.
But can you live with your perfidy?
Lawn owners have good reason for keeping clear consciences and generally living each day as through it were their last.
Death may lurk among the green blades.
If you go fertilizing with unsterilized bonemeal, for instance, hold your breath; the stuff can be crawling with anthrax germs.
Mole control can also get you into trouble.
One victim having failed to dislodge the vandals by pouring petrol into their tunnels, crept out at dawn and fired a shotgun into a mole then constructing a hill.
Unfortunately, the tunnels were still full of gasoline vapour, which was ignited by the gun's muzzle flash.
The flame erupted under the fuel tank of the victim's new Vauxhall, parked outside the garage.
The tank blew up, hurling the Vauxhall through the closed garage doors, which caused twenty more gallons of petrol to explode, blowing the front off the house.
The lawn, though cratered, survived.
There used to be worse enemies: moss, for instance, and the emerald hell of clover.
Chemical warfare would set in with appalling ferocity, leaving the sward slimy with dead worms.
All that has changed.
The recent greening of the world means that the first clover of summer is greeted with an enthusiasm previously reserved for the cuckoo.
Not by Fast Dickie, though.
Dickie does not believe in clover, or mowers, and he would not recognize ‘Chewing's Fescue’ if you served it to him on a bed of rice.
What Dickie likes is no muss, no fuss.
Which is why he spoke to a geezer he knows down Battersea, and the geezer down Battersea done him some nice concrete and rolled an acre of Astroturf on top.
Pricey, as Dickie will admit.
But dead pleasant, and well heavy green.
Sam Llewellyn
Good Works
INSIDE INFORMATION
How to feel proud about going to jail
What's the difference between a battery hen and a British prison inmate?
Not enough.
WHY: Bad living conditions and lack of space are facts of British prison life; but for many prisoners the greatest hardship is isolation.
They are often abandoned and eager for contact with outsiders.
WHO: The largest and longest established organization, the National Association of Prison Visitors, arranges visits by its nine hundred members with local prison governors.
Volunteers are interviewed, asked for references and given a three-month trial.
To become a ‘regular’, you must have Home Office clearance and sign the Official Secrets Act.
Two qualifications are essential: an ability to listen, and commitment.
‘The most important thing is regular contact.
Many of these people have been rejected all their lives.
It is essential not to let them down,’ says one expert.
WHAT: Visits may be weekly or fortnightly and last about an hour, on a one-to-one basis in the prisoner's cell; all conversations are confidential.
Visitors must not take in presents, except cigarettes — which must be smoked there and then.
WHEN: Visiting hours vary, but evenings and weekends are popular.
HOW: For details contact: The National Association of Prison Visitors, 46b Hartington Street, Bedford MK41 7RL.
The New Bridge, 1 Thorpe Close, Ladbroke Grove, London W10 5XL.
Society of Voluntary Associates, Brixton Hill Place, London SW2 1HJ.
Alison Nadel 
The Essential Bookshelf
THRILLS AND CHILLS
Twelve great page-turners in the mystery mould
What the following thrillers have in common is that each is a rattling good read, and together they are the cream (1939, as will be seen, being a particularly creamy year) of their genre, leading you on to other delights.
I have tried to exclude the legendary detectives for another day, but, despite my best efforts, Sam Spade, Philip Marlowe and James Bond have still managed to insinuate themselves: they used foot-in-the-door tactics, I'm afraid, and who am I to argue?
1 The Woman in White Wilkie Collins 1860
This is the earliest novel that may reasonably be termed a thriller — a strongly atmospheric work, replete with midnight encounters, the eponymous mysterious and rather worrying white-clad lady and a highly dislikeable villain in the form of the obese and oleaginous Count Fosco.
2 The Four Just Men Edgar Wallace 1905
One of the earliest and most famous of more than one hundred and sixty thrillers and mysteries from the phenomenal and rather strange Mr Edgar Wallace, and certainly one of the most accomplished, readable and ingenious of them all.
A real page-turner, with a more than satisfying conclusion.
3 The Thirty-nine Steps John Buchan 1915
Devotees of the Hitchcock film will be gratified to hear that Buchan's book is even more chock-full of incident, cross-country chases, gung-ho and derring-do: a stirring monument to the days when a man of action might still be possessed of a stiff-upper-lipped charm and accomplishment.
As every schoolboy knows, Richard Hannay saves the day — and England.
4 The Maltese Falcon Dashiel Hammett 1930
The first and best example of the ‘hard-boiled’ thriller, with private dick Sam Spade chewing off chunks of lousy life in a lousy world, and spitting them right back in your face.
A convoluted plot, it must be said, but a really tough-guy read.
5 Brighton Rock Graham Greene 1938
The murky and seedy, small-time underworld of pre-war Brighton is brilliantly evoked by the Master in this most gripping of his ‘entertainments’.
The cold-bloodedness of the quirkily named and unforgettable Pinkie remains chilling, and the ending is both climactic and everlastingly poignant: this one is a work of art.
6 The Mask of Dimitrios Eric Ambler 1939
A detective writer sets out to track down a shadowy and fascinating villain in the Levant, and the intrigue and tension tighten a notch with each passing chapter.
Here we have a dry, laconic and completely unsentimental style that spawned hundreds of imitations.
7 The Big Sleep Raymond Chandler 1939
The first of the Philip Marlowe books sees our hero hanging tough among the broads, bimbos and gorillas — a hard-smoking bourbon man who eschews armour in favour of a belted mac and a fedora in which to play the down-at-heel knight errant.
The action and self-deprecating humour are expertly balanced.
8 Rogue Male Geoffrey Household 1939
An extraordinarily powerful book — in many ways reminiscent of Buchan at his best, but the Boy's Own element is tempered by shocking and fear-inducing realism.
The plot centres around an aristocratic sportsman who in turn becomes the subject of a manhunt: he is alone against the world, but we are with him through every breathless paragraph.
9 Strangers on a Train Patricia Highsmith 1950
The first novel by the so-called queen of ‘psychological’ crime, and — apart from The Talented Mr Ripley (1955)— her most memorable.
The insidious madness of Bruno (who wants to ‘swap murders’ with an innocent tennis pro) sneaks up on us slyly, and will not be shaken off.
10 Casino Royale Ian Fleming 1953
Forget all preconceptions of a wise-cracking booby whose lifestyle resembles a cross between Hugh Hefner and Ghostbusters — here is the first Bond book (no sequel was planned) that supports with expert plotting, deft characterization and breathtaking cruelty Fleming's claim to be a major exponent of the spy novel genre.
Superb.
11 Dead Cert Dick Francis 1962
This — Francis's first of more than thirty novels all loosely based on the racing world — has been picked almost at random, for each of them is masterful.
The understated elegance of the build, the sheer unabated enjoyability of the ride and the consummately satisfying conclusions place Francis at the very top: ‘thriller’ is really too crude a word for his achievement.
12 The Day of the Jackal Frederick Forsyth 1971
Forsyth is a top-selling and stylish author — decidedly not a purveyor of great literature, but a man writing for men, with thrills guaranteed.
This book is particularly clever, for although we know the outcome (de Gaulle was not assassinated), we are on the edge of our seats until the very last page.
Joseph Connolly 
And Fleming created Bond: the first, cruel classic
The Seasoned Cook
SURRENDER THE PINK
Simple salmon: king of the river cooked to perfection
Salmon is the most contrary fish.
I have fished some of the best salmon water, giving the damned fish every opportunity to outwit me, and I've caught the odd one here and there.
On average it works out at about once every five years and a cost of many hundreds of pounds per fish.
Your average salmon hatches in the gravel of the river bed as alevin.
When they come out, they are fry; as they grow a little, they become parr; larger still, they turn into smolt and fizz off down to the sea.
There they stay, apparently somewhere off Greenland and the Faroes, feeding on shrimp and turning pink.
But it doesn't stop there.
If a salmon comes back to a river after a year, it is known as a grilse, and — weighing anything from one to four kilograms — is ready for the pot or skillet or foil jacket.
It stays away for two, three or even four years, it is deemed to be full-grown.
That's when it returns to the river of its birth to spawn — and become a kelt, not really suitable for the pot or skillet.
No matter what anyone tells you, wild salmon, at its best, has as much in common with the farmed variety as Caroline Cossey does with Mother Theresa.
The question is, what constitutes wild salmon at its best?
Not the sexually played-out kelt, nor a fish that has undergone an exhausting twenty minutes or so battling with a master angler.
Fighting for its life causes chemical changes in the flesh.
That does not render it inedible if you cook it within a few hours — or freeze it immediately.
If you want to eat a salmon at its best, try to find one that has been netted at the river mouth or offshore early in the spring, that has been out of the water for no more than twelve hours and still has sea lice on it.
There is no comparison between the firm, delicate flesh of such a natural specimen and the fatty flab of the farmed fish made pink by E160g, washed in Nuvan to minimize lice infestation and packed into a cage so that it gets little or no natural conditioning.
Back from the fish counter, what does our angler do with his catch?
Hand it to his mate?
Certainly not.
There are few simpler things than cooking a salmon.
If the fish is whole, and the fishmonger has done the decent thing — removed the guts and gills, which would taint it during cooking — all you need do is immerse the beast in any container large enough to hold it (ideally a fish kettle), cover it with cold water and bring it gently to the boil.
The moment it comes to the boil, turn off the heat.
There let your fish rest until you are ready to serve it: warm with a sauce of your own devising — variations on the hollandaise theme always go down well — or cold when it has cooled.
There is a school — the old school, you might say — that advocates the making of a court bouillon, cooling that, immersing your salmon in it, then going through the process just described.
I think this both cumbersome and wrong; the flesh of the fish picks up other flavours very easily, particularly those of spices — pepper, coriander, allspice or whatever else is used to flavour the stock.
You could try adding a glass of white wine, an onion and a little celery and leek, if you must, but make sure that the court bouillon is cold before you start.
There you have it.
A bit of fish, a little sauce, one or two new potatoes boiled and then rolled in butter and parsley, and a frond or two of samphire if you have been lucky enough to find it.
Then wait for the plaudits to roll in.
Matthew Fort 
Wild thing: as much in common with farmed salmon as Caroline Cossey with Mother Theresa
A Shave in the Life
IN THE BUFF WITH ROGER McGOUGH
Morning becomes the Liverpool poet
Early Morning Poem 1
Got up, did my toilet,
Washed, shaved, combed hair.
My toilet looks much nicer now.
Roger McGough's bathroom is not a favourite or particularly inspiring place, but a functional, family-cum-laundry room, in which a washing machine, assorted plastic potties, a tumble-dryer and a pink inflatable dolphin jostle for space.
It has a basic white enamel suite, louvred doors and cupboards, varnished cork tiles and an interesting ‘Arabic effect’ wall with splodges of red and gold.
‘The bathroom used to be carpeted, but now we have more practical lino, called ‘Rhino flooring’ because it's tough, hardwearing and smells of rhino piss,’Roger chuckles.
He spends very little time there.
‘My morning thing is not really about getting ready for the day, but getting rid of the night.
In fact, I don't usually shave in the morning; that would be in the afternoon — or evening, if I'm going out.
The only reason I shave at all is for other people.
‘I do have an electric razor, but for me a serious shave is a wet one.
It's the only time I feel I've done it properly.
I use Palmolive shaving foam (sometimes Ted Lapidus, if I'm feeling extravagant), rather than soap.
I leave things like aftershave to my sons, who tend to drink it.
I do have some Eau Sauvage by Christian Dior and also Birchwood and Hawthorn Splash-on Cologne from The Body Shop, but I don't buy it myself.
‘I tend to shower when I go to the gym, but often I have a bath in the evening with my son.
We sing and play in the bath together; he likes that.
The soap I use is shared by the whole family, so my wife makes sure that it's that pure white, unperfumed stuff for sensitive skin.
My wife is always buying new products, and I find myself happily using them without question.
After washing, I put on Boot's non-sting anti-perspirant.
‘I'm very good when it comes to my teeth.
I clean them in the morning and also after each meal with Sainsbury's Oral Health anti-plaque toothpaste (with fluoride).
I use Mentadent P dental floss as well— in fact, I always have some in my desk.
‘I don't regret not having much time to pamper myself in the bathroom, as the inclination isn't there.
As a teenager growing up in Liverpool in the Fifties it still makes me feel it's a bit naff to spend too much time on your appearance.
Although I do admit to owning a bathrobe with my initials on it — and wearing green glasses for occasions when I want to draw attention to myself.
Linda Kessler
Early Morning Poem 2
Got up, had a shave,
Did Times crossword,
Had another shave.
Family funtime: Roger and son at play
Savoir-Faire
MASTA PASTA
Using up ties as if they were Kleenex is the downside of not being able to eat spaghetti in the proper manner.
But don't opt for the obvious solution: cutting the stuff into stunted threads is practised only by the infantile.
It is OK, though, to hitch a napkin round your neck, even if the last time your wore one was when your nanny tied it for you.
Crucially, remember to remove it; arriving in Finsbury Park at midnight with a bib round your neck is hazardous to personal safety.
Here's how to eat spaghetti properly:
1.
Put your fork in whatever hand feels comfortable.
2.
Insert the fork vertically into spaghetti, tilt to thirty degrees.
3.
Turn the fork until a manageable amount has formed into loops; then lift from the bowl and place in the mouth.
4.
If ends of the pasta trail from your lips, sucking is allowable, although audible sucking is considered inappropriate.
5.
Gently dab excess sauce from lips and chin.
Miles Blakey 
Man at his Worst
A WING AND A PRAYER
The day the Reverend Robin Clark got the bird
August 7, 1979.
The BBC's attempt to record a guitar recital in the small parish church of St Helen, at Brant Broughton, in Lincolnshire, was interrupted by a sparrow's chirruping from the eaves.
Twice, soloist Konrad Ragossnig's attempts to start were thwarted by birdsong, so the Rector — Robin Clark — took matters into his own hands.
Requesting the congregation to leave, he sent his son to fetch an air rifle.
After two shots, his son silenced the bird forever.
The rector was asked to explain his actions.
‘I was in an impossible situation,’ he said.
‘The guitarist just couldn't start.
You know what these BBC chaps are like: we've had them refuse to continue just because a chair squeaks.’
Letter from America
by Pete Hamill
DAY ONE
As the bombs dropped on Baghdad, I drove through small-town America, where a Hopperesque light lit a multitude of flags and a forest of yellow ribbons
So the war came at last, at exactly 6.35:24 pm on January 16, 1991, when Peter Jennings interrupted a canned piece to announce that explosions and flashes were breaking up the Baghdad night.
Like most Americans, I began switching channels.
From Baghdad, Bernard Shaw, John Holliman and Peter Arnett described the death-dazzled night, and you could hear in their voices the vibrato of fear.
After a while, I walked outside and stood beside the pool in the mild, warm wind of the Florida evening.
Nothing seemed less appropriate.
I wanted to be in a harder place, hearing the great murmur of shock and argument you hear only when people realize that life has changed forever.
I want to argue with my friends and console my secretary, Meri McCall, whose son, Kevin, was with an armoured division in Saudi Arabia.
Round midnight, I began to pack.
It was time to go home.
I drove north on I-95, through flat sawgrass country.
The light was fading.
On CBS radio, the sense of triumph was general.
In the first day of the war, the Americans and their allies had flown hundreds of sorties against Iraq, dropped thousands of pounds of bombs and met virtually no resistance.
‘We’ owned the skies.
A grateful stock market was apparently convinced that the war would be over in a matter of hours, and so the Dow Jones roared to a 114-point gain.
Then I heard Dan Rather saying there had been explosions in Israel.
In Tel Aviv.
Heard him say that sirens were blowing and people were donning gas masks and moving into sealed rooms.
There was fear of poison gas, in a nation where Zyklon-B was part of the collective memory.
Scud missiles streaked through the sky.
With that news, everything changed.
Saddam Hussein couldn't make ‘linkage’ with diplomacy, so he'd established it with missiles.
The next morning in all the poor souks of the Muslim world, they would chant his name.
The Middle East.
The Goddamned Middle East.
Later I picked up a station from Orlando, WINS — I listened to a maudlin piece about the poor families of soldiers and pilots.
This was typical of the suety coverage of the War Before the War, that long period of waiting before the January 15 deadline.
Even the soldiers in the field must've been thoroughly sick of all those whining pieces about Our Boys and Girls, and their mail, or the endlessly recycled nonsense about how hard it was to be a female soldier in Saudi Arabia.
Now that the shooting had finally started, we seemed about to be drowned in a tide of mushy stories about support groups, therapy and shrinks, all delivered in the insincerely intimate tones of psychobabble.
I started shouting out loud: ‘Stop, for Chrissakes, stop!’
In the morning in Jacksonville, I shaved and dressed, listening to the television without looking at the pictures.
I couldn't get CNN in the glorious Econo Lodge, but I wondered what had become of Arnett and Shaw and Holliman.
The reporters kept sending out the arithmetic of the Goddamned Middle East: sorties flown, bombs dropped, planes lost.
A reporter talked gravely about the fabulous success of this ‘astonishing high-tech war’.
The weapons people were the most triumphant; all those expenditures on weapons were now ‘paying off’.
I walked around outside the motel.
A man with a dog strolled along the edge of a field.
Another man washed his car.
The sky was clear, the day banal, but it was odd being an American.
Most of us were peaceful and decent, but here we go again, in our fifth war of this century.
Few Americans could even list the little wars, the invasions of Mexico, Haiti, Nicaragua, Grenada, Panama.
The Oil War was costing us a billion dollars a day, and we already had more than four hundred and twenty-five thousand men in Saudi Arabia.
I went to a Waffle House diner and bought a newspaper and ordered some breakfast.
The headline of the Florida Times-Union said: IRAQ STRIKES ISRAEL.
At the bottom of page one, there was a story  about the first American lost in the war: Lieutenant-Commander Michael Scott Speicher.
As always, we had an outline of the man's life, not its weight, density, complexity.
He was thirty-three, part of two FA-18 squadrons from Cecil Field on the USS Saratoga.
He was from Jacksonville, a graduate of Forrest High School in 1975, married with a three-year-old daughter and a one-year-old son.
He taught Sunday school at Lake Shore United Methodist Church.
The pastor said: ‘He was a wonderful husband, father and patriot.
He loved his country and he loved flying.’
There wasn't much else about his short life.
He would be thirty-three forever.
I drove north into Georgia and pulled off the road into Brunswick.
The air was filled with the sweetish, rotting odour of a paper mill.
I drove down Newcastle Street, the town's main street, and parked in front of the Bullard Sewing Center.
The buildings were two stories high, sharply defined by the hard Hopperesque light.
I got out of the car.
American flags lined the street.
Across the street, a woman walked out of Oz for Hair and went into Happy Days Health Foods.
I say a tall man coming across the street in shirt-sleeves.
We talked in front of the Coastal Bank of Georgia, at the corner of Newcastle and Gloucester.
‘The War?
Oh, we're for it,’ he said.
‘We're very stable here, very patriotic.
We're for it for patriotic reasons.
The day before the war, there was a demonstration.’
He laughed.
‘A couple of old hippies.’
After lunch I sat in the car and listened to a Bush press conference.
The Scud attacks on Israel were, of course, ‘terrorism’, he said, but the Israelis were to be congratulated for all their restraint.
Across the street, a stray dog poked his head into the barber shop, then skittered out again.
About the Scud launchers in Iraq, Bush said he would launch ‘the darnedest search-and-destroy mission ever seen in those parts’.
Or, as someone else once said, war is heck.
I drove away slowly and then came to the corner of Union and Gloucester.
Across the street was City Hall, with US and Confederate flags flying together.
On the corner was a huge oak tree.
And tied around the oak tree was the largest yellow ribbon I'd yet seen.
I parked and got out.
There was a plaque at the base of the tree, dedicated to Fernando Torras, who helped to save the ‘lordly oaks’ of Glynn County.
The ribbon was signed by Victorian Gardens & Gifts and by Wanda's Beauty Shop.
I turned and saw a sad-eyed middle-aged man sitting on a bench staring at me.
‘Hell of a ribbon,’ I said.
‘Hell of a tree,’ he said.
‘Nothing good's gonna come from it,’ he said.
He gave a little wave of the hand and then stared out at the traffic, past the lordly oak and its huge yellow ribbon.
Nothing.
For the next few hours, I was back on the road, passing flatbed trucks carrying huge, tapering logs like giant carrots with their tips chopped off.
I moved fast through South Carolina, the land of fireworks and cigarettes.
The hot green South was behind me now; there were no more palm trees, and the land had turned a wintry brown.
Fayetteville is the home of Fort Bragg, which pumps three billion dollars into the local economy.
In peacetime, more than forty thousand men and women were stationed there; now three-quarters of them were in Saudi Arabia.
I drove down Bragg Boulevard, past dark dives and tattoo parlours and the Park & Pawn.
I could feel the sad power of disintegration: husbands gone off, wives abandoned, children baffled.
At Fort Bragg itself, no gate blocked access to the base, no hard-eyed sentries searched for kef-crazed Iraqis bringing the jihad home.
I drove past a housing development called Anzio Acres and the lumpy greens of a golf course and then past buildings reserved for Psy Ops, and the headquarters of Special Forces, with its monument to John F Kennedy and its statue of an old Green Beret.
All the old delusions seemed to stain the air.
I followed signs past abandoned barracks and empty streets.
Any decent terrorist could have levelled most of the base.
After a while, I cam to Building C-6841, the 82nd Airborne War Memorial Museum.
On a rise above it there were some old aircraft: a C-47, a C-7 Caribou, an old Huey helicopter, a C-119 Flying Boxcar.
I thought about all the young men who'd climbed into those machines and the death they'd seen and the death they'd made and the death they'd received.
I went into the museum.
A sign told visiting gentlemen to remove their hats; it was the kind of sign you'd see in the Duomo in Florence; in some parts of America, war still demands what passes for reverence.
Inside the front door was a glass case containing the sword, scabbard, swagger stick, cap and uniform shirt of Manuel Noriega.
I couldn't help myself; I laughed out loud.
As I moved into the small museum, a male chorus started singing over the sound system: Glory, glory, it's a hell of a way to die…
This was truly nuts.
The path through the exhibits led to World War I, a display featuring a talking dummy who reduced that gigantic disaster to an argument over submarines.
In another room, there was a smiling, life-sized dummy of a Nazi paratrooper, Nazi guns, Nazi uniforms, a 1942 BMW motorcycle used by the Nazis and material explaining how the Nazi airborne invasion of Crete in  1943 had been an inspiration to the Americans.
The music continued: Glory, glory, it's a hell of a way to die…
There was another huge exhibit commemorating the liberation of Grenada.
But I had to search for Vietnam.
That long agony was reduced to a niche and a wall.
I hurried out of the museum, while the ghastly chorus continued its song of death.
On the way to the motel, the radio played a Tears for Fears song called ‘Everybody Wants to Rule the World’.
I didn't want to hear the news for a while, but the music seemed to say it all.
As I drove north, the sky turning greyer and darker and more flags at half-mast, I remembered one final moment in Fayetteville.
I was in the parking-lot of the Quality Inn.
A black cleaning woman backed away from a door, a mop in her hand, and a complete family came outside, moving awkwardly with suitcases, uneasy in a place where they charge you more money if you stay past noon.
In the centre of the group was a lanky young paratrooper with a face like Huckleberry Finn's.
His father, unable to speak the words of farewell, kept patting him on the back, his face a ruin.
An older woman, perhaps a grandmother, squeezed the boy's hand.
Squeezed it once, then again, then again, and again and again.
A sister wept openly.
I slowed down.
The young paratrooper turned to look at me, his eyes alarmed, as if he expected somehow to see that his buddies had caught him in a moment of vulnerability.
He saw then that I was a stranger, and the anxiety drained out of him.
I drove the car under an arch leading to another wing of the motel and parked in front of my own room.
I took a fresh notebook from the glove compartment and started back to talk to them.
When I got there, they were gone, the American family bound for home, their fine young man almost surely on his way to the war.
I stood there for a while in the damp grey afternoon and whispered: ‘Godspeed.’
Letter from Europe
by Michael Walsh
Sex, Lies and Capitalism
In Warsaw's red light district, workers test the limits of a market economy
Standing at the bar on this rainy Friday night in Warsaw is a tall, thin, dark-haired and rather pretty woman of about thirty, who catches my glance as Leszek Kurowski and I enter and, with a darting, fitful gesture, invites me to approach.
I do.
Her name, she says, is Elena; her dark eyes gleam with gay desperation, an impression fuelled by the way she tosses back glass after glass of sparkling wine.
Clad head-to-toe in black, she could be a mourner at a wake, but from her body language one cannot quite make out her precise attitude towards the dear departed.
Is she drowning her sorrows?
Or is she dancing on his grave?
Perched on a stool next to her is her friend Barbara, a fat blond whose ample figure and dumpling smile fit the Slavic stereotype better.
From time to time, she too takes a sip of wine, gazing blankly at the bar, the barman and, beyond, the dance-floor, where sharp-featured Polish men and their pleasingly plump girlfriends boogie decorously to the strains of a bored rock trio.
I'm not here to dance, however; I'm here to talk.
For more than a year, the Poles have been engaged in a brave, almost quixotic attempt to transform a moribund command economy into a lively free market, and they are now suffering the growing pains of a capitalism devoid of capital.
There are goods in the stores, but prices are high and getting higher, as is unemployment.
It will be a while before there is any light at the end of the tunnel Marx built.
The underground economy in every socialist state, however, has always been resolutely capitalist, and so my friend Kurowski and I have come here tonight to find out how the world's oldest profession is adjusting to the new economic realities.
At a cost of one hundred and fifty thousand zlotys, about eight pounds, I buy Elena and Barbara a bottle of ‘champagne’.
That may seem reasonable, but it's a lot for Poland, where a million and a half zlotys a month is considered more or less an average wage.
Everything in Kamieniolomy, which means ‘The Quarry’ in Polish, is expensive.
The cover charge for the bar, which is owned by the Europejski Hotel across the street, is forty thousand zlotys, a little more than two pounds, double what it was six months ago.
Cognac costs the same, vodka half that — although if one can get drunk on either, given the proportion of water to alcohol, I have yet to prove it.
By comparison, you can have a good meal at Bazyliszek (The Basilisk), for years considered the city's best restaurant, for twelve pounds fifty — and that includes wine and caviare.
But pricey as the drinks at Kamieniolomy are, they are nothing compared to the girls.
Their asking price is a hundred quid a night, payable on demand in US currency only; around two hundred dollars.
The American greenback — not the almighty Deutschmark, and certainly not the zloty — is the specie of choice in the new, improved Poland.
At the Marriott Hotel, prices are quoted in zlotys (1,675,805) a night for a single room) but are charged in dollars (about a hundred and eighty).
At the hotel's bustling casino, the stakes are in dollars.
From a minimum bet of three bucks (nearly twenty thousand zlotys), dreams can come true.
These sums, of course, are still beyond the reach of most Varsovians, but, typical Slavs, the Poles are great dreamers.
They dreamt of free elections, of a restoration of their republic, of a future without communism.
If you worked hard enough, many assumed, the dreams might come true.
‘Everybody in Poland has a second job,’ Kurowski explains to me.
He's a strong, calm, controlled man with a scar down his right cheek and a perpetual half-smile on his lips.
During the day, he works a the Polytechnic Institute; at night, he is a minicab driver.
I met him last year, when I was coming out of Bazyliszek and needed a ride.
Tonight, he is sipping a soft drink, the old Warsaw Pact penalties against drunken driving being in force.
‘You noticed that guy I said hello to when we came in, the one on the door?’
Kurowski asks.
‘During the day, he's a cop; at night, he's a bouncer.
He's also a free-lance  taxi driver.’
But nobody has enough money, except the rich, the emigrant businessmen and the old Party officials.
Every day the split between the rich and the poor gets greater.
‘We're beginning to wonder whether capitalism has come too fast,’ Kurowski explains.
‘Maybe we're not ready for it.’
Ready or not, the Poles are putting up a stalwart front, rushing ahead with the same heedless bravery with which their mounted cavalry charged the German tanks in World War II.
One of the first signs one sees at the airport challenges, in English: ‘Take a chance on success!’
Indeed, all the advertisements appear to be in English, trumpeting such anglophonic necessities as the United Colors of Benetton.
The Palace of Culture and Science, a Stalinist wedding-cake structure that was a Soviet ‘gift’ to the Polish people in the mid-Fifties, and now home to yet another casino, is draped with a huge blue sign that proclaims: DIGITAL.
The hotel televisions offer CNN, Euro-Sport, MTV and Sky.
Aside from the palace, the Russians, like Ozymandias, has left precious little spoor.
Except, of course, for the lone and level sands of the wrecked economy, which stretch away in all directions.
Warsaw's Old Town, which was reduced to an ankle-high heap of rubble in the war, has been handsomely restored, but beyond its ancient boundary stretch the usual slate-grey apartment blocks that characterized New Socialist Man's living quarters.
Landscaping is pretty much limited to weeds and mud.
More than a year after the revolution, the euphoria has faded.
The new president, the folk-hero Walesa, can sound suspiciously socialist in his calls for greater protection of the working man from harsh economic reality.
Some of the old Polish poison is back, too; people mutter that former prime minister Mazowiecki lost the presidential election because he had too many Jewish advisers.
Never mind that in the whole country there is only one functioning synagogue, with a congregation so small and old that it sometimes cannot muster a minyan.
But I suppose if you can have capitalism without capital, you can have anti-Semitism without Jews.
Still, the Poles appear determined to make a go of it.
I ask Elena how her business is, and she says it is very good.
I invite her to come and sit at a table with Kurowski and me, but she prefers to remain on duty at the bar.
Talk may be cheap, but her time is expensive, and, unless I pay her, she prefers to stay right where she is.
‘Are you rich?’ she asks, and I assure her I am — which, this being Poland, is pro tempore true.
‘You come with me,’ she says, ‘and I'll give you a night you'll never forget.’
I pay, for I want to hear more of Elena's story, to compare it with what I learned earlier in the evening.
On the street outside the Marriott, in the rather rum section of town the locals affectionately have dubbed Pigalle Place, we had encountered Malgosia, a twenty-three-year-old prostitute, disembarking from a car.
‘How's business?’
I asked her.
‘Not bad,’ she said, ‘Times are good.’
There were fewer girls on the streets these days, she said, so the prices had risen.
Good old capitalistic supply and demand, I pointed out.
When I mentioned Aids as a possible reason, she looked blank.
‘I get two hundred thousand zlotys for French, four hundred thousand for intercourse,’ she told us.
‘I never go home with a man.
I'm too scared.
We look for a quiet, dark place, and we do it in the car.’
Since Warsaw abounds in quiet, dark places, one doesn't have to expend much precious petrol to satisfy one's Malgosian urges.
Any problems with the police?
I asked.
Malgosia explained that street prostitution, while not exactly legal, is considered a victimless crime, and carries no penalty.
She has a health card, which she produces to the cops on demand.
But since nobody wants to be a cop in Poland these days — the pay stinks, and the people hate you — those occasions are few.
Malgosia, it turned out, is not from Warsaw, but from Lotz, an hundred and twenty kilometres away.
She comes into the capital a few nights a week, moonlighting from her day job, which is being a seamstress.
Her husband knows all about her vocation, and approves.
In Poland, of course, everybody has a second job.
Elena, by contrast, is an exception.
Hooking is her only business.
‘I work two, maybe three, nights a week,’ she tells me on the way to the flat she shares professionally with Barbara.
‘The rest of the time, I sleep.
When I am out all night, the next day I cannot do anything.’
Kurowski stops the car at the flat, and the girls invite him upstairs.
He declines and asks whether I want him to wait for me.
Since my hotel is within sight, I tell him he can go.
The flat is rudely a furnished bedroom at the end of a dark hallway on the twenty-second floor of a downtown highrise.
The view is great, but the bed is small; no matter how they feel about each other, I wonder how Elena and Barbara sleep, or whatever, together in it.
I tell them I want only to talk, but, they — being dedicated professionals — think I am joking.
Barbara takes off her shirt and wraps a blue chiffon nightie around her waist; while Elena is in the loo, she opens her purse and shows me a picture of her six-year-old daughter.
Unlike Elena, Barbara speaks very little English, but she conveys her pride none the less.
‘My girl,’ she says.
She smiles.
I tell her I have two little girls of my own.
For some reason, this strange conversation does not strike me as at all odd.
Elena returns, wearing only her knickers.
She sits on my lap, looks at the photograph and tells me her dream.
‘I want to have a child too,’ she says.
‘But I had an operation’— she gestures to her loins —‘and I can't anymore.
So I must adopt.
I've gone to the nuns and begged them to let me have a child, but they say ‘You are a prostitute.
You cannot adopt.’
I tell them I am making a good living, that I can support a child, that I want a baby more than anything, but they refuse.’
She seems about to cry.
‘You told them what you did for a living?’
I ask, somewhat incredulously.
‘Of course,’ she replies.
‘Why not?’
Suddenly, the flat-bell sounds.
Elena leaps to the intercom, says something in Polish and hits the entrance-buzzer discreetly.
The look in her eyes has grown gayer and more desperate.
I ask her who it is.
‘It's nobody,’ she says, laughing.
‘You take your clothes off now?’ she asks, and tugs at my tie.
Alarm bells sound in my head.
The reduced police presence in all the former socialist countries has brought with it an increase in crime, and I have no wish to boost the statistics.
I judge that in the time it takes the lift to creep the height of the building I have to be out the door and on my way.
‘I've got to go,’ I tell Elena and rise to leave.
‘Why?’ she asks.
‘Please, you stay.’
She clutches at my arm.
As I leave, I tell the women to keep the money for the kids.
I throw on my overcoat and step into the pitch-black hall, take off my shoes and start to trot quietly down the twenty-two flights of steps.
On about the eighteenth floor, I hear the elevator doors open and voices cursing in Polish above.
Outside, the streets are nearly deserted, the Slavic moon's face nearly full.
Elena's parting words are ringing in my ears.
‘What do you want?’
I had asked her, as I disengaged her hand from mine.
Like a true capitalist, she had replied: ‘I want…everything.’
Letter from Nowhere
by Victor Lewis-Smith
LOWESTOFT OR BUST
Wretched scenery, warm beer, plastic tumblers, toothless passengers…are we there yet?
I am standing on platform eleven at London's Liverpool Street station, listening to a British Rail Tannoy announcement, delivered as dispassionately and routinely as an abattoir attendant's delivering a bolt through the skull of yet another helpless, terrified, steer: ‘British Rail would like to apologize for the late running of the six-thirty to Lowestoft.
This is due to…
’ What could it be?
A single leaf on the line to Colchester?
The announcement continues unremarkably, ‘…engine trouble.’
When the train eventually pulls in, I notice the name Sir John Betjeman, emblazoned on the side, and everything becomes clear.
Parkinson's disease, pernicious and contagious, affected not only the late Poet Laureate's motor functions, but seemingly also those of anything named after him.
Significantly, although this train is named after a bard who loved the towns and villages of East Anglia, a thorough search of his complete oeuvre fails to come up with a single reference to Lowestoft.
Small English seaside towns rarely receive favourable comment.
Brighton, as someone memorably said, looks like a town that is helping police with their inquiries.
If that is the case, then Lowestoft is undoubtedly the Blair Peach of coastal resorts.
Not only does the battered town seem to have been on the receiving end of a good deal of good, honest, no-nonsense coppering, but it gives the impression that a higher authority, God, must have passed over it in the Fifties, blasting it at close range with His celestial hair-drier, to judge from the universally blistered and leprous paintwork on all the buildings.
If I had not discovered through Exchange and Mart that Lowestoft was the home of the leading (and cheapest) breeder of Main Coon kittens in the country, I would not now be mounting the Sir John, clutching a cardboard box riddled with air holes and marked Pac-a-Pet.
The prospect of eventually arriving at such a gruesomely underwhelming destination makes me determined to enjoy every moment on the train.
Having been told by the gentleman at passenger enquiries that the Lowestoft train is one of the few in Britain to retain six-seater compartments, I am fully prepared to adopt my usual routine for such occasions; I intend to rush on, secure an empty compartment, slide the door behind me, adopt the brazen-hussy-like pose of an Amsterdam whore in her front window (tongue rolling out and knees wide apart, as I slouch across the upholstery), crook my index finger and beckon slowly at any commuters passing along the corridor outside who are considering invading my territory.
Such behaviour from an Amsterdam whore is generally regarded as a provocative come-on.
My hideous tableau vivant, however, will function as an equally effective go-away.
Who in his right mind would come and sit next to me?
Anyone would rather stand on one leg, crammed into the unheated guard's van for the entire journey, than spend one minute in my carriage.
A single glance and, one after the other, they will scurry away, leaving me free to place hat, coat, newspaper, boots and Pac-a-Pet box over the remaining five seats and enjoy a journey of uninterrupted solitude.
Unfortunately, this is not to be, since it transpires that the gentleman from British Rail was nothing short of a duplicitous cad; there are no small compartments, just open-plan carriages too large to be defended by even the most outrageous behaviour, so I slump sullenly into a corner, wallowing in layers of dust and grime that would easily qualify for a Quentin Crisp kitemark, waiting for the guard to switch on the heat and the lights, preparatory to the departure of the Sir John.
A curious misnomer, the British Rail carriage light.
Guards should properly refer to ‘switching on the darks’, since what they call lights seem expressly designed to suck all traces of illumination out of the carriage, casting shadows into every corner.
Through the dingy gloom of this motionless train, I catch a first glimpse of my fellow travellers.
At the moment, the train is static in more senses than one, as fifty City office-workers try simultaneously to detach their ninety-per-cent nylon polyamide jackets, which have statically fused to their hundred-per-cent nylon polyamide shirts, resulting in a display of electrostatics that I'm sure would surprise even Mr Van de Graaff himself.
People normally commute for one of two reasons: to live somewhere beautiful, or work somewhere glamorous.
But consider my fellow passengers, ill-starred wretches who have managed to get hold of a stick with two ends; they have succeeded in working and living in horrific places.
They work in the City and they live in Lowestoft; and, further, they spend three hours a day travelling between the two.
Lowestoft is a town twinned with nowhere, although it is considering a suicide pact with Basildon.
I look around me at the massed ranks of Lowestoftians, their vacant faces bearing mute witness to the devastation the town has wrought on their limbic systems.
For these people, the last word in radical chic is Brut Soap-on-a-Rope; they dress as though they have stepped straight from the pages of a Seventies mail-order catalogue; they consider a good night out to be crowding into the only working public telephone box, and, hyperventilating in their over-excitement, taking it in turns to listen to the talking clock.
For them a build-up of the primary manifestations of commuters' syndrome — tertiary dandruff and pyorrhoea of the gums — is regarded as being just a little bit natty.
The train sets off, and soon we are racing past the majestic façade of Romford station, gleaming out like Caesar's Palace in the Nevada Desert that is the Essex countryside.
Needless to say, the sight of such impressive architecture stimulates me, and I begin to contemplate on how rail travel has been a source of artistic inspiration to passengers for more than a century.
Trollope wrote The Barchester Chronicles during journeys; on a trip from Moscow to Paris, Stravinsky sketched The Rite of Spring; Cyril Connolly's The Unquiet Grave was conceived as the author gazed out of a carriage window.
In front of me, the noble tradition lives on in the hands of a middle-aged commuter who, peering intently into his 101 Puzzles and Games for Boys, is joining up the dots incorrectly.
The Tannoy announces the opening of the buffet, and up we get, not stopping for an instant to reflect that even standing in line for seven hours outside Moscow's GUM department store in pursuit of half a mouldy cabbage would be a more profitable venture than a futile pilgrimage to a British Rail catering outlet.
I join the queue that stretches back through three carriages, in pursuit of a warm can of Travellers' Fare lager — the only substance known to man that leaves the body in exactly the same state as it entered.
Thirty miles later, I finally reach the counter and get an opportunity to order my can of warm lager.
By now it has sold out, so I opt for a gin and tonic, at a price commensurate with a drink at the Ritz.
However, unlike at the Ritz, it is served without ice and a slice and — worse still — in a plastic beaker.
I ask the steward (who I notice has the words ‘Love’ and ‘Hate’tattooed across the fingers of each hand) for a glass, but am told, ‘We don't give out anything sharp here’.
I can quite understand his point of view, noticing the volatile ingredients for a riot are rapidly forming (forty miles to go, and only one giant chocolate-chip cookie among the three hundred remaining in the queue).
The swing-door dividing the buffet from the kitchen contains a central, circular pink-tinted window and, as I gaze through it at the catering staff, my eyes fall on a cross between Fassbinder's Querelle and one of Hieronymus Bosch's more frightening paintings.
Here is the quintessence of Rough Trade, personified by toothless Scottish ex-merchant seamen, clearly chosen not for their specialist knowledge of haute cuisine, but simply because of their sure-footedness on floors that list alternately from port to starboard.
But, to judge from the unsureness of their gait, they must have lost their sea legs somewhere between Sheffield and Colchester, perhaps after an incident involving a couple of bottles of Drambuie.
Like Querelle, men in tatty soiled uniforms are flexing their muscles, while others stare vacantly into the middle distance.
One is doing something with a Mouli not recommended by Prue Leith's School of Food and Wine diploma course; another is bending over a table; a third is spitting on to his palms.
Unfortunately a fourth hangs a tea-towel over the window at this point, obscuring my view.
The final cookie has been bought.
The queue disperses.
I find myself alone with the steward who tells me has been working on this line for the past twenty-five years.
‘You must have come across some real characters on this train,’ I suggest.
‘No, not one,’ he tells me.
A long silence.
‘Well…maybe one,’ and he goes on to tell me that in 1967 he once served the Singing Postman (whose career was then in its ascendance, as a result of his seminal work ‘Av yew got a light, boy?’) with a vodka and orange juice as he returned from a triumphant evening at the Ipswich Folk Club.
When I inform him that I read recently how the estimable gentleman had found the Lord and was living in a Salvation Army hostel in Grimsby, he wonders aloud whether the vodka and orange was not partly to blame.
The guilt of that rashly administered vodka, combined with a sense of shame at decades of serving up meals of such a consistency that it is impossible to tell where the food ends and the plate begins, is obviously weighing heavily on his shoulders.
I attempt to cheer him up by impersonating a Tannoy and announcing the train now arriving at platforms two, three, four, five and six coming in sideways.
He laughs forlornly and, as we pull in to Lowestoft station, tells me, in hushed conspiratorial tones, this riddle, popular among his colleagues on the Aberdeen run:
You have breakfast on the train at King's Cross, lunch at Peterborough and High Tea at Durham.
Where do you have dinner?’
‘Tell me.’
‘In hospital.’
Laughing through hard times
Forget your troubles and just get happy and say hello to the hundred funniest people in Britain
OK, the world's not a comedy show at the moment, we admit.
The papers are filled with gloom and doom.
Companies are swimming in red ink; shop windows are covered with soap; the value of your house is heading towards the basement; unemployment is heading towards the roof.
On the High Street, the post-Christmas sales began in November, and they may well continue through to Easter.
Easter 1992.
The City is as jumpy as a cat.
Least funny of all, of course, was that no-laughing matter in the Gulf.
No, it's not exactly a joke out there.
And as for the future, the economist's forecast is about the same as the weatherman's: cloudy at best, more likely bleak.
So let us be serious: our purpose here is not to kid anybody, to try to convince you that things are any better than they seem.
They ain't.
It is, however, to suggest that we all take heart.
To heed the lessons of history.
To take comfort in the simple truth about Hard Times: that however rotten things might seem at the moment, they will most assuredly seem altogether quaint fifty years from now.
Let's look back, for a moment, at the Hard Times of the Thirties.
Unemployed millions.
Tent cities.
Soup queues.
Workers' protests.
Bodies jumping out of windows.
The sale of pencils on street corners.
But we did have fun.
Lots of it.
We had Fred and Ginger to lighten our load, as we settled our tattered bottoms into seats in grand, new palaces — the Astoria in Charing Cross, the Regal (now the Odeon) at Marble Arch — where we forgot our troubles in art-deco hotel suites, aboard cruise ships and in nightclubs, all gleaming and glittery on the silver screen.
An if we couldn't afford the price of admission, we found other distractions.
Funerals, for example.
Back in those Hard Times, funerals offered us the comfort  of knowing that, however tough it was for me and thee, there was always somebody who had it worse.
Funerals were free and open to all.
One woman back then was heard to say to another old granny, ‘There's a lovely funeral round the corner, ducks.
Go and cheer yourself up.’
Some of us overcame the lethargy of our idleness to learn new skills (this was decades, obviously, before self-improvement became fashionable).
Young men formed neighbourhood jazz bands, creating uniforms out of crêpe paper and competing against one another for modest prices.
Others did what they could to scrape by.
If you think you've got it bad now, how would you like to be paid six shillings a ton to collect pebbles along the cold surf in Norfolk?
That, gentle people, was hardly a day at the beach.
But pebble-picking was preferable to other jobs.
There was one man near Tynemouth who was known as ‘Dead Bodies’, so named because he earned seven and sixpence for collecting (by hook) the corpses of suicides who'd jumped from the Tyne Bridge, ten miles up-river.
It wasn't much but it was a living.
But even the morbid gave way to humour.
A joke went around about a passer-by who saw a man drowning in a canal.
He asked the victim where he worked, then left him to expire as he raced to the drowned man's place of employment.
He told the gaffer that one of his workers had died and asked the boss if he could have his job.
‘Nay,’ came the reply.
‘The man who pushed him in has got it.’
And with that slice of humour, we are brought back to the present.
Yes, we are living in Hard Times; but no, let us not go gently on to that good ledge.
Let us instead sing the praises of those who get us to smile — the Hundred Funniest (say we) People in Britain: those indomitable men and women who help us to cackle through our tears, and who, while they don't make the bad times any better, certainly make them hurt less.
vic reeves: bruce forsyth on acid
It isn't easy getting across Vic Reeves' special brand of music-hall humour, but here goes.
One night the judge on the show's talent competition ‘Novelty Island’, turned out to be the pop star Mick Hucknall's orange hair resting on an oar.
Get it?
Then there was the time Vic and company decided to detonate a smorgasbord of Spam and boiled sweets.
That's right, they blew them up!
And then there was this memorable exchange: ‘Vic, can I have a couple of words please?’
‘Certainly,’ he replies, ‘rifle and marzipan.’
When it comes to Vic Reeves, you have to be there.
Martin Amis
Clive Anderson
Julie Baloo
Tony Banks
Nancy Banks-Smith
Lynn Barber
Glen Baxter
Steve Bell
Alan Bennett
Judy Blame
victor lewis-smith and paul sparks: absurdists
Victor Lewis-Smith has elevated bad taste into an art form.
When he ‘resigned’ as a BBC radio producer in 1986, he may have been pushed, but it was the start of a freelance career guaranteed to outrage the good citizens of Britain with a style of comedy that ranges from the macabre to the indecent.
Highlights of Victor's broadcasting career including having a simulated erection on live television while dressed as Batman.
He once said of himself and his writing partner Paul Sparks, ‘We have almost no shame’.
That's true.
And forget the almost.
Bernard Manning Bernard Mathews Rik Mayall FUNNY, FOR NORTH AMERICANS Jackie Mason Steve Martin Robin Williams Mike McShane John Candy Colin Bostock-Smith Jo Brand Coral Browne Craig Brown Clive Bull Maria Callous Copywriter for the Carling Black Label advertising campaign 
keith allen: ringsider
Allen has no peer when it comes to unmasking the self-delusion and primitive posturing of the modern British dickhead.
The best example is Larry ‘Ringside’ Lewis.
Larry covers ‘working-class sport for the working classes’, one of his classics being the time he reported on the local-government elections in Westminster.
Approaching Dame Shirley Porter, she of the generously ample proboscis, Larry chipped in: ‘I think it's absolutely marvellous you bothered to turn up.
I tell you this is one of the greatest days for me, as I've been a Barbra Streisand fan for years.
Give us a song!’
Antoine des Caunes
Craig Charles
John Cleese
Robbie Coltrane
Billy Connolly
Alan Coren
Julian Critchley
Richard Curtis
Jack Dee
Angus Deayton
Charles Grodin
Robert De Niro
FUNNY WHEN DRUNK
Oliver Reed
Denis Thatcher
FUNNY WHEN SOBER
Jim and Tammy Baker
Jimmy Swaggart
The Pope
rsm marcham: comic force
What do you call a fast-talking, no-nonsense, shoot-from-the-hip regimental sergeant major with a twitching swagger stick in his hand?
Sir!
RSM Steve Marcham, responsible for discipline at the Guards Depot at Pirbright in Surrey, gets results by quoting Kipling and with bayonet-sharp humour.
He also scared the daylights out of us when he said: ‘If you put down anything I don't like, I'll hunt you down like a shit-house rat’.
Yes, Sir!
Chris Donald
Jenny Eclair
Ben Elton
Harry Enfield
Fluck and Law
Bruce Forsyth's hair
Dawn French
Stephen Fry
Jimmy Greaves
Jeremy Hardy
FUNNY LOOKING, BUT NOT FUNNY
Emo Philips
FUNNY, BUT DEAD
Tommy Cooper
Jackie Gleason
Sid James
Peter Sellers
Kenneth Williams
sandi toksvig: nimble wit
What she lacks in sartorial sense she makes up in fun.
She became a comic because ‘I couldn't act’.
She practises her craft by saying ‘the first funny thing that comes into your head, and if that's not funny you say the second’.
Her most ingenious moment on Whose Line Is It Anyway? was one the public never saw: ‘We once did the nativity play in which I portrayed a paranoid shepherd convinced I wasn't following a star, it was following me.’
peter cook: the godfather
Peter Cook says he started making people laugh in order to disarm bigger boys at school.
That did not, however, stop Ted Dexter, now chairman of the English cricket selectors, from caning him when Cook was discovered tippling.
Cook's impudence sparkled in Private Eye, and he turned language and manners upside down with ‘Pete and Dud’ and ‘Derek and Clive’.
It's sobering to ponder that if Cook had followed family tradition and joined the foreign service, he'd be running the country by now.
Michael Heath
Ian Hislop
Jools Holland
Frankie Howerd
Sean Hughes
Barry Humphries
Clive James
Hanif Kureishi
Hugh Laurie
john hegley: stand-up poet
For a moment you think ‘this is going to be serious stuff’.
The manner is laconic yet earnest.
The poems are delivered with the pompous self-importance of an obscure poet addressing a small band of intellectuals.
But Hegley's poetry isn't merely accessible; as the absurdity of the lines builds in counterpoint to the serious manner, it becomes very, very funny indeed.
The pop Poet Laureate of the cabaret circuit, Hegley chooses subjects which range from McDonalds to the Gulf War, taking in on the way a whole range of everyday tragedies:
The other day I met a bloke
Lying on the pavement.
He'd just had a stroke
And I thought a man in his position
Might appreciate a joke.
So I said ‘Stand back please,
I'm a comedian’.
Garry Sadowiz Helen Lederer Jim Davidson's Chalkie Joke Michael Barrimore FUNNY FARMERS Benny FUNNY FACIAL HAIR Cilla Black Jimmy Edwards Lucinda Lambton Josie Lawrence Mike Leigh Maureen Lipman John Lloyd David Lodge Jonathan Meades Paul Merton Spike Milligan 
john walters: raconteur
It's frightening to imagine John Walters on ginseng.
He is a magpie possessed with singular vision.
‘I'm like the man who builds St Paul's Cathedral out of matchsticks,’ he says.
Good going, we say.
His humour is in the Comedy of Manners tradition.
‘I was having a pub lunch recently and noticed a thumbprint of food on the edge of the plate.
I called the waitress over and told her: ‘This plate seems to have some of yesterday's fish-pie on it.’
Irate, she scowled and said: ‘That's not yesterday's.’
Warren Mitchell
Bob Mortimer
Rob Newman
George O'Dowd
Michael Palin
Pet Shop Boys
Danny Peacock
John Peel
David Profumo
Griff Rhys Jones
Denis Healey
Norman Lamont
John McCrirrick
the men who know: wise guys
There is a terrible secret in the lives of Michael Magenis and Martin Plimmer: they are serious journalists.
Not that you would realize that when you hear The Men Who Know.
This is the ultimate double act.
These two don't just share a routine, they share each sentence, until the mind reels and the laughter explodes.
They may be the dual hemispheres of cerebral comedy, but when asked what makes them funny, they replied, ‘We don't drink sherry and listen to Texan polkas’.
Peter Richardson Roland Rivron Tony Robinson Jennifer Saunders John Sessions Michael Sherrard QC Ned Sherrin Dennis Skinner Tony Slattery Arthur Smith 
kit hollerbach: loudmouth
American Kit Hollerbach's in-your-face humour plays both sides of the pond.
Resident in the UK, she's as comfortable mocking the English (‘I'm married to an English guy.
He's typical in that he's very reserved.
In fact, it wasn't until after we were married I knew he wanted to go out with me’), as she is the Yanks (‘American tourists talk so loudly so they can be heard above their clothes’).
Maggie Smith
Mel Smith
John Sullivan
Theo Vidal
Julie Walters
Auberon Waugh
Ruby Wax
Paul Whitehouse
Kipper Williams
Barbara Windsor
Victoria Wood
Sweden on two herrings a day
by Bill Bryson
Things could always be worse: your cheap train journey to Göteborg could be one-way
A reddish-brown train was waiting at Helsingborg to take us on to Göteborg, two hundred and forty-three kilometres north, along the west coast.
We travelled through a landscape of low hills, red barns, small towns with mustard-coloured town halls, immense pine forests, scattered lakes dotted with clapboard holiday cottages, jetties upturned rowing boats.
Occasionally the train would swing near the coast and give a glimpse through the trees of a cold sea.
Rain began to streak the window.
I shared a compartment with a tanned young man, blond as only a Swede can be, in wire-rimmed glasses and a pony-tail, who was returning to Göteborg from Algeciras, where he had been visiting a girlfriend, as he put it.
Actually she was a former girlfriend, and he hadn't exactly visited her, because upon arriving he discovered she was living with an Algerian rug merchant — she had somehow neglected to mention this in her postcards — who had pulled out a scimitar and threatened to send the Swede home with his goolies in a sandwich bag if he didn't clear off instantly.
Considering that he had just made a pointless journey of several thousand miles, the young man seemed remarkably equable and spent almost the entire journey sitting cross-legged, spooning purple yoghurt into his mouth from an enormous jar and reading a novel by Thomas Mann.
At Ångelholm, we were joined by two more people, a grim-looking older woman all in black, who looked as if she hadn't smiled since  1937 and who spent the entire journey watching me as if she had seen my face on a wanted poster, and by a fastidious older man who I guessed to be a recently retired schoolmaster and took an instant dislike to.
The young Swede was sitting in the schoolmaster's reserved seat.
Not only did the schoolmaster make him move, but he instructed him to transfer all his personal effects from the luggage rack above the seat to the rack on the other side, which takes a particular kind of pettiness, don't you think.
The schoolmaster then spent an endless period fussily sorting out his things — extracting a folded newspaper and a small bag of plums from his case, arranging the case on the rack, examining the seat minutely for anything unpleasant and giving it a brush with the back of his hand, folding his jacket and his jumper with ritualistic care, adjusting the window in consultation with the lady, but without reference to me or to the young Swede, getting his case down again for some forgotten item, checking his hankie, readjusting the window.
Every time he bent over, his ass bobbed in my face.
How I longed for a Smith & Wesson.
And every time I looked round, there would be that old crone watching me like the Daughter of Death.
And so the morning passed.
I fell into one of those drooly, head-lolling dozes that seem to be more and more a feature of my advancing years.
When I awoke, I discovered that my companions were also snoozing.
The schoolmaster was snoring raspily, his mouth hugely agape.
I noticed that my swaying foot had rubbed against him, leaving a dusty mark on his navy trousers.
I further discovered, with cautious movements of my foot, that it was possible to extend the mark from just above his knee almost to his ankle, leaving an interesting streak on the trouser leg.
In this way, I amused myself for some minutes until I turned my head a fraction and discovered that the old lady was watching me.
Immediately, I pretended to be asleep, knowing that if she uttered a sound I would have to smother her with my jacket.
But she said nothing.
And so the afternoon passed.
I hadn't eaten since my snackette supper the night before and I was so hungry that I would have eaten almost anything, even a plate of my grandmother's famously awful creamed ham and carrots, the only dish I know to have been inspired by vomit.
Late in the afternoon, a porter came along with a creaking trolley carrying a coffee urn and snackstuffs, and everyone stirred to a kind of frisky wakefulness and examined the fare keenly.
I had twenty-four kronor of Swedish money, which I thought a handsome sum, but it proved sufficient to buy only one hopelessly modest open sandwich, like the bottom half of a hamburger bun with a menopausal piece of lettuce and eight marble-sized meatballs on top.
Eating in Sweden is really just a series of heartbreaks.
I bought the sandwich and carefully peeled away the Cellophane, but just as I lifted it to my mouth the train lurched violently over a siding, making the bottles clatter in the drinks trolley and causing all the meatballs to jump off the bun, like sailors abandoning a burning ship.
I watched with dismay as they hit the floor and bounced to eight dusty oblivions.
I'd have scarcely thought it possible, but the lady in black found a look of even deeper contempt for me.
The schoolmaster skittishly slid his feet out of the way, lest a meatball come to rest against his glossy brogues.
Only the young Swede and the attendant took a sympathetic interest and pointed helpfully as I gathered up the meatballs and deposited them in the ashtray.
This done, I nibbled bleakly on my piece of lettuce and dry bun and dreamed of being almost anywhere else in the universe.
Only two and a half hours more to go, I told myself, and fixed the old lady with a hard stare that I hoped somehow conveyed to her what pleasure, what deep and lasting pleasure, it would give me to haul her off her seat and push her out the window.
We reached Göteborg just after six.
Rain was belting down, drumming like bullets through the gutters.
I sprinted across the open square outside the station, jacket over head, dodging tramcars with split-second, if largely inadvertent, precision, skirted a large puddle, feinted between two parked cars, head-faked a lamppost and two startled elderly shoppers (once I start running, I can't stop myself from pretending I'm returning a kick-off for the Chicago Bears; it's a compulsion — a sort of Tourette's syndrome of the feet).
Then I darted breathless and sodden into the first hotel I came to.
A vertical puddle, I stood in the lobby, wiped the steam from my glasses with a corner of shirt-tail and realized with a touch of horror, as I hooked my glasses back around my ears, that this was much too grand a place for me.
It had potted palms and everything.
For a moment I considered bolting, but I noticed that a young reptilian reception-clerk was watching me narrowly, as if he thought I might roll up a carpet and try to carry it out under my arm, and I became instantly obstreperous.
I was damned if some nineteen-year-old pipsqueak with zits and a clip-on tie was going to make me feel loathsome.
I marched to the front desk and enquired the price of single room for one night.
He quoted me the sort of sum that would necessitate a trip to the bank with a wheelbarrow if paid in cash.
‘I see,’ I said, trying to sound casual.
‘I assume the room has a private bath and colour TV?’
‘Of course.’
‘Free shower-cap?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Assortment of complimentary bath gels and unguents in a little wicker basket by the sink?’
‘Certainly, sir.’
‘Sewing-kit?
Trouser-press?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Hair-drier?’
‘Yes, sir.’
I played my trump card.
‘Magic-wipe disposable shoe-sponge?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Shit.
I had been counting on his saying no to at least one of those, so that I could issue a hollow guffaw and depart, shaking my head ruefully; but he did not, and I had no choice but to slink away or sign in.
I signed in.
The room was pleasant and business-like, but small, with a twenty-watt reading light — when will Europeans learn that this is just not good enough?— a small TV, a clock radio, a good bath with a shower.
I tipped all the lotions from the bathroom into my rucksack, then tossed in the little wicker basket, too — well, why not?— and went through the room harvesting matchbooks, stationery and all the other items that were either complimentary or portable.
This done, I ventured out into Göteborg, still famished.
The rain was still falling in sheets.
I had thought I might stroll out towards the famous Liseberg Gardens, but I got no more than a couple of hundred yards before I was turned back by the pitiless downpour.
I trudged back to the city centre and tried to have a look around the main shopping district, forced  to sprint squelchily from doorway to doorway and from one dripping awning to another; but it was hopeless.
I wanted a restaurant, one simple wholesome restaurant, but there seemed to be none.
I was soaked and shivering and was about to return in a desultory spirit to my hotel to take whatever food was offered there at whatever price, when I noticed an indoor shopping centre and darted in, shaking myself out like a dog.
The shops were mostly dreary Woolworth-type places, and they were all shut, but there was a surprising number of people wandering around, as if this were some kind of marvellous place to take an evening stroll.
There were a lot of young drunks staggering about, too — most at that noisy and unattractive stage where they might want to be your pal or pick a fight or just throw up on you, so I gave them a wide berth.
In Sweden and Norway you have two countries where you cannot buy a beer without taking a bank loan, yet everywhere you go you see grossly intoxicated people — in train stations, on park benches, in shopping centres.
I don't begin to understand it.
They have the highest income-tax and VAT rates, the harshest drinking laws, the dreariest bars, the dullest restaurants and television that makes you feel as if you are warming up for a coma.
Everything costs a fortune.
Everything.
Even the purchase of a bar of chocolate leaves you staring in dismay at your change, and anything larger than that brings tears of pain to your eyes.
It's bone-crackingly cold in the winter, and it does nothing but rain for the rest of the year.
The most fun thing to do in the whole country is walk around semi-darkened shopping centres after they have closed, looking at the windows of stores selling platoons of wheelbarrows and plastic garden furniture.
On top of that, they have shackled themselves with some of the most inane and restrictive laws imaginable, laws that leave you wondering what on earth they were thinking about.
In Norway, for instance, it is illegal for a barman to serve you a fresh drink until after you have finished the previous one.
Does that sound to you like a matter that needs to be covered by legislation?
It is also illegal in Norway for a bakery to bake bread on a Saturday or Sunday.
Well, thank God for that, I say.
Think of the cataclysmic consequences that could befall the nation if some ruthless Norwegian baker tried to foist fresh bread on people on the weekend.
But the most preposterous law of all, a law so pointless as to scamper along the outer margins of the surreal, is the Swedish one that requires motorists to drive with their headlights on during the daytime, even on the sunniest summer afternoon.
I should love to meet the guy who thought up that one.
He must be head of the Department of Dreariness.
It wouldn't surprise me at all if on my next visit to Sweden all the pedestrians were wearing miners' lamps.
I ended up dining in a Pizza Hut in the basement of the shopping centre, the only customer in the place.
I had forgotten to bring anything to read with me, so I passed the time by staring thoughtfully at the emptiness around me, sipping a glass of water and making up Scandinavian riddles —
Q. How many Swedes does it take to paint a wall?
A. Twenty-seven.
One to do the painting and twenty-six to organize the spectators.
Q. What does a Norwegian do when he wants to get tight?
A. He takes the filter off his cigarette.
Q. What is the quickest way in Sweden to get the riot police to your house?
A. Don't take your library book back on time.
Q. There are two staples in the Swedish diet.
One is the herring.
What is the other?
A. The herring.
— and chuckling quietly in the semi-demented manner of someone who is sitting alone in damp clothes in an empty restaurant in a strange country waiting for a twenty-five-dollar pizza.
Afterwards, to make an evening of it, I went to the railway station to buy a ticket on the next morning's express to Stockholm.
You cannot just hop on a train in Sweden, but must think about it carefully and purchase a ticket in advance.
The ticket hall had one of those systems where you take a number from a machine by the door and wait for it to appear above one of the ticket windows.
My number was four hundred and fifteen, and the highest number seeing action was three hundred and ninety-one.
I waited for twenty minutes, and the numbers advanced only to three hundred and ninety-three, so I wandered off to the station newsagent's to look at girlie magazines.
The newsagent's, alas, was closed, so I looked at a couple of travel posters, then wandered back.
Not entirely to my surprise, I discovered there had been a frenzy of activity in my absence, and number four hundred and fifteen had come and gone.
So I took another — four hundred and thirty this time — and a seat and waited for half an hour.
When at last my number came, I presented myself at the window and asked for a ticket on the 10.05 to Stockholm the next morning.
The man regarded my sadly.
‘I'm sorry, I do not speak English,’ he said.
I was taken aback.
‘Everybody in Sweden speaks English,’ I protested feebly.
His sadness grew.
‘I don't.
Please you must go to window sree.’
He indicated a window farther down the line.
‘She speaks vair good English.’
I went to window three and asked for a ticket to Stockholm the next morning.
The woman, seeing the number 430 crumpled in my fist, pointed to the number above her window.
‘You have the wrong number.
This window is for number four three six.’
Even as she spoke, a ferocious-looking lady with grey hair and a dicky hip was hoisting herself out of her chair and charging towards me.
I tried to explain my problem with the monoglot at window five, but the ticket lady just shook her head and said: ‘You must take another ticket.
Then maybe I will call you.
Now I must deal with this lady.’
‘You are at zer wrong window!’ the old lady announced in the bellow of someone whose hearing is going.
‘This is my window,’ she added and tossed a haughty look to the rest of the room as if to say, ‘Are foreigners as stupid as shit, or what?’
Forlornly, I shuffled over to the machine and took another number.
In fact, I took three — I figured this would give me some insurance — then retired to a new seat to watch the board.
What a lot of fun I was having!
Eventually, my number came around again.
It directed me to return to window number five — home of the only man in Sweden who speaks no English.
I crumpled this ticket and waited for the next to be called.
But he called the next one, too.
I scampered to his window and begged him not to call my remaining number, but he did.
I couldn't bear to start the whole thing all over again.
‘Please,’ I said, speaking carefully, ‘I just want a one-way ticket to Stockholm for tomorrow morning at 10.05.’
‘Certainly,’ he said, as if he had never seen me before, took my money and gave me a ticket.
It's no wonder so many Swedes kill themselves.
Documentary
Seth Morgan's last ride
He went from the straight side to the wild side without turning back.
He braked for drugs, booze, and hookers, and wrote a good book about a bum existence.
Then, with a girl who loved him on the seat of his bike, he came to a bridge he was never to cross.
by Mike Capuzzo
In his life, as in his art, Seth Morgan created an appealing fiction — the same appealing fiction.
His legacy as an artist is contained in a single novel, Homeboy, the tale of a charming, drug-addicted, dope-dealing, pimping, strip-show barker who finds salvation, gets the girl (the whore with the heart of gold), and rides his motorcycle into the sunset and, presumably, a happy ending.
Seth was himself a charming drug-addicted, dope-dealing, pimping, strip-show barker who found what looked like salvation and wrote the novel that won him acclaim and rebirth.
Then he got the girl (the bartender with the heart of gold) and rode his motorcycle into…well, an ending.
Only five months after The New York Times anointed him ‘an important new novelist’, an heir to William Burroughs and Henry Miller, Seth Morgan — drunk, fucked up on Percodan and cocaine, bankrupt, his nose newly broken, his face joined by twenty-five fresh stitches, lonesome as hell — climbed on his Harley and began his final ride.
He had been roaming New Orleans, his adopted city, for two days.
He aimed his red-and-white bike down Decatur Street, towards a small brick pub in the Quarter, searching for his last friend.
The night before, alone and drunk, he turned the Harley the wrong way on to busy St Peter Street downtown and rode awhile through oncoming traffic until a policeman mercifully stopped him.
He was arrested and booked into the city jail for driving while intoxicated.
There was only one person left for him to call.
Suzy Levine and Seth had been lovers when he was writing Homeboy, best friends ever since.
She was known to all in the French Quarter for her good looks, her own hard-luck story (two marriages, two troubled kids, a problem with drink) and the soft spot she had for the hard-luck stories of others, poets in particular.
‘All he needs is someone to take care of him,’ she would always say of Seth, but lately she hadn't been so sure.
He'd been on the binge of all time, wrecking cars, hitting her, almost breaking two of her fingers.
But she couldn't say no, so somehow she raised the five hundred dollars to bail him out.
Now she was winding down another dead shift at the Decatur House bar, four customers on the dregs, drinking a little herself to get through the night.
Near the end of the evening, Seth showed up on the Harley, bombed.
Grinning, he stumbled towards the bar.
She was terrified.
He wanted to take her for a ride.
No way I'm gettin' on that fuckin' motorcycle with you,’ she said.
She said it over and over.
He went behind the bar, grabbing at her.
He could barely stand.
Suzy called a couple of friends, hoping to find someone to rescue her.
None of them answered.
Suzy poured shots for Seth and herself.
The other patrons left.
At 11.30 pm, a few regulars stopped by to find the door locked.
Through the window, they saw empty glasses on the bar, dishes in the sink, the TV on.
It looked as if someone had left in a hurry.
Not long after that, witnesses near the St Claude Avenue Bridge, eight miles away, reported seeing a man and a woman go by on a motorcycle.
The man was driving very fast.
The woman was holding on to him with one arm, and with the other she was pounding him on the back, very hard.
The tale of salvation begins as all good ones do, with high birth and great promise.
Seth Morgan was born in 1949, the son of Frederick Morgan of Park Avenue, poet, a founder of The Hudson Review quarterly, heir to a fortune built on soap.
As a boy, Seth listened in as his father chatted philosophy and poetry with friends like e e cummings, Robert Lowell, Dylan Thomas.
Seth was a bright child with a genius for wordplay and a talent for trouble; he bounced a devil-may-care swathe through élite private academies in New York, Connecticut and Switzerland.
Vocational training was not a high priority, thanks to his artistic bent, but also to the trust that would supply, at the very least, his mad money — between twenty six and thirty thousand dollars a year.
Seth was also blessed with good looks and lady-killer charm, which brought many high adventures his way.
He commenced one such exploit in 1970, when he dropped out of Berkeley to move in with singer Janis Joplin, whom he had met while making a cocaine delivery to her Marin County house.
Joplin was crazy about Seth, and called City Hall to enquire about a marriage licence.
According to Buried Alive, the 1973 biography of the singer by Myra Friedman, Joplin pleaded with Seth to force her to stop taking heroin, but he thought it was simply a play for more attention.
After Joplin's death, Morgan's notorious appeal won him many hearts, among them that of an unlucky waitress in Sausalito.
Drunk one day, driving her on his Harley, he slammed into a house that had once belonged to Jack London.
The crash left his girlfriend's face partially paralysed; Seth later said he married her in part so she wouldn't sue him.
His descent continued: his job talking rubes into a San Francisco strip-club was his most reputable career during a period in which he also became a heroin addict, a pimp for his next bride and an armed robber (he once pinned a victim's hand to the floor with a knife).
In 1977, he pleaded guilty to one caper and was sentenced to jail.
In an interview to promote his book, Morgan acknowledged that he had spent years ‘under the influence of cocaine, planning the strategic degradation of women’.
He blamed his mother, an alcoholic beauty who drank herself to death in 1964, and who, he said, raised her sons with such coldness that Seth's brother leaped to his death off the Oakland Bay Bridge.
Middle child Seth called himself ‘an addictive personality growing up in an alcoholic household’, honing his skills of deceit and manipulation.
He was released from prison after thirty months, returned to his barker's job in San Francisco and took up with a stripper.
Life went on that way until 1986, when he moved to New Orleans, where he first received notice for being arrested twice in six months for driving while intoxicated.
The second time, he collided with a police wagon.
‘He was funny as shit, very polite, always smashed,’ says Barbara Cruthirds, the lawyer who represented him.
‘He told us he had dated Joplin.
He told us he was writing a book.
He was always loaded, so I'd say, ‘Okay, sure, Seth.’
We didn't believe a word he said.’
The arrests gave Seth a record of at least nine drink driving incidents, leading the judge to order him into Alcoholics Anonymous and on to two years' probation.
‘On my last legs,’ Seth wrote later, ‘I hied down to New Orleans to drink myself quietly to death, and nearly did, but something awoke in me and I wrote a book instead.’
Although writing was to become his new addiction, he had actually started his novel (working title Dead Man Walkin') when he lived in San Francisco.
He had even won a writing prize while in prison for a story on Joplin's last days.
But it was in New Orleans, when the alcoholic fog lifted for a while, that he wrote eleven hundred pages in a four-month period ending in early 1987.
Jason Epstein, the editorial director at Random House and a friend of Seth's father, took an interest, helping Seth to pare the book down to a readable length, then publishing Homeboy.
Random House expected a modest début for the novel, even deciding against a publicity tour.
Then, on May 6, 1990, Seth was reborn on the front page of The New York Times book review.
The reviewer called him a ‘Joycean Hell's Angel’ who had created from the tawdry San Francisco Tenderloin district ‘an unnerving and utterly persuasive rendition of hell’.
In April, American GQ published a credulous profile of Morgan —‘The Degradation and Miraculous Redemption of the Hoodlum Heir’— and an excerpt from his book, which it described as ‘a flamboyant crime novel…that has New York publishing circles comparing him to Emile Zola, Ken Kesey and Nelson Algren’.
Seth's new career earned him a fifty-thousand dollar advance for the paperback edition, and a European version was in the works.
His agent was also negotiating a four hundred and twenty-five thousand-dollar movie deal, with Johnny Depp rumoured to star.
While all this good fortune unfolded, Seth said he was hard at work on his next novel, Mambo Mephiste, this one set in New Orleans.
He had gone clean and sober with a fury, he swore, up at five-thirty every morning to work out at the Y, at his word processor to write by six-thirty, stopping only to watch CNN during lunch ‘to connect with the world’.
His relationship with his father was whole again.
And in this way the aristocrat who had fallen to the low road returned — now sober, repentant, well-heeled — to the world in which he was born.
It was an appealing fiction.
But had anyone in New York thought to look in New Orleans, it would have been clear that his life was as disorderly as ever.
In March he had been sought by police for crashing his '66 Corvette Sting-Ray into a car he was trying to pass and then driving away.
A week after the hit-and-run, Seth was so drunk that police were able to determine he was drunk in charge while he sat idling his Vette in front of a friend's house.
On the same day the New York Times carried the review that launched his career, the Times-Picayune of New Orleans had Seth calling himself an ‘addict alcoholic’ and ‘a con man…
If I don't create, I destroy.
I'll destroy loved ones close to me personally, and once I empty the stage of everyone else, I'll get to work on Seth Morgan.’
But the stage was not emptied yet.
It was around this time that Seth began a new romance, with Susan Schilling, a preacher's daughter he met at the dentist's.
She is an thirty-nine-year-old actress and model with three children from two marriages, a tall blue-eyed blonde.
‘I was his good girl, the girl to take to book signings, to introduce to Norman Mailer,’ she says.
‘He'd tell me I was the nicest woman he'd ever been with.
I told him that's not saying much — I'm just not a junkie or an alcoholic or a prostitute.
He always presented himself as the redeemed bad boy, but it was a lie, she says.
She learned how much of a lie in August, when she went to Seth's house and walked in on what she later called ‘a horror show’.
‘I was stunned.
Seth was paying guys to have sex with junkies or prostitutes.
He was shooting cocaine into a woman's vein and watching the women perform sex acts for him.
It was really so incredibly humiliating.
I called them his sex circuses.
‘Of course, when he was on a binge he was in no shape to have sex, so he brought it in.
He liked to watch.
He'd tell me, ‘It's just the drugs.’
I'd say, ‘Bullshit.
I'm your girlfriend.
Can't you see how I'd feel so degraded?
I'm not so proud he was my boyfriend.’
He tried to patch things up by buying her a ten-thousand-dollar light-blue 1984 Cadillac — the colour of her eyes.
Some days later, Seth appeared at her door.
‘He told me to look out of the window — he had stolen my car, the car he bought for me.
He was using my car to pick up another girlfriend at the airport.
I said, ‘Seth, let me help you over this’.’
Instead, he drove away in the , ran over a kerb, got a flat tyre and kept going — to pick up Vicky Vanderford, whom he had flown in from California.
Vanderford was the stripper he had lived with for three years in San Francisco, starting in 1980, when he got out of jail.
‘Any bit of education or speaking I know I learned from Seth,’ she says.
‘I didn't get much schooling.
Books, opera, it was Seth who taught me.
I had an addiction to heroin, thanks to Seth, too.’
Seth had sent for Vicky four years earlier, when he first came to New Orleans, and they had lived together for six months.
‘He wanted to marry me — he told me I was all he needed to make his life perfect.
Now he told me he wanted to end it with Susan, and he begged my help and would I come down to New Orleans.’
That Friday night he picked her up at the airport and brought her home, but fifteen minutes after they got there, ‘some guys showed up to sell Seth cocaine.
And then he started doing coke.
That went on all night.
He was writing hundred-dollar, two hundred-dollar cheques every hour.
All Friday, Saturday and Sunday we were at the house, and he was shooting cocaine all the time — shooting it.’
There was drug paraphernalia all over the house.
On Saturday, a drug dealer brought his whole family over to use the pool.
Assorted addicts and alcoholics drifted in and out of the place.
By Sunday night, Vicky realized Seth wasn't planning to settle down and marry anytime soon.
She left the house and visited a friend at a Bourbon Street bar.
Before long, Seth showed up, apologetic.
He was in the company of his Percodan connection.
By Monday morning, Seth's two cocaine suppliers were calling, furious.
‘He'd been writing cheques all weekend on a closed account,’ Vicky says.
‘Between the two of them, he owed between three and a half and four and a half thousand dollars, just for cocaine for that weekend.’
That morning, Vicky demanded a bus ticket home to San Francisco.
‘I'd seen him like that so many times before, but at least after a couple of days he'd say, ‘Vicky, I got to clean up.’
This time he didn't plan on getting better.
He was spending money like I'd never seen.
There was no life left in him.’
Vicky searched the house for Seth, to break the news that she was leaving.
She found him at his desk, downing vodka, talking on the telephone to Susan, telling her soothingly, ‘No, I'm not drinking any more.’
So Susan was gone, and Vicky was gone, but still the stage was not emptied.
Seth and Suzy Levine had gone through a lot together.
He had been the one to persuade  her brother, an alcoholic and addict, to flee New Orleans for the sobriety of the Midwest, where he kicked his bad habit.
But Seth was also the kind of boyfriend who would visit Suzy at the bar where she worked, with a prostitute on his arm.
That their friendship endured explains why next day Seth showed up at his old friend's house, grinning, freshly showered and dressed, barely able to stand.
Suzy's sixteen-year-old son, Joey, answered the door.
A dropout with a troubled past of his own, Joey worshipped Seth.
Suzy had even let Joey live with Seth for almost a year.
She had hoped for a while that Seth could straighten Joey out.
Seth read Joey bedtime passages from Huckleberry Finn, a habit learned from his own father.
He taught him about literature and opera and encouraged him to write.
‘He'd say, ‘Listen, Joey, if you want to write a Homeboy, you'd better stay in school.’’
But in recent weeks, Joey had seen Seth drunkenly leap off his balcony into his pool.
Seth and Joey had fired guns off the balcony into the sky, and Seth had fired his .357 Magnum at a cat inside the house.
Now Seth was waving grandly towards the street, slurring, ‘What do you think of that?’— a twenty-six thousand-dollar Chevy van — a green-orange-white monster complete with its own bar, refrigerator, television, toilet and bed.
‘He bought it when he was loaded,’ Joey says.
‘He was drunk and on pills and he wanted to do something good for himself.
He'd always be throwing money around — a Harley, a Corvette — the same way.
When he bought the Harley, I said, ‘You know you just bought your death’.’
Seth led Joey to the van, but the teenager, seeing that Seth was too drunk to drive, took the wheel himself.
‘The moment I got behind the wheel, he went on a binge, and he was in no shape to drive, so I was his chauffeur for three days, three days without sleep.
He was drinking, doing drugs, screaming ‘I'm gettin' the fuck outta here!’
He was on a rampage.
On Friday evening, Seth directed Joey to a car dealer and bought him a maroon 1982 Cutlass Calais for three thousand dollars.
Joey turned the van over to Seth, and they both drove for a while, until Seth motioned for Joey to pull over.
‘He told me that all his life he was such a shit, and he finally realized he could make someone as happy as he made me,’ recalls Joey.
Late that night, they returned to Suzy's to show her Joey's gift.
She took in the scene and told Seth it was time they straightened out.
She said an ex-boyfriend had a house across Lake Pontchartrain they could use for the weekend.
Suzy and Seth loaded the van with food and clothes for the country, but on Interstate 10 out of New Orleans, Seth suddenly ordered Suzy to turn around so they could back and buy pain pills.
When she refused, Seth fought for the wheel, she won, and for the next fifty miles he fumed.
But when they reached the dock and were waiting for the boat to carry them to the camp, Seth snatched the van's keys, nearly breaking two of Suzy's fingers in the struggle.
He jumped in the van and left her there.
Shortly after midnight, as Joey drove his new car through Metairie, a suburb of New Orleans, he saw police lights and a wreck.
He raced to the scene and found the van, its interior sprayed with blood.
Seth had ploughed into the back of another van, earning himself a broken nose and twenty-five stitches in his face.
Seth's van, which he had owned for four days, was a write-off.
‘He told me, ‘Joey, I wish faces were disposable.
This one is about shot.
I wish I could hang it up and put on a new one’.’
In the first week of October, Seth momentarily returned to the Spartan ritual that had produced Homeboy: rising at six am, working out at the Y for an hour, sitting down to write by seven.
Over the past months, he had completed about three chapters of his second novel.
But privately he told friends that he had been cowed by his rave reviews.
‘He told me he didn't think he could be the Nelson Algren of his generation,’ Vanderford says.
‘I didn't think he had another book in him.
He made it seem as if he had gone to New Orleans drunk, got sober and wrote a book.
But he had been working on that first novel for at least ten years, ever since I've known him.
It's all he ever did.’
He sent Susan Schilling a chapter, ‘Crab Trap’, to prove that he was working.
It begins:
Dawn slopped like a bucket of blood over the greasy waves of Lake Pontchartrain, splashing the seaside slum of Bucktown in red…
It was possible to imagine that the sun was an expression of a force that was sick already of a day just barely started.
On October 6, he wrote her a letter: ‘Dear Susan, Never have I known a love so great, nor suffered so greatly love's penalty…
’ And two days later: ‘Along — my thoughts of us clarify, and my feelings distil themselves, and I realize that you're doing what you must do and it was probably best for me.
I have no right to expect the things I ask — even a kind word…‘
She refused to see him, she said, until he sought treatment.
A few nights later, Susan found a message on her answering machine: it was Seth, but his voice was hoarse, threatening her with ‘loathsome’ things, sexual violence.
The next day, when he had sobered up, she insisted on playing it back to him.
He wept.
She got another letter the next day: ‘Dear Susan…
That voice was mine.
It sickens me, but it talks with my words.
Try to understand me — I'm terrorized by that sick motherfucker, too.’
Still she would not yield, so in mid-October, Seth entered Riverbend Hospital for his drug and alcohol problems.
A day later, though, he called Susan to say he had checked out of the hospital.
When she began to protest, he claimed he was getting help on an out-patient basis, and that he had been going to AA.
That Friday, Susan Schilling visited Suzy Levine at work at the Decatur House pub.
When she walked in, Seth was at the bar with another woman.
He had a soda in front of him.
‘I said, ‘Suzy, what's going on here?
Is he drinking?’
She said, ‘No, it's just Coca-Cola.’’
He had spent weeks trying everything to win this woman back.
But in a single motion he was about to drive her away again, one final time.
Seth turned to Susan, smirking, and opened his leather jacket.
From beneath it he pulled a fifth of rum.
Now only  Suzy remained by Seth's side, and there, a few days later, is where the story ends.
Sergeant Newton Barrios had investigated more than seven hundred traffic fatalities in the city of New Orleans, but this was the worst he'd ever seen on the St Claude Avenue Bridge.
The seventy-one-year-old steel cantilever span narrows down to two lanes as it crosses a channel that connects the Gulf to the Mississippi.
One hundred feet from the bridge sits an immense piling to protect the bridge's warning gates — eight telephone poles cabled together, covered with yellow paint and reflectors.
On October 17, shortly after midnight, Seth Morgan and Suzy Levine approached the right lane of the bridge at about forty miles an hour.
He steered too far to the left and nicked the edge of the median strip.
The bike shot up in the air.
Seth flew forty miles an hour face first into the piling with such force that he uprooted the eight telephone poles.
Seth ‘stopped abruptly’, Sergeant Barrios explains, then rolled another twenty-four feet, coming to a halt in the roadway.
His rider, Suzy, missed the piling and soared beyond Seth, landing forty-five feet away from the point of impact in a foetal position.
Both died instantly.
An autopsy found that Seth had cocaine and Percodan in his blood and .3 per cent alcohol — three times the legal limit.
Suzy had .28 per cent alcohol in her blood.
‘If she'd been wearing a helmet, she might have lived,’ says Officer Carmine Menchel, who visited the scene later.
‘If he'd been he'd been wearing one, he might have had an open casket.’
A few days later Kiley Puma, Suzy's eighteen-year-old daughter, found two motorcycle helmets in a laundry basket in her mother's apartment, along with an empty vodka bottle and a pair of Seth's pants.
Suzy Levine was buried in Carter Cemetery in Springfield, near New Orleans.
Her father, Robert Skidmore, says, ‘There's a lot of anger in the French Quarter, because felt that Seth had a death wish and took my daughter with him.
I believe he killed my daughter.’
Seth Morgan was buried in a small private ceremony in Maine.
Seth's family hired Susan Neff, a New Orleans attorney, to handle his estate.
‘Though he had large sums of money coming in, it appears that Mr Morgan was insolvent,’ she says.
Susan Bell, Seth's editor at Random House, was tired of talking about him.
‘He wasn't a myth, he wasn't a genius.
He was a frail human being, he was an incredibly hard-working and talented writer, very nice, and sometimes he was an asshole.’
After Seth's death, Suzy's son, Joey, tried repeatedly to call Frederick Morgan, Seth's father, in New York.
Mr Morgan hasn't returned his calls.
‘I hope he calls me soon,’ Joey says.
‘We talked a lot of times and got along great.
He must be devastated.’
Joey plans to return to school and dreams of writing about the wild scenes he witnessed at Seth's house —‘La Traviata in New Orleans, man,’ he says.
Seth's brother and one of his sisters travelled to New Orleans to try to understand what happened to their sibling.
‘We don't know,’ says his sister Veronica, a teacher and unpublished poet living in Massachusetts.
‘None of us really knew him.’
In New Orleans, his brother and sister met Susan Schilling, who told them the story of her .
‘They told me, ‘That's good, at least he finally did something nice for somebody.’’
Homebody will be published in paperback by Vintage in June, £4.00
THE SOUND OF MORGAN
Kitty sat nude before the bathroom mirror, knotting a towel turban-style around her head.
The mirror was veined with gold and misted with the scented steam of the bath from which she'd just emerged.
With the heel of her hand, she wiped a circular space to see her face.
She frowned.
Not at herself, but at the ornate bathroom.
The golden fixtures in the shapes of mythological birds, the fluted blue marble seashell sinks, the sterling silver tub with lapis lazuli clawed feet, everywhere busy mosaics building geometric  migranes .
No wonder Dan's wife, Melissa, took the kid and booked.
Only a whore could love this Turkish bellyache.
Dan must have built it with just that fantasy in focus, to keep some bust-out bimbo with a big ass and chichis in a style befitting Little Freakin' Egypt.
‘Shitfire,’ she called through the partly closed door.
‘It must cost plenty to make a crapper look this cheap.’
HOMEBOY
Live fast, die faster (from top): Morgan on the Harley; Vicky Vanderford; Suzy Levine, who died on the bike; and a Morgan police mug shot
Con artist: Seth subscribed to the cult of the addictive personality
Esquire Goes on a Date
a night at the pictures with denice lewis
She's blonde, she's gorgeous, she's the face of the Nineties.
We're plain, we're nervous, we envy the popcorn on her lap
It's early evening in Leicester Square and the rain is splashing down.
We're waiting to play the dating game with Denice Lewis, the blonde supermodel, the woman David Bailey declared to be the image of the Nineties.
As we straighten our tie and suck on a Cloret, we reflect gloomily that the Mail on Sunday categorized Denice's former dates as ‘rich, famous and suntanned’ and we try to hope that perhaps she feels like a change.
We scan the street nervously in both directions.
Denice is never late, so we've been told, and she's due to arrive at any moment.
We've never met her, but we know what she looks like.
We've seen her golden smile on the cover of Tatler and her figure in dozens of fashion glossies.
And of course, we've seen her in the gossip columns, stepping out with the rich, the famous and the suntanned.
A small woman approaches us.
Although she may have many other fine qualities, she is clearly not an international fashion model.
She asks us if the cinema in front of which we're standing, the one with the large sign saying ‘Odeon Mezzanine’, could in fact by any chance be the Odeon Mezzanine.
We confirm that it is.
She then proceeds to whinge about how confusing it is that the Odeon Mezzanine, the Odeon Leicester Square and the Odeon West End are all situated within yards of each other.
We nod politely and look the other way to discourage further conversation.
We have more pressing matters on our mind.
We look at our watch and note that Denice is now thirty seconds late.
Where on earth can she be?
Then we spot a tall, blonde woman striding up the street in our direction.
She's wearing faded jeans and a long black coat and has a purposeful air about her.
Our heart pumps faster, and we take a firm grip on the large, green-and-white golf umbrella by which Denice has been told to recognize us.
As she gets closer, she scans the motley group of no-hopers gathered on the pavement and then suddenly she's looking directly at us.
We adopt a warm, welcoming expression, which somehow manages to combine immense charm with just a hint of dangerous animal magnetism.
She walks past.
We follow her as she continues towards the Odeon Leicester Square.
When she stops and turns back, we decide to abandon the low-key approach and we wave our umbrella in the air, pointing at it and grinning dementedly.
She recognizes us immediately.
We lead her back towards the Odeon Mezzanine and break the ice by saying interestingly how confusing it is that the Odeon Mezzanine, the Odeon Leicester Square and the Odeon West End are all situated within yards of each other.
The film we're going to see is Flatliners, and Denice tells us she's been dying to see it for ages.
She apologizes for being thirty seconds late and says she's been having her nails done.
We buy her a large Coke and an even larger carton of popcorn.
As we enter the tiny auditorium, the usher asks to see our tickets.
‘Window seat, no smoking,’ says Denice.
The man seems confused.
‘Just kidding!’ she says; he smiles thinly.
He shows us to our seats, and there's just time for Denice to switch off her portable phone before the lights go down.
The film stars Keifer Sutherland and Julia Roberts and concerns a group of unlikely student doctors who take it in turns to have their heartbeat stopped in order to experience the afterlife, which for some reason the director has chosen to portray as a series of rather unimaginative music videos.
Denice lets out little yelps of laughter at the occasional humorous moments and squirms and groans during the gory bits.
She seems to be enjoying it.
For our part, the only time our heart comes close to missing a beat is when Denice wedges the still-full carton of popcorn between her thighs and invites us to help ourselves whenever we feel like it.
Unable to trust our sense of direction one hundred per cent in the dark, and aware that misunderstandings might arise, we decide to give the popcorn a miss.
After an eternity or two, the film comes to an end.
It's time to eat.
We suggest a Japanese meal, and Denice agrees.
We happen to know a particularly nice little establishment in Soho, only a five-minute walk away.
Outside, it's still raining, and as we gallantly struggle to open our umbrella in the wind, we suddenly find we've come to a halt beside a large black car, and a man in a smart suit is opening the door for us to get in.
He's Denice's hired chauffeur.
Such is the life of the supermodel.
During the brief journey to Brewer Street, Denice tells us that she enjoyed the film, particularly the surreal portrait of the afterlife.
She asks us if we would agree that Julia Roberts is the most stunning thing we've ever seen, and we have to admit that Julia's extraordinarily wide mouth and upturned nose always remind us of someone with their face pressed against a plate-glass  window.
Denice thinks she's absolutely gorgeous.
We arrive at the Fuji restaurant.
Denice decides it's ‘cute’ and speaks enthusiastically of the dimmed lighting.
‘I'm so fed up with restaurants that have really bright fluorescent lights everywhere that make you look green,’ she says.
‘I mean, good lighting is so important.’
In complete agreement, we tell her we also think the dimmer the lighting the better.
Denice hands the waiter her coat (Christian Lacroix), and then we hand over our umbrella (from a sweatshop somewhere in Korea).
Once seated, Denice tells us she's only been on a blind date once before, and that was years ago.
We ask her what happened.
‘I went out with him for a year and a half,’ she replies.
‘This could be your lucky night,’ she adds, laughing.
We laugh too.
As we try to decide what to eat, we notice that Denice has managed to do a certain amount of major structural damage to her menu, resulting to the pages' coming out of the middle.
‘I didn't do it,’ she says defensively.
Last of the great chevaliers, we tell her that should there be any problem with the restaurant management, she will have to take full responsibility for her actions.
‘I'm gonna fix it for them,’ she says, and begins trying to stuff the pages back in.
She sighs.
‘Tearing up the menu, insulting the guy at the cinema.
Oh dear, it's not going very well, is it?’
The waitress arrives.
Denice has already decided she wants chicken, but isn't sure exactly what she wants done to it before it's put on her plate.
Then she hears something sizzling on the other side of the restaurant and decides she will have ‘sizzling chicken’.
The waitress then finds something on the menu that approximates to it.
For our own part, we decide on the beef teriyaki, medium rare.
We get back to the subject of dating.
Denice says nobody ever asks her out, and we say we find this hard to believe.
She says she doesn't have boyfriends, and we mention her much-publicized relationship with rich, famous, suntanned George Hamilton last year.
She says that was different.
And she says that at the moment she's more interested in just having fun than dating.
Our chin quivers very slightly.
‘Except for this one,’ she adds reassuringly.
Denice tells us about her first date, when she was seventeen, and talks about her early life in Houston.
She mentions that there was another girl in her class at high school who was also called Denice Lewis and also had blonde hair.
We wonder if she has ever heard of chronic paranoid schizophrenia, and she tells us to be quiet.
The food arrives, and we tuck in.
The conversation goes well, and we progress confidently along a tightrope of loose connections, with just the occasional wobble.
The chewy nature of our beef teriyaki leads on to Denice's dislike of beef, which in turn inspires her to do an extremely convincing impersonation of a fish, which leads her to mention that her mother's name is Wanda.
We talk about the ups and downs of being thirty, about Denice's ambition to become a successful actress, about books and birth signs.
We decide we like Denice a lot.
She's smart and fun to be with.
Yes, Denice is extremely nice.
We get on the subject of hobbies, and Denice tells us about her painting.
She paints hearts in lots of different colours and says she has no intention of branching out into other organs of the body.
She also collects teddy bears and has about fifty of them.
What she really wants is a puppy.
She tells us about one she came across the other day.
‘It was adorable,’ she says dreamily.
‘I held it and it was biting my lip and kissing my face…‘
About ten minutes later, we decide we've cooled down sufficiently to be able to leave the men's room and go back into the restaurant.
When we get back to our table, Denice decides to show us a trick with a toothpick.
‘It's something I learned when I was about four,’ she tells us.
‘You break it in half and just stick it against your skin, and it stays there.’
She proceeds to demonstrate, and within no time at all half a toothpick is stuck to her forehead, as if by magic.
We congratulate her on this remarkable feat.
‘You should try and see if you can do it yourself,’ Denice suggests.
We snap a toothpick and make a half-hearted attempt to stick it to our chin.
‘Push it hard,’ says Denice.
‘You have to push it a lot harder than that.’
We tell her that we are indeed pushing, but it hurts.
‘Well I did it,’ she says.
We try again.
‘No, not like that.
Here, gimme your forehead.’
We lean across the table with a certain amount of apprehension.
A split second later, we notice that the piece of wood in her hand looks particularly sharp and jagged.
Denice jabs it with considerable force into our forehead.
The pain is excruciating.
As we check for bleeding, Denice shrieks with laughter.
We reflect that this is the loudest she has laughed all evening.
‘Let me see your hand,’ says Denice, when she finally stopped laughing.
We're somewhat reluctant to offer it up, fearing a second stabbing, but she becomes stern, and we acquiesce.
‘Now let me read your palm.’
She scans our hand for a while and then adopts a worried look.
‘You don't have a life line,’ she says.
We find this slightly worrying.
We offer the other hand, and eventually a life line is discovered, although it's so short it appears that we died several years ago.
Denice shows us her own life line, which goes about halfway up her arm.
She then admits she doesn't know the difference between the head line and the heart line, although she's able to identify the little crinkle at the side of the hand that tells you how many children you're going to have.
She shows it to us.
‘It says I'm having only one.’
Then she examines our own crinkle and discovers it's almost identical.
‘Oh God, maybe we're having the same one!’ she says excitedly.
Naturally this is a very emotional moment, but we try to remain calm.
We have to plan for the future.
For a start, we have to think of a name for our child.
We decide too that the name should be a permanent reminder of our first date.
‘Flatliners?’ suggests Denice.
We say we were thinking more along the lines of Keifer or Julia.
This meets with Denice's approval, and she swears solemnly that if she ever has our child, it will be called Keifer or Julia.
We shake on it.
Our date seems to have reached a kind of conclusion.
Outside the chauffeur is waiting patiently.
He heads north, and in no time we're outside Denice's impressive town house in St John's Wood.
She kisses us goodnight and says she's had fun.
We mutter something similar.
As the chauffeur drives us home, he tells us what a lovely girl that Denice is, and we tell him that's the truth.
Looking out of the car window, we notice that the storm is over and already the streets are dry again.
Shock of the New
Far from the fitting room
La Dolce Vita by Dolce & Gabbana
There is good baggy and bad baggy.
This is, of course, about the former.The oversized designs of the Italian team Dolce & Gabbana are such a big hit in Britain that the mainstream menswear companies keep them under scrutiny.
This means that the baggy peasant look will be widely seen again: roomy, comfy clothes that look best when rumpled.
Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana are one of Europe's most innovative design teams, much influenced by their passion for Sicily and Italy's deep south.
The pair received a rapturous welcome at the latest Milan collections for continuing to portray the tough masculine image that is their trademark.
They create two basic silhouettes — one voluminous, the other highly tailored.
Here, we are concerned with the former, relaxed and floppy, with huge jackets as comfortable as cardigans and roomy trousers designed to be tugged in with a sturdy leather belt.
Their impact comes from layers of muted colour and a newly chic sloppiness that is easily imitated by donning any jacket far too big for you.
The designer difference lies in the fabrics.
The real McCoy is made up in loose linens, which can be relied on to hang stylishly on even the stickiest of summer days.
The Manzi brothers, pictured here, are unafraid of clothes that suggest they need ironing.
Neither are they worried by sizing that implies the clothes might belong to men of more ample girth.
This could be because Carlo (left) has made a career of clothes.
He spent eight years as a costume designer for television commercials and now boasts the widest stock of contemporary menswear in Europe at his eponymous clothing-hire company.
Carlo is wearing a large, double-breasted linen jacket and non-matching royal blue linen trousers over a slate-grey T-shirt and stone shirt.
His brother Eugene (right), the publicity chief for London/FFRR Records, wears an even bigger linen suit over a rayon polo shirt.
All clothing from a selection by Dolce & Gabbana, available from Joseph.
Marion Hume 
Esquire Fiction
The Wave by Milan Kundera
She was three women, whose lives were contained in one bewitching, unforgettable gesture
More often condemned to live than die, the characters that people the novels and stories of Milan Kundera are the architects as much as victims of their own fates.
In the arbitrariness of their actions, in their trivial comic act of cowardice, lust and vengeance, as much as in the sheer ridiculousness of history, lie the seeds of desperation and heartbreak.
Somehow most of them survive.
And it is no surprise that the man who first addressed a novel called The Joke to the citizens of a prohibitionist state in the middle of Europe twenty-five years ago should treat them with as much sympathy as harsh lucidity.
His own career is an exemplar of survival in the face of absurdity as well as adversity.
Born in Brno, Czechoslovakia, in 1929, Kundera worked as a labourer and a jazz musician before turning to writing.
Uncensored in his own country until the 1968 invasion (when he was put under an outright ban), he discovered his first novel to be published in the West had been rewritten from start to finish by the publisher.
Later, exiled in France, he found his models hailed as ‘major indictments of Stalinism’, when what he had written, he maintained, were love stories and chronicles of the human soul.
A film of his most recent novel, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, conveys little more than that he a master of the erotic situation.
For ten years, Milan Kundera has been a professor at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris.
Far from being his only subject, eroticism — along with politics, aesthetics and theology — is a seamless part of life for Kundera.
More than fifteen years ago, Philip Roth introduced The Joke and Milan Kundera to awestruck readers of American readers of Esquire.
Now, with this exclusive preview from Immortality, his long-awaited new novel, we're delighted to repeat the experience.
Immortality will be published by Faber & Faber in May.
She might have been sixty or sixty-five.
I was watching from a deck chair by the pool of my health club, on the top floor of a highrise that provided a panoramic view of all Paris.
I was waiting for Professor Avenarius whom I'd occasionally met here for a chat.
But Professor Avenarius was late, and I kept watching the woman; she was alone at the pool, standing waist-deep in the water, and she kept looking up at the young lifeguard in sweatpants who was teaching her to swim.
He was giving her orders: she was to hold on to the edge of the pool and breathe deeply in and out.
She proceeded to do this earnestly, seriously, and she sounded like an old steam-engine wheezing from the depths of the water (that idyllic sound, now long forgotten, which to those who never knew it can be described in no better way than the wheezing of an old woman breathing in and out by the edge of a pool).
I watched her in fascination.
She captivated me by her touchingly comic manner (which the lifeguard also noticed, for the corner of his mouth twitched slightly).
Then an acquaintance started talking to me and diverted my attention.
When I was ready to observe her once again, the lesson was over.
She walked around the pool towards the exit.
She passed by the lifeguard, and after she had gone some three or four steps past him she turned her head, smiled, and waved to him.
At that instant I felt a pang in my heart!
That smile and that gesture belonged to a twenty-year-old!
Her arm rose with bewitching ease.
It was as if she were playfully tossing a brightly coloured ball to her lover.
That smile and that gesture had charm and elegance, while the face and the body no longer had any charm.
It was the charm of a gesture drowning in the charmlessness of the body.
But the woman, though she must, of course, have realized that she was no longer beautiful, forgot that for the moment.
In all of us, a certain part of our being lives outside of time.
Perhaps we become aware of our age only at exceptional moments, and most of the time we are ageless.
In any case, the instant she turned, smiled and waved to the young lifeguard (who couldn't control himself and burst out laughing), she was unaware of her age.
The essence of her charm, independent of time, revealed itself for a second in that gesture and dazzled me.
I was strangely moved.
And then the word Agnes entered my mind.
Agnes.
I had never known a woman by that name.
When I wake up, at almost half past eight, I try to picture Agnes.
She is lying, like myself, in a wide bed.
The right side of the bed is empty.
Who could her husband be?
Clearly, somebody who leaves the house early on Saturday mornings.
That's why she is alone, sweetly singing between waking and sleeping.
Then she gets up.
Facing her is a TV set, standing on one long, stork-like leg.
She throws her nightgown over the tube, like a white, tasselled theatre-curtain.
She stands close to the bed, and for the first time I see her naked: Agnes, the heroine of my novel.
I can't take my eyes off this beautiful woman and as if sensing my gaze she hurries off to the adjoining room to get dressed.
Who is Agnes?
Just as Eve came from Adam's rib, just as Venus was born out of the waves, Agnes sprang from the gesture of that sixty-year-old woman at the pool who waved to the lifeguard and whose features are already fading from my memory.
At the time, that gesture aroused in me immense, inexplicable nostalgia, and that nostalgia gave birth to a woman I call Agnes.
But isn't a person, and to an even greater extent, a character in a novel, by definition a unique, inimitable being?
How then is it possible that a gesture I saw performed by one person, a gesture that was connected to her, that characterized her and was part of her individual charm, could at the same time be the essence of another person and my dreams of her?
That's worth some thought.
If our planet has seen some eighty billion people, it is difficult to suppose that every individual has had his or her own repertory of gestures.
Arithmetically, it is simply impossible.
Without the slightest doubt, there are far fewer gestures in the world than there are individuals.
That finding leads us to a shocking conclusion: a gesture is more individual than an individual.
We could put it in the form of an aphorism: many people, few gestures.
I said at the beginning, when I talked about the woman at the pool, that ‘the essence of her charm, independent of time revealed itself for a second in that gesture and dazzled me.’
Yes, that's how I perceived it at the time, but I was wrong.
The gesture revealed nothing of that woman's essence, one could say rather that the woman revealed to me the charm of a gesture.
A gesture cannot be regarded as the expression of an individual, as his or her creation (because no individual is capable of creating a fully original gesture, belonging to nobody else), nor can it even be regarded as that person's instrument; on the contrary, it is gestures that use us as their instruments, as their bearers and incarnations.
Agnes, now fully dressed, went into the hall.
There she stopped and listened.
Vague sounds from the adjoining room made her realize that her daughter had just got up.
as if to avoid meeting her, Agnes hurried out into the corridor.
In the elevator, she pressed the button for the lobby.
Instead of going down, the elevator began to twitch like a person afflicted with Saint Vitus's dance.
This was not the first time the elevator had startled her with its moods.
On one occasion, it began to go up when she wanted to go down; another time, it refused to open and kept her prisoner for half an hour.
She had the feeling that it wanted to reach some sort of understanding with her, to tell her something in its rough, mute animal way.
She complained several times to the concierge, but because the elevator behaved quite normally and decently towards the other tenants, the concierge considered Agnes's quarrel with it her own private matter and paid no attention.
This time, Agnes had no other choice but to get out and take the stairs.
The moment the stairway door closed behind her, the elevator regained its composure and followed her down.
Saturday was always the most tiring day for Agnes.
Paul, her husband, generally left before seven and had lunch out with one of his friends, while she used her free day to take care of a thousand chores more annoying than the duties of her job: she had to go to the post office and fret for half an hour in a queue, go shopping in the supermarket, where she quarrelled with the saleswoman and wasted time waiting at the check-out, telephone the plumber and plead with him to be precisely on time so that she wouldn't have to wait the whole day for him.
She tried to find a moment to squeeze in a bit of rest at the sauna, something she could not do during the week; in the late afternoon, she would always find herself with a vacuum cleaner and duster, because the cleaning woman who came on Fridays was becoming more and more careless.
But this Saturday differed from other Saturdays: it was exactly five years since her father had died.
A particular scene appeared before her eyes: her father is sitting hunched over a pile of torn photographs, and Agnes's sister is shouting at him: ‘Why have you torn up Mother's pictures?
Agnes takes her father's part, and the sisters quarrel, overtaken with a sudden hatred.
She got into the car, which was parked in front of the house.
The elevator took her to the top floor of the highrise that housed the health club with its big swimming-pool, Jacuzzi, sauna, Turkish bath and view of Paris.
Rock music boomed from speakers in the locker room.
Ten years ago, when she first started coming, the club had fewer members and it was quiet.
Then, year by year, the club improved: more and more glass, more lights, more artificial flowers and cactuses, more speakers, more music, and also more and more people, further multiplied by the enormous mirrors which the management one day decided to spread across the walls of the gym.
She opened a locker and began to undress.
Two women were chatting close by.
One of them was complaining in a quiet, slow alto voice that her husband was in the habit of leaving everything lying on the floor; books, socks, newspapers, even matches and pipes.
The other, in a soprano, spoke twice as fast.
The French habit of raising the last syllable of a sentence an octave higher made the flow of her speech sound like the indignant cackling of a hen: ‘I'm shocked to hear you say that!
I'm disappointed in you!
I'm really shocked!
You've got to put your foot down!
Don't let him get away with it!
It's your house after all!
You've got to put your foot down!
Don't let him walk all over you!’
The other woman, as if torn between a friend whose authority she respected and a husband whom she loved, explained with melancholy, ‘What can I do, that's how he is!
And he's always been like that.
Ever since I've known him, leaving things all over the place!’
‘So then he's got to stop doing it!
It's your house!
You can't let him get away with it!
You've got to make that crystal clear!’ said the soprano voice.
Agnes never took part in such conversations; she never spoke badly of Paul, even though she sensed that this alienated her somewhat from other women.
She turned her head in the direction of the alto: a young woman with light hair and the face of an angel.
‘No, no!
You know perfectly well you're in the right!
You can't let him act like that!’ continued the other woman, and Agnes noticed that as she spoke she kept rapidly shaking her head from left to right and right to left, at the same time lifting her shoulders and eyebrows expressing indignant astonishment that someone had refused to respect her friend's human rights.
Agnes knew that gesture: her daughter Brigitte shook her head and lifted her brows in precisely the same way.
Agnes undressed, closed the locker and walked through the swing doors into a tiled hall, with showers on one side and a glass enclosed sauna on the other.
There, women sat squeezed together on long wooden benches.
Some were wrapped in special plastic sheets that formed an airtight cover around their bodies (or certain parts of the body, most often the belly and behind), so that the skin perspired all the more readily and the women, or so they believed, would lose weight more quickly.
She climbed to the highest bench, where there was still some room.
She leaned against the wall and closed her eyes.
The noise of music did not reach this far, but the voices of the women, who chattered away at full blast, were just as loud.
An unfamiliar young woman entered the sauna and, the moment she walked through the door, began to order everyone about; she made them all sit closer together, then picked up a pitcher and poured water on the stones.
With much hissing, hot steam started to rise upwards, making the woman sitting next to Agnes wince with pain and cover her face.
The newcomer noticed it, declared, ‘I like hot steam; it gives me that real sauna feeling’, squeezed herself between two naked bodies and at once began to talk about yesterday's television talk show featuring a famous biologist who had just published his memoirs.
‘He was terrific,’ she said.
Another woman nodded in agreement: ‘Oh yes!
And how modest!’
The newcomer said: ‘Modest?
Don't you realize how extremely proud that man was?
But I like that kind of pride!
I adore proud people!’
She turned to Agnes: ‘Did you find him modest?
Agnes said that she hadn't seen the program.
as if interpreting this remark as veiled disagreement, the newcomer repeated very loudly, looking Agnes straight in the eye: ‘I detest modesty!
Modesty is hypocrisy!’
Agnes shrugged, and the newcomer said: ‘In a sauna, I've got to feel real heat.
I got to work up a good sweat.
But then I must have a cold shower.
A cold shower!
I adore that!
Actually I like my showers cold even in the morning.
I find hot showers disgusting.’
Soon she declared that the sauna was suffocating; after repeating once more how she hated modesty, she got up and left.
As a little girl, Agnes used to go for walks with her father, and once she asked him whether he believed in God.
Her father answered: ‘I believe in the Creator's computer.’
This answer was so peculiar that the child remembered it.
The word computer was peculiar, and so was the word Creator, for her father would never say God, but always Creator, as if he wanted to limit God's significance to his engineering activity.
The Creator's computer: but how could a person communicate with a computer?
So she asked her father whether he ever prayed.
He said: that would be like praying to Edison when a lightbulb burns out.’
Agnes thought to herself: The Creator loaded a detailed program into the computer and went away.
That God created the world and then left it to a forsaken humanity, trying to address Him in an echoless void — this idea isn't new.
Yet it is one thing to be abandoned by the God of our forefathers and another is to be abandoned by God the inventor of a cosmic computer.
In His place there is a program that is ceaselessly running in his absence, without anyone's being able to change anything whatever.
To load a program into the computer: this does not mean that the future has been planned down to the last detail, that everything is written ‘up above’.
For example, the program did not specify that in the year 1815 a battle would be fought near Waterloo and that the French would be defeated, but only that man is aggressive by nature, that he is condemned to wage war and that technical progress would make war more and more terrible.
Everything else is without importance from the Creator's point of view, and is only a play of permutations and combinations within a general program which is not a prophetic anticipation of the future but merely sets the limits of possibilities within which all power of decision has been left to chance.
That was the same with the project we call mankind.
The computer did not plan an Agnes or a Paul, but only a prototype known as a human being, giving rise to a large number of specimens which are based on the original model and haven't any individual essence.
Just like a Renault car.
Its essence is deposited outside, in the archives of the central engineering office.
Individual cars differ only in their serial numbers.
The serial number of a human specimen is the face, that accidental and unrepeatable combination of features.
It reflects neither character or soul, nor what we call the self.
The face is only the serial number of a specimen.
She recalled the newcomer who had just declared that she hated hot showers.
She came in order to inform all the women present that (1) she likes saunas to be hot (2) she adores pride (3) she can't  bear modesty (4) she loves cold showers (5) she hates hot showers.
By means of those five strokes, she had drawn her self-portrait; with those five points, she defined her self and presented that self to everyone.
And she didn't present it modestly (she said, after all, that she hated modesty), but belligerently.
She used passionate verbs such as‘adore’ and ‘detest’, as if she wished to proclaim her readiness to fight for every one of those five strokes, for every one of those five points.
Why all this passion?
Agnes asked herself, and she thought: When we thrust out into the world just as we are, we first have to identify with that particular throw of the dice, with that accident organized by the divine computer: to get over our surprise that precisely this (what we see facing us in the mirror) is our self.
Without the faith that our face expresses our self, without that basic illusion, that arch-illusion, we cannot live or at least we cannot take life seriously.
And it isn't enough for us to identify with our self, it is necessary to do so passionately, to the point of life and death.
Because only in this way we regard ourselves not merely as a variant of a human prototype but as a being with its own irreplaceable essence.
That's the reason why the needed not only to draw her self-portrait, but also to make it clear to all that it embodied something unique and irreplaceable, something worth fighting or even dying for.
After spending a quarter of an hour in the heat of the sauna, Agnes rose and took a dip in a small pool filled with ice-cold water.
Then she lay down to rest in the lounge, surrounded by other women who even here never stopped talking.
She wondered what kind of existence the computer programmed after death.
Two possibilities came to mind.
If the computer's field of activity is limited to our planet, and if our fate depends on it alone, then we cannot count on anything after death except some permutation of what we have already experienced in life; we shall again encounter similar landscapes and beings.
Shall we be alone or in a crowd?
Alas, solitude is not very likely, there is so little of it in life, so what can we expect after death!
After all, the dead far outnumber the living!
At best, existence after death would resemble the interlude she was now experiencing while reclining in a deckchair: from all sides, she would hear the continuous babble of female voices.
Eternity as the sound of endless babble: one could of course imagine worse things, but the idea of hearing women's voices forever, continuously, without end, gave her sufficient incentive to cling seriously to life and to do everything in her power to keep death as far away as possible.
But there is a second possibility: beyond our planet's computer, there may be others that are its superior.
Then, indeed, existence will not need to resemble our past life, and a person can die with a vague yet justified hope.
And Agnes imagined a scene that had lately been often on her mind: a stranger comes to visit her.
Likeable, cordial, he sits down in a chair facing her husband and herself and proceeds to converse with them.
Under the magic of the peculiar kindliness radiating from the visitor, Paul is in a good mood, chatty, intimate, and fetches an album of family photographs.
The guest turns the pages and is perplexed by some of the photos.
For example, one of them shows Agnes and Brigitte standing under the Eiffel Tower, and the visitor asks: ‘What is that?’
‘That's Agnes, of course,’ Paul replies.
‘And this is our daughter, Brigitte.’
‘I know that,’ says the guest.
‘I'm asking about this structure.’
Paul looks at him in surprise: ‘Why, that's the Eiffel Tower!’
‘Oh, that's the Eiffel Tower,’ and he says it in the same tone of voice as if you had shown him a portrait of Grandpa, and he had said: ‘So that's your grandfather I've heard so much about.
I'm glad to meet him at last.’
Paul is disconcerted, Agnes much less so.
She knows who the man is.
She knows why he came, and what he was going to ask them about.
That's why she is a bit nervous; she would like to be alone with him, without Paul, and she doesn't quite know how to arrange it.
I write about Agnes, I try to imagine her, I let her sit on a bench in the sauna, walk around Paris, leaf through a magazine, talk with her husband, but the thing that started it all, the gesture of a woman waving to a lifeguard by the side of a pool, it must seem as if I had forgotten that.
Does Agnes any longer wave to anyone in this manner?
No.
Strange as it seems, I believe that she had not done so for many years.
Long ago, when she was very young, yes, in those days she used to wave like that.
At that time she was still living in an Alpine town surrounded by mountain-tops silhouetted in the distance.
She was sixteen and went to the movies with a schoolfriend.
The instant the light went out, he took her hand.
Soon their palms became sticky, but the boy did not dare  let go of the hand he had so daringly grasped, for that would have meant admitting that he was perspiring and ashamed of it.
And so they sat with clammy hands for an hour and a half and let go only when the lights came back on.
He tried to prolong the date, leading her down the streets of the old part of town and then uphill to the courtyard of an old cloister, teeming with tourists.
He obviously had thought out everything in advance, because he led her quite briskly to a deserted passage, under the rather trite pretence that he wanted to show her a certain painting.
They reached the end of the passage, but instead of a picture there was only a dark brown door, marked with the letters WC.
The boy had not noticed the sign and stopped.
She knew perfectly well that he was not very interested in paintings and that he was  looking only for a secluded place where he could kiss her.
Poor boy, he had found nothing better than a dirty corner next to a lavatory!
She burst out laughing, and to make it clear that she wasn't laughing at him she pointed out the sign.
He laughed, too, but he was seized by hopelessness.
It was impossible to hug and kiss her with those letters in the background (all the more, since this was to be their first, and thus an unforgettable, kiss), and so he had no choice but to turn back with a bitter sense of capitulation.
They walked silently, and Agnes was angry.
Why didn't he kiss her quite calmly in the middle of the street?
Why did he have to lead her instead down an obscure passage to a toilet where generations of old and ugly and smelly monks had been relieving themselves?
His embarrassment flattered her, because it was a sign of his bewildered love, but it irritated her even more, because it testified to his immaturity; going with a boy the same age seemed like lowering oneself: she was only interested in older boys.
But perhaps because she was thus secretly rejecting him and yet knew at the same time that he was in love with her, a sense of justice prompted her to help him in amorous efforts, to support him, to rid him of childish embarrassment.
She resolved that if he couldn't find the necessary courage, she would.
He was walking her home, and she planned to throw her arms round him the moment they reached the gate of her house and to kiss him which would no doubt make him stand stock still, completely flabbergasted.
But at the last moment she lost the desire to do so, because his face was not merely sad but forbidding, even hostile.
And so they merely shook hands, and she walked off down the garden path to her door.
She sensed that the boy remained standing motionless, gazing after her.
She felt sorry for him once more; she felt for him the compassion of an older sister, and at that point she did something quite unpremeditated: as she kept on walking, she turned her head back towards him, smiled and lifted her right arm out in the air, easily, flowingly, as if she were tossing a brightly coloured ball.
That instant when Agnes suddenly, without preparation, lifted her arm in a flowing, easy motion was miraculous.
How was it possible that in a single fraction of a second, and for the very first time, she discovered a motion of the arm and body so perfect and polished that it resembled a finished work of art?
In those days, a woman of about forty used to come to see Agnes's father.
She was the departmental secretary, and she would bring papers for him to sign and take other papers back with her.
Even though these visits had no special significance, they were accompanied by mysterious tension (her mother would always turn silent), arousing Agnes's curiosity.
Whenever the secretary was leaving, Agnes ran to the window to watch her inconspicuously.
Once, as she was heading towards the gate (thus walking in the direction opposite to that which Agnes was to take somewhat later, followed by the gaze of her unfortunate schoolfriend), the secretary turned, smiled and lifted her arm out in the air in an unexpected gesture, easy and flowing.
It was an unforgettable moment: the sandy path sparkled in the rays of the sun like a golden stream, and on both sides of the gate jasmine bushes were blooming.
It was as if the upward gesture wished to show this golden piece of earth the direction of flight, while the white jasmine bushes were already beginning to turn into wings.
Father was not visible, but the woman's gesture indicated that he was standing in the doorway of the villa, gazing after her.
That gesture was so unexpected and beautiful that it remained in Agnes's memory like the imprint of a  lightning bolt; it invited her into the depths of space and time and awakened in the sixteen-year-old girl a vague and immense longing.
At the moment when she suddenly needed to say something important to her boy and had no words for it, that gesture came to life and said on her behalf what she herself was unable to say.
I don't know how long she kept using it (or more precisely, how long it kept using her), but surely up to the day when she noticed her sister, younger by eight years, tossing up her arm while saying good-bye to a girlfriend.
When she saw her gesture performed by a sister who had been admiring and imitating her from earliest childhood, she felt a certain unease: the adult gesture did not fit an eleven-year-old child.
But more important, she realized that the gesture was available to all and thus did not really belong to her: when she waved her arm, she was actually committing theft or forgery.
From that time on, she began to avoid that gesture (it is not easy to break the habit of gestures altogether).
She tried to limit herself to the most important ones (to nod ‘yes’ or shake her head ‘no’, to point at an object her companion had failed to see), to use only gestures that did not pretend to be her original expression.
And so it came to be that the bewitching gesture of her father's secretary walking down the golden path (which bewitched me when I saw the woman in the swimsuit take leave of the lifeguard) had completely gone to sleep in her.
And then one day it awoke.
It happened before her mother's death, when she was staying two weeks in the villa with her father.
As she was saying good-bye to him on the last day, she knew that they wouldn't see each other again for a long time.
Her mother wasn't at home, and her father wanted to see her to the car, which was parked in the street.
She forbade him to accompany her beyond the door and walked alone over the golden sand past the flower-beds to the gate.
She had a lump in her throat and an enormous yearning to say something beautiful to her father, something that could not be expressed by words, and so without quite knowing how it happened she suddenly turned her head and with a smile tossed out her arm in the air, easily, flowing, as if to see each other many more times.
An instant later she recalled the forty-year-old lady, who twenty-five years earlier had stood in the same place and had waved at her father in the same way.
That upset and confused her.
It was as if two distant times had suddenly met in a single second and two different women in a single gesture.
The thought passed through her head that those two women might have been the only ones he had ever loved.
In the salon where they were all sitting after dinner over glasses of brandy and half-finished cups of coffee, the first courageous guest rose to his feet and bowed with a smile to the lady of the house.
The others decided to take it as a signal, and along with Paul and Agnes jumped out of their armchairs and hurried to their cars.
Paul drove; Agnes sat next to him and absorbed the incessant movement of traffic, the blinking of the lights, the pointless agitation of a metropolitan night.
And she once again had the strong, peculiar feeling that was coming over her more and more often: the feeling that she had nothing in common with those two-legged creatures with a head on their shoulders and a mouth in their face.
There was a time when she was interested in their politics, their science, their inventions, when she considered herself a small part of the great adventure, until one day the feeling was born in her that she did not belong among them.
That feeling was strange, she resisted it, she knew that it was absurd as well as amoral, but in the end she told herself that she could not command her feelings: she was no longer able to torment herself with thoughts of their wars nor to enjoy their celebrations, because she was filled with the conviction that none of it was her concern.
Does it mean that she is cold-hearted?
No, it had nothing to do with the heart.
Anyway, nobody handed out as much money to beggars as she.
She could never ignore them as she passed them on the street, and they, as if they sensed it, turned to her, picking her out at once from a throng of a hundred other pedestrians as the one who saw and heard them.
Yes, it is true, but I must add the following: even her hand-outs to beggars were based on negation: she gave them money not because beggars, too, belonged to mankind, but because they did not belong to it, because they were excluded from it, and probably like her, felt no solidarity with mankind.
No solidarity with mankind: that was her attitude.
Only one thing could wrench her out of it: concrete love towards a concrete person.
If she truly loved someone, she could not be indifferent to the fate of other people, because her beloved would be dependent on that fate, he would be part of it, and she could no longer feel that mankind's torments, its wars and holidays, were none of her concern.
She was frightened by that last thought.
Was it true that she didn't love anyone?
And what about Paul?
She thought of the moment a few hours earlier, before they had left for dinner, when he had taken her in his arms.
Yes, something was going on inside her: recently, she was pursued by the idea that her love for Paul was merely a matter of will: merely the will to love him; merely the will to have a happy marriage.
If she eased up on this will for just a moment, love would fly away like a bird released from its cage.
It is one o'clock at night: Agnes and Paul are undressing.
If they were asked to describe their partner's motions at such times, they would be embarrassed.
For a long time now, they haven't been looking at each other.
Disconnected, their instrument of memory fails to record anything of those common night-time moments that preceded lying down in the marital bed.
The marital bed: the altar of marriage; and when one says altar, one implies sacrifice.
Here one of them sacrifices for the other: both have trouble falling asleep, and their partner's noisy breath wakes them; so they wriggle towards the edge of the bed, leaving a broad space down the middle; they pretend to be sound asleep, in the hope of making sleep easier for their partner, who will then be able to turn from side to side without disturbing the other.
Unfortunately, the partner does not make use of this opportunity, because he, too (and for the same reason), pretends to be asleep and fears to budge.
Not being able to fall asleep and not allowing oneself to move in the marital bed.
Agnes is stretched out on her back, and images keep passing through her head: that strange, kindly man is visiting them again, the one who knows all about them and yet has not heard of the Eiffel Tower.
She would give anything to be able to talk with him in private, but he deliberately chose a time when both of them were a home.
In vain, Agnes tried to think of a ruse to get Paul out of the house.
The three of them are sitting round a low table with three cups of coffee, and Paul is trying to entertain the visitor.
Agnes is only waiting for the guest to start speaking his reason for coming.
Actually, she knows the reason.
But only she knows, Paul doesn't.
At last, the visitor interrupts Paul's conversation and comes to the point: ‘You, I believe, have guessed where I'm from.’
‘Yes,’ says Agnes.
She knows that the guest has come from another, distant planet, one with an important status in the universe.
And she quickly adds, with a shy smile: ‘Is life better over there?’
The visitor only shrugs: ‘Agnes, surely you know where you are living.’
Agnes says: ‘Perhaps death must exist.
But was there no other way to arrange things?
Is it really necessary for a person to leave a body behind, a body that must be buried in the ground or thrown into a fire?
It's all so horrible!’
‘That's well known all over, that the Earth is horrible,’ says the visitor.
‘And another thing,’ says Agnes.
‘Perhaps you'll consider this question silly: those who live in your place, do they have faces?’
No.
Faces exist nowhere else but here.’
‘So then those who love over there, how do they differ from one another ?’
‘They're all their own creations.
Everybody, so to speak, thinks himself up.
But it's hard to talk about it.
You cannot grasp it.
You will, some day.
I came to tell you that in the next life you won't return to Earth.’
Of course, Agnes knew in advance what the visitor would say to them, and she is hardly surprised.
But Paul is amazed.
He looks at the visitor, looks at Agnes, and she has no choice but to say: ‘And Paul?’
‘Paul won't stay here either,’ says the visitor.
‘I've come to tell you that.
We always tell people we have selected.
I want to ask you only one question: do you want to stay together in your next life, or never meet again?’
Agnes knew the question was coming.
That was the reason she wanted to be alone with the visitor.
She knew that in Paul's presence she would be incapable of saying: ‘I no longer want to be with him.’
She could not say it in front of him, nor he in front of her, even though it is probable that he too would prefer to try living the next life differently, without Agnes.
Yet saying aloud to each other 's face, ‘We don't want to remain together in the next life’ would amount to saying, ‘No love ever existed between us, and no love exists between us now.’
And that's precisely what is so impossible to say aloud, for their entire life together (already over twenty years of life together), has been based on the illusion of love, an illusion which both of them have been anxiously guarding and nurturing.
And so whenever she imagined this scene, she knew that when it came to the visitor's question she would capitulate and declare against her wishes, against her desire: ‘Yes.
Of course.
I want us to be together in the next life.’
But today for the first time she was certain that even in Paul's presence she would find the courage to say what she wanted, what she really wanted, in the depth of her soul; she was certain that she would find this courage even at the price of ruining everything between them.
Next to her she heard the sound of loud breathing.
Paul had really fallen asleep.
as if she were putting the same reel of film back in the projector, she ran through the whole scene once again: she is speaking to the visitor, Paul is watching them with astonishment, and the guest is  saying : ‘In your next life, do you want to stay together or never meet again?’
(It is strange: even though he has all the necessary information about them, terrestrial psychology is incomprehensible to him — the concept of love unfamiliar, so that he cannot guess what a difficult situation he would create by his sincere, practical and well-intended question.)
Agnes gathers all her inner strength and answers in a firm voice: ‘We prefer never to meet again.’
These words are like the click of a door shutting on the illusion of love.
Next month, exclusively in Esquire:
They thought he was an eccentric, a curmudgeon, a man with no time for humanity.
And they were right.
Uncle Dick, a new short story by Paul Theroux.
Real Life
the doctor is sick
He suffers from overload; he aches with frustration; he's starved of resources.
In other words, the system is killing him.
It's midnight in the back streets of the East End, hard rain is sluicing down, and I'm trying to locate the abdo pain's front door.
This medical day started at 8.30 am, with forty-five patients, many with no English, in two surgeries and an antenatal clinic.
This is the fifth home visit, and on-call duty doesn't finish for eight more hours.
Carcinoma, methadone, diabetes, depression, miscarriage and angina have poured down as unremittingly as the weather.
Tonight I'm the rota doctor on call for thirteen thousand people, all potential patients, and the strain is beginning to produce its familiar bi-temporal headache.
There it is at last, a dimly lit porch, the number twenty-one just visible.
Bent double, nipping to the car boot to get the drug bag, I see the car's rear window has been bashed in; broken glass shards cover the rear seat.
Five minutes spent at the Health Centre looking at the patient's notes, and someone has removed my medical bag with all my portable diagnostic equipment inside it.
The Sikh pattern-cutter's abdomen is examined with a distinctly shaky hand that tries to elicit the signs of a possible perforated ulcer as his family of six stare on with fixed incomprehension.
There are previous laparotomy scars, and a certain amount of overacting going on too.
Still, he'd better go into hospital.
One of his daughters takes me to borrow the telephone of a surly neighbour, who insists I pay for the call.
The hospital telephonist eventually gets hold of the surgical registrar.
He's keeping his last remaining beds for acute admissions and asks, not unreasonably, for the patient's blood pressure.
‘Can't help you I'm afraid.
I've just had my sphygmomanometer stolen.’
If there is a last straw, this is it.
The newly opted-out hospital trust is trying to close Casualty and is running down the wards of the Mile End branch of the Royal London Hospital, which has been serving the East End well since 1858.
Waiting lists are longer than ever; yet the day-surgery wards designed to cut them have been padlocked until the end of the financial year.
Prolonged NHS under-funding causes daily problems, and GPs have had the worst year most of us can remember, trying diligently to make some sense of their government-imposed contracts.
Versatility is all very well, but we are now expected to be accountants, personnel managers and lawyers as well as dermatologists, psychiatrists, obstetricians and general physicians.
And the prospect of yet another massive reorganization of the NHS has made April 1, 1991 a date in very poor taste.
The morale of British doctors is severely eroded, particularly in general practice, which throughout the Eighties, was expansive, innovatory and, increasingly, the most popular career choice for newly qualified young doctors.
All this is grim enough.
But stealing the  tools of your trade when you are out in the middle of the night is macabre.
I drive home, the rain pelting through the window, depressed and angry; musing on what other professional would be doing emergency night-work without uniform, driver, radio or specialist vehicle.
And be expected to do a full day's work the next day?
Yet I know the hours of the junior hospital doctors are even worse.
In the space of four weeks, not only has the car been broken into, but the Health Centre has been robbed of computer hardware for our new cardiovascular screening programme, I have been threatened with violence in my consulting-room for refusing to prescribe opiates and my home has been burgled at 5.00 am by a seventeen-year-old wielding a club hammer.
Small beer to the police, but it makes you feel a fraction unwanted.
At breakfast my seven-year-old daughter enquires, quite seriously: ‘Daddy, do you like being a doctor?’
Slightly shocked, I hear myself say, ‘No’.
Since Aesculapius, doctors have enjoyed complaining.
About the hours, the stress, the inadequate resources, the  incomprehending bureaucrats and, most of all, about the incessant and insatiable demands of patients.
Occasionally there have been eruptions, most famously when mass pressure by GPs forced the 1966 reforms in primary care — the first substantial public investment into what had been the backwater of general practice.
More recently, junior hospital doctors took to the streets over their appallingly long hours, up to ninety in a single week.
In general, through, postwar morale among British doctors has been high.
We don't earn much by international standards, conditions of work are arduous, and chronic underfunding often makes them more so.
It is seldom possible, however many hours worked, to provide the quality of care we have been trained to deliver, except at the expense of the non-acute patients on the ever-extending waiting-lists.
The paradox exemplified: next day, I'm at Mile End Hospital with a patient who arrived with a pleural effusion, desperately short of breath, the previous night.
Lucy Wedderburn, the young medical registrar, has been up all night inserting drains and carefully drawing out bloodstained fluid, and she's still on duty, witty and vivacious through the exhaustion.
She finds time to sit down with the patient before she's wheeled off to X-Ray, explaining exactly how the lung will be sealed off, that pain is inevitable and how it will be controlled.
She then shows me the various x-rays, and we discuss the discharge arrangements.
There is real gratitude in the eyes of the lady whose life has probably been saved that night.
But Wedderburn is less thankful.
Over coffee and NHS apple crumble in the staff canteen, watching the West Indian cooks quietly stir the carbohydrates, she describes the staff's attitude to the opted-out hospital trust as ‘bitter indifference’.
‘A lot of people are just worried about having a j
The new head of the hospital trust is an avuncular ex-admiral brimming with ill-justified optimism, who told his first meeting with bewildered staff that ‘there was a lot in common between the NHS and the Navy’.
‘Sinking ships?’
Dr Wedderburn suggests as she dashes off the answer her bleep.
On my way out, I pass sealed-off wards, under-used equipment and dingy staff accommodation, the shameful — because unnecessary — stigmata of the Nineties NHS.
This hospital is being forced to transfer its acute services to its overcrowded sister-hospital in Whitechapel because of underfinancing.
But, ironically, it has recently opened a wing for old people, one of the most modern in Europe.
Unfortunately, instead of being integrated in a general hospital as planned, the wing will now be left high and dry.
There is a state-of-the-art cardiac resuscitation unit, much better than the one on the general medical wards.
But most of the patients' notes are marked ‘Not for Resus’!
We went through all this in the late-Seventies with Bethnal Green Hospital — a much-loved general hospital that was first geriatrified and then closed completely.
It used to provide a first-rate local casualty service and routine operating sessions that, especially in hip replacement, really sliced through the waiting lists.
The campaign waged by both public and hospital staff  was one of the biggest in east London's political history: over seven hundred people at the York Hall, the old boxing venue, twenty thousand signed petitions, a two-hour protest strike and the first-ever hospital work-in, which kept the hospital running for a month and treated eleven hundred emergencies after its official date of closure.
In the eventual settlement, fine promises were made about equivalent facilities' becoming available at Mile End Hospital.
And about geriatrics never again being isolated from general medicine and surgery.
But now they're doing the whole thing all over again.
Would you buy a used
It's the patients who suffer, stranded on the waiting-lists, nursing their pain and their justified anxiety till they get to see the specialist.
Inevitably, some will have diseases that go undiagnosed and therefore untreated.
The culprit is not, on the whole, inefficiency, indolence or excessive private work by hospital consultants.
Indeed, small miracles have been achieved in improving efficiency, shortening in-patient stay and improving facilities for day-surgery.
The problem is that we as a nation continue to expect a clinical quart out of an economic pint.
By all valid international comparisons, the NHS is under-funded by at least two per cent of gross national product.
Medicine is highly labour-intensive, and the NHS does not have the money to hold its own with the sheer weight of clinical traffic at present, let alone cope as the population gets older, the drug costs escalate and research brings exciting but expensive new treatments.
This prolonged under-funding strikes the GP most dramatically when he tries to admit an acutely ill patient.
The London Emergency Bed Service reports that this winter things have been four times as hard as last year, and my experience confirms this.
For six months I looked after a valiant clerical worker with cancer of the colon, which had spread to her liver before her condition was diagnosed.
When she became too ill and breathless to come to the surgery, I visited her once a week.
She was single, had no close relatives and didn't want the neighbours to know the diagnosis.
Her massively enlarged liver splinted her diaphragm, making her permanently breathless, and pressed on to her abdominal veins so that her legs became horribly swollen.
Yet despite the pain and dyspnoea, she would fuss over me and make tea for me with her best crockery.
For a long time, she managed to keep up her little flat herself, maintaining careful arrangements of dried flowers, folding newspapers into tidy piles, even sewing a teddy bear for a local charity raffle.
But in the final weeks she began to fall, and I organized a home help and district nurse.
I put her name down for the local hospice without her permission, because although she defiantly insisted she didn't want anything to do with it, I thought things might change as she deteriorated.
When I was finally called one wintry Monday by the neighbours, she looked quite dreadful; her faced was bruised from several falls the previous night, she was struggling for her breath, her legs and thighs were painful and very swollen.
She was incoherent and incapable of unassisted movement.
I heard myself saying the line that had been waiting ready for months: ‘I think the time has come when you must go in.’
She nodded.
It then took me an hour as she lay there sobbing to find her a bed.
She was nowhere near the top of the hospice waiting-list (a bed was finally offered six days after her death).
The general wards were packed with acute cases and, although I received a sympathetic ear, no one really wanted to know.
Eventually, I found a young hospital registrar who said, not entirely as a joke: ‘I expect we'll find a cupboard for her’.
As I hung on the phone, I ingested the  sad evidence of a service which, although well-intentioned, simply hadn't coped.
The promised home help hadn't turned up despite several letters, and there'd been no sign of the district nurse over the weekend.
The normally immaculate room was a dirty mess, and pus was oozing through a leg ulceration into a bandage that looked several days old.
I couldn't be certain how much painkilling medication she had taken, but it was almost certainly not enough.
The neighbours, once in the picture, were kindness itself — though the woman who had rung me, standing smoking on the steps, shouted after me: ‘Took your bloody time, didn't you.’
Next day, as soon as I'd finished giving a police statement about a drug addict who had threatened me and attempted to steal syringes and prescriptions, I went to see her in hospital.
The ward packed with seriously ill patients was in a state of controlled pandemonium.
I eventually tracked down the ward sister, who was wrestling with an intravenous drip that had collapsed.
The nurses seemed overwhelmed, and when I did find one with a moment to spare, she told me my patient had died half an hour earlier.
Her body had already been removed.
‘We need the space, I'm afraid.’
I wanted to ask if she had died peacefully, whether they had used a syringe driver, if there'd been anyone to comfort her.
I refrained because the evidence suggested the answers would all be negative.
The last dying patient I'd been to visit in this hospital had been the caretaker of our Health Centre, in much pain from a carcinoma of the pancreas.
Normally the mildest of men, Frank had said: ‘I'd like some of those bastards who say the NHS is safe in their hands to spend a night in here.
Two lasses looking after thirty surgical patients with two admissions on top.’
I have very little confidence in the ‘reforms’ being introduced with such a fanfare this month.
Rather than eliminating NHS under-funding and the resulting problems, I think they will increase the bureaucracy, without any guarantee of better patient-care.
And I don't believe it provides a strategy for getting to grips with the underlying causes of ill-health.
In London's East End, people, especially the elderly, are often ill-fed, ill-housed and ill-clad, as well as being plain ill.
These are the people who missed out on the Eighties' boom and who are now being hit hardest by the recession.
How can they hope their asthma will get better in a draughty, poorly insulated flat?
What price the ‘efficiency savings’ made by day-surgery and early discharge when the patient leaves hospital with barely controlled pain and becomes infected, or simply can't cope at home and requires re-admission?
What do I say when I visit an old Cockney lady with a fractured leg who has been sent home because the orthopaedic surgeons need her bed for the daily influx of trauma, but who can't stand unaided and who lives alone?
Increase her painkillers to a dangerous level, make do with the district nurses and hope she doesn't fall again, which is, in fact, her best chance to get back in hospital!
The ambulance service in London does an outstanding and poorly rewarded job under horrendous pressure.
And sometimes it lets you down.
A note is pushed under the surgery door: ‘Mr and Mrs Frederick Saposnik.
Cramps top leg.
Fainted.
Just had heart trouble.
Job to breathe.
Enard House’.
I hurry round.
Mr Saposnik's dying; Mrs S offers tea.
Despite two coronary bypasses, he's now strangled with anoxic pain, face grey, clutching his throat.
We wait for the ambulance, window open so they can identify us, doilies neatly heaped on yellowing copies of the local paper, the cat perturbed by my frantic resuscitation efforts.
‘Come,’ she used to say, ‘as long as you don't think he's wasting your time.’
That reflex is an old one, prepared to make a tactical retreat, but also courtesy.
To advance with charm or a curse.
He is dead now.
The ambulance is late.
I try to comfort Mrs S, while ringing with the other hand to cancel the 999.
Somebody else will need it.
Despite the planners, people are people and fiercely loyal to their hospitals.
Mr Morris, an ex-docker with a waggish humour, is one such.
‘Wotcha got this hammer for then?’ he says.
‘It's not, it's a stethoscope.
How's your chest?’
‘Sounds like someone's playing the flute down there at night.
If I go in, I want to go to Bethnal Green Hospital.’
‘Well you can't, you know — it's for older people now.’
His wife was an orderly there when it was still a general hospital.
She knows from inside the sadness of a hospital closure.
Later his wife calls.
‘Quick.
Now put your coat on and come quick.
He's faintified and sickified.’
He's cyanosed, hyperventilating; pneumonia with a possible infarct.
‘It's a bit dicky, like.
Could you give it a once-over?
Maybe I'll go in.
Just don't make me a geriatric case, Doc.’
I spend a long time with the Emergency Bed Service on the neighbour's phone.
They can't get hold of the medical referee.
‘No beds anywhere tonight, sir.’
The ‘sir’ is supposed to make me feel better.
He eventually dies in the ambulance, on the way to a hospital that isn't closed.
And so it goes on.
Punks with their dogs piss in the waiting-room and ask for money.
Saul the furrier is depressed again.
When he's depressed, he stutters.
‘I think it's a sin to answer a doctor back,’ he says, because he's angry and wants to shout at me, at anyone.
But can't.
I tell him that in a depression, manners are the first casualties.
His liver is enormous, and his liver-function tests will be sky-high.
I go to see his wife the next day.
She confides, ‘He gets a few drinks and wants to wipe everybody out.’
‘Well, how do you feel?’
I enquire.
‘When you feel happy you can share happiness, but we never are.
I tell you straight it's useless.
Pills — what are they supposed to do?’
The last visit of the day is to Mr Mercer who has myeloma: ‘It's a disease I can recommend to anyone,’ he jokes.
‘He's the kind that won't give in,’ says his wife.
He takes his terminal care in the pub: ‘Can you make that a large one, Ben, the other one went too quickly.’
He dies on Christmas Eve, and they don't come for the body till the day after Boxing Day.
Some weeks later, I receive a note of thanks along with an engraved beermug.
Home visit: chances are many of Widgery's elderly patients, once hospitalized, will be marked ‘Not for Resuscitation’
All in a day's work: since Aesculapius, doctors have enjoyed complaining.
About the hours, the stress, the resources, the bureaucrats and, most of all, about the incessant and insatiable demands of patients
Desolation row: Despite a concerted public campaign, the Bethnal Green Hospital (opposite) was geriatrified, then closed.
House-call (above): fear and loathing haunt a Hackney estate.
Resource Book
the tie
The art and anatomy of men's clothing
The choice of a tie will not make a dullard shine at work or help him get the girl of his dreams.
But don't underestimate the impact of the sartorial noose that hangs around your neck.
A wise man will always invest in silk, except in the rare circumstances where cotton or wool will do.
Before buying a tie, hold it up by the skinny end, like a fish.
If it is cut crosswise, across the bias of the cloth, which gives fluidity and firmness it will hang straight.
Purists might also check that the lock-stitch at the skinny end is hand-drawn for elasticity and strength and that the keeper-bar, which crosses the tie at its widest point, has also been stitched by hand.
As a rule, a striped tie should never be worn with a striped shirt, although Paul Smith frequently breaks that one with gusto.
And wider ties look better against the simplicity of a crisp white shirt.
Public schools have had hundreds of years to monopolize the best combinations of stripes, and T M Lewin & Sons will happily sell you anything you request by name — that you know what to ask for usually being deemed proof enough that you are entitled to it.
Colour is, of course, crucial.
Yellow sits on the fence between the powerful punches of red and true-blue; curiously, green ties are often associated with failure.
Most popular among the rich is the Hermès tie, in any of its myriad minuscule equestrian patternings.
It is a mark that one has arrived.
Fashion designers who include ties in their offerings (as opposed to tie designers like Turnbull & Asser) should be treated with caution.
Ties emblazoned with designer logos can spell a lot of money and a lack of confidence in one's own taste.
In 1939, Esquire told readers that ties should be ‘conservative, muted, an object lesson in restraint’.
It's a dictum that largely holds true today, except, of course, for the Pucci tie.
Whirligigs of bubblegum-pink and fuchsia, mauve, lime and café au lait look even more fun now than they did back in the Sixties — when men last loved them.
Marion Hume    
T M LEWIN & SONS Trustworthy deep stripes for the old Rugbeian, £17.50
MULBERRY The optimist's tie.
Summer's approach spelt out in a breezy spin on Paisley.
VALENTINO For the rogue within the establishment.
The print is wild, but the colours stay same.
Silk twill, £49.50
T M LEWIN & SONS The tie for that elder-statesman's occasion.
Silvered with silver on heavy woven silk, £24
YOHJI YAMAMOTO The fashion-speak tie.
Needs care to wear without looking like a nerd, unless one is Japanese.
Madras-checked silk, £60
Know your tie: what's where and why
Looped label with designer's logo
Outer shell
Hand-stitched keeper-bar
Interlining for shape
Rolled edge
Tipping, the second lining
Hemming or margin
The two shells of the tie are stitched together
HILDITCH & KEY Penny polka dots for the conservative in flamboyant mood.
Silk twill, £34.95
HERMES Looks fun, spells power.
The only joke-tie grown men should play with, £55
MOSCHINO For the boy in the man.
Safe background and tacky graphics.
The office-party tie.
In figured silk, £32.50
ERMENEGILDO ZEGNA The drinker's tie resonates favourably with the floral wallpaper of the watering-hole, £42.50
T M LEWIN & SONS Old School — the Marlborian navy, claret and slim-white stripe.
Heavy woven silk, £17.50
SALVATORE FERRAGAMO The refined gambler's tie, patterned in greyhounds on a daring tangerine ground.
Silk twill, £48
GIANFRANCO FERRE The arriviste's tie, complete with baroque coat-of-arms for the nouveau landowner.
Silk, £42.50
KENZO The bond-dealer's tie.
Traditional Paisley with a gutsy edge, £32.50
TURNBULL & ASSER The comeback tie.
Whirligig psychedelia from the heart of the establishment.
Heavy silk twill, £40
HILDITCH & KEY An avenger among ties.
A bold Sixties-style graphic for the brave.
Silk satin, £24.95
TURNBULL & ASSER A salesman's tie — but would you trust a man in canary yellow?
Silk twill, £40
T M LEWIN & SONS The convivial powder-blue, gold-and-amber Old Wellingtonian's tie.
Heavy woven silk, £17.50
T M LEWIN & SONS A monarch among ties.
Graphic black-and-silver dog-tooth in Duke of Windsor style, £24
PAUL SMITH For the modern medallion man, or those who trust Smith's taste implicitly.
A brave boardroom choice in silk twill, £39
T M LEWIN & SONS The double-dealer's club tie.
Hermès-style snaffle pattern without the price tag, £17.50
MULBERRY For the traditionalist, a palatable Paisley.
Silk twill, £45
MICHELSON'S FOR HARRODS The polka-dot standard in monochrome.
Silk crêpe de chine, £23.50
KENZO For the sensitive soul from a good school.
Old Boy stripes meet the flower bed, £39.95
PUCCI For those too young to remember them last time, or those too eccentric to care.
In silk twill, £45
HARRODS Sights of the Seventies, muted blow-up polka dots on a spot-woven ground, £35
YVES SAINT LAURENT The talking-head tie for the left-of-centre aesthete.
For Malcolm Bradbury or RSC directors, £45
TURNBULL & ASSER Dee-groovy — random graphic spots on respectable navy, £35
ERMENEGILDO ZEGNA The early-riser's tie, with the freshness of those best in the morning, £42.50
Dispatches
apocalypse now now
In South Africa, only mad dogs and security guards go out in the last white summer
In the car park of Johannesburg's giant Roodepoort Hyperama, around eight every Tuesday night, under the brilliant powder of the southern stars, you can hear music…big dog music…nocturnal mastiff choirs.
The dogs are excited, and they give voice to their exuberance.
But these are dogs in training: they come to heel; they do not attack indiscriminately; but they can barely wait for the big bite.
And so they bark.
Out there, in the darkness, it is clear that these hounds have friends, sisters, cousins, uncles.
All over the suburb of Roosevelt, from its hills and valleys, the dogs of the neighbourhood add their voices.
The world is barking mad.
All the dogs in the backyards and all the dogs in the gardens of this  pleasant white suburb, all the dogs patrolling factories and shops, join their brothers and sisters in the hypermarket car park, until you begin to believe there must be more dogs here that in all of England.
Roodepoort of Hyperama's car park is an arena — there are others, if you know where to look — in which are played out the sad, savage realities of modern South Africa.
Fear is the key, and it takes many forms.
There is no audience tonight; just owners, trainers, biters and the bitten.
Tonight, Mr Sherwood of the Sherwood Forest dog-training centre is working his attack group.
The owners — all white — hang on to his every word, and to their dogs.
Three bored black men sit in the back of a mini-van.
What is notable about them is not that they are black, but that they do not have dogs.
Roodepoort Hyperama may not look like the sort of place where white South Africa bares its heart.
But you'd be surprised.
The yellow lights on their anorexic columns look mad, like cyclopean triffids, very thin, very tall.
But they are one example of white South Africa's debt to Soweto.
The township got electric light a few years ago, yet for as long as anyone could remember power-station cooling stacks had blasted out steam day and night; the power went to white Johannesburg a few miles down the road.
No one thought it odd, just the way things were in the ‘old’ South Africa.
Today, Soweto has lights — so you can see who is mugging you, the locals like to observe.
And the lights — you guessed it — sit high on anorexic columns where they can't be stoned.
So in the Hyperama car park, part of the ‘new’ South Africa, they're taking another leaf from the Sowetan book of the dead.
Now it's target time.
And that is where the three bored blacks came in.
They have been sitting in the back of the mini-van, swapping football scores and smoking cigarettes.
In fact these are not really black guys at all.
These are meals on heels, moving targets, room service.
They are well-known to the dog owners.
‘Hullo Brian, welcome back.’
Brian doesn't reply.
He is putting on his protection, a long mitt made of sacking up to his elbow.
All three put on their arms.
They pick up sticks.
‘Brian,’ Mr Sherwood calls, ‘they're talking to you.’
Brian grins and waves his stick.
He doesn't exactly say; he's pleased to be back.
‘Peter, shut up!’ commands the owner of the overweight Rottweiler.
Peter doesn't listen, but goes on lifting his big, heavy head, trying to swallow the moon.
‘Praise your dog!’
Mr Sherwood commands.
Everyone so enjoined slaps his dog around the ears, and they all seem to enjoy it.
Stephanie comes forward and lies on the ground.
Under the harsh highlights, she  looks like a road-crash victim, stretched out on the tarmac, blonde hair fanning around her.
‘Moan like you're in pain,’ Mr Sherwood directs.
Stephanie does a very big number.
Her cries of distress reach across the car park.
Jody, her German Shepherd, goes wonderfully mad.
Brian and his friends advance on the fallen woman.
Mr Sherwood, also wearing an arm, joins the three others.
They raise their sticks.
They are no longer three black men and a dog-trainer.
They are rapists, burglars, muggers — what all the dogs, guns, armed-response patrols, high walls, razor wire and electrified fencing are all about.
They are, quite simply, ‘the terror’ that stalks white South Africa's beautiful suburbs.
Jody the German Shepherd is very, very good.
She attacks, but never lets herself be drawn too far away from the recumbent, moaning body of her mistress.
She forms a protective snarling circle.
Mr Sherwood is pleased.
‘Praise your dog,’ he tells Stephanie.
She dusts herself off and rejoins the group.
People get dogs all wrong, says Mr Sherwood.
For a start, there are these libels about violent Rottweilers.
In South Africa, you might think just about everyone owns a Rottweiler — especially if you read the small ads in the papers, where owners lament their loss and sign themselves ‘Devastated Rotty Lover’.
In fact, the most popular dog continues to be the German Shepherd, with the Dobermann a perennial favourite and the Staffordshire Bull Terrier enjoying a surge of support among white householders in search of a bigger bite.
The trouble with Rottweilers, Mr Sherwood  maintains, is that people simply don't understand them.
For instance, a householder choosing a Rottweiler will usually pick a male — a bad mistake, because Rottweiler males are quite incapable of taking orders from women.
They are canine chauvinists.
Mr Sherwood teachers prospective Rotty lovers to go for a female.
More amenable.
Then there is the cute puppy syndrome.
Buyers often choose the most go-ahead pup in a litter.
Choose the strong dog in a pack, then fail to discipline it properly, and you're asking for trouble.
The dog decides it had better police this family itself, and, next thing you know, it is fastening its jaws on disobedient members of the family, its family.
A top dog always wants to be top dog.
Contrary to distant impressions, keeping ferocious dogs is not exactly novel in South Africa.
The only element that may be called modern, or contemporary, is the training, the direction, the motive.
Everyone took out protection before.
They lay in bed and worried about the children, the silver, their daughters and themselves.
Everyone kept dogs and guns.
But the fear was not focused, nor was it terminal.
Now, increasingly, there is a feeling that things are hopelessly out of control.
A sense of an ending, a millenarian impulse perhaps, a fear that the Last Days are coming.
Now, it seems, with apartheid laws dying daily, things are getting worse.
And all shades of white opinion turn a little paler.
Sit with a right-wing, black-bashing, neo-fascist in a little pub in that great, arid and beautiful semi-desert, the Karoo, a kind of South African outback, and you will be told loudly and often that the blacks are getting ready to rise.
Hundreds and thousands of white will die.
It will be the old Boer v Black wars again.
Thousands will leave their shacks in Soweto and march on Johannesburg, massacring all before them, seizing babies and dashing their heads against the kerbstones.
I had this from a bible student named Johan, one of the new doom-mongers, who believes in apocalypse, not ‘now’ but ‘now-now’, as South Africans say, meaning pretty damn soon.
Many South Africans deny this.
They even get angry and suggest these are lies put about by foreigners who do not understand how deeply attuned they are to Mother Africa.
Alas, Mother Africa has always had pretty indifferent maternal instincts.
She sees her children die and makes more.
She is not given to grieving.
Fifteen thousand people were murdered in South Africa last year.
The removal of old-style apartheid and the beginnings of a democratic society have brought more bloodshed than ever.
But it is not political any longer; it's just that more people seem  to be doing damage to more people, especially old people, single people, those who live alone.
In a word, unarmed people.
It is a kind of bloody democracy.
It is the random nature of the violence that so terrorizes whites.
A man driving down a country road is stopped, and a spike is driven into his head.
He somehow continues his journey to the next town and dies in somebody's arms.
Who did it and why?
No one knows.
But it keeps the gun shops happy.
A locally admired civil servant, known to be gay, is murdered in his home, and the killers flee without their trousers.
The police are baffled.
Three trouserless murderers fleeing through the night in a quite Cape Town suburb?
Everyone registers the terror in his own way.
A leading publisher, Hugh Murray, has trouble deciding what scares him most.
‘You go to a dinner party and find that three of the guests have had an elderly parent murdered.’
Or, if he really wants to worry aloud, he recalls the time not long ago when he woke one morning to find a black man looming over him in his bedroom carrying most of the clothes from wardrobe in one hand and the family carving knife in the other.
‘And I've got just about the best security around,’ he says.
Back in the old days, in the Fifties, before the nights of car-park-training, people kept big dogs, with names like Nero and Saladin, Sakkie and Doris; dogs that roamed the sandy ex-Servicemen's estate where I grew up, on the edge of Johannesburg, a jumble of sandy streets named after English kings and queens.
Those dogs bit the neighbours, the dustbin men, visiting aunts and each other.
We kept them because of the burglars.
Our fathers, who had just been demobbed, struggled to build
The burglars lived in the bluegums at the bottom of the estate.
They were rumoured to wait until dark and them to cross into the white suburb and steal wallets from trousers draped across bedroom chairs while their white owners slept.
They used fishing rods and hooks, those cunning, black, nocturnal anglers, and they were blamed for the disappearance of booze from liquor cabinets and sugar from pantries.
Our fathers slept with their Browning Army-issue pistols beside them and sometimes rushed into the starry African night, blazing away at burglars we never saw.
But presumably they ran back to the bluegums, carrying in one arm a pair of trousers and in the other a fishing rod.
Such images emblazoned on the African night!
Most houses had their windows barred as standard; wealthier householders went in for burglar alarms.
Dinner parties were given over to discussion of the choices before customers.
Did you buy Tarson or Pluto of Reveille?
Johannesburg was the burglar-alarm capital of the world.
What did you do when you shot a black man running down the road?
The answer, passed onto folklore, was you dragged him back into your garden before you called the police.
That way you were covered, legally; he was dead, and the police were happy.
Now, the fearful buy their guns from guys like John, who has his own shop and also helps out at a suburban shooting school, the Academy of Marksmanship…
‘No hip shooting!
No tracer ammunition!’
A high-tech place with a video shooting-range.
Moving targets and this month's specials are advertised on the board as you enter: ‘A Beretta ten-gauge and a six-shot pump action…
’ And ‘Gun Hire’this week is toting a nice Parabellum.
John practises what he preaches.
He carries a gun everywhere.
‘Even on my lap between traffic lights…
’ Up near Alexandra township, bordering on a swish white suburb, there have been seventeen hijackings recently.
Hapless drivers draw up at the lights and are yanked from their cars at knife-point.
Just another form of the takeaway service some blacks are going in for these days.
They don't plan to stand around while Mandela makes up his mind about what they are going to get.
‘Question is not if I shoot someone, but when I shoot someone,’ says John.
He tells me, though, that he dreads the day, and I believe him.
John rests his not-inconsiderable front on the glass counter of the gun display which offers a nice little Derringer for the wife, or a thirty-eight special.
‘A lot of ladies carry them, in their handbags.’
John is a man heavy with fatalism: ‘I work with guns and live with fear every day of my life.’
The real attraction for the gun-hungry attackers, John observes acutely, is the gun itself.
‘They don't want you.
It's the weapon they want, and if they have to take you out to get it, what's to lose?
Nothing.’
They're teaching them to pull the trigger at the Academy of Marksmanship.
The beginners, in their red-and-yellow ear protectors, are a mixed lot, truly a sign of the new South Africa.
Though most are white, there is a sprinkling of blacks, Indians and ‘mixed race’ or coloureds.
There are figures to shoot on the screen, and the hits light up like splashes of gold.
The targets are black men with superimposed concentric circles declining to a solid, black bullseye.
A kind of lethal darts.
It's democratic.
The instructors walk around with weapons on their belts and constantly remind their pupils to don their ear protectors.
Two men share a single chair, their arms around each other.
Political liberation conveys a degree of sexual freedom.
They are being trained in the use of the twenty-two calibre revolver.
There is a small difficulty.
One of the instructors, Douglas, warns: ‘Locally manufactured twenty-two rounds have a failing.
The don't always go off.
The manufacturers have been alerted and they're working on the problem.’
It is, as you can imagine, a serious problem.
You've taken your certificate of competence, you can blow holes in the intruder with calm accuracy.
You lift your weapon, and nothing happens.
This is not the time to think of demanding your money back.
‘Best buy the imported rounds,’ Douglas advises.
‘Work every time.’
You don't need to be trained to get a gun licence.
But just because you don't need a certificate of competence doesn't mean you'll get a licence even if you have one.
It is, needless to say, a question of colour.
The new South Africa is not that new.
The government shares John's concern about the number of guns in nervous hands.
‘So it came up with the idea of an amnesty on illegal weapons.’
John raises sceptical eyes to the bomb-display board on the wall over our heads.
A common sight in public places, it teaches South Africans to recognize limpet mines.
‘What happened?
A lot of people started handing in pellet guns and antique muzzle-loaders they've been keeping for years without a licence.
But they're not the trouble.
Most of the illegal guns are not being bought over the counter, or stolen.
What about the heavy stuff coming in from up north?
From the borders?
I've seen a guy toting an AK-47.
With my own eyes!
Just three blocks from Alexandra township.
You can be sure  those guys won't be toddling down tot he police with their weapons.’
Far more than incipient political change, it is the random violence that makes for the sense of dread among whites.
That is what stokes their desire to flee (if only the damned rand were not so low, and the idea of settling in Ealing so bloody depressing); what scares the living daylights out of the lovely green suburbs.
So what is to be done?
Well, fine, you've got your dog trained in close-attack work; a female Rottweiler, number three in the litter, no top dogs for you.
And you've taught her not to savage the children.
Stephanie advises letting her lie on your tummy when you're pregnant and listen to the life within.
You've bought your own twenty-two, or hired a Parabellum, and you're using only imported rounds.
You've taken the full course at the Academy of Marksmanship.
You know when and how and whom to shoot.
The women in the house are all toting thirty-eights in their Gucci bags.
You've also built a big wall around your house.
Johannesburg is the wall-building capital of the world.
There are white walls, straight walls, curved walls; crenellated, spiked or studded; with portholes and peepholes; with grills, bars, gates.
And along the top of the wall where once, back in the peaceful times, you set pieces of broken glass, you now run razor wire, each tine designed for maximum snag.
The tines are erect, almost beautiful, along the neck of the beautiful walls; short, murderous hairs bristling along the nape of your fortress.
Publisher Hugh Murray graphically illustrates the sort of thing you can still expect when you arrive home and take refuge behind the walls.
Once you are inside, no one can hear you scream.
More and more people in South Africa want to go where they can't hear the screaming.
But what if it is your screaming?
‘This lady is fetching her kids from school.
She opens the electronic gates and drives into her home.
Closes the gates.
And there is this guy waiting for her
So you sign up with one of the many armed and mobile security patrols that operate in the white suburbs.
You can try Magnum Security, or Top ‘Em or Rent-A-Guard, Abe's Alsatian Patrols of Sandton Sentries.
You could do worse than to sign up with Armed Response, which looks after thousands of homes in middle-class Johannesburg North, a rich hunting-ground that Gary Whittaker, a director of Armed Response, calls ‘the captured area’.
Armed Response is doing wonderful business these days in the captured area.
‘Hullo, angel child!’ says a buxom blonde to a thin youth who looks like he's in training to become a sales manager.
Behind the desk, the receptionist appears to have had a late night.
I guess the folks at Armed Response never sleep.
This is a twenty-four hour service.
The armed guards who ride the patrol vans day and night, a kind of AA service with guns, are dressed in black-and-yellow uniforms and wear black, rubber police boots.
They carry pistols, handcuffs, batons and gas-spray guns.
The gas is not intended for human consumption — but to deter the angry dogs not trained to tell the difference between a burglar and a saviour.
Having failed to deter the murderer or rapist, these dogs are often eager for a second bite of the cherry.
The Armed Response guys are ready for them.
‘You get sent to investigate,’ says Gray Whittaker happily.
‘You bale over the wall.
You say hello to the Rottweiler.’
He extends a finger —
All the mobile guns working for Armed Response are white.
‘Every single person is finger-printed,’ Mr Whittaker explains.
‘And we pay better than the police.’
Looking at the guards in their bumble-bee uniforms and at their guns, I don't know what they do to the burglars, but they scare the hell out of me.
If things continue at this rate of terror, the white population of South Africa will one day divide into those cowering behind tall walls and those driving mobile-response vehicles.
Whittaker is dismissive of con men climbing on the bandwagon.
‘This business of full of camels.
So-called security.
Blasé individuals.
Put in a big alarm.
Goes off.
Police don't respond.’
Armed Response does things properly.
It is going great guns with special lines, the Fortress Alarm and the upgraded, fancy number, the Citadel.
Mr Whittaker will wire up your place to one of his alarms.
He'll fit you with the latest in Japanese-made static infra-red detectors.
His talk is all of pre-programmed key pads, panic buttons and radio relays.
Mr Whittaker is keen to emphasize that the rising crime rate is not really a racial affair.
It is a first-world v third-world thing.
When the economy is bad and unemployment high, crime is rife.
As residential restrictions on blacks buying houses in white areas are relaxed, he is beginning to pick up black clients just as anxious as their white neighbours to escape the dark forces prowling the streets.
This has led to embarrassing moments among his pure-white mobile guard force.
Mr Whittaker warns his men not to assume that the black who answers the door of a heavily guarded fortress  is the maid.
‘I had a guy knock on the door and ask: ‘Is the madam in?
Only to be told ‘I am the madam’!’
I talked to Whittaker almost a year to the day after Nelson Mandela had been released from his Cape prison.
His offices are on Hendrik Verwoerd Drive.
Oh, the happy ironies of South African life, the unconscious poetry of its names!
When Dr Verwoerd, the ayatollah of apartheid, ruled, South Africa was a policed desert where dissent seldom flourished, and the hangman was very busy indeed.
Mandela was in jail forever, and God was in His Heaven.
The year since Mandela was freed may have been pretty interesting politically; but for the Armed Response boys, it has been an absolute ball.
‘Since our friend from Robben Island was released, the alarm industry has popped!’
But if all the dogs and guns and mobile-response patrols cannot guarantee your safety, where do you go?
The answer, for numbers of whites, is to move lock, stock and Rottweiler into something called ‘cluster housing’.
If, as Le Corbusier suggested, a house is a machine for living in, cluster housing is a machine for not being murdered in.
For a large down-payment, all your cares dissolve.
You move into a group of houses within a walled compound, provided with all the security services you require.
Guards on the gates around the clock.
Lights that burn all night.
These places are reminiscent of medieval walled villages where the night watch called the hours, and the look-out scanned the countryside for invading mercenaries of yet another papal army.
Except this is not the Italy of the Middle Ages; this is Johannesburg, South Africa in 1991.
Some of these places are walled retirement villages for the elderly.
Some are for the young.
If the developers of these walled refuges were bold enough to include small industries, perhaps also offering to connect young executives by computer and fax to the outside world, the inhabitants of clusterland would never have to leave home at all.
They might indeed come to believe that they were not really living in Africa at all.
After all, that is why many whites bought into Africa in the first place.
It was on condition no one ever reminding them they were actually living there.
That is what Mr Whittaker means by his ‘first world, third world’ dichotomy.
It is just the latest, polite way of saying that whites want to live in Africa, but they can't for the life of them get along with Africans.
The trouble is, Africa keeps coming to call.
And since, in the words of Mr Whittaker, ‘our friend from Robben Island was released’, Africa keeps coming to call in no uncertain fashion.
The trek to clusterland seems assured.
Johannesburg even has a cluster suburb.
Next — cluster cities?
There are already cluster holiday camps.
And in the Karoo desert, in the northwestern Cape, a group of whites is trying to build its own homeland.
This is the ultimate in cluster thinking, the cluster country.
It is not to be imagined that logic assumes whites do not also welcome the political changes in South Africa.
Many do; emphatically, aggressively.
There is even a game played with the expectations aroused by dreams of the ‘new’ South Africa.
IN the new South Africa, Eugene Terre'Blanche, leader of the neo-fascist wing, will be a dress designer.
In the new South Africa, everyone will drive BMWs.
In the new South Africa, if you've worked for a white family for more than five years, you get to keep the house…
But, even in cluster housing, Africa will keep on coming to call.
Consider, finally and fleetingly, Mrs Rapapis, who owns a nice house inside the walls of Merrow Down.
Her husband was in Kuwait when the Iraqis invaded.
They held him hostage.
He finally flew home to South Africa and put down the money on his cluster house.
And left again.
Mr Rapapis travels.
Not even kidnap deters him for long.
But he wants his wife to be safe.
She is an invalid, and children are living abroad.
Mrs Rapapis wrings her hands in her new cluster house.
The trouble is the pipes.
A serious leak.
She battled for weeks to get the compound manager to fix the leak.
‘The trouble here is that there's no supervision.’
One day she opened her door, and ‘a big bunch of black men marched in’.
They were the plumbers — but how was one to tell?
Mrs Rapapis graphically depicts the open door and the black invasion.
‘My child,’ she says, and wrings her hands again, ‘what can I do?’
Showbiz
Here are 20 good ways to win an Oscar
What if on March 25, the envelope were opened and the winner wasn't you?
1 ACT YOUR AGE
Given movie trends, it is not surprising that women tend to win their Oscars in their late twenties, men in their early forties.
Twenty-nine is the average age for nomination for Best Actress, thirty-eight for Best Actor.
The youngest Best Actress was the first, Janet Gaynor, at twenty-two; the oldest was the last, Jessica Tandy, at eighty (for Driving Miss Daisy).
The oldest Best Actor was George Arliss at sixty-three for Disraeli (1929), the youngest Richard Dreyfuss at twenty-nine for The Goodbye Girl (1977)— thus upholding the ancient Oscar tradition that the Best Actors tend to be honoured for their worst pictures.
2 DON'T ACT YOUR AGE
Wear drag (Jack Lemmon in Some Like It Hot, Dustin Hoffman in Tootsie; put on weight (Robert De Niro in Raging Bull, Jack Nicholson in Terms of Endearment); even a sex change (Julie Andrews in Victor/Victoria, John Lithgow in The World According to Garp).
In other words, play out of character [see 15].
Liz Taylor's courage in playing a woman older and (then) fatter than herself in Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?(1966) was enough in itself to win her an Oscar.
De-glamorization also won awards for Olivia de Havilland in The Heiress (1949) and Grace Kelly in The Country Girl (1954), and nominations for Bette Davis in Now Voyager (1942) and Lynn Redgrave in Georgy Girl (1966).
3 PLAY A CRIPPLE
From Ray Milland's alcoholic in Lost Weekend (1945) to Jack Nicholson in One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest (1975) and Dustin Hoffman in Rain Man (1988), actors have increased their Oscar chances by portraying physical or mental defectives.
Last year's Best Actor contest saw Tom Cruise and Daniel Day Lewis competing wheelchair-to-wheelchair, with Cruise's Ron Kovics (Born on the Fourth of July) just losing out to Day Lewis's Christy Brown (My Left Foot).
This year's candidate is Robert De Niro in Awakenings.
4 PLAY A HOOKER
Julia Roberts's nomination as the happy hooker in Pretty Woman continues a venerable Hollywood tradition.
Twelve per cent of women's Oscars have gone to actresses playing prostitutes, with or without hearts of gold.
Easy-virtue Oscars went to Jo van Fleet in East of Eden (1955), Dorothy Malone in Written on the Wind (1956), Donna Reed in From Here to Eternity (1953), Shirley Jones in Elmer Gantry (1960), Liz Taylor in Butterfield 8 (1960) and Jane Fonda in Klute (1971).
5 APPEAR IN A ‘SWEEP’ BIGGIE
Charlton Heston got lucky in 1959 only because Ben Hur swept eleven of the twelve categories in which it was nominated.
How else could Chuck have outdone Jack Lemmon in Some Like It Hot?
The same goes for Ben Kingsley in Gandhi (1982), and maybe this year, Kevin Costner in Dances With Wolves.
6 DON'T DO COMEDIES, WESTERNS OR MUSICALS
The Academy has always been suspicious of comedians, from Charlie Chaplin (three nominations, no Oscars) and Danny Kaye (no nominations) to Robin Williams (two recent no-hope nominations, for Good Morning, Vietnam and Dead Poets Society).
Only five per cent of acting Oscars have been won in comedies (Jack Lemmon won Best Actor for the earnest Save The Tiger (1973), not for Some Like it Hot, The Apartment or The Odd Couple).
But only four per cent of Oscars have been won in musicals or westerns.
And most of those were anomalies, such as consolation prizes to Julie Andrews (Mary Poppins, 1964) for not being cast in the screen version of My Fair Lady; and to John Wayne (True Grit, 1969), whose only other nomination in forty years was for a war movie (Sands of Iwo Jima, 1949).
Dances with Wolves would be the first western since Cimarron (1931) to win Best Picture.
7 DON'T BE PETER O'TOOLE
O'Toole is the Oscars' all-time loser with seven nominations and no wins — Lawrence of Arabia (1962), Becket (1964), The Lion in Winter (1968), Goodbye, Mr Chips (1969), The Ruling Class (1972), The Stunt Man (1980) and My Favourite Year (1982).
Even in a ‘sweep’ movie [see 5]like The Last Emperor, O'Toole's Law deprived him of a Best Supporting nomination.
At least he is still in there pitching — unlike his friend Richard Burton, the only other actor with no win despite seven nominations.
8 BE KATHARINE HEPBURN
La Hepburn is the all-time Oscar champion, with twelve nominations spanning forty-nine years — and four wins, from Morning Glory in 1932 to On Golden Pond in 1981, without once stepping down into the Best Supporting category.
Only Laurence Olivier comes close, with one win (Hamlet, 1948) out of ten acting nominations over thirty-nine years, plus one directing nomination and two honorary Oscars; and Bette Davis with two wins out of ten nominations.
9 DON'T PLAY A BAD GUY
Two of the screen's toughest tough guys, James Cagney and Humphrey Bogart, each won his only Oscar in one of the few films in which he played a goody: Yankee Doodle Dandy and The African Queen respectively.
The Academy, after all, must be seen to be on the side of law and order.
If you play a baddy, try to ensure that it's Vito Corleone in the next Godfather remake.
That is the only screen role to have won Oscars for two different actors (Marlon Brando and Robert De Niro).
10 GET RAPED
Jane Wyman in Johnny Belinda (1948), Vivien Leigh in A Streetcar Named Desire (1951) and Jodie Foster in The Accused (1988) are the extreme examples of the Academy's penchant for women as victims.
Actresses should otherwise try to suffer from their husband's infidelity (numerous examples from the very first Oscar, to Janet Gaynor for Sunrise).
Alternatively they could combine show business with booze or drugs (nominations for both Janet Gaynor again and Judy Garland in A Star Is Born, Diana Ross in A Lady Sings The Blues, Bette Midler in The Rose, Jessica Lange in Frances and this year Meryl Streep for Postcards from the Edge).
11 BE AMERICAN — OR, FAILING THAT, BRITISH
In the sixty-two years of the Oscars, Americans have won more than seventy-five percent of them.
Next come the British, who have carried off forty-five acting Oscars — a success rate of eighteen per cent.
Almost twenty per cent of all nominees have been British, compared to seventy-five per cent US and a mere five per cent from the rest of the world.
Vintage for the Brits were 1964 and 1983, with four of the five Best Actor nominees.
In '64, Rex Harrison (My Fair Lady) beat Peter Sellers (Dr Strangelove), Richard Burton and Peter O'Toole (both Becket) and Anthony Quinn (Zorba the Greek); in '83, American Robert Duvall (Tender Mercies) held off Michael Caine (Educating Rita), Tom Conti (Reuben, Reuben), Albert Finney and Tom Courtenay (both The Dresser).
Gérard Depardieu might just be the exception that proves the rule.
12 DIE
The Academy's rules forbid posthumous nominations.
But the only actor to die between the nominations and the awards ceremony — Peter Finch in 1976 — wound up winning Best Actor for Network.
13 DON'T DIE…
JUST YET
In 1960 Liz Taylor was described as ‘gravely ill’ during the voting period; Melina Mercouri, nominated for Zorba the Greek, said all the other Best Actress nominees ought to stand down.
By Oscar night, Taylor had recovered sufficiently to pick up hers for Butterfield 8.
In 1981, when he was known to be seriously ill, Henry Fonda was voted Best Actor for On Golden Pond: his daughter and (co-star) Jane picked up the Oscar for him, and he died just five months later.
14 PUT ON AN ACCENT
Four of Meryl Streep's nine nominations have been won in foreign accents — British in The French Lieutenant's Woman (1981), Polish in Sophie's Choice (1982), Danish in Out of Africa (1985) and Australian in A Cry in the Dark (1988).
See also Spencer Tracy's Portuguese fisherman in Captains Courageous (1937), Vivien Leigh's Southern belle in Gone With The Wind (1939) and such unlikely nominees as Albert Finney's stage-Belgian (Murder on the Orient Express, 1974) and Alan Arkin's manic Russian (The Russians are Coming, 1966).
Michael Caine's cockney Alfie (foreign to American ears) won him his first nomination in 1966, but he had to play an American to win at last, twenty years later, in Hannah and Her Sisters.
15 HIDE BEHIND LOTS OF MAKEUP
It worked for Fredric March in Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde (1932) and for José Ferrer in Cyrano de Bergerac (1950).
Steve Martin tried the hooter again in Roxanne (1987), but he is a comedian [see 6]; could history come right for Gérard Depardieu?
16 MARRY THE PRODUCER
Would Jennifer Jones have won five nominations and one Oscar (The Song of Bernadette, 1943), if she had not been married to David O Selznick?
Would anyone but husband/director Blake Edwards have cast Julie Andrews so utterly against type in Victor/Victoria?
Some twenty per cent of all Oscar-winning actors, actresses and directors have been married to each other at one time or another.
But only one family — the Hustons — can claim three generations of Oscar-winners: Walter, John and Angelica, who may win her second this year.
17 STAR OPPOSITE BURT LANCASTER
Although he has won only one Oscar in four nominations (for Elmer Gantry, 1960), Burt Lancaster holds the record for performing in Oscar-winning films.
Stars who have won Oscars opposite him include Barbara Stanwyck in Sorry, Wrong Number (1948), Shirley Booth in Come Back, Little Sheba (1952), Frank Sinatra and Donna Reed in From Here to Eternity (1953), Anna Magnani in The Rose Tattoo (1955) and David Niven and Wendy Hiller in Separate Tables (1958), which Lancaster also produced.
Katharine Hepburn won her seventh Oscar nomination as his belle in The Rainmaker (1956), and Thelma Ritter her sixth as his mother in Birdman of Alcatraz (1962).
18 PLAY A REAL PERSON
Biopic roles have always been popular with the Academy.
Witness George Arliss as Disraeli (1929), Charles Laughton as Henry VIII (1932), Gary Cooper as Sergeant York (1941), Paul Scofield as Sir Thomas More (1966), Barbra Streisand as Fanny Brice in Funny Girl (1968), George C Scott as Patton (1970), Robert De Niro as Jake La Motta in Raging Bull (1980), Sissy Spacek as Loretta Lynn in Coal Miner's Daughter (1980), Ben Kingsley as Gandhi (1982), F Murray Abraham as Salieri in Amadeus (1984) and Daniel Day Lewis as Christy Brown (1989).
This year's biopic candidate is Jeremy Irons (as Claus von Bulow) in Reversal of Fortune.
19 KEEP ON TRUCKING
If at first you don't succeed, persistence should ensure that your ‘body of work’ will finally win you an Oscar, regardless of the merits of the performance in question.
Even before the release of their latest movies, there was heavy money this year on ‘body of work’ Oscars for Al Pacino (Godfather III) and Glenn Close (Hamlet and/or Reversal of Fortune).
Each had five previous nominations, but no win.
Pacino may pick a consolation Supporting Oscar for his hunchback in Dick Tracy, but this year could see instead ‘length of service’ Oscars for Richard Harris (first nominated in 1963 for This Sporting Life) and Joanne Woodward (first nominated in 1957 for The Three Faces of Eve).
20 IF YOU MISS OUT AGAIN…
Console yourself with the knowledge that the following never won an Oscar: Alfred Hitchcock, Charlie Chaplin, the Marx Brothers, Greta Garbo, Fred Astaire, Lillian Gish, Kirk Douglas, Cary Grant, Mickey Rooney, Maurice Chevalier, Barbary Stanwyck.
Most eventually got honorary Lifetime Achievement Awards — alias the ‘Whoops, sorry, we forgot you’ Oscars, or even ‘Whoops, sorry, we didn't know you were still around’, as happened to Sophia Loren in January, thirty years after she won Best Actress for Two Women.
ADVERTISEMENT FEATURE
best dressed at L'Esquire
Exclusive elegance, quintessential quality, the most stylish new store in Mayfair — L'ESQUIRE — with the finest fashions for debonair discerning men about town.
5 Dover Street, Mayfair, London W1.
Telephone 071–491 1000.
Mayfair boasts a superb new designer store for men, virtually opposite the Ritz hotel, at no. 5 Dover Street — L'Esquire.
The store features Europe's leading design houses across more than 4,500 square feet, with tailoring on the ground floor and chic casuals upstairs.
L'Esquire prides itself on its superlative standards of service and relaxed atmosphere.
The staff are all expert stylists, accustomed to helping customers create their own individual look from their marvellous range of exclusive labels.
Furthermore, for the man in a hurry, they will put together a special selection and take it to his home or office.
On the ground floor are immaculate suits from Valentino, d'Avenza, Ungaro, and other major designers, with a resident tailor to ensure perfect fit.
There is also a special made-to-measure service from a leading Italian suit company.
Designer ties and fine cotton or silk shirts complement the clothes, together with a full range of accessories including handmade Artioli shoes.
Upstairs, innovative design is the theme, with the very best international relaxed dressing.
Total looks by Byblos, Umberto Ginochetti, Gian Marco Venturi…great sportswear by Missoni and CP Company…trendsetting suits from Claudio Lugi and Rene Lezard…as well as a marvellous selection of designer jeans — Versace, Gianfranco Ferre, Valentino.
Also the hottest beachwear in town.
Vintage Esquire
great men die twice by Mark Kram
the later rounds of muhammad ali
There is the feel of a cold offshore mist to the hospital room, a life-is-a-bitch feel, made sharp by the hostile ganglia of medical technology, plasma bags dripping, vile tubing snaking in and out of the body, blinking monitors levelling illusion, muffling existence down to a sort of digital bingo.
The Champ, Muhammad Ali, lies there now, propped up slightly, a skim of sweat on his lips and forehead, eyes closed, an almost imperceptible tremor to his arms and head.
For all his claims to the contrary, his surface romance with immortality, Ali had a spooky bead on his future; he never saw it sweeping grandly towards him, but bellying quietly along the jungle floor.
‘We just flies in a room,’ he liked to say, moving quickly across the ruins of daily life, plane crashes, train wrecks, matricide, infanticide; then, after swatting half of humanity, he'd lower his voice and whisper, as if imparting a secret, ‘We just flies, that's all.
Got nowhere to fly, do we?’
Images and echoes fill the room, diffuse and speeding, the glass darkened to a degree no one thought possible; his immense talent, his ring wisdom, his antipathy for chemicals, argued against destructibility; all he would ever do is grow old.
For twenty years, while he turned the porn shop of sports into international theatre, attention was paid in a way it never was before or has been since.
The crowds were a wonder to behold.
Kids scaled the wings of jets to get a glimpse of him; thousands, young and old, tailed him in masses during his roadwork.
World leaders marvelled at the spell he cast over the crowds.
‘If you were a Filipino,’ Ferdinand Marcos joked, ‘I'd have to shoot you.’
The Pope asked for his autograph; sure, he said, pointing to a picture, by why ain't Jesus black?
A young Libyan student in London sat on his bed, kept him up half the night with dithyrambic visions of Muslim revolution.
‘Watch, one day you will see,’ said Moamar Gaddafi.
Half asleep, Ali said: ‘Sheeeet, you crazy.’
Leonid Brezhnev once dispatched a note to an official at Izvestia: ‘I would like to see more on Muhammad Ali.
Who is this man?’
The Ali Watch: how absurd that it would one day drop down here on a little hospital on Hilton Head Island, South Carolina.
The nurse dabs his face dry.
What is he thinking?
Never has his favourite phrase sounded so dismally precise: My, my, ain't the world strange.
If he could root back through the maze of moment and incident, would he find premonitory signs sticking  out like dire figurations of chicken entrails?
Does he remember King Levinsky, one of the many heavy bags for Joe Louis, in the corridor after the Miami Beach weigh-in?
Boldly coloured ties draped Levinsky's neck (he sold them on the street), his synapses now like two eggs over light, in permanent sizzle, as he tried to move into stride with a young Cassius Clay.
Over and over, like a one-man Greek chorus, Levinsky croaked, eyes spinning, spittle bubbling form his lips: ‘He's gonna take you, kid.
Liston's gonna take you, make you a guy sellin' ties…
Partners with me, kid, ya kin be partners with me.’
Does he remember a shadowed evening in his hotel room a day or so after the third Joe Frazier fight, moving to the window, his body still on fire from the assault?
He stood there watching the blood-red satin drop into Manila Bay, then took a visitor's hand and guided it over his forehead, each bump sending a vague dread thought through the fingers.
‘Why I do this?’ he said softly.
Does he remember the Bahamian cowbell tinkling the end of his final, pathetic fight, a derisive goodbye sound, stark with omen?
What is he thinking?
Ali poses a question, his eyes closed, his lips parting as if her were sliding open manhole covers.
‘You die here…they take you home?’ he asks.
The nurses roll their eyes and smile, struck by his innocence; it has nothing to do, they know, with morbidity.
He is not joking either.
The practical aftermath of death seems to stimulate his curiosity these days; nothing urgent, mind you, just something that begins to get in your mind when you're watching blood move in and out of your body for half the day.
Though he is very much a mystic, there is a part of Ali that has always found security and a skewed understanding of life in the quantifiable: amounts, calibrated outcomes, the creaking, reassuring machinery of living.
The might before in the hotel lounge, with his wife, Lonnie, beside him, bemusedly aghast, he grilled a pleasant waitress until he knew how many tips she got each week, how many children she had, the frequency of men hitting on her and the general contour of her reality.
‘She had a sad life,’ he said later.
The nurse now cracks with a deadpan expression: ‘You die, we take you home, Muhammad.’
Still, a certain chiaroscuro grimness attached to their surreal exchange and cries out for some brainless, comic intervention.
He himself had long been a specialist in such relief when he would instantly brighten faces during his favourite tours of prisons, orphanages and nursing homes.
When down himself (very seldom), he could count on a pratfall from his hysterical shaman, Drew ‘Bundini’ Brown, on the latest bizarre news from his scheming court, maybe a straight line from some reporter that he would turn into a ricocheting soliloquy on, say, the disgusting aesthetics of dining on pig.
No laughs today, though.
‘Don't make him laugh,’ a nurse insisted when leading a writer and a photographer into the room.
‘Laughing shakes the tubing loose.’
The photographer is Howard Bingham, Ali's closest friend; he's been with the Champ from the start, in the face of much abuse from the Black Muslims.
Ali calls him ‘the enemy’ or ‘the non-believer’.
His natural instinct is to make Ali laugh: today he has to settle for biting his lower lip and gazing warily back and forth between Ali and his nurses.
He doesn't know what to do with his hands.
Ali had requested that he leave his cameras outside; just one shot of this scene, of Ali on his back, the forbidding purge of progress, of fame and mystique splayed raw, would bring Bingham a minor fortune.
‘He doesn't want the world to see him like this,’ says Howard.
‘I wouldn't take the picture for a million dollars.
The process is called plasmapheresis.
It lasts five hours and is being conducted by Dr Rajko Medenica.
The procedure, popular in Europe, is a cleansing of the blood.
Ali is hooked up to an electrocardiograph and a blood-pressure monitor; there is always some risk when blood is not making its customary passage.
But the procedure is not dangerous, and he is in no pain, we are told.
Two things, though, that he surely can't abide: the injection of those big needles and the ceaseless tedium.
When he was a young fighter, a doctor had to chase him around a desk to give him a shot, and chaotic mobility to him is at least as important as breathing.
Bingham can't take his eyes off Ali; the still life of his friend, tethered so completely, seems as incomprehensible to him as it would to others who followed the radiated glow of Ali's invulnerability.
The nurses cast an eye at his blood pressure and look at each other.
His pressure once jumped twelve points while he watched a TV report on Mike Tyson's street fight with Mitch Green in Harlem.
It's rising a bit now.
‘Ali,’ one of them calls.
His eyes remain closed, his breathing is hardly audible.
The nurse calls to him again; no response.
‘Come on now, Ali,’ she complains, knowing he likes to feign death.
‘Now, stop it, Ali.’
He doesn't move, then suddenly his head gives a small jerk forward and his eyes buck wide open, the way they always used to when he'd make some incoherent claim to lineage to the gods.
The nurses flinch, or are they in on the joke too?
Eyes still wide, with a growing smile, he says to the writer, weakly: ‘You thought I dead, tell the truth.
You the only one ever here to see this, and I die for ya.
You get some scoop, big news round the whole world, won't it be?’
He leans his head back on the pillow, saying: ‘Got no funny people round me anymore.
Have to make myself laugh.’
The nurse wants to know if he has to urinate.
‘No,’ he says with a trace of irritation.
‘Yes, you do,’ the nurse says.
‘Your pressure…‘
Ali looks over at Lonnie with mischievous eyes.
‘I just thinkin' 'bout a pretty woman.’
The nurse asks him what he'd like for lunch.
‘Give him some  pork,’ cracks Bingham.
Ali censures the heretic with a playful stare.
Ali requests chicken with some cherry pie with ‘two scoops of ice-cream’.
He turns to the writer again: ‘Abraham Lincoln went on a three-day drunk, and you know what he say when he wake up?’
He waits for a beat, then says: ‘I freed whooooooo?’
His body starts to shake with laughter.
The nurse yells: ‘Stop it, Muhammad!
You'll drive the needles through your veins.’
He calms down, rasps, ‘I'll never grow up, will I?
I'll be fifty in three years.
Old age just make you ugly, that's all.’
Not all, exactly: getting old is the last display for the bread-and-circuses culture.
Legends must suffer for all the gifts and luck and privilege given to them.
Great men, it's been noted, die twice — once as great and once as men.
With grace, preferably, which adds an uplifting, stirring, Homeric touch.
If the fall is too messy, the national psyche will rush towards it, then recoil; there is no suspense, no example in the mundane.
The captivating, aspiring sociopath Sonny Liston had a primitive hold on the equation of greatness.
‘Clay [he never called him Ali beeg now,’ Sonny once said, while gnawing on some ribs.
‘He flyin' high now.
Like an eagle.
So high.
Where he gonna land, how he gonna land?
He gonna have any wings?
I wanna see.’
Sonny, of course, never made it for the final show.
Soon after, he checked out in Vegas, the suspicion of murder hovering over the coroner's report.
Who wanted to ask the question back then, or even be allowed to examine in depth its many possibilities?
It was too serious for the carnival, immediately at odds with the cartoon bombast that swirled around Ali, the unassailable appeal of the phenomenon, the breathtaking climb of the arc.
Before him, the ring, if not moribund, had been a dark, sombre corner of sports, best described by the sight of then middleweight king Dick Tiger leaving his beat-up hotel wearing a roomy black Homburg and a long pawnshop overcoat, a black satchel in his hand, heading for the subway and title fight at the Garden.
But the heavyweight champions — as they always will — illuminated the image sent out to the public.
There was the stoic, mute Joe Louis, with his cruising menace; the streetfighter Rocky Marciano, with his trade-unionist obedience; the arresting and dogged Floyd Patterson, who would bare his soul to a telephone pole at the sight of a pencil; all unfrivolous men who left no doubt as to the nature of their work.
With the emergence of Muhammad Ali, no one would ever see the ring the same way again, nor even the fighters themselves; a TV go, a purse and a sheared lip would never be enough; and a title was just a belt unless you did something with it.
A fighter had to be; a product, an event, transcendental.
Ali and the new age met stern, early resistance.
He was the demon loose at a holy rite.
With his preening narcissism, braggard mouth and stylistic quirks, he was viewed as a vandal of ring tenets and etiquette.
Besides, they said, he couldn't punch, did not like to get hit and seemed to lack a sufficient amount of killer adrenalin.
True, on the latter two counts.
‘I git no pleasure from hurtin' another human bein',’ he used to say.
‘I do what I gotta do, nothin' more, nothin' less.’
As far as eating punches, he said, ‘Only a fool wanna be hit.
Boxin' just today, my face is forever.’
Other saw much more.
The ballet master Balanchine, for one, showed up at a work-out and gazed in wonder.
‘My God,’ he said, ‘he fights with his legs, he actually fights with his legs.
What an astonishing creature.’
Ali's jab (more like a straight of jolting electricity) came in triplets, each a thousandth of a second in execution.
He'd double up cruelly with a left hook (rarely seen) and razor in a right — and then he'd be gone.
Even so, it took many years for Ali to ascend to a pre-eminent light in the national consciousness.
In the Sixties, as a converted Black Muslim, he vilified white people as blond, blue-eyed devils.
His position on Vietnam —‘I ain't got no quarrel with those Vietcong, anyway.
They never called me nigger’— was innocent at first, but then taken up as if he were the provocateur of a national crisis.
The politicians, promoters and sweeping sentiment converged to conspire against his constitutional right to work: stated barred him from fighting.
He resisted the draft and drifted into exile.
Three years later, he returned; heavier, slower, but with a new kind of fire in his belly.
Though he had defeated heavyweight champion Sonny Liston and defended his title nine times, Ali never had a dramatic constituency before.
Now a huge one awaited him, liberals looking for expression, eager literati to put in sculpture, worn-out hippies, anyone who wanted to see right done for once.
The rest is history: the two symphonic conflicts with Joe Frazier; the tingling walk with him into the darkness of George Foreman.
Then, the Hegelian ‘bad infinite’ of repeating diminishing cycles: retiring, unretiring, the torture of losing weight, the oiling of mushy reflexes.
The margins of dominance compressed perilously, and the head shots (negligible before exile) mounted.
Greatness trickled from the corpus of his image, his career now like a gutshot that was going to take its time before killing.
His signing to fight Larry Holmes, after retiring a second time, provoked worried comment.
After watching some of Ali's films, a London neurologist said he was convinced Ali had brain damage.
Diagnosis by long distance, the promoters scoffed.
Yet among those in his camp, the few who cared, there was an edginess.
They approached Holmes, saying, ‘Don't hurt him, Larry.’
Moved, Holmes replied ‘No way.
I love Ali.’
With compassion, he then took Ali apart with the studied carefulness of a diamond cutter; still, not enough to mask the winces at ringside.
Ali failed to go the route for the first time in his career.
Incredibly, fourteen months later, in 1981, his ego goaded him to the Bahamas and another fight, the fat jellied on his middle, his hand-speed sighing and wheezing like a busted old fan; tropic rot on the trade winds.
Trevor Berbick, an earnest plug, outpointed him easily.
Afterwards, Angelo Dundee, who had trained Ali from the start and had to be talked into showing up for this one, watched him slumped in the dressing-room, then turned away and rubbed his eyes as certain people tried to convince Ali that he had been robbed and that a fourth title was still possible.
The public prefers, indeed seems to insist on, the precedent set by Rocky Marciano, who quit undefeated, kept self-delusion at bay.
Ali knew the importance of a clean farewell, not only as a health measure, but as good commercial sense.
His ring classicism has always argued so persuasively against excessive physical harm, his pride was beyond anything but a regal exit.
But his prolonged decline has been nasty, unseemly.
Who or what pressured him to continue?
Some blamed his manager, Herbert Muhammad, who had made millions with Ali.
Herbert said that his influence wasn't that strong.
Two years after that last fight, Ali seemed as mystified as everyone else as to why he hadn't ended his career earlier.
He was living with his third wife, the ice goddess Veronica, in an LA mansion, surrounded by the gifts of a lifetime — a six-foot, hand-carved tiger given to him by Deng Xiaoping, a robe given to him by Elvis Presley.
Fatigued, his  hands tremoring badly, he sat in front of the fire and could only say: ‘Everybody git lost in life.
I just git lost, that's all.’
Now, five years later, the question why still lingers, along with the warning of the old aphorism that ‘we live beyond what we enact’.
The resuscitation of Ali's image has been a sporadic exercise for a long time now, some of it coming from friends who have experienced heartfelt pain over his illness.
Other seem to be trying to assuage a guilt known only to themselves, and a few are out to keep Ali a player, a lure to those who might want to use his name in business; though the marketplace turns away from billboards in decline.
Not long ago, a piece in the New York Times Magazine pronounced him the Ali of old, just about terminally perky.
Then, Ali surfaced in a front-page telephone interview in the Washington Post.
He appeared to have a hard grasp on politics, current states' rights issues and federal judgeships being contested — a scenario that had seemed as likely as the fusillade of laser fire Ali said Muslim spaceships would one day loose on the white devils.
Noses began to twitch.
What and who was behind the new Ali, the wily Washington lobbyist who had the ear of everyone from Strom Thurmond to Orrin Hatch?
The wife of Senator Arlen Specter even baked Ali a double chocolate-mousse pie.
For a good while, most of these senators, and others, knew only the voice of Ali on the phone.
David Kindred, a columnist for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution who has known Ali since his Louisville days, concluded that is most likely wasn't him.
At his farm in Berrien Springs, Michigan, Ali sits at the end of a table in the living-room.
The two hundred and forty-seven pounds of weight have made him a bit short of breath.
He's battled his appetite (two, three desserts, meals back to back) and sedentary lapses for years.
Several months before, he had been almost sleek, thanks to fourteen-mile walks and his wife's efforts to police him at the table.
But what is disturbing is the general profile of his condition.
For a long time now, he has appeared indifferent to the ravages of his problem.
But he dispels that notion when asked how seriously he considered a dangerous brain operation in Mexico before his family talked him out of it.
‘Scale of ten,’ he says, ‘a six.’
The answer reflects the terrible frustration that must exist within him, the daily, fierce struggle with a body and mind that will not capitulate to his bidding.
He sits there, his hands shaking, his movements robotic, the look on his face similar to what the marines call a thousand-yard stare.
Why is it, do you think, that after all these years, the dominant sound around Ali is silence?
Look at the cataract of noise caught by TV sound men, look at the verbosity that snared some novelists into thinking he was a primitive intelligence capable of Ciceronian insight.
Part of the fever of the times; if the Black Panther Huey Newton, posing with rifle and spear, could be written up as a theoretical genius, and his partner, Bobby Seale, interpreted as a tactical wizard, then how much a symbol was Ali — the first to tap and manifest glinting black pride, to dispute with vigour erosive self-laceration.
The fact was that he was not cerebral; he was a reflex of confusing emotions and instant passions.
He did have street cunning, most if it aimed to keeping himself a mystery.
‘People like mystery,’ he used to say.
‘Who is he?
What's he all about?
Who's he gonna be tomorrow?’
To that end, he tossed the media rabble dripping hunks of redundant, rote monologue; his loudness provided a great show and diverted probing questions.
By nature, he was a gentle, sensitive man, and even in the throes of angry threats against whites it was hard to hide a smile, for he loved what the blacks call ‘selling wolf tickets’, tricking people into fear.
The Black Panthers used that gambit well, and the TV crews followed their presence.
Thinking of all this, how could someone so alien to ideas and thought, who communicated privately in scraps and remote silences, be capable of fooling Washington politicians?
Absurd, of course, but then the question emerges: Did he allow himself to be used?
‘How about those phone calls?’ he is asked.
‘What calls?’ he responds, vacantly.
‘To politicians this past summer.’
‘You can't believe that,’ he says.
‘Man wrote that, he's a cracker from way back in Louisville.
Always hated blacks.’
‘But the piece had the goods.’
‘I'm signin' my autographs now,’ he says.
‘This is the only important thing in my life.
Keepin' in touch with the people.’
‘Were you used?’
‘Spend a hundred dollars on stamps every week.
Give 'em all my autograph that write me.’
‘Maybe you just want to be big again.
Remember what you told Elvis.
‘Elvis you have to keep singin' or die to stay big.
I'm gonna be big forever.'’
He smiles thinly: ‘I say anything shock the world.’
‘You like politics now?’
‘Politics put me to sleep.’
‘You were at the Republican National Convention.’
‘You borin' me, putting me to sleep.’
‘Reagan, Hatch, Quayle, they would've clapped you in jail in the old days.’
His eyes widen slightly: ‘That right?’
He adds: ‘I'm tired.
You better than a sleepin' pill.’
But don't let the exchange mislead.
Ali is not up to repartee these days, never was, really, unless he was in the mood, and them he'd fade you with one of his standard lines (‘You no as dumb as you look’).
He speaks very, very slowly, and you have to lean in to hear him.
It takes nearly an hour to negotiate the course of a conversation.
But if there was ever any doubt about the staying power of Ali, it is swept aside when you travel with him.
His favourite place in the world — next to his work table at his farm — is an airport.
So he should be in high spirits now; he'll be in three airports before the day's over.
But he's a bit petulant with Lonnie, who aims to see that he keeps his date at Hilton Head Island.
He can't stand hospitals.
They get in the way of life.
He found it hard even to visit his old sidekick Bundini when he was dying.
Paralysed from the neck down, Bundini could only move his eyes.
Ali bent down  close to his ear and whispered: ‘You in pain?’
The eyes signalled ‘Yes’.
Ali turned his head away, then came back saying: ‘We had some good times, didn't we?’
Bundini's eyes went up and down.
Ali talks about this in the Chicago airport.
He's calmed down now, sits off by himself, ramrod-straight and waiting.
He wears a pinstripe suit, red tie, and next to him is his black magician's bag; he never lets it out of his sight.
The bag is filled with religious tracts already autographed; the first thing he does every day at six, when he gets up.
All he has to do is fill in the person's name.
His autograph ritual and travel are his consuming interests.
He'll go anywhere at the ring of a phone, and he spends much time on the road.
Perhaps the travel buoys him; he certainly gets an energy charge from people.
Soon they begin to drop like birds to his side.
‘You see,’ he says, ‘all I gotta do is sit here.
Somethin', ain't it?
Why they like me?’
He is not trying to be humble, he is genuinely perplexed by the chemistry that exists between himself and other people.
‘Maybe they just like celebrities,’ he says.
Maybe, he's told, he's much more than a celebrity.
He ponder that for a moment, and says: ‘That right?’
By now, a hundred people have lined up in front of him and a security guard begins to keep them in line.
Ali asks them their name, writes, then gives them his autographed tracts.
Some ask him to pose for pictures, others kid him about retiring.
He raises his fist: ‘Kong [Mike Tyson], I'm comin' after you.’
Near the end, he does a magic trick for a lady, using a fake thumb.
‘Where you going, Muhammad?’ she asks.
He thinks, and then leans over to the writer and asks ‘Where we going?’
The lady's eyes fill, she hugs him and says: ‘We love you so much.’
What is it that so movingly draws so many people — his innocent, childlike way, the stony visual he projects, set off against his highly visible symptoms?
That night over dinner, Ali's eyes open and close between courses.
He fades in and out of the conversation, has a hint of trouble lifting the fork to his mouth.
His every day includes periods like this, he's in and out like a faraway signal.
Sometimes he's full of play.
He likes to swing his long arm near a person's ear, then create a friction with a thumb and forefinger to produce a cricket effect in the ear.
Then the play is gone, and so is he.
‘One day,’ Lonnie is saying, ‘I want someone to catch his soul, to show what a fine human being he is.’
Ali says, head down: ‘Nobody know me.
I fool 'em all.’
Lonnie is Ali's fourth wife.
She was a little girl who lived across from Ali's old Louisville home when he was at the top.
She is a woman of wit and intelligence, with a master's degree in business administration.
She plans his trips, is the tough cop with him and his medicine and generally seems to brighten his life.
Ice-cream dribbles down Ali's chin.
‘Now, Muhammad,’ she says, wiping it away.
‘You're a big baby.’
He orders another dessert, then says: ‘Where are we:’ A blade of silence cuts across the table.
Bingham says: ‘Hilton Head Island.’
Ali says: ‘Ever wake up and don't know where you are?’
Sure, he is told, steady travel can make a person feel like that for an instant; yet it is obvious that short-term memory for him is like a labyrinth.
Ali's day at the hospital is nearly over.
He will soon be counting down the minutes.
Right now he's in high spirits.
A nurse has secretly slipped him some strips of paper in his hands.
He crumples the paper, pretends to put it in his mouth, then billows his cheeks until he regurgitates tiny pieces all over his chest.
‘Ain't magic a happy thing,’ he says, trying to contain his giggling.
When Dr Medenica comes, Ali jokes with him.
The doctor goes about examining the day's results.
He looks at the bags of plasma: 15,000 ccs have been moved through Ali.
Floyd Patterson has expressed dismay over the current treatment.
‘No brain damage?’
Floyd has said.
‘Next you'll be hearing he was bit by a cockroach.
He's gonna kill Clay…
He'll drop dead in a year.’
Medenica bridles at the comment.
‘He's rather ignorant.
I'm going to have to call that man.’
Ali wants to know what Patterson said.
Nobody wants to tell him.
‘Tell me,’ says Ali.
Everyone looks at each other, and somebody finally says: ‘Floyd says you'll drop dead in a year.’
Ali shrugs it off: ‘Floyd mean well.’
It is Medenica; s contention that Ali suffers from pesticide poisoning.
Though his work has met with some scepticism in the medical community, Medenica is respected in South Carolina.
His desk is rimmed with pictures of prominent people — a senator, a Saudi prince, an ambassador — patients for whom he has retarded death by cancer.
He is supposed to have done wonders for Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia.
Tito was so grateful, he arranged funding for Medenica's clinic in Switzerland.
When he died, the funds were cut off.
Plasmapheresis is a solid treatment for pesticide poisoning, which occurs more than ever these days.
The blood cleaning removes the immune complex, which in turn removes toxins.
But how can Medenica be so sure that Ali's problem is not severe brain damage?
Dr Dennis Cope, of UCLA, has said that Ali is a victim of ‘Parkinson's syndrome secondary to pugilistic brain syndrome’.
In short, too many head shots.
Medenica, though, is a confident man.
He predicts Ali will be completely recovered.
‘I find absolutely no brain damage.
The magnetic resonator tests show no damage.
Before I took him as a patient, I watched many of his fight films.
He did not take many head blows.’
Is he kidding?
‘No, I do not see many head blows.
When he came this summer, he was in bad shape.
Poor gait.
Difficult speech.
Vocal-cord syndrome, extended and inflamed.
He is much better.
His major problem is that he misses taking his medicine, and he travels too much.
He should really be here once a month.
Finally, Ali is helped out of his medical harness.
He dresses slowly.
Then, ready to go out, he puts that famous upper-teeth clamp on his bottom lip to show determination and circles the doctor holding up a cocked right fist.
His next stop is for an interferon shot.
It is used to stimulate the white blood cells.
Afterwards, he is weak, and there is a certain sadness in his eyes.
On the way to the car, he is asked if the interferon treatment helps.
He says: ‘Sheeeet, nothin' help.’
The Lincoln Town Car moves through the night.
Bingham, who is driving, fumbles with the tape-player.
Earlier in the day he had searched anxiously for a tape of Whitney Houston doing ‘The Greatest Love of All’, a song written especially for Ali years ago.
He had sensed that Ali would be quite low when the day was over, and he wanted something to pick him up.
The words, beautiful and haunting, fill the car.
I decided long ago Never to walk in anyone's shadow; If I fail, if I succeed At least I lived as I believe, And no matter what They take from me, They can't take away my dignity.
‘You hear that,’ Bingham's voice cracks.
‘Everything's gonna be just fine, Ali.’
The dark trees spin by.
There is no answer.
What is he thinking?
Esquire, as it has taken form in America, has been an avid chronicler of games and the people who play them for all of its fifty-eight years.
As a monthly, the magazine cannot offer its readers the overnight scores, nor preview the week's to matches.
But what it can and will do is bring a literary perspective to sport, by encouraging gifted writers to go one-on-one against our most intriguing winners and losers.
Muhammad Ali is, without much argument, the towering athlete of this century.
An exquisite figure in the ring, he has used his indomitable spirit to capture the imagination of millions everywhere; he was, in his prime, the most famous man in the world.
It is appropriate, then, that Ali has been the subject of a great number of pieces in Esquire, most of them written by undisputed literary heavyweights, including Irwin Shaw and Norman Mailer among others.
The most recent piece about him — published in June, 1989 — could well be the one that will be remembered longest.
It shows the great champion in the throes of the toughest bout of his life, depicting his struggle with grace and poignance.
In keeping with our desire to acquaint British readers with selected Esquire landmarks, we're proud to present this intimate look at our greatest champion.
THE EDITORS 
The Express Traveller
Brussels
by Derek Blyth
So, the Euro-business capital lacks excitement, but the architecture's good and the food is even better
The big decision in Brussels is whether to stay in the Lower Town (historic and lively) or the Upper Town (elegant and leafy).
The Brussels élite from Count Egmont to the Eurocrats have always kept to the high ground, but the lower quarter has recently turned stylish.
HOTELS:
BELLE EPOQUE: the fin-de-siècle charm of nineteenth-century Brussels is preserved in the glittering halls and clanging lifts of the Métropole (Lower Town, 31 Place de Brouckère, telephone 02/2172300, cost: 6,000fr).
Just a few years younger, the Pullman Astoria still looks as grand as when Churchill stayed there, though the neighbourhood has certainly lost some of its sparkle (Upper Town, 103 Rue Royale, telephone 02/2176290, cost 6,000 fr).
TWENTIES: the chic allure of Brussels in the Twenties is echoed is the tastefully restored Albert I (Lower Town, 20 Place Rogier, telephone 02–2172125, cost: 3,000 fr).
INTERNATIONAL: most international hotel chains including Hilton, Sofitel and Novotel, are represented in Europe's capital.
The SAS Royal is pricey, but then it's got the only atrium in town (incorporating a stretch of the old city wall) and bedrooms in a choice of four styles (Lower Town, 47 Rue du Fossé-aux-Loups, telephone 02/5118888, cost: 10,500 fr).
BIZARRE: the New Hotel Suru is a must for anyone crazy about comics.
The outside is lit by zany neon, and you can spend a day just reading the cartoons in the corridors (Lower Town, 1 Place Rogier, telephone 02/2177580, cost 3,900 fr).
SIGHTS
ECCENTRIC: wander through reconstructed rooms modelled on Tintin cartoons at the Centre Belge de la Bande Dessinée, 20 Rue des Sables, a restored art-nouveau department store that has become Brussels's best-loved museum.
The little Musée Wiertz, 62 Rue Vautier, is an eccentric nineteenth-century atelier near the sprawling European quarter, but the strangest building in town is the Atomium, a gleaming symbol of Fifties futurism.
ARCHITECTURE NOUVEAU: the art nouveau Musée Horta, 25 Rue Americaine, is a fanciful fin-de-siècle town house build by Victor Horta, using exotic African wood and delirious tangles of iron.
Wander down to the Etangs d'Ixelles or over to the Square Marie-Louise to admire the lush art-nouveau mansions built from fortunes amassed in the steamy Belgian Congo.
GRAND PLANS: the Belgian colony, which Conrad dubbed the Heart of Darkness, gave King Leopold II the resources to build on a colossal scale.
The overbearing Palais de Justice is his least-loved legacy, but the Cinquantenaire museum complex is worth a visit.
The echoing Musée d'Art et d'Histoire, part of the complex, has Egyptian and Roman relics, Flemish tapestries and altarpieces, while the dusty Musée de l'Armée is crammed with rusted relics of Belgian battles from Waterloo to World War II.
In autumn, it is well worth taking tram forty-four through the forest to see the African masks at the Musée d'Afrique Centrale, another of Leopold's pet projects.
EATING
CLASSIC CUISINE: the innovative Belgian dishes of Pierre Wynants' Comme Chez Soi draw Eurocrats down from the Berlaymont building to a scruffy Lower Town square.
The intimate restaurant concealed behind thick curtains is tastefully  decorated in art-nouveau style.
Reserve long before hunger pangs hit (23 Place Rouppe, telephone 02/5122921).
La Maison du Cygne, an elegant, wood-panelled restaurant in seventeenth century Grand'Place guild house, offers imaginative variations on old Belgian themes such as Sole Ostendaise, Waterzooi (Flemish fish stew) and kidneys with chicory (9 Grand'Place, telephone 02/5118244).
SEAFOOD: the old fish market at Place Ste Catherine may have vanished long ago, but the great Brussels fish restaurants have stayed on.
La Belle Maraîchère is a well-run, crowded restaurant preparing elegant dishes using fresh fish from the North Sea (11 Place Ste Catherine, telephone 02/5129759).
CHIC: tactful transformation has turned La Manufacture from a vast nineteenth-century industrial building into an artful restaurant.
You get sensible, straightforward dishes such as guinea fowl with honey and sesame seeds.
Good for an offbeat business lunch, but be sure to book (12 Rue Notre Dame du Sommeil, telephone 02/5022525).
OLD BRUSSELS: Chez Jean has been serving steaming pots brimming with mussels and other Brussels specialties since 1931.
Locals can't resist the hearty portion of steak and frites served by formidable waitresses (6 Rue des Chapeliers, off Grand'Place, telephone 02/5119815).
SHOPPING
Souvenir shops don't aspire to much, but Euroline, 55 Boulevard Adolphe Max, sells sturdy Euro-blue brollies and watches studded with the twelve EC stars.
Head to Plaizier, 50 Rue des Eperonniers, for artful postcards depicting languorous art-nouveau buildings and wistful Brussels cemeteries.
And don't dare go home without a load of Belgian chocs if you want to keep your friends sweet.
The glittering Godiva shops, in the Grand'Place and elsewhere, have been producing pralines laced with alcohol since the Twenties, but dedicated chocophiles are seduced by the subtler tastes of Wittamer, 12 Place du Grand Sablon, or Mary, 73 Rue Royale.
ENTERTAINMENT
Brussels isn't dead after dark if you know where to delve.
Locals tend to stick to the pleasures of eating out in the evening, but there are a few spots in town for night revels.
Falstaff, Rue Henri Maus, is a bustling art-nouveau café that stays open long after most have dimmed their lights, while Cirio, 18 Rue de la Bourse, is a more demure, late nineteenth-century establishment where elderly Brussels women gather for a glass of Italian wine.
A l'Image Nostre Dame, down an alley off Rue du Marché aux Herbes, is a friendly old Flemish tavern, while Kitty O'Shea's, 123 Rue Stevin, is where the local Irish folk and other from Berlaymont go to talk the night away.
Brussels is Estudded with jazz cafés, of which the Bierodrome, 21 Place Fernand Cocq, is perhaps the most lively.
An aria sparked off the Belgian revolution, and the Monnaie , where it all began, is now home to an excellent opera company.
Theatre is, of course, mainly in French or Flemish, the two official languages of the capital, but you might find an English classic being staged by one of the expatriate groups.
THE ESQUIRE WALK
If you've an hour or two to spare, take the tour.
Head down to the Grand'Place (marked by the finger on the map) to look at the glittering gilt-laden guild houses from the age of Rubens.
Spot the boatmen's house with its ship-prow gable (number 6) and the bawdy tavern scene on one of the pillars of the Town Hall.
Now walk down Rue au Beurre to the Eglise St Nicolas, the merchant's church, hidden behind a cluster of old shops.
The shadowy interior is a sensuous baroque mix of gilt and candle wax.
Continue along Petite Rue au Beurre, turn right up Rue du Marché aux Herbes and left down Petite Rue des Bouchers.
The cobbled lane plunges you into a genial old quarter packed with restaurants.
It's fun ambling among the dripping-wet mountains of cod and mullet (or rabbits and pheasants during the hunting season), but the serious eating goes on elsewhere in town.
A right-turn up Rue des Bouchers gets you to the stately Galeries Saint-Hubert, a nineteenth-century glass-roofed arcade lined with marble-fronted shops.
Stop for an Italian coffee at Mokafé or browse through the latest French novels in Tropismes.
Turn left out of the gallery, cross the road and head along Rue Montagne aux Herbes, past the splendid, antiquated Café à la Mort Subite, the best place in Brussels to sample a cherry-flavoured Kriek or a sharp Flemish Gueuze beer.
You get a wonderful view of the twin towers of the Cathédrale St Michel on turning right up Rue d'Assaut.
Climb the hill and enter the echoing fifteenth-century Gothic church to peer through glass panels at the medieval foundations.
Go up Rue de la Chancellerie, past Hecq Congo (a shop that once clothed the Belgian empire builders) and turn left into Rue Baron Horta.
Film fans can put down 20fr in a slot machine outside the Cinema Museum for a current programme.
Climb the steps to the Upper Town and stroll through the formal Parc De Bruxelles  with its bandstands and stone cherubs.
Turn right towards the royal palace, then right again to reach Place Royale.
The uncrowded Musée des Beaux Arts, 3 Rue de la Régence, contains paintings by Brue (who lived just down the hill in the Rue Haute), Rubens, Ensor and Magritte.
Walking along Rue de la Régence to Notre Dame du Sablon, a shadowy fifteen-century church with stained glass in vivid tones of red and blue.
Head down Rue Rodebeek, past antique shops crammed with romantic Belgian landscapes and dusty marble busts.
Glance down Impasse St Jacques, where there's a cluttered violin workshop and a whole gallery stuffed full with wooden gods from the Congo.
Amble down the hill, past Wittamer's chocolate shop, follow Rue Lebeau, then Rue de l'Hôpital to reach Rue St Jean.
Turn left into Galerie Bortier, a forgotten nineteenth-century arcade occupied by second-hand bookshops.
A left-turn down Rue de la Madeleine brings you to Rue des Eperonniers.
Squeeze past the parked cars to look at the wonderful little shops, which specialize in tin toys, dolls' houses and cinema posters then turn right into Marché aux Fromages to get back to Grand'Place.
Derek Blyth moved to Brussels to write travel articles for the The Bulletin, the city's English weekly magazine.
He has published books on Amsterdam and Flemish cities.
The Town Hall in Grand'Place
Museum of Art and History
The Grand'Place, heart of the old town
Leopold's golden jubilee arch
Petite rue des Bouchers
The Business Traveller
pack up your roubles
by Brian Moynahan
Take Marlboros to Moscow or Minsk — and never leave home without a Swiss Army knife
Standing on a wet street corner in Moscow with a fistful of roubles, watching the cabs go by, you soon realize that Soviet taxi drivers have lost all interest in the local currency.
They will take you half a mile for a packet of Marlboros — for a carton, they'll fight each other for the privilege of taking you all the way (eighteen miles) out to Sheremtyevo airport.
But roubles?
Come off it, tovarish.
So, smoker or not, drinker or latter-day prohibitionist, be sure to equip yourself with your full duty-free quotas of Marlboros and Bells afore ye go behind the remnants of the Iron Curtain.
Marlboros have become the alternative to hard currency — safer than dollars, which the ordinary citizen is forbidden to have, and more useful than the rouble, so soft that it buys nothing worth having.
A packet is guaranteed to get you a taxi driver and other rare commodities — a waiter who discovers that not everything on the menu is off, a booking clerk who finds you a seat.
Those people do not smoke the things themselves.
Hence the millions of unopened red packets circulating ceaselessly from Brest to Vladivostok.
But drinking is a different, more personal matter, and a bottle of Scotch will get you a friend for life.
If you take your allowance in the form of miniatures, you will make a lot of friends — for a shorter period.
Remember that cigarettes or alcohol will lubricate a whole range of transactions.
(I recently paid five packs of Marlboro for a charming, framed watercolour of Arbat Street in Moscow; oils start at a carton.)
Rubber galoshes are almost as essential.
Wherever there is going to be snow-melt (much of North America), without a pair you are going to ruin your Guccis.
It's not so much the snow; more the salt that gets strewn around.
In milder climes, and Moscow in the autumn (ask Napoleon and the Germans), the problem is deep mud; you need wellies.
Nor are Continental cosh-style umbrellas much use; they don't last long; they don't protect as large a surface area of head and suit; and they're useless for hailing cabs.
But they do take little space.
Easily stowable silk vests and long johns also make sense in galosh-and-windchill territory, and you never know when a pair of swimming trunks will come in handy — even on business trips.
Indoor pools exist, and Moscow boasts a year-round, heated open-air affair between the Kremlin and the Defence Ministry.
Besides, swimming-trunks can always be used as reserve underpants.
Another necessary reserve is third-country cash — in a currency other than your own and that of the place you are visiting.
Otherwise, when you need it — wet night on the autobahn, fuel warning-light on — you'll have spent your local currency, and it's Germany, so the garages won't take credit cards.
A hundred dollars or so, in small denominations, you should be OK.
Of course, you have your list of international dialling and access codes — 010 here, 009 in Sweden, 19 in France, 38 in Yugoslavia, for example — but how about a guide to public holidays?
France, for example, has seventeen such breaks, many of them associated with monster traffic-jams and booked-out flights, as well as empty offices.
And the French are great pont-builders.
If a holiday falls on a Thursday, they build a bridge between it and the weekend.
No one shows on Fridays.
Ditto Mondays and Tuesdays.
And, yes, the cities do close down for August — and in mid-February.
Finally, if you don't already have one, beg, borrow or buy a Swiss Army knife — with its corkscrew for wine bottles, bottle-opener for beer, can-opener for tins, knife to cut through the seal on metal whisky bottle-tops that revolve instead of snapping when you try to open them, screwdriver and wire-stripper for changing plugs (and for removing insanity-inducing ticking clocks from the headboards of Stockholm hotel beds, etc), even a compass for navigating home in the small hours.
As useful, in short, as Marlboros in Minsk.
The Way We Live Now
Eight pages in the life of the culture
The Border Crossing
I live in Northern Ireland, with my wife and three children, We like it.
Home is the old nursery-quarters at the top of a big house overlooking Lough Erne.
We are twelve miles from the border agreed to in 1925 between the British and the Irish.
We cross the border once or twice a week.
One doesn't need a passport, which is great, but what are irksome are the checkpoints and the queues of traffic waiting to be processed.
There are fourteen or fifteen such crossing-points along the hundred-odd-mile border.
We know them all, and the one we like to use is Annaghmartin, north of Wattlebridge.
And so it was that on the first Monday after New Year, about midnight, we found ourselves on an icy road in County Cavan heading for the checkpoint, having just driven up from Dun Laoghaire, where we had disembarked from the Holyhead ferry.
I have lost count how many times we have done this.
Suddenly I say one of the ‘Stop Checkpoint’ signs that are ubiquitous in Ulster, but it was outside the Leggykelly, a pub just five hundred yards south of the border.
Coming to a halt, I was confused.
The British Army wasn't allowed over, was it?
Then I saw that the policeman coming out of the darkness was wearing the blue of a Gardai, rather than the green of an RUC man.
It was a southern checkpoint, I realized — and handed him my licence.
‘Is the checkpoint beyond Wattlebridge open?’
I asked.
‘Oh, yes,’ he replied authoritatively.
But he was wrong.
The gate at the frontier had been pulled over the road and locked shut.
I got out of the car and walked over.
There was a sign illuminated by spotlight from a pole behind.
If I wanted assistance, I was to speak into the intercom.
The checkpoint itself — a hurdle of pillboxes, corrugated iron and aerials — stretched ahead.
The night was dark and still, and there was not a soul in sight.
On the boat, I had been reading about the shooting of Fergal Caraher at the South Armagh checkpoint at Cullyhanna and now, in the darkness, as details of the story flooded back, I decided against pressing the buzzer.
I would go and find a place that was open for business.
A couple of miles up the road, a UDR patrol leaped out of a ditch and stopped us.
The sergeant — his pace blackened with boot polish — assured me, ‘You'll get through at Clones.’
‘Are your sure?’
I pressed, for I had begun to wonder if we weren't doomed to wander Cavan until dawn.
‘Into Clones and turn left,’ he said.
Well, that was all fine and dandy, except for the fact that there wasn't one sign in clones for the Kilturk checkpoint.
Some joker had removed them all.
Was this a political act?
I wondered, driving round the utterly deserted town.
Finally, I saw a young woman.
I accelerated towards her, At the same moment, she saw us and darted towards an alley.
If I lost her, we would never find our way home.
I wound down the window of the car and shouted after the woman, ‘Kilturk?’
She stopped.
Her relief was palpable.
We  weren't trouble, just lost.
‘Straight on,’ she shouted back.
She was right.
It was just the down the road.
But guess what?
It was closed.
How long had I been driving about?
It felt like hours.
No, this had to stop.
I would use the intercom.
We were going through, and I didn't care whom we woke to do it.
I got out and walked over to the gate.
Now guess what?
No intercom, nor any information about what those needing assistance should do.
I peered into the dark and deserted-looking checkpoint.
More corrugated iron and concrete and an army sign: ‘We apologize for the delay Please do not blame us Blame the Terrorists’, with another smaller one beside it: ‘Please take your little home with you’.
This is unbelievable, I thought, I'm locked out of the country where I live, and they worry about litter.
The Army GOC would hear about this.
First thing next morning I was going to fire off a letter, I thought, when I heard something.
A voice?
The creak of a boot?
I froze, heart thumping.
Then I saw a barrel glinting and realized two soldiers were creeping towards me.
‘Dip your lights,’ the corporal ordered brusquely, a private soldier behind him clearly terrified.
This was hardly surprising.
In these forts, the soldiers are sitting targets.
Just before Christmas, a man had been seized at gunpoint and made to drive a van loaded with three and a half thousand pounds of explosives into Annaghmartin; the Christmas before, two soldiers had been shot dead at the Derry checkpoint, next door.
They might be next.
I got into the car and turned off the headlamps.
The corporal called out our registration number.
I would be fed into the police computer, where it would join the details already stored by the hundreds of other crossings we had made.
‘Okay,’ the corporal shouted.
I turned on the parking lights and drove slowly forward.
Men were crouched and waiting everywhere, covering the ones who had come out to meet us.
Then I noticed that right beside the checkpoint, in fact touching it, there stood a terrace of houses, and that in the front window of one of them stood a Christmas tree, with lights draped along its branches.
It was something I don't think I'll ever be able to forget, the twinkling tree and the boot-polished, worried faces everywhere in the darkness.
‘Where are we?’ a child called sleepily from the back.
‘Are we home yet?’
‘Nearly home,’ my wife whispered, and we emerged form the checkpoint into a dark landscape, the cold, starry sky arching above us.
The April Curve
BEHIND
Celebrity chefs
National Gallery extension
Breakfast meetings
Karaoke
Doing the Lambada
Practical jokes
Nigel Kennedy
The Soho Crop
Mel Gibson's rear
Visiting eastern Europe
British motorcycles
Gibraltar
The RSC Kingsley Amis
AHEAD
Gregorian Chant (House Mix)
Salome
The Oscars
Flat racing
Emmanuelle Béart (Oh no)
Red Nose Day
The Boat Race
British Summer Time
John Lee Hooker
Paisley T-shirts without ‘jokes’ on them
Visiting western Europe
The Obsessed
Married to the muse
ANTHONY GREEN ON HIS WIFE, MARY: ‘I've just finished a picture about Mary and me making love on my mother's spare bed.
‘I've been painting about being in love with Mary for the past thirty years.
She has been my motivation and my subject matter.
‘We are more in love now than we've ever been.
And it's more fun now than when we were consumed by white-hot passion.
We are like a good bottle of claret; we both have sediment in our shoes.
‘Mary never poses for me, she is just around.
She is like an icon.
She has some wonderful features, and the most kissable, male chauvinist mouth.
‘I am married to the most perfectly lovely thing in the world.
It isn't strange to be madly in love at the age of fifty-one.
It's bloody marvellous.’
PICTURES PAINTED: 154.
TIME TAKEN: 49,280 hours (6,160 days).
WHEN STARTED: ‘After falling in love with Mary in 1961’.
WHEN TO FINISH: ‘When I drop dead’.
The Black Plague
Denis Nilsen Murderer lived and killed here 1981–83
23 Cranley Gardens
Although the property is currently for sale and is open to viewing by prospective home-owners, these days the front window of the top flat at 23 Cranley Gardens, Muswell Hill, north London, stays firmly and permanently closed.
That was not the case when Denis Nilsen lived there.
The unusual thing neighbours noticed about the quiet civil servant who occupied the attic flat was that he kept the window open in all weathers — to dissipate the smell from the corpses of three of the young men he murdered.
Nilsen was finally arrested when pieces of the corpses he was flushing down the toilet blocked the drain.
A man from Dyno-Rod was called in, to be followed, shortly afterwards, by a couple of detectives from Hornsey police station.
Nilsen began a life sentence in November 1983.
He had admitted murdering fifteen young homosexual men.
Gary Herman of the Muswell estate agents Tatlers is the man charged with the delicate task of selling the top flat at 23 Cranley Gardens — a cosy, one-bedroomed apartment with sloping ceilings and magnolia-painted plaster.
A rampant cheese-plant stands on the landing; there  are bottles of Czech Budweiser in the wine rack; Highgate Tube is a fifteen-minute, uphill yomp away.
The bath in which Nilsen washed his victims is gone; there is now only a shower-room.
You'd have trouble swinging a gerbil, let alone a cat, in the kitchen.
The present occupants did not realize there had been a famous ex-occupant and were, says Herman, ‘not too pleased when they found out’.
The flat is priced at £69,950, which Gary Herman thinks may be a little high.
Books
120 seconds to Gravitas
The book report for those too lazy to read
THE BOOK Possession, subtitled ‘A Romance’.
Winner of the 1990 Booker Prize and the Irish Times/Aer Lingus International Fiction prize.
Chatto & Windus, £13.95.
THE AUTHOR A S Byatt.
Known as Antonia to her friends, and as ‘that old trout in the blue tent’ to members of the general viewing public who tuned into the Booker award ceremony by accident, she is a former English lecturer and author of a study of Wordsworth and Coleridge.
Her earlier novels were regarded as ‘academic’(which translates as ‘not very interesting’).
Until last year, she was known best as the less successful sister of Margaret Drabble.
She is now known as the more successful sister of Margaret Drabble.
THE POOL Byatt, a keen swimmer, announced she would use her twenty-thousand-pound winnings to pay for a swimming-pool at her house in France.
The days of John Berger's denouncing what he saw as exploitation of the Caribbean and donating half his winnings to the Black Panthers are clearly gone.
THE PLOT Roland Michell, a twenty-nine-year-old research assistant in the London Library, discovers two drafts of a letter written by the fictional mid-Victorian poet Randolph Henry Ash to a fictional fellow poet, Christabel La Motte.
The letter suggests the two may have had an affair.
Michell embarks upon a spot of literary detective work, which brings about a meeting with flaxen-haired Dr Maud Bailey of Lincoln University.
Together they comb through the writings of the two Victorians, and gradually the true facts of the romance are revealed.
At the same time, the relationship between the two academics begins to progress in a similar direction.
Subsidiary characters run the gamut of weird and wacky academics, familiar from a host of campus novels.
The book reaches a melodramatic conclusion in a gale-tossed cemetery, where the final secret lies buried.
THE POETRY Having invented two Victorian poets, Byatt also invents their poetry, about seventeen hundred lines of it, in fact, and about a hundred pages of letters and journals in mid-Victorianese.
Those represent a considerable achievement on Byatt's part, but for the reader, the temptation to skip them is often hard to resist.
THE A S BYATT EXAMINATION FOR ADVANCED READERS Compare and contrast the following pairs of statements:
1 (a) Possession is at once a good, old-fashioned Victorian yarn and a post-modernist parody of the same.
Its parallel narrative establishes a telling contrast between nineteenth-century romantic sensibility and modern sexual knowingness. (b) One The French Lieutenant's Woman is quite enough, thanks.
2 (a) Possession successfully combines intellectual sophistication with the narrative pleasure of a detective story.
(b) One Umberto Eco is quite enough, thanks.
3 (a) Possession is exactly the sort of book that deserves to win the Booker Prize.
(b) Possession is exactly the sort of book you'd expect to win the Booker Prize.
THE A S BYATT EXAMINATION FOR READERS IN THE HOME COUNTIES Was the use of the word ‘cunt’ really necessary?
THE A S BYATT EXAMINATION FOR HOLLYWOOD FILM PRODUCERS CONSIDERING BUYING THE SCREEN RIGHTS Consider the following problems: 1 There is no obvious part for Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Do you:(a) get him to read the poetry as a voice-over and hope no one notices his accent?(b) make the drippy research assistant Michell a beefy Austrian and get Arnie to wear spectacles?(c) turn the whole thing into an action movie, with Arnie defending the London Library against a mass terrorist attack? 2 The title lacks commercial appeal.
Do you change it to:(a) The Poetry Lovers — their passion for great literature was matched only by their passion for each other!(b) The Austrian Professor — he wasn't just big, he was smart too!(c) Hardback Attack — when you mess with great literature, you pay the price!
A FASCINATING FACT The book's main character is dull and unappealing.
However, Byatt's American publishers, Random House, insisted that she make him sexier.
Hence the American edition contains several additional sentences of description, in which we find that Michell now has a ‘smile of amused friendliness and pleasure’, which often ‘aroused feelings of warmth, and sometimes more, in many women’.
As an attempt to make a character more sexy, that seems rather feeble, but an explanation perhaps lies in…
A WORRYING FACT Byatt told the Daily Mail that she considered John Major sexy.
‘He really is quite attractive,’ she said.
She is possibly the only woman in Britain, other than Mrs Major, to hold that view.
THE GET-OUT CLAUSE — HOW TO BRING ANY DISCUSSION CONCERNING POSSESSION OR THE BOOKER PRIZE TO AN ABRUPT END Ask if anyone has read The Bone People by Keri Hulme.
Tim Hulse 
Social Notes
Not Coming Soon: the Matt Monro Story
In the search for suitable pop biopic material, it's important to remember that sex and drugs are not enough.
Much more important is death.
And by far the best death, in biopic terms, is untimely.
Because a lifetime of debauchery somehow loses its romantic kudos once it winds down to a respectable job and keep-fit classes; it stops being a biopic and starts sounding like a how-I-conquered-my-bad-habits-and-became-a-normal-person telefilm.
Ask yourself why, for example, no one has made The Pete Townshend Story, with its denouement in the offices of Faber & Faber publishing, or Jagger!, complete with barnstorming finale in the pavilion at Lord's.
(Given the choice between emulating Mick Jagger or, say, Sid Vicious, only a lunatic would plump for the latter, but in terms of films you might conceivably want to sit and watch, Sid and Nancy win hands down with their blood-splattered, smack-snorting Liebestod.)
Every society needs its flawed heroes, and we appear to have saddled ourselves with rock singers and movie stars.
These pop icons are elevated to the pantheon of public attention and encouraged to Live Fast, Die Even Faster — preferably within inking distance of the tabloid press and/or Albert Goldman.
The reward for this self-sacrifice is to get their mugshot plastered across a million posters and T-shirts, witness Monroe, Dean, Presley, Lennon — the all-time greats, the Gang of Four.
But there are plenty of other second-league heroes and heroines who are available to re-enact the eternal cycles of birth and death, rise and fall, rinse and spin.
And plenty of ways for them to check out too, the most popular with the punters being bad driving (James Dean, Marc Bolan), firearms (John Lennon, Marvin Gaye) and taking more pills that it says on the bottle (Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin).
The plane crash is another favourite deus ex machina; singers and musicians fall like flies from the skies.
The most memorable bit of Sweet Dreams was not Jessica Lange's admirable performance as Patsy Cline, it was the lip-smacking tastelessness of her last plane ride: chug-chug, engine failure, oh dear, engine starts up again, phew that was close, oh no, watch out for that mountain.
Such untimely celebrity death provides our nice clean ending and saves us having to contend with the natural processes of ageing and decay, for some reason considered more horrific and obscene than going out with a bang.
It enable us to dabble in vicarious vice and to sit in smug judgement on the result.
It makes us feel better about our own humdrum lives that too much fun is so clearly bad for the health.
Even more usefully, from a film-maker's point of view, untimely celebrity death precludes the risk of libel, thus opening up all sorts of opportunities for dramatic license.
Of course, biopics still have to pussyfoot around the survivors, hence the Bearded Film Director Who Didn't Look Anything Like John Landis in Wired who finds John Belushi (honorary rock star), snorting coke in his Winnebago and then says (best line delivered in the film)‘John, this is economically unfeasible’.
But the real wonder of pop biopics is that no one has made a movie about Jim Morrison before now (The Doors opens on March 15).
The group, after all, were the Los Angeles rock band — Morrison first met keyboard player Ray Manzarek while they were both attending UCLA's film course.
The singer's life contained enough misbehaviour to make director Oliver Stone's job easy (pace that notorious gig in Miami when Jimbo bared more than his soul); his songs are riddled with references to drugs and sex; and — making the film a dead cert — he obligingly took an early bath in Paris in '71.
He couldn't have picked a better place: laid to rest in Père Lachaise alongside such genuine nineteenth-century bohos as Gérard de Nerval, who took his pet lobster for walks in the Palais Royal and eventually hanged himself with a piece of string he insisted was the Queen of Sheba's garter.
Only one disturbing rumour can possibly mar the film's success.
It is said in some circles that Morrison is alive and well and living in Des Moines, so perhaps we will one day have to sit through Doors II: the Incognito Years.
If so, the public will require another martyr.
Queue here for Brian Jones Takes a Dip.
Anne Billson 
The Green Man: Rigmer, Sussex
Money
Mr MacThrifty Buys a Suit
The first time I met my wife, I was wearing a fine blue jacket.
It had been tailor-made…for someone else, unfortunately.
It was, in fact, made for my brother, who is blessed with a rather different physique.
It is not true I married for a red corduroy jacket belonging to my wife's father; but there is no denying he did pass it on to me, as a sort of dowry I believe.
Once again, it was tailor-made.
And when I had it customized, I could boast I was wearing something that was made-to-measure — twice.
When family charity fails to clothe you, try a charity shop.
Oxfam is the thrifty man's chain-store, and the branch at 202b Kensington High Street is its menswear flagship.
Since this shop has the reputation of being the best for designer clothes, its customers tend to pay more than at other branches — but still only a fraction of the retail price.
There for a song clothes from Hugo Boss, Yves Saint Laurent and, more rarely, Cerruti 1881.
The record price for a suit was one hundred pounds, and that was brand new, passed on by a lunatic who changed his mind as soon as he had taken it home.
Shirts that left Comme des Garçons with a one-hundred-pound price tag will be knocked down for a bargain price; and a man's shirt that looks good on a woman will cost more than the men-only variety.
The time to re-stock your wardrobe is when the fashionable are emptying theirs — in the spring and autumn.
But for a sudden, necessary purchase, it is worth scouring the charity shops at any season.
For a tenner, I snapped up a dinner-jacket for an office party, and gave it back afterwards.
An everyday grey suit cost me twelve pounds.
Does the thrifty buyer never slip into anything new?
Certainly.
He haunts street markets.
Better still, off-street markets in open-plan warehouses, which have a roof, if not much else.
My favourite stall, in Peckham, south London, may not have changing-rooms, but modesty is preserved by making a screen of racks of clothes.
Here I snap up Levi's for the price of lesser brands, and those for even less.
A friend of mine dresses entirely in Harrods, bought in the January sales.
Next sales are even cheaper.
And, despite the name, Amazon's four outlets in Kensington Church Street also offer menswear, with labels including Nicole Farhi, French Connection and Ciao.
This year they had ninety-pound coats for thirty.
Now, though, the sartorial saver will have to wait until the early summer sales.
You have to work at thrift.
Some people, though, are born thrifty.
Because there are fewer short than medium-sized men, a suit made to their measurements is less likely to find a buyer, and is knocked down accordingly.
The same is true of shoes.
I once lived next door to a giant of a man with feet like Yeti slippers.
Every pair of shoes he bought was a bargain.
Jonathan Sale
Inner Sanctum
Robert Elms's Fridge
The following were recently noted to be its complete contents
Pitta bread (half consumed)
Allinson's Stoneground brown bread (half consumed)
White bread (half consumed)
Lemon gâteaux
Hot Indian lime pickle
Mango chutney
Lemon and mustard-seed pickle
Ginger pepper jelly
Elderflower jelly
Blackcurrant conserve
Redcurrant jelly
Strawberry conserve
Safeway mayonnaise
Yoplait Petit fromage frais(cherry, orange and banana)
Goat's cheese (very expensive)
Smoked applewood cheese
+English waxed cheddar
Manchego,(hard, Spanish cheese)
Grated Parmesan (fresh)
Falafels (eight, unopened)
After Eight mints (opened)
Smoked salmon (manky)
Spanish gherkins
Spanish Little Gem lettuce
Safeway pre-packed cherry tomatoes
Fresh bay leaves
Fresh rosemary
Fresh mint
VEGETABLE TRAY
Belle de Fontenay potatoes (French and tiny)
Romano (pink and new)
Cara (big baking potatoes)
FRIDGE DOOR
Château St Jean Californian Chardonnay
Manzanilla Spanish sherry — La Gitana
Highland Spring mineral water (flat)
Hot taco sauce
Fierce chilli peppers
Sun-dried tomatoes
Anchovy paste
Japanese mustard
Fresh garlic
One egg
Tomaro purée
The Green Man: Sevenoaks
Esquire's first reader event!
Join us at Austin Reed in Regent Street, London W1, for our very first readers party on Wednesday April 17, between 6pm-8pm
The party is co-hosted by Woolmark and the House of Seagram.
Hot jazz and other attractions, both fun and informative, together with Martell VSOP Cognac and Mumm Cordon Rouge Champagne, will make the evening go with a real swing.
You will meet the Esquire Editors, and our fashion editor Marion Hume will be there to give you personal advice on how to put your looks together.
You can find out how all the key ingredients in your wardrobe are made: demonstrations will encompass silk tie making, shoe making and hand-sewing of Chester Barrie suits.
Entertainment will include a surprise celebrity jazz band.
There will be an exhibition of early American Esquires, going back to the 1930s.
Special offers, just for Esquire's guests, will be available throughout the store.
Do join us for a glass of cognac or champagne.
To receive your ticket (admits two), please phone Katie Wohlrab, Esquire, 071 439 5306).
Social Notes
Oh No!
Yet Another Book Launch!
In today's ‘Get Ahead’ publishing world, it is considered vastly more glamorous to be a marketing man than an author.
As a result, the traditional party outfit of flamboyant cravat and tweed jacket has been replaced by the ninety-nine-pound wool suit.
Always grey, it should be purchased at the modishly named ‘Suit Company’.
Tie
Very wide or very narrow, the ideal tie should mark you out as solid, reliable and totally free of any artistic tendencies.
Perhaps the dream tie in today's ‘hands on’ publishing world is that brown one from M&S that came in a set with its own matching handkerchief.
The wine
Usually white, usually Italian or German and always served at least eight degrees above room temperature, its only merit is as an antidote to…
The food
Phileas Fogg's Mexican tortilla chips, Thai chicken satay with peanut dip, French prawn and garlic vol-au-vents, and sundry other delicacies from countries where halitosis has never been a social no-no.
These can all be rested on a makeshift tray, which is usually…
The book
Always referred to as ‘the product’, this item is of minimal importance — unless accompanied by easily retailable novelties (T-shirts, key rings, inflatables) or recorded on a ‘talking book’ tape with Paul Eddington and that nice Felicity Kendal doing the voices.
Cuff-links
These play a vital back-up role to the tie in establishing your credentials.
Ideally joined by a bar (less fiddly than a chain), they should feature masonic crests, ‘the Royal Antediluvian Order of Buffaloes’ perhaps being best, in accordance with the rule that the more eccentric these groups sound, the duller they are.
(A prime example is ‘the Oddfellows’, actually a group of Rotarians and minor town-hall officials from the Harlow area, whose lifestyle would make Terry and June seem like coke sniffers.
Trousers should show signs of Corby pressing.
However, as only the bottom two-thirds can fit into one of Corby's otherwise estimable machines, the area from the crotch up should be baggy and creased.
A light-brown leatherette belt will nicely ‘pick out’ the grey material of your suit.
Bunch of keys
Looped around a belt notch, and resting against the hip, this should include the ignition key for a Ford Sierra Cosworth.
Shoes
Grey, scuffed, quilted on top and laden with mock-Italian ribbons, ‘gold’ buckles.
Always fake: publishing executives have no interest in fashion and, if pushed, would venture that Gucci opens the batting for England.
What to say
Refer constantly to the number of dump-bins, shelf-wobblers and spinners you have persuaded W H Smith to take.
If asked ‘Have you read the book?’, answer ‘Yes, but not personally’.
Show your dynamism by suggesting a few surefire financial winners, the sort of title that will end up extracted in the Telegraph Magazine.
Here are four to be getting along with: Melvyn Bragg's Lake District, John Mortimer's Tuscany, Jilly Cooper's Somerset, Kingsley Amis's Stomach.
What not to say
‘Perhaps we should encourage young novelists’; ‘the Booker Prize is a media junket’; ‘actually, I'm here because I wrote the book’.
Modern Afflictions: Dial N for Neck
On the phone, in fifth and in the fast lane looks and feels better than three months in a surgical neck-support, which is the likely outcome of what is becoming known as ‘phone neck’.
Shrugging the receiver between cheek and shoulder places an enormous strain on the sternocleido-mastoid muscles, the prominent bulges on each side of your neck, and the splenius capitis, the muscle that runs up to the base of your skull and stops you wearing your head at a jaunty angle.
The strain usually results in stiffness and discomfort, but can be quite debilitating, requiring more extensive treatment — deep massage, heat treatment and sometimes physiotherapy.
In short, avoid the horrors of a tell-tale padded dog-collar by investing in a car fax.
The Green Man: Harlesden NW10
Private Eyes
What's that at Three O'Clock
How many times has it happened?
You're walking down the street during the tourist season and you spot a group of Japanese.
They may be crowded up against the window of the tour bus or milling together on the pavement, but one thing is for sure— they're taking snapshots.
You point your eyes in the direction they are pointing their Nikons, only to be baffled by what, if anything, they are photographing.
So in an effort to find out whether are blind, or they're just weird, we asked a member of a party of visitors from Tokyo, Miss Takishima, to be kind enough to let us process the film in her camera.
Our conclusion?
They're just weird.
Ten Sure Ways to Keep You in Your Trousers
HIS
1 A trouser-press
2 A Polaroid camera
3 Soiled underwear
4 Satin sheets
5 The K-Tel Love Album
6 Nail clippings
7 The ‘tennis girl’ poster
8 Novelty condoms
9 Kleenex on the bedside table
10 Edible underpants
HERS
1 Teddies, gonks, furry toy animals
2 A picture of her Bader Meinhof boyfriend
3 Wicked Willy books
4 Damart underwear
5 A poster of Jason Donovan or any Radio One DJ
6 A cot
7 The K-Tel Love Album
8 Pop socks
9 Any ceramic item from the Franklin Mint
10 Batteries on the bedside table
Esquire Offer
Sporting Friends
Take a closer look at the Esquire special offer for April.
Of all Carl Zeiss Jena binoculars, perhaps the most famous are the Deltrintem 8x30.
The perfect union of size and style ensures that the glasses are a worldwide favourite.
With a magnification factor of eight and an objective lens diameter of thirty millimetres the binoculars are compact, lightweight and rugged, classic all-purpose glasses.
For generations, sportsmen have revelled in Carl Zeiss Jena's marriage of design and performance.
In black, the Deltrintem 8x30 come complete with a tough felt-lined mahogany leather case and detachable lanyard.
All Carl Zeiss Jena binoculars are covered against manufacturing faults by a lifetime guarantee.
Special offer price £79.69
The stainless steel hip-flask is perfect for taking a little home comfort with you into the great outdoors.
Designed by the Regent Belt Company Ltd, the flask holds six fluid ounces and is beautifully covered in mahogany-coloured leather.
Special offer price £18.45
This offer is open only to readers living in Great Britain, including Northern Ireland, and remains open until July 14, 1991.
To order, please complete the coupon below and send it with a UK cheque/PO (not cash) to: Esquire Hip-flask Offer, Offer Number 5 and/or Esquire Binoculars Offer, Offer Number 6, PO Box 6, Kettering, Northants NN15 5JW.
Items should be received within twenty-eight days of receipt of order.
If more than one item is ordered, they well be dispatched in separate packs.
Coupon not required for repeat orders.
If you are not entirely satisfied, please return any item within seven days in the condition in which it was received, with a covering letter; your money will be refunded in full.
We cannot be held responsible for returned goods lost in transit.
Credit-card holders may order direct by telephoning 0536 723799 (orders only, it is not an enquiry line).
Please note that your credit-card account will be debited when your purchase is sent.
Post coupon and payment to: Esquire Hip-flask and Binoculars Offer, Offer Numbers 5 and/or 6, PO Box 6, Kettering, Northants NN15 5JW.
The National Magazine Company Ltd, Registered Number 112955, National Magazine House, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
Data Protection: as a service to readers, we occasionally make dispatch lists available to carefully screened companies whose products or services we feel may be of interest.
If you do not wish to receive such mailings, please send your name and address to The National Magazine Company Ltd, DR Department, Eagle House, 50 Marshall Street, London W1V 1LR.
From Toe to Head
Richard Boston's Ankles
Stage two in the construction of the great British writer.
Next month, Pete Davies's knees
My ankles are a disaster.
The left one's not too bad, but the right one's ridiculous.
For years whenever I've got out of bed in the middle of the night — about whatever pursuit you get out of bed in the night for — my right ankle has made cracking noises, like kindling being snapped.
Nor do they do a lot for me as erogenous zones.
I was once photographed at Cap d'Agde sans culotte for the cover of the first issue of the review section of a national newspaper — in the interests of serious research, you understand, on nudist colonies.
(As befits a writer on a broadsheet newspaper, my laptop concealed my…laptop.)
Everyone agreed it was a fine picture, a breezy blend of wit and taste.
Until the picture editor saw my ankles.
He was right, of course.
Skilfully cropped, that picture sold thousands of papers.
Uncropped: who knows?
The Weekend Guardian might be just another memory.
I console myself with the thought that whatever happens to the ankles of others (and there is no doubt that prettily turned item is a tremendous turn-on), mine are contemplated without the libido's charging in with its usual tedious cries of ‘Me, me, me’.
As Lorelei Lee said  immemorably in Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend, a girl can't go on laughing all the time.
To be serious: In German, an ankle is a Fussknöchel, a foot knuckle.
(The Germans have a direct approach to these things: a nipple is a Brustwarze, a breast wart.)
An archaic English word for the ankles is huckle-bones, and these huckle-bones, and knuckle-bones (usually from sheep), were used for playing dice.
The medical name for the ankle-bone is the astragalus), the Greek word also for dice.
So whatever the ankle has done for sex, its contribution to other games of chance has been incalculable.
One summer's day a few years ago, I was about to play a game of tennis.
It was quite some time since I had last played and, inhaling huge lungfuls of air as I did so, I looked forward keenly to demolishing my opponent with my supra-sonic service, my cunning topspins, bottomspins, sidespins, every-this-and-thatspins.
With such thoughts in my head and lithe grace in my movements, I loped up the grassy knoll to the court.
I slipped.
On a dog turd.
And my ankle gave out a sound like a pistol-shot.
It came up like a multi-coloured balloon and was pretty painful for a while.
The treatment was quite fun, though.
It's called the RICE principle.
R is for rest; I is for ice (a bag of frozen peas does nicely) applied to the ankle; C is for compression — firm bandaging; E for elevation, otherwise known as putting your feet up.
What this means is that you're the centre of attention and you're waited on hand and (of course) foot.
And since the frozen peas and firm bandaging were applied by the fair hands of a comely maiden, I began to think that perhaps I could reasonably update my views on the ankle, Eros-wise.
I was all too soon up and about, hobbling with a stick.
This had some value, leading old ladies to get up and give me their seat on public transport.
To tell the truth, I continued to use the stick for longer than was strictly necessary.
Gradually the ankle got better, but it will never be a hundred per cent.
That dog turd, so much more bitterly prosaic than any arrow, gave me my Achilles' heel.
But I laugh it off, paraphrasing Beau Brummell, only remarking lightly that the saddest thing is, it was my favourite ankle.
Area of detail Alan Coren's feet