

At twelve Jane was taken to England to be educated and encountered her indelible railway wagon.
The school was large and famous and she hated the institutionalised life — but what to do?
If she ran away she would only cause worry to her parents, and anyway, where could she run to, on this island?
She was brainy, except for maths, but was blessed with a maths mistress of infinite patience called Miss Walden, who gave her extra lessons.
Jane would never forget her unselfish devotion.
Jane was not popular: in order to be popular, you had to be good at games, and Jane was useless at all of them — and they played everything — netball, rounders, tennis, lacrosse, hockey — even cricket — every afternoon, rain or shine, exams or no exams.
In cricket they used to put her at ‘long leg’ where the ball hardly ever penetrated, and she would take a book and lie down to read in the long grass.
Then on the rare occasion that the ball did come, of course, she missed it.
She loved the country surrounding the school, however.
The South Downs with the short springy turf decorated with harebells and scabious, and the deceptively gentle slopes, the horizon constantly moving ahead of you, as you puffed after it.
And then at last, the summit, with the cloud shadows scudding across the huge curved expanse and a band of sea which was always surprisingly broad ‘and above the sea the line of the Downs, so noble and so bare’.
In those days she had likened the climb to life: she had dared to hope that there might be wonderful things over the horizon.
Now she knew that there was probably nothing on  the other side.
It might be quite bare.
But it was still imperative to look to the horizon hopefully, or quit.
The Sussex coast was best seen at a distance, though, for proximity to the sea causes human beings to create great ugliness.
India certainly got its own back for the British Raj by imposing this horrific version of the bungalow upon us.
Still, as Jane belonged nowhere, Sussex became the nearest thing to home.
Then suddenly, just before the exams, she became popular, and was at a loss to know why.
A kind, serene girl called June told her the reason.
June was one of those characters who don't develop.
At fourteen or forty they are constant, dependable, consistently dispensing happiness wherever they go.
‘It's because you and Irene are the cleverest,’ she explained.
‘And they want you to come top.’
‘But why?’ asked Jane, who was totally non-competitive.
‘Because Irene's Jewish.’
For the first time, Jane became aware of anti-Semitism, and it horrified her.
She remembered her father's good-humoured jokes about his Jewish friend, but this was different, evil.
It made her want to escape from the world.
From then on she discovered many things about the human race, but could find no explanations for them.
She did come top, though she did not try and hoped she wouldn't.
The congratulations sickened her.
The headmistress, who had always ridiculed her for being bad at games, now referred to her as ‘our best pupil’ and gave her a set of Shakespeare, duly inscribed.
University was better, less claustrophobic, more cosmopolitan.
There were undisciplined Welsh, well-mannered Iraquis, English slobs, beautiful Norwegians.
One of the Norwegian girls, Riborg, was the daughter of a ship owner, but had attended a folk high school, along with children whose parents were cobblers and other manual labourers.
How much more civilised, Jane thought, than her own segregated education.
Riborg approved of the Iraquis because they wore clean shirts every day, but disapproved of the Welsh because they were dirty and noisy and went round in droves.
‘They have no dignity and no manners,’ she observed severely.
Once, at school, the girls had amused themselves by putting together the perfect woman, and Jane  had been surprised when they chose her eyes, which were large and brown.
She had always hankered to be tall and fair, like Riborg.
Riborg showed her a photograph album, with herself by a fjord in a miniscule bikini.
‘What do you think of me appearing like that in front of the men?’ she asked in her slow, earnest, Germanic accent, gazing at Jane with steady blue eyes.
Then answered her own question.
‘You see — Norwegian men are very — slow.
They need to drink very much spirits to get them going!’
Jane had a fleeting affair with a tall, rangy Scottish lecturer, whose main pleasure was to walk for miles.
Sometimes she went with him, but found it hard to keep up.
Later she met his wife, a flirtatious, self-centred Latvian whom she was sure must be a Gemini.
She told Jane, laughing: ‘Hamish was a lecturer at Riga University and we were all determined to marry him to get out of Latvia.
And I won!
It was because I sat at his feet with my blouse undone.’
Jane understood then why Hamish was so lonely and sad.
Latvia's loss had not been his — or Britain's — gain.
The same goes for certain other immigrants, such as newspaper proprietors.
Shortly afterwards Jane went to a friend's house in Kensington to a musical party where a famous quartet was playing and, sitting on the stairs, talked to someone whom she took to be one of the players.
He turned out to be a friend of the musicians and, within a year, she was launched on her disastrous marriage.
She, too, had found her immigrant.
In the difficult job of getting through one's life happily, she had made a bad start.
Not all bad, though.
It brought her four children who opened up the world for her and unlocked her own narrow viewpoint — though not enough, as events were to show.
And it introduced her to Budapest, a jewel of a city.
It was as if some artistic giant at the making of the world had arranged it — with the perfect placing of Buda Hill in a curve of the Danube on an otherwise flat landscape.
The spectacular Danube!
Yet Karl Marx probably never saw it.
He had picnics on Hampstead Heath.
And, despite everything, the citizens of Budapest knew how to live.
Not like Londoners, rushing home to their dormitories.
They  enjoyed their city as the eighteenth-century Londoners must have done, before the delightful town houses had been raped and turned into offices.
In Budapest, they still strolled around for the sheer pleasure of it.
They played chess on the park benches, and on Buda Hill there was a mega-chessboard, with the men almost human size.
Their humour did not consist of mere jokes (though they could make those too) but in their whole attitude to life, as the violin runs through the Benedictus of the Missa Solemnis like a golden thread from which all else rises and falls; an unforced humour which has known tragedy, and learnt to surmount it.
Jane saw it in the smallest things, all impossible in self-conscious Britain.
At dinner in the garden one evening, for instance, two perfectly ordinary businessmen suddenly burst into a Verdi duet.
Her host, Laszlo, an ex-accountant, used to take action directe by tossing down the remains from his dinner plate of fish to the cats waiting beneath the balcony.
Another day there was an impromptu competition between Laszlo, his wife, and mother, to see who could crack most eggs between their knees — an extraordinarily difficult feat to achieve.
Laszlo was  indomitably trying to learn English, and when Jane saw him again, ten years later, he had still not progressed beyond the first book, now old and tattered.
Then there was Rubletsky, an old friend of the family, a true Bohemian of the old school and still, at eighty, with as sure a touch in his sculpture and drawings as ever Titian had.
He was the complete, unashamed opportunist, with immense charm, and took nothing seriously except his art.
He completely changed when he was working.
When at play, Jane watched him with delight as he rolled about on the floor with mirth at the English ‘W’.
Despite an indigestible plethora of consonants in the Hungarian language, they have no W. ‘Zee shop — how you call eet?
Woll — wort!’
He shrieked with uncontrollable glee.
He was a spare aquiline man, who had once been court sculptor (and perhaps unofficial jester!) to a mythical-sounding Ring Zog.
Nevertheless, the Communist government had awarded him a life pension, so he had no worries.
In the summer, he lived in a little house surrounded by sunflowers higher than it was, beside a village with a pale  blue pump in the centre, with geese marching around, pigeons gurgling (they have a different accent on the Continent) and people sitting on walls gossiping in the evening.
Coming back to England from one of these school-holiday visits to Hungary, Jane was more than ever struck by the contrast.
Was this the land of Shakespeare, with his spontaneous carnival of images?
What had gone wrong, and when?
With all their virtues and even (perhaps especially) when they were trying to enjoy themselves, they were stiff, awkward and apologetic.
At New Year, compare the joyous skating in Moscow, the balletic conducting of Carlos Kleiber in Vienna (whose grace shone through his shapeless suit!)— with the Trafalgar Square mob!
Britain had no style, though it once had.
Who had killed it?
Had it been Cromwell?
Perhaps.
The Restoration lacked the spontaneity of the Elizabethan age.
But no, she was sure it was Queen Victoria, personally, who had spread this grey fog over Britain from which we've never recovered.
Great Victorians like Trollope and the Pre-Raphaelites had been fully aware of what was happening.
Perhaps, Jane mused, we should never get over it.
The despair in the air was particularly dense at the present time, though its monetarist perpetrators were now fighting a rearguard action against the rest of Europe.
But hopelessness, like the class system, had now become so ingrained in the soul, she feared that it could be removed neither by stimuli nor legislation.
The English character puzzled her, so must totally confuse foreigners.
‘You never know what the English are thinking, because they're always so polite,’ Riborg had told her.
‘You don't say ‘no’, but ‘I will if I can.’’
But tiny Britain, uniquely among countries, is many nations.
We have to watch television to see how the others live.
And the weather, from one part of this diminutive island to another, is as varied as the people.
There are some general characteristics, however.
We are docile and lethargic and much easier to govern than the French.
We let off steam in graffiti, vandalism and football  hooliganism .
Again, unlike the French, we are guilt-ridden.
That's why we say ‘sorry’ so often.
And we do not take ourselves seriously like the French: we can demolish everything with our humour.
We've got a wider lunatic fringe than other nations.
We re an odd mixture of tolerance and prejudice, of the apologetic and the arrogant.
Nobody understands us: we don't even understand ourselves.
But we are fascinated by ourselves — which is why Jane's thoughts rabbited on so long about her country.
After the glimpse of Scandinavia through Riborg, and later the experience of Hungary, Jane was so far carried away by her enthusiasm for classless freedom, the beauty of northern landscapes, plus the humorous awareness of the central European people, that when a Finn crossed her path, she was fair game.
A Finn represented the fusion of Scandinavia and Hungary (to which country they were first cousins) so no doubt she expected too much of Erkki.
Anyway, he looked like an ageing Nordic god.
He invited her to lunch at his club for international journalists in Carlton House Terrace.
They went to hear the Sibelius Violin Concerto superlatively played by Isaac Stern.
But then slowly, unwillingly, she had to admit that he was cold and conventional, and his lovemaking was nasty, brutish and short.
A sheep in wolf's clothing.
A timid, pathetic creature disguised by a big, manly body.
‘Outers’ can be so misleading!
The vistas of fir forests, islands and lakes disintegrated into an outer London suburb and a mundane wife called Letitia.
She was, he said, bad-tempered, a snob, and he seemed afraid of her — she had obviously married him!
Perhaps because of fear, his latest book — a life of Nelson — bore the placating dedication ‘To Letitia, in gratitude for her sweet company’.
Sanctimonious fool!
So they kissed, for what Jane knew would be the last time, in Belgrave Square.
Goodbye to another dream that had died.
She felt angry with herself for getting carried away by the ideas in her head, for turning her back on reality.
She deserved to pay the price.
All the same, she could not bear to listen to the Sibelius concerto for some time afterwards.
True, they had not suited each other, but supposing the chemistry had been right, should such a relationship have been ruined by the wretched man-made social system?
There is nothing a woman wants so much as to be in love, and the odds are very much against two ‘right’ people ever  finding each other.
The whole of human life is a matter of chance, and we only live once!
Jane knew from bitter experience that love is a rare thing, so she felt very strongly that nothing should be allowed to come in its way, that nobody should be condemned to endure the rest of life with those two small, sad words: ‘if only….’
Jane had played her cards, and played them wrong.
She had married too soon and was married too long.
She was resigned never to meet the right man.
She had to let imagination take over.
Her namesake, Jane Austen, she supposed, had found the same, so she invented Darcy and Mr Knightley.
The same went for the Brontës (Charlotte's late marriage being irrelevant), so in a perfect world, we should certainly have been deprived of these characters.
No doubt the past was just the same to the people who lived in it as the present is to us.
Nevertheless we tend to think times used to be rosier.
Thus ‘olde’ journalistic memories acquire something of the patina of antiques, ordinary at the time, but with hindsight, quaint and even charming.
Jane had ‘missed her first’ and went down from university with only a two-one in English Language and Literature, thus deprived of the academic career she had coveted with cowardice.
She ‘got onto’ a newspaper.
It was the old Daily Herald , in Endell Street, Covent Garden, then dominated by Odhams Press, in turn reigned over by the benevolent Lord Southwood.
The cosy status quo seemed as secure as the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
But all regimes must end, just as surely as we will die: though we don't like to face it, any more than we like to face death.
How fortunate for the denizens of The Daily Herald , then, that they could not see into the future — even the immediate future!
Jane's appointment was quick and unceremonial.
‘I like you, I like your personality, you're on,’ said the maverick editor before she had uttered one well-prepared word.
At lunchtime she was taken across the road to the paper's local, The Cross Keys, to meet the gang, at which initiation she remembered in particular a short, genial, Punch-like ‘ex-RAF type’(as he liked to call himself) named Arthur Eperon, who later became a well-known travel writer.
She never forgot his name as she connected it with heraldry.
She did forget the name of the other most memorable character, bearded and effusive.
He was the television critic who shortly afterwards unfortunately wrote up a programme which had been cancelled, and got the sack.
Hannen Swaffer — revered almost as the Bernard Shaw of left-wing journalism — used to blow in and write his piece on the corner of someone else's desk.
He never had his own desk on principle, as he said all desks had chains attached.
Too true.
The feature editor had a bad stutter, and Hannen Swaffer was deaf, so to watch them trying to communicate was hilarious.
But the halcyon days were short-lived.
A takeover was under way by the grey men and the only ones who survived it were the grey people.
The old Herald , moral and earnest, was metamorphosed, with supreme irony, into the unspeakable Sun .
Being obliged to earn a living without intermission, Jane had no time to pick and choose, but snapped up the first offer — on a woman's magazine.
Now this, to outsiders, is an unbelievable world, totally severed from the outside world, utterly divorced from reality.
The only analogy was St Trinian's, but this was dead serious.
No spark of humour (even of sanity) was allowed to invade the hallowed Mixture as Before: Beauty, Knitting, Fashion, Cookery, Short Story, in embalmed vacuity, delivered from that pinnacle of self-righteousness which only the mediocre could sustain.
The editor, Pamela Hellebore, was fat.
Perhaps it was puppy-fat because she always said she was very young, though she didn't look it.
She had a habit of shrieking.
When the magazine folded she specialised in dried flowers which had the virtue of not being able to shriek back.
Her aide, Fiona Shurll, the ex-editor of an obscure knitting magazine, was unbelievably like an owl.
She had a round face, round eyes which she rolled and raised to the ceiling while she spake (spoke was too mundane a term for her pronouncements) and she invariably began these pronouncements with ‘Whooo —’ to which Jane mentally added ‘To-whit-too-whoo’, and concluded that there must be an owl species called Shurll.
Whatever happened to Shurll, Jane wondered — did she go and live in a hollow tree?
The chief sub lived with her brother in Clapham and used Epsom Salts in her bath.
‘I think that's a good idea — don't you?’ was her leitmotif .
It reminded Jane of one of the  Professor Branestawm stories she had read as a child in which the characters were photographs come alive, each repeating, over and over again, the sentence he or she had been saying at the moment the photograph was taken.
Another weird species which Jane encountered in magazineland was the Public Relations Woman.
She took various forms, but was usually overdressed and over voluble.
The job was looked upon as glamorous and attracted some deb-types.
Jane came across one called Georgina, whom she had been at school with.
Georgina, whose Pekinese accompanied her everywhere, took Jane up to her office in the lunch hour, while the head ‘image-maker’ was out.
There were a number of plastic heads — wig holders — and on each was stuck a label ‘out to —’(with the name of a well-known hairdresser).
‘The wigs are in the cupboard really,’ said Georgina.
‘That's just a ploy — done to impress a prospective client who's coming this afternoon.,
A second deb-type took Jane out to lunch at The Hyde Park Hotel.
‘Red or white?
Let's settle for rosé.’
They always said that: it was somehow symptomatic of PR: sit on the fence — never upset anybody.
Halfway through lunch, this blonde, baby-faced girl started to kill herself with anxiety because she saw someone she knew but could not remember their name.
She flapped and fretted for the remainder of the meal.
What the hell does it matter?
Jane wondered.
But at that time the PR mentality (one could not call it mind) was new to her.
Later this rosebud spent a weekend at the stately home of a young lord.
She instructed all her friends to keep their fingers crossed, played her cards right, and married him.
It didn't last, but at least she acquired a title.
At the other end of the spectrum was an obese one-eyed woman who wore scarlet heart-shaped specs and looked like a brothel madame.
She had a toy-boy in tow whom she called her ‘animal’.
‘Where's my Animal?
I like to enjoy my Animal,’ she roared predatorily, smacking her lips.
It's amazing what some men will do for a meal ticket.
Some twenty years previously she had produced a son, who was prematurely middle-aged, bald and overweight.
‘He's full of decent sex,’ she confided to Jane.
Jane escaped as soon as she could and never went back, though she once saw  ‘madame’ tango at a press party.
It reminded her irresistably of a scene in Fantasia .
What mystified her was how any firm could employ such a gorgon to promote their products.
On the magazine, Jane's main task was to wrestle with the anglicising of indifferent American short stories, while the particular harpy who was her boss gazed out of the window for ninety per cent of the time.
Eventually, about six weeks after joining, Jane was indiscreet enough to ask why they could not use English writers, and promptly got the sack.
She appealed to the Father of the Chapel on the grounds of wrongful dismissal, but he shook his head sadly.
‘I could have resolved it for you,’ he said, ‘if only you'd come to see me earlier.
Your editor, you know, is notoriously devious, so I always take my secretary in as witness.
She (Jane's editor) is so jittery it's said she wriggles about on her chair to such an extent that she wears out several pairs of knickers a week!’
However, the NUJ man managed to squeeze a month's money out of the management and Jane crossed Blackfriars Bridge back into the real world in a thunderstorm but with a light heart, passing the inevitable drunk Irishman proclaiming to the heavens: ‘Jasus, Mary and Joseph — a bludy hurricane!’
For Jane, that slice of life evaporated as if it had never existed.
She never looked at a woman's magazine after that, though she saw from their covers, displayed beside the supermarket till, that they had not changed, but went on churning out the same old stuff.
Jane continued her career — if you can dignify it with such a name — on Vogue , where the personnel manager fiercely shot at her the rhetorical question: ‘You've got a private income,of course ?’
Where the editor rattled her half dozen strings of large beads and remarked with a toothy grin: ‘They say it's the fashion —’ Where Gerald, the art editor — who was reputed to have a fabulous house on the Chelsea Embankment full of priceless works of art — was so sensitive that he had to have a soundproof office specially built for him, while his assistant Jeremy padded along like his superior's spaniel, and if Gerald wore a shirt of subtle pink on Monday, his minion would appear in the same shade on Tuesday.
Where top photographer ‘Parks’ was  utterly unable to take photographs unless he wore an ornamental skull cap.
Jane was surprised at the ferocity of gay rows.
‘I'll be sick on the floor if he comes near me’— a photographer loaned from American Vogue threatened if Gerald should intrude once more on his studio photo sessions.
It was all over a Brazilian boy who looked after the props.
Jane found it highly amusing.
Jane was invariably caught out by Cecil Beaton on the telephone, thinking it was his housekeeper.
‘Cecil Beaton here,’he trilled.
Then she would go down to his cluttered little house in South Kensington with his hundreds of contacts (for he was clever enough never to leave anything to chance) and he would pronounce them all ‘Absolutely Divine,’ but at last succeed, with supreme anguish, in selecting one or two which were even more divine than the others.
The ‘abominable army’ of fashion editors (trailing clouds of Benenden they came) who could not write, nipped over to Deauville for the weekend, often wearing dark specs to hide the bags under their eyes, while Jane converted their illegible notes into copy.
She stood it for a year.
It was funny, in a Lewis Carroll sort of way, and at least the result was passable, if only as a trade magazine, whereas the woman's magazine had been beyond a joke and she could not bear to look at the end product.
Her next editor was a man.
She was pregnant and it was just starting to show.
He was terrified that she might ‘drop it’ in the corridor, and so, to put his mind at rest, she told him she was only three months on, whereas in fact she was six, but carried her offspring high, so that it didn't show too much.
‘There can be NO QUESTION of you staying on.’
He issued the command like a Roman edict, raising his voice to a querulous crescendo.
He was an old, stooping, emaciated bachelor, aghast at the facts of life; he never smiled, but glowered defensively at the world from under his eyebrows, and she felt a certain sympathy for him.
He was a rotten journalist.
it was only the stress of the job that kept him anything like upright at all.
He was just there because he'd always been there.
All the same, Jane stayed on to within a month of the birth because they couldn't do  without her and she needed the money.
But he never knew.
‘Three twelve,’ said the auctioneer's girl, and disappeared into an inner office.
Jane brightened.
‘£312!’ she thought, ‘All my problems solved!’
Then the girl came back and gave Jane…£3–12p in cash.
Emotional troubles pale before financial ones.
Jane had run out of money.
She had sent her younger son to a private school because the switch to comprehensives was such a mess and because he had a horror of a huge education factory after his primary school where everybody was known by their first name.
The trouble was, the private school fees had suddenly doubled.
Running out of money is most educative.
When Jane asked for an overdraft, the bank manager (slogan: ‘We Like to Say ‘Yes’’), a pompous Dad's Army look-alike, after conferring with some nasty men in suits who turned their backs to her, had shown her the door.
So she had ‘cried all the way from the bank’.
No matter whether it's the ‘Yes’ bank, the action bank, the thoroughbred bank, the listening bank, or the bank to which all points, you can't make a friend of your bank manager unless you've got loadsamoney.
They're all bastards.
The real villians of our society are the money men.
With a mortgage, you have to run very fast to stay in the same place — like the Red queen.
Jane dreamt she was clinging to the edge of a cliff, and her bank manager was hammering at her fingers.
She then, most unwillingly, asked her sole surviving relative — her uncle-in-law, Arpad, for a loan.
He was the younger brother of Lajos' father, and had been a successful export — a businessman who owned a factory.
In his dress, he out-Englished the English, wearing tweeds with huge checks, or blazers with outsize badges.
He was very limited in mind and interests but had not altogether lost his native humour.
‘I can't speak any language any more — not even Hungarian,’ he would say.
He was a hard worker, but Jane marvelled at how he had been able to build up a business while remaining practically unintelligible.
He had an expensive ‘bijou’ residence with fluorescent tubes running under the banisters and a Music Centre with a huge bank of switches and buttons which he had no idea how to use.
Mantovani was his favourite ‘composer’.
And he had a status-symbol mega car which he drove very slowly in the middle lane, his knuckles white with the strength of his grip on the steering wheel.
He had been stopped by the police several times for driving too slowly.
How he and many others ever get through their driving test in Britain is a recurring nightmare.
He had no friends, only business contacts, like his bank manager who was quite willing, together with his boring wife, to be entertained by the little foreigner.
Jane had once invited a bank manager to Christmas Eve drinks, which he had loftily declined.
She was in credit at the time too.
— but was obviously on the wrong side of the finance barrier.
She never repeated the goodwill gesture.
Money was Arpad's lifeblood.
He needed it to give him security, because he had none within himself.
He was possessed by his possessions, and had two topics of conversation: age and money.
How old: and how much?
He was seventy and continually engaged in frenetic schemes to bolster up his old age.
He made himself ill with the worry.
‘When I was hungry I hadn't money.
Now I have money, I can't eat!’
So when Jane asked him for a loan, he snapped back: ‘I think my first duty is to look after myself!’
Jane was angry, not just because he had refused, but because it was unbearable that such a worm could be so successful.
The illiterate, inarticulate businessman, the exportable type, the survivor!
The most likely to inherit the earth.
With the spiders.
So now Jane was selling the family antiques.
Maybe they weren't antique, or weren't in fashion: anyway, as usual, she had no luck.
Bills are never late, nor lost (payment cheques often are).
Problems come by every post.
The postman becomes the Daily Dread.
Nothing was going her way, but she did not panic.
When you have a lot of trouble, you learn to live with it.
It's the people with easy lives who make heavy weather.
Difficulties, she told herself, like the wind, will fan a strong flame, but put a weak one out.
Still, she had a sneaking hope that as she'd reached her lowest ebb, the tide might turn.
She had to try in every direction.
Trouble was, she had run out of directions.
Except one.
Advertising.
The Grovel Industry, where you get paid danger money because it's so insecure.
There was nothing for it.
It was easy for journalists to get jobs as copywriters.
Advertising was a large tatty lino-floored room crammed with people who all wore faded jeans de rigueur , with a smell of spray mount, and magic markers littered everywhere.
And a great deal of noise: people continually shouting across the room.
The posh agency was terribly ashamed of its creative department, and never took clients up there.
They were shut away like lunatics and made to use the back lift.
There was a breathless hush in the executive floor all day, perfumed by smart secretaries, softened by deep carpets, cultured by pictures on the wall — not advertising, but Art.
Advertisements were only admitted into the reception area.
On the floor above the loony bin, nobody quite knew what took place.
It was called Market Research.
Yet all research projects seemed to be expensively commissioned from outside firms.
Towards the end of her time in advertising, Jane was actually offered a job in the mystery department.
She said jokingly: ‘If I moved up here, I'd lose my tenuous grip on reality altogether!’
But the marketing director was not amused.
She knew by then that the only bearable department in the agency was the creative — the Bin.
When Jane first entered the Bin, Rod, a diminutive Scot, was engaged in trying to climb round the walls of the room without touching the floor, loudly cheered by all on his way.
Later, there was frenzied activity in the creation of a spoof campaign for Tunnel Vision, a ‘new’ TV channel.
Soon visuals with clever captions were pinned all round the room.
Jane had struck an ‘off’ period, for advertising goes in  fits and starts.
Relieved of the dead hand of the client and his shadow, the account executive, the creative department ran riot and produced some brilliant stuff.
Their masterpieces were witty birthday and leaving cards.
Jane kept hers for years.
It was in the Bin that Jane worked alongside Salad (as they called him) Rushdie, who was a part-time copywriter.
He was also busy campaigning for racial equality.
‘You will never do anything on your own?’ he told Jane, ‘you must always collaborate with like-minded people.’
All the same, novel-writing is a lonely business, and English-educated Rushdie was perhaps too trusting.
Novelists can hardly be expected to be au fait with international law and religion.
Surely there should be legal experts to advise them?
Her first job was to produce ideas and scripts for a TV commercial.
The clients chose the dullest and safest of the half dozen submitted, as was their wont.
And this, only after a series of killing meetings in which Jane invariably nodded off, to be kicked into consciousness under the table by jean, her art director.
When the day of the shoot came, she was astounded by the transformation in the appearance of the creative director, who took the day off to attend.
He was completely kitted out in film director's gear — cap, dark specs, cigar, baggy casuals, replacing his usual natty suit — for faded jeans stopped short of him — he had a separate office, complete with pretty secretary.
Unfortunately the commercials company had omitted to provide a Director's Chair, so he had to make do with a low wall.
His presence was not necessary.
On the other hand, the most important person, the cameraman, wore jeans and a Micky Mouse T-shirt, over which his mournful, deadpan moon face shone incongruously.
Jane had the opportunity — or rather, misfortune — of an adman's view of two foreign countries.
The first was Switzerland: safe Switzerland, protected by mountains and international banking.
The scenery was beautiful, but it had not entered into the soul of the people.
Did not two of history's greatest villains come from beautiful surroundings?
Hitler from Austria.
Stalin from Georgia.
She travelled with a boring ad-team of account director and illiterate art director, called Clive.
She thought that breed was extinct, but he, fat, bearded, boss-eyed, aged thirty-six but looking fifty — an effigy of dissipation — was unfortunately very much alive.
He was useless at his job, but indefatigable at imposing his presence on contacts in pubs.
It seemed to Jane very fitting that he should come from Cleethorpes.
Surely England must outdo any other country in ugly place-names — Scunthorpe, Skegness, Biggleswade…how did they happen?
Clive's favourite, perfectly serious,leitmotif was: ‘We're a top team, aren't we!’ until Jane felt she'd scream if he said it once more, and ordered breakfast in her room so as to avoid him first thing in the morning, at least .
The account director, Bogg, was a short, square ginger-haired man with a very large head, but not much in it.
His leitmotif was: ‘How much will it cost?
Double it!
Simple!’
Their venue was a multinational with huge plate glass windows overlooking Lake Geneva.
It was manned by zombies who not only clocked in and out of work, but for lunch also.
There was a ‘clock’ beside every lift.
The governing board included, as always, a representative from the Swiss government, to give operations a veneer of official approval.
Jane was amused, however, to see that a whole large room was devoted to ‘activist’(said with a sort of spitting intonation) literature: Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and other unmentionables.
The company made a large profit exporting wholly unsuitable milk powder to Africa, where there was no pure water to mix it with.
Babies died.
Never mind, play on ignorance.
It's good for business.
She was chuffed to observe, however, how nervous these well-tailored industrialists were of the ‘activists’.
The English representative on the board asked her whether she'd like to work for the company in Switzerland, as resident copywriter (for Jane was bright, though she despised the ‘profession’).
She replied: ‘No, thank you.
I'd rather be a street sweeper.’
At least the Swiss were very clean.
Later, in the ‘eighties, that same high-ranking sartorial executive — by then with another company — was hauled before the Serious Fraud Squad in London.
Jane  was not surprised.
The air in Switzerland was polluted by money.
When they went out to dinner (for they were a ‘top team,!) she was incredulous at the Great Gatsby look of the other diners — all middle-aged.
She never remembered seeing any young people.
The second, even greater and more prolonged misfortune, was to go to the USA, where the agency she worked for had their head office.
First to New York, which she thought was the ugliest, filthiest town she'd ever seen, typified by their slouching, smoking mounted police.
A spade should be substituted for the heart on the car sticker.
Broadway, Times Square, Greenwich Village (their pathetic Chelsea) made her belligerently European.
But on reflection, she fancied she was too late for New York.
Places have their Time.
They then went south by Amtrak (the railway fast disappearing, like BR).
She remembered only two things about New York with affection: the man at Pennsylvania Station, perched high in a little glass box, who announced the trains in the rhythm of a square dance, and the man who returned her purse which she'd dropped on the platform — a black man.
And she recalled one thing with amusement: God and Mammon, side by side at the hotel: a Bible and an American Express application leaflet in her bedroom.
South, they dropped in at New Orleans, where again she found the reputation was far superior to the reality.
The ‘old’ Orleans was like a museum: streets, balconies, blues saloons, street musicians, carefully preserved in aspic specially for tourists.
She noticed that the horses drawing the ‘olde’ cabs were not all that well cared for, and several clinked along with loose shoes.
Why travel thousands of miles to visit a spoof Paris?
It was inevitable, she supposed, when America was seen by most through a haze created by  its films — the greatest publicity stunt ever.
The journey through Louisiana was more down to earth.
The train's arrival was an Event and whole families gathered on the station platforms to see their travelling members off.
Jane was squeezed beside the fattest black woman she'd ever seen, shaking like a jelly with continual mirth.
But Louisiana was at least real and human.
The worst was to come.
Texas.
Why did Sam Houston ever reclaim it?
It was only fit for crocodiles, not even for the abysmal species of human life she found there.
They lived in luxurious misery in sub-divisions , like an army encampment (which subdivision do you come from?)
They travelled in cars proudly called ‘Suburban’.
They inhabited houses which, in the building boom organised under the strict and uncontrolled power of the Mafia, laughably resembled English houses, with pitched roofs and fireplaces — in a temperature which rarely fell below thirty degrees and a humidity comparable to Brazil's.
Jane took early morning walks and watched the building operations.
Designs ranged from one to six.
When they reached six, they began at one again.
Here and there they charged extra for ‘landscaping’, which equalled one or two flowerbeds in the front ‘yards’.
Nobody walked.
She was often offered lifts, but when she said, thank you, but she was going for a walk, a pitying expression spread over the faces of the drivers.
‘The accent — English.
Mad English.
Poor thing.
She can't help it.’
The vacancy — mental and physical — was claustrophobic.
Never — even in South America with all its faults — had she seen human life like this.
It was like another planet, and the rest of the world was indeed another planet to these people.
Few had been abroad, despite the frequent German and Hungarian names displayed Texas-fashion outside their houses.
These belonged to their forbears.
This generation fed on the advertisement-ridden local paper, thick as a book, which was tossed daily onto their front yards.
Worse even than English local papers, which are thin and at least read by a minority.
These had the news crammed onto the back page, and very little of it.
News from another planet.
Washington Post?
New York Times ?
Not here.
America as a  whole might be drunk with self-congratulation, but the Texans went further: they were totally unaware even of the other States.
And Houston was, as the television reminded one every other second, ‘the greatest town on earth’.
With a murder a minute.
The Texans were a very unhealthy race.
They suffered from bronchial diseases — even the children — and Jane made herself unpopular by suggesting it might be something to do with the ubiquitous air conditioning.
In the houses — never a window opened — in the cars, in the gruesome, echoing hypermarkets set in the middle of nowhere (where they wished you a ‘nice day’ at 10 pm).
Even to get money from the bank, you didn't have to leave your car.
Your cheque went, and the money came back, through the car window (opened ever so little)— on a conveyor belt.
The endemic hypochondria of the Texans was milked by a plethora of expensive clinics which most of them attended.
Jane accompanied her hostess, who had taken her ten-year-old bronchial, backward (‘France is the capital of Paris’) overactive child to one, and while waiting was confided in by a fashionable, staring-eyed woman.
‘I'm being poisoned by my saucepans,’ she whispered darkly.
‘Then why don't you get a new set?’ asked Jane.
English.
Steely silence.
Another patient filled the gap: ‘I think Mrs Thatcher an’ yer King and queen are jus' wunnerful!’she said.
Jane's host inhabited magnified suburban house, Style No 3, and there was a whole tree growing in a tub in his hall.
He was an uncomplicated, well-meaning Organisation Man and was always called ‘JC’, which stood either for Jesus Christ or Julius Caesar.
Jane could never remember which, but it was one or the other.
God's air was not good enough even for the Methodist chapel.
It too was air-conditioned.
It was clinical white with a spotless red carpet, and full on Sundays.
Even the children were obliged to wear their best clothes, and obviously uncomfortable — the boys in suits, collars and ties, like a 1930s movie.
The God who hovered above was doubtless white and all-American.
There was not an Indian or Mexican to be seen.
Surely they can't all be white and holy?
Jane looked around for some other inhabitants.
The Indians had been hived off into reserves like national parks  for endangered species, where they made plastic souvenirs for tourists.
But the white-and-holy showed them off like prized exhibits, for they liked to make the most of their scanty history.
The Mexicans crossed the border to sell fruit and vegetables very cheap to the over-fed Americans, though Jane noticed that her overweight hosts made a great ceremony of using tablets instead of sugar in their coffee.
The food these suburban Texans threw away would have been enough to feed the whole of Latin America.
Jane saw only one black man, driving a ‘garbage’ cart.
And she glimpsed the flip side of the coin: clusters of caravans where the ‘poor whites’ lived.
No joke in the Texan climate.
One rainy morning, she did see some cowboys, though no horses.
They were breakfasting in a highway café — eggs sunny side up.
And to her amazement she saw that they were all wearing their stetsons.
A friend had told her that they never took them off, but she had thought that he was pulling her leg.
In the loo, the graffiti on the wall said: ‘Texans are living proof that a bull can copulate with a human.’
Another disgruntled traveller, no doubt.
The only memorable ‘in the round’ person she met was her host's eighty-year-old mother, quick, intelligent and agile with, moreover, a sense of humour.
‘Ma mother —‘she told Jane, ‘came from Tennessee in a covered wagon.
She didn't like it here, so back she went home again.’
Jane realised then that she had never really believed in covered wagons, other than as a vehicle for John Wayne.
(Just as she has never believed Christ existed until she read about him in Tacitus — an independent witness.)
How depressed those tough pioneers would be to see their descendants, who had not only lost their pioneer spirit, but the ability to walk!
It's through the intrepidity of our ancestors that any of us are here at all, but this was an extreme case of decadence.
Most depressingly of all, there seemed no hope, even among the young people.
Jane was in a junk food café trying to eat chips off a floppy paper plate and drink red wine three-quarters full of ice, when a young man with long hair entered carrying a guitar, ‘Ugh — don't like him,’ said her host's son, aged sixteen.
‘Why not?— you don't know  him.’
‘He's dirdy.’
‘He's not’.
‘Well, he's different anyway.
He ain't one of us.’
Britain, the alleged home of ‘not one of us’, seemed to be wearing a halo to Jane at that moment.
After she got home, Jane received a letter from the United States.
There was a candle on the stamp with the words: ‘The light of America, fueled by Reason and Truth.’
Meanwhile, on the radio, there was news from El Salvador.
Jane came out of the tube station and walked along the road.
An outer tentacle of London stretched before her in all its identical horror, a ribbon of living units on each side, a mock Tudor pub at every roundabout, fragmented countryside surviving amidst the sprawl of buildings.
She had been offered a job called ‘copy chief at one of the agency's clients on the strength of the work she had done for this client at the agency.
As the money was better, all the children still at home, and moreover as the bank had begun to play ball-games again, she had felt constrained to accept.
Misery acquaints one with strange employment.
That is how Jane entered British Industry.
The first thing she noticed was the car park.
It was hierarchical.
A big oblong for the managing director, six medium ones for the directors, a dozen small ones for the salesmen.
The first person she met was the Manager of Managers, a man nearing retiring age.
(‘I'd give them six months, survival when they leave here,’ the doorman had told her.)
The Manager of Managers had been there thirty years.
‘He went far because he's so correct he never upset anybody,’ was the general opinion she heard later.
What will you do without this place?
Jane wondered, what have you got it in you to do?
No, probably, six months of idleness and he'd have had it.
Outwardly, she took his proferred hand.
‘Pleased to meet you,’ he said.
‘Glad you're joining us.’
(Oh! thought Jane, because I'm good at my work?)
But he continued: ‘Because you won't be getting pregnant.
Got all that behind you.’
He sat down behind his middle-sized desk (eighteen inches smaller than the directors') and placed the tips of his fingers together.
His voice took on a well-rehearsed tone.
He was at once timid and status-conscious.
His friends called him an easy-going chap; his enemies called him weak.
‘The other lady here —’ there was only one other female executive, though plenty of secretaries mincing about —‘Phyllis — she's brand manager for one of our OTC (over the counter) products — Bitewell Baby Rusks.
The factory's moved to Southampton — part of our diversification.
And Phyllis put her skates on — off she went — bought a house down there — she moved in before the factory opened.
There's keenness for you!’ he concluded admiringly.
(Shortly after the rusks were banned for having bits of metal in them, the factory closed — and what did dear Phyllis do then, poor thing?)
Jane had removed her specs for a short myopic rest, but now put them on again, quickly.
Was he?
Yes he was!
Crying!!
‘My managers,’ he sobbed, embracing the air.
‘My managers!’
Overcome with emotion, he led her out to meet some of the other prisoners in Algox' gilded cage: first, he mistily introduced her to a tall, thin nervy man with black brows knitted in a permanent frown.
His voice was tragic, the words bubbled out rapidly on top of a sigh.
‘In a perfect world,’ he whispered, making little darting gestures with his hands, ‘everything would go smoothly, silently, on oiled wheels….’
His voice tailed away.
Apparently he had been devising procedural systems for years, but nobody used them and everybody laughed at him.
Now computers had been added to natural incompetence, and Cyril the Systems was on the edge of a nervous breakdown.
Jane met no more people then because there was a Meeting.
Life at Algox existed within a framework of Meetings (I go to Meetings, therefore I am).
Unfortunately, nothing sent her to sleep like the human voice, and, struggle as she might, she kept dropping off, then waking with a start.
She heard, as if from afar, the meeting-spiel: ‘Basically…at this point in time…credibility…rationalisation…realistic…restructuring…
I've got a lot of time for…personnel…track record….’
She became desperate to break into this institutional twaddle, so when asked what  she thought, she agreed enthusiastically, in order to keep them quiet and terminate the interminable.
As they rose, she noticed the man sitting next to her: ebullient, extrovert and coarse.
‘Didn't you feel it?’
He leered.
‘Feel what?’
‘I was rubbing your leg.’
Then he looked under the table, ‘Oh no — it was the table leg.
And there I was, rubbing away!!
But come, let me show you my office,’ he held out his hand, ‘Ray Shallows, Promotions Manager.’
He had a loud metallic voice and a loud metallic laugh.
He was very assertive, but had nothing worth asserting.
They passed a line of doors to his particular pigeon-hole.
Jane was nearly knocked over by his aftershave, then noted all the details she would have expected: his exactly filled expensive/cheapo suit, his red tie and pocket handkerchief, his shiny shoes, the leather folded at an angle to form a point, the artificial orchids on his desk, and she remembered the untidy Bin and faded jeans with nostalgia.
He then showed her with great pride some utterly appalling objects which were used to persuade customers to buy their products.
Incentives, they were called.
Vases, ornaments, vanity cases ‘for the wife’— all complete kitsch.
But this was Ray Shallows' kingdom and it was hard to escape from his flood of ecstasy.
By a supreme effort, however, Jane managed to remain polite, and to get away.
Now it was lunch time and she rushed out before anyone could ask her to join them.
A very straight military-type man was waiting for her when she reached her own pigeon-hole, which she shared with her assistant (off sick).
She almost expected him to salute.
‘Evelyn's often off sick,’ he announced, ‘high-strung girl.’
He took a deep breath before he spoke as if to keep himself calm.
‘I'm Jim, supplies manager.
Office supplies.
What'll you be needing?’
Jane mentioned a typewriter, paper, carbon — when asked for anything, Jim had a habit of drawing in his breath even more sharply, as if he'd been wounded.
He never said ‘yes’, but ‘I'll see what can be done’— and went off bravely, as if to battle.
At three o'clock she heard the banging of car doors.
Looking out, she saw men in suits getting into the medium-sized cars.
The large car was already gone.
These were the managers going home.
Then she realised why the meeting had dragged on, when the matter under discussion could  have been finalised in ten minutes: it was the morning's work.
Their days went like this: a) dictate letters b) meeting c) lunch d) sign letters e) go home.
Anything — or nothing — can be bloated into a full-time job.
That's Parkinson's Law.
The real workers — the producers — kept things going.
But a lot of ‘desk’ activity is invented to give people importance and provide them with something to do.
People like the managers.
Never was so little done by so many.
Jane found Algox the hardest job to bear of any that she'd ever had.
The church clock, slowly and deliberately striking seven in the morning, was like a knell to that day's death.
On Saturdays and Sundays she grew more sanguine, but the mood was dispersed on Monday morning with the prospect of enduring that place for another week — right through till Friday when all the managers wore tweeds.
Evelyn, her assistant, reappeared after her flu (she never had colds, only flu).
She had a white puffy panicky face and prominent eyes accentuated by pink eyeshadow.
Although she was scrawny, she still managed to have a double chin.
Her hair needed washing and her legwarmers were in concertinas round her ankles.
Jane found her an exhausting girl (she was twenty-six) and yet she was sorry for her.
Evelyn was just about the most self-deluded person she had ever met, a vociferous pseudo-feminist.
In fact, most of her energy went in talk (on an intellectual level, mind you) so she had very little left to use on work.
Women who talk a lot about independence are often the most dependent.
Evelyn was very voluble on the rights of women, was, she said, a Committed Feminist, yet Jane had never met anyone so utterly dependent.
But the contradiction had never, apparently, occurred to her.
She had trapped a fellow-student at Cambridge —‘Brian had the longest hair in college,’ she chirped admiringly, ‘and as soon as we'd graduated, we got married — for fun.’
(Funny thing to do for fun, thought Jane.)
It was Evelyn's idea, as Jane had guessed.
Brian was so thoroughly weak that marriage to Evelyn, dire as it was, was better than no framework to his life, since his working-class parents were children of a lesser god.
Evelyn was weak and yet strong, like bindweed.
Her incessant chatter was mainly of feminism, she referred pointedly to her ‘walk Person ’, yet when her typewriter went  wrong, she bleated: ‘Is there a man around?,
She was incapable of taking any action without seeking justification from her compliant husband.
But she ruled the roost: ‘I don't like the heat.
Poor Brian can never have the holiday he wants.
I am awful, aren't I!’
Yet if she was asked out, she exclaimed: ‘Oh — but I can't go without Brian!’
Brian, his famous hair cut by now, used to fetch her dutifully every evening.
He walked with a peculiar goose step, though there was apparently nothing wrong with his legs.
Jane instinctively disliked anyone who marched or strutted.
She had never met anyone who expressed her opinions so convincingly and who was so unfailingly wrong about everything as Evelyn.
She absorbed influences around her indiscriminately, like blotting paper, and was so busy, strident and involved that she could never draw back to see things as they really were.
Her high-pitched voice, rapid speech and stabbing at the telephone betrayed her lack of balance and control.
She had already had one nervous breakdown, which was no doubt a great nuisance to everybody, and now she was heading for something worse: agoraphobia.
This enabled her to opt out of active life and become totally dependent.
Jane suspected that she had brought it on herself.
A psychotic person would enjoy it.
Also, it was a way of holding Brian in an even tighter noose.
In a way, her departure was a relief.
Things going out of control had been the spice of life to Evelyn, but upset Jane, with her love of order.
Looking back, it seemed inevitable that Evelyn would go down with some sort of psychological trouble.
She had been continually up the spout, or over the moon, about someone or something.
Yet it was a pity, for she was not stupid, and could be friendly and generous.
But she could not, would not, control her emotions.
Jane's immediate boss was called Bertram Tinker.
‘You'll like Bertie,’ Evelyn had promised her with characteristic misjudgement, ‘he's very with it’.
Bertie was the director of publicity at Algox.
He had been Away on a Course when she first joined, and when she met him it was — as far as she was concerned — hate at first sight.
His pate was bald, encircled by a monk-like fringe of hair.
This he grew long and combed up, due north.
As compensation for not being  able to grow hair on his head, he achieved monstrously long sideboards.
His eyes were high, small close together and calculating.
He had no abilities, but made up for this drawback with sharp elbows.
He was a highly tuned machine for using people.
Like many untalented people, he was full of futile energy.
He constantly fiddled with that badge of office, a ready-made, multicoloured, bow tie, as he talked to Jane.
‘Like most creative people,’ he said affectedly, ‘I'm very easily bored.’
He was a non-starter, but didn't realise it and was excessively pleased with himself.
Organisations like Algox insulate such people from the world.
He liked to refer to his ‘abrasive’ personality and Jane noticed that his colleagues all gave in to him.
It was depressing that arrogance paid off so well.
But in truth he was a tatty little man with a furtive walk.
You have to get people out from behind their desks to see them clearly.
Algox prospered despite the ludicrous management.
Its wealth depended on the scientists who worked in a large lab behind the administrative block.
There was minimal communication between the two, but Jane breached the divide as — partly to get away from Evelyn's chatter, gossip and telephones, she took to working for part of each day in the scientific library.
She felt more at home with the scientists.
They were at an opposite pole from the self-important, vacuous management.
They wandered about, apparently aimlessly, in white coats.
The drinks machine was in the passage leading to the library and sometimes one or other of them would sit down for a break, and she found it a relief to talk to a real human being.
One such was Simon, whose vague manner concealed an agile and acute mind.
He was one of their most brilliant scientists, his research having led to some of Algox' bestselling products.
He was tall, thin, dark haired, slightly stooped, with a dry sense of humour — a pleasant change from the humourless ciphers in the other block.
He was as unable to bounce the ball of small talk as Jane, and had the quietness of a man absorbed in his thoughts.
He was under no illusion about the management types: ‘They act a part and in the end the part becomes them!’
And he was totally unconscious of money.
He was unmarried and lived in a superlatively untidy one-room flat quite near the lab, to which he travelled by bicycle.
‘I couldn't live in this mess if I had a woman,’ he said.
He found the research interesting, which was the only thing which made him stay, but the firm didn't own him.
Now and again he appeared in a new/secondhand tweed jacket or a new/old pair of shoes, duly noted by his companions who said: ‘Ah!
Simon's been down Oxfam again.’
Talking to him gave Jane the idea (obvious, as most good ideas seem, once they're thought of) of producing a guide to the firm's products, loose-leaf for updating, to be distributed to doctors and clinics.
Simon thought it sensible and practical ‘which is more than can be said for most of their gimmicks, but’ he warned her, ‘if they like it they'll take it over as their own.
It's not so much what people are that matters, as what they think they are, and they’— waving his hand towards the admin block, ‘are all on an ego trip.’
Jane did not really care, and told Bertram — he was offended if you called him Bertie to his face — about it.
He paled slightly, was heavily non-committal and barked: ‘Thank you’.
She was dismissed.
For the next few weeks she ploughed on, doing her normal writing, extolling the virtues of the firm's products.
Then one day, Evelyn came in waving what looked like a handsome dark green ring file.
Evelyn chatted to everyone.
‘Good isn't it!
This is the plastic one.
They've got them in leather too — for special customers.
Bertie's idea!’
And she slammed it down on the desk.
Jane gave nothing away.
‘Never mind,’ she told herself, ‘keep in good terms with them.
It's their whole existence.
But it's only a tiny part of my life.’
Simon said she should have put her idea into a memo for Bertie.
‘What difference would it have made?’
Jane shrugged.
‘I'm not after promotion.
Nor more money.
I wouldn't get it anyway.
Let them play their games.’
But then she was confronted with a game she could not play.
Bertie buzzed for her.
He greeted her with a thick-lipped smile.
‘How about a spot of dinner tonight — and then back to my place — I've got a flat at —’ he named a nearby location.
She knew he had the proverbial wife and  two kids at Camberley.
He told enough boring stories about them and ended each office day with: ‘I must go or my children will be afraid I've got lost.’
(If I were them, I'd be glad, thought Jane.)
But his domestic situation wouldn't have mattered if she had fancied him, but she didn't.
She pleaded a prior engagement.
‘Next week?’
She shook her head.
‘Not ever?’
‘No.’
In obvious anger he dismissed her with a wave.
Two weeks passed during which she didn't see him.
Then she was summoned again.
‘I want a word with you,’ he said, scowling.
‘All right.
Choose your word.’
‘We're rationalising our staff.
I'm sorry, we're discontinuing the post of copy chief.’
There was a pause, filled by the voice of a brand manager on the other side of the partition extolling the virtues of ‘our new product guide’ on the telephone.
Bertie felt the need to say something else.
‘All the copywriting will be done by the agency.’
‘You're giving me the sack —Sir ?’ she said with contempt.
He wilted.
‘Er — we have to discontinue your services — it's the cuts, you see.
Rationalisation.’
‘But it is the sack,Sir , even though it's dressed up in fine words.’
‘Er — yes — I'm….’
‘Thank you’, she interrupted, and left the room.
This was at once a problem and a happy release.
She could not bear the claustrophobia of the place, which magnified the smallest incidents or most trivial remarks into giant horrors.
Everybody over-reacted.
It was an infectious disease.
All businessmen are dull, whatever their age.
The rot of what they do invades their brains.
What Jane could never understand, looking back, was: if this was a successful example of British industry (Queen's Award for Export and all that), whatever could the unsuccessful ones be like?
Jane was in a state of high excitement.
She knew she had been dismissed from Algox because she had not been up for grabs.
She also knew that Bertie had been lying to her over ‘discontinuing’ the post.
She heard shortly after that they had appointed someone else.
She felt very strongly that now was the time to start a new phase, when at last her life would be her own.
For years, she had nurtured an ambition to set up a conservation centre and nature trail in the country; she would need a house and some land.
So, only three days after she had got the sack, she caught a train — drawn by a diesel called Peter Pan — from Liverpool Street into Suffolk.
She said nothing to her family, she wanted it to be a surprise.
She left early, bought a day return, and sat back to enjoy the journey.
Her spirits rose as they left the ugliness of London behind.
It was September, when the days take a long time to wake up and the green of the trees is brushed with gold.
She had never been to Suffolk, but had chosen it because she had found out that property there was cheapest and the rates lowest, of all the counties within reach of London.
Her information came from a huge list — as thick as a book — published free by the Department of the Environment, which gave details of old and interesting properties (including lighthouses, watch towers and windmills) throughout England.
Just right for mad people like her.
This was 1983, when the Department of the Environment was still a helpful body.
The train was going slower now.
‘Sorry for the delay but there's a preceding train in front,’ called the driver through  his intercom.
As they neared the little town the guard went through the train saying: ‘Move to the front — you've gotta look quick for the platform there, ‘cos there ain't much of it!
She alighted at the ‘unmanned’ station with its empty flowerbeds: it was one of those magic spring days in the midst of autumn and there was a tangy scent of wood in the air from the sawmill beside the railway line.
She took a taxi outside the station and the driver promptly launched into his life history: he had worked hard all his life for one of the big oil companies, inspecting petrol pumps all over Suffolk and had been made redundant in his early fifties with the very minimum of redundancy money.
So now he worked for a taxi firm.
He knew every lane in Suffolk.
The first house Jane looked at was moated and she was shown over by an ex-policeman who seemed happy to be working for an estate agent.
‘Meet a better class of people!’ he said.
But the house was too remote.
The second, however, seemed ideal, and was cheaper, though unfortunately it only had a small section of moat left, which had been suburbanised into a rock garden.
The people who were selling it consisted of a very large woman, her parchment face frozen in a permanent ‘bad smell’ look, and a small man (like female and male spiders, thought Jane).
The woman showed her over, making clipped comments.
The place was full of antiques, exhibited rather than used.
Her husband appeared to have something wrong with him — he was shaking as if shell-shocked and propped himself up with a walking stick in his right hand.
Jane thought she'd better not offer to shake hands in case he let go of the stick and fell over.
The place was run down, but Jane decided on it because it was beautiful and a bargain.
Buddleias were growing out of the gutters and doves watched her stone-still, looking like part of the masonry.
The long grass of the front lawns was luminous with golden bars of sunlight.
Behind the house, the ground sloped down to the river and the waving tasselled heads of the rushes gleamed with a light that was between silver and gold.
A slice of original Suffolk!
Untouched for thirty years, ideal for a nature trail — the undisturbed habitat of birds and animals.
She asked the driver to take her to the estate agent.
He was interested in her decision.
‘Those,’ he said significantly, ‘were the Pyglings.’
‘Oh yes?’
‘Very well connected,’ he informed her.
‘No doubt you know of them?’
‘Oh no,’ said Jane, ‘I'm not connected at all.’
She put in an offer to the oily estate agent and just caught a train to London, which was lucky, for there was not another for two hours.
She was in high spirits; the idea which had been growing in her with increasing, undeniable force was now going to become a reality.
She had never become acclimatised to city life.
She wanted to see a night sky unsullied by a red glare from the ground, to breathe air which did not turn one's nose into a sooty chimney; above all, to escape from thraldom and belong to herself.
It was more than a conscious and detailed decision: it was like a force of nature.
She would spin off, like a Texan tornado, and establish her centre of gravity in paradise!
This was an unfamiliar feeling.
Few outward things had occurred in her life to cause her happiness.
She still said nothing to her family when she got home, but the next day she put her London house on the market.
This meant a brush with solicitors — a strange breed, but at least not monotonous.
She turned away from the clinical whiteness of one successful firm with its forbidding elderly receptionist, to the old-fashioned chaos of another with its smell of coffee and everyone being informal and helpful.
But she was fascinated by their names: Cadge, Perks, Wily, Quarrell.
Did people with names like that automatically become solicitors?
Of course she sold her house at the wrong time.
If she'd waited another year she would have garnered twice the price, as the yuppie age was dawning, but unfortunately for herself and her family, Jane had no financial sense whatsoever, except, thanks perhaps to her Scottish ancestry, she always spent as little as possible.
(She was in exalted company.
‘I wish,’ Mrs Marx had said, ‘that Karl could make some capital, not just write about it.’)
Still, it did not take long to sell, and as soon as people started to look over it, she told her family.
Hell comes unexpectedly.
You're full of apprehension, and it doesn't come.
You're sure everything will go  smoothly, and it suddenly hits you.
Jane's ‘good news’ died in her throat as she saw their faces.
They did not share her enthusiasm for peace and space and wide skies.
They were, after all, Londoners.
She had felt fortunate in being able to please herself where she lived.
She .
What about them ?
Why had she not consulted them?
They were grown up now, after all.
‘Yes — I waited till you'd finished with your schools…her voice tailed off.
Her dream was their nightmare.
‘You're whipping the rug from under our feet,’ she was told, ‘We'll be cut off from all our friends.
We've lived in the city all our lives and we don't want to be buried in the country, however nice the house.
And what about work?
We'd have a better chance to find reasonably paid jobs in London.
But now — where are we going to live?
And what about transport?
How are we going to get around?’
(This latter point had occurred to Jane, as a nagging worry.)
Her spirits had come down from the heights to the abyss.
She had to go through with it now, as she had exchanged contracts on the house.
How could she have been so blind?
She, who prided herself on her intelligence!
She realised with a shock what a mystery her children were to her, and what a mystery she must seem to them.
She had made the mistake of assuming they would think as she did.
But she had never really known them.
She had allowed her personality to get in the way.
It was not the first time, but it was the worst.
She had not wanted to impose her ideas on her family, nor run their lives for them.
Always, always, she came a cropper over people.
Of all her mistakes, this was the most gargantuan.
They were not selfish, and were genuinely sorry for her disappointment.
In the end it was decided that they'd ‘give it a go’.
They would move in by Christmas and bring as many friends as they could.
And Jane would pay for everything.
Jane's family went away to stay with friends before moving day and she travelled down to Suffolk first to make the place habitable.
She felt she could never forgive herself, but when she got there, the beauty of the place overcame her again.
The weather smiled as though it could never frown.
A bunch of bright pink roses tapped the window, like a last gesture of summer.
She had hung up a Breughel pint, and the golden patterns on the wall brought it to life — the Elizabethan diamond panes casting shafts of light and designs which would have been impossible through a modern window.
Huge amber clouds —‘symbols of a high romance’— floated across a brilliant blue sky, and the sun went down dramatically with vertical shafts of crimson, fake flames behind the pine trees, the birds — many of them new to her — still shouting after dark.
Then she went for a walk.
She loved the night sky, brilliant with stars, which to her town dweller's eyes, seemed much nearer to earth here in East Anglia.
She found the stars companionable.
It would be lonely and awesome to be the only ‘heavenly body’!
And to complete her new-found golden age, the bells rang out, for this was bell-ringing night in the nearby little town.
No matter what disasters in the world, no matter what the weather, the dedicated company of campanologists assembled every Wednesday night and the bells of the Norman tower rang out over the Suffolk fields, ceasing promptly at nine lest they should disturb the local population.
How much pleasanter they sounded, she thought, than the clang of old iron of the Catholic bells.
There were charming carillons on the Continent, but something dreadful seemed to happen to Catholic bells when they crossed the Channel.
These sounds and sights of East Anglia, she felt, would remain with her for the rest of her life.
But she hadn't reckoned with how the people would see her.
The remnants of feudalism still survived.
The new occupant of the only surviving manor house was a matter of extreme interest to the local population.
Jane was fond of history and old houses, but was not guilty of folie de grandeur .
Others, however, were.
Especially the ‘ancient’ family who had sold her the house and now, pathologically, could not forgive her for buying it, since they had lost caste by moving away — unfortunately for Jane, only a mile away.
Mrs Pygling, leader of the pack, was, as Jane had noticed, a lady large in size and personality.
(Jane could never imagine these upper class women making love at all).
Mrs Pyg lost no time in reappearing, her bulk accentuated by an excessively wide-shouldered coat.
She bore down on the surprised Jane like a galleon in full sail and demanded, imperiously, what she intended to ‘do’ with the house.
Jane restrained herself from inquiring what she had done with it, for she sensed a field telegraph situation, so forced herself to be polite.
The ancestral lady was not, however, to be put off, and hardly a week went by when she did not telephone or call on some pretext, bringing her gardener in tow to take cuttings or dig up bulbs, and keeping up her barrage of accusing questions, inquiring, for instance, in her peremptory manner, what Jane was going to ‘do about’ the long-neglected yew hedge.
Mrs Pygling was, in fact, a lonely and embittered woman.
So often flawed vision results from people not having enough to occupy their minds.
Her husband was an invalid and she had but one friend, or rather, vassal, referred to jokingly by the local people as ‘yon auld witch’.
The monkey connection was very apparent in this creature.
She was short and square, with a small head poked forward, long swinging arms and a bent-kneed running walk.
Her scrunched up face made her look as if she was wearing a perpetual mirthless grin.
No one knew how old she was, but she looked as though she was made of leather and would  last forever.
She had tremendous will-power, and the locals reckoned she would outlive everyone just to spite them, yet she was so senile she was practically imb -senile!
Mrs Pygling sent her in to spy on Jane and she prowled about with a cordless telephone, through which she had to talk very loud, so that her cracked voice and cackling laugh could be heard in every corner of the estate.
It was as if she had a hot line to the Devil.
All this was so ludicrous that Jane could only laugh in disbelief, until, by accident, she found out the reason for the hostility of the erstwhile ‘noble’ family.
In the course of her research into the history of the house, she discovered that the male Pygling line had in fact died out, and that the present bearer of the hallowed name — the pathetic husband of the overbearing Mrs Pygling — came in fact through the female line and had adopted the name of Pygling.
No one is more vicious than a person who has something to hide, so this made their strange behaviour more understandable to Jane.
The fraud is always more menacing than the real thing.
The pitiable Mr Pygling, who jerked through the little town with a stick — it turned out he had Parkinson's disease — doffed his check cap to Jane and even held the door open for her when they ran into each other at a shop until she opened the house to the public (having restored it sufficiently) on Sundays.
After that he cut her dead and let shop doors bang in her face.
After all, it cut across class.
She was a traitor.
It seemed that people were often worse than even Jane thought they could be.
On top of all this, her family arrived with their imports.
In the interim, she had become a bit‘bolshie’.
After all, she told herself in extenuation, this was the first thing she had ever done to please herself…but , said a small voice —‘but’ is surely the most miserable little word in the English language —but …they hadn't asked to come into this vale of tears….
Her family she could stand, and even regarded some of them as having qualities superior to her own, arrogant as she knew she was.
A few things nettled her: she did not relish being a clearing house for family complaints, for instance, and was carefully reticent on such occasions.
But  their ‘friends!’.
As luck would have it, a furious wind was blowing on the day of their arrival, by hired minibus.
A wind such as East Anglia only knows, cruel, ‘lazy’(too lazy to go round you, going through you instead), a wind which made the old ladies in the town say: ‘Oi've got me thermals on’.
It was as if autumn could not wait to get rid of summer.
Jane found it cold, but her visitors found it freezing , so she turned up the thermostat to seventy.
She had just come in, having staggered round with the dogs, and she and they were covered with ‘sweethearts’ as the locals accurately called burrs — hard to get rid of.
She settled everybody round the fire, took them hot drinks, and then set to work on her sweet-hearted retriever with a comb, during which she got her guests into perspective.
Most conspicuous was a short, dark girl dressed in scarlet who had a big head, big eyes (her best feature), a big nose and a very big voice, which could be heard above all the other bleating, twanging, cackling, warbling, conspiratorial voices.
Jane withdrew, not her presence, but her mind, as a tortoise withdraws its head.
The owner of the loud voice was called Fatima, and although immature was no teenager, being twenty-seven years old.
She had come over from the east with her Arab mother, who, once in Britain, had married a stranger in order to stay — rather like buying a spare part to save one's life.
Fatima was lazy, stupid, self-centred and hysterical.
She shattered the opalesque, birdsong-studded peace with her unpleasant rasping voice for, like most people with awful voices, she used it constantly and loudly.
For unfortunately, very stupid people have the most to say.
She did everything loudly: loud sneeze, loud blowing of the nose, loud banging of doors when she was in a temper; she would march (she always marched) into the kitchen, clattering all the saucepan lids to see what was for supper, saying ‘brrr’ and turning up the heater, turning on the telly, tapping her foot to the music.
Without an audience she three-quarters died.
She needed to be the centre of attention and her clothes showed her love of display.
Everything was fancy; even her wellies were decorated.
She lived for occasions and would not miss one  for the world.
If something did not go right, such as missing a train — even if it was her own fault — she flew into a rage.
She could scream blue murder, but half an hour later would be the life of a dinner party, for she was very vain and never missed a chance to show herself off.
Unfortunately, some of the guests had arrived early, before she perked up with a smile, and witnessed the other side of the sweetness and light.
Fatima was very concerned about her health, but Jane was amused to note that there was nothing wrong with her lungs.
She would sleep till two in the afternoon, then come downstairs, very bright, very quick, ready for a meal.
She attacked her food with ferocity, using her fork like a harpoon, scraping noisily, then wiping the plate with her finger, which annoyed Jane intensely.
Her body was constantly on her mind.
‘Ah!’
She would cry, ‘the sun!
You can feel the vitamins going into your body!’
She was in her element with doctors, hospitals, osteopaths, chiropractors, acupuncture (health by a thousand pricks) and was never able to do very much because (she said) of her ‘small bones’.
The final irony was when she took to psychology.
People who study psychology never seem able to apply it to real life.
Fatima was as insufferable as ever.
‘She needs a course on child psychology,’ thought Jane, ‘to apply to herself.
But the neurotic person can never see him or herself, and wears everyone else out.
‘The atmosphere here's as thick as mud,’ she said.
‘I haven't said anything,’ said Jane.
‘No that's the trouble: you don't say anything’— and she rushed out slamming the door.
She didn't like to be deprived of her drama.
‘She could do with a bit of growing up,’ observed Davyd, the shrewd Welsh gardener.
‘I suppose she can't help it,’ Alan, Jane's neighbour, philosophised, ‘it's all a matter of how the genes, or the DNA or whatever it is, falls.
One must try to see the good in her — but I must say, it's a hard job!’
‘When she behaves like a Sharina, she blames people's dislike of her on being a foreigner,’ sighed Jane.
But the fact remained that Fatima was a drag, and would drag everyone around down if you let her.
She had brought with her two friends, Giselle and Rodney, also prize idiots.
Incongruously, Giselle was a flabby girl (parents should  think!)who couldn't screw the top of the coffee jar on straight, couldn't put the milk back in the fridge, couldn't shut the door.
But she could reel out pages of verbal textbook at the mention of any subject.
She had a very good memory and had passed many exams on the strength of it.
In the end one dared not mention any topic at all.
She wore her knowledge like an ill-fitting coat.
She was brainy — that is, she had her head stuffed with facts, but she had neither the intelligence nor judgement to interpret their significance and relate them to the world.
In person she was gauche and jerky.
‘Nice bit of fish,’ she remarked of one of Jane's painstaking recipes, ‘very tasty,’and gobbled it up, holding her knife like a pencil.
She was only twenty-two, so had at least fifty years of boring other people before her.
Rodney was like a whirlwind and upset both people and animals (cats, dogs and horses do not like sudden movements).
He did everything at breakneck speed and was insatiably sociable, always turning up when Jane was particularly busy, crashing into the room and asking jauntily: ‘What's everyone doing?’
Then crashing out, whistling.
He tried Jane's tenuous tolerance to the limit.
He had very little ability, but immense energy.
He was taut like a coiled spring, compact and pugnacious, both in physique and character.
He had taken a ‘Development’ course at the local university.
This was meant to prepare people to do useful work in the Third World.
Jane asked him whether he'd settled on anything yet.
‘Yes!’ he cried proudly, ‘I've got a very exciting job!’
‘Oh?’ said Jane, South America and Africa looming before her.
‘I'm going to work in Renaissance!’
He proclaimed triumphantly, pulling himself up to his full five foot six inches, his face aglow.
‘Renaissance?’
‘A whole-food shop!’
It was unfortunately impossible to ignore the Renaissance Man.
He was banging non-stop around the house all day, bellowing ‘TELEPHONE’ when everyone could hear it ring, sitting at the piano without even looking at the keys, and making an excruciating racket.
He turned every conversation round to himself.
‘If he tells me once more that his parents met at midnight on Hallowe'en and live in a riverside pub which is his and his brother's — I don't know  what I'll do!’ thought Jane.
‘As is only too obvious, he thinks he's charming.
Well, he'd better have another think.’
This perennial pest was top of her list of people pollution.
Jane had had wide imaginings of everybody's abilities coming together to a common end, but fortunately she had kept her thoughts to herself.
Her elder son, who had done a conservation course, would have been warden, her elder daughter — a very good journalist — would do the publicity, her younger daughter, an artist and photographer, would design the field centre and set up exhibitions, and her younger son, an excellent communicator of great charm, would show the schoolchildren round.
She had never envisaged that they would all be solidly against it.
But she soon realised that they had come down to the manor only as a duty (perish the word!) and courtesy to her, and regarded the house as a white elephant, being too far away and too cold for weekend breaks.
And she had to admit they were right.
Yet another dream was dying.
Their departure was hastened by an abnormally cold winter: one shudderingly cold day succeeded another.
And then it snowed.
The dawn came up like a fire behind the white roofs.
Every leaf was picked out in golden radiance.
The sky was gold and blue in the east, purple in the west.
All sounds were muffled except the song of the birds and the pigeons were puffed up, looking as if they were wearing greatcoats, as they waited for the generous breakfast which they knew Jane would bring out to them.
But the others saw none of this: they were all in bed.
Jane would light the fire, turn the heating on, put the horses and donkey out and do the shopping.
The roads were all scrubbed clean by the frost and the snow.
When she got back they were getting up, having baths, shivering and grumbling.
She would be almost glad when they were gone — some of them at any rate.
Fatima had an emotional outburst and stormed out first with Giselle and the Renaissance Man in tow, taking all her sound and fury and phobias elsewhere, and everyone was profoundly relieved.
‘And she shall make trouble wherever she goes,’ thought Jane.
Later she heard that her virulent hypochondria had turned into real illness.
Then the others thinned out, and there was the sort of  forced conversation which takes place when people are seeing each other off.
Jane was glad when it was over.
With her family she remained on excellent terms.
And then, when only the stalwart Rosamund was left, the weather suddenly changed.
They woke to one of those balmy days you get in midwinter when the frost has lost its grip and before the rains begin.
A day when ‘Winter, slumbering in the open air, Wears on his smiling face a dream of Spring!’
Jane had not wanted them to stay against their will, and once they were gone, she plunged into work.
She'd got to paddle her own canoe, as she always had done.
‘It's not what happens to you, but how you cope with it, that's important,’ she told herself, as she tackled the cobwebs in the lofty rooms.
If the pursuers of Robert the Bruce had been women, they'd have known that cobwebs come overnight.
She had an almost Germanic regard for order, and set about repairing the house, the stables, the outbuildings and conservatory with the willing and cheerful help of a small, dedicated band of local people, with whom she could relax and be herself, without putting up defences as she'd had to do with the false Pyglings.
The derelict gardens were rescued by Davyd, who had moved down from the mountains of Wales to the plains of East Anglia, but remained very Welsh, his accent giving authority to everything he said.
He was slow and deliberate in every way, from his voice to his walk.
Jane was reassured by the very look of him, with his long stride, his careful, unhurried rolling of a cigarette — his ‘thinking time’.
He had developed co-operation with nature, and hence the economical use of time, to a fine art.
While others dashed about and fussed and worried, he achieved enviable results with the minimum of effort.
‘Don't shake the tree: let the wind do the work.’
He prefaced each pronouncement with an apologetic twitch of the head to the left, but lesser mortals hung on every word — and he knew it.
He was of farming stock, the product of many generations  of common sense.
He never drank till the evening, but then he indulged in beer and gossip.
He loved scandal and intrigue and made his contribution in low, conspiratorial tones.
But he was close about himself: he knew that where two or three are gathered together…what they don't know, they'll make up.
Drink never loosened his tongue, though it did have an effect on his sizable nose which, like Bardolph's, was a beacon in the dark.
He was slightly deaf and it was only natural that when Jane asked him if he liked Dylan Thomas, he replied: ‘Gin and tonic?
Yes — very much indeed’.
Then there was Mervyn: tall, dark and monosyllabic, with a slow but sure sense of humour which had to circle through his brain.
‘Huh!’ he would chuckle down his shirt several minutes later when the funny side struck him, long after everyone else had forgotten the joke.
His greeting was always the same (and would have been, Jane was sure, in the middle of an earthquake): ‘YOU AU ROIGHT?’
Suffolk, having no Hardy, has an accent which is less well known, but no less unintelligible, than that of Wessex.
Suffolk people hiccup half their words away.
At first Jane could hardly understand a word Mervyn said, but he was too good-humoured to be offended.
He was a quiet man, so his sudden bellowed opinions made one jump.
‘YER STILL IN YER NOITE KLASS THEN?’
(To Jane's son, Jack, who found the manor cold after his London flat, so wore a dressing gown all the time).
‘A'LL'AV A STANES BAER’(Stone's beer.)
‘THA KEAY'S UP MY ‘ASS’(This startled Jane until she realised he was saying: ‘The key's at my house’.)
‘YER'LL'AV TA FILL YER CUPS LAOW’(to two po-faced caravanners who were fussily clamping a magnetic spirit level onto their trailer in an unsuccessful attempt to get it to stand even — and to think caravans originated with gipsies!).
Mervyn had to repeat his observation three times before they understood, but he was determined that they should get the message.
Jane was cheered by his sagacity and quick eye for the ridiculous — a welcome change from pompous people like the Pyglings.
Mervyn liked best to work alone, in the open air, and was very observant.
He delighted in the blue tits which hung  upside down on the peanuts Jane put out, yet his job was killing chickens — just because there was no other work.
He grumbled all the time, but was really quite happy because he did not allow himself to worry.
Jane envied him, for she was beseiged by worries.
‘Well, we've had a nice day and no one can take it away from us,’ he would remark contentedly.
Every day was like a hurdle in a steeplechase for her.
She fought through the days with relentless activity, aiming to get thoroughly tired, so that she could sleep.
She dreaded going to bed, because then several swords of Damocles quivered above her.
She must face up to facts: her original project of family co-operation had fallen through because of her misjudgement.
She had improved the property.
She had wanted to share the house for, after all, history belongs to everybody.
People enjoyed visiting it, so she enjoyed having them.
But it was not a source of income; it was a source of loss.
She was becoming increasingly despondent about the way things were going.
Despite hard work and iron determination, she had to admit she was nowhere near establishing a conservation centre on her own.
She was merely coping with one thing after another, not achieving.
She battled against depression, especially in the evening.
She told herself not to let negative thoughts take over, but, night after night, her will-power dissolved into helplessness, and when at last she slept, her past life rose before her like a grotesque apparition.
The beatings, the escapes, the fear which were still in her came out in her dreams.
We cannot eradicate what we have been through.
Eventually she would climb out of the deep pit of the subconscious, exhausted.
She felt, every morning, like wilting and recoiling.
She had hoped for a new freedom, but had found a trap.
She went to her doctor for sleeping pills and a tonic, though he himself was a better tonic than anything in a bottle.
The doctor, universally known as ‘Hubert’, was rotund, but it was a jolly bouncing roundness, not like the disgusting pot-bellied men who don't know whether to wear their trousers above or below their pots.
The perfectly symmetrical large football was crowned by a smaller one: his head.
And that in turn was crowned, incongruously, by a mop of unruly brown curls, giving him the appearance of an inflated schoolboy — Billy Bunter, in fact.
Hubert was a lone GP, and a very good one.
Partnership would have been unthinkable, for he was so expansive, both physically and in personality, that there was no room left for anyone else.
He had a deafening voice and a still more deafening laugh.
His consultations were conducted fortissimo and his guffaws echoed through the hall which was his waiting room, lined with an interested audience, and out into the street: ‘BEEN TO ITALY?
HAVE YOU?
AND HOW MANY BRONZED LATIN LOVERS DID YOU FIND, EH?’
The waiting patients pricked their ears and tried not to smile and then the surgery door would burst open and eject…a little old lady, pink with pleasure!
While Hubert roared: ‘Next !’
There was nothing clinical about his surgery.
Under his large untidy desk he would keep several bottles of champagne, and on the shelves above were lines of very explicit African phallic carvings.
People would stare and look away, but he didn't let them off with that.
‘GOOD, AREN'T THEY!’ he would roar, and take one down, pushing it under the nose of the confused patient, ‘MARVELLOUS WORKMANSHIP!’
He was the kindest, most generous of men, and spread great happiness (Jane had only to think of him to cheer herself up)— but was himself a tragic figure, tied to a wife he did not love.
She was a small, emaciated mouse who wore a perpetually martyred expression.
She was often ill, and Hubert spared no effort to make her well again.
He was an ebullient, larger than life denial of all that was Right: he chain-smoked and drank too much.
He had discovered that you were allowed to be drunk in charge of a boat, so he pub-crawled on the river.
‘It's great,’ he said, ‘to have an obsession — keeps me going!’
Jane accompanied him on one of his forays one evening.
The whole world must have known that Hubert was on the river.
He hailed everyone.
He saluted a little man in tight trousers and a yachting cap, standing by a boat pulled up on the bank.
‘The River Rat!’ he boomed, laughing heartily at his own joke, ‘never takes his hat off because he's BALD and never  puts his boat in the river because he CAN'T SAIL!’
Later, when he and even his customary buttonhole of Michaelmas daisies were drooping, he confided his deep despair.
He did not hint, but was characteristically outspoken.
‘I had to work my way through medical school,’ he told her.
‘In the vacs I loaded fish at Yarmouth and we lived on fish and chips.
That's why I'm so fat.
Soon after I qualified I got married — knew it was a mistake straight away.
Not poor Lena's fault; my fault.
And soon after that I was ill — something with the liver — and went to Italy to recuperate — by myself.
And I had the most divine young Italian girl to look after me.
In fact she did everything for me.
It was the happiest time of my life.
Then I had to come back — and into this — and do you know —’(he leant towards her)‘even now I close my eyes and think of her, otherwise I can't make love —’ He was still living on that charmed island of experience in the past.
His present life was, and would be, making the best of things.
He had been hurt so much by life that he had to laugh at it and there was not a trace of bitterness in him.
But Jane was profoundly sad.
The apparent peace of the countryside disguises great activity and relentless watchfulness.
Nothing you do goes unnoticed, especially if you live in a big house, as Jane discovered to her cost.
And even if you keep ‘yourself to yourself, you cannot escape.
You become the source of endless speculation.
This insatiable hunger to know other people's business alarmed her, for she was the least inquisitive of mortals.
In the fight to make ends meet, she was obliged to surround herself with people.
She ran a caravan site and rented out grazing and stables at the lowest rate in the neighbourhood — naturally!
First to take advantage of this were Les Nouveaux, who, because of Jane's foolish undercharging, had plenty of money left to transform themselves overnight into Horsey People.
First on the scene, a showy horse, a Palomino — the locals called it the cardboard horse.
Then, expensive accessories of dazzling fluorescence.
Pink riding hats, turquoise waistcoats, stetsons (Jane just stopped herself from asking where the corks were) and they wore all these glories even when they were mucking out.
This modern Jorrocks, who wore earrings, was an uncouth, awkward man, with an ungainly walk, rowing himself along with his arms.
The Potter's hand certainly slipped when it made him.
He was a truly gruesome sight on a horse.
A good rider, like a good ballet dancer, needs to be the right shape.
About a week after he had taken the stable, a Land Rover swept round the drive at high speed and disgorged its chamber of horrors — his family.
Le Nouveau had part traded in his mere Ford for this summit  of status symbols, which gave him a new occupation.
With their male love of machines, he and his friends (especially rounded up for the occasion) spent hours tinkering with it, heads down in worship under the bonnet.
Jane could not get worked up about any car.
She was glad she had not got one; it wasn't worth the trauma.
To her it was just a means of getting from A to B, but she welcomed its invention because it lessened cruelty to horses.
Jane had also done up and let the cottage at a low rent.
Cottage dwellers were either authentic or immigrant — but mostly the latter.
Local people on the whole preferred a modern bungalow to a picturesque cottage.
So Jane's tenant, Alan, was an immigrant from the Home Counties, but like Les Nouveaux (who were locals, though originally non-horsey) he lost no time in countryfying himself.
In his case, it was a farming image, though he was incapable of cultivating the smallest back garden.
He had a head start, in that he was already a self-made eccentric.
He was the odd one out in a gifted family.
Yet he was endlessly intrigued with himself, and he decided early on that the only way he could make his mark was to be Decidedly Different.
Here he had much greater scope than in London's country.
Within days of moving up he assumed a Farmer Giles accent, extra-shapeless trousers (nothing is so sexless as an Englishman's trousers), broken boots (‘They don't just let water in, they suck it in,’ he said proudly), and most important, a bucket hat, of which he had a whole series.
His favourite was in bright print patchwork, and he wore it dead straight, one inch above his eyebrows.
Alan not only created himself, but also his own world in which to live.
On the walls of his ‘with-drawing’ room, as he called it, he had hung an important reminder, a notice carefully lettered by himself: ‘Stop doing, start thinking’.
Jane found him a source of constant amusement.
‘What is AIDS?’ he asked her one day.
‘Is it some sort of insurance policy?’
He was indeed another contender for ‘the wisest fool in Christendom’.
The sight of him also had her in stitches.
To see him passing by the window in his bucket hat holding a slice of bread and butter in his hand like the Mad Hatter, then hitting his forehead with his palm and rushing back in again.
She had seen him in the little town  so immersed in looking up at the old buildings, that he ran into a lamppost.
He had a spot-on, though unconscious, sense of timing.
A serious discussion was taking place in the kitchen (the hub of the house).
In the middle of this solemn crisis, Alan burst in: ‘Have you a book on insect identification?’— which effectively deflated the solemn mood.
He also had a soporific gift.
His voice was foggy and droning, and, once he got going, would not cease for hours unless drastic action was taken.
Jane often saw Mervyn beginning to fall asleep, defenceless against the monotonous sound.
But at least she could escape.
His family were a captive audience, especially at meal times, which were central to their day.
She had never put her own family into meal thraldom.
There had been a running buffet in the kitchen and they helped themselves when they were hungry, like gauchos on an Argentine estancia , but meals glued life together for Alan's family and he could be heard intoning, intoning, instructing, instructing in his foggy monotone with never a word in reply, until the children were able to ‘get down’.
He was not without humour, but completely impervious to Jane's irony.
Lazy people develop great cunning in ways of getting by without working.
Staying in bed was ‘recharging one's batteries’.
‘Well,’ said Jane one afternoon as he emerged for the first time, blinking in the sun, ‘how's life in Lotus land?’
Alan shook his head and his jowls quivered.
‘Not good — not good at all!’
He was the Permanently Interrupted man, the man who, willy nilly, Got Involved, busying himself with trifles to avoid doing what really mattered.
‘I've got to go to a Fatherhood Class,’ he told Jane gloomily.
‘Dear me!
However has the world survived without Fatherhood Classes!’ she laughed.
‘No number of classes or courses or theories about bringing up kids replaces common sense’.
He did not reply, but got into the car glumly, with a martyred air.
His wife seemed dumb in both the American sense (undoubtedly) and the English (apparently, since she never spoke to anyone).
Alan, however, would now and again treat his audience of Jane, Davyd and Mervyn to purported nuggets of wisdom which she had uttered.
Her existence certainly saved him from making decisions: ‘I've got to consult my wife’ always let  him off the hook and annoyed the independent Jane.
Sometimes, however, he emerged wearing an unmistakably henpecked look, muttering something about having had to do some ‘domestic engineering’— his name for housework.
With his wife, he had taken on a ready-made family for, although a Catholic, she was divorced, with two lolloping sons.
So he was either a man of great courage, or a great masochist.
The dividing line is thin.
Alan's only skill was in playing the system, and DHSS benefit pay days were always obvious as he was unrecognizable.
First he had to sustain the shock of getting up at eight am, then he had to wash and transform his carefully arranged untidy hair into real tidiness, for on this day, the bucket hat was taboo.
Then he would don his man-made fibre flared trousers of airforce blue and a clean, ironed shirt and drive into the neighbouring town for the opening of the office.
This four-weekly experience always sent him to bed with a migraine for the rest of the day.
Of course, he was forever the victim of circumstances.
He lived in a cocoon of self justification.
‘Today's eccentrics are tomorrow's establishment,’ he would say.
Maybe, but born, not intentional ones.
Jane prospected for conservation help.
The District Council actively opposed her plans.
The County Council were sympathetic.
A nature trail was needed, they said, it would certainly benefit the community, they said,but (that sad little word again) they could not help because of the cuts.
Locally, conservation was known about, but it appeared in some rather odd guises.
Two old ladies let half their garden go wild and put up a notice ‘Conservation Area’.
The conservation corps of the YTS were clearing a nearby churchyard, and every lunchtime, the foreman pulled out an armchair which he kept in the church specially for the purpose, and had an hour's sleep in the churchyard.
Jane thought she had gained the co-operation of a local ornithologist.
He had a limp, walked round importantly with a stick and talked big, blinding her with science.
He chose a site for an aviary and gave very exact and imperious directions as to the materials and measurements.
He could not help, because he had a limp.
The aviary was  for injured birds before releasing them into the wild.
Then, when it was all ready and Jane was several hundred pounds poorer, he backed out arrogantly and without apology, making the excuse that his game leg was playing him up.
He had turned out to be a lame duck and limped out of her life.
Then there was the very earnest, dedicated ‘alternative’ coterie, with a ‘no smoking’sign on their front door.
The leader of the clan was Erica, half German and a dedicated do-gooder who always greeted Jane with an unnerving ‘How are you, Jane?’ delivered with a look of such worried concern that Jane felt there ought, or must, be something wrong with her.
Erica was a born teacher.
She taught all the time.
Her conversations, especially with the children, became lessons, and remembering the way she had ‘brought up’ her children — she made Jane feel disturbingly inadequate.
She kept bees in Jane's orchard and would appear regularly swathed in black net with her eleven-year-old son in tow.
One hot day, Jane was gardening on the other side of the hedge and one of the bees stung her on the head.
She rushed indoors, using her choicest language, not realising that Erica was in the orchard.
With German tenacity she followed Jane in and explained: ‘They're working very hard and become angry if anyone gets in their way’.
Small comfort for Jane.
But Erica, with all her virtue, was a dangerous woman.
She was a great roper-inner, and Jane, having some land, became a prime target.
It's hard to refuse a neighbour, as you have to go on living near them, so she agreed to lend the front lawns for a folklore festival, attended by ‘ethnic’ people with flowing skirts and hair.
They imported bales of straw to sit on, and a recalcitrant mess of straw had to be raked up after their departure.
But that was nothing compared with what was to follow.
In her insistent way she asked Jane for the loan of a field in which to hold a charity fair.
It meant moving horses, but Jane agreed.
Soon, one field was not enough, and the request ‘all in a good cause’— spread to Jane's two other fields, so the horses, most of which did not belong to her, had to be moved to a farm, and she had to cope with angry owners.
But she was really deep in it now.
‘You shouldn't give these people an inch,’ Davyd had warned her.
The hippies, of Stonehenge fame, moved in, and parked on Council land, making a mess.
Extra police were called in, and Jane was held responsible for everything.
Angry letters appeared in the local paper.
‘I won't let my wife and daughter look out of the window,’ wrote an irate resident — because the ‘travellers’were peeing against the trees (1985 — or 1885?).
A fussy neighbour broke his collar bone building barricades against the hippies.
But the local publican told Jane that these maligned outsiders behaved much better than drunk Councillors.
At long last, it was all over, and Jane was glad to hear that people, and especially children, had at least enjoyed themselves.
There was one incident however that, even with hindsight, she could not laugh at.
Erica herself was entirely honest, and worked hard for her causes, but the same could not be said of some of her associates.
There was a very affected couple, Erwin and Pam, who were expert at creaming off the best for themselves — and as they were in their mid-thirties, they had had time for some practice.
They were a sham in every detail, from their studied breezy tones to their carefully casual clothes.
Jane was horrified when Erwin drove up in a Land Rover which had been given to the charity by a large company, and which he had appropriated.
Posters for the fair still adorned its sides.
‘Shouldn't that be in Africa by now?’ she asked.
‘Oh it's no good for Africa because it's petrol.
They need diesel!’ he replied with his ‘winning’smile.
He had unashamedly pinched it.
Moreover, he was just back from holiday in France.
He and Pam had taken off on the very day the fair ended — a fact that did not go unnoticed by the locals.
Jane found solace in the humour and support of the local people: Davyd, Meryvn, the clever Henry, aged sixty-eight but very spry, who had run away to sea at fifteen, and did everything so well and systematically — shipshape, in fact.
He could solve every practical problem, and made Jane some superlative furniture, just out of odd pieces of wood which were lying about the estate.
‘You could have been a great cabinet maker,’ she told him.
‘It's too late now,’ he said.
It was so sad.
He was a prime example of self-disparagement.
The trouble was that they got married too  young and had too many children.
Henry had eight.
One of them, Neil, could — like his father — turn his hand to anything, and also had the same sense of humour, which nothing could quench.
He would pitch a dead tree over the front fence.
‘Let the Council clear it up,’ he said, and doubled up in silent mirth at the thought of flouting authority.
He had a happy turn of phrase.
A car going up a dead end at speed was ‘going nowhere fast’; a ‘cock and bull story’ was more often, in his opinion, a ‘hen and cow story’.
His observations were concise and to the point: ‘The Ministry of Agriculture wants feral minks to hang up in its pests display.
We could hang up a few politicians too., ‘There's that farmer who used a plough with horses.
First time he got on a tractor — when he reached the end of the field he shouted ‘Whoa!’’
Tim the blacksmith was another true friend to Jane.
He shared her natural ability to understand horses, her insight into how their minds worked.
And she had rarely met anyone with a sharper eye, or a truer judgement on people.
He brought his considerable intelligence to bear on the tiny village where he lived.
Not that he was unconscious of his sagacity.
He loved to tell stories of how he had given advice, how it had been disregarded, and how he had been proved right.
But he told them in a straightforward way.
There was no arrogance in him.
If Tim had been Czar of Russia he'd have made a better job of it than the nincompoops that were.
Yet he had never been further from his native village than the horse and carriage festival forty miles away, where he competed every year.
After all, Bach never set a foot outside Germany, but he has the universe in his music.
The difference is in kind, but not in degree.
Having drawn a blank with the local councils, and having been used instead of helped by nearby ‘conservationists’, Jane now wrote dozens of letters to banks, charities, environmental societies, corporations, official bodies, in search of sponsorship, or even a loan.
But there was no money in conservation as far as the business people were concerned and the charities and voluntary bodies were well-meaning but lacked resources.
Even the government bodies were starved of money.
So the field centre and nature trail were not to be.
And without them, there was no point in keeping the house.
It was too big and expensive to run.
However hard she worked, she could not run the conservation projects on her own, and she could not afford to employ any qualified person.
The only answer was to sell.
She had few regrets in leaving the house.
She had not been able to come to terms with her ‘public position’.
She was inherently an observer, and in order to observe you have to be incognito.
But she was ‘known’.
It clung to her as surely as her shadow.
And the little town was rich ground for observation.
London had been too crowded, and the suburbs too typecast.
Here, individuals stood out in sharp focus and Jane's walks were always enlivened by the indomitable characters she saw and the wry humour of the remarks she overheard.
Age was the great enemy to be laughed away.
An old man came out of the baker's and his young dog greeted him.
A girl ran out with his buns which he'd forgotten.
‘Don't ever get old,’ he said to Jane.
‘Enjoy life  while you're young,’ said a man to a woman sitting on a bench.
‘I'm going to!’
They were both about eighty.
‘Happy days!’ another octogenarian greeted her.
When he got out of the shop she saw that he could hardly walk.
Then there was Whistler, who strode doggedly on in a frayed tweed overcoat, summer and winter, always with his head down as if he were in the teeth of a gale, shrilly whistling — in perfect tune — a repertoire which extended from old music hall to Elgar.
People shouted requests to him: ‘Give us Britannia Rules the Waves , Whistler!’
Jane caught the little town just before it was ‘improved’ and standardised.
There was still an old-fashioned fishmongers where they wore caps and wellies, as if the river ran just at the back of the shop.
There was an exclusive feeling of community.
‘Tea for Posty!’ the baker would shout to the back of the shop.
(In France there would have been more of a flourish: ‘Monsieur le Facteur’.)
Outsiders were frowned on.
‘They're foreigners — they come from Bury St Edmunds!’
It was muttered darkly about the vegetable stall in the market.
Christmas was acknowledged in various ways.
The butcher — a distinguished-looking man who could have served as a model for Mr Micawber and had, also, his turn of phrase.
‘The atmospheric conditions are not exactly propitious’— wore a bright red cloth cap from December 22nd.
His elderly assistant, a tiny Tyrolean hat with a feather (he had been to Austria for nine guineas in 1956), and the rather poker-faced greengrocer lady sported a tinsel crown.
‘Ah nearly sobered up on Boxing Day, but ah caught it just in time,’ a doleful customer told her.
Whistler stuck red and green feathers into his cloth cap and then forgot to take them off.
Not all the old cottages were inhabited by ‘escapees’.
An exception was an early seventeenth-century black and white cottage (slightly askew, like the crooked man's in the nursery rhyme) which was the pride and joy of an old man who had lived there ever since anyone could remember.
He was so bent, that when you walked behind him, you could not see his head.
His black and white cat surveyed the world contentedly from the doorstep.
His two front windows were a permanent exhibition for the benefit of passers-by.
Sometimes his collection of gnomes would be on display, and every anniversary was commemorated by faded buff photographs and artefacts.
A royal occasion — such as the Queen Mother's birthday — caused the cottage to be decked with red, white and blue bunting.
The Post Office was a great centre for gossip as there was usually a queue there.
‘Of course, he's got to have his tea now, they've just opened!’
‘Good people, you know, they give me money every four weeks.’
‘Lost weight?
Never!
What with all those steaks I get with the money they give me here!’
It was in the Post Office that the Improvements started.
The appearance of a high-tech advertising board — red on black — caused some anger.
‘Better if they paid for some more staff.
Millions of unemployed, and they spend money on useless things like that.
I reckon the Scots will get ‘em out, with the Poll Tax.’
Next, queue-control bars appeared overnight.
‘That's where you tether your horses,’ said the cleaner, with the unerring British humour which demolishes all absurdities.
Authority tries to make people uniform, categorizes them, gives them numbers; but Nature, with splendid abandon, persists in making them all different.
Jane's neighbour, Alfred, for instance, was reputedly a millionaire, having been successful in scrap and demolition.
His slippers were famous.
He was so fond of them that he'd stuck them together with Sellotape.
The Oxfam man took pity on him and brought him a pair from stock.
Then there was the ex-train guard who lost his job when the countryside lifelines — the local railways — were abolished.
He rejoiced in the name of Blossom, and continued to live in the converted station.
‘My grandfather built it, my father ran it — and I had to dismantle it.’
Blossom would have been a suitable name for the large oilman who arrived in a huge lorry to deliver the central heating oil.
The first time Jane saw him, he got out and proceeded to release some pigeons from a basket.
His other hobby was home-made wine.
After the delivery, he would always have a cup of tea.
He was so ample that he  completely filled one side of the table, and a heavenly smile suffused his round pink face as he said: ‘My favourite of all the wines is — rose petal.’
He was also a thinking man, of opinions.
‘The EEC time clock on the lorry means we can't do anyone a favour.
Stops you being human.’
And ‘Why can't influential people like Mary Whitehouse back things that matter, like Greenpeace?’
People everywhere thrive on gossip: the world has a village mentality.
Jane knew it was unfair to blame the place for her misfortunes.
And yet…the sun might shine, but it did not shine in her life.
Here she sat amidst all the beauty she had created — miserable as hell.
She had tried to fly over experience, to slough off all that unpleasant part of her life as a snake sloughs off its old skin, but always misery reasserted itself.
Dwelling on the past drags one down, she told herself —don't let it .
But still her mind looked back, of its own accord, to Lajos, the harpies of the women's magazine, Algox, and it seemed she had always been got at, and ‘they’ were still getting at her.
She was dangerously near to self-pity.
But no.
Others — better people — had suffered much more.
‘One's whole life is just a perpetual traffic between the grimness of reality and one's fleeting dream of happiness,’ Tchaikovsky had said, who had perished by being shopped by a forgotten grey jurist, who considered him a disgrace to the Legal Profession (because he was gay), Tchaikovsky having made a false start in law.
They ordered him to commit suicide by taking poison, and his 6th Symphony — the Pathétique — was his farewell.
Life's hard enough to bear if you're not a genius.
Jane didn't know how he — or Mozart, Schubert, Monet, Van Gogh — had lived, let alone created.
And in a society ruled by money and false morals, these grey people still often win, in the ceaseless struggle between personal profit and the common good: the ignorant, illiterate, hypocritical Town Council, the blinkered planning officers, the successful local speculators (nicknamed the Mafia) who flew their own flag over their local headquarters, as if they were a private army — all the Holier than Thou brigade.
They were the enemy, not any foreign power.
Events, at last, seemed to be taking on a constructive momentum of their own.
That spring, Jane put the house on the market.
She went over the place with the country gent estate agent, who wore a check cap, cavalry twill trousers, had a limp handshake and permanently narrowed blue eyes.
She nearly slipped into a ditch and he pulled her out, giving her that ‘I'd like to fuck you’ look.
Back at the house he said: ‘We will now go into the cawsts’— which were tremendous.
He was so stiff upper-lipped he could hardly speak.
It struck her that they made their money very easily.
She had to pay for the lavish colour brochure (the details of which contained many mistakes), she provided the historical background and ran her feet off showing people over: all they did was make appointments (underpaid girls did that) and yet she had to pay them thousands.
They even got the transparency of the house the wrong way round in their ‘Country Homes’ magazine, but their name and reputation insulated them against such elementary errors.
All estate agents ought to be called Spiders' Parlours.
But, having made up her mind, Jane was determined to sell, and didn't let the grass grow under her feet; in fact, the ground under her feet was bare!
At last— in March — it was sold and she was exhausted.
The winter, like her troubles, never seemed to end.
But the spring, when it came, was beautiful.
The air was full of petals.
Hawthorn, horse chestnut and cow parsley (which has one of the most wonderful scents in the world) were all out at the same time.
She awoke from worried dreams to  soothing, luminous mornings and the comfortable, reassuring cooing of the wood pigeon from deep in the foliage —‘It's all right, you know’.
Often she went out to see the sky complete, unfettered by any window-frame.
The sun, like a pearl through the mist, turned the cobwebs into jewelled tracery.
It was that moment when the owl was still calling and the day birds began to sing.
One was telling her to ‘cheer-up, cheer-up!
That was the thrush (‘he sings each song twice over’) and she could also recognise the thoughtful song of the robin, a loner like herself, the virtuoso blackbird (why had so few poems been written in praise of him?) and the starling, with its one sweet note on a flute.
Ring-doves like Chinese paintings with their fanned tails flew all around and resplendent pheasants rose from their nests.
But the morning faded into the light of common day and the sun was contending with a missle (mist/drizzle).
She shivered and turned to go in.
‘East Anglia is one layer of clothes colder than the south,’ remarked Davyd who was getting out of his car, ‘but look —’he pointed at the sky — and there was a rainbow — that magic circumference of the world.
Davyd's voice lowered confidentially.
‘Seen your new neighbour yet?’
He had asked her this before, apparently interested in such a meeting, but Jane had had to disappoint him.
She had not seen her nearest ‘big house’ neighbour, though she had been hearing about him for some time.
He was something of a mystery, which intrigued the locals.
He was more talked about than if he had been open and obvious.
‘He keeps hisself to hisself,’ she was told several times, though Davyd, who always had superior knowledge, added ‘cut him in half and you'd find pure gold, all through.’
He was evidently much more successful in the art of privacy than she had been.
Nevertheless, there were certain facts which he could not conceal.
He had bought the 1815 house four years previously, when it was a mere shell.
All the lead from the roof had been stolen by official vandals, and bushes were growing through the floor of the entrance hall.
It had been unoccupied since the war.
In the mid-thirties a very charming German gentleman, known as Herr  Knapp, had lived there, had participated in the local social life and charmed everybody.
From time to time he would visit his family in Germany and when he left in July 1939 everyone assumed he would return.
But he did not.
War was declared, and his real name was later revealed by the national press: Herr Ribbentrop.
He left behind a butler and a cellar full of the highest quality drink.
The butler, being a hospitable fellow, threw a huge party to which practically the whole population of the small town (then even smaller) was invited.
This was the ‘phoney war’ period and everyone drank to peace in a few weeks.
The butler then went in for breeding dogs which he kept in large wire enclosures.
One day he was found mysteriously dead in one of these enclosures, killed, not by the dogs, but by a human hand.
The murderer was never found.
The house proved unsaleable: first, because it was too big to run during the war; second, on account of its unfortunate recent history.
And then, later, because of its increasing dilapidation.
Nothing was done to arrest this by the local council, which had discretionary powers to do so.
They were quite content to let it fall down.
It became a sorry sight: a ghost of grandeur.
The outlines of its circular hall, the sweep of its symmetrical staircases (the banisters surviving because they were metal), the gallery and the great dome were still apparent.
Even the stables were in perfect balance.
In the eighteenth century it seemed impossible to build a barn without creating a work of art.
Now, no number of ‘top’ architects can create anything of beauty at all.
The real reason may lie in the clients: eighteenth century clients were men of taste and education, unlike the corporations of today.
Private societies and official bodies dedicated to preservation tut-tutted and said: ‘what a shame’ but did nothing.
It seemed a lost cause.
Locals predicted that it would be allowed to fall down and then the property developing Mafia would move in and build a housing estate on the fourteen acres, by means of a considerable backhander to the Council.
‘Public interest’(local jobs and executive homes) would be pleaded, though if caught in time, the house could have been converted into a dozen flats for local  people instead of second homes for outsiders, and the landscaped grounds adapted for the public benefit.
Then, suddenly, it was sold.
Highly professional renovators and restorers moved in and gradually the house resumed its former glory.
Curiosity ran high as to who this purchaser — obviously someone of wealth and taste — could be.
But the builders and craftsmen came from outside and talked to nobody.
Would it become a school?
A nursing home?
A conference centre?
Surely, it must have been bought by a company.
No clues.
Then a sighting was reported.
A dark man, hatless, in a dark overcoat, driving a BMW.
The builders and decorators moved out and he moved in.
Furniture vans arrived bearing the finest antiques (binoculars had been brought into use by now).
Then, secrecy shut down again.
The local postman reported that the name was Petrie — plain Mister.
The enigma took no part in local social life.
He called on nobody.
His telephone number was ex-directory.
He was in residence mainly only at weekends, but entertained no guests.
Sometimes classical music was heard.
Early on Monday mornings he would drive north.
That was all.
But speculation ran rife.
He was a diplomat, an arms dealer, a spy (he did look a bit foreign).
But no hard facts emerged to back up any theories.
Jane was amused by the energy of the unassuaged curiosity.
Of course, she was often questioned, but had no intention of intruding on privacy — a commodity which she herself prized so highly, and which she knew was difficult to attain.
The nights were still cold, and Jane lit a log fire in the evening.
At about nine pm one dark evening, a log fell out of the fire onto a floor cushion where the cat was washing herself.
Smoke billowed up.
Jane snatched the cat up (still obliviously and intently washing a leg she had forgotten) and threw some rugs on the cushion, then opened the windows.
But the smoke was rapidly seeping through again.
Fortunately she had a chaise longue which opened and was full of rugs which they used in the garden in the summer.
She whipped these out to try and smother the blaze, her eyes smarting with the smoke.
Suddenly she realised that another pair of hands was piling rugs on and a pair of feet  treading them down.
She looked up and saw through the smoke — Mr Petrie!
‘Quick,’ he said, ‘get a wheelbarrow — a metal one — and a spade.
I'll see to this.’
She rushed down the corridor, through the kitchen, out of the back door to the shed and ran back with the barrow and the spade clattering on top.
Mr Petrie deftly shovelled the smouldering contents of the cushion into the barrow and wheeled it out of the front door, round to the back of the house, and left it.
Jane met him at the front door.
‘Thank you!
Would you like to come to the kitchen and wash?’
‘I'll just go and check the front room first.’
His voice was dry and calm.
He joined her in the kitchen, and she saw that the descriptions which had reached her through the field telegraph and by which she had recognised him, were accurate.
He was of middle height, well built, possibly in his mid-forties (though Jane was not much good on ages) with dark curly hair and slanting eyes which gave him a slightly Slavonic look, though there was not a trace of accent in his speech.
He was wearing a dark Russian-style overcoat.
‘That foam rubber's lethal,’ he remarked as he washed his hands, ‘it will smoulder all night.’
(He was right.)
Jane poured two whiskies which they both drank neat, at the kitchen table.
‘Why did you not call the fire brigade?’ he asked.
‘Because — living in a house like this — one's so public.
Everything's news.
They even reported a bonfire that went out of control in the local rag!’
He nodded.
‘I understand.’
He finished his drink.
‘I can't thank you enough —’ said Jane.
‘Don't mention it.
I was just passing and saw the smoke.’
‘Lucky for me!’ said Jane.
He almost smiled, and took his leave.
She heard him drive off.
What a strange appearance!
And how perfectly timed — for her.
That, of all people, the most elusive one should suddenly materialise to help her.
She, who refused help swiftly and automatically as someone accustomed to live alone does.
But he had not even asked — she had found him a little unnerving.
He was dry and lacked spontaneity.
He had a hard edge to his voice.
Perhaps it was shyness.
However, he was certainly not cast in a common mould.
She had never met anyone like him before.
Pondering these matters, she went through to the front  room to clear up the mess.
With the sale of the manor off her mind, Jane set the wheels in motion to find somewhere small to live, and treated herself to many walks with the dogs — more carefree, perhaps, than she had ever been.
She felt a certain poignancy though.
She wanted to fix this countryside, in all its detail, in her mind's eye and never lose it.
She wanted to remember the colours — even on a morning when the old walls and stones were damp, with dark, rich colours after rain, and everything looked very clear in the waterlogged air, the trees etched in all their variety.
And the flowers — all miracles: first the aconites, with their Elizabethan collars, then the snowdrops, with green designs on each petal, the ubiquitous daisies, some with bright pink undersides which showed when they were closed, the plantains with their frou-frous.
Nature was a tireless artist.
In the walled garden, the foxglove boldly pointing skyward, like a cathedral spire.
Honesty, that confident, cheerful plant with its brave brilliant flowers and beautiful silver-gold glistening seeds, which grew where nothing else would.
And the cool, blue, soothing delphiniums: drink in their colour for peace!
Tulips like red satin which closed up — even in a vase — when it was pouring with rain.
Forget-me-nots (woody — the tall East Anglian variety)— like little bits of heaven, and golden rod — the last burst of sun.
And above all — literally — giant hogweed, symbol of survival.
She remembered the vetch, clover, wild roses, flowering grasses and blackberry flowers of early July.
And the  long-suffering elder, which always looks beautiful, graceful, however much you cut it, with its lacy plates held out to the sun.
Jane stopped the chainsaw-happy men from cutting down the trees.
There's a dreadful finality about cutting down a tree.
Like death.
She saved an old apple tree which the gale of 1987 had blown horizontal, but which sprouted again in the spring.
A lesson not to give up!
There were no conifer plantations growing in serried ranks (like battery hens) on Jane's land.
They grew unofficially, here and there, interspersed with beech — which shed its leaves like autumn in the spring, willows, the ballerinas of the forest in a permanent static pirouette, their white seeds drifting down in a slow shower against the blue sky, and the tireless gorse, the popping of its seeds breaking the silence of high summer.
Jane loved the serenity of green: the sun through leaves, and later, golden trees visually warming the chill air, with giant puffballs like fallen moons at her feet.
‘You'd think,’ she said to herself, ‘that the larger the tree, the larger the seed, like eggs — but a chestnut is larger than an acorn.,
One of the cats came to meet her in the wood and accompanied her back into the house.
Another leapt off the ironing-board where there was a warm blanket and both went with her into the sitting-room where they settled expectantly in front of the unlit fire.
Cats were a calming influence.
Unlike dogs, they had composure.
They were in control of life and never let it buffet them about.
They guarded their privacy jealously, and treated human beings as equals, yet responded to kindness and sympathy.
Once you gained their trust, they became affectionate when they were in the mood, and were capable of gratitude.
Jane had found that when she rescued a stray, Fluff: he displayed far more confidence in her than in anyone else.
He was a long-haired tabby she had found in the kitchen garden, old and nearly dead from starvation.
After he recovered, he took great care of his health, finding every ray of sunshine to sit in and when it rained, still resolutely taking the air, under the porch.
Nothing perturbed him, and he had a sphinx-like face, with amber eyes which seemed to look into your soul.
Later, Jane saved Titch, a black and white kitten who was going to be put down.
She was very nervous at first and  would not come out from behind the piano.
Then she disappeared, until Jane opened the airing cupboard and met the unblinking gaze of Fluff and Titch side by side on the blankets.
Fluff continued to look after Titch, and even when she grew and became Big Titch, she never forgot her first friend, and they shared a basket, though she persecuted everyone else — feline and human — giving them no peace until she fell asleep, having worn out herself and everyone else.
She was the Becky Sharp of the cat world.
Jane found animals a great prop to sanity.
They got on with their lives, didn't interfere, knew nothing of human quarrels, obeyed natural laws without any chicanery.
Each animal is an individual within the species — after all, each was a unique mixture of genes, the same as a human being.
Jane valued their presence, and their sounds, even the discordant ones, like the donkey's mournful honking — as though it had an amplifier — and the desperate strangled cry of the vixen.
And she enjoyed the humour: the comic dignity of goats, with their vacant, pale, wide-angle eyes (reminiscent of a well-known soap star), the retriever who collapsed in an untidy heap (dogs were becoming outcasts, like smokers)— in contrast to the neat pool of sleeping cat.
Exact Nature! which designs and makes both plants and animals so carefully — each animal with precisely the amount and type of intelligence it needs to survive — and then squanders them so carelessly.
Life, not lives.
It had been a gloomy day which suddenly burst into splendour in the evening, the clouds rising behind the fields in the setting sun like mountains (if only they had been!) and above, a darkening amethyst sky with — the finishing touch — a rose pink filigree disc of a moon foreshadowing the peace and perfection of a moonlit night.
As she walked, it seemed to Jane that the stars looked down, calmly and mockingly, at this speck in the universe, crawling with ants fighting each other.
Ants which were unimportant in the history of Earth: Earth which itself was unimportant in the context of the universe.
Many more ants would need to go up into space for them to see themselves in perspective.
Meanwhile they fought, in the name of the politics and  religions they had invented (inventions which divide, whereas art unites).
All through their brief history, the ants had got into the habit of deceiving themselves that there must be an Enemy.
It made them Feel big, boosted their egos.
There they were, crawling on one tiny planet, not knowing why they were there: all in the same boat — why did they need to defend themselves against each other?
Earth was littered with the corpses of those who had done no wrong, whereas those who caused great torment to others rarely got their deserts.
And they pillaged Earth because their lives were based not on co-operation with Nature, but on money.
One did not need to go up into space to see that Earth's resources should be used (though not used up) for all its inhabitants.
It was on a moonless night, fortunately, that the little town held its firework display, the culmination of its week-long yearly carnival.
Once it was dark, Jane went out to sit on a low wall where she could have a good view.
Suddenly the dogs scampered off, and she saw them jumping up to greet a dark figure.
‘Good evening,’ said a dry voice out of the gloom.
Mr Petrie!
He came and sat on the wall beside her, still dressed the same.
She wondered whether he had any other clothes!
‘I thought you only had one dog,’ he remarked, ‘the other one's invisible.’
Jane had a tan whippet and a black retriever.
She laughed and wondered what she could say.
He wasn't an easy man to talk to.
‘I didn't hear your car,’ she said, rather lamely.
‘No — I walked over.
Oh…a better sort of fire this time, she said, as the sky was momentarily lit with pink and green light, punctuated by golden falling stars.
‘Yes!’ he answered with a half laugh.
They watched in silence for a time.
She sensed that he had something to say to her.
At last he observed drily: ‘I understand you're selling.’
‘Have sold.’
‘Oh.
Fixed on anywhere else yet?’
‘No — I'm still looking.,
‘I've had the stables converted into a cottage.
Thought you might like to have a look.’
She was taken by surprise.
‘Why yes — thank you — I would.’
‘You've had a rough ride here, haven't you?
One way  and another.’
‘Er — yes.
I sometimes feel I'm a magnet for trouble.
I must make it happen to myself!
My fault.’
‘No perhaps you just lack judgement.
Trust people too much.’
‘I'm also blind.
I always think I'm right.’
‘Sometimes you are.’
‘Oh?’
‘Not allowing shooting here, for instance.’
‘How did you know?’ she asked, startled.
‘I know.
I don't allow it either.
They think we're mad.
People are willing to pay high for the privilege of killing,’ he said, grimly.
His hand closed over hers on the wall, and his voice was less dry, more relaxed.
‘Never mind.
Fate does work things out, you know — but never in the way you expect.’
And at that moment their feeling for each other made all previous connections irrelevant.
Christopher Petrie and Jane lived for a year as neighbours: he in the manor and she in the stables-converted cottage, which she made much cosier and more inviting than the manor — one reason perhaps why Christopher spent so much time there.
But it was not the only reason.
Visiting rights have the great advantage of being optional, not obligatory, so Christopher and Jane were only together because they wanted to be.
Jane had rationalised her past life: she was a loner; she was better alone.
It was a hedge against disappointment.
But now, unconsciously, her prejudices were being overturned.
She was beginning to acclimatise to not being alone, to look forward to seeing Christopher: to eating with him, listening to music with him, being silent with him, talking to him, walking with him, occasionally sleeping with him.
She took a lot of convincing: distrust was deeply ingrained in her, she dared not believe in good fortune; she was conditioned to thinking in terms of Lajos and adjustment took some time.
But the realisation gradually came unawares, that here was someone who was kind, generous and manly, who considered her — unthinkable after the everyone-for-himself world she had inhabited.
She did not expect him to be ‘faithful’, but he was.
He was the opposite to Lajos: Hyperion to a satyr.
Before, she lived in negative, now in positive.
Would it last?
Yes — it deepened.
Her vision of life grew stronger.
She felt that nothing could destroy it now.
You can know everything about a person, and know them for years, and still be miles away from them.
Or you can know next to nothing and still be close.
Her central  happiness irradiated the rest of her life, from important happenings, down to her mood when she was doing trivial things.
She no longer woke up wondering why she was alive, wondering how she would get through the day.
I've got one life, she told herself: I refuse to be unhappy any more.
I've paid my debt in unhappiness.
I'm positive now, not merely Teflon.
Christopher was reserved: a fellow-loner.
He only opened out to her slowly.
She never pressed him and he appreciated that.
But Jane had always respected the privacy of others.
Like the visits themselves, the confidences were optional, not obligatory.
Obligation destroys all pleasure, all romance.
That's why marriage, or even a relationship when it becomes heavy, is a bad idea.
Brought up in the ethic of duty, this was hard for Jane to get used to, but when she broke out into the sunshine, it was all the more joyous, and she thanked God, or Nature, or Fate, or whatever power there is, that it had happened for her in her lifetime.
The greatest test, of course, were her family.
There came the brass tacks: how old was he?
Was he married?
How did he make his money?
When she said she did not know (which was true, for a long time) they did not believe her.
This was only natural as she had a reputation for secrecy.
But no, she told them, she would not be pigeon-holed.
They were not a couple.
Just friends.
Neighbours.
With visiting rights.
The whole basis of her life was different, becoming progressively transformed.
But ghosts from the past still intruded.
Sheer will-power cannot banish them.
Despite her determination to be happy, she still suffered from chaotic dreams, and quickly plunged into everyday activity to save herself from the terrors of her own mind.
Influenced by these dreams, beautiful mornings seemed to mock her waking despair, but once she had shaken herself free from their shades, sun, sky, trees and birds enveloped her like a benediction.
Christopher was fully aware of her transitional problems.
He wanted her to relax into happiness — physically, mentally, spiritually — but he knew it would take time.
There was never any need to explain things to him (even if she had wanted to).
Equally, it was impossible to hide  anything from him.
He was the most perceptive person she had ever met.
Regarding himself, one fact emerged, in a roundabout way and with a purpose.
They were sitting on the terrace outside her curved stables-cottage, watching the sun go down over Capability Brown's vista, uninterrupted because of the ha-ha (however did it get that name?)— and they were talking, over glasses of wine, about poetry.
He asked her whether she liked The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam .
‘Yes!
When I'm reading it I feel you can't fault the philosophy.
It's foolproof, watertight, totally convincing.
Away from the poem, of course, I begin to have doubts — it's too clear cut,too perfect.’
‘I was thinking more about the pottery,’ said Christopher.
‘The Pottery ?’
‘Yes — the passage about the Potter's shop with its clay population.’
‘I know.’
‘I read that when I was sixteen — and it had, well, an almost mystic effect on me.’
This was the first time he had ever talked about himself, so she knew it must be very important and felt flattered that he was confiding in her.
‘Such belief as I have — I see in those symbols.’
Jane resolved to re-read the passage that evening.
He gave a half laugh.
‘To cut a long story short — I became a potter.’
‘Still?’
‘Well, yes.
I still enjoy doing it.
It concentrates the mind better than anything I know.
Concentration means lowering one's eyes from the past and the future — especially the future.
I'm thinking of setting up a kiln here, just for my own amusement.’
‘Great!’
‘But — I'm into it in a bigger way now.’
He fumbled and brought out his wallet from an inner pocket, opened It and passed it to her.
There was a picture of an early nineteenth-century mill, with water in the foreground reflecting its reassuring squareness and symmetrical windows.
‘My mill,’ he said, his face glowing akin to a blush.
He  carried a colour photograph of his mill in the same way that others carry their wives and children.
He volunteered some further information.
‘It's in Cheshire.
I restored it.
We make ceramics there.’
So that was why he drove north early every Monday morning!
But he had not finished.
He still had not reached his point.
‘We don't design everything ourselves.
I have some outside help.
Special people.
Particularly one lad in France.’
Jane nodded, afraid to speak for fear of damming the flow.
‘Anyway, I go over and see him now and again.
I'm due to go next week.
Wondered if you'd like to come?’
‘Love to.’
She strove to keep her amazement and joy out of her voice, to be as laconic as he was also struggling to be.
He finished his wine and stood up.
It was almost dark.
‘Good — early Tuesday morning then — we'll drive.
It's a nice trip.
That'll give you time to arrange about the animals?’
‘Oh yes!’
His matter of factness suddenly evaporated, and he took her in his arms and gave her a passionate kiss which said: ‘I'm glad you're coming.’
Despite appearance, he was a man of impulse, not premeditation.
The way to the marvellous boy led through the flat, lush green pasturelands of western France, peopled with huge milk-white cows, and alternating with the serried rows of vines.
Here and there a creeper-covered country house with a pitched roof which the French dignified with the name of ‘château’, here and there a little town with broad tree-lined avenues, the inevitable ‘Place Napoléon’, and the lycée in a prime position.
They stopped at a roadside café for something to eat and were wished bon appetit , without a trace of sarcasm, by the lorry drivers.
Jane was not over-enamoured of the French: they were continually expressing themselves (discuter , they called it) which was rather tiring, and she had less than happy memories of a French au pair .
Still, they had achieved a class system which was far less awkward and  agonised than our own.
And their country was not claustrophobic.
She could feel herself relaxing.
A lot has to do with one's travelling companion.
Christopher was quite at home.
He did not stick out like a sore thumb — the drawback of most Englishmen, and he spoke French fluently.
Their destination was an unfashionable part of France called Tarn et Garonne — gently rolling green hills and farmland.
Christopher made for his favourite restaurant in his favourite town — Agen.
It was early September so getting dark with the street lights already lit, and the restaurant stood under some arches.
He was given a great welcome by the waiters and Jane was introduced to the Maître in person.
Christopher had obviously been going there for some years.
He recommended a regional speciality and local wine — both delicious.
Jane could not even remember what her worries were.
She'd always had to have an imaginary life simultaneously, as the real one was inadequate.
Now the imaginary one was becoming the real one.
‘They've a very fine church here,’ said Christopher, ‘painted in shades of gold.
Moorish influence.
We'll come back and see it.’
They said little of importance during the meal, but Jane had the feeling that he was watching her, though in a kindly, not a critical way.
She longed to probe his mind.
She felt that here at last was a man who saw things clearly and saw them whole.
She also felt that, without realising it, she had become very set in her ways.
Rigid.
That had been to strengthen her for all the troubles and problems she'd had to deal with.
This was not so much an escape as a therapy.
Christopher's potter friend lived in a farmhouse and the nearest village was called Bourg de Visa.
He stopped at the Pâtisserie and emerged with an elegant box bearing the insignia of the French Federation of Master Bakers.
A miniature Fortnums in the remote French countryside!
‘Thought I'd take them a cake,’ he remarked.
Jane wondered who ‘they’ referred to.
She'd soon see.
On the top of a steep rocky hill there appeared to be a fortress, with every window lit.
This was the farmhouse, with walls of stone, three feet thick.
Jane wondered what  attack the original inhabitants had been expecting.
English, perhaps?
They were greeted by the inspired potter — Francis in person, with a flood of effusive French.
He was thin, boyish (looking even younger than perhaps he was), maskless, full of joie de vivre .
The men embraced and Jane suddenly felt very foreign.
Then Francis turned and greeted her in perfect English.
So she wouldn't have to struggle on in her fractured French!
‘I'm half English,’ Francis explained, ‘my father —‘.
The fortress-farm was full of people, all young and wearing tattered jeans and T-shirts with ‘green’ slogans.
Apparently there was always a flood of people flowing through the farmhouse: friends, friends of friends, friends of friends of friends.
Francis took no notice of them, but led Christopher and Jane straight out to the kiln which was housed in a huge barn, with brown squirrels perching on the rafters.
Shelves lined the walls on which stood magical pots — organic, looking as if they'd grown rather than been made, with the colours of the trees, the earth and the sea merging in the glaze.
No formal, added, decoration.
Jane could understand Christopher's enthusiasm.
The kiln was very large, fine, up-to-date and valuable.
There were several potter's wheels.
A lazily good-looking young man with longish hair sat cross-legged at one.
‘My brother Marc,’ introduced Francis.
‘Marc with a ‘c’’, added the young man pointedly.
Older than Francis and a poseur, he smiled languidly.
‘I'm just back from India,’ he announced importantly.
Back, complete with Buddhism and so on, thought Jane.
He sat cross-legged all over the place, even at the dinner table.
He had none of Francis' directness and none of his talent.
Francis was the driving force and wore himself out.
Didn't eat enough, nor sleep enough.
Marc was the one who hitched a lift.
The young people played tapes until late, and Christopher, Francis, Jane and Marc (cross-legged on the ground) sat on the terrace with wine.
A dark girl with long straight hair and a fringe, obviously pregnant, joined them and sat silently beside Marc.
Christopher and Francis were deep in conversation about pottery, speaking French.
Francis apologised to Jane: ‘French is faster, you can say more in  less time.
She was glad, however, being tired and not inclined to speak to anyone.
The girl addressed her once.
‘You are English?’
‘Yes.’
‘I speak a little.
My name is Martine.’
‘And mine is Jane.’
They relapsed into silence.
Marc seemed to be in a state of meditation.
The full moon now blazed down and the countryside looked limitless.
Jane dozed off, having travelled, eaten and wined.
She awoke to a matter which had crossed her mind.
Where would they sleep?
As she imagined, Christopher, characteristically, had not enlightened Francis as to their relationship.
Francis therefore showed her into his mother's bedroom — scattered jewellery and Chanel all covered in cobwebs, and Christopher, she presumed, occupied one of the rooms facing onto the semicircular gallery, which was now becoming covered by bodies in sleeping bags.
The pop tapes went on and on.
Jane put in ear plugs (she never travelled without them) and collapsed into bed exhausted.
At least the bedclothes were clean.
But her ear plugs were not impregnable and — the music having stopped at last— she did hear a tap on the door.
She opened it.
Christopher.
‘Oh God!’ she thought, ‘the pattern.
Holiday abroad….
But chided herself the next moment.
Christopher did not run to pattern.
She held the door open but he did not enter.
‘This lot,’ he said, ‘will be blotto till midday.
I like the mornings.
I think you do too.
Shall we go for a walk?’
‘Oh yes!’
‘Right — I'll come for you about seven.’
‘Fine.’
‘Good night.’
She returned to bed and went out like a light.
The farmhouse by day looked even more like a fortress.
Grey and impregnable.
‘Why did they build them on the top of hills?’ she asked Christopher.
He shrugged.
‘Mad.
You find the same thing in Yorkshire, here and there.’
She discovered he had a Plan.
‘The drawback to this place,’ he said, ‘is food — or lack of it.
Despite the French reputation for gastronomic prowess, none of these girls can cook.
If we want a decent meal, we'll have to do it ourselves.
Otherwise poor Francis, and he already has to feed the chickens and the cat, milk the goat, herd the sheep.
Nobody else lifts a finger.
So — unless you want baked  beans (and I know I don't) let's set to work.’
They had crossed the dusty lane into an orchard.
There were masses of good apples on the ground, and Christopher produced two carrier bags.
‘Apple pie,’ he said, and they set to work.
Jane was no great cook, and didn't even enjoy it, but she had brought up a family of four, so quickly got her bearings in the kitchen, which was off the main circular room.
In this room, below the gallery, stood the dining table with about twenty chairs and a large decorative closed stove on one side, all of which increased the impression of a castle with a baronial hall.
The kitchen had windows on three sides and the cat — only kitten-sized, though it was full grown — appeared.
Jane gave it a tin of meat which she had found plus — with great relief — the tin opener.
‘They'll all wake up hungry,’ Christopher had said grimly, and went outside on the terrace with the carrier bags and a bowl to peel and core the apples in the early morning sunlight.
Jane was glad.
She preferred to be on her own in a kitchen.
She marshalled the troops: flour, sugar, eggs, milk, vanilla essence.
First, make the pies and put them in the oven.
No cream, but perhaps Francis could solve.
Then , she thought, having found a small canister of mild English curry powder, a vegetable curry, while the pies were doing.
She set about preparing the vegetables.
The flour was in an open sack on the floor.
All very primitive.
Like in a film.
Never mind.
L'esprit Anglais !
By the time Christopher had peeled all the apples, she had the oven heating and the pastry rolled.
She made four big pies, and with the trimmed-off pastry designed some crude Picasso doves as decoration for the tops.
Meanwhile a huge cauldron of vegetables was simmering for the curry.
Francis was up by now and had tethered the goat — a huge brown animal with fearsome horns called Brunette.
He was the only one who could manage her.
Marc couldn't, even though he was bigger than Francis.
Christopher went with him to feed the chickens and let out the sheep which were used as ‘mowers’ for the steep lawns.
People were stirring now, yelling French in unison, splashing, exclaiming, swearing, someone put on a tape.
It was already 11.45.
Martine came into the kitchen.
‘Can I  ‘elp you?’
‘Yes please, Martine — to set the table.’
Martine was obviously a frequent visitor and knew where everything was kept.
She flung mats, knives, forks, spoons, salt and pepper containers onto the table.
Christopher and Francis appeared to announce that they were going down into Bourg to fetch some wine.
Christopher's BMW had become the farmhouse taxi.
Otherwise it was a tiny Citroën or a moped, both clapped out, and having to be run with at high speed down the hill and then jumped on with alacrity.
Getting to the village was always a highly dramatic event witnessed by a yelling, clapping audience.
Jane had decreed bowls rather than plates for the curry and spooned it out in the kitchen whence it was ferried by Christopher, Francis and Martine (Jane's mind darted back involuntarily to Puchero and gauchos in Argentina).
But the next minute there were shrieks.
People covered their mouths in agony.
Jane had forgotten that the French have no connection with India and are therefore unacquainted….
And it was only a mild curry!
She felt rather riled.
It was all over-dramatised.
An unnecessary fuss.
Francis and Christopher dissolved in laughter, lapped theirs up and declared it very good.
Marc, sitting cross-legged, fresh from India, felt constrained to consume his.
The rest could go to hell!
There was noting else to eat.
Then the active ones cleared the plates from the jabbering throng and the pies were produced with many oos and aahs.
Cream had been purchased in Bourg.
The pudding went down like a dream, in blessed silence, and Christopher and Francis disappeared to brew coffee.
At the end Christopher took matters in hand and commanded Francis to instruct his guests that some of them must volunteer to wash up.
The cook had done enough.
There were groans, but a reluctant few drifted to the kitchen.
‘Leave them !’
Christopher ordered Jane, so while he and Francis went to the pottery barn, she stretched out on the grass and the cat came and lay, purring, on top of her.
From a half doze Jane saw Christopher and Francis emerge from the barn, go to the kitchen and re-emerge with the sack of flour, which they took to the barn!
Was it flour — or something they used in pottery?
Jane's mind writhed in  agony, but she said nothing.
Any damage that had been done, was done.
Nobody died.
Nobody even complained of stomach ache.
The explanation lay forever hidden in mystery.
It was warm for early September.
Francis, having concluded his business with Christopher, took command.
‘Everyone to the river!’ he cried.
And they all seized their swimming trunks and towels and piled into the BMW.
Those who couldn't get in pushed the Citroën, and three managed to get onto the moped.
The river was clear and rushing and fringed by trees.
There was a bridge, and the village children were already jumping in from it.
Jane sat on the bank and marvelled at their courage.
She didn't swim and wasn't sure that she could , despite relentless tuition at school.
Christopher came and sat beside her.
‘Am I stopping you?’
‘Ugh no — I'm a fire sign — I hate water!’
He believed in astrology.
‘Thanks for the meal,’ he said, unbeknowing.
She shivered in horror.
‘It made a real holiday for Francis.
He wears himself out with these people.
Unfortunately he's very gregarious.
Not to have a companion is for him like lacking a limb.
But it drains him — mentally and physically.
And he's so gifted!’
He lapsed into silence.
Jane had never heard him speak with such enthusiasm about anybody before.
It was getting chilly and the novelty of the river palled.
People were coming out, wrapping themselves in towels, shivering and complaining.
Time to go home.
Christopher did his bit by cramming about a dozen in his car, then, having dumped them, said to Jane with some asperity:.
‘Let's get away from it all!’
So they escaped down into the village.
There was the very up-market Pâtisserie , a very down-market haberdashers which hadn't changed since the 1930s, and the priest playing boules with a friend in front of the church.
‘How different —’ said Jane.
How different from England, she meant, and of course Christopher understood.
‘Let's go on into Agen,’ he said.
This time they saw the church in all its Moorish exuberance.
‘Francis had a pottery exhibition in the cloisters,’ said Christopher proudly.
And then — of course— back to the welcome and excellent food of the favourite restaurant.
‘You deserve this,’ said Christopher raising his glass, ‘after  the lunch marathon!
‘Do I?’ said Jane still a mite worried.
‘Christopher,’ said Francis to Jane, who was helping him with the sheep the next morning, ‘has been like a father to me.’
Jane pricked her ears.
Christopher was reticent about himself, especially his good points.
These she would learn of only through other people.
‘My own father,’ Francis continued, ‘failed in business and drove himself over a cliff in full view of us all, five years ago.
Christopher knew him and came straight down.
Has never withdrawn his support since.
My brother ebbs and flows.
Just now, he's overboard for India.
When we were in England, at school, he was overboard for England.
Now he's overboard for France, and spells his name with a ‘c’ instead of a ‘k’.
Can you beat it!
So petty!’
(Jane had deduced he was somewhat superficial.)
‘My father went to English public school: so did we.
My mother, I'm afraid, went quite to pieces after his death.
She's with a boy our age — a toy boy — and though he deserts her for young girls and even beats her up — she's such a sucker for punishment, she goes back for more.
It's hard to understand people even — perhaps especially — one's own family.
But Father — an apparently unemotional Englishman — left the farmhouse to me and Mark only , so we have a roof.
Christopher, who was a friend of my father's, had the kiln brought here from my father's workplace miles away, and said he'd buy whatever I produced.
I love pottery — and so it's gone on.
But Christopher won't be thanked….
‘His name isn't really Christopher, you know.
It's Stefan — Stefan Petrovitch.
His parents were Ukrainian, and he was born in Germany.
He speaks five languages, but doesn't use them much — in speech, that is, though he reads a lot.
He talks more to me than anyone, I think.
But his actions are what count.
They're always good — and speak louder than hundreds of bloody words!’
And that wasn't the only eye-opener which Jane had that day.
A little later Martine buttonholed her.
‘Excuse me — I want to talk.
You are English — you don't belong here, so it's easier to talk to you.
You don't talk to anyone else — you don't know anyone else.
Marc went to India six months ago, and before he went — I got  his baby.
Now I don't know what to do.
He has no money.
I can't work for much longer.
He says it's my business — he can't help.
And I am trapped.
But I want my baby to have a father —’ and she started to cry.
Jane was at a loss.
It was too late for an abortion, and as for Marc, she hardly knew him, and didn't much like what she knew.
She mentioned the matter to Christopher, who showed some anger.
‘Useless bloke!’ he exclaimed, ‘use- less to himself and everyone else.
And you know what will happen?
He'll move the girl in here, so Francis will be further burdened.
Francis — who's worth the whole of the rest of the family put together!’
And, she knew, Christopher would help Francis.
The world seemed to consist of spongers like Marc, supporters like Christopher, and victims like Francis.
Sure enough, Martine did move in, and had two more kids, and the wild old farmhouse became a bourgeois habitat.
The fact that Christopher turned out to be an east European too hardly caused a ripple in Jane.
The two men were so different — opposites even: Lajos acting out his tragedy to the world Christopher-Stefan self-contained, self-reliant, intensely private, yet looking out rather than in.
And — not having a big ego to get in the way — viewing the world and its inhabitants with a penetrating intelligence.
No sham could take him in.
Just behind the estate which he had saved, the land had not been so lucky.
The developers and their henchmen, the Council, had tricked an old lady into parting with her cottage and twelve acres of ‘agricultural’ land at a knockdown price.
Planning permission was sought and granted at breakneck speed and the foundations were already being excavated for twenty-four executive-type four to five bedroom ‘dwelling units’ with two garages apiece but no gardens.
Asking price — around £200,000.
Christopher swiftly arranged for a six foot wall to be built along his boundary, and angrily muttered that it was going to have to be the Scottish islands.
The government was lavishing money on roads instead of railways and the developers were cashing in on a projected ‘up-grading’ of the existing A road to a motorway, thus bringing Suffolk into the commuter zone.
‘Your house will be worth a lot more now,’ people remarked brightly, which observation — if it brought forth a reply at all— was countered by a snapped: ‘I didn't buy it as an investment’.
But mostly he responded with an angry grunt.
He had only bought the land to keep people away.
‘Despite the wall, the atmosphere will change.
I shall become a refugee all over again.’
Jane had never seen him so depressed, his anger frequently spilling over into words to her, as the dwellings went up with hideous and indecent haste, flaunting a flag: ‘Waterloo Homes’ right next to his drive.
‘To come out all this way, to live in the country at immense cost!
And have a tiny back yard because otherwise they couldn't cram so many boxes onto the site.
‘Country’ houses six feet from each other!
Might at well stay in town.
But the cars — ah!
God the Car —they're catered for: one for the yuppie commuter and one for wifey at home.’
Jane, who only rode a bicycle, fully concurred.
And yet felt uneasy.
He was so deeply disturbed!
She analysed her feelings and had to admit that she feared there was a danger of his leaving.
And she did not want him to go.
While all went well she could maintain a fine independence, but when the order threatened to change, she was more affected than she would have believed possible.
The unknown is always the most fearsome, opening out into wide areas of conjecture.
The new inhabitants would be zombies.
But would they?
All of them?
Christopher hated them in advance.
He was away all week and now arrived back on Friday evenings in a ready-made bad mood.
The builders worked throughout the weekend, so with their hammering and concrete mixing and loud radios, it was impossible to ignore their presence.
Fuming, Christopher shut himself in the house.
There were no more relaxed, refreshing weekends.
About half the houses were now finished, the turfs laid, the flower beds cut, looking like fresh graves — all in the front, of course.
There was hardly room for a washing line in the back.
One weekday, braving the ‘Keep Out’ and ‘Guard Dogs’notices, Jane took the dogs and invaded the pitch.
She had decided to have a look at the human face of the bogey, and there is nothing like a dog (the only animal which trusts humans!) for starting a conversation.
A slim, smart, but friendly woman was just getting out of her car and smiled at Jane.
She resembled Jackie Kennedy, but — surprisingly — had a strong Scottish accent.
‘Would your dogs like some bones?’ she asked.
‘I haven't a dog to give  them to at the moment.
Only a rabbit — Flopsy.
Come in and meet her.’
The house was close-carpeted in turquoise, but there was some antique furniture, obviously passed down through the family.
A large lop-eared white rabbit was in a pen in the tiny back yard.
‘She's having a run.
We bring her in at night.
We've had her for eight years.’
‘We’ turned out to be a husband who worked at the London HQ of an oil company and two children, a boy of twelve and a girl of fifteen, both at boarding school.
Mrs Fletcher was extremely chic, but her accent gave her a reality.
She was very hospitable, made Jane sit down, was friendly to the dogs, brought coffee, then sat down herself, obviously overjoyed to have found a neighbour.
‘We've come from Weybridge,’ she said, ‘for the cleaner air.’
(Now polluted by two extra cars, thought Jane), ‘but’ she went on, ‘originally from Scotland.
(as if that wasn't obvious!)
‘Orkney, in fact — my mother was the only schoolteacher there.’
‘Quite a change,’ said Jane, wondering what mother would have thought of this fashion plate.
‘Alastair — my husband — is Scottish too, born and bred, like me.
I went to the school in Edinburgh where Miss Jean Brodie had her prime!
It's the job that dictates where we live now, I'm afraid.
Alastair is based in London, but goes abroad now and again.
He speaks Arabic.’
Jane, as the nearest thing to a next-door neighbour, asked them to drinks that weekend.
She didn't dislike Flora, who wasn't as brittle as she seemed, and was knowing enough to play down her fashionable side to Jane.
She realised that this was not a woman to whom one chatted about shops or clothes.
Jane had not visited her on impulse, nor yet as a premeditated plan.
She was activated by something in between.
To show Christopher the human face of the dreaded development.
IF she could persuade him to come, which she doubted.
‘Oh! the bones!’ said Flora, and brought them from the kitchen — in a Harrods' bag.
Jane dreaded broaching the subject to Christopher.
He'd think.
Oh!
Becoming suburbanised, are we!’
But it was easier than she expected.
‘Oh yes, Alastair Fletcher — Scottish bloke.’
‘You've met him?’
‘Well yes.
I was taking out my fury on a bit of practical work last Saturday — painting the front gate posts — and he stopped, and got out of the car and introduced himself.
And you know, he insisted on shaking hands, even though mine were covered in black paint.’
Christopher seemed impressed by this.
So he agreed to come.
Wine and cheese: one up from sweet sherry.
They weren't in Weybridge now.
A sad event intervened, however.
Flora appeared on Jane s doorstep with a distraught face.
Flopsy had died.
‘Well,’ said Jane, ‘they do only live about eight years, you know.’
‘Yes — but not to see her lolloping from room to room any more —‘.
‘I know, I understand: one lays oneself open to this sort of thing with animals.
My orchard was a veritable graveyard of cats: poison, old age, flu.
It's what's called an ‘occupational hazard’.’
‘But will you come round?
I'm all on my own….’
‘Yes, of course.’
(Surprised, though; one expected a Swede to be neurotic — but a Scot!)
When she arrived, minus dogs this time, as they would have destroyed the solemnity — Flora showed her into the back room.
There she had arranged a little altar, flowers and candles.
Jane was fearful for a moment that Flopsy might be lying in state.
She could not bear dead bodies of any breed.
It was, however, only a memorial chapel.
She felt she ought to have bought a card.
Flora had put one on the altar inscribed: ‘To darling Flopsy.
I hope you'll be happy in spirit.’
She did not, however, think it any more ridiculous than any other memorial chapel, but she was glad Christopher had not seen it, and hoped Flora would not mention it when they came round.
Alastair was a tall, handsome man, who would have looked very good striding over the heather in a kilt.
He and Christopher got on well, and Jane heaved an inward sigh of relief.
She did not find Flora any strain either.
She confided in Jane about her children.
‘Jeanette’(Jane had noticed a photograph of a very pretty girl on their unplayed piano)‘doesn't seem to want to do anything beyond getting married.
She could have been a top model.
And James has just announced he doesn't want a career.
In fact — he wants to leave school after O-levels. £6,000 a year down the drain!’ rather a loud voice)‘If he wants to be a sheep farmer in Australia?
Better than a poky little office in a characterless building on the South Bank — and meeting after meaningless meeting!’
‘I still think they should take advantage of their education,’ retorted Flora.
‘They'll only realise it later,’ said Christopher, smiling.
‘As Wilde said: ‘Youth is a wonderful thing.
What a shame to waste it on children!’’
Jane tried to comfort Flora by telling her that her own two younger children had got itchy feet at sixteen too, and left school: her son had gone on to a sixth form college which he found highly satisfying —‘One's treated like an adult,’ and her daughter to do a foundation course in art.
‘Things have turned out all right for them, though at the time I felt like you, and thought they ought to have stayed till eighteen, as I did, and the two elder ones did.
But things change, even within one generation.’
‘All these conflicting views — it's like a soap opera, living in my family,’ said Alastair.
Jane appreciated Flora's style and ‘game for anything’ attitude which she knew she herself lacked.
Christopher meanwhile walked back with them, as they had left their car at home: they had not lost their legs.
He came back elated and poured some wine for Jane and himself.
He touched his glass to hers.
‘Next weekend I'm going north instead of south.
Alastair will be in Aberdeen and I'm going to join him there.
He's going to show me a bit of Scotland.
Why don't you drink to it?’
Jane did, while she mused, ruefully, on how one's intentions can boomerang.
Jane, the supreme example of self-control, did not know what was happening to her!
She, who had always prided herself on total moral and material independence.
She, the great advocate of the Freedom of the Individual.
She, who had never demeaned herself by falling in love (which she considered a weakness).
She, who had been forced to be her own person: first, by circumstances; second, by temperament; third (as she fiercely told herself) by inclination…and yet she, Jane, could not get him, Christopher, out of her mind.
She had to capitulate and admit to herself that she missed him terribly.
But he had only been away for three days.
No-one had penetrated her proud defences like this since her father.
Yet Christopher was no father-figure — he was a friend, a companion, a lover.
Without him, the world was incomplete.
His absences, and an impending change, forced her to face her own feelings.
His neat, slant-eyed Slavonic face was always before her.
She tried, angrily, to brush it aside.
Even music, which had always been her ultimate solace, failed to take her mind off him.
On Sunday evening she put on Beethoven's Ninth.
If this wouldn't do it, nothing would.
‘Pull yourself together!’ she shouted at herself, mentally, like a true public schoolgirl (one's education never leaves one: even the religion stays stubbornly in the core of one's being).
The second movement was just ending, and had succeeded in stabilising her to a certain extent.
She was sitting on the floor, surrounded by dogs and cats — when Christopher came in, and lay on the sofa, without a word — as he always did — and listened to the music with her.
She restrained herself  from reacting, except with a smile, which he returned.
She could tell that he was relaxed and happy.
For once, she longed for the symphony to end.
At last it did.
After a decent pause, she made the very English enquiry:
‘Well — how was Scotland?’
‘Inexplicable.’
‘Oh?’
‘Yes — feelings can't be put into words.’
He came and sat beside her on the hearthrug.
His face was more animated than she had ever seen before.
At last he said, with a helpless shrug, ‘I feel I've been let out of prison.’
‘What about the weather?’
She knew at once this was a trite remark.
He got up abruptly and walked impatiently about the room.
‘Please don't debunk everything,’ he said.
‘Sorry — habit — Alastair took you around?’
‘Yes — mountains — heather — space.
It's Britain's last frontier.
All petty fears fell away from me, up there.
Human beings can't live on grey areas for ever— unless it enters their soul.
And, except for a few Teflon exceptions, it does!’
The irony of the whole situation made her dumb.
That she'd introduced him to the Fletchers to keep him there…well, she deserved it.
‘What's next?’ she asked, lamely.
‘I went to an estate agent.’
He bent down to his briefcase which he'd left on the floor, took out a folder, turned back the pages, and handed it to her.
It showed an old cottage, with woods behind and a sandy beach in front.
She read the description.
‘Thirty miles from Edinburgh; good golf courses within easy reach.
Own private beach.
Originally a smugglers’ cottage.’
She felt dizzy.
What the hell was wrong with her?
‘I've bought it,’ said Christopher with cruel finality.
‘That was quick!
The east coast's the cold side, you know.
No Gulf Stream.
My father came from there.’
He knelt beside her on the hearthrug.
‘Why are you trying to put me off?’
‘I'm not — if it's what you want.’
‘It is.
And it's time you stopped being afraid of life.’
Yes — that was the heart of the problem.
She'd spent the  whole of her adult life in a state of dread.
However, it was irrelevant to discuss her frame of mind now.
‘You'll — give this up?’
‘I've decided to give it to the Royal Horticultural Society as an eastern centre.
Keep the bastards’ claws off it.’
‘Splendid!’ she exclaimed with genuine enthusiasm.
‘A woman did the same in the west country.’
She had a lot of questions she wanted to ask him — his pottery — his plans, but she felt too filled with emotion at the moment.
So all she said was, ‘Hungry?’
‘No.
Alastair and I had a six-course breakfast in Edinburgh.’
‘Well, I'll go to bed then.
I'm exhausted — one way and another.’
‘Okay!’
He spoke sharply and looked disappointed, but she couldn't take any more, just then.
It was a cold goodnight, and yet she had never felt so warm towards him.
Needless to say, Jane slept badly: all her past life rose before her and condemned her present feelings.
Yet what was her past?
Had it been happy?
No — drab, dutiful, with occasional rare flashes and centrally — she'd always known, but never before admitted — a fearful void.
There was a note put through her letterbox.
It was Monday and Christopher had driven off early.
‘If you feel inclined,’ it said non-committally, ‘join me at the Station Hotel, Edinburgh on Friday, then I'll show you the smugglers’den.
Love C.’ He appended the time of the best train.
This was make or break.
Or maybe not.
It's so hard to separate emotions from facts.
Still, she would go.
She hadn't been to Scotland for years.
After a lifetime of analysing herself and other people, she gave up.
Christopher cut through her much-vaunted intelligence and she degenerated into passivity.
It was only a temporary phase though, she told herself — just for a change.
After all, she was not now responsible for anyone else, so she could throw good sense and caution to the winds.
Anyway, she was only going to look at a cottage.
He was sitting at a carefully chosen table with the magnificence of Princes Street stretching out through the window behind him.
He rose and kissed her with  spontaneous pleasure.
The waiter brought best malt whisky straight away.
‘Here's to our first drink together,’ said Christopher.
‘The night of the fire!’
‘You've a good memory — even in duress!’
‘I remember everything.’
The meal followed.
He had ordered the things that Scotland did best, just as he had chosen the best French courses in Agen.
What a difference, though, Jane thought, as she looked round the room.
Lofty ceilings, highly polished dark wood, ancestral crests, chandeliers.
Nowhere was history ‘done’ more convincingly than in the British Isles.
Christopher — more talkative than usual — was animated in his description of the Highlands, where he had taken several long walks with Alastair.
‘I'll keep in touch with that ‘laddie’’, he said.
‘Well — he's your neighbour —’‘Not for long.
But he'll enjoy coming up here.
He misses his homeland.’
Jane nodded, wishing she belonged somewhere.
Once she had been proud of being rootless, but now she was beginning to feel like a boat without a rudder.
She shivered through her whole being.
They then cruised at seventy mph to the cottage, thirty miles along the coast.
The scenery was full and free, though not as grand as the west coast.
Cottages, however, were hard to find on that side.
Christopher had enquired.
It was squat and solid, in a cove, with outbuildings, some land and its own sandy bay.
Jane noticed that it was fairly sheltered — she was already imagining the winter.
It had been left in beautiful order — carpets, central heating, furniture, thick curtains.
‘They had all the appurtenances,’ said Christopher.
‘It just remained for them to find happiness — and in that they failed.’
‘No dinner parties or near neighbours to keep them going,’ smiled Jane.
‘No — that's it.
It's a severe test, for two people to be just on their own.
Very few can stand it.’
They went out on the beach.
There was quite a warm offshore breeze.
‘Well?’ said Christopher.
(Well — what did she think of it?)
‘Of course, I love it.
It's like something out of a fairy story.
But —‘
‘Go on.’
‘I hope you're not romanticising Scotland.
They're not a charmed race, or even a charming one.
Scottish businessmen and advertising men are just as horrible as any others.
I've experienced them,’— remembering, with a shudder, a crappy little agency in Clapham where there had lurked a loud gritty third-rate Scottish horror she'd had the misfortune to run across in her Algox days.
Was he still rushing up and down stairs shouting at the top of his voice in case anyone had missed his presence?
Christopher's voice broke into her thoughts: ‘You're trying to put me off.’
‘No —‘
‘I think you are.
Why?’
‘I'm not — really.
I just wonder whether you realise what you're taking on — what it would really be like to live up here.’
‘You think I'm being carried away by enthusiasm.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Am I the type?’
‘We all have our lapses.’
He kicked a pebble into the sea in exasperation.
‘I'm disappointed in your opinion of me.’
‘Does my opinion matter so much?
I'm often wrong.’
‘Yes it does,’ he snapped.
She was both taken aback and flattered.
But she could not tell him her real reason for trying to dissuade him.
Couldn't he guess?
Men are so slow!
Even the best of them.
But having got so far, she could not leave it there.
She heard herself say, as if it were someone else: ‘What is it you want from life, Christopher?
It seems to me you're continually running away.
What would you do if they came and built a hotel on this stretch of coast?
Move up to Fair Isle?’
There was a long pause.
So long, she thought he wasn't going to answer.
He frowned and looked fixedly out to sea.
In the end he said: ‘Yes.
You've put your finger on it.
I hate the human race.
They've put everything under threat.
It fills me with loathing.
I've been escaping all my life.
It's a coward's way to live, I know.’
She had no difficulty in entering into his feeling.
‘Yes — it's sickening.
All greed and power and pettiness.
I've often felt desperate too, but I've never been able to talk about it  because people think you're being superior: holier than human.
But it's nevertheless real — for me, and I think for you.
I get terrible depressions.’
He swung round and looked at her hard.
‘You do?’
‘Oh yes — but I'm careful not to wear them on my sleeve!’
‘I wasn't sure.
I was wondering a long time.
But now I think I know.
The two misfits have found each other!’
‘Through hell and high water!’
‘That makes it all the more precious.’
He held her close, beside the grey Scottish sea.
‘No swimming against the tide any more for either of us.’
They slept together that night, and as the spiritual chemistry was right, so was the physical.
They had ‘had sex’ before, but each had been guarded.
Now the barriers were down, and Jane had never felt happier, nor more complete.
It's funny, she mused, how one feels incomplete on one's own.
It shouldn't be, but it is.
So Christopher ‘donated’ his north Suffolk estate to the Royal Horticultural Society and he and Jane moved out — their tastes in common now strengthened by a deeper understanding — to the Scottish smugglers' cove.
Their first visitors were, of course, Flora and Alastair.
Fond of the good life, they came armed with salmon, whisky and champagne.
‘We'll do the cooking!’ cried Alastair, donning an apron which reached half way to his knees.
‘You lassies go for a turn on the moors.’
Unlike Jane's father, who was bilingual, his accent was always as broad, whether he was in Suffolk or Scotland.
So Flora put on her green wellies and Jane her black ones, and they marched out over the hills.
They had things in common and, in this environment, found more.
To begin with, they were of a similar age: Jane's children were older because she had started to breed younger.
And now, surrounded by hills and sky, they shared that glorious, harmonious feeling that makes one at peace, at one with the world.
So Jane found it easy to ask Flora — whom she found honest and direct — how she and Alastair had got together.
Normally she was not inquisitive, but now she had Christopher greatly on her mind, and felt the need for parallel examples.
Flora laughed.
‘On my part — by missing a train!’
‘That's not like you.’
‘I wasn't like me at that moment.
I was in such a tizz — in love, I must admit.’
‘Alastair?’
‘Yes — I was to meet him at Glasgow and I was late.
But a taxi driver — his taxi was ah old London cab — swore he'd beat the train to Kilmarnock, and off we went, hell for leather along the road beside the railway track.
It was the  most exciting drive I've ever had in my life.
The taxi was clattering away and I thought it would fall apart at any moment.
But he made it, and got to the station just before the train did.
Alastair waved from the window and I collapsed into the compartment excited and laughing.
There was no time for any formalities.
Our friendship was just jolted forward.
That taxi was the catalyst.
Just the job for defeating everyday protocol!’
‘A pity it's necessary — unexpected drama, I mean,’ said Jane, thinking of the stories she had heard of the bonhomie of the war, in contrast with the stiff, glib cult of the eighties.
Flora went on: ‘Yes — well — the inherited playacting dies hard.
We may be very liberated and all that but —‘Oh — I must ask my husband’’ She put on a high-pitched imbecile voice like a detergent or wash-up liquid ad.
Jane was startled to hear this.
She had found it hard to reconcile Flora's intelligence with her old-fashioned wifey-at-home role, retrograde from her schoolmistress mother.
Flora seemed to read her thoughts.
‘I admit I've been spoilt.
I was lazy.
I shouldn't have been content to be just a wife.’
‘I think that, maybe, your beliefs have not been reflected in your life,’ Jane ventured.
‘Too true.
It's because of having too good a husband.’
‘The opposite from mine!’
‘I really admire you, bringing up four from the time the youngest was only five and working full time.
‘No bravery.
Circumstances dictated it.’
‘Well — there's nothing like adversity —‘sweet are the uses of adversity’’— for bringing out the best in you.
Dickens, W H Davies, Gorky, Dostoevsky — there are loads of examples!’
‘I'm no genius, so I can do without it.’
‘Still, I'm sure it brought out hidden strengths you never knew you had.’
‘Maybe.
Never thought about it really.’
‘But I can see it.
I'm quite the armchair feminist!
Not the frightening kind.
My sister's one of those.
Formidable.
She's a psychiatrist.
You'd need a psychiatrist to help you recover from her.’
Like Jane, Flora had the gift of demolishing characters with a few swift shafts, but at the same time with  wit and good humour.
‘But you're a lovely example to prove one of my pet theories: that women can always cope.’
‘Some women,’ Jane interposed, thinking of Evelyn, Fatima and others she'd come across.
‘Oh of course there are always exceptions, but mainly I think romantic novelists are quite wrong.
They still try to portray us as vulnerable and weak, but in reality we're very tough — not just the enormous butch ones, but small ones like us.’
Jane reflected that if she'd been enormous, with masses of stomach and bust up front, Lajos might have thought twice about bashing her.
Flora had really got going now.
‘Still, men have achieved their superior position because they literally have it, in sex, and because mainly they have got greater physical strength.’
‘Also, they're the greatest creatively,’ Jane interrupted.
‘There's no female Shakespeare or Beethoven.’
‘Circumstances,’ Flora brushed that aside: ‘what they could do, they did do — novels — Jane Austen, the Brontës, Virginia Woolf….’
‘But no great composers or painters, even now,’ Jane persisted.
‘Pah — there aren't any male ones either — not since Sibelius and Cézanne —however — as I was saying (among ordinary people) physical strength used to matter, but now most of the hard work is done by machines, so it doesn't wash any more.
Women can drive cars, taxis, buses, trucks, diggers, lawn-mowers — that sort of thing, though in the West they mostly don't (except cars) because of tradition.’
(And because they're spoilt, like you, thought Jane).
Flora darted a glance at her.
‘Though you only ride a bicycle, don't you.
I suppose that's because of the environment?’
‘No — I was riding one long before the environment was heard of.
I'm a throw-back.
I just don't like machines with a mind of their own — not even a moped!
Also, a car's very expensive to buy and to run.
As they say, what you don't have, you don't miss.
I do mind about the environment thing too.
A bike's healthier for the person and the air.
I think private cars should be limited to the infirm, really.’
‘I don't know how I'd live without mine.
But I expect that goes for millions of unnecessary car owners!
Still, I confess I'm a wee bit disappointed in your reasons.
I liked to think you were ahead of your time in everything !’
We're all walking viewpoints! thought Jane, then she laughed.
‘I've never thought of myself as avant-garde .
As I said, what I did was dictated by necessity.
But I still appreciate good manners in men.
Even a touch of chivalry.
Especially now.
I expect it's hard for them to find their feet on these shifting sands.’
Christopher's thoughtfulness was in her mind.
‘Ah yes — it's becoming more difficult than ever to achieve a balance.
We've still got to let them believe they're a bit macho.’
Flora took her arm.
‘We're lucky in Christopher and Alastair at any rate,’ she said.
‘Let's go back to this fantastic meal!’
Of course, there is no such thing as living happily ever after.
Unhappy human nature precludes that.
In Jane's case, she could not snap out of a lifetime of worry overnight.
She did not relish all those dishes which memory served up.
She loved the present, but the past intervened, especially when Christopher was away.
There was no escape: ‘I am a part of all that I have met.’
Too true, but Tennyson goes on:
‘Yet all experience is an arch wherethro’
Gleams that untravell'd world, whose margin fades
For ever and for ever when I move.’
Between her and Christopher there had been no euphoria to fade into the light of common day.
There had been no mad paroxysm of love, with the inevitable bathos.
They had been wary, and had resolved many of the doubts of two suspicious, confirmed loners already.
The groundwork had been achieved.
But Jane still dreaded the threatening disease of daily life.
Boredom and routine were less of a menace because Christopher was not a nine-to-fiver.
He ran his own business, and worked almost round the clock, so was away for days at a time.
At these times Jane was assailed by self-doubt; by fears as to whether their relationship would decline — for nothing human remains static.
Then, when he returned — which he always did, as quickly as possible, for Smugglers' Cove (and its occupant) were so strong a magnet that he often drove home through the night —then she was unfailingly reassured.
But what a boring person I am, she thought, to need constant  reassurance!
To be always afraid of confusing imagination with reality.
Away from his business, Christopher craved only peace and solitude, now shared with her — the first person ever to share it.
His greatest pleasure was to walk with her along the seashore.
He wanted no parties, and few visitors.
Alastair and Flora came quite often and the four of them enjoyed the luxury of being totally at ease.
Occasionally Jane's family dragged themselves away from their busy life in the south and arrived with boyfriends and girlfriends.
They were sage young people and got on with Christopher.
He himself had no family and Jane never questioned him.
Until now, he had always been solitary.
He had never thought he could share his life with anyone.
She had always been surrounded by people — and was still haunted by memories and bad dreams — but essentially had been just as solitary.
She had never come to terms with her old life, but, inch by inch, she was coming to terms with this one: her first reality.
The worst time of day had always been the morning blues — another day to get rid of — please God, help me through.
The people she would have to deal with in the London offices, paved with razor wire, rose up before her grotesquely and she would pull the sheets over her head and moan: ‘I don't want to get up — ever again!’
But she did get up.
It was her relentless sense of order which had scaffolded her life.
So different now, even on dark mornings.
To think that she and Christopher — two such hopeless, ingrained loners — had found each other!
It was a million-to-one chance.
And the still, small voice which persisted in whispering ‘too good to be true’ gradually,very gradually, became fainter.
It had never occurred to her that Christopher had been thinking of these things too.
They never went in for small talk (‘Had a nice day at the office, darling?’ complete with obligatory peck.
‘I was talking to Mrs Jones today and she said —‘) Neither felt the need of talking, for the sake of talking.
They were walking along the shore, arms linked against the wind, when he said.
‘Is it all right here for you, Jane?’
You're never bored I know, but do you get lonely?’
‘Lonely!’
‘I've been wondering — trying to see the place from your point of view.
‘No — I love it.
I've never been so happy.
‘I love the place — and — I love you.
Oh dear — not in that order!’
She'd never said that to him before — nor indeed to anyone in her whole life.
They stopped and kissed, under their sou'westers.
‘And how I love you!
Thank you for being here.’
And he'd never said that to her before.
(Nor, we think, to anyone else.)
Now, they turned and walked back to the cottage, with the wind behind them.
‘You're the breeze and I'm like the aspen tree,’ she said.
‘What?’
‘Yes, the breeze that ignores all the other trees, but plays its tune on the aspen, rustling its leaves, only on the aspen!’
He laughed.
‘The things you say!’
‘I didn't know I had it in me — aspen tree similes — let alone love!’
He stopped and looked into her face with those dark penetrating eyes which she had noticed so vividly on the night of the fire.
‘There's a lot more in you that you don't know about — yet,’ he said gently.