

Philip stared, hardly believing what he saw.
It was the shock of it.
He'd never seen anyone in Jubilee Wood in all the months he'd been coming up here.
And now, here was this boy standing by the big pool, as cool as a cucumber and wearing his helmet.
The boy looked round behind him up at the cliff.
Philip stepped back quickly into the cover of the trees.
The boy was stooping now, searching for something on the bank.
The helmet had tipped forward and the boy pushed it back.
Like Philip he wore glasses.
Then he picked up a rock from the shallow water at the edge of the pool and threw it out into the middle, making a huge splash; the rings of the splash spread nearly to the edge of the pool.
A pheasant squawked and birds burst out of the trees.
Keeping himself hidden, Philip watched him as he looked for another stone.
If the boy carried on like that, he'd scare off everything: the birds, the fish, the lot.
Close by Philip's foot was a rotten log.
He broke a piece off carefully, so it came away without any noise, just crumbling.
He waited till the boy turned away from the edge of the pool again and was looking into the trees behind him.
Then Philip sent the piece of rotten log spinning over the pool.
It landed in the water just in front of where the boy was standing.
Philip, crouched behind one of the big beeches that grew right down close to the pool, watched the boy for his reaction.
He'd scared him, you could see that.
You could tell because he was looking all round, nervous.
Then he put his fingers in his mouth and let out a shrill whistle.
Philip hadn't expected that and it unnerved him.
Maybe the boy was signalling to his mates and any moment there'd be an  ambush.
It could be that the boy had got the whole thing planned, luring Philip out, then having him surrounded.
Philip waited, crouched on the wet leaves listening, staring into the trees, looking for movement, shadowy figures.
But there was no one except the boy — and him.
And it was deathly quiet except for an aeroplane overhead.
The boy looked up at the plane, then threw himself to the ground.
He stayed there till the plane had gone over.
Maybe the boy was on the run and they had planes out searching for him.
No, that was stupid; the plane was too high.
Besides he did that himself sometimes when they new over, if they were enemy planes.
The boy got up and you could see he was still nervous.
He broke himself off a thick stick from a tree behind him and looked all round again.
Philip worked a flat stone out of the earth by the roots of the beech tree.
Then, when the boy wasn't looking in his direction he hurled it towards the pool.
The stone was heavier than he'd thought and he bungled the throw.
The stone fell very short, landing not far from his hiding-place.
The boy looked over in his direction at once.
You could see he'd spotted where the stone had landed.
Philip, pressed so close to the tree he could feel the knobbles in the bark, watched him.
The boy was making straight for the stone, holding his stick up and making little darting glances all round him.
He wasn't very big.
Philip reckoned he wasn't as big as him but you couldn't have told what age he was.
He had sandy red hair.
As he jumped the ditch that joined the two pools the helmet fell off.
He stopped to put it back on again, clamping it on his head and holding it there.
He was quite near Philip now and was climbing up the bank towards the spot where Philip had thrown the stone.
When he reached the stone he stood looking at it, shifting it with his foot.
Then he came on towards Philip, scrambling the last bit of the slope.
Philip thought he must have seen him but he  hadn't, because he stopped and whistled again, looking up towards the cliffs.
Philip didn't run.
He'd hold his ground; he was higher up than him and at an advantage.
But he didn't fancy him getting too close.
He'd lose what advantage he had.
There was nothing of any size to throw, so he flung a handful of beech-mast.
It did the trick.
The boy looked right at him and stopped, the stick held above his head, threatening.
With his other hand he took the helmet off.
His glasses were too big for him.
‘That's mine,’ said Philip.
The boy stared at Philip.
‘That helmet's mine,’ said Philip again.
‘Where did you get it?’
‘I didn't get it anywhere.
It's left over from the War.
My great-uncle gave it me.
So you give it me back.’
The boy stood there twisting the helmet in his hands, inspecting it.
‘I can't see any bullet holes.’
‘He was in the Home Guard,’ said Philip.
‘What's that?’
‘They didn't go to war, not abroad.’
‘You're having me on,’ said the boy looking at Philip.
‘Nobody had it in the War.’
He flung the helmet on the ground and Philip grabbed it.
He inspected it, looking to see if the boy had damaged it.
It looked all right.
The boy waved his stick round his head and threw it into the pool.
‘Don't,’ said Philip.
‘There's fish in there.’
‘I know,’ said the boy.
‘I've seen them.
Tiddlers.’
‘If they catch you up here,’ said Philip, ‘you'll get into trouble.’
The boy was still looking round him as if he expected someone to come.
Philip wondered again about the ambush, but he didn't look the kind that would set up something.
Barry organized ambushes at school between the portakabin class-room and the main school building.
‘You seen my dog?’ he said.
Philip shook his head.
‘What colour is it?’
‘Black,’ said the boy.
‘I saw a black dog last night,’ said Philip.
‘It wasn't him,’ said the boy.
‘My Dad locked him up last night.’
He whistled again.
‘I ‘d better go and look for him,’ he said.
‘I expect he's gone home.’
And he ran off into the trees.
Philip waited till he couldn't see him any more, then went back to his hide.
Who was the boy?
Where had he sprung from?
Philip hadn't set eyes on him before that he was aware of.
He sat down now in the hide and put the helmet on.
It was damp from being buried in the leaves.
He took it off again, inspecting the inside.
A hair was stuck to it, a red one, the boy's.
Philip picked it off.
He wiped the inside of the helmet with his anorak sleeve and put the helmet down beside him.
The boy couldn't have come from Thirkett surely; it was too far.
Unless he'd biked.
It was worrying, very worrying indeed.
Philip picked up the carrier bag.
Strange boy or not, he had to get on.
He crawled out of the hide and laid the wire, the plan that he'd drawn and his Dad's wire-cutters on the ground.
It wasn't just today the boy had come up to the wood but yesterday as well.
Of course it was him that had messed up his diary, drawing those stupid pictures in it.
Philip pulled at the end of the wire to loosen it.
If he caught him up here again he'd see him off, scare him to death.
He looked at the plan for the pheasant trap.
What he needed were sticks, thick ones.
You wired them together to make a kind of pyramid.
Then you propped it up on a twig, attached to a piece of string that you pulled when the bird walked into the trap.
The framework fell on the bird, so it couldn't escape.
He looked round the clearing.
The sticks wouldn't be too difficult to find, not here in the wood, especially after  the gale.
Finding them the right length would be more of a problem.
He knew he could really have done with a saw.
But he hadn't dared bring his Dad's saw.
His Dad kept it hanging on a nail in the shed and he'd have noticed right away if it was missing.
He found plenty of thickish sticks and picked up far more than he needed.
He'd sod them by the hide and arrange them into lengths.
He needed four about a metre long, then four more shorter than that, and four more shorter still.
Twigs or thin bits wouldn't do.
They had to be strong.
The wind had dropped right down and it was warm in the wood, so warm that Philip took his anorak off.
It was very pleasant and peaceful and he almost forgot about the boy.
He stopped worrying about him anyway.
He'd most likely go back to Thirkett or wherever he'd come from and stay there.
Philip picked up the armful of sticks he'd gathered and walked across to his hide.
Then he nearly dropped the lot.
From out of the trees on the cliff side appeared a big black dog.
He recognized it at once.
It was the same dog he'd seen outside Mrs Wright's hen-house.
For all he knew, the one Mrs Wright had shot at.
It snatched one of the sticks that Philip was holding and dragged it to the far side of the feeding-place, barking.
Behind the dog in the trees stood the boy.
‘Here, Caspar,’ he shouted.
The dog bounded up to him and he took the stick out of the dog's mouth.
He threw it deep into the wood and the dog chased after it.
‘Is that your dog?’ said Philip.
The boy nodded.
‘You should have it on a lead.’
The dog had brought the stick back and the boy threw it again.
This time the dog didn't come back.
‘Jack who does the shepherding, he'll shoot him,’ said Philip, ‘if he worries the ewes.
Or Mrs Wright will if he goes near her hens.’
‘He won't touch sheep or hens,’ said the boy, walking over towards the hide.
He stopped in front of it, tugging at the camouflage netting.
‘Leave that,’ said Philip, following him.
He dropped his sticks on the ground.
The boy shook one of the branches that made the framework of the hide.
‘Don't you touch that,’ said Philip.
The boy took hold of the net again, tweaking it.
‘Did you get that from the War too?’
‘Course not,’ said Philip.
The boy bent double and disappeared inside the hide.
He came out with Philip's note-book.
‘You draw good pictures,’ said the boy, turning over the pages of the note-book till he came to the whole page drawing of a pheasant, the cock pheasant that Philip had coloured in at home.
‘Where's mine, my bombers?’
Philip snatched the book from him.
‘You'd no right to draw those pictures in my book,’ he said.
‘Where are they?’ the boy said.
‘Here,’ said Philip, taking the crunched-up ball of paper out of his jeans pocket and throwing it at the boy.
The boy picked it up and carefully unravelled the pages, smoothing them on his leg.
Then he folded the pages neatly and put them in his pocket.
‘I know what they call you,’ he said.
‘Anybody knows that,’ said Philip.
‘It's written at the front of my note-book and it says ‘Private’ in case you hadn't noticed.’
Somewhere quite close a pheasant called.
Philip imitated it.
The boy stared at him.
‘How d'you do that, then?’ he said.
‘It's a gift I got,’ said Philip.
‘Do it again.’
Philip did it again.
There was an answering call from the far side of the wood.
‘What's that bird?’ said the boy pointing.
‘It's a pheasant,’ whispered Philip.
‘Sh!’
The hen pheasant had appeared on the other side of the feeding-ground.
So she'd come back again.
Philip put his finger to his lips.
But to his horror he saw the boy cup his hands round his mouth and make a crude and earsplittingly loud imitation of a pheasant's call.
The hen pheasant flew off.
‘Now look what you've done,’ said Philip.
‘You've scared off my hen pheasant.’
‘It's only a bird,’ said the boy.
‘A stupid bird.’
And he made another appalling imitation of the pheasant call.
‘Get out,’ yelled Philip.
‘No one asked you to come up here.
It's private property.’
He hurled himself at the boy.
‘Get off, I haven't done anything.’
Even as Philip pushed the boy to the ground he couldn't believe it was him that was doing it.
He'd never started a fight in his life.
It was asking for trouble especially if you wore glasses like him.
But he didn't think about that now.
He was angry, really angry.
The boy was kicking like crazy to get free of him but Philip held on.
His glasses fell off but he didn't care.
He could see close up, couldn't he?
He could see enough.
The boy elbowed him trying to get him off.
Philip thumped him.
Hadn't done anything?
He'd messed up his note-book, scared off the hen pheasant that he'd waited ages to lure to the feeding ground, nicked his helmet, that was all.
He could kill him.
‘Leave off, can't you,’ gasped the boy.
‘Get out, then,’ said Philip.
‘Get back to Thirkett or wherever you come from.’
The boy stared at him.
His lip was bleeding.
‘Thirkett?
What for?’
‘I bet that's where you live.’
‘I don't,’ said the boy licking his lip where Philip had hit him.
‘Tell us where you do live, then.’
‘Down there’ said the boy pointing.
‘Where?’ said Philip.
Little Knoll,’ said the boy.
‘Beech Place.’
‘You don't,’ said Philip.
‘How do you know I don't?’ said the boy sitting up.
Philip had loosened his grip.
‘Because you don't go to Thirkett School, that's why.
You don't get on the school bus.’
Philip picked up his glasses.
‘Got you there, didn't I?’
‘I go to a different school,’ said the boy.
‘What school?,
‘Garth House.’
Philip put his glasses on and stared at the boy.
It could be true.
He'd heard of the place.
It was a special school, he didn't know what for.
The boy, free of Philip, rolled over and sat up.
‘Look,’ he said pointing.
‘There's another one of those birds.’
On the bank by the beech-tree that Philip had hidden behind was a cock pheasant.
The boy crooked one arm and stuck out the other as if he were holding a gun.
‘Bang, bang,’ he shouted.
‘BANG, BANG.’
The pheasant flew off, squawking its alarm call.
Philip lunged at the boy.
He hit him with his clenched fist with every bit of strength in him.
The boy was as good as a murderer.
How dared he come to his, Philip's place, and act like a bird shooter.
The boy fell to the ground and lay there with his eyes shut.
He lay quite still, not moving.
Philip was scared.
He'd never hit anyone that hard before.
The boy lay there, not moving.
But he was breathing.
You could see that.
Philip bent over the boy, looking down at him.
There was no blood coming out of his mouth or anything.
It was only his nose.
Philip knelt down beside him.
The other boy had a white face and freckles.
He could have had a fit.
There was a boy at school had fits.
Maybe the special school he went to was a kind of hospital.
Probably right now there were people out looking for him.
Philip heard a noise behind him in the trees.
That could be them now.
He reached for one of the sticks he'd collected for the pheasant trap.
As he picked it up, the boy opened his eyes.
‘Did you think I was dead?’ he said.
‘Course not,’ said Philip.
‘I bet you did,’ said the boy, sitting up.
He didn't seem angry with Philip for having hit him.
‘This is my place,’ said Philip.
‘It's private.’
The boy pulled a handkerchief out of his pocket and wiped his nose.
The handkerchief was full of little holes.
‘Where do you go to school, then?’ said the boy.
Philip put the stick back on the pile.
‘Thirkett Middle,’ he said.
‘Now clear off, will you.’
It looked as though something had chewed the handkerchief, or it had been destroyed by acid or something.
‘What's it like, your school?’ said the boy.
Philip thought of Mrs Mills and Barry Butler.
‘I don't like it,’ he said pushing the sticks with his foot.
‘Me neither,’ said the boy rolling on his back.
‘Sometimes I don't go.
They think I do, but I don't.
I write notes,’ he said.
‘Absence notes.’
Philip looked at the boy, who was mashing the leaves up with his heels.
Philip had spent the whole of one night thinking of faking an absence note for Mrs Mills.
But he hadn't had the guts to do it.
He'd tried several, imitating his Mum's signature but he'd scrumpled them up and put them in the waste paper basket.
He couldn't do it.
‘I can't go to your school,’ the boy went on.
‘The classes are too big.
I couldn't manage.’
Philip thought he wouldn't have minded going to his school.
He fancied a class half the size especially if he could have picked who was in it.
He wouldn't have Barry and his mates for a start.
‘I might be able to come to your school for two days a week,’ said the boy.
‘So I can get used to it.’
‘How do you get to go to your school?’ said Philip.
The boy sat up.
‘My Mum and Dad can't handle me, right?’
Philip laughed.
Anyone could handle him.
He was just trying to make himself sound big.
He turned his back on
him and began sorting his sticks into lengths.
‘What are those for?’ said the boy, turning over on to his stomach and poking at the pile of sticks.
Philip didn't answer.
‘Are they for your camp?’
‘No.’
Philip picked up the roll of wire and nipped off a length with the cutters.
He placed two of the sticks at right angles overlapping and began to twist the wire to fix the two sticks together.
‘I can make things,’ said the boy, picking up the wirecutters and nicking at bits of grass with them.
‘I made the cage for my mice.’
Philip stopped twisting the wire.
He wondered if the mice were white.
When they said he couldn't have a parrot he'd said ‘Well, mice, then, white ones,’ but his Dad had said he couldn't have them either.
No reason.
‘I've got four of them, white ones,’ said the boy holding  up his handkerchief and showing Philip the holes.
‘They made them.
I put them in my pocket sometimes.
My Dad gets mad.’
Philip clipped off another piece of wire.
‘That bit's too short,’ said the boy looking at the piece of wire that Philip had just cut.
It was.
He wasn't making a very good job of fixing the sticks together.
The boy was distracting him.
‘I'll be off, then,’ said the boy and disappeared again into the trees.
He heard him whistling for his dog.
Philip hoped he'd find his dog and the pair of them would clear off.
With luck, with his whistling that loud Jack would catch him and see him off.
Philip began the second join, placing another length of wood at right angles.
Maybe he'd tell Jack about him anyway, then Mr Hyde would go and see the boy's Dad and tell him to keep off private land.
But it wasn't that easy.
It would put him, Philip, in a difficult position.
He wasn't supposed to be in Jubilee Wood either.
Philip persevered with his trap.
He was finding the wire hard to bend.
It was thicker than he would have liked and the sticks were too long.
He could have done with a saw.
And the pieces of wire he'd cut were too short.
The boy was right.
He'd start again with longer pieces.
He looked round for his wire-cutters.
He couldn't see them.
They'd gone.
And he remembered that the boy had been fiddling with them.
That was the last time he'd seen them.
The boy must have gone off with them.
Philip ran into the ride, looking in both directions along it.
There was no sign of the boy.
He'd most likely be out of the wood by now.
Philip was mad at himself for not taking the cutters off the boy.
Now it was too late.
He'd gone.
Philip had to get them back.
His Dad would kill him if he found that he'd taken them.
It was one of the worst things.
He stood in the ride.
Maybe he should go back down through the wood.
He daren't call out; someone might hear him.
Then he looked again down the ride.
The branch  he'd climbed over this morning that had been tom down in the wind was moving, shaking violently.
Philip ran towards it and as he came round the slight bend in the wide path he saw the boy tugging at it.
He was trying to move it off the path.
‘I can't shift it,’ he said to Philip.
‘Where's my Dad's wire-cutters?’ said Philip.
‘I haven't got them,’ said the boy.
Philip didn't believe him.
He'd got them all right.
‘They're my Dad's.
He'll kill me if he finds out I took them.’
‘Here you are then,’ said the boy, taking the wire-cutters out of his pocket and giving them to Philip.
‘What did you take them for?’ said Philip.
The boy didn't answer.
He was still tugging at the branch.
‘I know the person who owns this place,’ said Philip.
‘And if you don't get out of here I'll tell him you've been up in the woods with a dog.
He'll tell your Dad.’
Philip walked back up the ride not turning round till he got to his hide.
He couldn't see the boy any more.
Threatening him like that had most likely scared him off.
He picked up the lop-sided contraption that was meant to be his pheasant trap.
It didn't look anything like the diagram.
It was no good.
It wasn't working out like he'd thought and it was going to take him a lot longer than he'd planned.
It was the boy's fault, he'd spoilt everything.
He was a thief and a liar.
He bet he hadn't got any white mice either.
He probably just said that.
You could never tell if what people told you was true.
Barry had told them at school that his Dad had bought him a tarantula.
It had been a lie and the whole class had laughed when Philip had asked him how much it had cost, even Mrs Mills.
She'd known it was a lie too.
Even up here in the wood miles away from the class-room Philip felt his face burn at the way he'd made a fool of himself.
‘You mustn't believe everything you're told,’ Mrs Mills had said.
Philip kicked at the pile of sticks he'd gathered for his trap, scattering them.
He wouldn't believe the boy or anyone.
They all told lies: Barry, Mrs Mills, his Mum and Dad, all of them.
The sheep were making a racket, more than usual.
He wondered what it was that could be upsetting them.
Maybe Jack was rounding them up and moving them to another field.
Or it could be the boy going down through the field and scaring them.
He was that stupid he could do anything.
‘What's it for?
Rabbits?’
He couldn't believe it.
Not again.
The boy had crept up behind him and was standing, staring down at Philip's diagram of the trap.
Seeing him again was like a bad dream.
He picked up his diagram.
Fancy him thinking you could get rabbits with that.
You needed snares for rabbits.
The boy knelt down by Philip's wreck of a trap.
He looked carefully at the sticks of uneven length and thickness that Philip had fixed together, too loosely.
‘You need a saw,’ said the boy.
‘I know that,’ said Philip.
‘But I haven't got one, have I?’
‘We've got plenty,’ said the boy.
‘Plenty,’ said Philip scornfully.
‘People don't have plenty of saws.’
‘My Dad does,’ said the boy.
‘He's a builder.’
‘Oh, yes?’ said Philip.
That was probably another of his lies.
A plane flew over.
‘Enemy plane,’ said the boy.
‘Those are from the base,’ said Philip.
‘R.A.F.,’ he said.
‘Here,’ said the boy pulling his pictures out of his pocket and laying one on the ground in front of Philip.
‘That's a German one,’ he said pointing to a large drawing that took up nearly all the page.
‘I know that,’ said Philip.
‘Messerschmitt.’
He saw that the boy had initialled the picture at the bottom.
‘L.D.’ The boy saw him looking.
‘Lee Dent,’ he said.
‘That's my name.’
Philip didn't say anything.
He wasn't interested in his name.
He wished more than anything he'd go.
Didn't he ever stop talking, poking his nose in?
And now it was the planes.
When Philip was alone in the wood he imagined all sorts of things about the planes, that they were enemy planes bombing Thirkett, that they were on reconnaissance flights spying, that they were looking for him: a crashed pilot hiding out in the wood.
He didn't want this boy taking his planes, pretending about them.
The sheep had gone strangely quiet and there was a queer thundering noise that he'd never heard before.
It took him a second to work out what it was, that it was the sheep galloping.
Something must have scared them.
Philip ran across to the far side of the feeding-place.
He knew a quick way to the field through the top of the wood.
It was quicker than going along the ride.
It was rough, but you could get through easy enough before the new bracken grew.
He knew that Lee was following him.
He didn't care.
He had to see what was up with the sheep.
‘What's the hurry?’ called Lee.
‘Can't you hear the ewes?’ said Philip.
‘There's something scared them.’
The noise of the sheep pounding across the field was loud, like horses in a film.
It must be the whole lot of them, the whole flock and there were hundreds in the field.
He clambered up the bank to the top where the trees ended.
The fence ran in front of him.
The sheep were tearing across the field all bunched up together.
After them was a black dog.
A ewe and two lambs were trailing and the dog had got them marked.
It was the worst thing — unless the old ewe turned on the dog and went for it.
If the dog got one of the lambs and drew blood there'd be no stopping it.
He heard Lee come up beside him.
‘Call it off,’ said Philip.
‘Call your dog off.’
But Lee just stood there holding the fence.
Philip  couldn't believe it.
Here was his dog about to kill a lamb and he just stood there doing nothing.
‘I'm going, then,’ said Philip beginning to climb the fence.
He felt Lee pull his arm.
‘There's a man,’ said Lee.
‘With a gun.’
Jack was coming through the gate from the other field.
He was shouting at the dog.
Both boys dived for the cover of the trees.
Jack fired into the air and the dog left off chasing the sheep and ran towards the wood.
It jumped the fence lower down and disappeared from sight.
Jack was coming straight for them, up towards the gate with Floss at his heels.
‘I told you you should have had him on a lead,’ said Philip.
‘He was going to kill those lambs.
Couldn't you see?
Don't you know anything?’
‘It wasn't Caspar,’ said Lee.
‘You're a liar,’ said Philip.
‘Of course it was your dog.
I've seen it, haven't I?,
He looked witheringly at Lee.
‘And you were going to let it kill those lambs.’
‘He's coming this way,’ said Lee who was still looking at Jack as he came up to the gate, his eyes fixed on the gun.
Philip knew what Jack was doing.
He was on the warpath looking for the killer dog.
And if he caught him, Philip, and Lee in the wood there'd be real trouble.
He ran down the bank, Lee following him.
He heard Jack open the gate.
Philip dropped down in the old bracken.
Lee beside him.
‘Is he going to shoot us?’ said Lee.
‘Not if you shut up,’ whispered Philip.
Suddenly they heard a noise behind them.
Philip turned quickly and saw the boy's dog bounding over the bracken towards them.
‘Caspar,’ said Lee.
‘Caspar, where've you been?’
Lee got hold of him by the collar.
‘Shut up, will you,’ hissed Philip.
He was watching Jack and Floss go down the ride  towards the feeding-ground.
Caspar had seen Floss too.
He was straining to be off.
‘Help me,’ said Lee.
‘I can't hold him.’
Philip thought of Caspar chasing the lambs.
He wasn't going to hold him.
The dog was leaping about now, trying to wrench himself free of Lee.
Lee was being dragged down the bank.
Caspar was a big dog.
Philip watched Lee's fingers loosen on the studded collar and the dog break away.
He disappeared in the direction of Jack and Floss.
The next thing they heard the report of a gun, really loud.
Every bird in the wood seemed to fly up into the air.
Lee looked at Philip, stricken.
‘He's shot Caspar,’ he said getting up out of the bracken.
‘Wait,’ said Philip holding on to him.
‘I got to go and see if Caspar's 0.
K.’
‘You don't want to walk straight into the barrel of Jack's gun, do you.’
Philip kept his voice down.
Jack was still most likely in the wood.
‘I got to go,’ said Lee.
His face was white.
All they could hear was one of the spy planes.
As its noisy buzzing faded they heard Jack whistling to Floss, far away.
‘He's going out of the wood,’ said Philip.
‘The far end.
He's most likely going down to tell Mr Hyde.’
He let go Lee's arm and Lee ran down to the ride.
‘Caspar,’ he called.
‘Caspar.’
‘Shut up,’ said Philip.
‘Jack'll hear you.’
The boy was mad rushing out into the open like that.
He had crossed the ride and was looking for his dog the other side.
‘Not that way,’ said Philip, still keeping in the trees.
It had sounded to him as if the shot had come from somewhere near the pools.
Lee ran back to him.
‘It wasn't Caspar in the field.
It was another dog, a black dog but it wasn't Caspar.’
Philip looked at him disbelieving.
‘I'd know, wouldn't I?,
‘Jack wouldn't,’ said Philip drily.
They had almost reached the feeding-place walking in the trees beside the ride carefully, trying not to step on sticks.
‘If he's hurt I'll have to get him to the vet,’ said Lee.
‘He hates the vet's.’
‘If Jack shot him he'll be dead,’ said Philip.
Then he wished he hadn't said that.
Lee was crying.
Philip tried not to look at him.
He, Philip, hardly ever cried.
As they reached the edge of the clearing Philip saw the dead magpie.
He walked over to it.
‘There,’ he said.
‘That's what he shot.
Not your dog.’
Philip was relieved.
He hadn't wanted to find Caspar dead even if it was Jack's right to shoot him.
But he wasn't going to tell Lee that.
Lee had gone over towards the pools and was whistling.
Caspar came bounding out of the tangle of fallen trees below the cliff.
Lee flung himself on to the dog.
‘He's all right,’ he said.
‘Get hold of him,’ said Philip.
‘And keep hold.’
Lee got hold of the dog by its collar.
Philip picked up the roll of wire from beside the hide and clipped off a good length of wire.
‘Twist that round his collar and make a loop the other end,’ said Philip, throwing Lee the wire.
It would have to be the right length as he wasn't giving Lee the cutters again.
Lee picked the wire up.
He'd stopped crying.
‘Shall I make him a lead, then?’ said Lee.
‘That's what I said,’ said Philip, picking up the dead magpie.
‘What did he shoot that bird for?’ said Lee, struggling to get the end of the wire fixed to Caspar's collar.
Caspar wasn't keeping still.
They re killers, magpies, said Philip.
‘What d'you mean?,
Lee had managed to make the wire into some sort of makeshift lead.
Philip put his finger on the blue feathers that had other colours in, like petrol.
‘They take baby birds out of their nests,’ said Philip.
‘That's cruel,’ said Lee, holding on to Caspar with two hands through the loop he'd made in the end of the wire.
Caspar was trying to get at the dead magpie that Philip was still holding.
It was cruel.
Last spring there'd been a blackbird's nest in the tree by the goal-post in the school playing-fields.
When he was supposed to be playing football he used to watch the parent birds taking stuff to the nest.
Then one day he heard the birds making a frightful racket and this huge magpie flew out of the tree.
Philip had shouted to the others and they'd all come running up.
The magpie had dropped the skinny pink baby bird at Philip's feet.
It was dead, or nearly.
Barry had flung it into the hedge.
Caspar was sniffing at the dead magpie.
Philip hoisted it with a stick so it hung over the branch of a tree.
Caspar leapt up, trying to get it.
‘He's vicious,’ said Philip.
‘It wasn't Caspar chasing those lambs,’ said Lee.
‘It was a dog like him, but it wasn't him.’
‘It won't do any good saying that,’ said Philip.
He couldn't make the boy out.
Was he stupid or was he lying?
It was hard to tell with someone like him.
Philip looked at him now holding Caspar with one hand and throwing bits of stick at the dead magpie to knock it off the branch.
What had he come up to Jubilee Wood for?
He had a feeling he'd never get rid of him.
He'd never get the message.
He was thick, thick between the ears.
Even Jack on the look-out with his gun wouldn't keep him away.
Look at him now.
Most people if their dog had nearly got shot would have gone, cleared off, but not him.
Philip walked back across the feeding-ground towards the ride.
There were still a few grains of corn left.
‘Where are you going?’ said Lee coming after him.
Philip carried on.
‘You going back home?’
Philip turned suddenly, facing the boy and his dog.
‘Look, it's none of your business where I go,’ he said.
‘You coming back up here?’
He walked on along the ride.
The boy ran after him.
‘Where d'you live?’
‘I'm not telling you,’ said Philip.
He'd reached the place where the broken branch lay across the ride.
He began to climb over it.
Lee couldn't with the dog.
‘If you don't stop following me I'll send Jack right round to your place.
I know where you live.’
Lee stood there on the other side of the branch, holding Caspar with the lead made with his Dad's wire.
‘That dog wasn't Caspar.’
‘You're a liar,’ said Philip.
‘And stupid.’
Philip jumped off the branch and pushed it.
Lee, who'd begun to climb it, trying to pull Caspar over with him, lost his balance and fell.
He wasn't hurt and he didn't let go of Caspar but he howled, an awful wailing with his mouth open.
He didn't try to follow Philip, he turned and went off howling back along the ride.
Philip was disconcerted.
He wasn't expecting that.
He could hear him as he walked on towards the gate.
He could still hear him when he got there.
It was an awful noise like little kids you heard in the street when they fell down and their Mums dragged them along the pavement.
But Lee wasn't a little kid.
He was quite old, as old as him most likely.
Philip ran down through the field so he couldn't hear the noise any more.
It scared Philip.
It wasn't right.
He didn't understand it.
When he was upset the noise was all inside him.
Philip pulled his bike out of the ditch.
He'd better get a move on.
It was nearly dinner-time.
His Mum had dinner on the table.
‘Didn't you get any more books then?’ she said.
Philip stopped dead in the kitchen.
He'd completely forgotten he was supposed to have been to the library.
Everything that had happened up in the wood had put it out of his head.
Even now as he stood there by the kitchen table he could see Caspar closing in on the weaker lamb, and he could hear that weird and terrible wailing of Lee's.
‘I just took the others back,’ he said.
‘I'll get some more next time.’
‘Sit down, then.
Your sausages are getting cold.’
Philip sat down at the table.
‘Did you see anyone from school, any of your class?’
‘No,’ said Philip.
He hoped Lee would leave his books alone and his notebook.
And the helmet, he'd probably take that.
Then what would he say to Uncle Walter?
‘I've told you,’ said his Mum.
‘You're very welcome to bring your friends home to tea — if it's a day I don't work.’
Not likely, thought Philip.
That was one of the reasons he liked living out at Little Knoll, so he could have his own life, his own place that none of them at school knew about.
Ask them home to tea.
His Mum must be mad.
He stuck his fork in his sausage.
Anyway they wouldn't come.
They didn't like him.
His Mum helped him to mash and peas.
He'd once tried to explain to her that he wasn't popular, that people didn't like him, but she wouldn't have it, so he'd given up.
‘There's nothing wrong with you,’ she'd said.
But she would say that.
She was his Mum.
Barry saw plenty wrong with him.
Philip split his sausage down the middle.
He didn't care; he had his own life in his own place — or had.
He suddenly had a vision of Lee tearing up his note-book and wearing his helmet.
He put his knife and fork down.
‘You all right?’ said his Mum.
She had that envelope out again, the one that his Dad had been looking at last night.
‘Fine,’ said Philip.
‘And while we're talking of friends,’ said his Mum, sitting down beside him with her tea.
‘I've been hearing a few things about this boy that s come to live at Beech Place.
I don't want you to have anything to do with him.’
‘What things?’
‘He goes to Garth House for a start.’
‘What's it for, that school?’ said Philip.
‘Difficult children.’
‘Difficult how?’
‘What are you so interested for?’
‘I'm not.
I just asked a question.
Difficult how?’
His Mum helped herself to peas and poured him lemonade.
‘He's violent.’
Philip speared his peas.
Lee hadn't seemed violent to him.
It was him, Philip, that had been violent.
It was Lee that had the bleeding nose, not him.
‘Anyway your Dad and I don't want you to have anything to do with him, and that's it.’
Philip trailed his fork through his mash, making a track.
Then there was a knock at the door and he jerked the fork, spoiling his pattern.
‘Whoever's that?’ said his Mum going through to the front door.
It was Jack and she brought him into the kitchen.
‘Ask him,’ she said pointing at Philip.
‘I've been in all morning.’
‘Have you seen owt of a black dog?’ said Jack to Philip.
‘No,’ said Philip, making the pattern in his potato more elaborate.
‘Up in't far field by Jubilee Wood?’
Philip shook his head.
‘No,’ he said.
‘I haven't seen any dogs.’
He didn't know what he was lying for.
He had a chance now to tell on Lee, to get him off his back, out of Jubilee Wood.
And he wasn't taking it.
He didn't know why.
He didn't care about Caspar, not if he was going to kill lambs, and he didn't care about Lee.
‘Philip's been to the library,’ said his Mum.
She didn't like Jack because of the way he spoke, broad Yorkshire.
She said she couldn't understand him but she could.
‘Aye,’ said Jack.
Philip knew he was looking at him but Philip kept looking down.
He'd made a regular spaghetti junction of his potato.
His Mum saw Jack out.
She didn't come back right away because the phone rang.
Philip looked at the clock.
If she didn't hurry she'd be late for work.
Philip wanted her to go.
He wanted to go up to Jubilee Wood again.
He had all his stuff to fetch down.
Apart from Lee messing with it Jack could go up again looking for Caspar.
He wouldn't give up.
If a dog was worrying his sheep he wouldn't rest.
Philip could hear his Mum on the phone.
She was on a long time.
He wondered who it was.
And Lee.
He didn't trust him up there in the wood on his own.
He could do anything.
He was most likely still in the wood.
He hadn't said anything about going home for tea.
Philip scraped up his potato and swallowed it fast.
Then he put on his anorak.
His Mum was still on the phone.
He looked at his plate.
He'd left his sausage and the square of treacle tart she'd put out for his pudding.
He put the cold sausage and the slice of tart in his pocket.
He often got hungry up in the wood and he'd most likely want them later.
‘Come on, then,’ said his Mum, coming back into the kitchen.
‘Get that garage door open.’
‘Why?’ said Philip, staring at her.
‘Because you're coming to Thirkett with me, that's why.’
Philip's hand closed round the greasy sausage in his pocket and the treacle tart.
The pastry crumbled.
‘Why?
You never said.’
‘I didn't know, did I.’
‘Why do I have to come?’
His Mum hadn't taken him to work with her since last year.
‘Your Dad and me's got something to show you.’
‘What?’
‘You'll know soon enough.’
Philip went out and opened the garage door.
He'd have to leave Lee now; up there in the wood on his own.
He was convinced he'd take the helmet.
It was obvious.
He was only waiting for a chance.
If Philip had had any sense he'd have brought it down with him, that and the other stuff.
He'd most likely nick his Dad's wire and cutters too.
There was nothing to stop him.
His Mum backed the car out and he got in.
‘What are we going for, Mum?’
‘Wait and see.’
She sounded as if it was something he was going to be pleased about.
But there wasn't anything.
The only thing he wanted right now was to go back to Jubilee Wood.
They were passing Mrs Wright's.
Philip glanced quickly through the gates.
Mrs Wright had her car out.
She was most likely going to fix up about someone shutting the hens up for her instead of him, going to see the other boy.
Philip opened the car window.
It was stifling.
He knew who the other boy was.
It was Lee.
He was the only other boy living near the village.
It was him she must have been thinking of.
Well, she wouldn't find him at home.
And good luck to her with Lee.
He wouldn't ask Lee to do anything.
You couldn't trust him.
And there was Caspar.
He'd seen Caspar down at Mrs Wright's, hadn't he.
The arrangement wouldn't work out.
Philip shut the window.
He didn't want it to work out.
He didn't want Lee to lock the hens up instead of him.
‘She shouldn't drive a car,’ said his Mum, who'd seen the car out too.
‘Why not?’ said Philip.
‘She's too old.
She's a danger on the roads.
People like her should live near the shops.’
‘What if she doesn't want to?’
‘She'd be better off in a house in Thirkett than stuck out here in that great barn of a place.
As likely as not, she'll get burgled one of these fine days.’
The dental surgery where his Mum worked was on the outskirts of Thirkett.
It was just an ordinary house with the waiting-room and surgery downstairs and a flat above.
Philip hated coming here.
He hated the smell and the noise of the drill you could hear from the treatment room.
His Mum made him sit on one of the chairs that were all round the walls and look at the magazines.
Everyone thought he was a patient and kept looking at him when his Mum called names out.
He knew they were wondering why there wasn't anyone with him.
He used to feel himself going red every time.
Once Barry's Mum had brought Barry with her and Mr Field, the dentist, had said they could go into the garden at the back.
Barry had pulled all the yellow tulips up and blamed him.
He'd never been in the garden again, though Mr Field said he could.
Barry's Mum got up from the desk as they went into the waiting-room, and put her coat on.
Philip's Mum took over from her at two.
‘Hello, Philip,’ she said.
‘I haven't seen you in a long time.’
She waited before she put her arm into her coat.
‘You don't grow much.’
Philip didn't say anything.
He had grown a lot in the last few months.
His Dad measured it.
Philip didn't like her.
She thought Barry was the best.
She looked at her watch.
‘I'd better be going,’ she said.
Philip supposed she didn't know about Barry breaking his watch-strap.
She wouldn't believe it anyway.
‘See you later,’ she said to Philip's Mum and went out.
Philip sat down on the chair near the desk.
There weren't many people waiting.
He was pleased.
‘What did she mean?’ he said.
‘See you later.’
But his Mum didn't answer.
She picked up the phone.
‘I'll ring your Dad now.’
‘What for?’ said Philip.
But his Mum was dialling.
His Dad worked not far away.
He was an electrician.
‘He won't be there,’ said Philip.
‘He's taking a late dinner hour,’ said his Mum.
Philip slipped down his chair, stretching his feet out.
The woman opposite stuck her feet out too, so Philip pulled his in under his chair.
His Mum had acted like this before, all secretive, he remembered now, when they'd taken him to choose his bike, his last birthday.
It had been all whispers and lies till they got to the shop.
But it wasn't his birthday now.
Philip stared at the picture on the wall opposite.
It was for children, rabbits having a picnic in a wood with toadstools, birds.
The birds weren't anything he knew and he'd never seen toadstools like that with spots on.
‘Yes, I've brought Philip,’ his Mum was saying.
‘No, I haven't told him.
See you in ten minutes, then.’
She put down the phone.
Philip looked sideways at the girl sitting next to him.
He could see the name-tape on her sock.
Polly Scott.
Polly.
That was a stupid name for a girl.
It was what they called parrots.
Philip sat up straight suddenly, knocking the daffodils on the desk.
A parrot.
Of course.
That was it.
They'd relented, his Mum and Dad, and they were going to give him a parrot for Easter.
They were keeping it a secret and they were going to take him some place where they sold parrots.
There wasn't a pet shop in Thirkett.
‘Great,’ he said half aloud.
The girl beside him thought he was saying something to her and looked away.
‘There's your Dad now,’ said his Mum looking out of the window.
Philip lifted a corner of the net curtain in the window.
His Dad had pulled up on the other side of the road.
He was in his work van.
Philip watched him cross the road.
He looked quite cheerful.
His Mum must have persuaded him about the parrot.
‘You've checked it's all right for us to go?’ said his Mum to his Dad as he carne into the waiting-room.
‘Two-thirty,’ said his Dad.
‘Right, then,’ said his Mum.
‘Moira'll take over till I get back, I've asked her.’
Moira was Mr Field's assistant.
‘Come on then, Philip,’ said his Dad.
And something about his voice made Philip think perhaps it wasn't to be a parrot after all.
‘Where are we going?’
‘You'll see.’
He didn't see, not even when they got in the car and his Dad drove off.
They weren't going in the direction of the shops or the Sports Centre, he knew that.
It was more like in the direction of the school.
But they wouldn't be going there.
It was holidays.
His Dad turned off the road they were in, into one lined with trees.
He knew where they were now.
They were near Barry's house.
Barry lived on an estate on the side of Thirkett farthest away from Little Knoll.
Philip had been to Barry's house once with his Mum.
Luckily for him Barry hadn't been there.
Now his Dad was turning right into the estate.
‘It's in the same road as the Butlers,’ said his Dad.
‘Number forty-five, Hill View Road.’
‘They're number forty-eight,’ said his Mum.
Philip looked out at the houses, some of the front gardens still had pockets of dirty snow in them.
There were no fences between the gardens.
By one path was the remains of a snowman.
There were children everywhere.
Philip looked straight ahead.
‘What have we come here for?’ he said.
A boy looked out of a toy wigwam and fired an arrow with a rubber end at the car.
He missed.
‘You'll see in a minute,’ said his Mum.
His Dad parked the car near the end of the road.
Philip saw a woman's hand with rings lift the lacy white curtain of one of the houses.
‘Number forty-five,’ said his Dad.
‘That's it.’
Philip leant back in the car.
He'd seen Barry on his BMX.
He was doing wheelies on a steep bank with a wire fence at the top.
The other side of the fence was the recreation ground.
‘Come on, then,’ said his Mum, putting the envelope back in her bag.
Philip looked at number forty-five.
In the other downstairs window of the house, not the one with the lacy curtains, was a bird-cage.
In it was a blue budgie.
Philip thought again of the parrot.
Maybe someone had one for sale and they'd advertized in the papers.
He tried to see through the net curtain but he could see nothing.
perhaps the house was full of caged birds owned by the lady with the rings.
He glanced at the bank.
Barry had gone off up the road on his bike.
He wasn't there any more.
That was something.
They got out of the car and his Dad rang the door-bell of number forty-five.
It was chimes.
The daffodils by the path weren't anything like out.
Some hadn't even got buds.
They were blind.
The woman with the rings opened the door.
‘Come on in,’ she said.
Philip stepped into the hall.
The stairs were the kind you could see through.
Barry's house had had those kind of stairs.
At the bottom was a huge cheese plant.
‘Where's the parrot?’ said Philip.
‘The parrot?’ said his Mum.
‘Who said anything about a parrot?’
‘It's a budgerigar,’ said the woman.
‘Would he like to see that?’
‘No, thanks,’ said Philip.
Why were they all treating him as if he was five years old.
He felt like screaming, screaming at them all.
But of course he didn't and none of them could see what he felt like.
He looked perfectly normal to them.
He wasn't feeling it.
And suddenly with the woman's cheese plant tickling his ear he thought of Lee up in Jubilee Wood, running down the ride howling.
‘I'll show you upstairs first,’ said the woman.
‘I've some more people coming at three.’
Philip followed them up the open staircase and into the woman's bedroom.
‘What do you think of the house, then?’ said his Mum.
His Dad was opening the door of a built-in cupboard.
Philip didn't know.
He didn't think much about houses.
‘What are we going to buy?’ he said.
‘This house,’ said his Mum.
‘Maybe.
If we can afford it and they don't put up the price.’
Philip stared at her.
He thought he couldn't have heard right.
‘What for?’ he said.
‘To live in, what do you think.’
‘But what about our other house in Little Knoll?,
‘We'd sell that.
To get the money.’
Philip moved towards the window.
Out of it he could see Barry, his bike propped up against his house, mending his chain.
And they'd never told him.
They'd got it all planned behind his back.
His Mum came and put her arm round him.
He stood rigid.
‘Look,’ she said pointing out of the window at the toy wigwam.
Further up the street, some boys he recognized from his class were playing football.
‘You'd have plenty of friends here.’
Philip looked away in case they saw him.
On the dressing-table was a white china hand.
On each finger was a ring.
For some reason the hand reminded him of Mrs  Wright, though her hands weren't white.
They were brown and blotchy.
He looked out of the window again.
Out of the wigwam crawled the boy who d shot the arrow.
He was wearing a Red Indian suit.
‘Well, what do you think of it?’ said his Mum.
He turned to go out of the room.
He didn't think anything of it.
Opposite was another room, smaller, that looked out the back.
It was dead tidy as if no one slept in it, though there was a bed.
Propped on the window-sill was a postcard of blue praying hands.
‘There's only two bedrooms,’ said the woman.
‘But they're a good size,’ said his Mum.
‘And we don't need more than two.’
‘This one will be yours, son,’ said his Dad.
Philip saw the garden.
The daffodils were out here.
In the garden next door there was a climbing frame.
‘The garden's not very big, I'm afraid,’ said the woman.
‘It's bigger than the one we've got,’ said his Mum.
‘We've only a yard and a bit out the front.
There's nowhere for Philip to play.’
Philip couldn't believe it.
Nowhere for him to play.
He thought of Jubilee Wood, his hide, the pools.
‘There's no children of his age in Little knoll.
It's lonely for him.’
‘And for you too,’ said the woman.
‘There can't be much going on there.’
‘Oh, I'm all right,’ said his Mum.
‘It's Philip we're thinking of.’
‘Well, he'll have plenty of friends here,’ said the woman leading them downstairs again.
‘The road's full of children.’
The budgerigar was in the kitchen and Philip stayed in there when the rest went back into the living-room.
Through the window he could see Barry still fixing his chain.
Philip pushed the bell in the cage with his finger.
Why hadn't they told him?
He didn't want to move.
He didn't want to live here right opposite Barry.
He wanted to  stay where he was.
They'd never asked him.
They'd picked this house without saying a word to him.
Philip opened the cage door.
The bird shuffled along its perch.
He put his finger in but it wouldn't hop on to it.
Stupid thing.
He shut the cage door.
And jumped.
He heard a noise at the window.
There was Barry, his face like a monster mask, his nose and lips flattened against the glass.
Philip walked quickly out into the hall.
‘What did you think of Joey, then?’ said the woman.
‘He's all right,’ said Philip.
Through the glass in the door he saw Barry running across the road.
‘Goodbye, then,’ said his Dad.
‘We'll be in touch.’
The woman opened the door and they went out.
‘Look,’ said his Mum looking back at the house.
‘There's one of those arrows sticking to the door.’
And she laughed.
His Dad pulled the arrow off the door and gave it to him.
‘You can take that back,’ he said.
Philip shook his head.
He was looking down at the pavement outside the house.
Someone had marked it with chalk.
‘That's nice,’ said his Mum.
‘Hopscotch.’
Philip looked at the chalking again.
It wasn't squares for hopscotch.
It was writing: NUTCASE.
‘Well, what did you think of it?’ said his Mum as they drove off.
‘I don't want to live there,’ said Philip.
‘Yes you do,’ said his Mum.
‘You're just saying that.’
Philip pulled the rubber suction disc off the arrow.
Then he broke the arrow in half.
Winding down the window, he threw the bits out into the road.
A big new car, driven by a woman in a fur coat, ran over them.
What was the use of saying anything if it wasn't what they wanted?
They wanted him to like this house but he didn't, and he wasn't saying so just so they'd feel better.
‘Your Mum and me like it,’ said his Dad.
‘And it looks like we'll be moving there, if she sticks to the asking price, so you'd better get used to the idea.
I've had enough of your stubbornness.’
Philip knew he was thinking about the swimming, the way he objected to spending all his time training and how he tried to get out of it.
He didn't mind.
Maybe his Dad would get the message one day.
Of course his Dad liked the house in Hill View Road; it was only ten minutes walk from the Sports Centre.
He wasn't stupid.
He saw his plan and his Mum's too.
She thought that if there were loads of other kids around he'd be forced to play with them.
And she'd like that.
She'd think it was natural.
She'd be happy.
Philip watched as the wigwam boy kicked a football at the snowman.
He hit it and its head dropped off.
His Mum turned to look at the car that had crushed the arrow bits.
‘Did you see her, Dennis?
I reckon that's the other person, the one she said was coming, to view the house at three.
It is.
She's stopped outside and she's looking at it.
What'll we do, Den?’
‘There's nothing we can do.
I've told you, we can't afford a penny more than the asking price.’
‘She looks made of money,’ said Philip's Mum, waving to Barry's Mum who was in her garden.
‘Stop a minute,’ she said to his Dad.
His Dad pulled up by the fence and wound his window down.
‘Did you like it?’ said Barry's Mum.
‘It's nice,’ said Philip's Mum.
‘There's lots of people interested,’ said Barry's Mum.
She looked at Philip.
‘You taking Philip back with you to work?’
‘No choice,’ said his Mum.
‘Barry will be back in a minute.
He's only off looking for Rebel.
He's the devil for going off.
Why don't you leave Philip here and collect him when you finish?’
‘Philip,’ said his Mum, turning round in the car so she could see him, ‘Joyce is asking if you'd like to stop here with Barry instead of coming back to work with me.’
He'd heard, hadn't he?
He wasn't deaf.
She didn't have to repeat everything.
‘Well?’
His Mum was looking at him.
She wanted him to stay.
There was no way he was going to.
He hunched up against the back of the car.
‘I've got a headache.’
He had.
That house had given him a headache.
‘Gets a lot of headaches, doesn't he?’ said Barry's Mum.
And he knew that she didn't believe him.
He was off school quite often with headaches.
Barry had most likely told her he was skiving.
And she'd believe him.
‘It's his eyes,’ said his Mum.
‘What a pity he has to wear specs,’ said Barry's Mum.
‘Can't be helped,’ said his Mum.
‘He gets it from my side.
His Uncle Walter's always been short-sighted.’
His Dad started the car.
‘See you next week,’ said his Mum and his Dad drove on.
‘At least there's normal people in this place,’ she said.
‘Not like in Little Knoll.’
Philip didn't think there was much normal about Barry's Mum, the way she thought Barry was perfect.
And the woman in the house.
She wasn't normal either.
Not with all those hands everywhere.
It gave you the creeps.
He reckoned Mrs Wright was more normal than her.
Out of the window he saw not Barry but Barry's dog.
It crossed the road and his Dad had to brake to avoid it.
‘That's Butlers’ dog, isn't it?’said his Dad.
‘It's no collar,’ said his Mum.
‘They should put a collar on it.’
Philip twisted round so he could see the dog better.
It was the same kind of dog as Caspar.
You could say it was identical except for the collar.
Then he remembered.
The dog that had jumped over the fence into Jubilee Wood hadn't been wearing a collar.
He was sure of it.
He'd seen it quite clearly.
Caspar had had a collar.
Lee had been right.
It wasn't Caspar that had been after the lambs.
It had been a dog just like him, a dog like Rebel.
But it couldn't have been Rebel.
Dogs didn't wander that far.
Back at the dentist's the waiting-room was packed.
His Dad came in with them into the entrance lobby.
‘You'll phone the Agents, then,’ he said to his Mum.
‘Right now,’ said his Mum.
‘I'll phone them right now.
I didn't like what Joyce said about lots of people being interested in the house.
It's got me worried.’
Philip followed her into the waiting-room.
A house.
A house in Hill View Road.
And he thought they were going to buy him a parrot.
You had to laugh.
But he didn't feel like laughing.
Not at all he didn't.
His Mum didn't phone right away.
She couldn't because she was too busy.
Philip leant against the wall as there wasn't a chair for him.
Two hours he'd have to wait.
His Mum didn't finish till half-five.
And Lee would most likely be all that time in Jubilee Wood, him and Caspar.
His Mum was phoning now; no one was answering at the other end.
She put her hand over the receiver.
‘That helmet,’ she said.
‘The one your Uncle Walter gave you, where is it?
I didn't see it this morning when I was turning out your room.’
Philip, his legs tired with standing and his head throbbing, slid down on the floor.
He knew where his helmet was.
Lee would be wearing it.
He saw him in his mind's eye, running through the wood wearing Uncle Walter's helmet and firing a make-believe gun at the spy planes.
‘You haven't gone and lost it, have you?’
‘No.’
‘You didn't take it to school?’
He shook his head.
She must be joking.
He wouldn't take it to school for Barry and his mates to kick round the playground.
‘Well, you'd better find it.
Uncle Walter won't be too pleased if you've lost it.’
She was right about that.
Uncle Walter hadn't really wanted to part with it.
‘How's your headache?’ said his Mum.
‘Bad,’ said Philip.
‘Can't I go back home?’
‘How?’ said his Mum, flicking through the line of records in the drawer.
He couldn't.
There was no bus.
More people came in, a whole family.
Philip squeezed against the wall.
‘Can I go to the library?’
Any place would be better than this.
He couldn't stand it.
‘What, again?’
‘There's things I can look at.’
‘All right, then, I'll pick you up when I finish.’
‘I'll go home with Dad,’ said Philip.
His Dad sometimes finished at five.
‘All right, then.
Take care.’
Philip was thankful to get out of the crowded waiting-room.
It was quite cold outside.
There was a wind.
But he didn't mind that.
His head felt better already.
He thought about walking home.
But it was too far.
The library was over the other side of the town.
He had to go through the shopping centre to get there, and the market-place.
The market-place was used as a car-park.
As he walked between the lines of cars he saw that one of them was parked so it was sticking out.
Looking at it he saw that it was Mrs Wright's.
He looked in.
On the back seat was a sack of grain and a box of cartridges.
He was curious about them.
Was it rats or dogs she was going to shoot?
Or both.
‘Hello, Philip.’
He jumped, feeling guilty about staring into the car.
‘So you've got some more hen-food then,’ he said for something to say.
He thought of the grain he'd pinched yesterday, spilt and lost.
‘If you come back with me you can help me take it out the other end.’
‘I've got to go to the library,’ said Philip, walking on.
He felt bad.
She'd most likely think it was because he didn't want to help her.
He'd never thought how she got the sacks out of her car.
They were very heavy.
He pressed the button at the pelican crossing and waited.
The lights changed and he was pushed by someone behind him.
But he didn't cross.
He just stood there and the lights changed again.
Why didn't he go back with Mrs Wright?
There was nothing stopping him.
If he went back with Mrs Wright he could nip up to Jubilee Wood, check his hide and maybe get his helmet back off Lee.
His Mum and Dad wouldn't worry.
They'd each think the other was taking him home.
He'd have to take the flak for having a lift with Mrs Wright.
Right now he didn't care.
He turned and went back up the rows of cars.
She hadn't gone.
She was still trying to get out of the parking space.
He went to the driver's side and shouted through the window.
She wound it down.
‘I've changed my mind,’ he said.
‘About the library.’
‘Get in, then,’ said Mrs Wright.
She'd got the car out of the space.
Philip ran round the other side and got in beside her.
They bumped off over the cobbles.
Philip didn't know much about driving but he thought that maybe she was in the wrong gear.
He didn't mind.
He'd be back home in ten or fifteen minutes.
He couldn't believe his luck.
‘There were two eggs today,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘What will you do with them?’ said Philip.
He remembered what she'd said about not being able to eat eggs.
Then he felt embarrassed.
Maybe she would think that he wanted them.
‘The other boy can have them,’ she said.
‘I called at his house on the way in.
He was out, but his mother says she'll tell him, and that he will shut the hens up for me when I have to go out to visit my friend.
She's no objection.
It's a great relief to me,’ she added.
Philip looked at the floor of the car again.
She needn't go on making him feel guilty.
It wasn't his fault.
‘He's got a dog,’ said Philip.
‘I know,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I heard it.
It was locked up somewhere round at the back.
It barked when I drove in.’
That was something.
Caspar wasn't still out loose.
‘I hope you're not in too much hurry to get home,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘Why?’ said Philip.
He was.
He was in a hurry.
‘Because I'm not going straight back to Little Knoll.’
Philip looked at her.
She wasn't.
She was going out of Thirkett on the Atherton Road.
‘Where are you going?’ said Philip.
This wasn't what he'd planned at all, a detour.
‘To my friend's,’ said Mrs Wright, wandering over the road a bit.
A car sounded its horn at her.
‘Where does your friend live?’ asked Philip, dreading the answer.
If it was Atherton he'd never get up into the wood and back before his Dad carne home.
‘It's not far,’ said Mrs Wright.
Philip looked out of the window.
That didn't tell him much.
He hated seeing the fields slipping past, the wrong ones.
They must have gone at least three miles along the Atherton Road already.
And she was going faster, a lot faster.
She didn't drive at a steady speed like his Mum.
He looked at her hands on the steering-wheel.
Like the woman in the house in Hill View Road, her hands were covered in rings.
He bet they were valuable.
He wondered if she hung them on a china hand at night when she went to bed.
‘There'll be three eggs tomorrow, you see,’ said Mrs Wright.
They were a long way out of Thirkett now.
They'd be in Atherton soon at this rate.
‘Where does your friend live?’ said Philip again.
‘The other side of Atherton,’ said Mrs Wright.
Philip opened his mouth in horror, then turned it quickly into a yawn when Mrs Wright looked at him.
That was it, then.
He wouldn't get up to Jubilee Wood before his Mum and Dad got back from work.
He didn't dare ask how far the other side of Atherton.
He wished he'd had more sense than to get a lift with Mrs Wright.
But it was too late now.
There was nothing he could do about it.
He wished she'd told him she was going to see her friend before he got into the car.
After Atherton they turned left, then left again up a lane.
It was full of pot-holes and the car lurched.
The cartridges on the back seat fell on to the floor.
Philip leant back and picked them up.
He hadn't known the box would be so heavy.
There must be masses in there.
‘Here we are,’ said Mrs Wright stopping by an isolated house with a large untidy garden.
‘I'll wait in the car, shall I?’ said Philip.
‘You can come in,’ said Mrs Wright.
Philip didn't want to.
He was shy with people.
He didn't want to meet Mrs Wright's friend.
And his Mum wouldn't approve.
If she didn't like him talking to Mrs Wright, she wouldn't like him meeting her friend and going into her house.
‘No, it's all right,’ said Philip.
There was a wood on one side.
He heard a pheasant call and almost called back from habit.
He only just stopped himself in time.
‘Out you get,’ said Mrs Wright.
So he got out of the car.
He didn't reckon he had much choice.
He followed Mrs Wright through the gate, up a path full of grass to the front door.
Mrs Wright didn't ring the bell or knock, she took a key out of her pocket and opened it.
Philip thought that maybe Mrs Wright's friend was an invalid and couldn't come to the door to open it.
He imagined an old white lady like a ghost in a wheel-chair.
Aunt Edith, Uncle Walter's wife, had been like that before she died.
There was a pile of letters on the floor inside the door.
‘Pick those up, will you,’ said Mrs Wright.
Philip picked them up and followed Mrs Wright down a long, flagged passage.
He looked at the letters.
They were addressed to a Mrs Dorothy Soper.
He was still looking at the envelopes as they went into a sitting-room at the end of the passage.
It was a big room and looked out the back.
The grass in the garden was nose-high.
There was bright pink blossom on a tree.
The room was empty.
‘Where is she?’ said Philip.
‘Your friend?’
He was still holding the letters.
‘Is she away?’
Mrs Wright took the letters from him and tore them.
She dropped the bits into a waste paper basket.
‘She's dead,’ she said.
‘She died two months ago.’
Philip gaped at her.
So his Mum and Dad were right after all.
She was mad.
When she said she'd been going to visit her friend, there'd been no friend.
Her friend was dead.
Philip looked around him uneasily.
He noticed, looking out of the window that there was a lot of snow left in the garden, white, not dirtied at all, piled up against the fence.
Mrs Wright lifted a vase of flowers that was on a small table by the door so that she could see how much water was in.
Who had put the flowers there?
Her?
And Philip remembered how he'd seen her go out two weeks ago with yellow flowers in the back seat of the car.
These were they now, shrivelled and dropping petals on to the carpet.
‘They're going to sell the house,’ she said, leaving the room with the dying forsythia.
She was still saying something but Philip couldn't hear what.
He had to go after her.
He found her in a small kitchen.
A door led out into the garden.
Mrs Wright put the flowers down on the draining-board, took a key out of her pocket, and unlocked the door.
‘Get some more,’ she said.
‘Some more of that blossom.’
It didn't occur to Philip not to do what she said.
He'd been a bit scared of her before, but he was even more so now she was acting as if she wasn't right in the head.
He looked at her more closely as she poured the stale brownish water from the vase down the sink.
She didn't look any different.
She looked the same as usual; untidy, a hole in her coat where she'd caught it on a hook in the yard.
He remembered her ripping it the day she'd taken him to see the hens for the first time.
‘What are you waiting for?’ she said.
He wasn't waiting for anything.
It had just taken him by  surprise, her wanting to put flowers in an empty house.
His Mum only put flowers if people were coming.
She always picked flowers for Uncle Walter, for instance.
‘It's not dead, you know,’ she said.
‘The house.’
Philip opened the door.
‘Take these,’ she said, opening a drawer and taking out a pair of kitchen scissors.
Philip went out into the garden, stepping into a patch of snow that lay by the step.
He jumped up, pulling the lower branches of the tree down and clipped off stems, letting them fall to the ground.
How much did she want?
He didn't know.
He cut a lot to be on the safe side.
But he felt guilty.
His Dad didn't approve of picking blossom; you didn't get the fruit.
His Dad would be back from work soon, then his Mum.
When they discovered he wasn't home, they'd phone the police.
He gathered up the blossom and took it back into the house.
Mrs Wright put it in the vase that she'd filled with fresh water.
‘You can put it in there,’ she said, pointing to the sitting-room.
Philip took the vase and put it on the table where it had been before, wiping off some of the dust with his elbow.
Mrs Wright wiped the rest with her handkerchief.
He thought they'd be going now but he was wrong.
Mrs Wright sat down on one of the chairs and took out her cigarettes.
‘Sit down,’ she said.
Philip knew that she was irritated by his being there, that she wanted to be on her own.
He sat on a chair that was embroidered, like the thing you knelt on in church.
He wished he knew what the time was.
There were two clocks in the room but they had both stopped.
‘I have to get back,’ he said.
‘My Mum and Dad'll be worried about me.’
She nodded and lit her cigarette with a lighter.
Philip had never seen her smoke before.
‘I shan't keep you long,’ she said.
There was silence.
Philip watched her smoking her cigarette.
Most likely when she'd finished that, they'd go.
But she was slow letting it burn.
Philip watched the lengthening tail of ash.
He could, because Mrs Wright wasn't looking at him.
She was staring out of the window.
Suddenly she jumped up and the ash dropped to the floor.
In the garden was a huge magpie.
Philip thought of Jack shooting the magpie up in Jubilee Wood while he and Lee hid in the bracken.
It had been a close thing.
‘I'll bring my gun next time,’ said Mrs Wright putting her cigarette down in an ash-tray.
She banged on the glass and the magpie flew up into the blossom-tree.
‘Come on, then,’ she said.
Philip looked at the half-smoked cigarette in the ashtray.
‘Put it in the fire-place,’ said Mrs Wright.
Philip went over to the fire-place and emptied out the cigarette.
In the fire-place were masses of cigarette stubs.
He stared at them.
Did she come to this empty house and smoke?
It was a queer going on, as his Uncle Walter would say.
He shivered.
He wouldn't be sorry to get out of this house.
It was cold like all empty houses were.
As they came out of the house Philip saw two girls, quite old.
One of them was trying the gate.
‘Here,’ said Mrs Wright, giving him the front door key.
‘Lock it, will you, while I have a word with those two.’
But though she walked quickly towards the gate the two girls ran off up the lane.
Philip saw what he hadn't seen before, a ‘For Sale’ notice stuck in a holly bush by the corner of the house.
He wished he hadn't spotted it as it made him think of this morning and going round the house in Hill View Road, and the idea his Mum and Dad had about moving.
He ran quickly to the car, not looking at the sign again.
Would they put one of those outside his house?
Where?
In  the lilac.
He'd pull it down if they did.
There was a blackbird's nest in there.
Mrs Wright opened the car door for him.
Then she turned the car and drove off down the lane.
There was no sign of the girls.
Philip wished she'd drive a bit faster.
He kept thinking of how his Mum and Dad would be when they found out he wasn't back, that he hadn't come home with either of them.
They'd think it was like the things you heard on the television news, about children going missing.
They were always on at him not to go with strangers.
Philip looked at the speedometer.
Forty-five miles an hour, he couldn't believe it.
Well, he hadn't gone with a stranger.
Mrs Wright wasn't a stranger.
He couldn't help it if Mrs Wright had taken him to visit her friend who wasn't there, who was dead.
It wasn't his fault.
He glanced sideways at Mrs Wright.
He saw that her coat was buttoned up wrong.
He would like to have told her but he didn't dare.
She always wore the same coat, to feed the hens, to go out, to go to church even.
But she couldn't be poor.
She could always sell those rings if she wanted money.
His Mum and Dad said she was rich.
He wouldn't tell them that the friend didn't exist, that she was dead, and that there was only the house that Mrs Wright visited and put flowers in.
They'd say she ought to be put away.
And he didn't want them saying that.
It was true what she said; the house wasn't dead.
It was empty and all locked up but it wasn't dead.
All locked up?
It wasn't.
Philip put his hand over his mouth.
Mrs Wright looked at him.
He took it away and tried to look normal but he felt awful.
Mrs Wright had given him the key to lock the door but he hadn't locked it.
Seeing the ‘For Sale’ sign had put it right out of his head.
He tried to persuade himself that he'd locked it but he knew he hadn't.
‘Not far now,’ said Mrs Wright.
The speedometer swung to fifty and she overtook a tractor.
He should tell her.
People would get in, those girls maybe.
But he was only a mile and a half from Little Knoll.
If he told her she might go straight back and he wouldn't be home for hours.
By the time he got back there'd be search parties out looking for him.
He felt the key in his pocket.
He'd give it back to her when he got out of the car.
They were in Little Knoll now.
Philip could see the
church clock.
It was twenty-five to six.
And he could see his Mum and Dad outside the house talking to Jack.
They'd most likely be asking him if he'd seen him.
They turned and saw the car.
‘Could you drop me off here?’ he said.
He didn't want Mrs Wright driving right up to his house.
But Mrs Wright turned in through her entrance.
‘Here's the key,’ said Philip.
‘And Mrs Wright, I'm very sorry but I've just remembered I didn't lock the door.
I forgot.’
He stumbled out of the car.
‘Wait,’ she said.
He waited.
‘I'll have to go straight back and lock it.
I can't leave it unlocked.
All sods of people walk up that lane.’
‘I'm sorry,’ said Philip.
‘So am I,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I had thought you were reliable.’
He was.
He was reliable.
He'd never once forgotten to lock up the hens when she'd asked him.
‘Listen,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘That other boy who is going to do the hens for me is coming at six for me to show him what to do.
I arranged it with his mother.
As I've got to go back to Atherton, I want you to do it.
Will you?’
She began coughing and put her hand to her chest, wheezing.
‘All right,’ said Philip.
There wasn't anything else he could say.
It was his fault she had to go all the way back to the house.
She was still having trouble getting her breath.
‘Are you all right?’ said Philip, scared.
She didn't look too good.
‘I'm all right,’ she said.
She didn't look it.
Mrs Wright reversed out into the road again and drove off past the church.
Philip ran up the village.
His Mum and Dad came to meet him.
‘Philip,’ said his Dad.
‘Your Mum and I were just about to phone the police.’
‘I'm all right,’ said Philip.
‘Where have you been?’
‘To the library like I said.
Mrs Wright came in and she said she'd give me a lift home.
What's wrong?’
‘You told me you were going home with your Dad,’ said his Mum.
She wasn't pleased to see him any more.
She was angry.
They took him into the house and shut the door.
‘You didn't go to the library,’ said his Mum.
Philip looked down.
He knew the pattern of the carpet by heart but now it was as if he were looking at it for the first time, taking it all in, the design of orange and black squares.
‘I finished early and I called at the library for you.
I asked Miss Lofthouse if she'd seen you and she said you hadn't been in this afternoon.’
That was stupid of him.
He avoided the library Friday afternoons, the day Miss Lofthouse helped out.
Still looking down, it seemed as if the pattern of squares was moving.
Philip tried to hold them steady.
‘I changed my mind,’ said Philip.
‘Where did you go, Philip?’ said his Dad, his hand heavy on Philip's shoulder.
‘I met Mrs Wright on my way to the library,’ said Philip.
‘She was going back here so I came with her.’
‘So how come you weren't here when we got back?
You'll have to do better than that, son.’
‘Her car broke down,’ said Philip.
He'd got the pattern of the carpet under control now.
His Mum and Dad were always saying Mrs Wright would have trouble with her car the way she drove it.
‘That's not true, is it?’ said his Mum.
‘If her car had broken down your Dad or me would have passed it on the road.’
‘Where did she take you?’ said his Dad.
‘Tell us, son.’
‘She had to see her friend,’ said Philip.
‘She had to take her some flowers.’
‘She hasn't got any friends,’ said his Mum.
‘And she's not safe in a car.’
‘Philip,’ said his Dad.
‘Tell us where you've been.
That's all we want to know.’
‘I told you,’ said Philip.
‘I went with Mrs Wright to visit her friend Mrs Dorothy Soper.’
He remembered the name on the letters that Mrs Wright had torn up.
‘Mrs Dorothy Soper, Greystones, Quarry Lane, Atherton.’
‘No one lives there,’ said his Mum.
‘It's empty, up for sale.
We had the details about it.’
His Mum went to the drawer in his Dad's bureau and took out some papers, leafing through them.
‘Here it is,’ she said.
‘Greystones, Quarry Lane, Atherton.’
Philip saw a photograph of the house he'd been to with Mrs Wright, only it was a different time of year.
There were holly berries on the holly tree.
‘So don't try that one,’ said his Dad.
‘A liar is what I won't have.’
‘Go to your room, Philip,’ said his Mum.
‘I've a good mind to go down to Mrs Wright's now and get to the bottom of this,’ said his Dad as Philip went upstairs.
‘You won't find her,’ said Philip.
‘She's gone out.’
Philip went into his room and shut the door, leaning against it.
He could hear them talking downstairs, not what they were saying, just their voices.
They were talking about him, he was sure of that.
Then he heard the noise of the phone being put down.
That was most likely his Dad phoning Mrs Wright.
Much good that would do him.
She'd be halfway to Atherton by now.
He wondered what the time was.
In his desk drawer was his watch with the broken strap.
It was six o'clock.
Lee would be down at Mrs Wright's now, waiting for her.
When she didn't come he'd go away again.
He wouldn't lock the hens up.
He wouldn't know what to do.
And Mrs Wright wouldn't check when she got back.
Why should she?
She'd asked Philip to help Lee and he'd said he would.
She'd discover he hadn't locked the hen-house when she went to let the hens out in the morning.
Philip sat down on his bed.
He was hot in his anorak.
As he took it off he remembered the sausage and treacle tart in his pocket.
He didn't feel like them now.
Anyway they'd be pretty disgusting, mixed with the bits in his pocket.
He could hear someone coming upstairs, his Mum.
She picked his anorak up off the floor and stood there with it over her arm, leaning against his chair.
‘Why don't you tell us, Philip?’ she said.
‘What's the point of all this lying?’
She came over and sat on the bed beside him.
‘Did you go to the recreation ground, or to the shops, or back to Hill View to play with Barry?’
Philip shook his head.
She must be mad if she thought he'd do that, go anywhere near Barry.
He hadn't forgotten what Barry had chalked on the pavement.
‘I would have let you if you'd asked,’ said his Mum.
‘I told you what happened,’ said Philip.
‘Mrs Wright asked if I wanted a lift home, then she went to that house, the one in the photograph.’
‘But you said you went to see her friend.’
His Mum took him by the shoulders and turned him to face her.
‘That house is empty, Philip.
It came on the market two months ago.
The estate agent said if we wanted to see it, we'd have to get the key from them.’
‘You can go to see empty houses,’ said Philip.
‘She did.’
‘Whatever for?
She's surely not thinking of moving there, is she?’
Philip fiddled with the remaining strap of his watch.
‘Her friend lived there.’
‘What's that got to do with it?’
His Mum got up off his bed and went and opened his cupboard.
‘Maybe the helmet your Uncle Walter gave you is in here.’
She felt to the back of the shelf.
Philip was glad he'd left the wire and cutters up in the wood.
Not that it would make much difference if Lee got hold of them.
‘If Uncle Walter died, I'd like to go to his house,’ said Philip.
‘What an idea,’ said his Mum shutting the cupboard door.
‘No, it's not in there.’
Of course it wasn't there.
It was up in Jubilee Wood, or on Lee's head.
‘If I went to his house, I might see him.’
‘Not if he was dead, you wouldn't,’ said his Mum.
‘Really, the things you do say.
Your Uncle Walter'll go on a long time yet, you see.’
‘I might,’ said Philip, ‘I might see his ghost.’
His Mum came and sat down beside him again, smoothing his anorak.
He hoped she wouldn't find the sausage and the treacle tart.
He wished he'd eaten them now.
‘Come down and have your tea.’
‘My headache's come back,’ said Philip.
‘Pop into bed, then, and I'll bring it up,’ said his Mum, stroking his hair.
She did that quite often.
He wished she wouldn't.
‘And no more about ghosts.
You don't want to think about things like that.’
But he did.
Ghosts didn't scare him.
He wouldn't mind being haunted by Uncle Walter.
He'd quite like it.
Ghosts didn't have to be stupid and scary like in stories Mrs Mills read them.
He undressed and got into bed.
It was true; his headache had come back again but it wasn't that bad, not as bad as he got them in term-time.
It was his Dad who came up with his tea.
Philip hoped his Mum was following.
He didn't like being alone with his Dad.
But she wasn't.
‘Well, son, how about it?’ he asked, giving Philip the tray.
Philip didn't know what that meant, so he didn't say anything.
He shook the sauce bottle and that was all the noise there was.
His Dad didn't go.
He was looking at the board at the end of Philip's bed that had his swimming certificates pinned to it.
‘There's one missing,’ he said.
‘Your five hundred metres.’
‘It fell off,’ said Philip.
‘It's in the drawer of my desk.’
His Dad found the certificate and pinned it on the board, levelling the pins in the corners.
‘Your thousand metres next,’ he said.
Philip trickled a line of sauce on each of his fish fingers.
‘It will be a lot easier if we move to Thirkett.
Morning sessions.’
Philip had always dreaded that, morning sessions.
Even with goggles, the chlorine in the water made his eyes red.
They'd take the mickey out of him at school for that.
‘I don't want to move to Thirkett,’ said Philip.
‘There'd be no more gallivanting with nutcases like Mrs Wright,’ said his Dad and went out.
After his Mum had been up to say goodnight to him, Philip lay a long time thinking and he couldn't keep out of his mind the thin chalk letters on the pavement in Hill View.
Nutcase.
That meant mad, a weirdo.
His Mum and Dad thought Mrs Wright was a nutcase, Barry thought he, Philip, was one.
He'd written it, hadn't he, on the pavement?
And Philip thought if anyone was a nutcase it was that boy in the wood.
Lee or whatever he was called.
He turned over, pushing his head under his pillow.
It didn't make sense.
When Philip woke, the first thing he thought of was the pheasants.
That was what he'd thought of every morning since he'd first started feeding them with Mrs Wright's grain.
There wouldn't be any for them today.
They'd come to the feeding-place and there'd be nothing there.
He wondered how long it would be before they gave up going to the clearing altogether.
Somehow he'd have to get up to the wood today to fetch down his Dad's clippers and wire.
He'd be mending the fence by the garage tomorrow, Saturday.
His Mum went to work this afternoon.
He'd have to somehow work it so he stayed behind.
He swallowed, checking for a sore throat, his ears.
There was nothing.
It would have to be a headache again.
If he didn't wear his glasses, he could bring one on.
Only thing was his Mum would take him to the opticians again.
Well, he didn't mind that except that it wasted time, time he could have used making his trap.
Philip dressed slowly.
He wasn't sure he wanted to make the trap now.
The whole idea that he'd been thinking about since Christmas seemed pointless all of a sudden.
It had begun to seem like the ideas he'd had when he was younger, that you worked out in school and at night in bed, that seemed so easy, then when it carne to it didn't work out.
He thought of his dam that had been to make a lake.
He tied his shoe laces, his feet on the chair.
A lake!
A muddy pond was all that he'd achieved.
Then the water had gradually seeped through, so it was normal again.
Now someone, most likely Lee, had bust it.
As he finished dressing he heard a knock on the front  door.
His Mum went to open it and then he heard it close again.
It was probably the milkman.
He'd taken to calling on Fridays for his money.
But it hadn't sounded like the milkman somehow.
His knock was different.
This had been more of a thump.
Philip went downstairs to the living-room where his Mum was vacuuming.
She switched off.
‘Who do you think that was?’
‘Who?’
‘The boy that's come to live at Beech Place.’
‘What did he want?,
‘He didn't say.
He just ran off.
That's all we need in this place — boys that knock on doors, then run off.
I told you he would be up to no good.’
She looked at Philip.
‘I don't want you to have anything to do with him, d'you hear.’
Philip thought of him meeting Lee up in the wood.
‘Yes.’
Philip wondered why Lee had come to his house.
He didn't believe like his Mum, that Lee had been making trouble, knocking and then running off.
He made trouble all right but not like that.
He'd most likely wanted to tell Philip something.
He probably had a message from Mrs Wright, something about the hens.
Philip followed his Mum into the kitchen.
He wasn't sure he wanted to hear that message.
‘Your Dad says I'm to take you to work again,’ said his Mum, putting the vacuum cleaner away.
‘Why?’
‘You know why, Philip.
After yesterday.’
‘I'll be all right here.’
‘That's what I said to your Dad but he wouldn't hear of it.’
She pushed his feet out of the way with her broom.
‘Look what trouble you've got yourself in telling those lies.’
‘I've got a headache,’ he said.
He had.
He hadn't put his glasses on when he got up.
‘I'll have to take you to the optician's,’ she said.
‘You get too many headaches.’
‘Can't I stay, Mum.
I'll be all right.’
His Mum looked at him.
He knew she didn't want to take him with her.
‘Oh, all right, then.’
His Mum had finished sweeping and was wiping the cooker.
‘But you're not to go out.
You're to stay indoors.’
Philip hardly heard her.
On the broken fence by the garage was Lee, his sandy head bright in the sun.
He was making signs at Philip, mouthing something.
Philip went close to the glass door, standing between his Mum and it.
He waved at Lee to go away, but Lee climbed from the fence on to the garage roof, something Philip's Dad had forbidden him to do.
Then he ran his finger round his neck and held up three fingers of his left hand.
Just in time before his Mum turned from the cooker, he jumped off the roof.
‘I'm going now,’ said his Mum putting on her coat.
‘Why are you going so early?’ said Philip.
‘I'm going to have a look at wall-papers.
We'll do all the rooms up fresh in that house in Hill View.
Is there anything you fancy in your room?
I've got my eye on some nice paper with birds on.
I thought you might like that, seeing as you're so keen on birds and that.
Birds of Paradise they were.’
Philip remembered the room he'd seen yesterday, empty and dead, shaped like a shoe-box.
Birds of paradise would look ridiculous in there.
He watched his Mum go from the window, waving.
Then he went into the living-room and switched on the television.
She'd let him stay on his own at any rate.
She was never as strict as his Dad and she didn't like him getting in the way in the waiting-room.
Friday was always a busy day.
But it wouldn't be as easy as all that to get out.
She'd phone to see if he was all right and if he didn't answer the phone there'd be trouble.
There was nothing worth watching on television, so he went back into the kitchen.
He put three slices of bread and  some sultanas into a polythene bag.
It would be better than nothing for the pheasants.
He guessed his Mum would phone when she got to work and then maybe again when she took her break at half-three.
He was closing the bag up when there was another thump at the door.
On the door-step stood Lee.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘I got something to tell you.’
‘You'd better come in, then.’
Lee stepped into the living-room and Philip closed the door.
‘They're dead,’ said Lee.
‘Her hens.’
Philip felt sick.
‘What, all of them?,
‘Three of them,’ said Lee.
Three.
There were eight altogether.
‘It was a fox,’ said Lee.
‘She said so.’
Philip thumped down on the settee.
Lee stood in the middle of the room.
Philip saw him staring at his Dad's swimming trophies.
For the first time he was proud of them.
‘You seen her, then?’
Lee nodded.
He picked up one of his Dad's cups and read the inscription.
‘She phoned up.
She asked me to come round and I told her about you not showing up.
She was real cut-up about the hens.
She said she was going to shoot the fox that killed them.
She didn't care what people said.
She was going to shoot it.’
Lee put the cup down.
‘She was bad,’ he said, ‘coughing and that.
Who won these?
You?’
‘My Dad.
I just got certificates.’
‘Can I see them?,
‘They're in my room.’
Three hens.
That was dreadful and it was all his fault.
He went up the stairs with Lee after him.
‘Their heads were bitten off,’ said Lee as they went into Philip's bedroom.
‘That's foxes for you,’ said Philip.
Everybody knew that, what foxes did.
‘This is a nice room,’ said Lee.
Philip pointed at the display board with his certificates on.
‘You got a lot of these,’ said Lee.
Philip could see he was impressed.
He looked at the other things on Philip's wall, the pictures from the nature calendar, the photograph of Uncle Walter's brother, his Uncle John with his platoon in the War.
Uncle John had been killed in the War.
Uncle Walter had given him the photograph.
‘Who are all of them?’ said Lee running his finger along the rows of heads.
‘I don't know,’ said Philip.
He was beginning to wish he hadn't brought Lee up to his room.
He'd knocked the pictures crooked and now he was fiddling with the things on Philip's desk, his pens and Sellotape.
Philip put the picture straight and shut the cupboard that Lee had opened.
When he turned round, Lee was closing the drawer in his desk.
Then Lee went to the window.
‘Shall we go to that place again?’ he said looking up towards Jubilee Wood.
‘It's my place,’ said Philip.
He wished Lee would get out of his room.
He pushed his desk drawer in.
It was all his fault for wanting to show off about his swimming certificates.
‘I'll be off, then,’ said Lee.
They went downstairs again and before Philip could stop him Lee had gone into the kitchen.
He found the bag of bread and sultanas that Philip had filled for the pheasants.
‘What's this for?’ he said.
‘I know, those birds.’
‘Give it here,’ said Philip, snatching the bag back.
‘She's got corn,’ said Lee.
‘That Mrs Wright.’
‘I know,’ said Philip.
‘Why don't you nick some?
She's not at home.
She's  gone out.’
He looked at the bag Philip was holding.
‘It would be better than that stuff.’
Philip looked at the white bread and the sultanas.
He knew it would.
He ran back into the living-room and took the phone off the hook.
Then he went with Lee down the village.
‘You sure she's out?’ said Philip as they ran through Mrs Wright's gate.
Lee pointed to the empty garage, the doors swinging.
‘She keeps the corn in here,’ said Lee, opening the door of the shed.
Philip pushed Lee out of the way and went in first.
The new sack was on its side across the door.
‘It wasn't half heavy,’ said Lee kicking it.
Philip looked at Lee.
So that's how he knew about the grain.
Mrs Wright must have got Lee to help her out of the car with the sack.
‘Don't do that,’ said Philip.
‘You'll make a hole in it.’
‘So what?’ said Lee.
Philip hoisted the sack so it was neat against the wall by the opened one.
‘There's rats in here,’ he said.
Lee was poking about, knocking dusty packets of seeds off the shelf and moving flower pots.
He hadn't scared him.
He wanted to.
‘She shoots them,’ he said.
‘And foxes.
She's going to shoot that fox.’
‘You can't shoot foxes.
They're hard to hit,’ said Philip.
But Lee wasn't listening.
He was piling the flower pots up.
Philip began to scoop grain from the opened sack into his polythene bag quickly.
He wanted to get out of the shed.
Mrs Wright could be back any time.
‘You can take your time,’ said Lee.
‘She's gone to see a friend.’
‘Her friend's dead,’ he said.
Lee didn't know everything.
Lee was fiddling with the bag, opening it again and knocking grain caught in the folds of the sack on to the floor.
‘My Dad's dead.’
‘You said your Dad was a builder,’ said Philip.
‘He's my stepdad,’ said Lee.
‘What d'you call him your Dad for then?’
Philip knotted the bag.
‘Come on, I'm going.’
‘Can I come back to your house?’ said Lee.
He looked stupid, a cobweb with bits in was caught in his hair, his glasses were crooked.
‘No,’ said Philip, going out of the shed.
What if his Mum came back unexpectedly and found Lee in the house?
Besides he didn't want him.
‘D'you want to see the hens, the dead ones?’ said Lee.
‘They're still there.’
He pointed to the orchard.
‘No, thanks,’ said Philip.
He wanted to go back home.
His Mum might phone.
‘Don't you like dead things?’ said Lee.
The way he was looking at him, Philip knew he was testing him.
They did that at school.
They asked you to cut worms in half, watch them wriggling off in two halves, made you draw blood with a compass, and watch it oozing out.
Mostly they knew he didn't want to.
That's why they asked him.
‘All right,’ he said.
They went through the gate into the orchard.
The rest of the hens were roaming as if nothing had happened.
What was left of the three dead ones was by the fence.
The two boys stood looking down at the heaps of feathers.
Where the heads had been bitten off it was disgusting.
But Philip kept on looking.
One of them was the hen with the neck feathers missing.
‘They can run about without their heads,’ said Lee.
The cobweb was above his eye now.
‘Just after they're dead,’ said Philip.
‘Not now.’
He went on looking at the disgusting bits.
Lee didn't know much.
‘You going to touch them?’ said Lee.
‘You going to?’
Lee picked up a stick from by the broken wire fence and poked the feathers of one of the dead hens, then the bloody bit by the neck.
Philip saw he had his eyes shut.
He was scared of it.
Philip didn't bother touching the dead hen.
He knew he didn't have to.
Lee was scared.
‘Where's Caspar?’
‘Locked up,’ said Lee.
‘I told my Dad to keep him locked up or on his lead.
He'd better not let him loose.’
Philip put his anorak hood up.
It was raining.
‘It wasn't Caspar chasing the sheep,’ said Philip.
‘That dog hadn't got a collar on.’
‘I told you,’ said Lee.
‘You must keep him locked up.
Jack won't know the difference.’
‘I know that,’ said Lee, and they ran back into Mrs Wright's yard.
‘I'll be off home, then,’ said Philip.
‘Wait,’ said Lee.
He pulled a Marathon out of his pocket and gave it to Philip.
‘Thanks,’ said Philip.
He tore the wrapper off.
‘You going home?’
‘Not likely,’ said Lee.
‘My Dad's got the week off.’
‘What difference does that make?’
Lee hadn't got a hood and his hair was flat to his head with the wet.
‘I don't get on with my Dad.’
‘You said he wasn't your Dad.’
‘He isn't.’
Philip finished the chocolate bar.
He gave up.
If Lee didn't know if his Dad was his Dad or not, he must be a hopeless case.
Lee untwisted the wire that fastened the shed door and pocketed it.
‘Give me that,’ said Philip.
If they didn't leave the shed door properly shut, Mrs Wright would know someone had been in.
‘No,’ said Lee.
And he pushed Philip, knocking the polythene bag of grain out of his hand.
Then he ran off with the wire, not out of the gate, but round to the front of the house.
Philip picked up the bag, checking for holes.
He was lucky.
It was still O.K. No grain was spilling out.
It wasn't thanks to Lee, though.
Some of the things he did were stupid, really childish, like the way he'd gone off howling in Jubilee Wood.
He'd have to go after him now, get the wire off him and fix the door.
He ran round the corner of the house.
Lee had disappeared.
He couldn't see him by the house or in the trees at the bottom of the big lawn.
He was scared to call out because of the noise.
He walked quickly past the windows with the drawn curtains to the far end of the house.
Round the end with some shrubs poking over it was a small window with frosted glass.
It was open.
He looked along this end of Mrs Wright's house that he'd never seen before.
There was no sign of Lee.
He'd vanished.
The window looked as if it belonged to a toilet.
She'd most likely left the window open to air it.
His Mum did, and it made the place freezing.
At this rate it was more than an airing it was getting, it was a soaking.
It was pouring with rain.
Then he jumped.
Someone had flushed the toilet.
The next thing, he saw Lee looking out of the window.
‘What are you doing in there?,
‘It's a toilet,’ said Lee.
‘I'm not deaf,’ said Philip.
‘You'd better get out, quick.’
Lee disappeared from the window.
He reappeared, waving a walking-stick.
‘Where's that wire?’ said Philip.
‘I don't know.
I lost it.’
And he disappeared again.
‘Lee,’ said Philip.
But there was no answer, no noise.
Philip jumped up to see if he could get a look in through the window.
He  couldn't; it was too high.
Lee must have got in by standing on a stone vase thing on the path.
Philip stood on the vase, trying not to crush the flowers that were in it.
The vase wobbled, so he hung on to the window ledge to steady himself.
He could see in now.
Immediately below him was the toilet.
By the door that Lee had left open were walking-sticks of all sorts, and umbrellas.
Philip hung on, waiting for Lee to come back.
But he didn't.
There was dead silence.
What was he doing?
The rain came on harder.
Then he heard a crash like something had dropped.
‘Lee,’ he called, his head right in the window.
There was no sound except for the rain.
‘Phil,’ He heard him calling now.
‘Phil.’
Phil?
No one called him Phil except sometimes his Uncle Walter.
But his Mum didn't like it.
Philip they'd called him, she said, and Philip was his name.
‘What are you doing?’ called Philip, one foot slipping off the vase.
There was no answer, only silence again, followed a few seconds later by the crashing sound.
Philip put his foot on the ledge and his hands on the window and wriggled through.
He lowered himself on to the toilet seat and jumped down on to the floor.
He slipped through the open toilet door and saw Lee standing half way down the long, flagged passage.
He was wearing a tin helmet and staring at something on the wall, a picture.
Lee, startled to see Philip, moved and the helmet which he had on the back of his head fell off on to the flagged floor.
So that's what the crashing noise had been.
‘Where did you find that?’ he whispered.
‘In the toilet,’ said Lee.
‘Behind the door.’
The helmet was identical to the one Uncle Walter had given him.
‘It's a Spitfire,’ said Lee.
Philip stood beside him, looking at the picture.
It was a  photograph of a fighter plane with the pilot standing beside it.
It was a Spitfire.
Lee was right.
It was a good photograph.
The pilot was smiling, his foot up, ready to get into the plane.
‘D'you reckon he made it?’ said Lee.
‘Course not,’ said Philip.
He knew.
His Aunt Edith, Uncle Walter's wife, had worked in a factory that made Spitfire bits.
‘I mean, d'you think he got back from the mission he was on,’ said Lee, putting his face right up close to the picture.
‘Probably,’ said Philip.
‘Lots of them didn't,’ said Lee, running down the passage and into the kitchen that Philip had been in yesterday morning where Mrs Wright had given him a cup of tea.
He followed Lee.
On the table in the milk bottle was the daffodil he'd picked.
Beside it was the box of cartridges she'd bought yesterday.
There was a radio on, but not tuned, giving out a strange, crackling noise.
‘Give us that piece of wire,’ said Philip.
‘I'm getting out of here.’
‘What's upstairs?’ said Lee, leaving the kitchen.
‘How should I know?’ said Philip.
Lee, the helmet once more on his head, went up the dark staircase.
Philip stayed at the bottom by the photo of the Spitfire and the pilot.
Maybe he had made it back.
Maybe he had medals.
He wasn't wearing any, just his flying-suit.
‘Come up here, Phil,’ called Lee.
‘What is there?,
‘Lots.’
So Philip went upstairs.
Lee was in a bedroom opposite the top of the stairs.
It was hers, Mrs Wright's.
The curtains were drawn and it was crowded with heavy brown furniture.
Lee switched on the light and the bulb went, like the one in the kitchen yesterday.
On a chest of drawers on a white cloth was another photo.
Lee picked it up and they looked  at it.
It was of the pilot, this time without the plane.
He was in a different uniform, not in his flying-suit.
‘It's him again,’ said Lee.
‘He s got a moustache, said Philip.
‘It's still him,’ said Lee.
And he went out of the room, his arms angled like a plane.
He rushed down the stairs and Philip ran after him, his arms out like a plane too.
He did that sometimes on his own up in Jubilee Wood but never so anyone could see him.
‘What's in here?’ said Lee, opening the door of the room that Mrs Wright had taken him into, to see the birds' eggs.
‘We should go,’ said Philip.
‘She'll be back soon.’
‘Why's she gone to see her friend if her friend's dead?’ said Lee.
‘Stop touching things,’ said Philip.
‘She'll know we've been in.’
He'd never known anyone for touching things like Lee.
‘Why?’ said Lee, pulling open the drawers of the egg cabinet.
‘Why does she go to see this lady if she's dead?’
‘She likes going to her house.
She smokes cigarettes,’ said Philip.
He didn't say about the flowers.
‘Does she think her friend's still alive?’ said Lee.
‘Does she see her ghost?’
‘Maybe,’ said Philip.
He hadn't thought about it.
‘I'd like to see my Dad's ghost,’ said Lee.
He opened the drawer that had the pheasant's egg in.
Philip lifted it out.
It felt light, empty.
‘What's that?’ said Lee.
Philip didn't let him touch it.
‘A pheasant's egg,’ said Philip.
‘It's not much,’ said Lee.
‘No,’ said Philip, putting the egg back and closing the drawer.
Lee had slipped out of the room.
He called Philip.
Philip found him by the door into the yard.
Mrs Wright's gun was leaning against the wall.
Lee was staring at it.
‘If someone shot that other dog,’ said Lee, ‘Caspar wouldn't have to be locked up all the time.’
He walked down the passage and sat on the bottom of the stairs.
Philip sat down beside him.
‘Jack'll get it,’ he said.
‘If it comes again.’
‘But what if he gets Caspar first by mistake.’
‘He can't, if you keep Caspar locked up.’
‘But my Dad'll let him out, you see.’
‘Why?’
Lee was staring at the picture of the Spitfire on the wall.
‘I think he wants Caspar to get killed.’
‘Course he doesn't.’
‘He never wanted us to bring him when we moved.
He says he's nothing but a nuisance.
Mum got him when she was on her own after my Dad died.’
‘Is he your real Dad or isn't he?,
‘He's my stepdad.’
‘Then why do you call him your Dad then?’
‘Because I do, see.’
Lee got up and ran back to the toilet, picking up the helmet that was on the floor.
‘You can't take that,’ said Philip.
‘I'm keeping it,’ said Lee.
‘You can't,’ said Philip.
‘It's hers, Mrs Wright's.’
‘I'm keeping it.’
‘Give it here.’
‘No.’
Lee flung the helmet on the floor and kicked it again and again against the toilet.
‘Stop it,’ said Philip.
‘Stop it, will you.’
But Lee didn't stop.
He kept on, and it was worse because he'd got hold of the helmet now and was smashing it against the toilet.
Philip was scared.
He wondered if Lee had gone mad.
‘You'll break the toilet if you don't look out,’ said Philip.
‘Break it, d'you hear.’
He was shouting now.
But Lee didn't leave off.
The din was awful.
Philip, desperate to stop Lee, made a grab for the helmet.
He got hold of it and hung on.
Now they both had hold, crouched on the floor by the toilet.
‘Leave it,’ said Philip.
‘She'll come back, you dumbo.
She'll catch us.’
Lee was trying to prise Philip's fingers off the helmet.
It was as if the only thing he cared about was the stupid thing.
He wasn't letting it go, not for anybody.
‘You can have my helmet,’ said Philip.
‘I'll give it to you.’
Lee loosened his grip and sat back on the floor.
Philip hung the helmet on the hook behind the door.
He wasn't giving him Uncle Walter's helmet.
He'd only said that to get him out of Mrs Wright's house.
They'd no right to be there.
They'd broken in and they'd better get out.
‘Come on, then,’ he said.
Lee was just sitting on the floor.
Philip pulled him up.
He was limp like a puppet.
Philip pushed him towards the toilet and the window.
‘What about that?’ said Lee pointing to the bag of grain that Philip had left on the cistern.
Philip took it.
At least Lee was acting normally again.
He climbed out and Philip followed him.
‘How was the window?’ he said.
‘Like that,’ said Lee pushing it up a bit.
‘You sure?,
Lee nodded.
They ran back round the front of the house.
Philip stopped in front of the shed.
‘That wire for fixing the door,’ said Philip.
‘Where is it?,
Lee took it out of his pocket and gave it to Philip.
So he'd had it all the time.
Philip slipped the wire through the staple and began to twist it.
He'd only made two twists when he stopped, listening.
‘Is it her?’ said Lee.
‘No,’ said Philip.
It was shots, a series of them in the distance.
‘Caspar,’ said Lee.
‘I'm going back to see if Caspar's still locked up.’
Without waiting for Philip who was still securing the wire he ran across the yard and out of the gate.
Philip saw him go down the village towards the church.
There was no one about except Miss Lofthouse taking the dead heads off the daffodils in the churchyard by the War Memorial.
And she was stooping; she didn't see them.
Philip walked back home, only running when he reached his own gate.
The phone was still off the hook.
He'd just remembered.
He rushed into the house and put the receiver back.
Then he flung himself down on the settee.
He couldn't believe what he'd done, that he'd been into Mrs Wright's house, into her bedroom even, when she was out.
If his Mum and Dad found out they'd kill him.
And Lee too.
But they hadn't done any harm.
He straightened the cushions where Lee had moved them.
Then he jumped as the phone rang.
He grabbed the receiver.
‘Philip, whoever's been on the phone?
It's been engaged for ten minutes at least.
If I hadn't got through this time I was going to phone them to check a fault.’
‘It was Uncle Walter,’ said Philip.
It was the only person he could think of.
No one else phoned much.
‘Uncle Walter?
What's he doing phoning this time of day?’
Uncle Walter always phoned in the evening.
‘Just for a chat.’
‘A chat?
What did he say?’
‘He's got something on his chest.
He's not well.’
‘That makes two of you, then.
How's your headache?’
‘A lot better.’
Philip had forgotten all about his headache.
Anyway she seemed to have swallowed all that about Uncle Walter.
‘You had your dinner?’
‘Not yet.’
‘What have you been doing?
It's past one o'clock.’
Philip had no idea what time it was.
It seemed like only half an hour since his Mum had gone.
He must have been in Mrs Wright's house with Lee much longer than he'd thought.
‘I'll have my dinner now.
Bye, Mum.’
He put the receiver down.
His Mum had left him ham and salad in the kitchen.
He helped himself.
Twenty past one.
He'd plenty of time to go up to Jubilee Wood.
He'd scatter some of the grain he'd nicked, and fetch down the wire and cutters, and his books.
The library wouldn't think much of them all wet from the wood.
Besides, he wasn't interested in that type of trap any more.
Or any type of trap for that matter.
What was the point if they were moving from Little Knoll?
He wondered if his Mum had fixed on the wallpaper with the Birds of Paradise for his new room.
She could choose what she liked.
He didn't care.
Philip rinsed his plate and went out again.
He looked down the road but there was no sign of Lee.
He was glad.
He didn't want Lee coming up with him.
He was all right was Lee.
But you couldn't trust him if something upset  him not to act up.
He'd never forget that senseless smashing at Mrs Wright's toilet with the helmet.
He took the short cut through the farm buildings.
He'd be safe from Jack.
It was still his dinner=time.
He ran up through the quarry and climbed over the gate into the field with the ewes and the new lambs, then up the side of the wood till he reached the gate into it.
He vaulted the gate and landed in the wood.
It had stopped raining but the wood was sopping.
You could hear the rain dropping off the trees.
He skirted the branch that lay across the path and carried on till he reached the feeding-place.
The first thing he saw was his helmet hanging from the branch of a tree near his hide.
That must have been Lee who'd put it there.
He took it and crawled into the hide.
His note-book and the library books were piled neatly on the stone with the wire and cutters.
He was relieved.
For all he knew, Lee could have done anything stupid with them.
Philip pulled the camouflage net over the entrance.
He shivered.
The hide wasn't anything like waterproof.
Outside, he could still hear the popping and dripping of the wet wood.
He opened the note-book and filled in the date.
He didn't know what to write.
Things had changed.
And for some reason he found himself drawing a Spitfire.
He tore the page out.
Lee drew Spitfires better than him.
He flipped back through the book looking at his entries, neat, and pages of notes about the pheasants and the weather and the times he'd been up there.
Way back, he found the sketch he'd made of the hide.
He made a face.
It didn't look much like it.
He shut the note-book.
There wasn't much point in it now if they were going to live in Thirkett.
Still holding the note-book, he crawled out of the hide and made his way down to the edge of the bigger of the two pools.
He dropped the note-book in the mud just where the water came and stamped on it, grinding it in to the soft mess of leaves.
Overhead a plane flew over.
It was the one that pulled gliders.
The glider was still on the wire.
Philip ran to the scree at the bottom of the cliff to get a better view.
He watched the plane release the glider and the glider shoot up silently above him.
Last year one had come down not far from Little Knoll.
There'd been a photograph of it in the paper, across someone's hedge, its wings in a tree.
The pilot was all right.
They'd used them in the war, gliders.
Quiet, flying at night, they dropped troops behind the enemy lines.
Maybe that's what Uncle John had got his medals for.
He didn't know what the medals were for.
Uncle Walter hadn't told him.
He'd get him to tell him next time he saw him.
He wished he saw more of Uncle Walter.
But Uncle Walter liked his independence, so he never stopped with them long.
Philip sat down on the wet scree thinking about the War, and Arnhem where Great Uncle John had been killed.
He'd seen a film about it and he could remember it very well.
Thinking so hard about it, he thought for a moment he was hearing guns.
He stood up.
No, it was real shots.
It must be Jack again, shooting pigeons.
Philip ran down the slope.
Or the dog.
He couldn't be shooting at Caspar.
Caspar was shut up.
That's what Lee had gone home to check, that Caspar was locked up.
Philip took the path that he and Lee had taken yesterday to get to the edge of the field.
As he was scrambling up the steepest bit, pulling himself up by the bracken, he heard something.
It wasn't Jack.
It was some sort of animal.
He could hear it panting.
He turned quickly and saw it coming up the slope behind him.
It was Caspar.
There was no doubt of it, he recognized the collar.
Caspar took no notice of him and carried on through the wood towards the field.
If he went that way, he'd go right into the range of Jack's gun.
‘Caspar,’ called Philip.
‘Caspar.’
Caspar stopped sniffing in a bracken tunnel and came bounding back towards Philip.
Philip held out the paper  that the chocolate bar Lee had given him had been wrapped in.
Caspar sniffed it, then licked it.
Philip put out his other hand and took hold of his collar.
‘Come on,’ he said.
‘Unless you want to be shot.’
He tried to pull Caspar back down the slope.
Caspar growled.
‘Come on,’ said Philip as encouragingly as he could.
And slowly, luring him with the chocolate wrapping, he led him back towards the feeding-place.
Until he heard someone in the wood.
Jack, he wondered?
Instead of crossing over to the hide as he'd intended, he stopped in the trees by the pool.
He tried to pull Caspar with him so that they would be hidden by a tree, but Caspar hung back barking.
‘please,’ said Philip.
‘please shut up.’
He managed somehow to get Caspar near the tree and by giving him the wrapping to chew he got him to stop barking.
But if it was Jack, it would be too late.
He would have heard him.
Philip crouched, his fingers round Caspar's collar.
Jack wouldn't shoot so long as he'd got hold of him.
From where he was he could see the ride.
And it wasn't Jack coming along it with his gun, it was Mrs Wright, with hers.
What was she doing up here in Jubilee Wood?
He'd never seen her up here before.
Dressed in the old coat she always wore, she was walking fast.
At that rate she'd soon be through the wood and gone.
What was it Jack had said about her wandering, that she was losing her mind.
It didn't look like it.
He bet she was looking for the fox.
Philip gripped tight hold of Caspar's collar.
Mrs Wright had stopped by the feeding-ground.
She was staring at something, the magpie that Lee had thrown up into the tree.
She walked across the clearing and prodded it with the gun till it fell to the ground.
Caspar, the chocolate wrapper licked clean, was pulling to get away.
Philip willed him not to bark again.
Mrs Wright had stopped now by the hide.
With the barrel of  the gun she lifted the camouflage net.
Then she let it drop again.
Caspar, straining to get at the dead magpie, leapt forward and the collar snapped.
He went tearing across the clearing.
Mrs Wright waved her gun at him and Caspar charged past her, picked up the dead magpie and disappeared.
Philip held the collar in his hand.
It hadn't come undone.
It had snapped all right.
There was a place where it was very worn.
It had gone there.
It was Lee's fault.
He should have a proper collar for the dog.
From behind the tree he watched Mrs Wright who was still in the clearing.
She looked clumsy and old.
Her coat was wet with bits sticking to it.
Slowly she lowered herself on to a dead log and sat there.
Overhead was a plane.
She looked up at it and lit a cigarette.
When she'd finished it she moved on more slowly this time, stopping twice for a fit of coughing.
He waited a long while, looking out all the time for Caspar.
But there was neither sight nor sound of him.
He'd gone.
Philip was sick with himself for letting him go.
He should have seen the collar was no good.
He threw it now into the bushes.
He dreaded hearing a shot.
But there were no more.
He hoped Caspar had gone home.
It was stupid of Lee to let him escape.
Philip didn't believe what Lee had said about his stepdad letting him out on purpose, wanting him to get killed.
Philip knew it was time he was getting back.
He wouldn't put it past his Mum to leave work early.
He ran across to the hide and fetched his things, the books and the wire and cutters.
Then he hurried back through the wood, down the field and along the road past the stream.
The phone was ringing as he went into the house.
Not his Mum again.
‘Is that Mrs Hartley?’
It was a woman.
‘No, it's Philip Hartley, her son.
She's out.’
‘Could you give her a message?’
‘All right.’
‘Could you tell her that Mr Warden's neighbour phoned to say that her uncle's been taken to hospital?’
Philip felt sick.
It was Uncle Walter.
‘Have you got a pencil handy?’
‘What?’
‘I'll give you my phone number, so your mother can ring when she gets in.’
Philip scrawled the number on the pad by the phone.
The woman put the receiver down.
Philip ran upstairs.
She hadn't told him what was the matter.
Was that because it was really serious.
Was Uncle Walter going to die?
He didn't know what to do.
Maybe he should phone his Mum.
He had her work number.
But the woman hadn't said it was urgent, that his Mum should go to the hospital right away or anything.
He looked at his watch that was beside his bed.
It was five to four.
Even if she took it into her head to come back early, she wouldn't be back till half four at the earliest.
He sat down at his desk, straightening his things that Lee had moved, putting them where they had been before, in the exact spot.
What if Uncle Walter were really ill?
He arranged all his pencils in the holder with the points the same way.
It was uncanny what he'd said to his Mum about Uncle Walter phoning up about his bad chest and now him being in hospital for real.
Philip sharpened one of his pencils that Lee must have broken, sharpened it too much and the lead broke again.
Somehow him telling that lie that turned out to be nearly true made him feel that it was his fault.
He turned the sharpener slowly, keeping his eye on the lead.
But you didn't die just because you were taken to hospital — unless you were old.
And Uncle Walter was old.
He'd been in the War, him and Uncle John.
The last time Philip had seen him was when he'd given him Uncle John's medals.
It had been just as he was leaving on a Sunday evening.
His Mum hadn't been able to persuade him to stay, though she was worried about his cough.
She'd gone back into the house to fetch something and his Dad was all ready in the car waiting to drive Uncle Walter back to his house.
Uncle Walter had walked down the road a bit with Philip.
‘I've been meaning to give you these of Uncle John's, Phil,’ he'd said taking the medals out of his pocket.
‘Seeing as you're interested in that sort of thing.
I've no use for them.
They're mine by rights, mind, so don't go losing them.’
Philip had promised to take great care of them.
‘That's all right, then,’ Uncle Walter had said as his Mum
had come out of the house.
Philip opened his desk drawer to take the medals out and look at them again.
He put his hand in the drawer.
He knew just where the medals were.
He didn't need to look.
There were three of them with ribbons and pins, in the back left-hand corner of his drawer.
But his fingers only felt the lining paper of the drawer.
There were no medals.
He pulled the drawer fully open.
The medals had gone.
He pulled the drawer right out so that it was on his knee.
He looked under his drawing paper.
They weren't there.
He opened the other drawer but he knew he hadn't put them in there.
He couldn't understand it.
Maybe his Mum had taken them out when she was clearing out his room.
But why?
What would she want them for?
He fitted the drawer he'd taken out back in.
It was either her or Lee.
They were the only people who'd been in his room except for his Dad last night.
And his Dad wouldn't touch them.
The swimming certificates were all he was interested in.
No, it was either his Mum or Lee.
He pushed the drawer in, knocking his desk crooked.
And he knew which of them it was.
It was Lee.
He'd been fiddling with his desk, hadn't he?
It had been him that had wanted to nick Mrs Wright's helmet.
Philip ran downstairs.
He was getting them back.
Lee had no right to them.
Uncle Walter had given them to him, Philip.
He'd go straight down to Lee's house, force him to give the medals back.
He had time if he went on his bike.
He hauled his bike out of the shed and raced down the village.
Lee's house was left and up the hill, about a mile out of Little Knoll.
He'd never been there.
It was an elderly couple that had lived there before, retired.
When he reached the house, he leant his bike against the fence and opened the gate.
He was scared.
Most likely Lee's Mum and Dad would be there.
His mouth was dry.
He didn't know what he'd say.
There was a lot of gravel to walk across with troughs and wheelbarrows with snowdrops and crocuses in.
Nobody looked at him from the windows.
Maybe they were out.
He pressed the bell and waited, half hoping that it wouldn't ring or no one would come.
From somewhere round the back he heard Caspar barking.
He was safely back, then, and locked up.
Philip could hear someone coming now.
A man opened the door.
‘What do you want? he said.
‘I've no jobs.’
‘Is Lee in?’ said Philip, taken aback by the man's hostility.
‘Lee,’ shouted the man.
‘It's someone for you.’
Over the man's shoulder Philip saw Lee come downstairs.
They were open stairs like the ones in the house his Mum and Dad were buying.
‘You'd better come in,’ said the man.
‘Who is it?’ called a woman from inside.
‘What's your name?, said the man.
‘Philip Hartley.’
They shut the door behind him.
‘Phil,’ said Lee.
He looked pleased to see Philip.
He wouldn't be when he knew what he'd come about.
He could still hear Caspar barking.
A woman, Lee's Mum, appeared.
‘Go and let Caspar out, Lee,’ she said.
‘He's already been out,’ said Lee.
‘He let him out.’
He looked accusingly at the man.
‘Let him out again, then.
It's not fair to keep him in like that.
He's not used to it.’
‘What do you want?’ said Lee to Philip.
Philip didn't say anything.
He couldn't, not in front of Lee's Mum and Dad.
He wished he'd never come right into the house.
‘Are you going to let that dog out or aren't you?’ said the man, taking Lee by the shoulder.
‘He's not to,’ said Lee.
‘There's someone in the village that'll shoot him.’
‘Stop that,’ said the man.
‘Ask him,’ said Lee.
‘Ask him.’
And he pointed at Philip.
‘Lee's got this idea,’ said Lee's Mum, ‘that if he lets Caspar out, someone down at the farm in the village will shoot him.’
Lee had a camouflage jacket on and Philip had this feeling that Uncle Walter's medals were in his pocket.
‘There's no one down there'll shoot dogs,’ lied Philip.
If Lee had damaged the medals or lost them he'd kill him.
‘I told you,’ said the man to Lee's Mum.
‘He was just having you on.’
Caspar was barking non-stop.
Philip's coming had set him off.
‘I'm letting him out,’ said the man.
‘I've had enough of that racket.’
‘No, don't,’ said Lee.
‘He hasn't got his collar on.’
‘Where is it?,
‘He's lost it.
It's come off.’
Philip kept his eyes on the fish tank in the corner of the living-room.
He knew where Caspar's collar was.
Up in Jubilee Wood.
‘He won't come to any harm,’ said the man.
‘No, please,’ said Lee, taking hold of the man's arm.
‘No, who?’ said the man.
‘No, Dad,’ said Lee.
‘There's no danger to Caspar, Lee,’ said his Mum.
‘There is,’ said Lee.
‘You don't understand.
There's this other black dog, nearly Caspar's double, scaring the sheep and Caspar'll get shot instead if he's let out.
You know we can't stop him wandering.
He knows,’ he said looking at Philip.
‘But he's not saying.’
Philip looked round the room.
It was a big room with the stone and bricks showing in places, and long curtains  on a pole, like hospital curtains.
He thought of Uncle Walter in hospital with the curtains pulled round his bed.
When Philip had been in hospital when he'd had croup that's what he hated worst, the pulling of the curtains.
‘Let's take a look for this collar,’ said the man and took Lee out.
Philip watched them from the window.
They went into a shed.
‘They won't be long,’ said Lee's Mum.
‘Brian thinks Lee's taken Caspar's collar off on purpose.’
Philip didn't care about the collar.
He wanted the medals back.
That's what he'd come for.
‘Lee hasn't told me about you,’ said Lee's Mum.
‘Do you go to his school?’
‘No.’
Lee and his stepdad had come out of the shed.
It was Caspar's shed and he was still barking.
‘Lee thinks the world of that dog,’ said Lee's Mum.
‘The trouble is Brian doesn't.
He's right really.
We got him from the Dogs’ Home and he's never been very obedient.’
She sighed.
‘Brian says they're two of a kind.
Sometimes I don't know what to do between them.’
Philip felt awkward.
She was talking to him as if he was grown-up and it made him feel uncomfortable.
He looked past her beyond the stairs into a kitchen.
On the table was a cage with two white mice clinging to the top.
So he hadn't lied about them.
He did have white mice.
‘I'll go and see Lee,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ said Lee's Mum.
‘You do that.
I'm glad he's found a friend.
I was worried about him with us moving.
And with him going to a different school.
We're hoping he won't be there long but they thought he mightn't be able to manage in big classes.
Hyperactive he is.
But he's been a lot better, especially since we got Caspar.’
Philip went quickly out the way Lee and his stepdad had gone.
Lee wasn't his friend.
She'd got it wrong, and he didn't know what she was on about.
Hyperwhatsit…
He'd never heard of it.
There was a builder's van in the yard but Lee's stepdad had gone.
Lee stood in the doorway of a shed which was full of old furniture and carpets.
‘Where's my medals?’ said Philip.
‘How should I know?’ said Lee.
‘You nicked them from my desk.’
Lee shook his head.
‘What's in your pockets?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Show me.’
Lee pulled out the linings of his pockets.
He didn't have the medals.
‘They belong to my Uncle Walter, see.
And now he's in hospital.’
Philip looked at Lee.
‘He's probably dead by now.’
‘I haven't got them.’
‘Haven't got what?’
Lee's stepdad suddenly appeared behind Philip.
‘You been taking things again?’
Lee kicked at a roll of carpet.
He didn't say anything.
‘Has he?’ he said to Philip.
‘Is he in trouble again?’
‘No,’ said Philip.
He wasn't telling him.
This was between him and Lee.
‘That's all right, then.’
And he went off again.
‘You've got them,’ said Philip.
‘I know you've got them.’
Lee went right into the shed to the back of it.
He beckoned Philip.
‘What, then?’
The shed was really a garage but there was no car, just the carpets, two old cookers, and some broken chairs.
Lee opened the door of one of the cookers.
Inside was a tiny blue egg with a pin-prick at the end, three biros, a ruler, and Uncle Walter's medals.
Philip took them.
‘You nicked that?’ he said, pointing to the egg.
‘From out of that cabinet.’
Lee nodded.
‘What for?’
Lee shrugged his shoulders.
‘You'll catch it,’ said Philip, examining the medals.
They'd come to no harm.
Then he saw Lee put his finger to his lips.
But it was too late.
His stepdad came into the shed.
‘So that's it,’ he said.
‘He pinched them off you, didn't he?’
Philip was silent.
Caspar was barking.
Lee was standing in front of the cooker.
‘Is that it?
Is that all?’ said his stepdad.
Philip nodded.
Caspar was barking on and on.
Lee's stepdad strode out of the garage.
Lee ran after him.
‘Where are you going?’ he said.
‘To let that flaming dog out,’ said his stepdad.
He went across to the shed where Caspar was.
He opened the door and Caspar rushed out.
Lee made a dive to try and stop him but it was no good without the collar and he fell sprawling on the gravel.
His stepdad got into the van and drove off, gravel spitting from under the wheels.
‘I told you,’ said Lee.
‘That's him for you.’
His hand was grazed from falling.
‘I'm going after Caspar,’ said Lee.
‘You won't catch him,’ said Philip but he ran after Lee.
He grabbed his bike.
‘Get on the crossbar,’ he said.
Caspar was way down the road.
Lee sat sideways on the crossbar and Philip freewheeled down the hill.
‘He's gone through the hedge,’ said Lee.
Philip put his brakes on and skidded.
They could see Caspar tearing across towards Mrs Wright's orchard.
‘I'm going after him,’ said Lee.
‘She's got a gun.’
‘I know that, stupid,’ said Philip.
Lee slipped off the bike and Philip wheeled it over to the other side of the road.
Lee was already over the fence.
‘Help us over with the bike,’ said Philip, lifting it.
Lee took hold of the bike and pulled it over the fence.
He let it fall and they ran down through the field after Caspar.
‘He's going to her place,’ said Lee, unbuckling his belt.
‘I'll get hold of him with this.’
‘You'll not catch him,’ said Philip.
Caspar was way down the bottom of the field near the wood at the foot of Mrs Wright's lawn.
‘Is she at home?’ said Lee.
‘How should I know?’ said Philip.
She could be at home or she could be up in the wood still.
Caspar was in the trees, zig-zagging among them.
‘I'll get him now,’ said Lee.
‘He's stopped.’
They reached the fence at the bottom of Mrs Wright's garden.
Lee made his belt into a loop.
‘Wait,’ said Philip pulling Lee back.
He couldn't go like that.
He'd be in full view of the windows.
Lee turned to face Philip and Philip knew immediately what was going to happen.
Because he'd pulled him back like that, stopped him from doing what he wanted, he was going to have one of his screaming fits.
‘No,’ said Philip, looking straight down into Lee's open mouth.
It was horrible.
‘Don't start that stupid yelling.
Here.’
And he took the medals out of his pocket and gave them to him.
Lee didn't take them but he closed his mouth and there was no sound.
He was quiet.
Then they both heard the window opening.
Philip pulled Lee down beside him and put his hand over his mouth.
In the window stood Mrs Wright, pointing the gun.
‘Lie flat,’ said Philip.
One of the pellets from the gun hit a tree to their left.
The second embedded itself in the ground near Lee's foot.
‘Wow, that was close,’ said Philip, raising himself on his elbows.
He heard Mrs Wright shut the window.
‘She shouldn't go shooting people,’ said Lee, sitting up.
He was covered in wet leaves.
‘She was scaring Caspar off,’ said Philip.
‘It's the hens she's worried about.’
‘Caspar,’ said Lee, jumping up and looking through the trees.
‘Where's he gone?’
‘He's miles away,’ said Philip, pointing to the field by Mr Hyde's house.
‘Quick, after him, then,’ said Lee.
Philip shook his head.
‘I've got to get back.
My Mum'll be home soon.
I'm not supposed to be out.
I'm supposed to have a headache.’
Lee took hold of Philip.
‘Come on,’ he said.
‘We've got to find Caspar.’
Philip pulled free of him.
‘I've told you.
I've got to go.’
Philip watched Lee run off after Caspar, keeping close into the hedge.
He looked back once and beckoned.
Philip set off back up the field towards the road.
Good luck to him.
He hadn't much chance of catching Caspar, not at the rate the dog was going.
Philip hurried back to his bike.
He hoiked it back over the fence and pelted down the hill.
He was in luck.
His Mum wasn't back yet.
The car wasn't outside.
But there was something strange in the garden by the fence: a ‘For Sale’ sign.
The people must have come and put it there while he was out.
He leant his bike against the gate and shook the sign.
It was firm, knocked right in.
He wheeled his bike round to  the back.
That was it, then.
They were dead serious, his Mum and Dad, about moving.
He threw his bike in the shed and shut the door.
His Dad insisted he locked his bike, but he didn't this time.
He didn't care about it.
He wouldn't be riding it in Hill View Road.
They'd destroy it, those kids.
He knew them.
He was only just back in the house when he heard his Mum draw up in the car.
She waved at him but he didn't wave back.
She must have known about that sign, about the people coming to put it up.
She'd most likely arranged it.
He felt a hard lump of anger in him.
They should tell him things.
His Mum came in, her arms full of parcels.
It looked like she'd been Christmas shopping.
‘Here,’ she said, giving him one of the parcels.
‘I couldn't
resist it.’
Philip pulled off the paper.
It was a bedside lamp in the shape of an owl, except it wasn't like any owl he knew about.
‘It's for your new room,’ said his Mum.
‘I just took a fancy to it.
What a queer thing, Uncle Walter phoning like that out of the blue,’ she said, taking off her coat.
‘He's in hospital,’ said Philip.
‘Somebody phoned.
Here.’
He gave her the bit of paper with the phone number on.
He put the owl lamp down.
It was gross.
He hated it.
She should ask him first before getting him things.
His Mum was dialling already.
Then she was talking to the woman.
She put the phone down.
‘Is he all right?’
‘He's fallen again and he's broken his leg this time.
I'll have to go and see him tomorrow.’
‘He's not going to die, then?’
‘Course he's not.
He's broken his leg, that's all.
It'll take a long time at his age but it'll mend.
You're really morbid, you are.
I bet there's no other boys your age thinking about things like that.’
She looked at him.
‘It was his chest he phoned you about, was it?,
Philip nodded.
It wasn't surprising him thinking about people dying, what with Mrs Wright's friend and Lee's Dad, his proper Dad.
And that Spitfire pilot in the photograph in Mrs Wright's house.
He bet he hadn't survived the raids.
There wouldn't be photos of him if he had.
In Uncle Walter's house there were photos of Uncle John but not of Uncle Walter.
‘Well,’ said his Mum.
‘You haven't got much to say for yourself.
How's your headache?’
‘It's better.’
Somewhere he could hear a dog barking.
He listened.
‘Can you hear a dog?’ said Philip.
‘No,’ said his Mum.
‘I can't hear anything except your Dad's van.’
His Dad came in.
‘Uncle Walter's broken his leg,’ said his Mum.
‘It seems he fell in the kitchen.
Mrs Carter heard him shouting.
They had to get the police to break the door down.’
She moved some of the parcels off his Dad's chair.
‘It's what I've always said — he shouldn't live on his own, not at his age.’
‘You try and move him,’ said his Dad.
‘He's as obstinate as they come, your Uncle Walter.’
‘I'll go to the hospital tomorrow,’ said his Mum.
‘I'll go early so I can see the Social Services.’
‘I can't come with you,’ said his Dad.
‘I've said I'll stand in as coach for the under-fifteens.
Alan can't make it.’
‘I'll be all right,’ said his Mum.
‘But what about Philip?’
‘Can I come and see Uncle Walter?,
‘Not tomorrow, another time.
I'll have too many things to see to.’
‘I'll stay here, then,’ said Philip.
‘I'll be all right on my own.’
He could still hear that dog barking.
It worried him.
His Dad sat down at the kitchen table with the paper.
‘It'll be a long job at his age,’ said his Mum.
She was still thinking about Uncle Walter.
‘He'll not sell up and go into a Home, that's for sure,’ said his Dad.
‘He might,’ said his Mum.
‘I might be able to persuade him.’
‘You won't,’ said his Dad.
Philip could still hear the dog.
It sounded as if it was somewhere up in the farm buildings.
It was just possible that Floss had got shut in one of them.
Or was it Caspar?
Had Caspar got himself shut in one of the sheds?
He moved towards the door.
Maybe if Lee was still out, he'd hear him.
‘Look at this,’ said his Dad.
‘There's a dog round these parts killing lambs.’
He put the paper down on the table and his Mum looked over his shoulder.
Philip came away from the door and looked at the paper too.
The headline was thick black letters.
‘Killer Dog’ it said and there was a picture of a dead lamb with the farmer beside it.
‘It's a shame.
People shouldn't let their dogs roam,’ said Philip's Mum.
‘It's irresponsible, that's what I call it.’
‘There's somebody'll shoot it,’ said Philip's Dad.
The dog was still barking.
Philip was almost sure now it was Caspar.
Where was Lee?
Why didn't he let him out?
‘I saw Jack,’ said his Dad.
‘He stopped me down the village.’
‘What did he want?’
‘He was wanting to know if Philip had been up in Mr Hyde's woods.’
‘What did you tell him?’
‘No, of course.
I said he'd better things to do than roam about up there.’
Philip looked through the glass of the door.
It was almost dark and raining.
‘There's someone who has,’ said his Mum, taking some oven chips out of the fridge.
‘I saw Miss Lofthouse in Thirkett and she told me.
Apparently this person's been going out all hours of the day and night.’
‘Don't tell me,’ said Philip's Dad.
‘Mrs Wright.
Senility, that's what it is.’
‘What's senility?’ said Philip.
He thought of Mrs Wright up in Jubilee Wood, looking for the fox.
‘Old age,’ said his Dad.
‘Your mind wanders.’
‘Her mind doesn't wander,’ said Philip.
She was sharp, Mrs Wright, in her own way.
She never forgot to get the hen-food and she could shoot straight, even with her knobbled hands.
There were no flies on her.
She'd get that fox if she could.
‘Her legs do,’ said his Mum.
‘Parks that car of hers on the roadside and just roams.
A patient saw her wandering in Atherton quarry.
She'll come to some harm if she doesn't look out.’
Philip's Mum scattered the oven chips on the baking tray.
‘This place, it gives me the creeps.
If there was just one person I could talk to it wouldn't be so bad.’
‘Wait till we're in Thirkett,’ said Philip's Dad.
‘You'll be all right then.’
Philip looked at her.
She would be.
He wouldn't.
Philip pressed his face against the glass of the door and stared out.
The rain was splashing on the concrete, and the hole in it that he used to pretend was the way to Australia had filled up.
Uncle Walter had told him you could get to Australia by digging.
He hadn't really believed him but he'd dug all the same and his Dad had been angry.
He'd never got round to mending the hole.
Philip rubbed the mist off the glass where he'd been breathing on it.
Uncle Walter wouldn't like it in Hill View.
He knew that.
He rubbed the glass again.
There was something moving out there, by the broken fence.
A cat maybe.
He strained his eyes peering into the gloom.
He was wrong.
It wasn't a cat.
It was a person.
It was Lee.
What was he doing?
He was mad.
His Mum and Dad would see him.
Quickly Philip pulled the curtain across the door.
‘What's out there, then?’ said his Mum.
‘Nothing,’ said Philip.
Still looking out, the curtain behind him, he could see Lee quite clearly by the shed.
What did he want?
He shouldn't come here.
Philip jumped as a tiny stone bounced on the concrete and hit the door.
‘What is it, cats?’ said his Mum.
‘My bike,’ said Philip.
‘I never locked it.
I just remembered.’
‘Don't be long, then.
Tea's nearly ready.’
Philip opened the door and stepped out into the yard.
It was cold after the house, and still raining.
There was no sign of Lee.
Had he gone?
He went to where he'd seen him by the fence and looked down towards the woodpile.
‘Phil.’
He turned and a figure appeared from behind the shed.
It was Lee.
‘What d'you want?’ whispered Philip.
Lee was soaked, his hair dark and flat with the rain.
‘Caspar,’ he said.
‘Caspar's shut in one of those buildings and I can't get him out.’
‘Why not?’ whispered Philip.
If he whispered, maybe Lee would too.
‘I can't open the door.
It's locked.’
‘Which shed is it?’ said Philip.
‘The one with the big door.’
They both listened, as above the noise of the rain they could hear Caspar barking.
‘That's the tractor-shed,’ said Philip.
‘Jack must have caught him and locked him in there.’
‘How'll I get him out?’ said Lee.
He was shivering, and his teeth were chattering like Philip's did when his Dad had kept him in the swimming bath too long.
Philip didn't answer.
A light spread across the yard.
Lee darted back behind the shed.
Philip saw his Mum standing in the doorway.
‘Philip, what on earth are you doing out there?’
‘I'm just coming.’
His Mum shut the door and there was darkness again.
‘Lee.’
Lee was beside him again.
‘I've got to get him out,’ he said.
‘There's another door at the back, off the old cow byre,’ said Philip.
It was the way he'd got out the time Barry had locked him in the tractor-shed.
‘How'll I find it?’
Caspar was howling now, long howls like they said wolves did to the moon.
‘I'll show you,’ he said.
‘Now?’ said Lee.
‘No.
Not now.
Later.
I'll have to have my tea first.’
He knew as soon as he'd said it that he was in trouble.
‘No.
Now, now,’ said Lee, nearly shouting and banging his head against the shed so hard that the whole thing shook.
‘Stop it,’ said Philip.
‘Stop it.
Mum and Dad will hear you.
But Lee banged his head against the shed even harder.
‘Look,’ said Philip.
‘Banging your head like that's stupid.
It doesn't help anyone.’
‘Now,’ said Lee.
‘Now,’ and carried on banging his head.
It was hopeless.
It was as if he was three years old.
‘I'll come.
I promise,’ said Philip.
Lee stopped his head banging and looked at him.
‘You wait here and I'll come as soon as I can.
promise.’
Philip held out his hand like they did in films.
Lee didn't shake it like they did in the films but he didn't carry on with his tantrum.
He'd calmed down.
‘You wait in here,’ said Philip opening the shed door.
‘Till I come.’
And he pushed him into the shed just as light filled the yard again.
‘Philip.’
It was his Mum again.
She'd come out of the house and was standing outside the door.
As Philip ran across to her
he heard a crash.
It sounded like his bike falling over.
Lee must have banged into it in the dark.
It had better be that and not him having another of his scenes.
Philip looked quickly at his Mum.
But she didn't seem to have heard.
‘Your tea's getting cold, Philip.
What on earth have you been doing out there?’
His Mum shut the door, pulling the curtain across.
‘There wasn't anybody out there, was there?’ she said.
‘I thought I saw someone.’
‘No one,’ lied Philip.
‘That's all right, then.’
His Dad had already started his tea.
Philip sat down beside him.
His Mum passed him his chips and crispy pancakes.
All the time he was eating he was thinking how he could get out again.
He'd promised Lee he'd go with him to get Caspar out.
If he didn't keep his promise there was no knowing what Lee would do.
Besides, it wasn't right for Jack to lock Caspar up.
It wasn't him that was worrying the sheep.
Philip put his knife and fork down.
What would Jack do to him now he'd caught him?
Take him to a dog's home, shoot him?
Philip carried on with his tea.
Every now and then he heard Caspar barking.
He had to go.
He had no choice.
If he didn't, Lee would most likely start banging his head against the shed wall or smashing things up.
Philip looked at his Dad.
And there was plenty to smash up in the shed.
His Dad kept all his tools in there.
‘That dog,’ said his Mum.
‘I can still hear it barking.’
‘It's Jack's dog,’ said his Dad, who was reading the paper.
His Mum shook her head.
But she didn't say anything.
She didn't argue with his Dad.
Philip finished his tea, refusing the ice cream his Mum offered him.
He hadn't time.
He kept thinking of Lee out in the shed fiddling with his Dad's tools, nicking nails, messing with his bike.
‘You all right?’ asked his Mum.
He always had his ice cream.
‘Fine,’ said Philip.
He'd thought of a way, how he could get out without his Mum and Dad knowing.
He'd nip out while they were watching television.
His Dad was addicted to the News and watched all of it.
It bored Philip, so he usually stayed in the kitchen or went up to his room.
‘How's the bike, son?’ said his Dad.
His Dad was really interested in his bike.
‘I need to fix the chain,’ said Philip.
The bike most likely would need fixing if Lee got his hands on it.
‘I'll do it,’ said his Dad.
‘It's not much,’ said Philip.
‘I can mend it.’
That was the last thing he wanted, his Dad coming out to the shed.
‘All right, then,’ said his Dad, putting his hand on Philip's shoulder as he got up from the table.
His Mum had gone to switch the television on.
‘We'll have you a mechanic yet.’
Philip was pleased when his Dad had taken his hand off him.
He didn't want his Dad to think that he was interested in fixing his bike.
But it was better him thinking that, than finding Lee in the shed.
‘Don't get cold out there,’ called his Mum.
‘Put your anorak on.’
She came back through the kitchen and gave him the  torch.
Philip took it and went out.
He hadn't long, half an hour maybe.
He shut the door, making sure the curtain was drawn across behind him.
Then he switched on the torch and splashed through the puddle in the concrete to the shed.
He opened the door, switching off the torch and closing the door behind him.
He couldn't see a thing.
‘Lee,’ he said.
There was no answer.
Philip peered into the darkness.
What was up with him?
It wasn't the time to be playing silly games.
He turned on the torch and shone it round the shed.
His bike was over on its side.
There was no sign of Lee.
He'd done a bunk.
Philip picked up his bike, propping it up against the wall so it half slipped again.
He was angry.
He'd told Lee he would come, hadn't he?
He couldn't have been more than quarter of an hour having his tea.
Philip straightened his bike.
Caspar was still barking.
So he hadn't let him out.
Lee was stupid, going off like that on his own.
He couldn't let Caspar out without him, Philip, to help him.
He didn't know where the other door was.
He'd never find it, in the dark and without a torch.
Philip came out of the shed and slipped out the back where the fence was broken.
He ran.
He hadn't much time.
It would be halfway through the News now.
There was a light in the lambing-shed.
But that was nothing unusual.
Jack was most likely in there, or somewhere about.
He'd have to be careful.
In the dark he cut across the grass by the tractor-shed, then back behind a row of buildings where there was an old cow-byre that they didn't use any more except for storing stuff.
The door in the back end of the tractor-shed was off this.
He'd never been through it since the time Barry had locked him in.
Now he ran along the concrete passage that edged the stack-yard.
Then he stopped and listened.
He could hear nothing except the corner of the tin roof blowing.
‘Lee,’ he whispered.
He jumped as a dark shape detached itself from the wall.
It was Lee.
‘You didn't come,’ Lee whispered accusingly.
‘You didn't wait.’
‘I was scared.’
Lee was close to him and was standing on Philip's shoelace that had come undone as he ran.
Philip pushed him away and gave him the torch to hold while he did up his lace.
Lee switched on the torch and the beam lit up the stack-yard like a searchlight.
‘Turn it off,’ he hissed, grabbing the torch off Lee and
switching it off.
Lee tried to get it back off him.
‘Give it to me,’ he said.
‘I want to find Caspar.’
‘Don't be stupid,’ said Philip.
If he gave Lee the torch, he'd let Jack and everyone else know where they were by mucking around with it, and if he didn't let him have it, he'd most likely give them both away by having a scene.
He was mad, Lee was.
It was his dog they were rescuing but he was clueless like a little kid.
Philip wished he'd never promised to help him.
He wasn't worth it.
‘I want the torch.’
Philip knew what he would do.
He'd trick him.
Turning round he took the battery out of the torch.
‘What are you doing?’
‘Nothing.’
He handed Lee the torch, which was now dud without the battery.
He heard Lee flicking the switch backwards and forwards.
‘The battery's run out,’ said Lee.
Philip let out his breath slowly.
‘It was nearly done,’ he said.
‘Now come on.
I haven't time to waste.’
The door that opened into the tractor-shed was three doors along.
The bolt was on this side, the stack-yard side.
They'd be able to get in unless Jack or Tom had put a  padlock on since he'd last been there.
It was hard to see and he touched the stones as he walked along by the wall.
Lee was behind him, holding on to the back of his anorak and bumping him with the torch.
Philip paused by the door, feeling for the bolt.
There was no padlock.
From inside the shed came a dull rolling thudding noise.
Caspar had stopped barking.
He'd heard them.
‘What's that?’ said Lee, pulling Philip back.
‘Only the beet,’ said Philip.
‘It's stacked against the door.’
Lee was still pulling at his anorak.
Then he dropped the torch.
‘Shut up, will you,’ said Philip.
‘My Mum and Dad'll kill me if they catch me out here.’
Lee didn't say anything.
He was tugging at a length of chain that was hanging from a hook in the wall.
A thought struck Philip.
‘Where's your Mum and Dad?’
Fine, there was no padlock, but the bolt was jammed.
He couldn't pull it back.
‘They've gone out,’ said Lee.
‘They do, Fridays.’
‘Do they leave you on your own?’ said Philip.
The bolt was shifting a bit now.
‘No,’ said Lee.
‘There's Mandy, a girl, she comes.
But she's gone to the pub.
I don't tell Mum.
I don't mind.’
Philip had got the bolt back.
He could hear Caspar behind the door, whining.
‘Have you got something to get hold of him with?, whispered Philip.
‘I've got no lead.’
Philip unbuckled his belt.
‘You grab him,’ he said.
‘I'll shut the door.’
It was pitch-dark in the shed.
Caspar had gone mad, leaping all over the beet and sending it rolling.
He jumped up on Lee.
‘Quick,’ said Philip.
‘Get the belt on him.’
‘There aren't enough holes,’ said Lee.
‘It'll slip off.’
‘Just get hold of him,’ said Philip.
‘I haven't all day.
I've got to get back.’
‘Hang on,’ said Lee, taking something out of his pocket.
‘I've a nail.’
Philip didn't need two guesses to know where that had come from.
His Dad's shed.
Lee pushed the nail through, working it round to make a hole.
‘You sure it's O.K.?’ said Philip.
He didn't want things bungled now.
Feeling in the dark, he checked that Lee had got the belt on tight enough.
It would do.
They hadn't time to make another hole.
‘Right,’ said Philip.
‘Let's go.’
They slipped out of the shed.
Lee held on to Caspar who was pulling, while Philip bolted the door, forcing it, and picked up the torch that Lee had dropped.
Then he ran back towards the stack-yard gate.
The News on TV must have nearly finished.
Caspar was jumping about like a mad thing.
‘Get him home,’ said Philip.
‘Before Jack comes.’
‘I'm not taking him home,’ said Lee.
Philip didn't think he'd heard him right.
‘Not taking him home,’ he said stupidly.
‘No,’ said Lee.
‘I'm not having my Dad let him out again.
I'm not having him shot.’
‘Where you taking him, then?’
‘Up there,’ said Lee.
‘Where?’ said Philip.
How did Lee think he could see where he was pointing to in the dark?
‘I'm taking him up to that wood.’
‘You can't,’ said Philip.
‘You can't leave him up there all on his own.’
‘I'm going with him,’ said Lee.
‘I'm staying up there.’
‘You can't,’ said Philip.
‘Want to bet,’ said Lee.
He disappeared into the dark with Caspar.
Philip ran  back down to the bit of broken fencing, climbed through and got back into the kitchen as the local news ended.
He recognized the music.
‘That you, Philip?’ called his Dad.
‘Yes.’
Philip pulled the curtain.
His Dad came into the kitchen.
‘I was just coming to give you a hand, son.’
‘The chain's fine,’ said Philip.
‘You got enough oil on yourself,’ said his Dad.
Philip looked at his hand.
It was sticky and brown with oil.
He must have got that off the bolt.
He wiped his hand on the cloth his Dad gave him and went into the living-room.
He sat on the bean-bag beside his Mum.
There was a tiny hole in it and it was spilling white blobs of polystyrene like grain.
He wondered how long it would take Lee to get up to the feeding-ground.
A long time in the dark and he d have to go a long way round if he wasn't to upset the sheep and alert Jack.
‘Thank goodness that barking's stopped,’ said his Mum.
‘It was getting on my nerves.’
She scooped up the bits of spilt polystyrene in her hand and dropped them into the waste-paper basket.
‘I'll get a new one of these when we move.’
Philip had forgotten temporarily about them moving from Little Knoll, what with getting Caspar out of the tractor-shed and thinking of Lee making his way up to Jubilee Wood.
He got up.
‘Where are you going?’ said his Mum.
‘Upstairs,’ said Philip.
‘Don't you like our company, then?’ said his Mum.
‘I've things to do.’
‘Like what?’
‘Just things.’
He was going to put the medals back in his drawer and listen out of the window for Lee going up the field, listen for the sheep.
The phone rang.
His Mum answered it.
Philip waited.
It  might be about Uncle Walter.
But it wasn't.
‘That was Joyce Butler,’ said his Mum.
‘Rebel's gone missing.
She wants to know if we've seen him.
I said of course we hadn't.
What would he come right out our way for?’
Philip went to the door as his Dad came in.
‘Where are you off?’ said his Dad.
‘To my room.’
‘He's got things to do,’ said his Mum.
‘Secrets.’
Philip saw her catch his Dad's eye.
That did it.
He ran to the bureau.
He pulled out the bottom drawer, grabbed all the leaflets from the estate agents, all the newspaper cuttings of houses for sale, and threw them on the floor.
They scattered everywhere.
‘What about them, then?
You never told me.
That's secrets.’
And he pushed his foot through them.
‘Pick them up, son,’ said his Dad, not shouting but angry.
When his Dad was really angry, he was quiet.
‘Pick them up, there's a good boy,’ said his Mum, picking up the cutting nearest to her, a half page of photos of houses for sale.
‘Leave it,’ said his Dad.
‘Let him do it.’
And he stood over him while Philip picked them all up and packed them back in the drawer.
Philip saw the date on one of the letters: May the fifteenth.
He stared at his Mum and Dad.
They'd been planning it, moving, for a year.
And he hadn't known one thing about it.
‘Goodnight, Philip,’ said his Mum.
‘I won't look in before I go to see your Uncle Walter in the morning.
It'll be early.’
Philip went up to his room.
Out of the front window he saw the ‘For Sale’ sign, the white paint of the board showing up in the light that shone from between the curtains of Tom's cottage.
He wasn't going.
They couldn't make him.
He crossed to the other window.
The sheep were quiet.
Lee must have got safely up to Jubilee Wood.
He opened  the window, letting in the cold wind.
He'd go up there too and if he died of exposure, too bad.
He didn't care.
They could come to his funeral.
Philip waited, sitting on his bed till he heard the noise of the television stop, and his Mum and Dad come upstairs.
He still had the window open, though it made him shiver.
He might as well get used to it, the cold.
It probably wouldn't be too bad.
Lots of things lived in the woods, all weathers.
They survived.
And there were boys in films who lived with the animals.
The wind shook the window-frame.
But they lived in jungles, Tarzan and Mowgli.
Jubilee Wood wasn't a jungle.
And he wouldn't be on his own with the pheasants and shrews and things.
There was Lee.
And Caspar.
Thinking of Lee made him remember Uncle Walter's medals that he still had in his pocket.
He didn't know whether to leave them here with all the other stuff that he was leaving behind or take them with him.
He didn't know whether he could trust Lee not to nick them.
Lee wasn't like Barry who you couldn't trust, full stop.
You just never knew with Lee.
Philip kept the medals in his pocket.
When he could hear no more sounds from his Mum's and Dad's room, he opened his door.
He crept downstairs, hardly making any noise.
Luckily the stairs were carpeted.
In the kitchen he switched the light on.
He'd forgotten about the way it flickered before it came on properly and made a noise.
He listened, but there was no sound from upstairs except for his own bedroom door banging.
That was his own stupid fault for leaving the window open.
The torch was still on the shelf where he'd put it when he came in.
He put the battery back in.
Then he took two packets of his swimming biscuits and a carton of orange from the back of the fridge, so his Mum wouldn't notice.
His bedroom door banged again and the curtain in front of the door moved in the draught.
A blanket.
He'd need a blanket for the cold nights.
There was one on the back of the settee in the living-room.
But his Mum would notice right away if that was missing.
He'd be better off with one off his bed.
But that would mean going upstairs again.
Still, he'd have to go back up and shut his door.
Banging like that, it would waken his Mum and Dad.
He put the biscuits and carton down on the table and turned off the light.
He was all right going up the stairs till half-way.
Then feeling for the window-sill that was part way up, he knocked the owl lamp that his Mum had put there for him to take up to his room.
It fell on the stairs, knocking against the wall.
‘Is that you, Philip?’
‘I'm going to the bathroom,’ said Philip, putting the stupid lamp that his Mum had bought him back on the window-sill.
Then he went to the bathroom.
Fancy her thinking that getting him that lamp would make him feel any different about moving.
He could just see it in that box bedroom in Hill View Close, its eyes full of light like some weird toy.
Then he put Hill View Close out of his mind.
He wasn't going.
Back in his bedroom he pulled off his under-blanket.
For a second he was in two minds about it.
It was pink, one he'd had from a baby.
He folded it and smoothed back the sheet.
What did it matter what colour it was?
There'd be no one to see it up there in the wood, except Lee.
And he wouldn't say anything.
Philip didn't mind if he did.
He wouldn't pick on him like Barry.
Philip shut the window and took the camouflage jacket his Mum had been going to throw out.
Then with it and the blanket he slipped out of the room, shutting the door quietly and letting the knob go back slowly without a sound.
He had to be careful.
He couldn't use the bathroom as an excuse this time.
If he went to the toilet twice in five  minutes his Mum would think he was ill and she'd be out like a shot.
In the kitchen he put on the combat jacket under his anorak.
Off the back of the door he took an old net shopping-bag that his Mum hardly ever used and stuffed the carton and biscuits into it.
Also hanging on the back of the door was the hot water-bottle that his Mum filled for him when he had tonsilitis.
He had a brainwave.
He'd fill it and carry it up to the wood in the blanket.
Then he'd be warm all right.
The only problem was the kettle, the noise he would make filling it.
He shut the kitchen door.
He'd have to risk the pipes making that queer noise they sometimes did when you turned on the tap.
He wasn't in luck.
As soon as he turned the tap on it started.
Bang, bang, bang, in the pipes.
He'd woken his Mum and Dad.
He knew he had.
One of them went to the toilet.
Quickly while the toilet was still flushing, Philip filled the kettle.
When he heard the bedroom door shut again he switched on the kettle.
He wondered about making himself a hot drink but he'd have to wait too long to drink it.
Those pipes banging like that had made him nervous.
But he could fill a flask with coffee.
His Mum had about four flasks she kept on top of the fridge.
A couple of them she never used.
Philip took one, spooned in some coffee, and poured in a bit of milk.
The kettle was getting too noisy by half.
He switched it off and half filled the hot water-bottle.
He poured the rest of the water into the flask.
Then he put it in the bag and wrapped the blanket round the bottle.
He was set.
For a moment he wondered about taking food for the pheasants.
But he had a lot to carry and it was time he went.
He could hear his Dad coughing.
He might go to the bathroom, or come downstairs even.
Philip turned off the light.
With the blanket under one arm and carrying the bag with the other, he unlocked the  door.
His Mum and Dad would wonder why it was open but they'd most likely think that they had forgotten to lock it.
It wouldn't be the first time.
It happened when each thought that the other had locked it.
They'd probably have a row about it.
Outside in the yard he reorganized his load, so he had a free hand for the torch.
He wondered if he'd been sensible to bring so much.
It wouldn't be too easy climbing the fence with this lot.
By the shed he jumped as he heard what sounded like the dust-bin lid being pushed off.
Cats most likely, or maybe the fox.
He shone the torch and saw by the bin not a fox but a dog.
Oh no, not Caspar.
Surely Lee hadn't let him get loose.
Still shining the torch, Philip went closer to the dog.
It jumped away snarling, barring his way through the fence.
In a mess by the bin were papers and the end of a loaf his Mum had chucked away.
It wasn't Caspar.
It was Rebel.
Philip swung the bag at him and the dog ran off down towards the wood-shed.
The sheep, thought Philip.
It's Rebel that's worrying the sheep.
He had come that far from Thirkett after all.
He'd warn Lee when he got up to the wood.
He switched off the torch.
He'd better not switch it on till he was in the wood.
Jack could be out in the field with a ewe and Philip would be a good target, a bobbing torch across the field.
It was a good thing he knew the way so well.
He didn't envy Lee going up with Caspar pulling, and not knowing the way like Philip did.
There was no light in the lambing-shed now.
That was a good sign, but Jack could still come out at any time.
Philip hurried past the shed to the gate.
He dropped the bag over and then climbed with the blanket and the torch.
He was glad Rebel had gone off towards the road, though he had probably run back by now for the loaf.
So much for Barry boasting at school that Rebel only ate the best.
Safely over the other side of the gate and out of the farm precincts, he ran up the hill towards the quarry.
It was very dark with no stars.
By now his eyes were used to the darkness but he could make out very little.
He fell over things he avoided in daytime like stones and bushes.
He couldn't see the sheep.
It was bitterly cold and it was raining.
No, snowing.
Snow settled on the blanket and he could feel it on the back of his neck.
He ran the few yards to the fence.
panicked by the snow which he hadn't been expecting, he threw everything over and he had a job finding it all on the other side.
In the end he switched the torch on.
There was less snow in the wood but he had difficulty walking.
Carrying so much, he hadn't a hand to push the branches away.
All the time he'd imagined Lee up in the wood, with Caspar most probably sheltering in the hide, but now, as he climbed through the wood in the gulley, he wasn't so sure that Lee would be there.
Maybe he'd been scared off by the snow and taken Caspar home.
A branch whipped him in the face.
He struggled on, dragging the bag as he half-crawled up the steep bits.
The blanket had come unrolled and twice he brought himself down with it.
He thought of his Mum and Dad at home.
Maybe he should go back, but inside him was still the lump of anger against them.
They'd be sorry, come looking for him.
But he'd probably be dead, frozen, lying under a pile of leaves, dead from starvation.
The biscuits wouldn't last him long.
He'd most likely end up eating the grain he'd nicked from Mrs Wright for the pheasants.
He was nearly at the feeding-ground now.
He'd come out onto the ride.
He shone the torch round the clearing.
It didn't light up much.
‘Who's that?,
‘It's me, Philip.’
He saw Lee now, crouching by the hide.
Caspar was tied to a tree with wire fixed to Philip's belt.
‘What are you doing?’ said Lee.
‘What d'you think?’ said Philip.
He dropped the bag on the ground and the blanket with the bottle inside.
He didn't care about the blanket on the ground.
It was wet enough already.
Lee had grabbed the bag and was pulling things out of it.
‘Leave that,’ said Philip.
‘I'm thirsty,’ said Lee.
‘All right,’ said Philip.
‘Have some of the juice, then.
Only a little of it, mind.’
Lee scrabbled in the bag, found the carton and opened it.
He took a few gulps, then passed it to Philip.
Philip propped it carefully by the hide.
‘It's ever so cold,’ said Lee.
He was shivering.
‘Let's go in the hide,’ said Philip.
‘It'll be warmer in there.’
‘She's in there,’ said Lee.
‘Who?’ said Philip.
‘The old lady.’
‘What, Mrs Wright?’
‘Yes, her, her with the chickens and those eggs in little drawers.’
The snow was thick now, covering them both, settling.
It showed up white.
Philip looked down at Lee where he was crouching on the ground by Caspar.
Maybe he'd gone mad.
Snow did make people mad.
‘Have you gone crazy or something?’ said Philip, scared.
‘She's in there all right, you see.’
Philip knelt by the hide entrance, shining in the torch.
‘Is that you, boy?
Hasn't anyone ever told you not to shine a torch in someone's eyes.
It's like a gun.
Never point it anyone.’
Philip lowered the torch.
Lee was right.
It was her, Mrs Wright.
She was sitting in Philip's hide, wearing her old coat.
‘I'm sorry,’ said Philip.
He went back to Lee.
‘What's she doing here?’ he whispered.
‘I found her,’ said Lee.
‘In the camp.
She asked me what the time was.
I think she'd been asleep.’
Suddenly Caspar barked.
Lee tugged the wire.
‘I saw the other dog,’ said Philip.
‘The one that's worrying the sheep.
It belongs to a boy at school.’
‘You should tell him,’ said Lee.
‘Tell him,’ said Philip.
‘You must be joking.
He'd never believe me.’
He looked away.
‘Anyway I hate him.’
He'd never told anyone that before.
It made him feel a lot better.
‘Barry can't control Rebel,’ he said.
‘He doesn't bother with him.
He said he was taking him to obedience classes but he wasn't.
He lies to everyone.’
Caspar barked again.
Philip jumped.
‘You shouldn't let him bark like that.’
‘I give him sweets,’ said Lee.
‘Every so often.
I've only three left.
I gave her two.’
He nodded towards the hide.
‘Why doesn't she go home?’ said Philip.
‘I don't know,’ said Lee.
‘You ask her.’
‘I'm scared to,’ said Philip.
‘But she should go back home.
She's old.’
‘She's freezing,’ said Lee.
‘She said so.’
Philip looked at the pink blanket where it lay on the ground.
He picked it up and the hot water-bottle fell out.
He'd forgotten about that.
‘Go on,’ said Lee.
‘Give her them.
She might die if she's old.
I don't want her to die.
I'd be scared.’
‘All right, then.’
Philip took the bottle and the blanket to the entrance of the hide.
‘Here,’ he said, pushing them inside.
‘A blanket and a hot water-bottle,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘Just what the doctor ordered.’
Philip went back to Lee.
‘Did she say she wanted the doctor?’ said Lee.
‘No,’ said Philip.
‘I don't think so.’
‘What's this?’ said Lee who was fiddling with the bag again.
‘Coffee and biscuits,’ said Philip.
‘D'you want some?,
‘I'm starving,’ said Lee.
‘Me too,’ said Philip.
He opened one of the packets of biscuits and unscrewed the lid of the flask.
Then he poured the coffee.
Lee held the torch.
He had half, then passed the cup to Lee.
‘I forgot the sugar,’ said Philip.
‘It's disgusting.’
‘It's all right,’ said Lee, tipping out the dregs and wiping his mouth with his sleeve.
‘What time have you got to be back?’ said Lee.
Philip screwed the top on the flask.
‘I'm not going back.’
Lee gave Caspar a biscuit.
Philip poured more coffee and held the cup in his hands to warm them.
‘Why not?’ said Lee.
‘Lots of reasons,’ said Philip.
‘Anyway, I like it up here.’
‘That's what she said, Mrs Wright,’ said Lee.
‘That she liked being in the wood.’
‘What else did she say?’
‘Not much,’ said Lee.
‘She kept going on about the fox and coughing.’
Philip shone the torch round the clearing.
He saw something lying beside the log.
‘What's that?’ he said.
‘Her scarf,’ said Lee.
‘No, the other side.’
Lee got to the log first.
‘It's a gun,’ he said, bending to pick it up.
‘Don't touch it,’ said Philip.
‘It's her gun.
It's most likely loaded.’
Lee crouched down beside the gun, running his hand along it.
‘It's a shot-gun, isn't it,’ said Lee.
Philip knew he shouldn't be touching it.
‘Here,’ he said.
‘Take this coffee to her.’
Lee took the coffee from his hand and Philip switched the torch off.
Quickly he pulled the gun round to the other side of the log, hiding it.
He didn't trust Lee not to mess about with it.
The thought of Lee with a loaded gun made him feel nearly sick.
‘What did you have to switch the torch off for?’ said Lee.
‘I've spilt it now.’
‘Get some more coffee.
There's plenty,’ said Philip, turning the torch on again.
Lee poured more coffee from the flask with Philip holding the torch.
‘I'll take them too,’ said Lee, taking the biscuits.
‘You might as well take the whole lot, the orange and all,’ said Philip.
‘It's getting wet.’
The snow was turning to sleet.
They ran over to the hide and Lee crawled half in.
‘We've got some coffee,’ he said.
‘No sugar.’
‘How lovely,’ said Mrs Wright.
She was sitting there with the pink blanket spread over her, the hot water-bottle on her ankles.
She took the cup Lee held out to her in her knobbly hands.
Philip knew it was arthritis.
Uncle Walter had that.
‘Is this something to do with the Boy Scouts?’ she said.
‘No,’ said Philip, crouching, only his head in the hide.
It was pouring down now, rain not sleet.
‘You look like a couple of drowned rats,’ said Mrs Wright, looking at them in the light of Philip's torch.
‘Come on in.’
‘All right, then,’ said Lee.
Philip crawled in after him and they sat close up against the side.
‘I was fortunate to find this shelter,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I felt quite ill.
I couldn't walk back.’
‘It's his,’ said Lee, prodding Philip.
‘He built it.’
‘Is it your camp?’ said Mrs Wright.
‘No, it's a hide,’ said Philip.
He hoped she wasn't going to ask any more questions.
He hated answering questions.
‘He watches those coloured birds,’ said Lee.
‘The ones like big parrots.’
‘Pheasants,’ said Philip.
‘And he feeds them,’ said Lee.
‘He's going to catch one.’
‘Shut up, can't you,’ said Philip.
Why couldn't Lee keep his mouth shut?
‘Ah,’ said Mrs Wright, pulling something from behind her.
‘Is this what you give the pheasants to eat?’
She held up the polythene bag that was half full of grain, her grain.
Philip nodded.
‘And I thought it was those rats or my silly old brain and all the time it was you, young man.’
‘I didn't take much,’ muttered Philip.
‘But we must feed the birds,’ said Mrs Wright.
She put her hand in her pocket as if she'd suddenly remembered something.
‘You shoot them,’ said Lee.
‘We saw your gun.’
‘Vermin,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I only shoot vermin.
And I sometimes use the gun to frighten dogs away from the hens.’
Yes, thought Philip, she did that all right.
Outside Caspar was giving short barks and whining.
‘They're going to shoot my dog,’ said Lee.
‘They think  it's him that's killing the sheep.
It isn't him.
It's another dog like him.’
‘I've seen that one,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘It's a black monster.’
Caspar whined again.
Out of her pocket Mrs Wright took a revolting bone covered in fat.
‘Give it to him,’ she said.
‘I forgot to put it out for the birds yesterday morning.’
Philip shone the torch on the bone.
Had she had that in her pocket since yesterday morning?
What would his Mum and Dad say if they knew she kept meat as good as rotten in her pocket?
Lee took the bone and crawled over Philip.
Mrs Wright had a coughing fit, holding her chest and her eyes watering.
Lee went out of the hide, letting rain in through the opening.
Mrs Wright had stopped coughing.
She closed her eyes.
Philip switched off the torch.
‘He liked that,’ said Lee, crawling back in again.
‘You can hear him chewing it.
Listen.’
But Mrs Wright couldn't hear anything.
She was asleep, her head flopped over.
Lee pointed at her.
‘We could go somewhere else,’ whispered Philip.
‘Where?’ said Lee.
‘It's pelting down out there.
I'm not going anywhere.’
And he curled up, pulling some of the blanket over him.
Philip shivered.
He was cold and uncomfortable.
Uncle Walter's helmet was sticking into him.
He put it on and leant back against Lee.
Lee grunted.
Mrs Wright was snoring a bit.
‘You awake?’ he said to Lee.
There was no answer.
He'd gone to sleep too.
Philip tried to stay awake.
Someone should be on watch.
But what he was thinking turned more and more into bits of dream and finally he slept too.
He woke with pins and needles in his foot and Lee poking him.
He must have slept nearly all night.
It was getting light.
He wriggled his foot.
He was wet and cold.
He wasn't sure that he could stand many more nights up in the wood.
Lee seemed quite cheerful.
‘I'm going out to see if Caspar's all right,’ said Lee.
‘Give us the hat, it's still raining.’
Philip looked at Mrs Wright.
She was still asleep — or dead.
Lee came back into the hide.
‘He's finished the bone,’ he said.
Philip pointed at Mrs Wright.
‘Is she dead?’
Lee shook his head.
‘She's still breathing.’
Lee passed Philip a biscuit.
‘What will they do if they find us,’ he said.
‘My Mum and Dad'll be really angry,’ said Philip.
‘Mine too,’ said Lee.
‘I wonder what they'll do if they find her up here?’ said Philip.
‘Put her in a madhouse,’ said Lee.
‘Or a hospital.’
‘Oh no, they won't,’ said Mrs Wright sitting up.
‘They'll put me in a home for the elderly.
And they'll sell my house.’
‘My Mum and Dad are selling ours,’ said Philip.
‘The people have been and put a sign up.’
‘Oh dear,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘It's trouble for all of us, then.’
Philip looked at her.
She didn't seem very bothered.
Maybe it didn't matter so much if you were old.
They none of them said anything for a long time.
Lee was pulling bits of twig through the camouflage net and going to the entrance all the time to look at Caspar.
At least he hadn't insisted on bringing him inside.
Mrs Wright had dropped off to sleep again, making a kind of whistling noise through her mouth.
It was getting noisy in the wood.
Philip could hear pheasants calling.
And a plane.
‘Spy plane already,’ said Lee leaning out of the hide and shooting down the plane with an imaginary machine gun.
Mrs Wright opened her eyes.
‘Were you in the War?’ asked Lee.
‘Yes,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I was in the War.’
‘Did you shoot down planes?’ said Lee.
‘Women made guns and drove ambulances and things,’ said Philip.
‘They didn't shoot down planes.’
‘I know someone who did,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I know who,’ said Lee.
‘It was him in the photo.
By the Spitfire, wasn't it.’
He leant forward and the helmet fell over his face.
Philip pinched him.
They weren't supposed to have seen the photos.
It was a secret they'd been in the house.
He looked anxiously at Mrs Wright, waiting for her to ask questions.
But she pulled at the pink blanket and didn't say anything.
‘Did he make it back home?’ said Lee, pushing the helmet up so he could see.
But Mrs Wright didn't answer.
She was looking for her cigarettes.
Philip passed them to her.
Lee crawled out of the hide.
‘It's stopped raining,’ he said.
‘It sounds like thunder,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘How odd at this time of year.’
Philip stuck his head out of the hide.
It did sound like thunder.
‘Lee,’ he called.
There was no answer.
He crawled right out into the open.
He couldn't see Lee.
He wasn't with Caspar.
‘Lee,’ he called again.
Caspar jumped up at him, pulling at his makeshift lead.
‘Where is he, then?’ he said to the dog.
He looked up at the sky.
It was grey, still spotting with rain.
The noise was louder.
And it wasn't thunder.
He knew what it was.
It was the sheep running.
It was the noise he'd heard before.
Caspar began to whine.
Something had scared the sheep.
Rebel most likely.
And Jack wasn't there.
This was the time of day he went to Mr Hyde's farm to fetch the milk.
Philip ran to the edge of the feeding-ground and stood  on the log.
He looked along the ride both ways.
There was no Lee.
And no gun either.
It had gone.
He knew at once Lee had taken it.
Philip felt sick.
There was no knowing what he'd do with it.
If he got into one of his queer moods he could do anything.
He could point it at someone, shoot even.
If he started fiddling with it the way he fiddled with everything it could go off in his own face.
Philip ran down the ride.
He should never have let Lee go out on his own.
You had to watch him.
It was his fault.
Philip ran down the ride towards the field, shouting for Lee.
He didn't care who heard him.
His feet splashed in the pools that had formed in the night.
He scrambled over the fallen branch and saw Lee by the gate with the gun.
‘Put the gun down,’ shouted Philip.
‘It's loaded.’
‘It's the killer dog,’ said Lee.
‘Come quick.
It's after the lambs.’
‘Don't touch the gun,’ said Philip.
‘It'll go off.’
Lee raised the gun clumsily to his shoulder.
‘What are you doing?’ shouted Philip.
The ground was shaking with the galloping of the sheep.
‘I'm going to shoot him,’ said Lee.
‘Shoot him dead.’
‘No,’ said Philip, coming up to him and holding his hand out for the gun.
‘I am, I am,’ said Lee.
And he banged the gun up and down on the gate.
Philip looked at where Rebel had separated one of the lambs from the flock.
It hadn't a chance.
Lee raised the gun, aiming it.
He fired, missing by miles.
‘I can't,’ he said, turning to Philip.
‘I can't see.
My glasses are all steamed up.’
He was shaking from the shock of the recoil of the gun, which had sent him flying backwards.
‘You do it.’
Philip shook his head.
He couldn't do it.
‘Kill it,’ said Lee.
‘If you don't, they'll shoot Caspar.
That's him barking now.
They'll find him and shoot him.
They will, they will.’
He tugged Philip's arm.
‘Look,’ he shouted.
‘It's getting the lamb.’
Philip saw Rebel reach the lamb and begin to savage it.
The ewe couldn't save it.
‘Give it here, then,’ said Philip.
Lee pushed the gun along the gate.
Philip raised the gun to his shoulder and sited it on Rebel and the lamb.
He pulled the trigger and the report was deafening.
The recoil flung them both back.
‘You missed,’ said Lee.
‘Have another go.’
‘There's only two cartridges in,’ said Philip.
‘We've fired them.’
‘He's killed it,’ said Lee.
‘It isn't moving any more.’
Then they both heard a shout.
They turned round.
Mrs Wright was coming slowly along the ride towards them.
She seemed out of breath.
‘Is it that dog?’ she said, coming up to the gate.
‘It's killed a lamb,’ said Philip.
‘There'll be no stopping it now, then,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘Here, give me that gun.’
‘There's no cartridges,’ said Philip.
‘We've fired them.’
‘I've got some,’ said Lee.
He started pulling things out of his pocket.
Nails, screws, staples.
‘You nicked those from my Dad,’ said Philip.
‘Hang on,’ said Lee.
And he took two cartridges out of his pocket.
Philip knew where he'd got them, from Mrs Wright's, the time they'd sneaked into her house.
‘You'll have to load it,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I'm too slow with my old hands.’
Philip broke the gun and fitted the cartridges in.
Rebel was racing after another lamb he'd steered away from the main flock.
‘He's coming this way,’ said Lee.
‘Quick.’
Mrs Wright raised the gun and aimed.
Philip shut his eyes and prayed that she would hit Rebel.
The lamb he was  after he saw now was a black and white one that had been sickly and Jack had kept in the lambing-shed a long time.
It was a triplet and small.
‘Go on,’ said Lee.
‘Now.’
There was a loud report.
‘Missed him,’ said Lee.
‘But you got him scared.’
Rebel was tearing away from them now.
‘You've got one more shot,’ said Philip.
‘Hurry.’
There was a bang as he spoke.
‘Got him that time,’ said Mrs Wright.
She had.
Somehow she had hit him when he was running at full speed and almost out of range.
Rebel lay motionless on the ground.
The triplet, reunited with its mother, was heading back towards the flock that was bunched up against the top fence.
‘You got him all right,’ said Lee.
‘About time too,’ said Mrs Wright, flexing her fingers.
‘I shan't be able to do that for much longer.
With these old fingers.’
Lee took the stump of a tube of sweets out of his pocket.
‘Have one,’ he said.
Mrs Wright took a sweet.
He offered one to Philip.
‘No, thanks.’
What would Barry do to him if he knew that he Philip had tried to shoot Rebel?
‘What'll they do with him?’ he said, turning away from the sight of the dead dog lying in the field.
‘If he's got no owner, they'll just bury him,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I know the people that own him,’ said Philip.
‘Will they come for him?’
‘Perhaps,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘It depends whether they want to own up to it.’
‘They won't,’ said Philip.
‘Barry never owns up to anything.’
‘Well, that's that,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘perhaps we should go home.
I feel better now, much better.’
Philip thought she didn't look it.
And her breathing was queer.
‘Caspar,’ said Lee.
‘I'll have to get Caspar.’
Mrs Wright was sitting down on the bank, the gun across her knees.
Philip ran back along the ride with Lee.
‘What do you reckon the time is?’ he said.
‘I don't know,’ said Lee.
‘Morning, at any rate.’
They skirted the fallen branch.
‘What about your Mum and Dad?’ said Philip.
‘Won't they be worried?’
‘They sleep late Saturdays.’
They reached the feeding-ground and Lee untied Caspar.
‘That's my belt,’ said Philip.
‘You can have it back,’ said Lee.
‘You come to my house.’
‘I'm not coming back down,’ said Philip.
‘I'm stopping up in the wood.’
Lee stared at him.
‘What for?’
‘I feel like it.’
Philip looked round the clearing.
It was a mess.
There was the carton of juice tipped over outside the hide and the paper from the biscuits.
From out of the hide trailed the pink blanket.
The bone Mrs Wright had given Caspar lay by the tree.
‘What, are you stopping up here nights?’ said Lee.
‘All on your own?’
‘I don't mind being on my own,’ said Philip.
That's what he wanted, to be on his own.
The  feeding-ground, his place, looked like a tip.
Lee was fiddling with the helmet which lay near the log.
‘And you can give that back,’ said Philip.
Lee threw the helmet across the ground towards him.
‘Want a sweet?’ he said, holding out the last one in the packet.
‘No, thanks.’
‘Don't you like them?,
‘Look, get out, will you.
Leave me alone.’
Lee was prodding at the hide with a stick, Caspar leaping about like a mad thing.
‘It's collapsing,’ said Lee.
‘There were too many inside.’
‘I didn't ask you to come, or her,’ said Philip.
‘This is my place.
D'you hear?’
He was shouting.
‘My place, and you and your stupid dog and her had no right up here.’
Lee screwed the top on the flask
‘Why are you stopping up here?’ said Lee.
‘Is it your Mum and Dad?’
‘And don't you nick that,’ said Philip, ignoring the question and pointing to the flask.
‘I know why you're at that school.
Because you nick things.’
Lee disappeared into the hide and came out waving the polythene bag with the grain in.
‘I'm not taking any more of that,’ said Philip.
‘No point.’
‘Here,’ said Lee.
‘You can have these back.
I don't want them.’
He held out the handful of nails and stuff he'd taken out of his Dad's shed.
Cupping his hand, he put the things in his hand into the empty carton.
‘They might come in handy for making your trap,’ he said.
Lee picked up the helmet and put it on Philip's head.
‘So long, then,’ he said and ran off with Caspar.
Philip didn't move.
Two planes went over but he didn't look up.
He heard Lee shooting them down, then him whistling.
From the sound of it he was still around.
A pheasant called and he heard Lee try to answer it.
Philip crept through the trees at the edge of the ride.
Lee  was sitting on the fallen branch.
He was peeling the bark off a stick.
Then he jumped off, grabbed Caspar who was trailing his lead, and ran off towards the gate.
He climbed over it and disappeared.
Philip ran down the bracken bank to the gate and watched him run down the field to Mrs Wright who was walking slowly down the field.
The two of them made their way together towards the road with Caspar.
Philip shivered.
It was cold.
The sun had shone briefly, then gone.
It looked like it could rain again or even snow.
It was cold enough for snow.
A pair of pheasants, a cock and a hen, flew over the ride calling.
They'd be nesting somewhere.
‘Wait,’ he shouted.
‘I'm coming.’
And he ran full speed down the hill, by-passing the bodies of Rebel and the lamb and scattering the sheep that had almost settled again.
Lee and Mrs Wright who'd nearly reached the gate by the road turned and waited.
‘Here,’ said Lee.
‘Take Caspar.’
Philip took the lead.
And Lee opened the gate for Mrs Wright.
The three of them walked back to the village.
At the school they stopped.
There was no one about.
‘Caspar and me'll be off home, then,’ said Lee.
‘I think I'll go and see my friend,’ said Mrs Wright.
‘I'll take her some daffodils.’
She coughed, leaning on the gun.
‘It's heavy,’ she said.
‘I'll carry it down for you,’ said Philip.
She looked all in.
‘What about your Mum and Dad?’ said Lee.
‘They're out.
They won't be back for a while.
My Mum's gone to see my Uncle Walter in hospital and my Dad's got a coaching session at the swimming baths.’
They walked down to the Old Rectory gates.
‘So long,’ said Lee.
‘See you.’
Philip looked after him as he and Caspar ran off past the church.
See him?
When?
Because Lee went to Garth House his Mum took objection to him, and anyway he was moving to Thirkett, wasn't he?
He gave the gun to Mrs Wright.
‘If I were you,’ she said.
‘I'd leave off feeding those pheasants till winter-time.’
‘All right, then.
Thanks.’
Mrs Wright went into the house and Philip went out into the road.
Miss Lofthouse had taken the wreaths from the Memorial.
He leant over the church wall and Uncle Walter's helmet tipped forward.
He straightened it.
He'd forgotten he was wearing it.
While he fixed the strap, he read the names on the Memorial.
There were five and he knew them all.
Denis Atkinson, Charles Hyde, George Lofthouse, Thomas Lofthouse, and Anthony Richard Wright.
Anthony Richard Wright.
That must be the man in the photograph in Mrs Wright's bedroom.
Philip put the helmet back on.
So he hadn't come back.
Philip went back up the village.
He wondered about Uncle Walter, what his Mum would say when she got back.
Philip hoped Uncle Walter wouldn't be in hospital a long time.
He wouldn't like that.
Back at the house Philip made himself some tea and ate some cereal.
Then he had a shower and changed.
His Mum had left him a note on the kitchen table.
‘Clear your room.
Dad's coming with me to see Uncle Walter.
Back about two.
Mum.’
That's what he'd do, clear his room.
He unpinned all his pictures and posters from the wall.
He took down everything except the photo of Uncle John's platoon.
Then he went through his desk drawers, pulling out all his cuttings and notes, plans and magazines, everything to do with Jubilee Wood and the pheasants.
He stopped himself from looking at any of them and stuffed them into his waste-paper basket.
Then he took it out to the back and burnt every bit of paper in his Dad's incinerator.
When there was nothing but ash he could crumble with a stick he went back up to his room.
He took down the picture of Uncle John and put it in the drawer of his desk.
The room was quite bare like a hospital.
Suddenly he remembered the owl lamp that he'd knocked in the night.
He fitted on a plug and tried it out in his room, closing the curtains.
The two eyes glowed.
He was in his room when he heard his Mum and Dad come back.
He ran downstairs.
‘How's Uncle Walter?’ he said, touching the medals in his pocket for a charm.
‘He'll mend,’ said his Mum, switching the kettle on.
‘But they say he mustn't go home and live on his own, not for a long while at any rate.’
‘Where'll he go, then?’ said Philip.
‘He won't go into a Home and that's flat.
Even temporary.
I don't know what to do for the best.
It's a real worry with him being so far away.
I can't keep going over there.’
The phone rang.
‘Now who is it?’ said his Dad, going into the living-room to answer it.
‘Couldn't Uncle Walter come here till his leg's mended?’ said Philip.
‘We won't be here, Philip,’ said his Mum.
His Dad came back into the kitchen.
‘I'm really sorry, love,’ he said.
‘What?’ said his Mum.
‘It's not Uncle Walter, is it?’
‘No.
The house in Hill View.
It's been sold.’
‘Sold?
How d'you mean?
We only looked at it yesterday?,
‘It seems someone's offered more than the asking price and they've accepted it.
There's no chance.’
‘I'll bet it was that woman who went to see the house after us yesterday.
I didn't like the look of her.
I said she looked made of money, didn't I?’
Philip looked at his Mum, then at his Dad.
‘So we're not moving, then?’
‘It doesn't look like it,’ said his Mum, slumping down on the settee.
‘Not for the moment, anyway.’
‘So Uncle Walter can stay here till his leg's mended?’
‘I suppose so.’
Philip straightened his Dad's trophies where Lee had moved them.
He'd like that, his Uncle Walter, stopping in Little Knoll.
Maybe he'd persuade his Mum not to move.
You never knew.
He had an image of Uncle Walter throwing his crutches away and Philip giving him a pheasant chick.
He'd have to make a better trap though.
Then he remembered something.
‘I've just burnt all my stuff.’
‘Well, there was no call to do that,’ said his Mum.
There was a thump at the door.
‘Answer it, will you, Philip.’
Philip opened the door.
It was Lee, standing there with the pink blanket, the string bag and the hot water bottle.
‘I've fetched these down,’ he said.
‘I went back up to the wood.
And my Mum's had a letter.
I'm going to your school next term.
Three days.’
‘Who's that?’ called Philip's Mum.
Philip took the things and whipped past his Mum into the kitchen.
She didn't notice the things.
She was looking at Lee.
‘I've a note from my Mum,’ said Lee.
‘She says, can you come to coffee and tell her about what I'll need for school.’
‘I thought you went to Garth House,’ said Philip's Mum.
‘Not any more,’ said Lee.
‘Not much anyway.
Only two days.
They're trying me out at the school Phil goes to — to see if I can manage.
My Mum's had a letter.’
‘He's called Philip, not Phil,’ said Philip's Mum.
‘I know,’ said Lee.
‘He's my friend.’
‘You'd better come in, then,’ said Philip's Mum.
Lee wiped his feet on the mat.
Philip was pleased.
You could see she liked that.
She took the note from Lee's Mum.
Through the open door Philip saw Jack drive up and stop outside the gate.
‘I've a dog,’ he shouted.
‘Shot dead.
Do you know it?’
He jumped out of the van and pulled off a sack that was hiding something in the back of the truck.
It was Rebel's body.
Philip's Mum went up to it.
‘That's Butlers’ dog,’she said.
‘It's killed one of t'lambs,’ said Jack.
‘I'd better go and phone Joyce,’ said Philip's Mum.
‘She'll be upset.’
‘Who shot it?’ said Philip's Dad.
‘I don't know owt about it,’ said Jack.
‘Dead in t'field it was.
It weren't the dog I locked in the tractor-shed, that's all I know.’
‘She shot it,’ said Lee.
‘The old lady.’
‘Mrs Wright, d'you mean?’ said Jack.
Lee nodded.
‘That caps it, that does,’ said Jack, moving the pick-up so Tom who was coming up on his tractor could get past.
Tom stopped by Jack and turned the engine off.
‘I met the doctor,’ he said.
‘He's had old Mrs Wright taken into Atherton hospital.’
‘What for?’ said Philip.
‘What's the matter with her?’
‘Pneumonia,’ said Tom.
He leaned out of the cab window.
‘There was a message for one of you boys.’
‘What?’ said Philip.
‘She said to look after her hens.’
‘Will she die?’ said Philip.
‘Of pneumonia?’
‘She'll be all right,’ said Tom.
‘You see.’
‘The likes of her'll go on for a bit yet,’ said Jack.
‘Anyone'd get pneumonia living in that draughty old house,’ said Philip's Dad.
‘She was all right in the wood,’ said Lee.
Philip stood on Lee's foot and Lee's voice trailed away.
That was their secret, the three of them, the night in Jubilee Wood.
Philip's Mum came out of the house.
‘A lot of thanks I get for doing a good deed,’ she said.
‘I wish I'd never told Joyce,’ she said.
‘She said it couldn't be Rebel that had killed the lamb.
She called me all sorts of  names, said I was a liar.
I told her Barry should have kept him in, and she said if I started criticizing him, she'd get Don to the phone.’
‘I'll fettle her,’ said Jack.
‘Where is it she lives?,
‘Forty-eight Hill View,’ said Philip's Mum, turning to Philip's Dad.
‘It's a good job the sale has fallen through.
I don't want her shouting names at me over the fence.’
‘I'll be taking him, then,’ said Jack nodding at the sack in the truck.
He leaned out of the cab window.
‘You'd best be getting down to those hens of the old lady's,’ he said to Philip.
‘She'll not likely be doing them for a while.’
‘Can I?’ said Philip, looking at his Dad.
‘All right, son,’ he said.
Philip and Lee ran down to the Old Rectory.
They let the hens out.
‘There's four eggs,’ shouted Philip.
They took two each.
‘She said there'd be eggs come the longer days,’ said Philip.
He looked at Lee.
‘What about the one you nicked?’
‘I'll give it her back,’ said Lee, running off to the far side of the orchard.
He was pulling something out of the hedge.
‘What are you doing?’ shouted Philip.
‘I got some wire,’ said Lee.
‘What for?’ said Philip.
‘What d'you want wire for?’
‘That trap,’ said Lee.
‘I've burnt all the plans and that,’ said Philip.
‘I can make it,’ said Lee.
‘I know how.
I don't need plans.’
‘All right, then.’
They tugged at the wire.
‘Will we mend the fence?’ said Lee.
Philip nodded.
He knew Mrs Wright wanted the fence fixing.
A plane flew over.
They both looked up at it.
‘He didn't come back,’ said Philip.
‘Who?’
Lee was looking for the bits of the fence that were buried in the grass.
‘Him with the Spitfire.’
They both faced each other and saluted.