

The Reluctant Samaritan 
IF one could be sure of having access to the book of the Recording Angel, heaven would indeed be something worth striving for.
To know with certainty whether one's life had been considered good or bad would be a comfort, but even more satisfying would be to find there in the book the answers to the little unsolved mysteries of everyday life; to read what really happened clearly and truly, like a watchmaker who opens the little door in the front of a grandfather clock and looks inside.
For the first time in my life I was having breakfast in my dressing-gown.
It was a summer morning, the birds were singing and the sun shining.
I had been looking through Situations Vacant in the local newspaper: ‘Secretarial assistance required…
’, ‘Comfortable woman needed, good with children…’, when the thought came to me that, with a roof over my head and just about enough money to live on, there was no real need for me to work at all.
For the first time I was free of obligation or responsibility.
My time was my own; I could do anything in the world I liked.
As I turned  this thought over in my mind it became as sparkling and as beautiful as the morning itself.
And then, to add to my pleasure, I saw the postman coming up the path.
The letter he brought was addressed in a large, childish handwriting unfamiliar to me, and the postmark was that of a town in Suffolk.
The contents were simple; so simple that the letter seemed to look up at me and to say, ‘I am in code, you know.
See what you can make of me.’
Dear Madam,
Your aunt, Mrs Louise Ross, has asked me to write to you, as her eyes are bad.
I cannot keep her any longer for what she can afford to pay, and she would like you to find her accommodation near where you live.
I should be glad to hear what you are going to do about her as soon as possible.
Yours faithfully, Lily Girdlestone (Mrs) PS She is spotlessly clean.
Aunt Louise was the last survivor of the family of which my mother had been a member.
Lively and headstrong, considered beautiful in her day (and there had been something proud about her — the way she held her head), she had married well and had lived abroad for almost all my life.
Before she married, my father, who had rescued his parentless sister-in-law from a succession of scrapes, once remarked (not unkindly), ‘She has been a nuisance  all her life and always will be.’
Others of the family said of her, ‘You can't believe a word she says!
She makes trouble wherever she goes.’
Also, ‘Louise is a coward; she always retreats in an argument.’
But Louise was not a coward, even as a little girl I had understood this.
Nor, I realize now, was she exactly what one would call a liar:.
it was just that her imagination, so strong and enticing, was apt to sweep away the barrier between itself and reality.
Over the years she had become a stranger to us, her sisters tending to avoid her; all but my mother, who still wrote to her at Christmas-time.
I had found Aunt Louise's address when my mother died, and had written to her; writing again when my father, then living with me, had died also.
It seemed that she, now a widow, lived in Scotland with her only child, Celia, her son-in-law, and their two little boys.
How did Aunt Louise now come to be living in Suffolk?
And how could she, always so proud, have come to ask a stranger to write for her a private letter, even if her sight was becoming bad?
And that PS, ‘She is spotlessly clean’— why did it startle me so?
I knew there was no hope at all of my finding lodgings for Aunt Louise, and put the letter aside; only when bedtime came could I no longer hide from myself its implications.
The next day I wrote to Mrs Girdlestone; a nice letter, explaining that Mrs Ross had a daughter living in Scotland, and giving the address.
She would be the right person with whom to get in touch concerning her mother.
A reply came almost by return of post.
Mrs Ross's daughter had gone from Scotland.
She had left her mother in Suffolk knowing that the rooms were only available for three months.
She had written to her mother giving no address, saying that she had left her husband and was going abroad, that she could do nothing more for her mother and had her own life to live.
Mrs Ross, Mrs Girdlestone added, had only her pension to live on, and she repeated that she would be glad if I could do something about her as soon as possible.
As in Miss Austen's day it was universally accepted that a young unmarried man with a house and fortune was in need of a wife, so Mrs Girdlestone might have been beguiled into accepting a somewhat similar assumption that one elderly lady living alone is in need of an even more elderly lady to live with her (prudently stipulating, however, the three months only, in case she should wish to draw back).
On more than one occasion I, too, had been approached.
Once my brother had warned me.
‘Don't do it.
I know of someone who took in an old lady and she turned out to be well-known for being difficult.
She fastened on to the person whose house it was like the Old Man of the Sea in ‘Sinbad the Sailor’.’
‘But surely if there was difficulty and she had relations, they would have taken her back.’
‘Not they.
They disappeared, and the old lady drove the one whose house it was dotty.
The one whose  house it was got taken away and the other one lived on in the house.
They couldn't get her out.
Don't do it.’
On another occasion I had received a letter from my mother — not usually given to handing out advice:
Last night, while sitting doing my ration of embroidery, I thought of what we had been talking about — the paying guest, and have come to the conclusion that you ought not to undertake such a responsibility as you have had such a difficult time in one way and another with sickness and trouble.
You should look after yourself for your children's sake.
Mothers are often needed unexpectedly.
Once with you, the old lady might be difficult to get rid of.
She may fall ill, or have an accident while you were out, or set the house on fire and herself, so that you would not want to leave her even to go shopping.
Once with you, you would not get rid of her easily, I feel it in my bones.
Neither of us has talked about it and I had not said I was writing until I have now started, but your father says he lay awake nearly all night thinking about it.
There must be a strong reason why no one of her family will have her and it is not as if she had no money.
I hope I do not sound unkind, but I am sure it is not right for you to have her.
I had my own experience years ago with your cousin's Uncle Merritt, and he was not even a relation of ours.
We agreed to have him for a fortnight but when the time came he refused to go, and would be with us yet if it had not been for the First World War and your father having to go…
PS Read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest.
(But was there not a difference here?
Aunt Louise was a relation, and if she were going to drive anyone dotty  should it be the trusting stranger with whom Celia had left her ‘for three months only’?)
That evening I went to see an old friend (that is, old in years) in case out of the experience of a long life she might bring forth words of wisdom.
I stood at the door and looked up, but the windows were dark; she had gone to bed.
I had once given a few lessons to a nun at a convent not far from where I lived, so that I was slightly known there.
They did, in fact, take in a small number of elderly people.
Nuns, I thought, would understand the troubles of the old and homeless, and would give balanced advice.
And nuns, I thought, would probably go to bed fairly late, so I rang the convent, asked to speak to the Mother Superior and explained my problem.
‘Have you children?’ asked the disembodied voice of the nun.
‘Yes, I have, but they are almost grown-up.’
‘Your duty is to your children,’ said the nun, and rang off.
Because of a vague feeling of loyalty, a need to repay someone or something who had seemed to walk with me through the burning fiery furnace of my husband's last illness, I had started now and then to go to church.
I went the next evening, and because for some reason 
there was rather a large congregation, and I was late, I found myself sitting more to the front than usual, in fact opposite the lectern.
Incredibly the lesson was the parable of the Good Samaritan.
From school I knew this parable by heart, and I think the reader must have known it too, because as he reached the concluding sentences, his frail hands were already feeling for the embroidered marker and preparing to close the great heavy book, so that his eyes were not on the page but were gazing unseeing into mine as he spoke the final well-worn words, ‘Then said Jesus unto him, ‘Go, and do thou likewise.’’
That evening I wrote again to Mrs Girdlestone and said I would come and see how things were with my aunt, and if possible arrange for something to be done.
The relief of having made a decision did not last.
A picture had begun to form in my mind.
It was of all those in heaven who had ever loved me, gazing down horrified, and saying, ‘Look at her!
Look what she's doing now!
She'll never get out of this.
She'll never be a match for those two old women.
She'll have Louise on her back for the rest of her life, and she'll never be able to manage her.
Louise will drive her dotty!’
And another picture.
Once I had seen a rabbit snare fixed between the palings of a fence, and now my mind's eye saw a rabbit hopping slowly towards this remembered snare as if hypnotized, and the rabbit was me.
That last evening, as unable to settle I wandered round the house, the computer within which insists on running hither and thither matching like with like (laying its finds before us like a cat presenting a dead mouse) now threw up the words of a hymn from long ago.
Miserably I looked up the hymn.
Yes, it was rather apt, and going into the cold little room where the piano stood, I played it over — stiffly, and with many mistakes — the words, nevertheless, bringing their own gloomy comfort.
What if Thou call'st me to resign
That which I prized, it ne'er was mine;
I only yield Thee what is Thine.
Thy will be done.
And now the train was taking me to Aunt Louise through the quiet countryside, and in spite of my preoccupation I could not help enjoying the journey.
The year seemed more advanced here, and very slightly the leaves were beginning to turn.
There was a bus connection at the other end, and lonely narrow lanes, and the cottage in which Aunt Louise was living with her unwilling hostess was like a little house in a fairy tale, with small lattice windows of endearing shapes and sizes, and a mossy garden path.
Aunt Louise greeted me with a kiss, and there was a feeling that I was the guest of some great lady in exile.
Although upright and looking much younger than her years, she seemed to have changed a great deal from when I had seen her last, and she wore a slightly dazed expression  (as well she might, I told myself, considering her age and the difficulty of her situation).
I hardly remember what Mrs Girdlestone looked like, other than that she was plump and elderly, and gave an impression of being prepared for battle; but I was touched when I saw the tea that had been laid out ready for me, imagining the two ladies conferring about the slices of bought ham, the thin bread-and-butter, and the bought cake.
They ate nothing themselves, but watched me eat with a sort of respectful deference which made me uneasy, it being, I felt, inappropriate and therefore dangerous.
When tea was done and cleared away, Aunt Louise withdrew, her demeanour portraying a dignified acceptance of what Mrs Girdlestone and I should decide for her.
I had seen that look somewhere before, and memory suggested two pictures: one was from an old history book and showed Marie Antoinette on her way to the guillotine —‘The Queen went forth, stately and calm’;, the other (‘Tales from over the Border’) showed a beautiful girl withdrawing modestly while a Highland chief petitioned her father for her hand in marriage.
Neither picture seemed to me to be appropriate, and I could not quite understand why it was necessary for Aunt Louise to retire at all.
Now that Mrs Girdlestone and I were alone together she appeared ill at ease, and there was a difficult silence; then angry words began to flow.
‘I told her daughter three months.
It was not long  after my husband died.
I've heard since that people can do silly things then.
She ought to be in a home!
More than once she has unbolted the front door in the night and gone out in her nightdress.
And sometimes I have heard her crying for her mother — you know what that means.’
(I did not.)
‘Crying for her mother, how dreadfully sad.’
My heart went out to poor Aunt Louise.
Mrs Girdlestone eyed me sharply.
‘…but strange,’ I said, ‘because I believe she never got on with her mother.’
‘There you are, then,’ said Mrs Girdlestone.
‘And another thing, she won't be able to get into a home here.
She has no claim at all on a place.
She is a stranger, and doesn't belong here, and there are long waiting lists already — people who have lived here and paid their rates all their lives.’
‘I'd thought of that.’
‘And there are very very few women willing to take old people in these days, not with the pension.
They don't have to give up their best rooms and their freedom and not be mistress in their own house, and wait on people like that any more.’
‘It is the same where I live.
I don't think I can find her lodgings, but I could try to get her into a home.
I could enquire and let you know.’
But I saw at once that this was not what Mrs Girdlestone wanted to hear.
It was too indefinite, and suddenly I felt very sorry for her.
‘There is this’ I said putting my head firmly into the noose, ‘I won't let you down.
I will see to it that you are not left with Mrs Ross on your hands.
Whoever's responsibility she is, she is not yours.’
Mrs Girdlestone's face changed: brightening and softening, transformed by an expression of immense relief.
‘Well, in that case,’ she said, ‘I'll keep her a little longer while you look round.’
Afterwards Aunt Louise came and took me to her room, leading the way up a strange little creaking curving staircase.
Halfway up was a landing lighted by a small Gothic-shaped window with leaded panes — a window fit for a witch's gingerbread house.
Aunt Louise's glance slid back over her shoulder to see if I had appreciated the window; I nodded and smiled back.
Her room was pleasant and airy; a front room, probably the best in the house, and Aunt Louise's possessions gave it quite an air.
‘You are going to miss this room,’ I said, ‘I can't think you will be able to find anything as nice as this anywhere.’
‘It is not only the room that matters,’ said Aunt Louise, ‘it is the people.
Mrs Girdlestone is a nice woman but she is old.’
‘I thought what we were worrying about was a roof over your head,’ I said, feeling that Aunt Louise needed bringing down to earth.
She laughed, and showed me how one of the windows  led on to a tiny balcony and a view over ancient pasture-land; across the lane spread the branches of a great oak tree.
She laughed again.
‘A balcony,’ she said, ‘but no Romeo.’
She took me to a corner where a miniature chest stood on a table.
One by one she slid out the drawers, then taking a necklace from its bed she held it up.
It was a string of crystals.
‘For you,’ she said.
Until that moment Aunt Louise had seemed almost a stranger, her mannerisms and glances unfamiliar, and I had had no real feeling of kinship.
Now, while as if bestowing some order of merit she fastened the beads round my neck, her face wore a motherly expression and for the first time I was with the Aunt Louise of my childhood.
It was then that she said something which later I remembered and understood: ‘I'm sorry to have to do this to you, dear…
And what has been arranged for me?,
‘Mrs Girdlestone has agreed to let you stay on while I try to find somewhere near where I live.
But it is no good; I don't know if you could even get into a home.’
‘I could never go into a home,’ said Aunt Louise quickly, and with such authority and finality that I dismissed homes from my mind.
‘The only thing I can think of is that there is a convent near where I live, and they take a few elderly people.’
‘A convent…nuns…‘
I could see that Aunt Louise did not altogether rule out nuns.
‘And what if you can't get me in there?’
‘I have promised Mrs Girdlestone that I will do something,’ I said.
Later Aunt Louise opened her bag and showed me a letter.
‘From Celia,’ she said.
‘Read it.’
This was, I thought,the letter — the letter which had brought me on my journey and which seemed about to change my life.
Like the first letter from Mrs Girdlestone it was short and simple, and like that letter (but now the feeling was stronger) it seemed to look up at me and to say, ‘I am in code, you know.
See what you can make of me.
There was one word of address (the name of a town in Yorkshire), the date, and then,
Dear Mother,
I have left Geoffrey and the children.
I have got someone else and we are going abroad.
You must understand that I can do nothing further for you.
I have my own life to live.
Celia.
Beneath the word ‘Mother’ and beneath the name ‘Celia’were what appeared to be two tiny letters.
But I did not think at the time to ask what they were, or their significance.
Aunt Louise came to me at the end of the summer.
Surprisingly businesslike, she had seemed disappointed with her bedroom.
It was the second-best of three: mine was the best, and the third was very small indeed.
I had to mention one thing then, that if my children came home for Christmas, or for a holiday, or for a little visit, we should all have to squeeze up.
It was something that had to be said but I could see that Aunt Louise did not like it, or even accept the idea.
One's bedroom, I suppose, is one's little kingdom, especially in a strange place.
‘Couldn't that great bookcase thing be done away with?
It seems to press in on me.’
Her hand went to her throat.
The bookcase was the top half of a big old-fashioned dresser.
‘Surely there is no need now for all those children's books.’
‘There's nowhere downstairs; I could put them in my bedroom, I suppose.’
‘And I shall need a bigger wardrobe; I think I saw one in that other bedroom.’
(I had not provided nearly enough space for her clothes.
The wardrobe in the other room was full, but I could perhaps get them in with mine.)
‘I notice you keep your bedroom window open.
It's very unwise.
I wish you would close it now I am living here.
In a place like this we could scream for hours and no one would hear us.’
With a slight change of posture — a lift of the head, a straightening of the already straight  back, that little proud look — she seemed to transform herself into a great lady of some kind.
‘I have some rather good jewellery’(and it was as if somewhere among her assortment of boxes was a very special one — but there was not — a mysterious Ali Baba store of necklaces, bracelets, rings, even a tiara); ‘I don't think my insurers would be very pleased to know that a window was left open at night.’
It was strange with Aunt Louise in the house, she and I alone together, our relationship a delicate bubble which must at all costs be kept floating intact.
It had to be done.
There was no going back.
It could be accomplished, I thought, by not worrying about the future, by taking things day by day, and our being perfectly honest with one another so that we knew where we were; and loving.
(Yet some instinct told me that I must be careful to give her no cause for having a grievance.
Living alone with an Aunt Louise who was acting someone with a grievance might, I thought, be rather difficult.)
While the early days of autumn lasted, it seemed as if she might settle down.
She began to look well, and plump.
The dazed expression had almost left her face and I wondered if she might not have had a slight stroke when Celia abandoned her, and was now recovering.
It was when the novelty had worn off, when the days grew short, when earlier and earlier the curtains were drawn against the dark silence outside, that she  became restless.
And she was cold; it was a small house and caught the wind.
‘I think perhaps we could have this curtain permanently drawn.’
It was the curtain to a single French window leading to the garden and right to the side of her chair.
‘There is always a draught through glass.’
This was reasonable; there was a draught, and I should soon get used to the room being a little darker and my not being able to see the sunset and the lights of the town shining in the darkness below like a handful of diamonds.
She had brought her own armchair, and I had put it in my place — the best place — near the fire.
It seemed to me that each person living in a house needed his or her special place, a sort of perch.
It seemed also that in justice Aunt Louise, being old and a visitor, should have the best place.
(Secretly, however, I longed for my own perch back; I could not seem to settle anywhere.
The room was small, and if a chair stood on the other side of the fireplace from where Aunt Louise sat, it was in the way of anyone passing through the door leading into the kitchen, or that leading to the stairs.
One could sit in front of the fire, but there the lighting was difficult and it was too scorchingly hot.)
Nevertheless, I told myself, the success of Aunt Louise and me living together hung on such fragile things as unselfishness and the making of adjustments; and with shame I led my thoughts towards all those people living squashed together in real discomfort and privation.
I must learn to sublimate my desire for  my own perch by feeling happy for Aunt Louise sitting there.
So I told myself.
In any case it would be better if I sat at the table, the light was better there and I should not get lazy.
It was so much more businesslike to spread out needlework or write letters sitting at a table.
Sometimes, indeed, we both sat at the table doing our mending or writing letters.
I noticed that Aunt Louise could thread her needle without too much trouble and even write a few letters, but I had heard that sight is often impaired by poor health, and prided myself that this improvement might be due to good food and peace of mind.
Aunt Louise was always telling me to put more coal on the fire — higher and higher up the chimney which, as I knew, needed sweeping.
Chimney sweeps are few, and are not always willing to come so far out for a couple of chimneys.
Aunt Louise did not seem to understand this.
Poor Aunt Louise!
I had not realized just how cold my house might seem, she having no need to be working about the place.
Then I had expected to feel cold in winter, both indoors and out of doors, all my life.
She had known warmer climes and situations more civilized and now, in her old age, needed and expected to be warm.
(I reflected also that elderly people seldom feel warm in other people's houses.
One hears bitter complaints even where there is central heating and every comfort.
‘They are always turning the heating up and down.
One is never really warm .’)
I had given her my electric blanket.
It was of the  kind that one is warned against sleeping upon, but I knew she did sleep upon it.
The smell of scorch came floating down the stairs, very strong.
It was no good explaining.
I learned quickly that she did not like being ‘told’.
She felt, it seemed to me, that a middle-aged aunt (herself), had to maintain a certain dignity, even authority, over her young niece (me).
It was the same with the bath taps.
There was something wrong with the ballcock, and if both taps were turned on to capacity at the same time there was an overflow outside.
I had asked the plumber to come and had reminded him several times and no doubt he would come in the end.
Meanwhile, I had to go up into the roof and push down the ballcock when things went wrong.
I had explained this to Aunt Louise, who enjoyed her bath and filled it almost to the top; but she took no notice, becoming affronted and resentful if I reminded her.
But there were evenings when the fire burned brightly and Aunt Louise sat in her winged chair, her skirt turned back to toast her knees; while having made up the fire I knelt on the hearthrug, loath to leave the fierce heat of the flames.
‘We had a Rolls, of course…
’(The worst of it was one never knew what to believe and what to leave out; sometimes the most outrageous things proved to be true.)‘…and the cruises!
You should go for a cruise if you ever get the chance.
If I win a prize with my Premium Bond we will go together.
‘Afterwards, when I came to London, I was never  really well, although the work I was doing was not hard.’
She glanced across at me.
‘I was at Harrods, you know, modelling hats for the older woman.
I had to go to the doctor in the end and he told me I was suffering from malnutrition.
He made me give him Celia's address, and he wrote to her and said I should not be working and living alone at my age.
I had to tell him my age, of course, although doctors can usually tell.
It was a little different from the age I had given to my employers!
I have always been able to knock off twenty years.
I have been told’ she smoothed the black lace across her knees, ‘that my legs are the legs of a woman of thirty; white all over — not a mark.
Of course I take care of myself; massage, you have to work towards the heart.’
Her manner implied associations with the medical profession.
‘The same with my arms.
I have no patience with women who let themselves go.’
She broke off.
‘That person I was living with,’ she chuckled, ‘she thought a lot of you when you came to see us.
I told her you were in a very good position.’
‘Aunt Louise!
How could you.’
But it was of Celia that she spoke most, and with bitterness.
‘She had not the spirit to stand up for her own mother.
He said, ‘Either your mother goes or I go.’
Of course it was me.
Things were different when I was young.
Grandmothers were looked up to and respected then.
A friend of mine had their grandmother living with them — I remember her sitting in her special chair, her  feet on a footstool, with people getting her this and that.
She never moved a finger.’
‘But in those days there was always someone in the house, and when were you ever content to sit with your feet on a footstool never moving a finger?’
‘Never.
I've got too much spirit.
All I want is a little cottage.
It's not much to ask for, at the end of a long life.’
‘It's all anyone wants, and the time to have thought of it was when you were rich.’
‘Ah, but how were we to know about the crash?
In any case the richer you are the less likely you are to realize how cold-hearted the world can be when you are old and penniless — even one's own relations.’
She eyed me speculatively but I was hardening up and met glance with innocent glance.
‘…a little cottage, and perhaps a few chickens.
I've always liked chickens — the way they hold their heads on one side and look up at you with one eye.
Cackle, cackle, cackle, cackle,
Such a lot I've got to say.
Mr Hennypenny quarrelled
With his wife the other day.
She's quite gone off, 'tis such a pity;
Once I used to think her sweet;
Now she's getting like her mother.
Dear, these dainties are a treat.
Her eggs all taken by a hedgehog!
Stupid ninny, think of that.


Dear, this cup of tea is lovely,
How I do enjoy a chat.'
There was a long pause.
Aunt Louise was seeking in her mind for the next verse, but it had gone.
‘When I went to live with Celia I asked her to find me work — voluntary work; I have always wanted to help others.’
For a moment it was Florence Nightingale speaking.
‘She arranged for me to be companion to an old lady, the mother of a friend of theirs, for an hour or two a day.
The woman was dreadfully greedy.
She was always eating.
She lived to eat.
I really thought sometimes that she was going to burst.’
Aunt Louise seemed to swell up like a bullfrog, her eyes about to pop out of her head.
‘One day, I warned her that she would burst if she were not careful; someone had to say it.
And that was the end of my companionship.’
She folded pensive, Dorcas-like hands upon her knees.
‘Then Oxfam; have you ever heard of anyone getting the sack from Oxfam?
I did.’
‘Whatever had you done?’
‘Nothing at all.
Jealousy I expect.
Little did the other helpers know that I had had real experience in the world of commerce outside.
‘And there was a lot of trouble when I wanted to help the Vicar.
He was a very nice sympathetic man,not all that old — about sixty, I suppose.
I could see how things were with him at home; his wife was no good at her job.
A man in that position needs support from his  wife.
She seemed to take no interest at all in his work and didn't even take care of him.
I saw a hole in one of his socks at the back as big as a potato, and offered to do some mending for him.’
Her eyes twinkled.
‘I could see that he was touched by my offer, but of course his wife would not have allowed that.
In the end, would you believe it, my own daughter accused me of trying to get off with him; a woman of my experience!
I began to realize that the absent Celia had not had an altogether easy time with Aunt Louise in her care.
No wonder her marriage had foundered.
‘Aunt Louise, that letter of Celia's, what was the little bit of writing beneath ‘Dear Mother’, and the bit after her name at the end?’
Her face softened.
Now it was the real Aunt Louise.
‘It was when she was a little girl.
I used to sing to her, ‘All things bright and beautiful, All creatures great and small…
‘'. One day she said, ‘You are creature great, and I am creature small.’
Then, years later — and she takes after the tall side of the family — she said, ‘Now I am creature great, and you are creature small.’
That's what the letters stand for — C.S. at the beginning, and C.G. at the end.’
I thought of Celia.
How could a person have written as off-handedly, as cruelly, as she had done, yet still be able to add those cryptic letters, relic of a loving bond?
Was it possible that the letter had been written simply that Aunt Louise might use it as use it she had?
For the first time I realized that Celia would know  all about me from my letters to Aunt Louise.
She would understand that since my father's death there had been, as it were, a vacancy in my home which, with careful management, her wayward mother might come to fill, secure within the bonds of kinship.
Worse, might not Aunt Louise herself have known of the plan and have colluded in it, so that Celia might escape, freed of responsibility, into a new life abroad?
The bubble, that frail bubble which had seemed to float above us, invisible symbol of the understanding and trust which was to have helped us to live together, shuddered and sank; then bravely rose again into the air, though not now quite as high as before.
Every week we went shopping to the town, taking a bus from the bottom of the hill: it did not seem quite safe to leave Aunt Louise and the fire together alone.
In any case, although the outing was not easy for her she enjoyed it, and stepped out manfully.
One evening we went to a play — a stage production of an Agatha Christie thriller performed by a local concert group.
It was cold that night and Aunt Louise wore her fur coat and fur hat.
‘You look lovely,’ I said.
She did, glowing with anticipation as she was.
Approaching the village hall we saw quite a crowd  outside, and while we waited more and more people joined us.
‘Oh dear,’ whispered Aunt Louise.
‘Will there be enough room do you think?
Suppose we can't get in.’
She looked up at me out of the corner of her eye and lowered her voice.
‘Shall I faint, dear?
Shall I scream?’
‘They are good to old people here;we shall probably get in if no one else does.
We shall probably be put in front.’
‘Old?
I am only sixty-four!
Sixty-four isn't old.’
‘Nearer eighty-four; eighty-four is.’
‘Eighty-four!’ she giggled.
‘How time flies.
One forgets.’
In fact we were put right in the front row, and Aunt Louise graced her position perfectly; her evident enjoyment and generous (though ladylike) applause could not, I felt, have been without its encouragement to the players.
‘Did you like it?’
I asked, as we plodded back up the hill, she clinging to my arm, pausing now and then for breath.
‘Did you think it worth the effort?’
‘Oh yes .
That man…who took the lead…how old do you think he was?…
I would say…he was about sixty-four, wouldn't you?’
We stopped for her to regain her breath, then, ‘I ask because there seemed a sort of affinity between us.
It almost…seemed to me…in the end, that he was…playing just for me.’
Again we paused, although now we were over the worst stretch of hill.
‘Did you notice how his eyes were on me almost  right through the performance?
Is he a local man?…
Do you know him?’
‘I don't know him, but I expect he comes from somewhere round here,’ I said.
After this she began paying even more attention than usual to her appearance.
She had always taken a long time over her toilet: a review of her clothes; a long-drawn-out bath; massage; manicure; then her hair and make-up.
Now these routines seemed to take most of the morning, and after lunch and a little rest she sallied forth for a walk.
At first I had suggested that I should keep her company but she dismissed the idea at once: ‘I am not a child, and I refuse to be treated as one’, and I guessed she wanted to be alone rather as a young girl might who sets out to post an imaginary letter, hoping to meet on the way the person for whom she has made herself beautiful.
She did seem to meet quite a number of people on her walks; people whom I knew a little, so that fragments of conversation pursued me.
‘We hope you don't mind our saying this, but do you think it wise to let Mrs Ross go out alone at her age when she is not used to living in the country?
We wondered if you realized that she walks right in the middle of the road; some visitors do, you know, thinking there is no traffic here.
When we see her we are so afraid she might get run over or lost.’
I wanted to say that it was not a question of ‘letting’ Aunt Louise do anything; I wanted to say I should like to  see anyone trying to stop her from doing anything she had set her heart on.
All I could think of was to give a sickly smile and to murmur, ‘I think you are probably right.’
And then (with a curious scrutiny of my face), ‘Mrs Ross and I had quite a long chat the other afternoon.
She has had a very interesting life, hasn't she?’
And, ‘I said to Mrs Ross, ‘but it is your niece's house ’…
'Whatever could Aunt Louise have been saying?
Was the speaker trying to tell me something or was I in the first stages of paranoia?
It was particularly cold that winter; snow was whipped into drifts by a biting wind, making Aunt Louise's walks impossible.
Soon the curtains were drawn by four o'clock and there were days when the mist and rain so muffled the sounds of the world outside that there was almost complete silence.
And as the feeling of isolation deepened, so did Aunt Louise grow more and more irritable and hard-done-by.
‘Which is the coldest room in the house, would you say?’
‘The bathroom; it faces north and east.’
‘No, my bedroom!
I hung my thermometer on the wall, and do you know what it registered?’
(It was indeed a very low reading.)
‘I did say you would be cold if you came to live with me, but you said you wouldn't mind.
You said all you wanted was a roof over your head.’
She had also said she  would not be lonely and dull, but I knew she was; far from shops and with no companionship but mine.
I had invited everyone I could think of to tea, and we had been invited back, but it was not her style, and when she complained that it was not right for her ‘to be living among all these old people’ I understood very well what she meant.
‘…and why can't you make the fire up properly!’
She turned on me a look so cold, so calculating, that I almost shrank from her.
‘It wouldn't be very nice, would it, if I had to tell people that I had a mean niece.’
Mean!
Was I really mean?
How did one know.
A mean niece.
How could she have brought herself to think such a thing, let alone put it into words — let alone threaten me!
Did she not understand that she had no need to fight me, to defend herself from me ?
Did she not understand that I would look after her, that 1 would see to it that she was safe and well?
That I was her friend, not her enemy.
(I remembered an evening, almost bedtime, when the coal in the scuttle had been very low.
She had suggested that I should go and fill it, but there had been ice and snow outside, and darkness, and to reach the coal I should have to climb down into the concrete bunker.
‘I'm afraid of slipping in the dark and cracking my head on the edge of the bunker,’ I had said.
‘I did it once and it has made me afraid.
It is better if I wait until the morning when I can see what I am doing.’
But she had insisted, and although the room was warm, and the kitchen stove had already been made up for the night, I had gone — yet  it was a strange experience to me, and rather a frightening one, to have been persuaded by someone near to me into doing even so small a thing I felt to be hazardous.)
Meanwhile, something had happened.
The delicate bubble which had seemed to my fanciful mind to float above us, had burst.
I woke one night to hear noises downstairs.
A cold draught of air was coming from the kitchen and I found the back door to be wide open — and then my horrified glance fell upon Aunt Louise.
She was standing outside, quite still, dressed only in her nightdress; her feet, misshapen with age, standing unprotected upon the frost-rimed path.
When I tried to lead her indoors she became indignant, shaking me off, ‘Do you call yourself my niece, trying to get me into a burning house!’ and it took me some time to persuade her that all was well.
From then on I began to interpret each nocturnal sound as a footstep or as a bolt sliding back, and in the misery of the night I turned round and round in bed, my nightdress winding itself tighter and tighter about me, while a little voice inside me complained, ‘I tried to do right, and now look what you've done to me.
She'll drive me dotty, and that won't help anybody.’
Early one Sunday morning I decided to go to church.
Before I set out, I took Aunt Louise her usual breakfast cup full of hot tea.
I did not switch on the light in case it should dazzle her.
She came of a family whose heads felt cold in the night (their father had worn a nightcap) and now she rose to a sitting position looking, in the gloom, like some eastern potentate, her beautiful nose and high forehead all surmounted by what seemed to be a turban but was actually some sort of woolly garment skilfully disposed about her head.
I put the cup on the little table by the bed.
‘I shan't be long,’ I whispered, ‘but if you want to start breakfast I have put it all ready and I have lit the fire.’
‘All right, dear.’
‘Goodbye, then.’
As I dropped down the hill my spirits rose.
I felt so free!
The cold air (I thought) is like wine.
With fresh eyes I surveyed the familiar landscape.
How beautiful it was, how dear.
From outside, the church looked very old, and deserted, and I began to wonder why I had come; and I must have been a little late, because in the perfect stillness within, the members of the congregation already knelt — like statues, some caught in a swath of rainbow  light where the rising sun shone through a stained-glass window, splashing the bowed heads and bent shoulders with crimson, royal blue, emerald and gold.
Finding a seat to the back of the church I took a prayer book, and kneeling down began to find the place.
‘Q. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?’
I read.
‘A. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace…
’ It was not the Communion Service, it was the Catechism.
I turned the pages; but the top of the pew in front of me, upon which I was balancing the book, was narrow and my fingers cold.
The book fell to the floor with a loud bang.
At once the kneeling statues came to life.
Every head turned.
But quickly I retrieved the book, opened it anywhere, and balancing it firmly with both hands began industriously to read.
But no amount of reading from the prayer book gave me the comfort I sought.
Even when the clergyman appeared from the vestry and began the service, the prayers he intoned brought me no help.
Yet it was then that I knew why I had come, for just distinguishable to me against the background of reciting voices, I heard my own voice.
‘O God,’ I was groaning, ‘deliver me from my aunt!’
Then I saw Aunt Louise's body lying dead in the middle of the road.
No, not that!
There was nothing wrong with her that she was not born like.
A home?
But she wouldn't go, and in any case might she not be misunderstood, ill-treated, and all my fault?
‘…with honour,’ I added (they were not, I realized, quite the right words but they were the nearest I could find in the urgency of the moment).
And then there came a nasty little uninvited unspoken voice which added wickedly, ‘If you can.’
I had supposed that Aunt Louise would be in bed, but she met me at the door; opened it, in fact, and held it ready for me to come in, because there was something she was bursting to tell me: ‘I'm not staying in this cold place a day longer .’
After I had left her she had spilt her cup of tea all over the bedclothes, which had soon become not only wet but cold and wet.
The fire in the living-room had gone out, and the kitchen stove was burning low.
Had not the echo of my prayer been upon me still, I should not have been ready.
I should have tried to comfort her, saying it would only be a month or two before spring came.
As it was, I answered promptly, ‘I think you are right.
If we could find a good home, you would at least be warm.’
‘I could never go into a home,’ she said.
But later I returned to the subject.
‘I shall get used to it here in time,’ she said.
‘No, things will get worse.
You will feel the cold even more when you can't get about as you do now, and you will be even more bored and lonely.
We should both be unhappy.
Tomorrow I will ring up and see how we should set about it.’
A week later someone from the social services came to see us.
His manner was kind but official, and I could see that for some reason Aunt Louise distrusted him and was even a little afraid of him.
(Could she be worrying about her habit of giving her age as twenty years younger than it was?)
Whatever the cause, she answered his questions evasively and it seemed to me that she was making an impression she did not deserve.
(Look at your poor Little auntie.
What does she remind you of?
She reminds me of a small animal at bay.
And who is responsible for putting her into this position?
I am.)
But it made no difference.
After a while Aunt Louise retired and our visitor tidied his papers together and looked across at me.
‘I am afraid there is no hope at all of your aunt getting into one of our homes,’ he said.
‘There are many old people much worse off.
Of course we should like to find room for everyone, but we just haven't the places.
I suppose, technically speaking,’ he paused, ‘if you put her out into the road she would have no roof over her  head and we should have to take her in.’
(Was he serious !)
‘I could never do that to her,’ I said, ‘or perhaps I mean I could never do it to myself.
You don't know her.
She has a terrific sense of humour.
She would be in her element.
Her screams would be heard for miles around.
I should never live it down.’
He rose from his chair, walked to the window, looked out, then came back to the table.
‘I understand your difficulty well enough,’ he said.
‘It is the strain of living alone with someone who is no longer predictable.
But it is no good my holding out any hope that Mrs Ross can be found a place in one of our homes.’
He began to put the papers into his case.
‘Would it be possible, if I could get a job, to pay for her in a private home, with part of her pension added on?
Only I don't know how I should set about finding a home, let alone one that she would be happy in.’
He came back to the table and sat down.
‘There I might be able to help you.
We are always in touch with the private homes.
I could send you a list of vacancies, and mark any I thought might suit Mrs Ross and which I could vouch for.
‘But you wouldn't have to hang about.
You would have to go and see the home right away.
I might give you a name one day and the next day the vacancy would be filled.
‘There is another thing.
It is no good shilly-shallying.
Assuming that you have found a place, and that you  are both satisfied; has your aunt a key to your door?
If she has, you must have the lock changed.
Otherwise she might have some little upset, jump into a taxi, and you would find her here when you got home from work.
Things might be even more difficult then than they are now.’
He picked up his case and walked towards the door.
‘Don't worry,’ he said.
‘If you can get a job and we can find Mrs Ross a suitable home, I think she will probably be happier where there is more life going on around her.’
Looking back, I realize how fortunate we were in finding the place we did.
It was in a small town which had once enjoyed fame as the home of a well-known poet and his friends but which, because of its geographical position, time seemed to have passed by.
Now the cafés in the quiet, tree-lined High Street were a little shabby, and the handsome Georgian houses taken over as bank premises, solicitors, offices, and old people's homes.
But the home looked directly out upon the life of the High Street and seemed clean and well-run, although its appointments and furnishings by no means matched the magnificent brass door-knocker or the gracious proportions of the house itself.
Later, when I came to ask Aunt Louise about the food, she had seemed satisfied: ‘Country food; good plain country food.’
The vacancy must be filled within three days, and for those three days Aunt Louise berated me almost without pause.
I try now to remember what that outpouring of words was about, it must have been about something.
At the time all I could think was, three days — anyone can put up with anything for three days.
Then it was only two days, then just one day more.
It was with the end in sight, the last evening, as we were sorting out which of her possessions she should take and which I should try to sell for her, that I started to cry; and cried and cried and cried.
It is strange how we struggle to hold back tears as if our very lives depended upon it; yet there is nothing like tears — that is, genuine tears, genuinely struggled against — to bring people down to earth; for now, and at once , Aunt Louise became real: a motherly, rational, human being.
‘Don't cry, dear,’ she said, putting an arm round my shoulders, ‘it is not your fault.
You have been a good friend to me when there was no one else; and you have given me back my health.
I shan't forget that.
Now I'm going to be a good girl.
Let's go to bed, and finish this in the morning.’
I was not accompanying her to the home but was treating her to a taxi all the way.
It would have been too chancy and too tiring a journey for her to have taken by the complicated network of bus connections, with its many waits, and there was her luggage.
As I followed her up the pathway, every inch of her  breathed that she was being a good girl, and as the driver settled her in the front seat beside him she gave him a happy smile; almost, one felt — seeing the hat-boxes and cases piled up behind them — they might have been starting out on their honeymoon.
Rather to the surprise of my new employers, since I had been so eager to work for them, I told them I should not be able to start for a fortnight (I needed to recover, being exhausted by my burden of guilt).
More than a year passed.
When I visited Aunt Louise there was just time for us to have a meal in one of the High Street cafés before I caught the bus home.
She looked well but was somewhat on her dignity.
(I learned later that she had thought I had put her into some kind of charitable institution — a sort of workhouse.
I had forgotten to tell her it was a ‘paid for’ home.)
She told me she made a point of taking a walk each day to get out of the way of all the old people, but I was reassured when I saw that she was well-known at the café and seemed to have several friends among its patrons.
About this time it was announced that pensioners whose means were insufficient to pay their rent were to have the amount made up by social security allowances even if they were living in a private home, so with a light heart I set about making application.
I had been paying the fees of the home a month in advance, but when explaining about the social security payments, I sent two months' fees in advance to cover, as  I thought, any delay.
It seems to me now that I must have been more than a little simple, because I received a telephone call from the home the very next day.
They were, they said, returning Aunt Louise at once.
They had in any case been considering asking me to remove her, as she had caused them quite a lot of trouble in one way and another.
I think I was then as near to hysteria as I have been in the whole of my life.
I put down the receiver and sat on the stairs trembling with panic, and I think I must have become pale, because I remember that my face felt very cold.
I would run away.
I would lock my door and go right away and tell no one where I was.
After a while I became calmer; then the postman came, and the milkman, and life became more normal.
At last, I picked up the directory and began to look for the telephone number of a solicitor.
During the next few days I lived in terror, doors locked, ready to fly — to leave through the front door if Aunt Louise came to the back, or out of the back door if I saw her coming down the path.
Then the telephone rang.
It was the social security man, and recognizing his voice I braced myself for what he might say.
But he told me of a new home just completed, where Aunt Louise had been offered a place.
‘You have  behaved marvellously,’ he said, ‘and now we are taking the responsibility for Mrs Ross off your hands.’
You have behaved marvellously .
Afterwards I indulged myself by repeating the words several times.
You have behaved marvellously .
Then, although I did not believe them for a moment, I stored them away in my memory against a rainy day.
As soon as I could I went to see Aunt Louise in her new home.
She was delighted with it.
She had a room to herself, and showed me her built-in dressing-table, wardrobe, and cupboards.
She said it was like living in a good hotel.
‘It is a council home,’ I said.
‘It was the other one which was a private home.’
‘I know, dear, they told me.
I had been doing you an injustice; but I am going to make a will leaving you all I have.
‘Do you know, three times a week a nurse comes, and helps me to bath myself!
I don't mind; it is rather like being a little girl again.
‘And now, there is something I haven't shown you — the best of all.’
She drew aside the curtain of a small window and stood back for me to see the picture thus revealed.
In the distance, above the offices and blocks of flats, soared Windsor Castle, silver-grey in the sunshine which was about to dispel the morning mist.
And from the round tower floated a standard.
‘The  Queen,’ said Aunt Louise proudly.
‘She's in residence today, I see.’
All the way home I was so happy; everything had been worth while, everything was going to be all right.
However, less than a month later, I received a telephone call from the home.
Mrs Ross’ s condition had deteriorated; she had fallen out of bed and it seemed she might have suffered a further stroke.
It had been necessary to transfer her to hospital, the home being equipped only for residents able to look after themselves.
The hospital was a vast conglomeration of grim buildings, some Victorian, some additions of a later date, surrounded by well-trodden grass, conventional flowerbeds, and the usual dusty evergreen shrubs.
Later, habit was to help me to find Aunt Louise with the assurance of a homing pigeon; now, hesitant of asking the way (being unable to read on the faces of those I encountered whether they were patients or helpers), I had great difficulty in finding the right building; and then — up ill-lit stone staircases and along corridors — in finding the ward to which I had been directed.
I found her in a large day-room where groups of elderly ladies sat in plastic-covered armchairs.
Along one side of the room was a row of doors where nurses and helpers appeared and disappeared like actors on a stage  set.
There was a dining area, with small tables, and beyond I glimpsed a further ward; and through an open door a dormitory where there were rows of beds, each with its flowered nylon eiderdown.
I looked along a line of patients and recognized a back still straight and a head still proudly held.
Aunt Louise's eyes were over-bright and she tried to pass her hand across them as if to brush away a cobweb.
‘I saw Celia on the other side of the road and ran across to her.
I think I must have been knocked down by a car.’
Because of the distance of my journey I had been given permission to come during the morning, and there were no other visitors.
My signal to go was when a helper began to lay the tables with cutlery.
Usually Aunt Louise would seem to be asleep, or not to realize I was there.
Then I would sit beside her putting into her mouth one by one the marshmallows I had brought.
She accepted them without opening her eyes.
When I asked if there was anything she would like me to bring, she shook her head.
In all the time she was there she asked for only two things, and in both cases I had to disappoint her.
One was acid drops.
I knew the ones she meant; she meant the square transparent boiled sweets which when she was a child would have been weighed out in pennyworths from a tall glass jar, but although I searched in grocers’ shops and sweet shops high and low, all I could find were wrapped oval-shaped acid drops.
These I knew  well were not what her whim had remembered, and when I brought them to her she said nothing, but put them aside, sadly shaking her head.
On another day when I asked the question, she began slowly and with difficulty to lift the skirts of her dress, revealing bare knees.
Higher and higher the shaking hand pushed the skirts until I saw that she was wearing a pair of white calico drawers, and remembering the black lace French knickers with their little rosebud trimmings, I understood.
But it was hopeless.
The white calico drawers would be standard wear, laundered all together, and I knew, having realized that none of the patients wore their dental plates, that there was no place here for black lace with rosebuds — nor if I brought them would they be long in her possession.
Her companions did not always remain seated.
Sometimes one or other would roam round the room picking things up, examining them and putting them down again; or looking with unfocused eyes at nothing at all.
One of them would come and talk to me as I sat beside Aunt Louise, and discuss her with me as if she were a child.
‘Here, have a mouthful of this.’
She was holding a can of lemonade and pushed the straw into Aunt Louise's mouth.
Politely Aunt Louise took a mouthful and inclined her head in thanks.
‘She thinks you are my little girl,’ I said as the patient wandered off.
‘I know; sometimes I feel as if I should like to knock all their heads together.’
But her voice was tolerant, almost sisterly.
On a wet day, eyeing the lanes of traffic before crossing to the hospital, I caught my toe in a paving-stone and fell fiat.
From my audience (a solid queue of cars waiting bumper to bumper at a side road) there came a sort of gasp or groan.
Clumsily, like a fallen horse righting itself, I scrambled to my feet, gathered up the bananas, marshmallows, umbrella, thermos, handbag, and other possessions which had fallen or rolled around me and, waving reassuringly, I walked briskly away (ignoring a warm stream which was beginning to flow from an enormous hole in one knee of my tights).
‘Whatever's that!’
A passing nurse had noticed the blood as I sat at Aunt Louise's side.
‘It's just one of those grazes children get,’ I said.
‘I tripped on a paving-stone.
It is quite all right; it is hardly noticeable under my mac.’
‘I shall have to get some water and clean it up; it is not the look of the thing, it is the infections.’
She sat beside me and bathed and bandaged my knee but Aunt Louise made no sign that she realized what was going on.
‘Their minds are like trains going along a track which here and there has a broken connection,’ said the nurse.
‘Have you tried holding her hand?’
‘No, I don't think she would like that.
I think in her day people were more reserved, and she is rather proud.’
‘Try.’
Gingerly I took one of Aunt Louise's hands and held it in mine.
‘Take your clammy hands off me !’ growled a surprisingly wide-awake voice.
My hand sprang away as if electrified.
I felt rather hurt.
My hands are never clammy, and something told me that Aunt Louise knew very well who had touched her.
Soon the balding brown lawns seemed to decide that they had been brave long enough, and every dahlia in the flower-beds needed dead-heading.
In a little while the cold rains of winter would come; a few Christmas cards would appear on the window-sills in the ward, and there would be a token show of paper-chains.
Then the grass would recover and the flower-beds would be full of daffodils.
So the seasons passed, and Aunt Louise grew more sleepy and conversation almost impossible; it had been a limited conversation at best.
Every subject I could think of could be painful to her and in any case would be hard to sustain as a monologue.
Yet, I thought, it was necessary to speak, so that she could hear my voice — the family voice.
Might not some echo of it reach her mind, so that she would know someone of hers had been near; that she had not been deserted?
There was a drowsiness and calm about the ward, which I guessed was not the case at all times of the day.
The patients had all been washed and set up in their chairs and most of them seemed to be almost asleep.
I wondered sometimes if the effects of some sedative given perhaps the night before had not worn off completely by the time I came.
I had at my command a whole hour and a quarter, and I had my voice; but the words…
‘It was very dark when I got up today,’ I began, trying to speak distinctly but without raising my voice.
‘I thought I would wear my thick coat because it might be cold waiting for the bus and it would stand up to the rain.
I was a little late, so I ran all down the hill…‘
Aunt Louise sat impassive, eyes closed, mind apparently far away, but the area of the ward surrounding us had become very quiet, my voice superseding with ease that of the television which, as usual, was droning away unnoticed in its corner.
Everyone within earshot was listening, eyes concentrated on mine, heads bent forward — but what did it matter in this little world of shadows where all barriers were down.
So I continued.
‘There is a man halfway down the hill who catches the bus to go to work.
When he saw me running he thought he must be late, and he started to run, too.
We both got there in plenty of time.
‘I found a good place on the bus, on the top deck, right at the front, where you can feel the warmth coming up through a grating’(here and there a head nodded  understandingly)‘and see the view.
When I changed buses there was just time to get the sweets and bananas — the bananas were very good today; and on the other bus there was a nice driver who said that if I sat near the front he would let me off at the crossing if he was held up in the traffic, instead of my going on to the bus stop and having to walk back; because of the rain.’
The listening faces were attentive, but I was beginning to run out of words…
‘All the people waiting at the bus stops were shrivelled up with the cold; they looked so miserable standing there but cheered up when they saw us coming along.
They got on the bus puffing and blowing but happy to be inside in the warm, and sat in their own special places.
They are nearly always the same people and they nearly always sit in the same places.
Probably when I am on the bus I am sitting in someone's special place.
‘Every single passenger on the bus was dressed differently: Marks & Spencer's hats, head-scarves, hoods, old felt hats, caps, but all different.
Boots, high-heeled shoes, trousers, long skirts, short skirts, macs, anoraks — everyone dressed up to keep warm and every one different.’
The faces were thoughtful, but I was getting desperate.
‘A man sat next to me,’ I said.
My audience stiffened, and I paused.
‘He tried to make conversation but I just smiled and went on reading my book.’
‘Quite right.’
Aunt Louise had the vocal range of the born actress and was now using a deep (though soft) organ note.
‘Kind, yes; kind always.
But firm!’
Perhaps the train in Aunt Louise's mind had jumped back on to the rail for a while because it was then, in quite a conversational voice, that she began to speak of her daughter.
‘It's a pity about Celia, isn't it,’ she said, opening her eyes.
A pity?
‘Would you like me to try to get in touch with her?’
She shook her head.
‘It would be no good.’
‘I could try.’
‘No, it would be no good.’
‘Perhaps she will be happier with this new man.’
Aunt Louise peered at me from almost sightless eyes.
‘New man?’ she said.
‘What new man?
She's perfectly happy with the man she's got.’
‘I thought…
’ But Aunt Louise had closed her eyes and was pretending to be asleep.
Visiting her had become part of my life but I knew it would not always be so; twice I had been summoned to the hospital when she had seemed to be failing.
In the absence of anyone more nearly related I had been designated next-of-kin, and now I wrote to the Court of Protection who had been dealing with her affairs, asking what my responsibilities would be if she died.
I was surprised to hear that their involvement would end with her  death.
I was also surprised to hear that during the last few days her Premium Bond had won £5,000.
Running on again, my thoughts paused at Aunt Louise's grave.
Not here, surely, among strangers: yet where now was she not a stranger?
Where she had been born?
Where she had grown up?
There, I learned, the churchyard was closed to burials, although her ashes might be interred — not in her parents' grave as I had asked — but in the church's garden of remembrance.
Now my mind's eye saw Aunt Louise's little resting place: but the inscription?
Laura Louise Ross Born: Died:
‘All things bright and beautiful;
All creatures great and small;
All things wise and wonderful;
The Lord God made them all.’
Then I saw another picture: a very old woman (it was Celia) searching for the grave of the mother she had abandoned, and coming upon that inscription.
It would not do…
Aunt Louise died early one morning having, as people say, passed away in her sleep.
I was called to the administration block of the hospital and later went to register  the death, and to make an appointment with an undertaker — this was for ten o'clock the next morning.
I arrived in good time and was shown into a small living-room where a clothes-horse, hung with baby clothes, stood steaming before an electric fire.
The undertaker, his wife said, had been called out.
Time went by until a whole hour had passed but it was restful sitting there in the homely room with its smell of damp wool.
A second hour went by, while little by little I abandoned hope first of one bus connection, and then of another, until there were footsteps and a small thin man hurried in, pushing back the strands of hair which had plastered themselves across his forehead.
‘Sorry, sorry to be late.’
He sank into a chair.
He looked absolutely exhausted.
‘I've had a terrible morning.
A whole family, five of them, killed in a car crash.’
‘How dreadful !’
He looked up, studying my face, ‘All black,’ he said, as if to comfort me.
Then quickly, again reading my expression, ‘All God's children, of course, just the same as we all are, but travelling on the wrong side of the road — not used to the traffic.’
It was a still, autumn day when the cremation took place.
Leaves were falling but the sun shone, and I could not help enjoying the ride, so stately in the funeral limousine.
Nor could I shake off a feeling that Aunt Louise was sitting beside me, enjoying it too.
After the ceremony the clergyman came out and shook hands with me, offering sympathy.
‘Had she no children?’
‘She had a daughter and two grandsons, but they were estranged.’
‘How sad.
How very sad.’
I think he meant it, he seemed a kind man.
‘Perhaps in the end she was not sorry to go.’
I thought of Aunt Louise as I had seen her last, sitting upright in her plastic-covered armchair.
‘I don't think it would have occurred to her to want to die,’ I said.
‘She had not had an easy life, especially towards the end, but the impression she always gave was of courage.
He nodded.
‘I have wondered sometimes whether the strength we gain while fighting our troubles is not given to aid us when our time comes.’
He stood, looking thoughtfully at the ground; then, coming to himself, he shook hands once again.
‘Well, I must say goodbye, Mrs…
Mrs…’, and he hurried away.
The solicitor I had consulted talked of power of attorney.
‘Before we begin, do everything you can to trace the daughter.
Perhaps there is an old address book.
Work through every address, however unlikely.
It may be necessary to advertise but it is my experience that relatives have a way of surfacing after a death.’
I began with Celia's old address in Scotland.
A pleasant, man's voice answered the telephone.
‘I wonder if you could help me,’ I said.
‘Does a Mr Elmore still live at that address, please?’
‘Speaking.’
Celia's husband.
I could hardly believe it, and said the first thing that came into my head.
‘The Mr Elmore who had a lot of difficulty with his mother-in-law some time ago?,
‘Yes, indeed.’
‘Mrs Ross has died.
I am her niece, and there is the question of a small sum of money.
Have you any idea at all, can you give me even the slightest clue, as to where her daughter might be?’
‘She is in the garden,’ said the voice.
‘Shall I get her for you?,
‘In the garden ?
In your garden?
I understood she was missing.
I understood she had remarried and had gone abroad.’
There was a silence, then: ‘I think there must be some misunderstanding.’
‘But I understood she had left you and her children and had gone abroad.’
He laughed.
‘You have been misinformed.’
‘No.
I have Mrs Ross's papers before me, including a letter from her daughter saying she had left you and her children, had found another man, and was going abroad.
She gave no address and said she could do nothing more to help her mother.
And I understood from the hospital where Mrs Ross has been a patient that before she was admitted enquiries were made and you wrote back — supposedly in your wife's absence — saying you had no idea where your wife was and you did not want to hear about her mother or to see her.’
There was a long silence.
Then, at last, ‘Oh that.’
‘Do you mean to say that Mrs Ross's daughter never left you and her children?— that she has been with you all the time and is still your wife?’
‘Well, yes…but let me get Celia.’
‘It is not necessary.
She will hear from Mrs Ross's solicitor.
There is enough money to cover the cremation and any other expenses.
There is no need for me to speak to Celia,’ and I rang off.
Afterwards I sat for a long time trying to reconcile myself to these new ideas.
How like Aunt Louise, and how like her daughter.
They had run circles round me.
All my moilings and toilings over Aunt Louise!
During the next few weeks the thoughts continued to come and go.
How much of the plan had Aunt Louise understood?
Had even Mrs Girdlestone known about it?
It might have been easy for Celia to persuade herself that it would all make little difference to me.
Even if she could not have so persuaded herself it would have made no difference .
Who should understand that better than I.
At least Celia's marriage seemed to have been saved.
She could not have had an easy childhood.
It would have been sad if her marriage, also, had been sacrificed.
One thing I could do, and I did it.
I sent Celia a bill for everything, as far as I could remember, Aunt Louise had  cost in money.
There would be change enough from her £5,000 after the funeral expenses had been paid, and I felt a little better after that.
Christmas was coming round again, and one morning two little girls stood on my doorstep.
They handed me a cardboard plate on which was an apple, a slice of cake, and some homemade toffee.
They wished me a happy Christmas then stood waiting, eyeing me curiously, till I understood.
Without noticing it, while I was looking the other way, I had become old; so old that I was an ‘old lady’, known as such at the village school.
Under their teacher's guidance little hands had struggled — arranging, rearranging, fingering — plates such as this, to remember, and to show love for, the aged at Christmas-time.
The little girls were still watching me, now rather doubtfully, I thought, so with a mighty effort I changed my whole concept of what I was, in order to respond.
I was an old lady, a very old lady.
I smiled, benignly I hoped, wondering about laying a hand on head or shoulder but fearing I might not be able to carry it off.
Then, more naturally, I smiled again, thanked them, admired the present — asking if they had made the toffee themselves — and wished them, too, a very happy Christmas.
Perhaps I had managed to fulfil their expectations, because their faces became less watchful and they smiled, and said goodbye before walking primly up the path — to  burst out into the sunshine and race each other down the hill.
Such is the power of suggestion that that night as I neared the top of the staircase, my foot stumbled on the last step but one.
It is old age, I thought.
It is no good pretending.
I have got old while I was not looking.
I will grow old gracefully, as we are advised; and as I made ready for the night I tried to see myself as the little girls must have seen me.
The next morning, about nine o'clock, there came another knock at the door.
It was the taxi-man.
‘It's all right, my dear,’ he said.
‘I'm a bit early.
Take your time, don't hurry yourself.’
I thanked him but with some embarrassment.
I had not, in fact, ordered a taxi.
‘It was your name.
Nine o'clock for someone to be taken to —’(It was the day-care centre for the very old — those no longer able to manage for themselves.)
I was horrified, and must have shown it.
‘But you know me,’ I said.
‘You can't, you can't think…‘
He looked down and shuffled his feet.
‘Well, it was your name.
I thought you might have someone staying here.
It was your name.’
‘It must have been the other one!
The one who lives at the end of the village.
It must have been the other one.’
We were both immensely relieved.
When he had gone I remembered the Christmas plate.
The cake I had eaten (thoughtfully, and in the true spirit) had been meant for someone no longer able to  make cake for herself; the apple for someone who no longer had a garden.
The toffee, too, had been intended for another.
And that night I fairly bounded up the stairs.
There was still time.
The Councillor 
HAVE noticed that any old grandad who can prop himself up on a spade can dig better than I can, and it does seem that although women have virtues not given to men, men also have their gifts.
I think my brother-in-law was summoned to the help of Mrs McLaren, when she fell into the brook one dark morning, because he was a parish councillor.
It was known, also, that the old lady had been friendly with his mother; and anyway, being a bachelor and retired, he could usually be counted on to take sufferers to hospital in emergency, or bring them home; as well as visiting murderers in prison, and other tasks (often called do-gooding by people who have never been remotely in need of that particular little world).
I learned afterwards that Mrs McLaren was in the habit of getting up and going to bed so early that night was confused with day; and having an idea that she must get a message to the man who did her garden, she had gone out before it was light, lost her way, and fallen into the brook, where she was found by a man walking to work.
When from the kitchen window I had seen my brother-in-law the councillor walking slowly down the path arm-in-arm with Mrs McLaren, it was the strangest, the most unlikely sight I could possibly have imagined.
Strange, because he, an elderly bachelor, dry and very conventional, seemed perfectly composed, as if it were the most natural thing in the world that Mrs McLaren's white hair should be hanging about her shoulders, and that she was naked to the waist, showing all her poor sad bosom, her clothes hanging from her sodden with water.
Unlikely, because Mrs McLaren had taught in school for many years — the school at which her husband, when alive, had been headmaster.
(‘You children are very lucky,’ he would say, ‘having two certificated teachers in one school.’)
Handing her over to me, all my brother-in-law had said was, ‘I will try to be back by six o'clock.
I will ring you.’
It was then about half-past eight.
I found it helpful that Mrs McLaren behaved as naturally (or perhaps as unnaturally) as her companion had done.
She talked cheerfully in her usual bright, slightly authoritative teacher's way about the weather, without the slightest loss of dignity.
I led her upstairs, took off her wet clothes, bathed and dried her; she accepting my ministrations automatically, as if she were a child and I her mother.
Then I dressed her up in some things of my own (oh, so much too big!).
The tights, very long in the leg, were quite a problem, hanging round her ankles in great folds however hard I tried to keep them up, and settling into the enormous-seeming bedroom slippers to make walking dangerous.
Her hair was difficult to get right; there were hairpins and little  nets, but I managed somehow, and downstairs we went.
I had lit a fire, and the room was very cheerful with the sun shining in.
We had coffee, talked of the gardens and of plants difficult to grow in chalky soil — but nothing personal was said on either side, nor any thought of how she happened to be with me.
Afterwards she came into the kitchen while I washed her clothes and hung them on a bush in the garden to dry — and there was nothing in our words or manner to suggest that all this was not quite ordinary and everyday.
I showed her the garden, and we chose and cut a cabbage, which I cooked, and we had lunch.
It was such a bright sunny day that there was quite a holiday feeling in the air.
By that time her clothes were dry, and we brought them in and I ironed them and hung them in the sun again, this time to air.
Then I undressed her, and dressed her up in her own clothes, she acquiescent as a little child, talking all the time about the snowdrops, and how the days were beginning to draw out — and everything except people, and the circumstances in which we found ourselves.
Soon it was tea-time.
We had both had quite a happy day; but as the sun began to creep round to the west and to decline, I had a feeling of unease.
Conversation was lagging, and it seemed to me that Mrs McLaren was tiring and might lose confidence.
Almost to the minute, the telephone rang.
My brother-in-law had managed to fix things up, he said, and would come right away.
Was Mrs McLaren ready?
He came in and stood waiting, hat in one hand, the other arm crooked ready for Mrs McLaren.
He had done well that day — almost performed miracles — having located Mrs McLaren's Scottish relations; persuaded a most excellent and locally well-known lady to come at short notice and be in the house to stay with her; and had seen to it that the house itself was tidied, and cleaned ready, and supplied with food.
Now, however, for the first time, Mrs McLaren asserted herself.
She smiled, shook her head, and in a voice which gave no room for argument said, ‘Oh no.
I am staying here .’
Left to myself I might have tried to persuade, to plead, to wheedle, to say how nice it was going to be at home.
My brother-in-law the councillor said nothing, just stood looking down at her; and in his eyes was just the right mixture of kindliness and a sort of authority; and something else — a twinkle, a you-and-me-having-a-little-joke-together look.
Did she see then, in that look, the son she never had?
Or her dead husband?
Or even her father?
Whoever it was she saw, she smiled up at him, rising to her feet without a word and taking his arm.
Then together they walked out into the garden and up the path.
the Kiss 
SOME families are more given to kissing than others; one sees them at railway stations kissing a whole carriage-full of friends as they prepare to say goodbye.
Ours is not a kissing family — that is, what one might call social kissing; but there was one person I always kissed, my husband's Aunt Nesta.
I kissed her for the last time as she lay in her hospital bed: the bedclothes were crisp and undisturbed, and she looked very clean, just as she would have wanted to; and very small, because she was so old, and having started life none too big had ended up, at the age of ninety-one, not much bigger than a child.
Her face was still something of the colour of a ripe apple, and her silvery hair shone with cleanliness as did the pink scalp beneath it.
Two people sat at her bedside in the little cubicle contained by the screens.
I had never seen them before; relatives summoned from the north of the country, perhaps.
They greeted me without enthusiasm — even with suspicion, I thought — and the woman said, ‘She's well away, as you can see.’
Yes, I could tell from Aunt Nessy's breathing that she would not recover consciousness; nevertheless, before I crept out I did kiss her, just in case some little part of her, still aware, should feel it.
In fact, in this moment of her departing I was irrelevant, the couple sitting beside her even more so.
The one person who should have been with her was absent, having (as Aunt Nessy had told me some years before in bewilderment, and with a valiantly suppressed trembling of the lip) written to say that she never wanted to see her again.
‘Could Beatrice perhaps be getting a bit old in herself,’ I had suggested, ‘or could it perhaps be something to do with the accident she had as a child?’
Aunt Nessy had been one of those children who, in the days of large families, had been given away to elderly childless relatives to be brought up as a kind of maid-of-all-work and as an insurance against old age; and what had upset her most when the parting came was having to leave her youngest sister, Beatrice, on whom she had lavished the mother-love within her — birthright of the children she was destined never to conceive.
‘She was such a beautiful little baby; and because things were a bit easier by the time she came along she was always dressed in pretty clothes, not second-hand things and hand-me-downs as we were.
‘Then one day my mother dropped her!
She fell on her head and was unconscious for a long time.
My mother was beside herself and after that, although she  still almost worshipped her, she was afraid even to hold her up or lift her, so I had all the care of her.
‘She was a beautiful child, too, and tall — not like the rest of us.
She was like a little princess in the family; my mother gave in to her in everything and she had whatever she fancied.
People thought her spoilt, I know, but it was not her fault.’
In the course of time Aunt Nessy, having looked after her adoptive parents until they died, was left a small sum of money.
She rented shop premises — run-down, and modest in size, but in a handy position — and opened a sweet shop.
Unable at first to afford even a bed, she slept behind the shop on a sack filled with paper straw from the empty sweet boxes.
Perhaps because she was a bright, good-hearted little person, her business prospered.
Once a year she went to Scarborough for a week.
‘I was so tired by that time that all I could do was sit in a deck-chair on the sea-front and sleep all day, but it was enough.’
After the First World War she added ice-cream to her stock-in-trade, and soon she was able to buy the shop outright.
Later she branched out, taking on another carefully chosen establishment, with two assistants, and a penny-in-the-slot music machine — forerunner of the juke box.
By the time she was fifty she was in a position to fulfil her life's ambition: to sell up, go south, and buy a little house about ten miles from Beatrice (‘near, but not  too near’).
Beatrice was married now, with a family of her own, and because times were hard her sister helped her with surreptitious gifts of money; and with clothes, toys, and treats for the children.
Meanwhile she lived the life of which she had dreamed.
She went to church, and cultivated herbs among the vegetables in her garden.
She planted the fruit trees and bushes she had always wanted, made her own bread, and experimented with such things as parsley jelly and mint tea, all to her heart's content.
Sometimes Beatrice would come to see her, bringing the children; and afterwards, when they had grown up, they would visit her still.
Later, my husband had taken me with him.
Then I went to see her alone.
Her house was always freezing cold in winter, although she did not seem to notice it.
She moved very lightly, and was always cheerful and very clean, with a rosy, deeply wrinkled face and big brown eyes.
One day as she tripped forward to greet me I had, without pausing to wonder if my embrace would be acceptable to her, bent down and kissed her.
I need not have worried.
Her response — such a lighting up of her face — made me remember how few times it was likely she had been kissed in her whole life: not as a child, by the parents who had given her away; not by her old foster parents; not often, I guessed, even by Beatrice and her boys.
So it was that every time I went to see her, she  would run forward and stand, head on one side, looking like a little robin, waiting for her kiss.
Sometimes she would be invited to her sister's house, but not too often now, because it must be admitted that with the passing of the years Aunt Nessy had come to look a little eccentric.
Indoors she wore a long black pinafore-like garment, sleeveless and reaching almost to the ground, which she had made from a cotton material used later during the war for black-out curtains and called, I think, sateen.
The folds of this pinafore fell amply from a short yoke, and beneath it she wore a succession of woollen jumpers.
Her coat, also, was black and very long, and winter and summer she wore the same comfortable black straw hat.
Her shoes were of the kind then called ward shoes, with low heels, one strap, and a little metal star on the front for ornamentation.
Then, as in the nature of things Beatrice's lot had improved, so Aunt Nessy's had declined, and her little house had come to look very small and pinched.
It happened that I called at Beatrice's house the last time Aunt Nessy visited there — the time before she was banished.
I had always found visiting my mother-in-law difficult; it had never been an easy relationship.
Perhaps I could have tried harder to be what she wanted in a daughter-in-law.
She had been a mother of sons only and I think now that she would have liked me to call her mother; but then, such an idea never entered my head.
Again, although I visited her regularly, taking little presents; remembered her birthday and saw to it that her  sons did the same; looked after her once when she was ill; and respected my husband's love for her, I did not take much notice of her suggestions: ‘My mother seems to think…
’, ‘My mother would like…
’, ‘My mother would prefer the name to be…
’. I listened, looking vague I expect, but did nothing — not from ill-will but because it just did not occur to me to change.
Sometimes she would compare me unfavourably with her ideal daughter-in-law: ‘So-and-so asks her husband's mother for recipes.’
Again I listened but said nothing.
I did not like recipes; in any case I knew how to cook what my husband liked perfectly well without them.
One's mind is occupied so much when one is young, but I wonder now if I could not have thought more about Beatrice.
(Only now do I realize how strong the desire in her for a daughter must have been to cause her to dress her youngest son as a little girl almost until the day he went to school, his fair hair nearly reaching his waist; yet he had grown up a man.)
Perhaps then I might have come to understand her, and instead of just doing my duty (as I thought), to love her…
Perhaps now, but not then with my mind brim-full of other more immediate concerns.
Then I could not forgive how (she said) she would often hit my husband when he was a little boy and naughty, on his bare bottom, with the bristles of a hairbrush.
(What a thing to do to a loving little boy!
He adored her.)
Worse, he had helped the baker in some  way (held his horse?) every Saturday morning, although he wanted to play football or marbles so much, being gifted in that direction.
(‘He wanted more to earn enough money to buy me a present,’ she said.)
Every day on his way to school he had seen a brooch in the jeweller's window, the price showing on a card beside it.
It was the sort of brooch only a very little boy could admire.
‘You don't think I am going to wear that trash, do you?’ she had said when the great day came; and wondered why he had ‘got into one of his passionate tempers’(poor little disappointed boy !)
In the end she had taken the brooch back to the shop and exchanged it for a plain silver cross on a chain.
For these things I did not forgive her.
Aunt Nessy had been upstairs, but hearing voices she came down, and seeing me ran towards me, as lightly and softly as a little bouncing ball, her eyes full of love and welcome.
Only now have I come to understand what it was my sixth sense was trying to tell me then; in any case it would have been too late, Aunt Nessy was waiting, and bending down, I put my arms round her, and kissed her.
Wilson 
EVERY day people passed by our house taking their dogs for a walk.
There were very old dogs, taken gently to the nearest suitable spot then straight home; dogs who bounded ahead, to wait for a moment, look round, eyes shining, mouth dripping, before dashing off once more; dogs on the lead, who would drag their owner slowly from one thoughtfully sniffed-over site to the next; and there were some, like Wilson, who trotted to heel — alert, brisk, responsible — although Wilson was not a dog, only so much like an Aberdeen terrier in bearing and gait that his picture sometimes became confused in my mind.
Wilson had to trot briskly, to keep up with his wife; and he trotted responsibly, because there was no doubt that he was proud of his charge — tall and upright as a Grenadier Guard as she was, and issuing instructions in the way that I imagine a Grenadier might, so that when they were at home her voice would sometimes float right up the road and into our garden, ‘Wilson!
Wilson!’
Mrs Wilson dressed quietly and respectably in floating grey or black, the large hat which covered her coils of iron-grey hair complementing her height.
Her husband, who had a bristly white moustache, wore in winter a hand-knitted Balaclava helmet, a long cloth  coat, and boots; in summer, a cap took the place of the helmet, and a light jacket the coat.
When he had retired, not long before, he had still owned a small car, and he and his wife could do their shopping in style, and go for outings: Wilson in goggles, because the roof was usually open, and his wife carefully tucked in, and veiled.
But that was before their accident.
Now they walked to the shops; Mrs Wilson painfully, with a stick, her face scarred.
In the same way that he now helped his wife to dress, and waited upon her all day long, Wilson sought out people to keep her company.
‘Come and see my wife; she enjoys a chat.
Gets a bit lonely since our accident, you know.
Can't get about quite as much.
Come to tea.
Shall we make it tomorrow?
Perhaps three o'clock would suit you.’
But her energy gnawed at her so; her nature was so strong and vigorous, and her loneliness and boredom so intense, that she almost ate visitors up, so that they seldom went again.
She who could have managed twelve great sons, and trained a staff of servants with one hand, had only Wilson.
For all her gruffness and trying to hide that she loved Wilson, I knew she did.
It was touching to me to see how she would sometimes act helpless because she loved him being, as he often was, masterful with her, as well as tender; and for his part it was easy to see that he thought her a wonderful woman and admired every inch of her.
As for me, I liked going to tea with Mr and Mrs Wilson.
I loved the orderliness of their little bungalow, and their well-kept garden.
It was a pleasure to me to see the housewifely way in which Mr Wilson set about everything.
For some reason it was restful to watch him lay the crochet-bordered cloth cornerwise on the polished table just so; arrange the tea-tray, and bring in delicate, perfectly symmetrical sandwiches, and the Victoria sponge which, under his wife's direction, he had made so beautifully and had set upon a spotless lace doily precisely in the centre of the dish.
And then, I liked having nice little teas served to me for a change; to have Wilson taking care of me and treating me like a lady — because there was a little something between us.
There is an expression, ‘the unassailable complacency of the mother of eight’, and with Wilson I had the unassailable confidence of someone five feet eight inches high in the presence of a man she knows instinctively to admire tall women.
(I would even catch myself, sometimes, drawing myself up and standing extra straight and tall for his benefit.)
So Wilson and I were quite chummy together, and he looked at me approvingly through his thick-lensed glasses as I sat talking with his wife about, for instance, winter tasks.
Mrs Wilson had usually done all her winter tasks — turning sheets sides to middle, washing and mending loose covers and curtains, going through her wardrobe — by the end of January, and was left raring for more.
After tea we would sometimes walk round their garden, and she gave me tips on gardening which have since stood me in good stead; and cuttings, which still bring her to my mind.
She had the countrywoman's natural, in-built knowledge, also its little boasts: Our relations will be eating their peas next Sunday.’
I learned a lot from her, and when she and Wilson came to tea with me and we walked round my garden, she gave me a lot of good advice, evidently amazed at the poverty of my crops —‘These are not…your Brussels ?’
I had an old air-raid shelter, partly dug into the ground because of the slope: there was a load of stones on top, waiting to turn the shelter into an apple store disguised as a rockery, and when Mrs Wilson saw this she stood for a long time looking at the hump in the ground and the pile of stones.
At last she turned to me.
‘How I should love to do that rockery for you!’ she said sadly.
‘I know just how I would set about it.
But it's no good, no good.
I can't bend my leg.’
And it was as if she had glimpsed the celestial city knowing that she could never enter in.
(The rockery, left to my care, degenerated into a mass of elephants' ears and clumps of coarse grass.)
Yes, I could see by the way she grumbled about Wilson that she loved him and, although he was over eighty at the time, still saw him in a romantic light.
‘He's so slow!
Sometimes, when he has been working in the garden, he will come in and sit down, then out again and does a bit more.
And after dinner sometimes he will sit down in that chair and go to sleep!
I say to him, if he did  more gardening, more real gardening, more digging , he would keep more lissom.’
There was something else that baffled Mrs Wilson.
Although he so obviously loved her, waited on her hand and foot, thought almost entirely of and for her, there was a tiny part of him which eluded her.
It was as if he were a sheet of paper torn into many little pieces which she felt she had to cover entirely with her hand, but could not, however hard she tried, because the wind always blew a few of the pieces from between her fingers or from the edge of her palm.
In other words, there was a side to him that worried her, because she could not understand it.
Sometimes, when Wilson had gone into the garden to smoke his pipe, she almost confided in me.
‘He gets up at six every morning.
I don't get up till nine.
He brings me a cup of tea about eight.
He sits in the kitchen all that time.
What does he do?
There's not a sound.’
‘Some people need to be alone sometimes,’ I said.
She shook her head impatiently.
‘Then I have always kept to making the Ovaltine last thing, and on Friday night I forgot to put the sugar in for him and went to get the bowl.
What do you think he said?
He said it didn't matter, he had never liked sugar in Ovaltine.
Why couldn't he have told me before!
There's me been putting sugar in his Ovaltine for the last fifty years.
‘Do you know what I found in his trunk some time ago, right at the bottom?
Paintings!
His mother had done them — her name was in the corner.
He never told me anything about his mother painting in all our  married life.
Why should he keep a thing like that to himself?’
One thing she never mentioned, and it remained a mystery to me.
There was a legend, and goodness only knows where these tales come from, that Mr Wilson had once taken savings from the post office and gone to Brighton for the week-end.
Was it possible?
Could it be true!
Why all by himself?
Had Mrs Wilson refused to go?
The story was, that unused to concealing money about his person, he had been robbed on the train and had had to return home.
Although I was sceptical as to the Brighton affair, I could not help seeing that there was rather a look about Mr Wilson sometimes; for instance when, as occasionally happened, his wife's leg was too bad for her to go shopping and he went alone.
There was something in his walk — his whole aspect — as if , instead of having come out through the front gate, he had squeezed through a secret hole in the fence.
It was quite a shock to everyone when it was known that Mr Wilson had died; he who had always seemed so solid and enduring.
He had gone to the sideboard cupboard where a bottle of whisky was kept for medicinal purposes, drunk what was there, and died.
‘When I saw that he had drunk it all, I knew he must have felt bad.
If he had not felt really bad he would never have drunk it all, he would have saved some for me.’
There had been rather a mystery as to why he should have died at that particular time.
He had been in  good health, and had been subjected to no particular strain or exertion.
But it was his heart, and as everyone said, you can never tell with hearts.
A few weeks later, Mrs Wilson discovered for herself what she felt must have been the reason for the heart attack.
She had arranged to go and live with a niece, whose husband was out of work; the couple would look after the old lady together.
When it came to her last day at home, she had gone out into the garden for a final look round.
The earth was dry, and there, among the cabbages, lay Mr Wilson's spectacles.
‘He couldn't have seen without them.
He wouldn't have been able to see well enough even to lock for them.
He was almost blind without his glasses.
He must have died of worry.
Why couldn't he have told me!
He had only to tell me and I would have found them for him.
My eyes were always better than his.
He must have worried himself to death just because he was afraid to tell me.’
Her voice was gruff, and sounded contemptuous, but in her eyes were bewilderment and pain.
I saw his grave when I took a short cut through the churchyard — a modest, friendly, even jolly little grave, where in summer moon-daisies and red clover grew, and quaking grass which little children call shivery-shakes.
It was a small grave, and at its head was a low wooden cross inscribed with his name, date of birth, and date of death; and as I passed, I had a vision of a little Aberdeen terrier  who had gone off for a run by himself, and was now sporting in the fields of Paradise.
It was some years before I went that way again, and something had happened.
The wooden cross had been dug up and a new large memorial stone had been erected in its place.
Had Mrs Wilson died?
Surely I should have heard.
There was an inscription on the stone, and I paused to read it: ‘Sacred to the memory of John Wetherby Wilson of this Parish’, then the date of his birth, and of his death, and then a long empty blank.
Mrs Wilson had not died, but it was said she was very ill and was expected to die.
And die she did.
The grave was opened and her coffin was placed upon that of her husband.
And there she will rest for ever, securely weighted down by good Portland stone and a covering of granite chippings.
O Wilson!
You didn't escape after all.
The Duke of Wellington, and Jane 
I SYMPATHIZE with the Duke of Wellington who, towards the end of his life it is said, grieved continually over all the brave men killed at the Battle of Waterloo.
I sympathize because in my little way I grieve too, but over the people in my life I have allowed to die without ever having shown them any particular affection.
Yet, I always conclude, it might have seemed strange and unnatural to have shown too much feeling; strange, and perhaps embarrassing and out of order, I being somewhat far down in the family hierarchy.
At least, as a child, I was helpful, and perhaps that was something.
In those days I think I must have regarded many of the people dotted about my landscape more as bushes than as the human beings I now see them to have been: some dull and uninteresting like laurel bushes; some like lavender sweetly scented; some thorny, to be avoided; and then rose bushes, gooseberry bushes, fuchsia bushes — but all just part of the scenery, and I withdrawn from them into my dreams.
There was Jane, my mother's stepmother.
I wish I had shown her more affection, although I did spend a lot  of time collecting scraps of sheep's wool off the barbed wire for her to put round her corns.
(‘It is the oils!’ she would say.)
And ran errands for her willingly and without complaint; but no, I cannot remember ever having behaved particularly lovingly.
We children called her Grandma, although my mother and the aunts called her Jane.
She could not have been very old when I first knew her, but I thought of her as old, partly because her hair was pure white.
(She kept the combings and sold them to a wig-maker when there was a suitable quantity, because the texture of her hair and its being pure white made it especially suitable for his work.)
Jane was a Welsh woman from the Gower Peninsula, and there was something about her that my grandfather had not realized when he married her after my grandmother died so young: she came of very inbred stock, and had periodic mental lapses.
I do not think he married her particularly for love, but for the sake of his daughters, as people did in those days; and it might have seemed that she was ideally suited for this, with her quiet, dignified manner, and she having been a housekeeper.
She had once shown me, at some distance from the train in which we were travelling, a high brick wall enclosing the park of a great house: in this wall could clearly be seen a door, and through that door, Grandma told me, she had always passed when going off duty.
Her family were farmers, but she had been sent by her employer to learn the finer points of cuisine and household  management from the master chef and the housekeeper at the Savoy.
It must have seemed strange to have found herself keeping house for my grandfather and his daughters.
Perhaps she loved him — there is every reason to suppose he was attractive to women: quiet-voiced, good-looking with fine eyes, well-educated, witty, and musical.
When he was sixty years old he retired, and for Jane's sake, she being a country person at heart, and thinking she would be happy there, bought a cottage in Hampshire.
I have the page from his diary where he records ‘House, £125.’
We all went to see them once; it was quite a nice little place, in a village truly rural.
He was not a country man himself, and I think must have suffered torments of loneliness and boredom.
(There had always been a certain lifelessness about Jane — I felt it even as a child.
Something about her nature which was without structure; something which, if one put out a hand to touch, to join, simply dissolved.)
I found among my mother's papers when she died a letter from my grandfather which must have wrung her heart for years after his death: ‘…can't you spare a moment to write to your poor old Dad…‘
At the bottom of the garden of their cottage ran a deep stream of fast-flowing water.
My grandfather had a weak heart, and he died in this way.
He had gone for a short walk over some fields — his constitutional — and had met a woman pushing a bicycle.
She asked him if he would lift the bicycle over a stile for her, she not having realized there was a stile to be crossed  when she had embarked over the fields by herself.
Like most people with a weak heart, especially men, he had not liked to own up, and had lifted the bicycle over the stile, gone home, and died.
Jane had come to us for the time being.
We had a very full household: grown-ups, big children, small children, a baby, and a shop, as well as our father going to work each day.
We all helped with whatever jobs came to hand — cleaning the children's shoes, peeling potatoes, washing nappies, bathing the children, washing up, taking the children for walks, putting them to bed, reading to them, running errands, shopping, and a little slap-dash cookery here and there.
My father always did the fires, the garden, and cleaning the gas stove, as well as the usual maintenance jobs and the accounts; and my mother always did the washing and ironing — among other things — and, of course, the shop.
(Before I went to work in the morning I would take a bucket of water and a scrubbing brush and deal with the black-and-white chequered marble shop doorstep — in my memory it is a glittering affair, although cold on frosty mornings — because at that time of the day the rising sun often shone full down the High Street where we lived and on me, as I knelt on the cobbled pavement plying my scrubbing-brush.)
There were always things to be done, and Grandma joined in with the rest of us in her quiet, dreamy, unobtrusive way.
Occasionally she made rolled-up pancakes, and stuffed omelettes, and steak pies with lovely  gravy:I have in my mind's eye a picture of her, sitting in a corner with some child on her lap, and the usual dreamy expression on her face.
For my father's part, he accepted Jane's presence without question; and she had consideration for his duodenal ulcer, and looked up to him as head of the household, and fitted in like the rest of us.
I think I knew, even then, that she needed not only my mother, but my father, and all the rest of us, to fix her bearings and to keep her world in focus.
Grandma was always nice to me in her vague way.
(I can at least remember that I was helpful about the sheep's wool for her corns, and being willing about errands.
But no!
I cannot remember ever having behaved particularly lovingly.)
She liked going for slow, rather stately walks in the summer evenings when the shop was closed and the children in bed, and I usually escorted her.
Sometimes, when we got back rather later than usual, my father was already preparing to send out a search party in — as I thought then, not knowing about Grandma's lapses — his usual agitated way.
Once I urged on her a walk which I had taken with children I knew and which had seemed very easy to me.
But at the time I took her, the bushes had grown across the path, and we got stuck, with her widow's weeds entangled in branches and thorns until she could move no more.
I remember how her country beginnings showed themselves then: she made no fuss about seeming to be lost, nor did she work herself up into a state as the aunts would have done, just  stood there patiently and quietly while I untangled her and found the way; and did not even grumble, although after that I let her decide where we should go, which was usually across a field near the sewage plant, and along a road near the gasworks.
She had little private sides to her life.
Sometimes the postman would bring her a strange soggy parcel, with no letter inside.
It was laver bread (made with seaweed) from an old friend in Wales.
‘Lovely !’ she would say as she cooked and ate it, with the little pursing of her lips and narrowing of her grey eyes which was the nearest she ever came to a smile or a laugh.
To us, the black laver bread looked dreadful, poisonous, but we understood and respected that it was something Welsh, something special.
Very occasionally, on our walks, Grandma would tell me things about Wales: about the great cart-horses who died of heart trouble from toiling to and fro up the steep cliff road all their lives; and how, as a child, she had walked to church along the sands.
And she told me about her relations, of one young cousin in particular, who had never thrived but sat by the fire instead of going to school with the other children, not growing an inch.
There was nothing the matter with him, simply that he did not thrive.
In the end, the mother had sent for an old lady from the Isle of Anglesey, thought to be a witch.
She came, and with her little instrument (which in my imagination took the form of a ticket-collector's punch) nipped the lobe of the boy's ear.
Then she returned  home.
From that day on, the bewitched one had begun to grow, and was now (said Grandma) a fine man with a family.
She told me, too, of the mines, and how some of the young boys were terrified of going down the pit for the first time, but had to go, as there was no other work for them; and how at first they had been put to work beside their father, loading the coal he cut, until they had overcome their fear.
And how the mine at the bottom of the shaft was not always dark, but lofty, like a cathedral, and lit up, but with dark tunnels running out from it on all sides.
Then of an old lady known, because of her big stomach, as ‘Mrs Jones the Bol’, who after an operation for gall-stones boasted so much of their number and size that she was called thereafter ‘Mrs Jones the Pebbly Beach’.
But the thing which must have been nearest to her heart, because she returned to it so often, was how as a child she had walked to church along the sands.
She made a little rite of soaking her feet in a corn cure called ‘Reudel’, and as she lowered her feet into the bowl of steaming water there was again that little look, that narrowing of the eyes and pursing of the lips, which said so much with so little disturbance of her features.
Sometimes the look would come when my mother broke into wild extravagance, such as ordering dozens of hot cross buns on Good Friday.
Then Grandma would raise her hands in mock horror: ‘How the poor do live!’
And so she settled down quietly into our family  life for over a year, until one of the aunts, Aunt Kate, came to see us, and after that there was talk between our parents — children always know these things, having good ears — about it perhaps being best now for Grandma to be going back to her little house in Hampshire.
The aunt had told Grandma (or Jane, as they always called her) that she was being ‘used’.
I do not know whether poor, dreamy Grandma knew what it was all about, or whether she just gathered, in a vague way, the drift of things.
I expect my aunt meant well; I guess it might just have been one of her spasmodic assumptions of authority in the family — out of character and dramatic as these assumptions usually were.
Perhaps, being so very different from Grandma herself, she did not understand her needs.
Perhaps she really did think Grandma was being used.
Perhaps she even got Grandma thinking the same, not realizing that Grandma was a person who needed the near-replica of her childhood to make a background for her life; and that although she gave, she also received.
So Grandma went home, my parents making the journey to help her to settle in.
Some months later, in a spell of beautiful summer weather, a telegram — always a thing of dread — arrived.
Grandma had been found floating in the stream at the bottom of the garden — that lovely little stream, so sparkling and full of life.
The event was not much talked about in the family; it was too dreadful; and I don't suppose for a moment that Aunt Kate, then living abroad, would have wondered whether she, herself, might not have played a part in the sequence of events; nor do I remember any such theory ever having been put forward or even thought of at the time.
But now, looking back, I think that such must have been the case.
I never did believe that, as the coroner seemed to think, because of one of her mental lapses Grandma had gone out into the garden in her nightie and just fallen into the stream by mistake.
I guessed, as everyone else must have done, that at some point she could not manage her life any longer and had gone out and stepped into the stream as a way of escape.
Perhaps the end would have been the same in any case.
Only, I wish I had ever shown some sign of affection; I wish I had perhaps written to her — even if only a card (and even though I was rather far down in the family hierarchy).
Doctor's Orders 
I WAS really only a bystander in the tragedy of young Mr and Mrs McLeod; it was not really my business, although it could be said that I had known them both — had seen them about — for most of their lives.
I remember passing the church just after they were married.
It was a summer day, and they were posing in front of the porch for the photographer.
The bridegroom was a very tall young man with reddish hair, a very big man altogether, and as so often happens then, the bride was very small.
Her head did not nearly reach his shoulder, and even from where I stood I could sense the gentleness, the protectiveness, which were to be her portion.
She was dressed all in white, with a veil; she was an only child, and this was her big day.
An elderly verger once confided to me that he felt happier at a good funeral than at a wedding.
If the deceased had led a reasonable life and had died at a good age without too much trouble, leaving a reasonably good family behind him, what was there to be miserable about?
It was no worse than leaves falling from the trees in autumn.
You knew where you were.
But a wedding…
The bride always looked so happy.
Sometimes (he said) he was almost afraid to look into the young couple's  faces.
Little did they know!
Whereas a good funeral…
I, being about the verger's age, was inclined to understand what he felt.
When next I saw the young couple together it was winter.
They told me they had a little house not far away from where I lived, and that Dorothy was expecting a baby — twins, the doctor had said.
And then, not much later as it seemed, there they were, father pushing the pram, a very happy little family.
It was nice to see people happy, I thought.
It was how things were meant to be.
I always enquired about Dorothy's parents when we met.
They were a kindly couple, rather older than one would have expected, although there had always been a suggestion of old-fashionedness about Dorothy as a child.
Her father had been an invalid from the First World War — some kind of nervous trouble, I believe.
I suppose one would call him a hypochondriac, because Dorothy had once told me that her earliest memory was of her father standing in front of the looking-glass saying, ‘I am a dying man’; her mother's face had that bearing-up look one sees on the faces of those suffering with their feet.
‘All right, thank you,’ Dorothy would say when I asked how they were keeping.
‘Mum gets a bit tired; I go to see them as often as I can: it cheers Dad up, and Mum loves the children.’
She smiled proudly.
‘Mum  says she always looked forward to her grandchildren, because of me being an only child.
Dad won't hold the babies — he's afraid of dropping them!’
A little, impatient look showed for a moment in her eyes.
Before one could turn round, the twins were riding bicycles — and then, University.
It was about this time that their grandmother died of a sudden heart attack.
I was not surprised when I heard that the old man had gone to live with Dorothy.
There had never been any doubt in her mind that she would look after her parents in their old age: they had given up a lot for her, she said, and that was how she could repay them.
(Her aunts had been saying much the same kind of thing to her all her life, I believe.)
If she had ever thought much about the future, I think she would have seen her mother sitting in a chair by the fire, knitting; after all, her father had been dying all her life.
It was not until a few weeks after her father had been installed that Dorothy began to realize the fortitude with which her mother had cared for him over the years.
Perhaps Dorothy had been shielded too much, and again in her marriage she had been protected, so that there had been nothing in her life to prepare her for what was happening now.
It was not the extra work — she did it willingly, willingly.
It was not being more tied to the house.
It was that for the first time something illogical had crept into her world.
She was looking after her father in his old  age as she had always said she would, but instead of satisfaction she felt only guilt — guilt at her own impatience when he behaved not as her father but like a disobedient child.
These things I gathered from what Dorothy's husband Leo told me when I met him in the chemist's shop one day.
He had been trying to get something for Dorothy's headaches.
‘It is difficult for both of you,’ I said.
‘What about a home?
He can't be particularly happy as things are.’
‘Dorothy would never hear of it, and it is her decision.
‘When I go off to work each day,’ he said slowly, ‘Dorothy comes out to the car with me to say goodbye.
It is a little time when we can talk together, and I encourage her to talk about her father.
I think it helps her to get it out.
She is so loyal; but she knows she can speak to me.
When I drive off, I am so churned up inside that I find myself hoping I shan't make things worse by having a coronary on the way to work.’
Watching him speak, and seeing the man he was, I realized the distress that allowed him to reveal his feelings to me.
He was not, I knew, a person to talk about himself and his emotions.
So I was not surprised when he rang me a few weeks later to say that Dorothy was in hospital.
She had had what seemed to be flu, but it had left her breathless, he said.
They didn't seem to know what it was, so had taken her into hospital for observation — or so I understood.
The old man had gone to stay with relatives for a few days, and Dorothy wondered if I would water her houseplants, because he (Leo) wanted to spend all the time he could with her at the hospital.
I was amazed at the number of plants: I counted 147 — all along the window-sills, on tables, everywhere.
Then there was a little conservatory; but those plants I was supposed to leave for Leo, because they were Dorothy's special plants and he had special directions.
I was able to go to see her in hospital.
I thought it was rather a bad sign that I was told I could, as a family friend, go in at any time.
She looked very sweet propped up there on the pillows; and very clean and tidy, as seriously ill patients often do.
Although the breathlessness was noticeable, I could not understand what was the matter with her.
She hadn't a cough; it was not, it seemed, her heart — that would be mentioned, I felt.
She did not look feverish.
I did not like to ask; I had not even liked to ask Leo.
In any case, he did not seem to know.
‘It's Dad that's made me ill,’ she said.
There was nothing I could think of to say, so I said nothing.
‘It isn't the work I mind…it isn't even having to clean him up…’
‘I know,’ I said.
‘You don't have to tell me.’
‘It's the baiting…calling me upstairs when he's down, and down when he's up…and then thinking it's a bit of…a joke…and that kind of thing.’
After a time I said, ‘You don't think that if he had an outside person looking after him, who he didn't mind telling him what to do because it was their job…‘
‘I could never put him into a home.’
‘No, but Leo would see to it for you, while you were here.
You know you could trust him to do everything properly.’
‘I could never put Dad into a home.’
She smiled proudly.
‘And Leo would never go against my decision.
He knows how I feel, me being an only child…he's a wonderful husband, I couldn't have a better husband.
He's been a wonderful husband in every way…it's been the same all…our married life.’
I blinked.
It was no time for me to be getting weepy.
There was something wrong about the plants.
There were too many.
In spite of some of them being mere cuttings, there were too many of them.
I must do the watering carefully, I told myself each day — not make a mess.
It was silent in the house, and rather airless.
How had Dorothy found patience to look after all these  plants!
Slowly I went from pot to pot, pot to pot, giving each flower its drink of water.
They stood waiting.
They were very beautiful when you looked into them, the colours, the shapes.
After a while I began to feel a little like Dorothy myself.
Lovingly she tended them, and lovingly they responded.
She looked after them, and they behaved in a natural, foretellable way.
They would thrive, and obediently they would unfold into their familiar selves.
And their colours!
It was as if I could see Dorothy looking at them, looking at them, trying to draw something from them to help her to hold on.
She couldn't get enough.
One day Leo came to see to the plants in the conservatory.
I went with him to the glass door and stopped.
‘Whatever's that!
Whatever's that dreadful creature!’
It was standing, without a flutter, on some branch or piece of wood, watching us coldly.
‘Dreadful?
It's a pigeon!
It's Dorothy's pet pigeon!’
He looked surprised.
‘Surely you know a pigeon?’
‘They usually rise.
I have never seen one so close before, and it looks so bold, and bossy.
Whatever is it doing here?’
‘Dorothy found it in the garden a few weeks ago.
It was ill, and she brought it in and nursed it back to health.
I think it helped her having something like that to do.
The bird got so attached to her that it would take food from between her lips.
She had been going to set it loose  in case it got too tame to fend for itself.
Perhaps I had better do it now.’
The next time I went to see Dorothy I was not allowed to stay for long.
She was to have an operation (a biopsy?) the next day.
I remember walking through the bus station on my way home.
Whatever happened, I thought, Dorothy was not going to get better while her father was with them.
She might get over this present illness but would only fall victim to the first virus that came along.
But it was no good talking to her, she was too ill, and it was no good talking to Leo, he would never go against her decision.
There must be an answer; and my mind started running hither and thither putting forward suggestions, quotations, ideas…
‘Who shall we send, and who will go for us?’
Then said I, ‘Lo, here am I. Send me.’
Then, ‘Old Busybody!
Nosy old so-and-so!’
Then another voice (the devil?).
And now it was as if I were sinking blissfully into a warm bath and lying there perfectly relaxed…
‘It's not your business, is it.’
(Only, no one else seemed to realize.)
This was all happening while I was walking through the bus station and taking my place in the queue; and when I gained my seat I began looking in my bag for a piece of paper and a biro, and then, on the inside of  a chocolate-bar wrapping I wrote what I must memorize and recite if I were to get the message over to the doctor — I, who even made heavy weather of describing a sore throat; I, who after a period in the waiting-room could dry up so as to be virtually dumb.
It was almost at the end of surgery and it was almost as if the doctor were expecting me; and later, I could hardly wait to tell Leo what had happened.
Leo had promised to ring me that evening in case there had been any news from the hospital; and I told him my own news.
It fell quite flat.
It was a terrible disappointment, my heart sank as for the first time I detected a stiffness in Leo's voice.
‘It is Dorothy's decision,’ he said.
‘But Leo, she is in no state to make decisions.
It is the doctor's decision.
It is Doctor's Orders.
She will obey Doctor's Orders.
Leo, you must tell her that it is Doctor's Orders that she must not look after her father any more — that it is too much for her — that she need not even see her father until she is quite well enough, and the doctor has himself offered to find a suitable place, so that she will know her father will be well looked after.
Leo, you must tell her.
It will help her.
It may make all the difference.’
As it was, she died under the anaesthetic.
When Leo told me, I asked if he had been able to give the message.
He said he had, and when he told her, he said, she seemed to  relax all over.
‘We were very happy together until it was time for the operation.’
There was something else I had to say, and it was no good getting wobbly-voiced about it either.
‘While I was with her,’ I said, ‘she told me what a wonderful husband you had always been to her — always, in every way, all your married life.’
Adult Education 
I ONCE read a book by Bertrand Russell in which he said that at the age of seven years (as I remember) he got up one night to see whether there were, in fact, four angels round his bed:
Four corners to my bed;
Four angels round my head;
One to watch, one to pray;
And two to carry my soul away.
He must have thought there was some likelihood of angels being there, because he describes how he put out his arms in the darkness and made a grab, at thin air as it turned out.
In his book he seems rather proud of this episode, and I suppose it did foretell the scientist to be.
Yet, when I was seven years old, I should have thought him a very silly little boy indeed not to have understood about metaphorically speaking, even if he had never heard of it, and it does seem that what he possessed in the way of scientific approach he lacked in common sense.
All the same, he grew up to be a famous philosopher as well as a famous scientist, while I…
I puzzled over this little problem for years, right into old age in fact, picking it up when it happened to float into my mind, and putting it down again unsolved.
What had happened to us could not, I thought, have been due entirely to education — not even to the idea that girls develop more quickly than boys to a certain point and then slow down; but as I still clung loyally to my little world where all clergymen were good, all solicitors honest, and all philosophers and experts different from ordinary people and unquestionably right, I struggled hard against any idea that I might still be wiser than Bertrand Russell in some respects.
The problem came to a crisis after I had been going to evening classes (Workers' Educational Association), the subject being psychology.
I had attended WEA classes many years before, when they first started in the town.
Our teacher then was R. H. S. Crossman, and the subject, ‘If Plato Lived Today’.
I do not think I knew who Plato was at the time, but I enjoyed hearing Mr Crossman speak, and seeing the other pupils, although they were mostly people thought of in the town as being particularly well-educated already.
When I married I left the classes but now, all these years later, I joined them again.
There was something rather reckless in my attending the present lectures at all, because it was in the depths of winter, and from where I now lived it was rather a long walk to the town — over a mile, at any rate.
The classes started at eight o'clock and were supposed to end at ten, but with the usual chatting afterwards it was almost eleven o'clock before I reached home.
I would not do it again; it is too dangerous as things are today; but the  night on which I decided this to be the case was the night on which I leaned enough at my classes to decide me about Bertrand Russell, so it was well worth going.
It was a very cold frosty night in December, and because the snow on the footpath was hard and uneven, and as slippery as ice, I walked along the edge of the road.
I walked fast, to keep warm, so it may have been that I was a little above myself by the time I reached the school where the classes were held, because that night, try as I would, I could not believe anything our teacher was telling us.
We sat before him looking at him with respectful eyes (that is, all but one of us, who usually went to sleep as soon as the class started; she was not just closing her eyes, she was fast asleep).
The talk that night was about experiments carried out to explain why people behaved as they did, and we were told of different types of neurotic people and how they could be classified.
It would not have mattered so much if the experiments described all held water, but when (as we were encouraged to do) I put up my hand and ventured that one experiment was not consistent, the lecturer acknowledged that this was so in the particular I questioned, but said that the results were usually found to be as would have been expected.
And then he said something which, entering the realms of my own modest experience, I knew to be wrong.
He spoke of ‘the type of person who always offers to wash up after a party; the type of person who, winning a prize in a raffle, will give it back to be re-raffled’.
And this, he said, was because that person had a martyrdom complex.
(I saw a party of friends — all knowing that their host and hostess must either clear up before retiring, or rise early before going to work the next day — whisking round to help before they left.
Surely it was kindness of heart and had nothing to do with complexes.
I saw an elderly lady with half a lifetime of raffles behind her and half a dozen tea cosies in her drawer, winning yet another tea cosy and, smiling, handing it back to be re-raffled.
She was not suffering from a complex, it was just common sense; in any case, prizes could be symbolic only, appearing regularly at sales of work, bring-and-buy mornings, fêtes and tombolas, before finally coming to rest.)
That night I walked part of my way home with one of the other pupils, who lived in a group of houses a short distance from the school.
(She seemed to me to be about eighteen years old, although as we walked along she told me she had five children, all happily married.)
Then I was alone, and had a choice of two routes.
One took me rather out of my way, before turning at last, at right angles, up the hill and home; but it was the main road and was lit.
The other was a much shorter way, a footpath stretching diagonally across a very large ploughed field, this path making the third side of a triangle.
In my rather disgruntled frame of mind I rebelled that night against the long way round.
Surely I should be over the field in no time.
I thought of hypothetical dangers — murderers, rapists; and I have no doubt that such are abroad at night in the most unlikely of places at the most unlikely of times.
(Yet surely a murderer would not stand in the middle of an enormous snow-covered, frost-bitten field in the dark on such a night, just on the off-chance that someone would be silly enough to cross it alone!)
There was danger, too, underfoot: the path had been ploughed over in many places and here and there were lumps of frozen earth covered with snow, and slippery.
Yet if I concentrated on each footstep, I should soon be safely home.
On the other hand, if I did slip and break my hip I should no doubt be dead by the morning.
Along the main road, though lit, it was a long way; across the seemingly vast open field, pitch dark, might lie rape, and murder, or freezing to death.
But, I told myself again, I should soon be home.
And so I set off across the field.
I still remember that walk with pleasure.
Although it was dark where I was walking, the blackness stretching away on all sides, it was also, unexpectedly, ringed by lights.
There were the lights of the town behind me, lights along the distant main road, lights up the hill from an occasional house, continuing with the lights of my own road.
They gave a spurious reassurance: so friendly, so warm, so protective (‘…but God is round about me, and shall I be afraid?’ the computer within suggested  doubtfully, but I rejected the idea at once.
Why should God bother with someone who chose deliberately to do something foolish?), so I concentrated on every step, placing my feet carefully among the slippery clods and only enjoying the prospect and the blanket of stillness when pausing for breath.
(And all the time, at the back of my mind, the pedestals of famous philosophers, teachers, and experts were falling, until by the time I reached my own road they were just ordinary human beings.)
Soon I had come out of the field and was walking along the path opposite where my home would be.
A few paces ahead, on my left, was a five-barred gate — access to a paddock which ran along the back walls of some cottages, ending in the grounds of a large house.
Some faint glow of light from the direction of the town below caught the angle of a new padlock, the gate being chained as well as shut.
How bright the padlock was!
And how interesting was the way in which it took advantage of so little light as to shine enough for me to see it so clearly.
And then, by its light, I saw something else — a leg.
A leg in trousers, with a plimsoll at the end, frozen in the act of crossing the gate, perfectly immobile.
And still without needing to turn my head, but looking straight to the front, and walking at the same even pace along the path, I was conscious of a man perched motionless on the top bar of the gate, one leg over, so still that he might have been part of the gate itself.
There was not far to go; I only had to keep my eyes  straight ahead and my pace unhurried.
Home was almost opposite.
Only a few more yards, and soon I was inside with the door locked after me.
What had the man been doing there?
Why had he not continued climbing over the gate, said good-night, and gone off down the hill?
Why, thinking I was not aware of him, did he stay frozen?
What could he have been doing in that little field but reconnoitring the back premises of the house at the far end — even breaking in, there had been burglaries lately.
So still in the adventurous mood of my walk across the field, and my fright at seeing that leg, I rang the police.
They telephoned a little later.
They had picked up the man at the bottom of the hill.
It had looked suspicious, I had done right to inform them, they said kindly, but the man had nothing on his person at all, and said he had been after rabbits.
Automatically I began trying to accommodate my ideas to those of the police, the experts; trying to find some reason why a man after rabbits should have no gun, not even a piece of wire or string about him.
Before that evening's lecture and the fall of the experts, I should have managed it I know, but the spell had broken, it was no good.
It was after myxomatosis; there had not been a rabbit in that field or anywhere around for years.
Rabbits indeed!
The Murderer in the Bushes by the Gate 
WE came to know Mrs Browning when we were first married and knew no one else in the road.
She lived in a small house near ours and seemed very old to me; but that was many years ago.
She was so much a daughter of the vicarage in accent, manner, and appearance (her father had been a clergyman) that without being told I had assumed, seeing evidence in Mrs Browning's home that someone at some time had lived in a hot country, that her husband had been a missionary.
To cut a long story short, Mrs Browning was exactly like one of the old ladies in Arsenic and Old Lace .
There were very few houses in the road at that time; it was just a lane, leading to nowhere, and Mrs Browning was the first to acknowledge our presence by formally inviting us to tea.
Then one day she rang to ask if I would go to see her; she wanted my advice.
I felt proud and grown-up as I made my way down the road, concentrating my mind for what might be required of me.
Mrs Browning was bothered, she said, by a man who at night hid in the bushes by her gate.
She felt he  must have a grudge of some kind against her and she felt very frightened.
‘But surely you should go to the police.’
‘I have, and they are most kind, but that is all.’
I told my husband when he came home.
‘I'll go down and keep watch one night if she likes.’
‘But not by yourself.’
‘Well I should need a sort of chaperon in any case, I suppose.
I could ask the chap at the top of the road.’
These neighbours had lived there for a number of years; they knew Mrs Browning well, and what they told my husband made us feel rather small, and very inexperienced.
It seemed that the man hiding in the bushes by the gate existed only in the mind of Mrs Browning, although she was quite genuinely afraid.
She would phone the police and they would go out of their way to search her garden and reassure her of their vigilance, but it had been going on for years.
Although the subject was something not discussed, almost everyone in the road had at one time or another been confided in and had helped Mrs Browning as far as they could, although she seemed to feel she should not worry any particular neighbour too much so went from one to another, as it were in turn.
Looking back I think she could hardly have lived anywhere more suited to the containment of her difficulty.
Many years later, my husband by then having died and my children being away from home, Mrs Browning lived on.
She was well over ninety by that time.
Sometimes she would ask me to go blackberrying with her or, as she would say, to open a tin of tangerines with her.
The man in the bushes by the gate still worried her but I found it easy to isolate him from our friendship, although she felt now that he was trying to gas her; the fumes from someone's central heating outlet, discernible on the otherwise pure air, had inspired and confirmed her in this idea.
But when darkness fell, he was always in the bushes by the gate; and waking in the night I would sometimes hear a shrill cry, ‘Come out then!
Come out!
I'm not afraid of you,’ and would marvel at the strength of her voice.
On a night in early winter, one of those wild exciting nights with a brilliant moon sliding in and out of the racing clouds, Mrs Browning rang, and asked if I would go down.
When I arrived, she urged me inside and closed the door, and I could see that she was breathless with fear.
She asked me if I would speak to the police for her.
‘They are so good, but perhaps someone else…‘
Obediently I rang the police station.
‘I am speaking from the home of Mrs Browning,’ I said.
‘I am a neighbour, and she is being troubled again by…yes, yes, thank you very much.
I will tell her what you say.
‘He says he will look round your garden when he comes this way tonight.
He says don't be frightened, he's keeping an eye on things for you.’
Mrs Browning was still pale and shaky as we settled  ourselves by the fire (and what the moon saw, or what it might have seen if its beams could have penetrated the closely-drawn curtains supplemented by plastic sheeting to foil the poison gas, might have seemed a little unusual; but who can tell what strange sights are enclosed within the cheerful light of a curtained window?).
The fire by which we sat, Mrs Browning in front, I to one side, consisted mainly of a branch of beech which she had brought in from the woods: the thick end was in the fireplace, surrounded by burning twigs cosseted into flame by Mrs Browning, who puffed upon them with a pair of leather bellows when they faltered, and the other end, in shape and size rather like the antlers of a deer, reached out into the room.
(I was well aware that the man in the bushes was not Mrs Browning's only worry, and that she lived on interest from a small amount of capital fast diminishing in value.
‘Could you not perhaps raise a mortgage on your house?
Or use a little of your capital?’
I could not bring myself to suggest that she was not likely to live much longer, certainly not long enough to make either course imprudent.
As it was she was outraged.
‘A mortgage!
Break into capital!
Shame on you.
Is that the advice of a friend?’)
I was dressed in a heavy winter coat and still wore my gloves.
Mrs Browning had a felt hat tied on with a scarf knotted under the chin, a thick tweed suit, woollen gloves, and fleecy-lined suede boots.
Round her shoulders was a crocheted shawl, and over her knees the familiar little cover made from knitted woollen squares.
Behind, and on two sides, she was protected from cold and poison gas by the leaves of a high screen decorated with scraps by a hand long since dead.
Faded photographs, familiar as wallpaper, looked down upon us; and water-colours she had painted when a girl holidaying in Switzerland.
On countless little tables and shelves were books and ornaments, photographs in silver frames, and mementoes of that life spent in a hot country far away.
In the corner was Mrs Browning's bed.
Meticulously she enquired about my health, and we discussed the weather, and a small item of politics.
And then we talked of more interesting things, things by now as familiar to me as legend, in a sort of litany, each speaking in turn.
First, however, Mrs Browning rose, and gave the branch of wood a good push, making it spark into life; then built a little edifice of twigs, and applied the bellows.
Soon there was an exciting blaze.
‘A fire always reminds me of my brother Charlie.
We two were the youngest in the family and had lovely times together.
Fire fascinated him.
One day we were crouching by the gardener's bonfire (his pride was that the fire smouldered day and night and never went out).
It was a great mound of leaves and garden rubbish nearly as tall as we were — cabbage stalks, I can smell them now.’
(So could I.)
‘Charlie had managed to kindle a little fire of dry grass and was adding twigs one by one and I was squatting beside him.
It was a hot day, and I think I must have  been half asleep when I noticed something very strange.
Little flames were breaking through the brim of Charlie's straw hat.
I was so bemused that at first I could do nothing but stare.
Then, of course, I came to myself and tore the hat off.
Charlie was not at all worried: he was the happiest, sunniest child, and my parents’ favourite I think, although they would not have admitted to having favourites.
‘In those days the boys went into the church, the army, and so on down the family, and it fell to Charlie to go to the colonies.
‘One day a letter came from him asking permission to come home.
It was a terrible place, he said.
The men were dying like flies, of fever.
If he could not come home he knew he would die, too.
‘Our father and mother wrote back — kindly and understandingly I am sure — but advising him to stick it out like a man.
Within a fortnight he was dead.
‘We come of a very long-lived family on both sides, but soon after Charlie's death my father died, and then my mother, also.’
Mrs Browning was silent.
‘They blamed themselves,’ I said.
‘They died of a broken heart.
It doesn't bear thinking about.’
And we gazed into the little flickering fire, grieving once more for the parents brought face to face with reality.
Her father, like so many country parsons of his day, had interested himself, among other homely pursuits, in keeping chickens.
Once he put a broody hen on a clutch of eggs and ten little chicks hatched out.
The–e be put with their mother into the greenhouse, but visiting them the next day found that only five chicks still had legs.
He watched.
Soon the cat appeared, and enchanted anew by the sight beneath the door of little legs running hither and thither, began expertly to grope.
‘My father never could stand the sight of that cat afterwards,’ said Mrs Browning.
‘He gave it to a farmer.
The nursemaid and I took it to him.
I sat on our old pony with the cat in a basket, and the nursemaid held the leading rein.
It was quite a long way, and coming home she let the pony trot while she ran beside me.
She was a jolly sort of girl but I don't think our parents would have kept her if they had known the way she talked to us, and the things she told us.
‘About that time there was a notorious murderer at large.
If we were naughty or disobedient the nursemaid would threaten us with this man who, she said, hid at night in the high bushes by the gate, and would know what we had done and come and get us.
I tried so hard to be good but a lot was expected of children in those days, and I often had nightmares thinking the man would know about me and would come and get me.
He was never recaptured.’
Tonight it seemed to me that Mrs Browning had still not recovered from her fear, and I suggested that I should perhaps stay and see her into bed.
While I made sure the fire was safe she drank a sort of gruel which her home help had left for her in a Thermos.
‘I am so lucky,’ she said, ‘the water in these two hot-water bottles will still be warm enough by the morning for my bath.’
So I left her alone, locking the door behind me, and did not see her again (she developed bronchitis, was taken into the cottage hospital and died soon afterwards).
The clouds had thickened and the moon had gone when I left her house and made my way cautiously down the slippery brick path.
I reached the gate and looked back.
There was a faint glimmer of light from her window; it was from the night-light which she kept burning.
The house, in outline, looked quite snug, she might even be asleep by this time.
‘So boo to you,’ I said to the murderer as I went through the gate — and noticed for the first time that there were no bushes there, just a little hedge of lavender.
Forebodings 
NO one seems to take forebodings seriously, but they do happen, and they do come true, although how they work and from where they come it is hard to say.
My friend had a foreboding.
She was about nineteen years old at the time, as I was.
We had been childhood friends, not from deep affection, or even from admiration, but because we were the same sort of person and trusted one another.
We could say anything to each other— trying out ideas, talking over the happenings in our small world — and know that we were safe: there would be no teasing in public , no knowing glances, no betrayals.
Without having to say anything about it, we trusted one another.
We did not always agree.
For instance, the Count of Monte Cristo: my friend thought he must be egotistical, because he scratched on the wall of his dungeon, ‘Lord, keep my memory green!’
Why egotistical?
Surely he was only afraid his memories might fade, leaving him dispossessed.
But my friend thought that ‘Lord, keep my memory green!’ meant that he was afraid his name might be forgotten.
(Even now I am not sure which of us was right.)
Then, when I remarked it was strange that when a person was in trouble, one forgot at once any little  grudge one had against them, so that bearing grudges must be only skin-deep, my friend disagreed: she thought the change of heart was because one was willing to be magnanimous when at advantage, having the upper hand.
(There again, I still do not know which of us was right; a little of each, perhaps.)
But we knew that nothing we said to each other in private would be laughed at in public.
It was in this way that my friend confided in me when she dreamed, with great clarity, that she had been present at her own funeral gathering.
There had been a room full of people, and she knew she was dead and it was her own funeral.
That was all.
She herself was somewhere in the region of the ceiling, looking down.
We were both strong healthy girls at the time, and thought nothing of the dream; it was just a curiosity; but she did in fact die two years later — very suddenly, very unexpectedly, of an infection.
I do not feel that I myself am at all psychic and I rarely dream — at least to know clearly on awakening what I have dreamed; yet I have had in my life two dreams of foreboding.
One was strange, because it was about an old lady who meant nothing to me at all; I hardly knew her and only saw her on the rare occasions when I went into her family shop two or three hundred yards from us.
She had not been ill.
She was a wiry little person one would have expected to live on and on.
Nor had there been any talk of her — that she looked ill, or had been ill — nothing  at all.
But one night I had a vivid dream of her, that she had died.
About two days later she did die, without having been ill or, I understand, having shown any sign of failing.
I just dreamed out of the blue that she had died, and then she did die.
The other dream was much nearer the bone.
I dreamed that Elm Cottage, my father's old home (and his father's and grandmother's home before him), was in terrible distress.
Not the people in it, just the house.
In my dream I was overwhelmed by grief; it woke me, and I had quite a difficulty in getting the horror out of my system.
Yet, in any case, I thought, it was nonsense.
Nothing at all was happening there, nor was anything likely to happen.
It was many years later that my foreboding dream came true.
At that time the house belonged to my father's youngest sister.
Unmarried, she had lived at Elm Cottage all her life, looking after her parents until they died well into old age.
She had been letting the house to my father and mother, but they had now died also, and the whole property was to be sold: the house, yard, outbuildings, flower garden, kitchen garden, and a small meadow.
It had come to my grandfather through his great-uncle William Farmborough, on the understanding that he would be looked after in his old age.
To my brother and me had fallen the task of disentangling our parents' possessions from the original contents of the house.
After that, the solicitors would take over.
I happened to be the last person of my family there.
I went through the whole place from top to bottom, cleaning it, polishing the furniture, and making everything just so, as my parents would have left it.
Then I made one last journey through the house, the precincts, and the gardens, to see that all was as it should be, and to say goodbye.
I was not particularly sad that the house was to be sold.
It is no good hanging on to the past.
I had never lived there, although in my early childhood I had stayed for short periods (but then my mind was occupied in forming pictures; the time had not yet come for looking at those pictures, for interpreting them).
Yet I did, in some small way, feel that the house was part of me, and I liked its creaking bouncing floors and its spartan coldness (it was no place for lolling about); its medley of doors — some Norfolk latch, some brass door-knobbed; the ancient cloudy glass in its leaded windows; the odd corners, shelves and cupboards; its air of fragility, of dignity — for it was indeed very old; and above all, its village shop smell, of paraffin, strong kitchen soap, cough sweets and aniseed balls, prunes, string, and tobacco.
Nevertheless, for me the house had always seemed to stand a little aloof, and as well as a respectful reserve I felt still the restriction of a child in the company of old people: ‘Not too much noise, dear, because…
’, ‘Careful, careful, you might…
’, ‘Don't touch, dear, Grandpa…
’. I was never perfectly at ease.
It had never been my home.
So when I went creaking up the winding back staircase to the two attics and looked in through their respective doors (‘Don't touch, dear…
’, ‘Gently, gently, the floor…’), seeing that all was well I did not go right in or disturb the piles of old magazines, wormy furniture, books, and china lying there; after all, they belonged to the house.
Below the attics was a back bedroom looking out over the flower garden, and so on to the main road beyond.
I had once found two names scratched on one of the window-panes, ‘perhaps two soldiers billeted here for a time at the beginning of the 1914 War…’(or perhaps soldiers in hiding at the time of the Reformation?)
I had slept in the bedroom myself not so many years before, and in the first light of morning had got up to see what the village might have looked like before the traffic came and before the stone walls had been breached.
It was misty, and there was not a soul in sight, and I had the same eerie feeling which came over me sometimes in other parts of the village.
My second uncle must have slept in this room.
There was a large framed certificate on the wall, inscribed with his name; he had been awarded a scholarship to the Imperial College to learn wood-carving, being  artistically inclined.
My father was taken from his clerking job at Flatford Mill to go to London and look after his brother, a local merchant with interests in the City providing him with a post.
My grandfather, for his part, had found lodgings for the two boys through an advertisement in a church magazine.
That the advertisement had been in a church magazine was, for my grandfather, sufficient guarantee of respectability, but when the boys arrived in the great city even their inexperience could not hide from them the fact that the respectable lodging was nothing more nor less than a brothel.
In spite of the simplicity of their upbringing, however, they were resourceful, and found other rooms, though poor and the food not good.
They survived, and for entertainment would buy themselves hot potatoes from a stall for their pockets, and explore London, enjoying particularly the spectacle of the horse-drawn fire-engines thundering out of Cripplegate, often six at a time.
Across the landing which interrupted the downward curve of the stairs was a front bedroom where my youngest aunt slept until my grandmother took to her bed — and afterwards when left alone.
At night the room would be full of sounds: the bell of the church clock, so near, so harsh, suddenly striking the hour or half-hour; the chattering of the windows; and always the soughing of the pine trees in the churchyard.
There was a bookcase, one row all the work of  ‘Amy le Fevre’.
I could imagine my aunt as a young girl asking for the latest of the books for birthday or Christmas until she had them all.
It is often an effort to read certain books of that period now, and curiously I opened one here and there — and winced.
It was as if all the heroines were cast in circumstances where duty forbade them to marry.
Fortunately, it usually happened that the rejected lover did not go away, and when at last the heroine was free, there he was, waiting still.
It was not clear whether by this time children were possible for the couple; it was not apparent that the author knew much about that kind of thing.
Nor was there any instance, as far as I could see, of the faithful lover dying before his long wait was rewarded; or thought of how the heroine might have felt in such a case, with brothers and sisters flown the nest, father and mother dead, hero dead, the house empty, and the mind, so long attuned and subjected to the needs of other minds, no longer able to recognize and adapt to its own needs.
Of my aunt herself has been said, ‘She was always so patient; and so kind to the little ones; the kindest, sweetest person I ever knew.’
I do remember a little girl called Lucy, a classmate of mine then.
We were both about seven years old, and she had not yet developed the ability to pronounce the sounds ‘ck’ and ‘th’.
There was a lesson at school I should have loved if it had not been for poor Lucy.
It was  called ‘In the picture I depict’.
A large map, or picture, was unrolled and hung over the blackboard.
It was dark with age and looked as if it had been coated with treacle.
It showed an imaginary country liberally endowed with features: rivers, mountains, bays, promontories…
The teacher's ruler would point first to a pupil and then to a particular feature on the map.
The pupil would then rise, and say, ‘In the picture I depict…a mountain.’
How I longed for the ruler to point to me!
How I longed to be able to reveal to the world that in the picture I depicted…a lighthouse.
It was such a jolly little lighthouse, white, and standing at the very end of a promontory.
Wriggling in our seats we gazed dumbly at the teacher, as dogs will whose owner is eating a slice of cake (Miss!
Miss!), all except Lucy, and it was so often Lucy that the ruler sought — pointing then to the map.
An isthmus.
Obediently the little girl would rise to her feet, blushing, tears already beginning to gather in her eyes.
‘In the pitcher I depit…’ she faltered.
‘Speak up, girl!’
‘In the pitcher I depit…an…
’ There was a long painful silence, interrupted at last by the teacher's impatient voice.
‘Cry!
Now cry!
That's the next thing to do.’
And Lucy lifted her pinafore to her face and collapsed into a heaving, sobbing little bundle.
Not so when she went into the shop, carrying the family chicken-feed tin, to whisper, ‘Pet-a-torn, please.’
My kind aunty knew at once what she meant, but first she would invite Lucy to choose a sweet from the box on the counter.
Then, hand in hand they would cross the yard to the shed where there were two great bins, one of mixed corn and one of maize.
Here Lucy was lifted up, and allowed to measure her own corn, using a round wooden pottle measure filled to the brim each time and carefully smoothed off.
Then back to the shop, with Lucy now taking the money from her pinafore pocket where it had been tied in her handkerchief, and paying for the corn; to go on her way feeling quite a little woman of the world.
But there was the Wild Wood.
It must have felt solitary sometimes at night alone in that old house now in decline, undermanned, vulnerable.
It must have felt lonely when a respected customer (whose name was not exposed even to me) dropped from under her coat the bag of flour she had been concealing there.
A bag of flour!
It must have made one feel somehow disregarded, almost apart when, thinking to have a small lending library, one sees all the books gradually disappear.
It was so pitifully easy for the customers: the temptation so hard to resist, to pick up a bar or two of chocolate from the counter, a packet of tea from the shelf, even a bag of flour, as my aunt came from behind the counter, passed through to the kitchen, down  the steps into the old still-room to draw vinegar from the cask, or paraffin from the tank (its pump rattling up-down, up-down), or across the yard for corn or toppings, or up the back stairs for some item kept on the little landing; so that the shop began to make small profit or none at all.
Perhaps it was only natural, only to be expected; but with no one left to share these thoughts, the familiar presence gone, one might in the small hours come to wonder whether, being no longer needed, life was really worth living any more.
Through the door, to the big bedroom.
On one side was the flower-garden view; on the other, one window had been bricked up at the time when windows were taxed, and I walked over to the remaining window.
As I opened it, and looked out, I realized that it was the first time I had consciously looked out:before, I had always been hurrying by.
Now I realized how over the centuries this window must have provided an incomparable panorama of the goings-on in the village.
Even in these latter years, ‘Only three old women at church yesterday,’ my father would greet me hopefully, as cars streamed past in all directions.
‘How can you be sure?
It is not the only gate.’
His eyes would return to his book; so virtuous, so innocent.
‘Well, we won't argue,’ he would say piously.
The house stood at the junction of five roads, and  with its precincts formed one side of a triangle, the second side being the pond, and the third the wide steep steps up to the churchyard.
In the centre of this triangle, beneath the spreading branches of the Stocks Tree — now just a huge hollow stump with a green fringe of leaves sprouting like hair from its crown — had been the stocks.
From medieval times there must have been some kind of dwelling on the slight rise in the ground upon which the house stood.
Long, long before that, long before even the church — and the stone wall half-encircling the primitive source of water — had been built, cattle would have been brought to drink.
I saw the pond as it must have looked then, the converging tracks, and the grassy ascent to the foundations of the church.
I tried to see the people, but no picture would come, although among the shadowy figures might well have been a Peter de Fernborough, later Farmborough, who about that time made his appearance somewhere in the village.
At least, I thought, their eyes would have looked on that same pond, the pond which now my own eyes saw.
The wind stirred the leaves of the willows, and ruffled the water.
(The tide was coming in, as my mother would have said.)
Then there was the Wild Wood.
My father worried, as old people will.
When he and my mother came to live at the house he bought five Aylesbury ducks to swim on the pond and clear it of weed.
For a whiff the  strong white birds floated proudly there, diving, clearing the weed, and waddling over to the house when my father summoned them, for food and to be shut up for the night.
Then, one by one, they were stoned to death.
The house was in decline, under-manned, vulnerable.
When darkness fell and cavortings could be heard round the edge of the pond within the wall, and on top of and within the hollow shell of the Stocks Tree, my father worried, as old people will.
‘Did they know of the deep place in the pond?
Could they swim?’
And he reserved a ladder and a coil of rope, always to be ready.
Then might not the rotting stump of the tree split under their weight and they come to grief?
So in winter he kept a large torch to hand, in case.
With advancing years, and after the birth of his eighth child, my grandfather left the marriage bed and moved into a bedroom across the landing of the main staircase.
Here he had slept as a young boy and until his marriage.
When he had been given to Uncle Farmborough to be his heir and to look after him in his old age, he was considered fortunate — but how could a child reconcile itself to such a strange state of affairs that he had been given away, to the fact that his own father and mother, brother and sister, lived quite near in the village but, as it were, in a different camp?
He seems to have grown up rather a solitary boy, and afterwards not by nature a businessman — unlike his brother, who quickly outstripped him in enterprise, property, and prosperity.
By the time I was born he seems to have become set in his ways.
He was not a tall man and was soon almost dwarfed by his five lively, wryly humorous sons, who avoided him as far as possible and could not leave home soon enough.
Thus was he deprived of the free manpower which had been his and without which began a slow decline in the market gardening business, the hay and straw, and then even the bakery.
Meal times were silent: everyone at the table in time for grace to be said; everyone eating what was set before him.
(And yet I remember one morning — when confronted by a preliminary plate of very sour, very cold slices of orange I could not stop a few tears trickling miserably down my cheeks — a gruff voice coming from the other end of the table.
‘She can leave it if she likes.’
I do not forget.
Only now, in my old age, I wish I had got down from the table and put my arms round his neck and kissed him.
He would have been terribly embarrassed but it might have made him feel ‘one of us’ for a change.)
Not many years after this my grandmother took to her bed, retiring to the room below that in which her husband slept.
Over the fireplace was a print of the picture, ‘When did you last see your father?’, a present from the  son who had made the beautifully and lavishly carved frame.
I have heard her called a professional invalid, but I think by the time she retired to bed she must have been genuinely worn out, and duty done, how seductive must have been the temptation to escape into that room at the end of the house, with its garden door, and warm fire; to write poetry, like Elizabeth Barrett Browning, and to be waited on by her daughter (‘Coming, Mother!’) who would, and did, cope with the house and the shop and even my grandfather.
It was not only that my grandmother had given birth to and brought up eight children, and with the help of a Mrs Pipkin (whose wages were ten shillings a week and an egg) run a large house for many years; there was the shop, and shops in those days were by no means labour-saving.
For instance, sugar came in huge blocks, so that before weighing it out, sufficient must be chipped off with a knife; and black treacle must be ladled out spoonful by spoonful into the customer's jar.
(In summer there were many wasps, encouraged by the plums and pears outside.)
On a nest of cotton wool, in a little box, my grandmother kept the two wedding rings which had worn thin, then broken, during her married life, because of her handling of corn.
There were babies and there were children to be looked after, also Uncle Farmborough, who must in the end have become old in himself, since there was talk of my grandmother having to change his trousers.
On sunny days, when she had washed and dressed him, his  chair would be taken out and placed under the Stocks Tree where he could watch the people come and go.
I never remember her dressed other than what in those days would have been considered ‘ladylike’, with a touch of white at the high neck, and her hair drawn back, which suited her hairline and the shape of her head.
She had pretty hair and must have been nice-looking when she was young.
She was meticulous, and kept high standards (‘Surely not millions , dear’), which in itself, I think, must be a wear on a person.
There was a game she played with me when I was a very little girl which roused in me a discomfort I identify now as irritation.
She would tie a knot in two of the four corners of a handkerchief and fix one knot on each of her forefingers, to form puppets.
One puppet was a priest, and the other a penitent:
‘Father Confessor,’(bowing)‘I've come to confess my sins.’
‘Yes, my child, yes.’
(nodding)
‘Last night I filled a dish with cream…‘
‘Yes, my child, yes.’
‘But in the night, puss stole my cream…‘
‘Yes, my child, yes —‘
‘And I said, ‘BLOW the cat!’’
She taught me little songs, always with a moral:
Old John had an apple tree, spreading and green,
Which bore the best apples that ever were seen;
So rosy, and mellow, and red.
And as the years passed, Old John he grew poor,
And sold them to children who passed by his door
To buy him a morsel of bread.
Little boy, little boy, take your hand from that tree !
Remember there's someone who always can see
As well in the dark as the light.
She died of bronchitis at the age of seventy-seven.
‘I blame myself,’ my aunt had said.
‘I had gone Outside to empty the bedpan…
’(‘Outside’ was quite a sumptuous place in its little way; a good walk from the house, along a winding path between yew and box trees and down some artistically rounded white steps, to a trellised porch with chequered black and red tiled floor, where an escort might wait on a dark night.
The inside was lime-washed white, with colour supplement pictures from magazines on the walls; and there were two well-scrubbed seats, one large for grown-ups and one small for children.)
‘When I got back I found I had left the garden door a little ajar; she must have taken a chill.
I blame myself !’
Directly beneath my grandmother's room was the cellar, approached through a white-painted door in the sitting-room.
On the wall of that room was a patch where the barometer had hung — so familiar a face that I had hardly realized it was there.
When the meter man came for the last time he spoke of my aunt, and of the many years he had been to the house, so that he felt himself to be almost  an old friend.
He said how he had noticed the barometer as he passed through the sitting-room on his way to the kitchen where the meters were.
It had always been his ambition to own a barometer; could he buy this one?
I said there was to be a sale, but I would ask the solicitor; and afterwards, when he came to take the barometer away, he took it down from the wall very, very gently.
He said this kind needed gentle handling; he seemed to know a lot about barometers, and to be delighted with his purchase.
He said he had a friend who had a great interest in grandfather clocks.
It was his hobby.
He himself had always noticed the one in the corner as he passed through, and his friend…
Was there a whiff of the Wild Wood!
Soon after my mother had died, I had noticed a gap in the familiar contours of the furniture in the room leading out of the sitting-room — it was where the shop had once been, entered then via the yard gate and a large open porch.
The table!
The round mahogany table, friend of my childhood, under whose shelter I had lain and read; whose clawed brass feet I had cleaned every Saturday morning when young, and then later, admiring them all the time — never having seen any other claws as fine or as lifelike as these.
My father (my poor father!) was trying to look unconcerned.
‘There's a chap — he's been coming round for  years going on and on at me about buying the table.
I let him have it to get rid of him.
He had a good look at it and said part of the pedestal had been mended at some time which took away a lot of the value.
He gave me twenty pounds.’
I said no more about the table, not a word.
My poor father!
Even when, halfway through the morning he broke out with, ‘Well, there's no need for you to keep on and on about the table,’ I did not point out that I had said nothing, that it was he who was ‘going on and on about it’inside himself.
Then the kitchen; and the small scullery, bathroom, and lavatory, which had taken the place of the older, larger scullery.
Everything was in order.
Then the pantry — the old still-room — and up into the yard, with its pigsties, stables, cart sheds, barn, bakehouse, and wash-house, soon to be bulldozed…
And again, ‘Don't touch, dear…
’. So that I disturbed nothing, but went out through a door into the walled kitchen garden — the garden with its crumbly black soil enriched by centuries of pigs, pails, and poultry, where soon houses would stand.
Along almost the whole of one wall was trained a cultivated blackberry bush.
(Many years before, an uncle of mine had run along the top of that wall carrying a doormat which he had placed carefully on top of the chimney of the little building adjacent called the  Reading Room.
Within the room a meeting of the Coal Club was in progress, while in the shadows, others of my uncles crouched, waiting to see what would happen.)
Of late my father had lent the greater part of this ground to a retired gardener and his wife, who had little garden of their own.
At first my mother had found it difficult to remember their name, which was rather an unusual one: ‘Praise-my-soul-the-King-of-Heaven-to-His-feet-thy-TRIBUTE…
Mr Tribute …
’. They were what my father called ‘house-proud gardeners’— that is, they kept the garden tended immaculately.
There was a seat against a sunny back wall, and I would come upon the couple sitting there looking out over the garden and their handiwork, planning in quiet voices what should be done next, the next moves.
He was bent with arthritis but was the master spirit, the source of garden wisdom.
She did the bending and the kneeling, and they worked together hand in glove.
I can see them there as in a picture when, for the last time, arthritis having finally prevailed, they sat quietly together in the sun contemplating a magnificent crop of potatoes spread out to dry — the final gift of that bounteous old garden.
I came out of the front door and fitted the key into the familiar lock.
It seemed rather an historic moment, but I put the thought aside; one must not get sentimental, and everything had been done properly, had been left in order and as it should be.
So I walked away, breaking my journey home to leave the key with the solicitors.
A few days later, the house was ruthlessly, mercilessly, vandalized.
I heard of it indirectly, and from different sources: ‘even the telephone torn from its moorings!’, ‘chamber-pots smashed, windows smashed, doors kicked in!’, ‘things thrown about, things broken, things taken away — there was hardly a house in the village that did not get something!’
To some extent there was a rational explanation.
A short time before, estate agents' men had put up a board to say that five houses were to be built — but they had erected it in the flower garden of the house instead of in the field as they had been instructed.
I had, in fact, noticed this and had reported it, asking that the board should be moved at once in case the impression was given that the house was about to be demolished.
There was a rational explanation; but there seems no explanation as to why, thirty years before, the violation of the house should have disturbed my sleep.
‘Milkmaid's Rest ’
THERE was a small piece of spare ground on the other side of the hedge at the end of our garden, and on it, newly arrived, a caravan.
It was an old-fashioned caravan with a single room, not one of the modern kind which are really almost like little houses.
Outside, driven into the ground, was a painted name-board which read, ‘Milkmaid's Rest’.
The word ‘milkmaid’ brings to my mind a picture implanted there perhaps by a song we used to sing at school:
And as I walked farther,
I chancèd to see;
A cow and a pretty maid
Under a tree.
It was not like that at ‘Milkmaid's Rest’.
Instead of a cow, there was a goat, tethered by a long chain; and the milkmaid herself had, I believe, been a lecturer at one of the German universities until war came.
She was elderly, short, and rather stout, with iron-grey hair closely cropped.
Her eyes were crookedly set, which gave her a humorous, quizzical expression quite in keeping with her manner and disposition.
They were blue eyes, which one would guess might have been quite piercingly blue when she was younger.
I could well imagine her lecturing: she would be wearing a mortar-board and gown perhaps, her head on one side as she usually held it when talking; and her eyes would be twinkling, as she held forth in that clear, incisive, ‘educated’ voice of hers.
While pottering about her domain she wore old-fashioned riding breeches ending just below the knee, followed by surprisingly pink, surprisingly chubby, bare legs.
(As I write, I hesitate — I would not like to be disrespectful — but continue, because the picture would not otherwise be true, and I think that she, above all people, would agree that a description should be true.)
Next came a pair of thick socks wrinkling about the ankles, and then what seemed to be a pair of men's shoes.
She had a variety of cardigans and other woollies.
When she went shopping to the town she wore a long, voluminous, dark-grey cloak of which she was very proud.
It had been made in Austria, I believe, of wool so densely woven as to be impervious to rain.
She was an intellectual and an eccentric, and anyone less like the poetic image of a milkmaid it would be hard to find.
After a time the goat disappeared, and its place was taken by some hens, and these hens I looked after when, as quite often happened, their mistress went away for a few days.
In return, she offered to look after my own birds when I went away for one weekend (it was after the war but rationing was still in force, and most people who could, kept chickens).
I held back a little before leaving them in her care, because as well as the hens there were eleven chicks; she was a person full of goodwill and  theories, but not practical.
When I returned, six of my eleven chicks had died, but I said nothing.
I still had five, and I had rather expected something of the kind might happen.
When I took my children to bed at night they would pause to look through a little knee-high window which lit the stairs.
In winter, some way down into the darkness outside, there shone a square of light, and outlined within this square was a head.
It was our neighbour, playing patience.
That was a particularly cold winter.
I went down to the caravan one day to take some apples, and was startled to see a continuous ripple of ice on the inside of the caravan wall just by my friend's plump, inviting-looking pillow.
She disregarded such things altogether, rather relished them, in fact; and she must have been very strong, because I never knew her to show any weakness, nor to be other than her usual cheerful, robust-spirited self.
Eventually she moved down the hill to live in more conventional quarters, and I would meet her sometimes, she dressed, as usual, in her cloak.
She subscribed to a sort of education-orientated noblesse oblige which prevailed at the time, and would organize plays, and patronize enthusiastically any local concert party or visiting production, especially of Shakespeare; and she invited me to her poetry readings, where members of the circle read poems on a prepared subject, in turn.
I refrained, saying that I could never in any circumstances read poetry aloud in public.
Bach time we  met she invited me, and each time I declined.
In the end she suggested that I should just come and listen, and for politeness' sake I agreed.
There was one member whose sight was so bad that when she read she not only had to prop a second pair of spectacles on top of the pair already resting on her nose, but also had to stand under the standard lamp almost pressed against the light bulb.
As I watched her reading, with such difficulty but with so much pleasure, a poem she evidently loved, something inside me said, ‘Be ashamed !’
I was ashamed; and thenceforward I took my turn with the rest — to my benefit.
There was an impression that my milkmaid friend was what is called well-connected, and I am glad to say that as she grew old she was, as it were, gathered in, to be near her relatives.
In this way she lived to be a hundred years old, more or less.
Towards the end of that time she sent me a letter (not entirely personal, being printed, in facsimile handwriting):
Both my mind and my eyesight are becoming very worn and I can no longer write and answer letters as I should wish.
But I want all my friends to know that there is not any weakening of affection.
As the physical brain gets worn out it loses the power to record and express the action of the spirit.
But the spirit is immortal and will recover its powers when it is freed from the physical brain.
So please keep our friendship as strong as ever, though I am losing the power to give it outward expression.