

It had been quite a good summer in some ways.
Nothing to do with the weather.
That had been even less good than usual.
Last year the London evening newspapers had been able several times to trot out their favourite banner headline.
‘Britain swelters in the eighties!’
Nevertheless, these same newspapers in the late summer of 1938 could blazon the news: ‘England by an innings and 578 runs!’
Not only was it a Test Match victory more substantial than any before, but Hutton's 364 scored in thirteen hours and twenty minutes was the most remarkable exhibition of concentration and endurance ever seen on a cricket field.
A nation of cricket lovers could bury their heads in the dust of the Oval and forget all about Continental goings-on.
It could disregard in particular the onward march of Germany with Hitler at its head, and the sinister machinations of Stalinist Russia.
The Spanish Civil War was of less consequence now it was in its dying spasms.
There were people in Britain who didn't share in the national tendency to apathy.
Some of these saw Communism as a pretty serious threat to a way of life that included cricket, and for these people Hitler was more than a passing attraction.
They saw him as a bulwark against a ‘red menace’.
He had successfully stamped it out in his own country, and if he'd been rather too hard on the jews at the same time, well why not?
Of course Oswald Mosley, our own exponent of Fascism, went a bit far in that direction, but he was worth some support if he stuck to the Mile End Road and didn't provoke clashes in such cherished halls of entertainment as Olympia and the Albert Hall.
Numbers of influential visitors to Germany, mostly connected with commerce, the aristocracy, or both, came back with more than a little sympathy for what Hitler was achieving.
They clashed at parties and at country house weekends with fellow guests who might be termed patriots.
These were, surprisingly, by no means the majority of Britons.
They were led in Parliament by a handful of quite senior Ministers ready to resign rather than go on serving in an administration they accused of appeasement to Hitler and downright obstinacy towards rearmament for defence.
Their veteran spokesman thundered occasionally from the back benches, but he'd been banished to the backwoods by popular opinion.
For Clarissa Grey, the summer had been memorable because she had been consistently happy.
She was a devout appeaser, totally apathetic about world politics, but quite positive about Charles Willoughby; so much so that she'd allowed him to move into her flat in the enormous new block facing south across the river to the huge but fairly new Battersea Power Station.
The existence of Dolphin Square, easily the largest erection of its kind in Europe, owed itself to the general run-down of the British Army since the end of the war.
It rose from the demolished vastness of the old Army Clothing Depot.
Round the great quadrangle the blocks towered nine floors high, each named after a famous British admiral to show which was the Senior Service after all.
Clarissa's flat was on the eighth floor and its acquisition had been another good thing that summer.
£150 a year might seem expensive for an actress at the beginning of her career, but look what you got for it, and with Charles sharing the rent as well as the bed, what could be more acceptable in a period of economic pressure when whisky cost the exorbitant price of 12s. 6d. a bottle?
Not that Clarissa ever touched the stuff.
Charles was a patriot.
He was also asleep when a gramophone blared from the open window of a flat in the block across the way.
It woke Clarissa who sat up in bed with a start.
‘What's that?
Charles!’
Charles took longer to shake off the shrouds.
He stirred  grudgingly.
‘Um?
Bloody row.
What's the time?’
‘Seven o'clock.’
‘Only seven?
Blast them!’
He turned sharply on to his back.
‘Listen.
D'you know what it is, that tune?
Hitler's theme song.’
He leapt out of bed and to the window.
I'll soon put a stop to that.’
He flung it open and shouted in the direction of the offending instrument.
‘Stop that!
What the Hell are you up to over there?’
There was no reply and Clarissa said they couldn't hear him, so why didn't he leave it?’
‘Leave it?
Clarissa darling, it's the Hörst Wessel Song.
Mosleyites.
They must be.
Doing it deliberately.
Nazi propaganda.’
He bellowed again.
‘Turn that foul noise off, you over there.’
Mild advice to stop shouting and come back to bed because he wasn't being very effective did little to deter Charles from a sense of deep injustice.
‘Can't see the blighter.
The damn window's wide open across there and I can only see the gramophone.
A portable, plumb on the sill.’
Clarissa pointed out that nobody else seemed to be making a fuss.
The sensible thing would be to take no notice, shut the window and come back to bed.
Charles broke off from harsh censure of the people in the other flat.
‘Hang on.
A face at the window.’
His voice became cold and authoritative.
‘Do you mind turning that damn thing off?
Far too early for that ghastly racket.
What?
Speak up.
I can't hear you.’
The voice from over the way was equally cold.
It was arrogant and vindictive too, and quite clear enough to be heard above its musical accompaniment.
‘I have no intention of doing any such thing,’ it said.
This isn't Germany.
He was much less restrained.
‘We don't want any of that uncivilised Nazi stuff here.
So switch it off!’
‘You listen to me, my lad.
It will do you good.
And stop shouting.
You're spoiling my morning music.’
Bluster about morning hate and advice to go back to Adolph got a maddeningly cool reply.
The need did not arise  because the man referred to would be here himself before long.
Clarissa enquired from her bed if the gentleman had a black shirt on, and Charles was in the middle of telling her that it wasn't a man at all, but a woman, well a girl, and quite a pretty one too if treasonable, when the record, a 78 of course , ended.
‘That's better.
Much.’
Charles adopted a cutting tone which he considered he used to great effect in the final stages of an argument.
‘You're probably aware that the Prime Minister has gone to Munich to sort Hitler out.
I give you fair warning there'll be no more of that kind of rubbish when he gets back.’
The girl across the way wearily implored Charles to try and get his facts right.
Chamberlain, she told him, was a nonentity.
Adolph Hitler would make rings round him.
Not only did she find Charles's brand of ignorance excessively boring, but she would like to warn him…that from now on, he would be hearing the Hörst Wessel Song every morning…that both blocks of flats would too…every morning…7 a.m.
She slammed her window shut.
The promise was kept and there were sharp exchanges on several mornings across the courtyard separating the two blocks of flats.
On one such morning when the record of the Hörst Wessel Song woke Clarissa and Charles yet again, a hint of resignation was even noticeable in Charles's reaction.
‘There she goes again.
Every bloody morning since the Munich Peace Treaty.’
He flung the bedclothes back but not nearly so purposefully as heretofore, and he stayed on his back beside Clarissa who begged him not to go shouting just for once, because that was what the gramophone girl wanted, didn't he see?
Yes, he did see, but all the same it had to be stopped…somehow.
‘Why do all the other flats take it so placidly for Heaven's sake?’
‘Because they're not so easily roused or so — volatile as you are, darling.’
‘I don't like your tone.
You think I'm stupid to let her rattle me.’
Clarissa was as reasonable as ever, gently pointing out that it was a little game their neighbour was playing, which she'd get sick of if no-one responded.
Charles wasn't  impressed.
‘I think I'll go round getting up a petition from the residents.’
‘I shouldn't.’
‘…
Or to go to the police and report her as a Fifth Columnist.’
‘They'd laugh at you.’
‘Clarissa, I've got to have it out with the bitch.
It's obsessing me.’
Clarissa observed dryly that she could see it was and that he'd better go round ringing all the doorbells.
He'd be popular boy of the Remove, she prophesied.
But when Charles expressed that as his intention this very day, she softened at once, reminding him that today was his birthday and it would be a pity to spoil it.
A suggestion that he should take her out to lunch, instead, didn't, surprisingly, fall flat.
‘Let's go somewhere really exciting, Charles.
Celebrate and forget, why not?’
‘You're very good for me.’
A sober assessment that led only seconds later to a more characteristic upsurge of impulse.
‘Why don't we get married?
Today.
I'll buy a Special Licence.’
‘That's more than just impetuosity, that's sheer rashness.
It'll get you into trouble one day.
But not today.
Today I'm turning you down…except for lunch.
Where shall we go?’
Charles affected to be insulted and replied in kind.
‘Couldn't have afforded a Special Licence anyway.
Up the creek without a paddle.’
‘That's not quite the sort of husband I'm looking for, so just as well.’
‘Besides, I'm going along to see my agent this morning.
He thinks there's a part for me in the new play at the Queen's.’
It was arranged that Charles would book a table at the Ecu de France in Jermyn Street and that they'd meet there after the visit to the agent.
Clarissa kindly offered him first bath — if he promised not to go looking for pretty Mosleyites, but Charles smiled and shook his head.
‘No such thing.
Toss you for it.’
Charity answered her door bell.
‘Yes?’
‘Ah.
Got you.’
‘What can you possibly mean?’
‘The Hörst Wessel Song.’
‘You must be the excitable young man who shouts.
I didn't recognise you.
The face is unmemorable.’
Charles was terse.
‘Thank you.
I'm not here to receive compliments.’
‘For what then?
I'm in rather a hurry.’
‘The morning concert.
Time it stopped.
We find it offensive.’
‘It's meant to be.
Who are we?’
‘The residents.’
‘Where are the others?
I long to meet them.’
‘Some form of Nazi propaganda?’
‘What is?’
‘What you purvey each morning.’
‘Is that how you see it?’
‘Yes, I do.’
‘Good.’
‘You're proud of such unpatriotic gestures?’
‘It's a gesture.
Not necessarily unpatriotic.
We see patriotism and the well-being of our country in different terms.’
‘Are you talking about Britain?’
His question was meant to be extremely scathing.
It had no effect on Charity.
‘I'm talking about what's good for British politics.’
‘A Blackshirt.
A follower of Mosley.’
That had less effect  still.
He was also beginning to relapse into invective and his voice was rising.
Charity's was utterly relaxed and quite level as she posed her next question.
‘Are you in favour, in a democracy, of banning political parties of which you disapprove?’
‘I haven't come to argue about politics, but about a nuisance…’ just the slightest hesitation and a hint of a stammer.
‘A disgraceful racket and a…a distasteful one too.’
‘An arbiter of taste, no less.’
Charity sensed an easy victory and prepared to close her front door.
‘You're determined to be unpleasant.’
‘Of course.
Aren't you?
I've borne your unwelcome intrusion for long enough.
Good morning.
She closed the door on Charles without having actually to bang it.
At the Ecu de France, Charles behaved a little recklessly and ordered a second bottle of wine, which surprised Clarissa.
Her protest that it wasn't really necessary or economical was dismissed expansively.
‘Who ever heard of just one bottle of Champagne?’
‘But there are only two of us and I don't want any more.
Anyone would think you got that job at the Queen's Theatre.’
‘Well I didn't, but that's not the point.’
‘Something's worrying you.
It must be money.
So why run up an even more expensive bill?’
‘Money, no.
Not money.
Politics.
Ever since Munich we've had a cascade of appeasement.
Chamberlain's bit of paper was a washout.
It cuts no ice with me.’
‘Goodness, what a flood of mixed metaphors!’
Clarissa didn't want to make too much fun of him because she knew he was serious, so she picked up her glass, filled by the waiter from the fresh bottle.
Charles emptied his before continuing to castigate Neville Chamberlain.
‘Peace in our time!
Simply means submission to the whims of a madman.
You see, every time he lets Hitler dictate to him, his ignominious peace takes a step nearer a war.’
‘Here we go again.
All war is disaster.
Peace is a blessing.
Deny that.’
Charles juggled the bottle out of the ice bucket and filled  both glasses.
The waiter rescued the bottle which was dripping water generously about the table cloth and it was a moment or two before the mopping up was done and Charles could get on with the argument.
He treated Clarissa's interjection with particular scorn because he knew she thoroughly approved of the Prime Minister's contribution to peace.
‘Learnt all that at Granny's knee, didn't you?
With all the other simple facts of life — all the other worn-out clichés?’
‘Deny them.
Make a case.’
‘Potty.
A disastrous war in which one's country is so unprepared it's a push-over for the other side.
That mustn't happen.’
‘I wish you'd remember what I keep urging you about the Hörst Wessel Song.
‘Take no notice and it'll go away, you mean.
Well, it won't.
I know that now.’
When asked how he knew, he evaded an answer, together with any reference to his call on Charity Rainham earlier.
Instead, he concentrated on a bit of good news that had come out of the Munich mess.
There had been Ministerial resignations and they'd forced Chamberlain's hand.
He was allowing the Defence Forces to expand at last.
Men were even being urged to join the colours.
Clarissa was horrified lest Charles thought of identifying himself with such a call.
‘I just think I ought to look for a useful job.
I mean really useful, not just waiting about for the next piffling stage part.’
‘Oh Charles, be honest with yourself.
What else could you do?’
‘That's what I ‘m trying to be.
Honest.
This country's in a mess.
Acting isn't going to help it — footling waste of effort.
There's a good deal I could do.’
‘Wishful thinking, my darling.
You're good at acting.
Stick to it.’
‘No.
Men are going to be needed in the Services, mark my words.’
‘Yes, but they don't mean you, darling.’
‘Why ever not?
I'm an Englishman — an out-of-work one too.
It seems I'm exactly what they mean.’
Clarissa, refusing to take such foolishness seriously, accused him lightly of having too much champagne.
Then she caught sight of the maitre d'Hôtel approaching their table.
‘Oh dear, and here comes Monsieur Armand with what looks like a bottle of Cognac.
You didn't order any, did you?’
‘As a matter of fact, no.
Perhaps it's on the house.’
‘I think he thinks we're having a row.’
‘One way of getting a buckshee brandy.’
‘Monsieur, mademoiselle, with the compliments of the restaurant.
I think you celebrate today, yes?’
He poured generously and stood over them, beaming.
‘It's his birthday, Monsieur Armand, but I'm afraid we were spoiling it by having a political discussion.’
‘Monsieur Armand, you're a marvel.’
Charles did all the right things with the glass of Cognac before taking a good swig.
‘Excellent.
You've made up my mind for me.’
‘I am so very pleased, sir.
A decision between you and mademoiselle, perhaps.’
‘Call me a taxi, would you?’
‘No, Charles!’
In her horror, Clarissa forgot all about the head waiter and the brandy.
‘Charles, you'd be mad to do it.
It's peace in our time, as Chamberlain said…‘
‘Peace, hell.
It's war.’
The head waiter went off to order a taxi, looking puzzled.
Charles drained his brandy.
‘That's Groucho's line.
Did you ever see Duck Soup ?
There's a Marx Brothers’ season at The Everyman.
I'll take you.’
‘If you're going to be silly, you won't be able to.
Charles don't.
Don't go rushing off to do something you'll regret.’
Charles pointed to her untouched glass, but didn't speak.
‘It's the brandy and all that wine.
Charles, let's go to a movie, the British Museum, anywhere.
We must take your mind off this ridiculous idea.’
‘Anywhere?
What about back to the flat?
That would be nice — take my mind off beautifully.’
He pushed his chair back and stood up.
‘No, no.
I'm ratting.
King and Country.
Where's this taxi?
I'll drop you.
I'm going to Chelsea anyway.’
Clarissa sat tense and beaten.
‘You'll go alone then.
Charles, you're mad, and rather drunk, I suspect.’
‘I'm not so think as you drunk I am.
J. C. Squire, cricketer and poet.’
‘Oh dear.
Telephone me this evening — at the theatre.
I have a wait in the Second Act.’
‘9.45 to 10.15.
It's written on my heart.’
The head waiter was back.
‘Taxi at the door, sir.’
‘Good.
That's for me.
Order another for Miss Grey.’
‘You don't leave together?’
He followed them sadly to the door.
‘No fear.
Goodbye, darling.
Wish me luck.
See you again soon, Monsieur Armand…
I hope.’
At the curb, the cab waited with open door.
‘Chelsea Barracks!’
Charles got in and slammed the door.
He had time for a quick wave.
The cab moved quickly away along Jermyn Street leaving two forlorn figures on the pavement.
‘I am so sorry, mademoiselle.’
‘The Brigade of Guards.
He would.’
A small, rather bitter voice.
‘Pardon, mademoiselle?’
‘Mr Willoughby's gone to join the Army.’
Clarissa had to summon up a lot of courage, but she rang Charity's door bell.
Even the sound of it was tentative.
‘Yes?’
‘Good afternoon.
I hope you don't mind me disturbing you.
I have a favour to ask.’
She wished very much she hadn't come to ask it.
This tall girl, so beautifully yet so casually dressed, immediately made her feel insignificant, irrelevant even.
‘I don't think we've ever met.’
Charles always said she had such a cold, disdainful way of speaking, but she seemed pleasant enough, Clarissa thought.
‘No, we haven't.
I'm Clarissa Grey.’
‘An actress, aren't you?
I've seen your play.
Very good.’
Not exactly patronising, but not a bit interested.
Why should she be?
‘Do come in.
You obviously know who I am or you wouldn't be here.’
‘I'm afraid I don't.’
Now who's being rude, thought Clarissa.
Ought I to know who she is?
‘How very odd.
Charity Rainham.’
‘Of course.’
That's not enough.
After all, this girl's constantly on the front pages.
‘I've read about you.’
‘But that's not why you're here?’
‘Not exactly.’
You've really got to do better than this, Clarissa, she told herself.
You must be a very poor actress.
If you're going to make any sort of impression on this superior person, you'll have to make an impact soon instead of demonstrating little else but shyness.
Charity led the way into a sitting-room full of antique  furniture the effect of which was spoiled by Nazi posters and emblems of the Hitler cult covering the walls.
‘The Press are never very kind about me.
It doesn't worry me.
I know they simply write what their proprietors tell them.
And the Government instruct the Press Barons.’
She gave Clarissa a very suspicious scrutiny for several disconcerting seconds.
‘But your so-called ‘favour’ is nothing to do with vicious circles.’
‘Well…no.’
‘Sit down.
Tell me your trouble.’
‘Thank you.
It's a sort of trouble.
I want to ask you…
‘Clarissa heard herself hurrying through the difficult bit.
‘Not to play the German tune every morning.
Our flat's across there, you see.’
There by the window was the portable gramophone all ready to blare out the Hörst Wessel the very next morning.
Charity followed the glance.
‘Couldn't do that.
No.
Who are we?’
She was very firm.
‘I think you must have seen my friend, Charles Willoughby.
He's easily upset.’
‘Oh, him!’
The laugh was dismissive.
‘He came blundering in here this morning.’
‘He didn't tell me.’
‘Can t help that.
Impertinent bounder!
I practically had to kick him out.’
Clarissa would have liked to stand up for Charles, but it came out as nothing more positive than ‘Oh’.
‘The Hörst Wessel continues, I'm afraid.’
This time the ‘Oh’ seemed all there was to be said.
‘So that's that.’
Having settled the matter, Charity became quite friendly and urged Clarissa kindly to cheer up and not look so gloomy because there was a good time coming.
Clarissa said she wished she thought so and looked gloomier still.
‘What's so awful about the Hörst Wessel Song?
Oh I know it's hard to take at 7 am, but this country needs waking up.
‘That's what Charles says.’
‘Good for him — even though I suspect he means something quite different from me.’
‘Yes.
He's gone to join up.’
‘The Army?’
‘The Guards.’
One military establishment looks very like another to the civilian eye.
Generous application of whitewash outside, shining fresh paint within of a drab depressing colour.
Long bare corridors, kept constantly swept.
Door after door, each bearing an unintelligible abbreviation for what each room behind it contained.
Charles entered the one marked ‘Orderly Room’ in full.
There was a soldier behind a desk which was really only a trestle table with a grey blanket on it.
After the preliminaries, a form was pushed across the table to Charles.
‘Sign here.’
Charles did so.
‘There we are.’
The Sergeant seemed unforthcoming, so Charles enquired pleasantly if that were all.
‘For the moment.’
That wasn't nearly good enough for Charles.
After all, this was an important step he was taking.
He felt entitled to a response that was rather more sympathetic, to say the least.
‘Oh but look here, doesn't someone show me round — show me the ropes sort of thing?’
‘Not today.
Report back Friday evening 1900 hours.’
A brisk nod from the Sergeant indicated an end to the interview, and the man went back to his paper work.
‘1900?
Oh yes, 7 pm.’
‘Army time 1900.
Twice a week, Tuesdays and Fridays, same time.’
‘Twice a week?
Is that all?’
‘Friday we'll get you kitted up.’
‘Kitted up?’
He wasn't going to put up with this complete lack of concern a moment longer.
‘Can't I go to my own tailor?’
The Sergeant snorted.
No you can t.
Quartermaster s Stores, Duke of York's HQ That's your tailor, me lad.’
‘I see.
But I thought…isn't this Chelsea Barracks…the Brigade of Guards?’
No it ain't.
Duke of York's, this is, and you re in the London Irish Rifles.’
‘But I'm not Irish.’
‘So what?’
‘Look here there's some mistake.
I want to be a cadet officer in the Guards — Grenadiers, Coldstream sort of thing.
And anyway as I said, I'm not Irish.’
The Sergeant's deepening frown showed he'd reached his limit of forbearance.
He spoke precisely, as if by numbers.
We don t have cadet officers.
You re attested now.
Rifleman Willoughby you are…
An' it don't make a flippin' bit o' difference if you're Chinese.’
Later at Clarissa's theatre she wanted to know why if he was supposed to be a soldier, he wasn't confined to barracks or whatever they did to recruits.
‘You mean why aren't I peeling potatoes in the cookhouse instead of calling on actresses in their dressing-rooms?
Well, you see, there was this notice saying ‘Orderly Room’, and I was a bit stinking — as you pointed out…‘
‘Well?’
‘So I went in.’
‘This was at Chelsea Barracks?’
‘No.
Never got to Chelsea barracks.
The taximan made a muck of it — took me next door to the Duke of York's Headquarters instead, silly basket.
It looked like some sort of military place, so I walked in.’
‘And out again.
I could kiss that cabman.’
Charles reproved her for rushing on ahead of his story, and told her about this Sergeant lurking within like a spider waiting for a juicy fly.
‘He asked me if I wanted to attest.’
‘Funny thing to ask.
What does it mean?’
‘Haven't the faintest.’
Clarissa said it didn't seem to matter, because here he was, free again, and didn't he feel ashamed of getting tiddly at lunchtime?
Indignant denials were interrupted by the call-boy knocking sharply on the door and calling for Second Act beginners.
Clarissa scrambled into a dress with the help of her motherly dresser and Charles, feeling in the way, prepared to depart.
He turned at the door.
‘I'd just have you know that I'm a Rifleman.
A Territorial.’
Clarissa powdered her nose and addressed her mirror.
‘What's a rifleman?
It's not an officer.’
‘No it's a sort of private.
A pawn.
Pretty ignominious sort of territorial pawn at that.
Pity.’
Clarissa went to put her arms round him, leaving a great deal of wet white on his blue suit.
She kissed the air inches from his face in order not to smudge her lipstick or otherwise interfere with her make-up.
‘I'm not in the least sympathetic.
I was desperate at lunch.
But now I'm glad, glad and thankful and almost forgiving…because all you're going to do is play at soldiers twice a week.
My darling, darling rifleman!
I must rush.’
She ran away down the corridor.
Charles found himself muttering to the motherly dresser, who handed him his hat.
She smiled blankly when he confided darkly that he'd have to do something about that.
Behind the familiar trestle table with its grey army blanket, sat the commanding officer flanked by two others of lesser rank.
They wore patrol uniform of rifle green.
Silver cross belts blazoned battle honours across their chests and silver spurs gleamed under the table.
In front of each a Tam o'Shanter called a caubeen sported a pale blue hackle made of feathers.
Charles felt a bit  starchy in battle dress which had only just been issued to the TA.
He had been summoned to appear before an Officer Selection Board, having put his name forward shortly after joining the Regiment.
The CO had a neat military moustache.
He was about forty-five, a regular officer, seconded from the most famous of all Rifle Regiments.
He seldom forgot that.
He sat up very straight.
‘You were at Oxford, Willoughby.
But not for long apparently.’
‘I left.’
‘You were sent down.’
‘No, sir, I just left.
Told my tutor and the Dean of my College I wouldn't be coming up again.’
‘You must have had a reason.’
‘I went on the Stage.’
The CO leant across to the officer on his right, and then to the one on his left.
They mumbled a bit.
‘As your commanding officer, I'm the senior member of the Board and I speak for the others.
The stage is not, we think, very likely to produce good officers.’
‘I don't see why not, sir.’
‘Why should you imagine you are of officer material.
‘Since you ask me sir I can't think of a single reason — oh except…my voice is trained.’
Not a muscle moved in any of the three faces opposite.
His explanation was pleasantly delivered.
He'd been a little too theatrically technical.
‘I've got a good strong voice, I mean — for drill orders.’
‘You think that's enough?’
One of the officers whispered to the CO who nodded abruptly but asked his next question with less obvious sarcasm.
‘What did you do about going on the stage?’
‘There was a scholarship going at one of the drama schools, you see, and I entered it on impulse.
Took the train to London on the day and somehow got it.’
‘The scholarship?’
‘Yes, but I didn't get the money it carried.’
‘Why was that?’
‘The principal was rather a formidable lady.
She decided my father could afford to pay the fees so she gave the money to the runner-up.’
‘Your father approved of all this, I take it?
Running away from Oxford to be an actor?’
‘He was livid.
Luckily he was in the Far East at the time.’
The CO's imperceptible sniff managed to express disapproval.
‘You presented him with a fait accompli ?’
‘He replied with an ultimatum.
He knows nothing about the Theatre, you understand.
Otherwise he would never have threatened anything so ridiculous.’
‘An ultimatum has terms.
What were his?’
‘I was to make good in one calendar year, or he'd cut off my allowance.
Ludicrous terms.’
This time the CO's grunt was audible.
‘Reasonable terms.
I speak as a father.
So you lost your allowance?’
‘Well, yes.
At the end of the year I wrote telling him I no longer required it.’
‘Really?
Impulse again?’
Heavy sarcasm which Charles determined not to let disturb him.
His grin was broad.
‘Luck.
I did regret it later once or twice.’
The CO looked thoughtful for a few moments.
‘Yes.’
He  turned inquiringly to the others and they all mumbled for a while.
It took some effort for Charles not to lose heart.
He found that gazing at the CO's moustache helped.
At last it turned in his direction.
‘Willoughby, you've given us a brief outline of a frankly hap-hazard sort of life up to now.
Would you agree?’
‘I suppose I must.’
‘Exactly.
Haphazard and over-impulsive.
In war, an officer is likely to have the lives of his men in his hands.
Would you also agree that haphazard impulse is perhaps not the sort of attribute we're looking for?’
Charles's grin lacked sincerity.
‘I hope I have a few more acceptable ones, sir.’
He hoped he would be asked what these might be.
He wasn't asked so he supplied an alternative.
‘I'm not terribly good at blowing my own trumpet, though.’
The other two members of the Board laughed discreetly but the CO was delivering judgment.
‘Well, Rifleman Willoughby, the Board will watch how you get on with some interest…and we'll interview you again in six months’ time.’
Charles no longer bothered to hide his disappointment, but his salute was impeccable and he made a lot of noise with his about turn and exit.
As it turned out, he was interviewed only perfunctorily six months later, because events had moved fast in Germany and her neighbouring countries and to meet any threat to Britain, her allies, her interests and her Empire, the Services, particularly the Army, had more than doubled their manpower.
Officers were needed urgently to meet this expansion.
The London Irish were no exception.
Charles was gazetted Second Lieutenant in June 1939 and not many weeks afterwards he and Clarissa were embarrassed to encounter Charity Rainham outside the flats.
‘Hello.
Don't run away.’
Faint answering hellos from Clarissa and Charles.
‘Fancy bumping into her again.
Is that what you're saying to yourselves?’
A polite parry from Clarissa about being certain Charity had left her flat.
One hadn't seen her for ages.
How was she?
Charity didn't deal in small talk so she didn't bother to play that game.
‘Let me see, you're the actress but the name escapes me.
Both your names.
‘What Clarissa means is that we haven't — mercifully — heard you for ages.’
Rudeness to Clarissa always got a reaction from Charles.
He added a ‘Thank God’.
‘Back again now, so keep listening for me.’
Her cheerful smile was almost disarming.
‘Charity Rainham, Charles.’
‘as if I didn't know.
I've been reading about you.
Dead lucky you were getting in free to see the Olympic Games a couple of years ago.’
‘Yes, wasn't I?
They were thrilling.
Well now I'm back from Berlin once more, I shall start my morning music again tomorrow.’
‘Won't worry me.
I'm off to camp.’
‘Camp!
I was a Brownie once or do you mean the other kind?
I adore your get-up.
And such an amusing hat.’
‘It's considered very fetching.’
‘But your — I'm so bad at names and quite at sea about your relationship — She…told me you were in the Brigade.’
‘I thought he was.
Come on Charles, we must rush.’
‘Just a minute.
Have you two met before?’
‘Tut, tut, didn't she tell you?
The day you joined up, she came to tell me I'd driven you to it.’
‘Oh you did, you did.
But that was months ago.
Hitler's still doing very nicely.
The Anschluss — Czechoslovakia — what next?’
The question was ignored.
‘Do n't you think he looks rather divine as an officer?’
Clarissa agreed but reminded Charles that they must hurry.
Charity, however, hadn't finished her appraisal.
‘A brand new one, I'd say.’
‘You'd be right.
They found themselves terribly short of officers the other day so they practically had to promote me.’
‘It doesn't say much for the quality, does it?’
Charity summoned a taxi from the rank with one hand and dismissed Charles and Clarissa negligently with the other.
‘Off you go to your row of tents.
‘Bye….’
They came marching up the rough track.
The step was ragged, and the singing even more ragged.
A bedraggled, rain-drenched platoon.
Where was the Engine Driver
When the engine bust?
They found one bollock
A thousand miles away
Floating upon the Hudson Bay
His mother
Has got the other
And now he hasn't
A bollock today.
Not far ahead in the tented camp which the little party of soldiers was approaching, the Regimental Pipe Band was playing.
Charles asked his Sergeant if he could hear it and when the singers behind petered out dejectedly, he plainly could.
‘Retreat, sir.’
‘A band to welcome us back and I should think so too…after a long and tiring march in pouring rain.
Better march to attention into camp, hadn't we?’
‘Retreat.
When we reach the guard tent.’
‘Retreat?
Never.
Nearly home.’
‘I say they're beating Retreat on the parade ground.’
‘Oh yes of course.’
‘…an’ you're due for Orderly Officer day after tomorrow.
He takes the parade.’
‘Gosh!
Better go and watch it and see the form.
Only I'm so wet and exhausted…and my feet ache…‘
‘RSM will take you through the drill on the day.
Feet, sir.
First thing you do when we fall out.’
‘Go to my tent and collapse, that's the first thing.’
‘No, sir.
Men's foot inspection, sir.’
‘Foot inspection?’
‘I'll have their boots and socks off ready.
You inspect each man for sore feet and…er…anything else.’
‘Good Heavens, do I have to?’
‘Platoon Commander's privilege, sir.’
Charles's faint echo of the word ‘privilege’ prompted the Sergeant to expatiate.
‘Bit gamey some feet — well — most feet.’
The word ‘gamey’ caused Charles to get badly out of step.
The sergeant noticed and was more explicit.
‘Pong like, sir.
Stink.’
The sentry sprang to attention outside the guard tent.
Regaining his step, Charles grimly shouted his command.
‘March to attention!’
In the large marquee which served as Company Office and Company Stores combined, a line of wretched riflemen in dripping ground sheets sat bare footed waiting to display a fine collection of blisters.
Heavy rain drummed down on the canvas overhead.
‘When you're through, sir, the CO would like to see you in the Orderly Tent.’
‘Nasty mess on that heel, O'Riley.
Better go and see the MO.
Next.
Can't I have a wash and a change first, sergeant?’
‘Right away the Adjutant said.’
Charles sighed wearily.
‘Oh blast!’
The CO sat in another rain-washed tent to receive Charles's fairly smart salute and ask him if he'd had a good day.
It was hard to sound more than fairly enthusiastic.
‘Bit of news for you, Willoughby.’
The CO took his time as if savouring a titbit of information certain to delight its recipient, ‘As you know, camp breaks up in a day or two.’
He paused heavily again.
‘But a lot 's been happening in the world since we've been training here.’
It all added up to a premonition of tragedy for Charles.
‘You won't be going back to civilian life for the time being.’
‘But sir…
’ He was horrorstruck.
‘Why, sir?’
‘You've got a lot to learn, Willoughby….’
He interrupted breathlessly.
‘Yes I know, sir, but…‘…but you've shown a certain amount of keenness this last week or two, so…
I've selected you to join the Key Party.’
Charles was struck dumb trying to fathom what the man might possibly mean.
‘You see Willoughby, war may be imminent, and the War Office has ordered a mobilisation of key personnel throughout 
the TA.’
‘Yes, but sir….’
‘Yes Willoughby?’
The CO's smile was really very pleasant.
‘It's what you joined to do, isn't it?’
‘No, sir, I mean yes, sir, I mean I'm an actor, sir.’
He gulped and went rushing on.
‘I have to start rehearsal on Monday, I've got a new job to go back to.’
‘Sorry about that.
You'll have to let them know you've been called up.’
‘But I can't.
Can't possibly.
You see, sir…’ the note became sanctimonious as well as desperate, ‘…
The Show Must Go On.’
‘Exactly, Willoughby.
But just at the moment, it's the Military Show that counts.’
The cocktail party had reached its peak of pandemonium.
Men were bellowing fortissimo women screaming in order to be heard but Charity's voice was cutting through the uproar effortlessly.
She seemed not to have to exert her vocal chords to extra volume.
She was holding her audience of perhaps a dozen others in a corner of a large drawing-room overlooking the gardens of Belgrave Square.
‘So amusing this pathetic mobilisation.
Suddenly the streets are full of ridiculous individuals in fancy dress.
One can forgive the old dugouts retrieving their uniforms from the mothballs and flaunting medal ribbons and red tabs about the place, but the young are beginning to sprout extraordinary garments.
There's this youth, an actor wouldn't you know?, marching about Chelsea with his soldiers and showing off no end.’
‘If they're the ones who wear funny hats, Charity, I've seen them too.’
‘Yes and do you know, they're stationed in Cadogan Gardens?’
‘How terribly convenient for Harrods!’
‘The Food Hall Fusiliers.’
‘Not bad, Peregrine.
Do let me top up your glass, Charity darling.’
‘An actor did you say?
Pure farce.
Has he got a name?’
‘Oh I forget it, Peregrine, but he's revelling in it.
Easily the best part he's ever likely to play.’
‘I think we're being rather unfair.
We've got to have soldiers if there's really going to be a war.’
‘Ludicrous.
Playing at soldiers.
And there won't be a  war.’
‘Charity's dead right.
Who asked you to butt in Nigel?
Always so absurdly liberal, not to say egalitarian.
We were having a divine party till you came barging in with your pale pink politics.
Buzz off back to Fleet Street.’
‘Peregrine, sweetest one, don't be too bloody to poor Nigel.
He's only a tool of his filthy rag.
What we're suffering from is a scare promoted by newspapers like his.
We'd all be better off if it were abandoned.’
‘Muzzled, you mean, darling girl.
Muzzle 'em — by law if necessary.
Stop 'em aggravating the situation.
Look at the flap they've created — children being evacuated, all neatly labelled and toting Mickey Mouse gasmasks, sandbags blocking the streets…‘
‘…ridiculous balloons floating about all over the place…‘
‘Quite preposterous.
And anyway, Nigel, perhaps you'll tell us how the Hell we can do anything effectively for Poland.
It's far too distant, miles and miles away.’
‘Yes, but steady on a bit, Hitler's getting altogether too greedy.
He's marched into one country after another.
If you and Charity are condoning that sort of thing, you're raving mad.’
‘No, no, let me answer that, Peregrine.’
Charity actually lowered her voice for effect, in spite of the surrounding racket.
‘If you don't understand German politics, you're simply not qualified to comment.
She's expanding her Lebensraum and she has to.
Because, don't you see?, these are defensive moves against the imperialist countries like Britain and France.’
Nigel advised her to tell that to the Russians.
Surprisingly Charity seemed to concede the point against her, but Peregrine observed cuttingly that Germany and Russia understood one another over Poland at least.
‘That's the only thing I'm not happy about.’
She didn't look it.
‘Hitler's pact with Stalin — worrying.
Very.’
She continued to look extremely doubtful even when Peregrine told the bystanders that it was none of our damn business what happened in Eastern Europe.
‘Peregrine, dear boy, that's pure cock.’
Nigel was beginning to feel quite confident.
‘Look how the City's  reacting.
The Market's all over the place.’
Charity returned to the argument, but soberly.
‘It's a pity about the Russians, but markets will steady again if we quieten down.
After all there's no threat to the Empire.
Hitler's said that again and again.’
‘Hitler, Hitler, Hitler!
Sorry, Charity, you may be a great fan but to Hell with Hitler — and Mussolini too.
It's my impression that some of you are a jolly sight too pro-Axis.
It's a bit late, but Britain's getting ready to defend herself at last— in case .’
Charity closed her eyes at Nigel in distaste and asked coldly, ‘In case of what?’
‘Of war being forced upon us by your German friend, of course.
Forced on us here in London, who will certainly bear the brunt.
What's more, Charity, I've seen this actor you were talking about.
His name's Charles Willoughby.
Saw him this morning near Hyde Park Corner.
Very fine he and his men looked in their feathered bonnets with the pipes playing.
We could do with a few more young men like Charles.’
Next morning Charles was to be seen approaching Hyde Park Corner once again.
A single piper marched ahead of him and a party of riflemen in canvas fatigue uniforms swung along smartly behind him.
As they entered the Park through Decimus Burton's Screen, Charles gave an order to the piper.
‘Keep piping till we get to the digging site.’
The Sergeant came up from the rear to join Charles as they left the Carriageway and took the long asphalt path that leads diagonally away to Marble Arch.
‘Funny thing, sir, ain't it?’
‘What is, Sergeant?’
‘Here we are in Hyde Park — in peacetime.
There's the Serpentine, no one boatin' or fishin'.
There's the bandstand — deserted.
It's a fine sunny day in August — but where are all the loafers lyin' about on the grass?’
‘Where indeed?
Or the nannies and the nursemaids who lately pushed their prams up and down, and gossiped under the plane trees?
Where are all the children?’
‘Shoved off out of London an’ I don't blame whoever sent them.’
The little column followed the piper across the grass  past the Tea House.
‘One thing I wanted to ask you, sir, about these trenches we're diggin….
Troops were digging in all the other parks, Charles told him.
It was all part of the defence of London in an emergency.
‘He might drop parachutists in these open spaces.’
‘Yes, sir, but why are we diggin' them straight?
In the last war trenches had to be zig-zag like to stop being enfiladed.’
‘Good point.
I'll go over and ask the chap who gave us our instructions yesterday.
Get the men digging first though.
Party…
Party — Halt!
Fall out and draw your picks and shovels.
Carry on, Sergeant.’
He strolled over to the little Park Police Station among the trees.
A blackbird was singing and it was very quiet and peaceful in the Park.
The Superintendent didn't mince his words.
‘Defence of London?
Those trenches are not for the defence of London.’
‘No?’
‘Heavens no, old chap.
They're for the mass graves expected to be needed after the first German air raids.’
A few days later, Charles thought fleetingly of the Superintendent's little shock and the blackbird singing away as if he was just making a bad joke.
Fleetingly, because the wailing sirens outside forced him to think of the realities of the moment.
The CO's office where he was learning the job of Assistant Adjutant happened to be on the first floor of an empty house in Cadogan Gardens.
It was a bare room without a carpet, and in it, he and the Adjutant were trying to conceal the real terror they were feeling.
‘What are we supposed to do?’
How should the Adjutant know?
Like Charles, he had only heard practice sirens hitherto.
‘Haven't a clue.
Wait and see what hits us.’
‘That's all very well, but Chamberlain's only just told us on the wireless that the war's begun.’
‘Hardly worth ringing the BBC to complain.’
‘Hitler's pulled a fast one.’
Charles detected a tendency for his teeth to chatter and grew indignant the more he thought of this flagrant breach of the conventions.
‘Looks like it.
Half a tick — I've got a bit of bumph  somewhere with the drill in case of air raids.’
The Adjutant's hands shook a little as he riffled through his papers.
‘Yes, but oughtn't we to go out and calm the troops or something?’
‘No fear.
Not taking that kind of dam fool risk.
I think it says the Adjutant's job is to man the telephone in the CO's office.’
‘When the bombs fall, that'll go dead first.’
‘Possibly, but try and avoid unfortunate words, old chap.
Here we are.
It says…,’ he held the fluttering sheet of foolscap firmly to the table,…we have to lie down against an inner wall — under the table if possible.
Let's do that.
I'll take the telephone with me.’
‘Bloody silly we'll look if anyone comes in.’
They won't.
Everyone with any sense is taking cover.’
A loud slam from somewhere on the floor below put an end to further reluctance.
Both men dived onto the floorboards.
The Adjutant realised first that the front door below had slammed.
He swore at it and at the siren still wailing as frantically as ever outside.
‘Blasted thing gives me the willies!’
‘Me too.’
The camaraderie of fear was somehow comforting.
‘I'm petrified.
Are you?’
‘Panic stations!’
The Adjutant even permitted himself a rueful grin just as the office door itself opened and the CO strode in.
‘Willoughby!
What the Hell are you doing lying there?
Where's the Adjutant?’
‘Adjutant's orders, sir.
He's under the table.’
‘Come out, Perkins.’
‘Yes, sir.
War Office Instruction, sir.’
He emerged still clutching his telephone.
Charles was already on his feet looking sheepish.
The siren began to waver and died on a single drawn out discord.
‘Any second now…
’ The Colonel and his two juniors stood listening for an intense half minute until they all three felt uneasy holding the pose for so long.
‘Damn it, better off doing something.
Willoughby, you come with me.
We'll go round the companies.’
‘Er…yes, sir.
‘Perkins.
Hold the fort here.
If the bombing starts, take cover in the basement.’
‘Yes, sir.’
The Adjutant was able to sound thankful where Charles had given the least impression of unwillingness.
‘Don't forget your gasmask, Willoughby.’
‘Shall I put it on?’
‘Of course not.
Only if there's a Gas Alarm.
The P.A.D.
Officer or the Civil Power warn us of that.
Come on.
We'll visit E and F Companies in Eaton Square first.’
Sloane Square was deserted.
A line of cabs at the taxi rank waited for their drivers to emerge, not as normally from the green cabman's shelter reeking of cabbage and saveloys, but from the long humped air-raid shelter among the dusty trees.
Wardens in tin helmets poked their noses out of sandbagged alarm posts to watch Charles and his CO striding by.
The echoing impact of boot with pavement broke a silence nearly as terrifying as the noisy wail of the siren earlier, and drew heads to basement windows here and there up Cliveden Place.
Eaton Square itself presented a different scene, if still a silent one.
The central road between the gardens had become a parade ground.
E Company of the London Irish Rifles was standing-to in Close Order — bayonets fixed and gasmasks on, every officer and man stock still to attention, silent as grotesque dummies in Madame Tussaud's.
At the sight of this untimely concourse blocking their path, the CO and Charles checked, steel heelcaps scraping stone to a ragged halt.
In the hush, a muffled order could be heard issuing from the depths of the leading gasmask.
The whole peculiar assembly actually presented arms to its Commanding Officer.
‘One of the great moments of my life till now,’ was how Charles described it to Clarissa on the telephone later.
‘It could have been your death.’
She was still a little overwrought by events.
‘You mean they just stood waiting for the bombs to fall?’
‘Just one would have wiped out the entire company.’
Clarissa said she was glad she hadn't known he was walking about in the open.
No sign of the other company they'd come to visit, Charles told her.
Not a sign of life in  the whole vast house higher up Eaton Square which was the company's billet, until he and the CO discovered the inmates all prostrate under their beds in full marching order.
‘Good thing Adolph can't see how inept we are.
I expect his spies will tell him, though.’
Clarissa clicked her tongue at the other end of the line.
‘Oh dear.
‘Yes, the air was thick with rockets — and they weren't German ones.
The CO tore strips in all directions.
I thought he'd have an apoplectic fit.’
‘Poor darling!’
‘The CO or me?
Nothing poor about me except for trying to live on my measly eleven bob a day.
The whole morning was a fair to average shambles, even when we got back to Battalion HQ We found the basement at Cadogan Gardens full of fainting civilians — mostly rather pretty girls.’
‘Oh?’
‘Well, you know the sort of form round here — local debs from the posh mansions and salesgirls from Peter Jones.
We had quite a party in the end, most enjoyable.
I was rather sorry when the All Clear went.’
‘Sounds like it.’
‘I was worrying about you, though, the whole time.
There are going to be raids, heavy and soon.
No doubt about it.
No bombs anywhere this time.
False alarm.
Some bleeder with a flapping finger somewhere.
But next time…,
‘Wasn't it ages till the All Clear?’
‘Ages.
What did you do?’
‘Read a good book…but I was so frightened the print danced.’
‘I know what you mean.’
‘The show's come off.’
‘No?
Why?’
‘The whole West End's closing down from tonight.’
‘No theatres?’
‘No nothing.’
‘Good god!
Look here, you must go to the country — to your parents.’
They seem to think I ought to.
They rang up just now.
I  don't want to go, though.
I'd rather stay near you.’
‘Darling, no sense in hanging about London if you don't have to.
You buzz off home double-quick.’
‘What about the flat?’
‘I've got a key if I want anything, which doesn't look likely as things are.
Must go now…
Hun permitting, I'll ring you in the country tomorrow.
Goodbye.’
‘Goodbye, dearest, darling Charles.
I love you.
Don't do anything silly or dangerous…‘
In the Adjutant's office the routine was beginning to become boring.
Day after day Charles sat waiting for something to happen, but nothing ever did.
As Assistant Adjutant, he was given tasks of little consequence, mostly dull book work concerned with parade states and the number of sick reported from the companies.
Coughs and colds and minor ailments began to seem poor substitutes for the wounds everybody had been expecting when the bombs fell.
Visits of inspection to the cookhouses and latrines had a squalor about them that scarcely repaid even average keeness.
Communications arriving at the orderly room were largely turgid documents in ‘Whitehallese’ from the War Office.
The Adjutant's telephone usually conveyed complaints of various kinds about the Battalion's behaviour in the environs of London, S.W.1.
An urgent message for the CO one morning was a very welcome change for his staff, especially as the note was by hand and it came from Lord Halifax.
‘The Foreign Secretary.
That's more like it, but why has he bypassed the usual channels?’
The Adjutant observed drily that the Foreign Secretary made it very evident in his missive.
He handed it across to the Colonel who noticed with some satisfaction that it was addressed to him by name and not merely as commanding officer.
He read it with less pleasure…
Please arrange immediately for alternative methods of waking the men under your command.
In the early days of the emergency I was prepared to overlook the nuisance caused by the hideous and untutored blowing of bugles beneath the  windows of my house — I am unfortunate enough to live next door to one of your company billets.
The CO broke off to frown an inquiry at his Adjutant.
‘Hm’…
It is now however several weeks since the declaration of war and your buglers are still lamentably unproficient in their instruments which disturb my household throughout each day but particularly at 6 am every morning.
I could list many further complaints arising from proximity to a military unit, but I would urge you at least to abate the nuisance of bugles forthwith, or the matter will be dealt with at a rather higher level.
Halifax.
‘I'd better go round there and apologise right away.’
‘Shall I give the necessary orders to OC F Company, sir?’
‘Certainly not.
It's high time the Foreign Secretary realised there's a war on.’
No sooner had the Colonel stumped out, his face flushed with a moral indignation that might or might not be sustained as far as Eaton Square and the Foreign Secretary's residence, than the telephone rang.
‘Hello.
Yes.
The Commanding Officer's away on urgent duty.
Will I do?
I'm his Adjutant…
Yes, I see…
Ladysmith?..
Oh.
Ah, I've got it — treble barrelled — Lady Smith-Faines-Robinson.
Thank you…
Eaton Square?…
Football in the Square gardens…
Bad language…
Yes I'm afraid they do…
Ruining the plants, oh dear.
Well you see, nothing much seems to be happening in the way of actual fighting, so we try to keep them amused with sport.
I beg your pardon?
Afraid I didn't catch that…
Oh.
Oh I'm certain the sentry didn't mean to prick your niece in the — quite so — with his sword…
What?
Bayonet.
Of course…being a Rifle Regiment we call them swords…
Yes, it is ridiculous.
Yes, thank you Lady Smith — Er um — and Robinson.
I'll tell the CO as soon as he comes in and he'll probably…
Rung off.
Very angry Dowager.’
He put down the receiver thoughtfully.
‘Complaints, complaints.
They pour in one after the other.
Willoughby, as Assistant Adjutant you will deal with all other bellyaching.’
In the course of such disagreeable duties, Charles mounted the steps of an imposing mansion in Chester Square, close by another of the company billets.
In answer to his  pull at the doorbell a butler appeared who regretted, on Charles's enquiry for Lord Southdown, that His Lordship was out.
Charles explained that he'd come round in answer to a complaint and rather thankfully began to pass on apologies on behalf of the Regiment for transmission to Lord Southdown later, but the butler shook his head regretfully once more, indicated that Lady Charity was at home, and felt certain that she would deal with the matter.
He would go and find her if the officer would step into the hall.
‘Lady Charity Rainham?
Oh no, I don't think so.
No, no, I'll call again.’
Charles turned to walk as quickly as he could down the steps and away without actually running, when a young woman appeared beside the butler.
‘Who is it, Maxwell?’
It was said quite sharply and directed at Charles's retreating back.
It made him turn to face her from the bottom of the steps.
To flee cravenly would only invite more complaint, and personal complaint too.
‘An officer, my lady, to see his lordship.’
‘Oh, but I know the officer.
Come in, Mr Willoughby.
How nice.
I'm acting as my father's secretary.’
‘Oh.’
‘That's my war job.
Come along and follow me.’
In a high-backed uncomfortable chair in Lord Southdown's small dark study at the back of the house, Charles sat stiffly to hear the formal complaints about his soldier's  misdemeanours .
‘The noise at night is appalling.
You must realise that, so we'd like to know why it should be necessary.’
Not Charity in her sternest mood.
Really rather a reasonable sounding Charity.
Her manner puzzled Charles but he decided to be stubborn more than apologetic.
‘The sentries have orders to challenge.’
‘Surely not every passer-by.
They stamp with their boots and slap their rifles….’
‘They're trained to.’
‘Are they trained to sharpen their bayonets on other people's brickwork?
Horrible scraping noises from time to time.
Quite horrible.
Why do they have to do that?’
‘Their swords?
Are you sure?’
‘I didn't mention swords.
Bayonets, I said.’
‘Of course.
We call them swords.’
‘How absurd.’
‘Yes.
They have to have fixed — er — bayonets if you like, but they're not supposed to sharpen them.
I'll look into that and have it stopped.’
‘Please do.
And if you could stop them laughing so…so raucously all night and…and'’
‘…swearing so loudly and disgustingly?
Yes, I know.
I'm sorry.’
They looked at each other steadily for several seconds, then Charity laughed almost sympathetically.
‘Do you know, I think I'm going to forgive you.
I find myself extremely pleased to see you again.
Quite like old times, isn't it?
Charles agreed.
‘Do they ever let you out — on leave, I mean?’
‘Oh yes.
Nothing happening, you see.
It's getting more and more like peacetime.’
She wanted to know what he did with his evenings and was told of occasional visits to the West End now everything in the world of entertainment had opened up once more, but the mess or the local pubs were the usual haunts of his brother officers and himself.
Charity asked after Clarissa.
‘She's still in the country.
Her play's opening up again soon, she hopes.’
Do you know The Antelope?
My friends and I use it quite a lot.’
Charles said he knew it well, being just off Eaton Square and close to his place of work.
‘We'll be there tonight.
Why not drop in and have a drink?’
The use of the collective pronoun in Charity's invitation to the Antelope Public House reminded Charles how cliquey he'd always found it there.
This was his first visit since his call-up and it hadn't changed at all.
Little clumps of well-dressed young men and girls.
An older age group of superior tradesmen here and there — the public bar fraternity shunned the place, for this had been for many years the snob pub of Belgravia.
Each clique treated the establishment as its club and took no notice at all of anyone  outside the charmed circle.
Charles sat among Charity's glossy acquaintances, the only uniform in the whole peculiar set of imbibers, perhaps not so peculiar as the last time he'd dropped in when the Aleister Crowley entourage gave sinister overtones to the entire pub, the ‘Black Magician’ himself in his wide black hat sat surrounded by his followers in equally curious clothes.
The war seemed to have swept away the slightly homosexual attitudes of that corner of the pub, for which Charles was thankful, though not feeling particularly able for the brittle heterosexual backchat around him this evening.
He was sitting next to Charity, however, and she was giving him her sole attention.
He was finding that oddly agreeable because in spite of previous unpleasant skirmishes with her, her frank arrogance had always engaged him.
She was beautiful as well, and he remembered that Clarissa's warning that she was both clever and dangerous, had drawn from him the rather feeble reply that when they were pretty he never noticed much else.
They were laughing about Lord Halifax and the buglers of Eaton Square.
‘We've had several more since this morning, I may as well tell you.’
‘Several more what, dear boy?
Bottles?’
Peregrine sat on Charity's other side.
He leaned across her looking a trifle insulting.
Charles was only here on sufferance, not a member of the club.
‘Complaints, you idiot.
About the Army.’
She pushed Peregrine away.
‘No wonder.
I mean to say.’
He sniffed in a deprecating way and eyed Charles's uniform.
‘Why black buttons?’
Charles was not going to offer a cue for another derogatory observation, so he only picked up his glass and finished his drink.
‘Complaints with much braying of well-bred voices, I expect, Charles.
Just like yours, Peregrine.’
‘Can't help having a decent voice.
More whisky, dear boy?’
‘My turn.’
‘If you insist.’
Peregrine considered the conversation was over and relapsed in his chair.
‘Charles, we might leave them to it shortly, don't you think?’
She lowered her voice only fractionally.
‘If you say so.’
‘Tiny famished.
Do they feed you well in the mess?’
‘Very variable.’
‘Then I shall cook you something delicious.
Don't look so unbelieving.
I can, you know.
I'm not a conventional deb-like creature who considers cooking a menial occupation.
You'll see.’
‘Where?
At the great house?’
‘Against the rules.
At the flat.
‘Mine or yours?’
‘Oh mine.
And I promise not to put on the Hörst Wessel.’
The portable gramophone played instead something from the latest Astaire and Rogers film
There may be trouble ahead
But when there's moonlight and music
And love and romance,
Let's face the music and dance…
They sat on the sofa with coffee cups.
‘Funny kind of war, isn't it?’
Charles listened to Cole Porter's lyric, so full of irony.
‘Unnatural.
I can't wait for something to happen.’
‘So divine, yet so deluded.
It won't, you know.’
‘It must.’
The eagerness of you.
Don t you remember me telling you once — before it all started?
Hitler doesn't want a war with Britain.’
Because he felt so relaxed, he was able to smile and wait for another bar or two before letting the music dictate an answer.
There may be teardrops to shed
Before they ask us to pay the bill
And while we still have a chance
Let's face the music and dance…dance.
Let's face the music and dance.
‘Could Hitler be lulling us into a false sense of security?’
‘Why should he?
I believe he would love to do a deal.’
It was time to show his stubborn streak, Charles thought.
‘Far too late for that.
Even Chamberlain's been had too  often.’
Charity put her cup down and sighed.
‘Pity.
Am I spoiling the evening by talking politics?’
He reached over and found a table for his own cup.
‘Time I went home.’
‘I am.
Oh silly me.
Home?
Do you mean across the way?’
‘Back to barracks.’
He was on his feet, but Charity made no move to help him go.
Instead she stretched and lay back a little, laughing softly.
‘Oh pooh.
If I promise to keep perfectly silent, why not stay here with me?’
‘A kind of temptress…
’ The voice was very uncertain with a waver in it.
Charity tapped the sofa beside her gently.
She was not at all uncertain.
‘Yes.’
He sat down again and moved closer.
‘Oh yes.’
It was quite a long kiss, very soft and smooth without obvious passion.
‘Beautiful temptress…
’ He kissed her again for nearly as long.
‘No defences you see…‘
‘None.
Lovely.’
Charity gazed at him for a second or two.
He couldn't think of anything else to say, so he made as if to kiss her a third time.
She put a hand up to touch his lips and gently with the other eased herself up from the sofa.
‘Come along.’
Perhaps she wasn't quite gentle enough.
Perhaps some kind of spell was broken.
Anyway Charles began to murmur a little foolishly.
‘No Charity.
No.
I don't think I'd better.
In fact I can't.’
‘Nonsense.
Come.’
‘I've had too much to drink.’
A useless unflattering excuse.
‘Besides…‘
‘Besides what?
Besides me.’
She showed no offence.
Her patience appeared to be inexhaustible.
Charles went floundering on.
‘No really.
I'll have to risk you thinking I'm prudish…and….’
‘…a male teaser?’
She couldn't have asked it more gently.
‘If you like.’
‘I don't.
I don't believe you to be one.
Show me.
Come to bed and show me if you really are.’
Although he knew very well he'd lost the battle, he still  felt a need to justify.
‘You put me on a kind of honour…
I think I mean dishonour…
I can't, Charity.’
‘So repetitive, my angel.
Do I have to go coaxing?
Not my style.’
The steady gaze was only just beginning to show a hint of scorn.
It had the effect of bringing out the truth from Charles at last.’
‘I'm feeling disloyal.
Horribly disloyal.
In all sorts of ways.’
There was a scratch of the needle on the record player and a slur of discordant sound as Charity switched off her gramophone.
‘Dreary king.
Dreary country.
But principally, dreary ex.
Poor little dowdy ex.
I know it all.
You're making puerile excuses for yourself, little lad.’
‘I suppose I am.
I ought never to have let it start.’
A bit late to become articulate.
But now he wasn't making excuses, stating facts that had been under the surface all the time.
‘It's this uncertainty — of war or peace, of friend or enemy…of life or death.’
‘Big consequential talk!
Settle for the enemy.’
‘I'm settling for Clarissa.
She's coming back to London.’
‘You owe her nothing.’
‘I owe her above all…love.’
Charity was as he had first known her, the chill turning to ice.
‘Oh to Hell with that.
All right.
I might have known.’
She turned her back.
‘Find your own way out.
And keep out of my way.
I can be dangerous.’
Her bedroom door slammed.
After that Charles gave a wide berth to The Antelope, Chester Square, and until Clarissa's return to London, even his own flat.
So much of his daily duty took him to the general neighbourhood of these places it wasn't easy, but mercifully no bumping into the angry Charity occurred.
Most evenings he was able to relax in a much safer part of London, from his point of view: the West End, where the theatres and the cabarets, the smart restaurants and the exclusive nightspots were doing the sort of trade their proprietors had previously only dreamed about.
They were packed, with stunning girls in evening frocks escorted by officers on leave from all three services, and lucky locals like Charles with nothing very much to do except have a good  time when duties permitted.
As the duties were light and rapidly becoming merely nominal owing to the continued refusal of the war to start, Charles fetched Clarissa from her theatre nearly every night to take her dancing at one famous rendezvous or another.
It was a colourful time.
‘The Duchess of Richmond's Ball before Waterloo — every night since I got back.’
Clarissa loved dancing and found it the most exciting time of her life.
‘But never a Waterloo to follow.’
Charles couldn't help questioning the blurred boundaries of war and peace.
‘Hatchett's tonight, the Café de Paris last night, the Four Hundred tomorrow.
It's all very well this constant dancing and dressing up in Patrol uniform — Field Officers clanking about with highly hazardous spurs, silver cross belts liable to scratch tender bosoms….’
‘Delicious.
Your cross belt's beautiful.
You all look so handsome.’
‘If fatuous.
Makes me feel uneasy.’
‘Ants in your pants, darling?’
‘Jolly tight pants, whatever else.’
‘So elegant.’
Clarissa stiffened in his arm and stopped dancing.
‘Charles, look over there!
Just come in.’
‘Blast!’
He shuddered and felt himself flush with real anxiety to see Charity and Peregrine being shown to a table.
‘Bang next to ours.
I knew it was bound to happen sooner or later.’
‘Yes, but the very next table, it's not fair.’
‘Dance.
We must dance.
Have to keep it up till she goes.’
He swung her away to the farthest end of the floor from the new arrivals.
‘No, no, we can't go on and on.
That would slay me, Charles, much as I love it.’
They danced in silence, but still in the corner and almost on the same spot.
Clarissa looked at him quizzically.
‘She was quite pleasant last time.’
‘Well, she's not now.’
‘How do you know?’
Charles seemed to be listening to the brilliant quintet banging out its jazz.
He didn't answer until the violinist, Stephan Grappelli, had finished a spectacular decoration to the theme on his fiddle.
‘Superior Intelligence Service, mine.
Promise to cut her dead…promise or….’
‘Or?
I seem to detect something more than uneasiness.
Or what?’
‘Or you risk more than a mere snub.’
Clarissa was rueful when she spoke again.
‘My own Intelligence isn't half bad.’
She paused.
‘Tell me if I'm right.’
He raised his eyebrows in a puzzled way.
‘I'm not with you.
He quickly realised how false he was sounding.
‘Or are you making assumptions?’
‘Drawing deductions, darling.’
She was more rueful than ever, so that Charles stopped dancing and if he didn't quite haul her off the dance floor, he was rather brusque.
‘Come and sit down.
I'm not afraid of Charity.’
When they reached their table, Clarissa carefully failed to notice who was sitting at the next one.
Charity made sure she could be heard.
‘What a curious place!
Some sort of rendezvous for effete Servicemen.
What do you make of it, Peregrine?’
‘Dazzling, but frightfully vulgar.’
He sought to improve the description.’
Clothes by Clarkson, as the theatrical programmes put it.
Thank the Lord for a few soberly dressed civilians who actually work.’
‘Work?
Bone idle this lot.
As you say, this is nothing but fancy dress dancing at the Palais.’
‘Oh, swanning about regardless.’
An embarrassed Clarissa nervously sipped her wine, giving Peregrine an even more personal cue.
‘Knocking back the Champers, I notice.’
Charles crumbled a piece of bread self-consciously.
‘Stuffing themselves with unaccustomed goodies, too.’
Peregrine enjoyed this sort of game.
‘Stuffing the ladies of the town, I shouldn't wonder.
Tarts galore.
I can spot a dozen or more.’
Charity laughed joyfully.
‘Shocking sight!’
At the next table, nothing had been said to counter this barrage.
Now Charles murmured quietly to Clarissa.
‘Try not to take any notice.
Just think of it as bad luck.’
‘Let's go.’
‘No, we must stick it out.’
His voice rose a little in a forlorn attempt to drown the continued unpleasantness next door.
‘They're very dangerous, these people.
Against the war  effort.
Always were.’
‘But I don't understand.’
Clarissa really didn't.
She was very upset and needed some explanation.
‘Why are they doing this?
It can't be a question of manners.
They all come from aristocratic families.’
‘Yes, but these people still have links with Germany, don't you see?
Family links, commercial links probably.
There are only a few of them and we're unlucky to be involved.’
‘Involved?
I still don't understand.’
‘What I don't understand is why they're not detained under 18B.’
He explained the new Act which carried imprisonment for those liable to be subversive.
Charity was an obvious candidate, Charles considered, and she was probably being watched.
There were moves at the next table.
Charity's voice was more penetrating than ever.
‘Can't stand the false officers and their fancy women a moment longer.
Take me away, do, Peregrine, duck.
‘Subito, subito .
Enough of this slumming.
Waiter!
Give me the bill.
I'll sign it.
They'll settle it at White's’.
They swept out, Charity enquiring loudly as she went when the so-called war was going to begin.
Charles and Clarissa made thankful noises, drank a little champagne, and metaphorically wiped their faces.
Clarissa was particularly solicitous to Charles because she saw that, having been very red in the face, he was now quite pale.
She urged him to dance with her again.
‘No, wait.
I love you, my darling and….’
‘You may say that as often as you like.’
‘…and I want to…explain.’
‘I don't want…to hear.
Explanations are for children.’
‘Bad case of childish guilt here.’
‘Never explain, never apologise.
Your motto, remember?
Dance?’
They held each other very close but the evening was spoilt.
Even if the band had been the quintet of The Hot Club de France, which it very nearly was with Grappelli present, their spirits wouldn't have revived.
Charles was compelled to break some news to Clarissa that made her droop still more.
‘Clothes by Clarkson.
Wasn't that what Charity's ghastly Peregrine said?’
‘He got it wrong Wigs by Clarkson as if it mattered.
Why?’
‘No more dressing up for some time.
This is going to be the last party for quite a bit.’
‘Oh no.’
Afraid so.
I've managed to persuade the CO to let me chuck Assistant Adjutant.
Next week I'm back with my platoon.’
‘What does that involve?’
‘Going on duty — somewhere in the suburbs.’
‘That doesn't sound too awful — or does it mean you'll be in purdah?’
‘On detachment.
Yes, I expect it'll just be more routine marking time, though.
Charity's quite right.
The British Army's softening up.
I'm practically dough already.
When's my war going to begin?’
A railway engine was puffing slowly through Barnes Bridge station dragging behind it a long string of heavily laden wagons.
They rattled and clanked so that Charles had to shout to his Sergeant that he couldn't hear a word the man was saying.
The goods-train took its time.
When the din began to recede and fade, the Sergeant volunteered the information that the wagons contained the new twenty-five pounder field gun.
‘Dozens of ‘em.
Anti-tank guns galore as well.
That'll please the BEF…be able to handle 'em in practice even if they never fire 'em in anger.’
‘Ah, now I can hear you properly.
So carry on — what's the problem?’
‘Just come from changing the sentries on the railway bridge.
Found a man asleep, sir.’
Asleep.
That's a Court-Martial offence.
‘Dessay you could deal with it, sir.’
His easy manner bordered on the avuncular, but Charles was wise enough not to take offence with the experienced NCOs, particularly this one under whom he'd served while in the ranks such a short while before.
‘Will you see him in here or in the ladies’ waiting room?’
Seeing a doubtful look on his officer's face, the Sergeant answered his own question.
‘Right, sir.
I'll just nip next door to the booking office and check the Old Guard — ease springs and inspect their rifles like.
Won't be a minute or two.’
‘Then wheel in the prisoner.
Very well.’
‘Oh, I haven't put 'im on a charge, sir.’
He smiled from  the door.
‘Just needs a good talking to.’
Through the thin partition Charles could hear him carrying out his drill.
‘Detail!
For Inspection — Port Arms!’
Much slapping of rifle butts.
‘Ease — Springs!’
An agitation of bolts followed by a loud report which sent Charles reeling.
The shock made him shout.
‘God!
What the Hell's happening?’
But his call to the Sergeant after he'd recovered a little more self-possession was muted, tentative.
The Sergeant came rushing in from next door.
‘You all right, sir?’
Was that a shot?’
‘Oh Thank Gawd!
Man with a live round still in his breech.
Stupid devil might have killed someone.
Good job he missed you.
Look!
There's the hole right enough, see — in the panelling just above your head, sir…and it went…through the gents’…
No-one usin' it at the time so that was lucky too.’
A shaken Charles followed the line of the bullet and sat down in the nearest chair.
‘They're very raw, sir,’
Charles could only agree.
The Sergeant shouted along the platform ‘Rifleman Harris, let s have you!
A pale face appeared at the door.
‘March in, stand to attention and salute.
Rifleman Harris, sir.
Asleep while a sentry on Barnes railway bridge.’
If Harris was a little awed, so was Charles.
The words ‘While on active service’ began to have some meaning.
Both were prisoners of circumstances.
Both deserved a measure of understanding.
‘Well, Harris, were you asleep?’
Whispered assent.
‘Any particular reason?
I mean…
I know the two hours on and four off takes a bit of getting used to, but…perhaps you don't realise what an important job you're doing.’
Harris didn't.
‘Um.
Well, it's high time you did, Harris.
This bridge we're guarding is of great strategic importance.
Over it go a continuous stream of goods wagons carrying arms, ammunition, and supplies to the BEF.
Did you know that?’
‘Yes.
I seen 'em.’
‘Good.
That's something.
Waterloo to Southampton.
Across the Channel — then up the Lines of Communication  to the fighting soldiers.’
‘Only they ain't fightin', sir.’
‘Well, not yet, no.
But the build-up will ensure that they do well when the fighting starts.
Now…
I'm going to take no action this time, but you keep awake in future, Harris, because next time…you'll be for a Court-Martial.
D'you understand?’
‘Yes, sir, I will, sir.
Please may I have compassionate leave, sir?’
The eagerness of the plea as opposed to the hasty promise before it quite took Charles aback.
He'd been pleased with his magnanimous administration of justice, but this new development looked as if advantage was being taken of weakness.
He was hurt.
‘What?
I mean…why?’
‘Girl I'm goin' with — local girl — she's goin' to have a baby, sir.’
‘Local girl?
How long have you known her?’
‘Three days.’
‘Three days?
Someone else's — er — child then.’
‘Oh no, sir.
Mine.
See, she came to see me on the bridge.’
‘When?’
‘Last night…when I was on guard, see.’
At Charles s shoulder, the Sergeant visibly moved, took a pace forward and would have taken over the interview, but Charles felt his authority was being diminished rapidly enough.
He lifted a pacifying hand to the Sergeant and barked at the rifleman.
‘Yes?
Go on!’
Harris was keen to.
‘Well, sir, see I put's me rifle down — it was in the way like.
Then we lays there on the towpath, under the bridge, and gets stuck into it, see?’
‘I shouldn't go on, Harris, if I were you.
Very incriminating all this.’
Harris was indignant.
‘Yes, but I'm tryin' to explain, sir.
I let me little lot go, sir, see.
That means she s got my bun in' er oven, don't it?’
The despairing jerk of his head to his Sergeant proclaimed that to Charles enough was now enough.
Go away, Harris!
Go away…and consider yourself lucky.
No compassionate leave.
Extra duties instead.
See to it, Sergeant.
Time you learnt to be a proper soldier, Harris.
Take him away, Sergeant, and tell him the facts of life!
And Sergeant…leave an NCO in charge here and come with me round the sentries.
We'd better make sure no more of this sort of thing is going on.’
The two men picked their way along the line with the aid of a torch, but before they reached the bridge the Sergeant switched it off suggesting that they tread on the wooden sleepers and as softly as possible.
‘Don't want 'em to start puttin' on an act for us.’
His whisper and the darkness of the night made Charles shiver involuntarily.
‘All very quiet.’
‘All having a crafty smoke, I shouldn't wonder.’
They crept onto the bridge without meeting the expected sentry.
‘Mind the girders, sir.’
They left the wooden sleepers for the steel path at the side of the structure.
Charles rather hoped that the glow of illicit cigarettes would soon put an end to this slightly unsportsmanlike test of his sentries' attention to duty.
To find them asleep like Harris would be worse.
To find them awake and up to Harris's trick, much worse.
It wasn't a cold night but he shivered again.
The Sergeant touched his sleeve.
They stopped and listened.
A low laugh from some way off was somehow reassuring.
‘Other end of the bridge.
One of 'em left his post to have a chat.
I'll give 'em laughin'.
‘What's that?’
The laughter was louder.
With it was another sound.
The clash of steel.
‘Come on, Sergeant!
Torch!’
They quickened their steps.
No more laughter, but over the clash of steel a sharp cry.
They were closer now to whatever was happening and heard very distinctly the heavy fall on the steel deck, the clatter of a falling rifle and the choking gasp.
‘What's going on there?’
‘Stand fast or I fire!’
He pushed forward the safety catch of his pistol.
The Sergeant's torch played on a single figure ten yards away.
In a long tense pause the only noise was of sobbing and the voice that ended the pause was plaintive.
‘I didn't mean to do it, sir, honest.
We was pretendin', that's all.’
‘Pretending?’
‘Fightin' with our bayonets…swords.
I didn't mean to  do it, swear to God.’
More sobbing.
The Sergeant was kneeling by the sprawled body of the fourth man present.
‘He's dead, sir.
Sword right through his throat.’
‘But why?
Why?
Charles looked down at the flood pumping out in the torchlight.
‘Well, Sir…nothin' was happenin'…we got bored.
He suggested it.
We was just passin' the time till the relief came.’
‘What a waste!’
There was nothing else he could think of to say.
He was bitter.
‘What a waste.
When it hasn't even started — this phoney war.’
He made his pistol safe and took the rifle with its tell-tale bayonet point from the sob-shaken creature standing in the shadows.
It was a small room, full of photographs, many in silver frames, which helped to give an Edwardian flavour to the general appearance.
The whole hotel of which this was the Sanctum sanctorum gave an impression of earlier magnificence now a little dusty and down at heel.
Charity was telling Peregrine and an elderly lady with the air of a flawed duchess about her visit to Scotland Yard.
‘So sorry to have to ask you these personal questions, Lady Charity, he said, raising his bowler hat….’
Peregrine interrupted her with a languid chortle and was properly admonished.
‘Interrogation isn't funny, Peregrine, all the same.
You wait.’
Peregrine didn't think he was important enough to interest the Special Branch.
Compared with Charity, he was a mere minnow capable of slipping through the net as easy as winking.
‘Besides, as Mona will tell you, I've reformed at the very idea of being put in clink for treason or whatever they call it.
Shouldn't be surprised if it drives me straight into the arms of the recruiting officer.
‘And a good thing too.’
Mona, the distinguished elderly lady in the tea-gown with lace at the neck, had been listening with a disapproval balanced by her evident affection for both Charity and Peregrine.
She lifted a bottle of Champagne from among the photographs cluttering the occasional table beside her and passed it to Charity with an instruction to fill the glasses and hold the chatter, because she insisted on listening to the nine o'clock news on the wireless.
Charity glanced at the clock as she poured and  announced that she'd missed it, Peregrine asking if it mattered a hoot anyway, the wireless these day being so hopelessly uninformative, with nothing more important to impart than news of patrol activity on the Maginot Line.
‘You pipe down, young Peregrine.
Time you were in uniform.
If anyone thinks I'm going to miss my lovely Alvar Liddell they've got another think coming.
Switch on and shut up.’
Mona had missed the news and the Announcer reading some late information as a postscript was not her favourite.
‘A despatch from our correspondent in Washington quoting a report from American Diplomatic sources in Berlin, of a meeting between Hitler and Stalin at Brest-Litovsk, carries the reasonable assumption that Stalin seeks a quid pro quo from the Führer for his compliance over the conquest of Poland.
What is indicated is the possible Soviet interference in Baltic States such as Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia and Finland.
You are listening to the BBC Home Service.
Our next bulletin….’
Peregrine switched the wireless off, imitating the stilted tones of whoever had been reading the news.
‘Told you so.
Sweet Fanny A.’
He got a good-natured reprimand from Mona for not setting a good example to the lower classes.
Charity was included in it too and Mona launched into a short sermon on her favourite subject, patriotism.
It was expected from her young people, by which she really meant her customers.
After all, her young people all came from good families.
‘Mona, you're divine.
I worship you.’
Charity would never have accepted simple precepts from anyone else.
Mona was loved and tolerated for such ethics by a great many people, the young as well as the not so young.
‘Nowhere else in London is anything like so amusing these days.’
‘Funny thing, though, Mona, my Pa agrees with you about all that twaddle you were spouting.’
‘He generally did.
You tell him to come and see me again when he's in London.’
‘I will.
He's got me the offer of a Commission — in the Grenadiers.’
‘You take it, boy, before they think better of it.’
‘Couldn't go without Charity's permission now could I?’
He buried his nose in his glass to avoid meeting her eyes, but she didn't seem to be treating such a revolutionary idea as one of any importance.
‘No good going for a soldier if you can't show a little decision of your own.’
‘You'd be livid if I did.’
He cocked an eye speculatively over the rim.
When Charity exhibited nonchalance, one sometimes had to beware.
‘If you took a commission?
Why should I?
Do what you like.’
‘My little dove's changed her tune.’
Somewhat surprised approval from Mona, and she expected an explanation.
For several sleepless nights, Charity had been engaged in what she would call tiny wrestling with herself.
A possible committal to prison on account of her long-standing beliefs did not frighten her in the least.
In defence of an ideal she would quite probably be willing to suffer death, and she didn't discard ideals easily.
She answered the questions in her interrogation with perfect candour, but her answers had the effect of crystallising her basic thinking.
For one thing, she discovered that her conscience was at fault over Jewish persecution and she blamed herself for not coming out against such cruelty earlier.
Her Fascist leanings had nothing to do with that.
On the other hand, order out of chaos and the rebirth of a defeated nation were admirable reasons for being attracted to Fascism, yet they weren't the real ones in her case, and even if Hitler had mesmerised her very conclusively for a time, she was older and wiser now and able to revise her view of a man who could change his principles so casually in the light of expediency.
No.
The overwhelming reason had always been the same one.
She hated Russian Communism.
Hitler had stood for resistance to a cancer spreading across Europe.
Now Hitler and Stalin were allies.
It didn't make sense.
Charity had never felt a true patriot whichever way she might analyse the term, but it seemed to matter that Britain now lay defenceless in the path of a monstrous hybrid composed of two powerful ideologies.
Britain and France had drifted into this war and couldn't hope to win against such a combination.
America was bound to be  hopelessly isolationist.
It was time to jettison a faith so badly shaken by events, and be a convert to outdated gradualism after all.
‘I've been thinking objectively for once.’
Charity looked with disapproval at the solid wireless set in the corner of Mona's otherwise Edwardian sitting-room.
‘That was a very sinister news item just then.
I hold no brief for Britain in this war, but now I'm convinced Germany's no better.
Matiness with Russia!
It's a betrayal.’
She looked steadily at the other two and was very firm.
‘I dislike admitting it but I think I have changed my tune.’
‘You hadn't the other night at Hatchett's.
Fair old stick you gave those two at the next table.’
Unbelief mingled with a kind of optimism in Peregrine's expression.
‘That was a private war.
But I was wrong there too.’
Firmness gave way to nonchalance again and this time it was positively throw-away.
‘I shall get a job.
A Government job.’
Peregrine gasped.
‘Sporting and dramatic!’
He gave a triumphant leer.
‘Now I can let you into my secret.
I'm off to Pirbright next week for Officer Cadet training.’
‘Just in time — for both of you.
You needn't think I'd have come to see you in Brixton.
Can't abide traitors to class or country.’
With evident delight Mona smiled about her brightly and made for the door.
‘We need some more fizz to celebrate.
One of them out there shall buy us a bottle.
Shan't be a jiffy.’
Out in the hall sat several poor unsuspecting patrons of the hotel, one of whom was possibly rich as well as unsuspecting.
Next morning Clarissa was wandering about her bedroom in a state of undress, feeling miserable.
She hadn't slept well and she was lonely.
The flat felt emptier than ever this morning.
There seemed nothing she could do to make it less so.
The mood was not improved by a sudden burst of music from that hated and notorious portable gramophone across the way.
Clarissa didn't intend to be drawn into any trouble with Charity, so she ignored the music until she recognised the tune as something quite other than the Hörst Wessel Song.
‘I'm going to hang out my washing on
the Siegfried Line


Have you any dirty washing, Mother dear…?’
What on earth was going on?
Had Charity made some ghastly mistake and would she realise it and change the record pretty smartly?
No.
Not a bit of it.
‘I'm going to hang out the washing on
the Siegfried Line
If the Siegfried Line's still there'
Clarissa opened her window cautiously.
‘Good morning, Clarissa.
Does my gramophone surprise you?’
Clarissa hesitated.
She'd been caught.
Too late to slam the window shut.
Better to be casual and try to show no surprise.
Oh, it s you.
Surprise?
No.
The tune.
Such a change from…’
‘…
The Hörst Wessel Song?
I smashed it.
Hitler's let me down.’
Must be some sort of trap.
Better be aloof and sound cold.
‘How tiresome of him!’
‘I thought you ought to know…
I've gone clean off him — ever since he made that pact with Stalin and the ghastly Russians.’
‘Is that why you're hanging your washing on the Siegfried Line?’
‘Yes.
Vulgar song, but I'm demonstrating that I've seen the light at last.
Please tell Charles Willoughby when you see him.’
Mustn't fall for that.
No, certainly not.
Clarissa adopted a tone even more haughty.
‘It must be very recent.’
‘My change of heart?
Oh, you're thinking of the other night when I was so rude to you both at that dancey place.’
‘Hatchett's.
I was thinking of that.
Yes.’
‘Inexcusable.
Too too shaming…can we stop shouting like this and may I come across to your flat and say I'm sorry in person?
Do say yes, Clarissa.’
‘I'm not dressed yet.’
Don't start going wobbly.
Why didn't you just say no and close the window?
It's quite a thing for me to apologise for anything.
‘You alarm me, Charity.’
That was a confession of weakness.
Try harder.
‘Only for a tiny tiny second because then I'm dashing off to work.’
Charity was determined and she was weak, Clarissa told herself.
Terribly weak and terribly doubtful.
‘Oh well, why not?’
The record stopped in mid tune and it was Charity who slammed her window shut.
‘Oh dear.’
Clarissa closed hers quickly and scrambled into some clothes.
‘…and you see, when Hitler became bosoms with Stalin just before this stupid war started — I still think it's a stupid war — it dawned on me that he'd made a nonsense of my belief in him.’
Ever since Charity arrived in her flat, Clarissa had not only remained shy, but puzzled.
‘You and lots of others who should have known better.
Some of them are in prison.’
No need to sound priggish though.
‘Oh, thoroughly investigated I've been, don't you worry.
Hitler, of course, was dead set against a war between Britain and Germany.
We thought he had a weakness for us and our Empire.
So he had, but I see very clearly now that he's a double-dealer capable of any mean trick.’
‘Why are you confessing to me?’
‘Because you…and Charles…represent ordinary public opinion — my family usually ignore public opinion — and because I specially owe it to you…to both of you.
Besides, if I'm turning over a new leaf, I need new friends to go with it, don't you know?’
‘But how can we possibly…trust…after…
’ The idea of friendship with Charity was so daunting, she shook her head and dried up.
If only Charles were here he could deal beautifully with this extraordinary turn of events, tell Charity how unimpressed he was, laugh the whole thing off.
She tried again.
‘You must see why I can't be awfully impressed.’
It hadn't the same effect that Charles might have produced.
None at all in fact.
‘Yes, yes, but I'm banging on regardless all the same.
Trouble is I'm arrogant.
Always doing things, saying things so sweepingly — to the exclusion of all rational thought.’
Clarissa tried not to be disarmed, tried to fathom why such self-denigration was being paraded so abjectly before  someone who only last week had been a figure of insult and derision.
She didn't like the answer she came up with one bit, but she put it nevertheless to Charity, very quietly.
‘I'd like to ask you, Charity, if it's Hitler's treaty with the Russians that's making you talk like this to me, or…or is it Charles?’
‘Good Lord, both.
I loathe the Russians and I adore Charles.’
‘Ah.’
‘Charles is staunch.
I can't help the clichés.
He's true to his principles.
You're extremely lucky.
He'll marry you any time you say.’
‘Oh.’
‘And I want to come to the wedding, whenever it is.’
At last Clarissa was able to laugh.
‘I wish you didn't baffle me so, Charity.’
Then she thought of Charles and the laugh died away rather suddenly.
‘Anyway, there's not likely to be a wedding.
Charles has disappeared.’
‘Good Heavens!’
‘I haven't seen or heard of him.’
‘Since when?’
‘Since you left the restaurant that night asking so pointedly when his war was going to begin.’
The CO was not in the best of tempers.
He'd had a visit from the Brigade Commander, who had criticized quite sharply several things for which the responsibility did not lie with him, but with his officers and particularly with his men.
The worst record for absence while on leave of any of the three battalions, the Brigadier had grumbled.
As the absent soldiers who had overstayed their leave mostly came from Ireland, he felt it wasn't his fault.
As for some of these Territorial officers — temporary officers, he labelled them…about as likely to amount to anything if they ever went to war as a commercial traveller or a third rate comedian in a music hall.
Some of them were of course, he reflected, little better: actors, journalists, bank clerks…
‘Willoughby for interview, sir.’
‘Again?
I saw him yesterday.’
‘He says it's urgent, sir.’
‘Urgent, eh?
I've got something urgent for him.
Fetch me those findings of the Court of Enquiry on the Barnes railway bridge incident.’
The Adjutant and Charles had suffered together the Colonel's frequent fits of bad temper in earlier weeks, so a little hasty advice about humouring him was offered to Charles on his way to the CO's office.
The salute and stamp of boot on bare floor were smarter than normally as a consequence.
They did not remove the CO's frown.
‘Not a day goes by, Willoughby, without your coming in here asking to join some crack-brained new outfit dreamed up by cranks at the War Office.
First of all, it was Bren Gunners on Tramp Steamers, then Raiding Parties in the  Arctic.
What is it this time?’
‘Parachuting, sir.’
‘That's a damn silly way of breaking your neck.
Have you thought of that?’
‘But won't they teach us how not to break our necks, sir?’
He didn't smile in case he might seem either flippant or impertinent.
‘Not much evidence of it up to now.
Remember what happened to Frisby.’
When Charles echoed the name uncomprehendingly, the CO's frown gave way to his own special indication of relish which wasn't quite a smile, more a contraction of the upper lip.
‘Oh yes, that was when you were having your unfortunate experience at Barnes.’
The door opened and the Adjutant entered with a large file out of which he produced several sheets of foolscap.
‘The document you wanted, sir.’
‘Thank you.
Incidentally, Willoughby, you've earned yourself a black mark for that little trouble.
It amounts to a reprimand.’
All efforts to appear polite and subdued went by the board.
This gross libel by the Court of Enquiry must be hotly defended.
‘A reprimand?
How ridiculous!
I had nothing to do with the rifleman's death, sir.
His fellow sentry stabbed him through the throat.’
Sad business.
Dreadful.
In the Army someone has to carry the can.
Hence the finding.’
Charles asked to read it and was told he couldn't.
‘Just keep quiet and listen to me.
A reprimand is not merely an empty phrase.
So until further notice from me, you are to consider yourself confined to the Battalion area — that means the Officers ' Mess and your company billet — except when on duty of course.
Do you understand?’
If I am to be punished unfairly, could we return to the subject of volunteering for the Parachute School?’
‘Certainly not.
But I'll tell you this.
I slipped up very foolishly when I allowed Frisby to volunteer.
He went off to Barnard Castle up in the North somewhere to practice jumping out of a captive balloon, but he only had one go at 
‘Why?’
‘I'll tell you why.
In the Mess that evening the young madmen were all showing off to one another— demonstrating their intrepidity and lack of nerves.’
His eyes narrowed venomously.
‘Ever hear of Russian roulette?
Frisby the newcomer joined their barbaric game.
Picked up a revolver and shot himself through the head.’
He paused triumphantly.
No more volunteers from this Battalion.’
The depressing interview led to a telephone call.
Only the two ‘star’ dressing rooms had an extension in Clarissa's theatre, and the Stage Door Keeper grumbled a bit as he climbed the stairs to call her down to his box by the Stage Door.
It was her ‘wait’ and she sped down the stone staircase ahead of the lumbering old man and snatched up the receiver.
Her heart was beating wildly as it had for days whenever the telephone bell rang anywhere she happened to be.
This time she was rewarded with the sound of a familiar if dejected voice the other end.
‘Hello.
Clarissa?’
‘Charles!
Darling, darling, where have you been?
Such ages since I heard.’
‘Had a bit of trouble.’
‘What trouble?
Where?’
‘Er…in the suburbs.’
‘What did you do?
Are you all right?’
‘Nothing.
Only I had to carry the can for it.
I'm fine.’
‘Where are you now?
I've been searching for news of you all over Chelsea, Eaton Square, Cadogan Gardens…not a sign of your people anywhere.’
‘Oh that's all over.
Lord Halifax and the other grand residents got us booted out at last.
We're banished from the flesh-pots.
No more bugles in Belgravia.’
‘I see.
So where were you sent?’
‘I'm not supposed to tell you.
Sort of in the suburbs still.’
‘When can you get up to London?’
‘I can't.
I'm gated — sort of.’
‘For ever?
I miss you dreadfully.’
‘Me too.
I say didn't you tell me once you had an aunt in Wimbledon?’
‘Aunt Marjorie.
What's she got to do with it?’
‘Only that if you could stay with her for a night or two, I might manage to get over and see you there.’
‘When?’
‘What about tomorrow?’
‘When tomorrow?
Afternoon or evening?’
‘Both.
What's the address?’
‘I'll fix it with Aunt Marjorie now, this minute.
Oh darling, darling, hurry to me.’
She gave Charles the address, and looked so happy and excited when she asked the Stage Door Keeper to get her the Wimbledon number, that he quite forgave her for keeping him hanging about in the draughty passage outside his box.
Charles was happy too.
He did a little planning and on the next afternoon, in spite of the restrictions on his movements, he was able to keep his word.
‘Putney Heath, but I couldn't tell you on the telephone.’
‘That's only across the Common.’
‘I know.
We train on the Common.
I'm supposed to be attacking the Windmill at this moment — with my platoon.’
‘Then why are you here?’
‘You have to make a reconnaissance before you attack.’
He took both her hands and gazed lovingly.
‘I shall remember every feature.’
‘Oh, darling, don't go getting into trouble again.’
Something told her that the glint in Charles's eyes might lead to a follow-up of his recce.
Not trouble exactly, but with her aunt above, not the time or place.
She gently withdrew her hands.
‘I may be leaving the show.’
‘Yes, enough of my dreary life.
Tell me all about you.
What will you do next?’
‘I've volunteered for the Services.’
‘Volunteered?
My darling, is that wise?
Sorry, I sound like my own CO — except that he hardly ever calls me darling.
If you re thinking of joining the ATS, don't.
We call them Sheets, Ground, Officers for the use of.
Khaki next the skin.
Ugh!’
‘The Wrens.’
‘Oh, the Wrens.
That's better.
Very fetching undress uniform I shouldn't wonder.
Where will they send you?’
‘Portsmouth.
Dock duties, they said.’
‘That's miles away.
I'll never see you.
And anyway, you're not strong enough to be a docker.’
‘Secretarial, I expect.
Like Charity Rainham.’
‘D'you mean to tell me she's in the Wrens?’
‘No, no.’
‘Why isn't she in prison for subversive activities?’
‘Because she's in the Ministry of Information.
She's quite pleasant these days.
Don't look shocked.
I've seen her several times and before you rang me at the theatre, she had promised to find out where you were and tell me.’
‘Heaven forbid!
Ministry of Information, eh?
Passing it on, of course, to you know who.
Up to no good whatever she's doing.
Put your trust in Faith and Hope — but never in Charity.
They must be mad to take on someone with her record.
But then we're all slowly going mad.
Everyone except you, my little Jenny Wren.
Sorry.
Whimsy and sentimental, but you see I'm…well, sentimental plus if you understand what I mean…
Oh, Clarissa….’
She glanced a little anxiously towards the door.
‘Aunt Marjorie's hovering somewhere.
Won't they be wondering what's happened to you?’
‘Probably.
Who cares?
My Sergeant's extremely reliable.
What about this evening?’
‘I won't be back here till after the show.’
Excellent.
I don t know yet how I'll manage it, but I'll be here.
Does it matter if I'm rather late…or early — in the morning.
Can you let me in?’
Clarissa promised to leave the front door on the latch and pointed to the ceiling.
‘My room is above this.’
‘I'll find it.
Nothing can stop me.
Just one more thing.
Will you marry me soon?’
‘Not today.’
‘Next leave.
Promise.’
‘You promised me to hurry back before you're missed.’
‘Perhaps I'd better.
My new Company Commander is a horrible Tartar.
As bad as the CO.
They both go about with permanent scowls looking for trouble.’
On Wimbledon Common, the reliable Sergeant and the  platoon were still where Charles had left them, relaxing under some trees.
Birds were singing, dogs were being exercised, children shouted in the distance, but the pleasant afternoon had its drawbacks, as the Sergeant explained.
‘Turned up unexpected a few minutes ago, sir.
Said there was no need for a recce seein' as how we'd attacked the Windmill over there every afternoon this week.’
‘Snooping, was he?
That s a shabby trick.
Which way did he go?’
‘He's gone round the pubs to look for you.’
‘Has he, by Gum?
We'd better get on the objective double quick then, before he gets back.
Get 'em on their feet, Sergeant.’
The men took their time about it.
An air of laziness pervaded the ranks after their extended rest.
They needed galvanising.
Charles put on a low dynamic voice which rose in crescendo to an order.
‘Listen, Platoon.
Every man who can beat me to the Windmill is excused all fatigues.
GO!
He rushed away followed by his laughing, equipment-rattling band in a mad stampede, but someone else was running towards the Windmill from another direction in a vain attempt to cut them off.
‘Willoughby!
Willoughby!
What the Hell do you think you're doing there?
Willoughby!'’
The Company Commander arrived at the objective a long way last and considerably out of breath.
‘What d'you call that disorganised scramble?
You can't dash across the open like that.’
He gasped for breath but managed to finish a scathing indictment that wasn't as effective as he might have wished.
‘You're sitting targets!’
It wasn't the moment to correct terminological inexactitudes.
‘Really, sir?’
‘Disgraceful.
What's the idea?’
‘Initiative test, sir.’
‘Initiative test my foot.’
He turned his attention to the troops, who under the quick thinking extemporisation of their Sergeant were once again in some semblance of order.
‘All you men are knocked out.
Double back all of you to where you started and crawl here.
Crawl!
All the way, d'you hear?’
Before Charles could give an order to his platoon, in which he could identify himself with them in such a disagreeable manoeuvre, the new Company Commander continued to pursue the military solecism of humiliating an officer in front of his own command.
‘Not you, Willoughby.
Your turn in a minute.
Perhaps you'll tell me where you've been?’
‘Sir?’
‘Don't try and wriggle out of your inattention to duty.
You were absent from your platoon.
What were you doing?’
Direct answers to direct questions of this kind were no part of Charles's way of life.
Neither was he a particularly good liar.
‘The training pamphlet says time spent on reconnaissance is seldom wasted.’
‘So it does.
Which public house has the best beer?’
‘Out of hours, sir.
Thanks all the same.’
The new Company Commander felt unable to become further involved in a contest of non-sequitur.
He sent Charles back to start crawling.
It rained all that night, but that didn't stop a visit to Aunt Marjorie's at Wimbledon.
Aunt Marjorie herself was in the habit of having early nights and she wasn't encountered, but on the way back, in heavy rain, Charles did encounter his Company Commander.
‘Willoughby!
Is that you?
Stop, man, stop, will you!’
The only way to reply to a rude challenge must be an affected brightness of spirit however drenched and uncomfortable one might feel.
‘Morning, sir.
Filthy weather.’
‘Yes, Willoughby.
It is now 0600 hours.
Your bed in your billet was empty at 0015 hours — five and three quarter hours all told.
Have you been out in the rain in PT kit ever since?’
‘Oh yes, sir.
Took shelter for a bit, of course .
Night running.
Very good training.’
The Company Commander, well wrapped up against the weather, surveyed his dripping subordinate from plimsoll to clinging singlet.
‘Training for what?
Night Ops?
‘Er…yes, sir.
Roughly.’
‘Describe your route.’
‘Round the Heath…over to Wimbledon and back…
Etcetera.’
‘Etcetera eh?
Yes well I've marked you absent without leave.
You can explain yourself to the CO later.’
The case against Charles seemed a reasonably strong one but it was the charge of frivolity that chiefly told with the Colonel who showed a marked distaste for Charles's habit of eccentric behaviour followed by unlikely explanation.
The Adjutant, however, had a good word to say.
‘Reports from his previous Company Commander were invariably good, sir.
Particularly for keeness.
And the men like him.
But I'm bound to say that his recent experience at Barnes may be having some effect.’
When asked whether that might be so, Charles denied any such connection, but then put the Adjutant's suggestion to good use.
‘Oh except possibly that the business at Barnes has made me eager to volunteer for more active participation in the war, sir.’
The CO groaned quite audibly.
‘Oh not that again.’
‘Yes, sir.
I hope you'll forward my application to join an Independent Company.’
‘What's that?
Never heard of it.
It sounds like a reflection on your Company Commander.’
‘Not at all, sir.
They're forming in Scotland.’
‘Perkins, is this officer unhinged?’
Once again the Adjutant spoke up for Charles.
Charles was quite right and there were units called Independent Companies.
‘They're being trained in Scotland as Raiding Forces.
One is to assault and occupy the Azores and the Cape Verde Islands if Spain should enter the war.’
‘Cape Verde Islands?
Far-fetched flummery.
Azores — romantic day-dreaming, Willoughby.
What we're forgetting is that you were an actor in civilian life.’
The CO chuckled with unashamed glee at the little joke he was about to make at Charles's expense.
‘Perhaps you're missing the make-believe world of the stage, what?’
‘That's not fair, sir.’
‘I think it is.
So if it's drama you're seeking, let's ask the  Adjutant if he's yet appointed an Entertainments Officer.’
He chuckled even more when the Adjutant confessed he hadn't.
‘Well, we have one now.
That will keep you occupied in the evenings, eh, Willoughby?
You will, of course, continue to be restricted to the neighbourhood of Battalion HQ — no straying.
There you are then.
You'll find there's bags of talent to be discovered in the unit, and for a start I'd like you to lay on a cracking good entertainment we'll all enjoy.
There's a stage in the local drill hall.
It's yours.’
Only the Company Commander responded to the CO's triumphant solution to the problem of Lieutenant Willoughby.
He considered it a capital notion and just what was wanted.
They had a little laugh together, both eyeing Charles with amused satisfaction.
‘Try and look a little more enthusiastic, Willoughby.’
‘Is this an order, sir?’
‘Very much so.
The Adjutant will put it in Battalion Orders this evening.’
‘I didn't join the army to pursue my peace time job.
I'm a soldier.’
Stonily as he said this, it could only give the CO another opportunity for a barb.
‘Soldiers have to do what they're told.’
Perhaps reason was a better way of persuasion.
Charles tried it.
‘Then may I have an undertaking that if I can manage to put on a show, a stupendous show — I promise you it will be — may I then retire from the post?
I could train up a successor, sir.’
The CO had been given another obvious cue.
‘I don't make bargains with my officers.
You can rest assured I'm always fair to them.’
‘In that case, will you be forwarding my application to join either the Parachute School or the Independent Companies?’
‘Not at present, Willoughby.’
All trace of smile or chuckle disappeared rather quickly.
‘I've just given you a job to do.
You're wearing an insubordinate expression.
You'd better fall out before you say something you'll regret.’
The grim face, the extravagant salute and the loud stamp of his boots on the floorboards only fell just short of the military crime most disliked by superiors, dumb insolence.
The CO wisely decided not to notice this particular instance of it.
Being under constant surveillance, there could be no further runs across Heath and Common to Aunt Marjorie's, even if Clarissa had stayed on.
She didn't.
Wartime was having a decided effect on her life too.
Her telephone conversations with Charles were full of conflicting information about her future.
It seemed to Charles, waiting his turn at the public telephone box on the corner by his billet, that they were never going to be able to meet again.
His restriction of liberty and her impending removal to Portsmouth and the Wrens looked like making their relationship another casualty of war.
It was a depressing time for both of them, not helped for Charles by the failure of all his schemes somehow to circumvent the CO's ban on volunteering, together with his unwilling commitment of providing entertainment.
Both appeared to be insuperable problems until the evening when Clarissa's change of plan for the sixth or seventh time put a pattern into perspective.
‘What?
I missed that.
Damn lorry going by.
Going on tour?
What about the Wrens?
But are you sure this new form of service is going to take on.
I mean it's acting, isn't it?
That's hardly going to help the war effort….
I see.
Yes I'm glad in a way, I suppose, though I'll still never see you if you're off to the provinces to entertain the troops, damn their eyes.
They're watching me like hawks here.
I wish there was some way you could come and see me, before you go.
Clarissa?
Hullo?
Hold on!
You've given me an idea.
What's the name of your new set-up?
Entertainments National Service — what a mouthful.
ENSA for short.
Right.
Darling I'm going to ring off now.
Got to think.
Ring you tomorrow same time, if I don't have to wait too long in a queue with the whole blasted battalion.
Yes, it'll be about how we are to meet.
It may work.
Bye.’
Some days of furiously concentrated planning followed, and then Clarissa was able to telephone good news.
‘Hello?
Charles?
The ENSA people are delighted, and so is the management here at the Theatre.
Yes, we can bring the whole show — cast, props, music, the lot.
They're thrilled because it'll be our first assignment — at playing for the forces, I mean.
A launching.
A try-out.
The Press will be down too, so watch out.
Yes, rehearsing in your drill hall all day on the Sunday, then the show at night.
Just think, we'll have practically a whole day together….’
When the Sunday arrived, the drill hall was packed.
Officers and wives, riflemen and sweethearts.
The excited chatter hushed as Charles in his capacity of presenter of the affair, came before the curtain.
‘Ladies and Gentlemen, it's a great show from here.’
He got the first laugh of the show, a big one.
He told them they were in for a terrific all singing, all dancing, all laughing evening in the company of a galaxy of West End stars, and he informed them, after a bow to the front row where the CO and his wife sat among the senior officers of the Battalion:
‘The Commanding Officer proudly presents — direct from The Ambassadors Theatre, London — THE GATE REVUE!’
Charles watched from the wings with mounting excitement as sketches and songs got rapturous receptions.
Clarissa came off sparkling with pleasure after one of her very successful numbers.
‘Marvellous audience!
We all love them.’
‘You were gorgeous.
The men'll have the roof off with much more of that.
Pretty girls, risqué sketches, they've never seen anything like it.’
‘We thought elegance and sophistication wasn't quite enough, so we put in a lot of new stuff we're going to use on tour.’
‘Dead right.
What an evening.
I can't bear it to end.’
‘Darling.
All partings, this silly war.’
‘Will you marry me as soon as you get back?’
‘Yes, oh yes.’
‘No reservations this time?’
None.
Roll on Christmas.’
Perkins, the Adjutant, had somehow found his way back stage.
He made his way through groups of performers listening to Walter Crisham who was on stage rendering his famous song ‘The Lullaby of Broadway’.
The Adjutant spied Charles and Clarissa and bore down upon them a little diffidently.
‘Ah, there you are, Willoughby.
The CO sent me to find you.’
‘This is Clarissa Grey.
Does he want to make a thank you speech at the end?’
‘God, no.
He's fearfully creased about the whole thing.
Sorry, Miss Grey.
I think it's Heaven.’
His eyes followed a scantily dressed dancer making an entrance.
Charles couldn't believe his ears.
‘Creased?’
‘Oh livid, You're setting a bad example to the troops, apparently.’
‘I am?
But the men are lapping it up — so are their floosies.
Listen to 'em.’
‘I know, but altogether too blue — his very words.
The officers ' wives are being affronted.’
‘Blue!
The man's living deep in the past.’
The Adjutant nodded agreement sadly.
‘No more risque sketches and you're to get everything toned down in the second half.’
‘But we can't.
It's all rehearsed.
Charles!’
The professional in Clarissa could be altogether different from her off stage manner.
‘Don't worry, Clarissa darling, we won't.
It stays exactly as arranged.’
‘I say, old chap, it's an order.’
Nothing Thespian about the Adjutant.
‘All right, if he wants to walk out, let him.’
The letter of the law was something the Adjutant had learnt in his short army career.
He was covered.
‘Up to you, dear chap.
I've given you the message.
Oh, and he wants to see you directly the curtain comes down.’
‘So he shall, so he shall.
Accompanied by the whole  brilliant cast.’
‘Gosh, I shan't miss that.
Oh, one more thing, I'm afraid.
All these Press people — cameras everywhere.
He says if there's a single picture in the papers tomorrow, he'll….’
A great belly laugh from out front drowned the rest of the Adjutant's warning.
‘Better hurry back, old boy.
You're missing the bluest number in the show.’
‘Oh blast!’
The Adjutant hurtled back towards the auditorium, calling over his shoulder, ‘Sorry, Miss Grey.
You're terrific…‘
The position of Battalion Entertainments Officer was no longer held by Charles within five minutes of the drop of the curtain and although that was gratifying to him at the time, in spite of the manner of his dismissal, there were additional deprivations inflicted by a scandalized CO, that were not easy to bear.
He was sent into exile.
Barnes railway bridge was a sinecure compared with the limbo of the Willesden Marshalling Yards.
The limited excitements of training on Putney Heath were paradisal to someone faced with patrolling the altogether frigid wastes of Willesden.
It made things worse for Charles that he was responsible for his men's transfer with him to this wilderness.
‘Nothin' between here and Russia if you ask me.
Coo, that's an icy wind!’
Charles agreed with his sergeant that it was.
It seemed such an impossible feat to make the best of a bad deal that he made no attempt at it.
‘Pity my banishment should coincide with the onset of winter.’
The Sergeant continued to complain through chattering teeth.
‘A desert, that's what it is — a desert o’ railway tracks.’
He stuffed his hands deep into his greatcoat pockets and looked more miserable than ever.
Banished?
We're all banished, sir.’
‘My fault and I feel badly about it.
There is one consolation for the platoon.
I managed to get a leave roster for you all.
You re first on the list, Sergeant.
Go when you like.’
‘Then I act for you when you go, is that it?’
‘No such luck.
I don't appear on it.
Have to have a wonderful Christmas here instead.’
He contemplated the cattle trucks that were to be his and the platoon's home until further notice.
‘What?
With smelly old oil stoves in draughty wagons — not my idea of that old Yule Log in the grate.’
How long could he and his Sergeant stamp about in the cold feeling sorry for themselves, Charles wondered.
Napoleon's retreat from Moscow was possibly a more trying time for his troops.
Captain Scott's endurance until death at the South Pole made Willesden entirely bearable.
Well, not entirely.
‘These miles of wagons must yield something more comfortable than cattle trucks.
Have a look at the notice on the side of that one, Sergeant.
It's in French and it says ‘Five horses and forty men in each’.
No doubt who the cattle are.’
‘Tea up!’
A face appeared out of a wagon door further along the track.
‘Mug for you, sir?’
‘Thank you.
There's a good deed in a naughty world.’
When the Sergeant returned with steaming liquid in a tin container, Charles warmed his hands round it and gazed out across the flat expanse of his new command.
‘I think I'll go out with the next patrol and give these marshalling yards a thorough going over.’
Life at Willesden looked more promising on Charles's return from a detailed tour of his territory.
He was even able to astonish the Sergeant with some of his discoveries.
‘Blimey.
what's this then?’
‘Step aboard.
King Edward the Seventh's Royal Coach.
Circa the turn of the century at a guess.
Needs a bit of cleaning up, but it'll do me all right.’
Polished mahogany and blue velvet gave saloon, bedroom, bathroom and kitchen an elegance seldom found in even the most luxurious wagon lits on continental expresses.
The Sergeant was short of expletives by the end of the tour of inspection.
‘It's a palace.’
‘Buck House on wheels.
I'm afraid it's a good deal classier than the tumble-down old Pullmans I've found for the rest  of you.’
‘Never mind that sir.
There's one snag to it all.’
‘Bound to be What is it?’
Charles felt a little deflated, and when the Sergeant explained what he meant, quite depressed.
‘If they come visitin' — CO, Adjutant, QM, like — they'll never let you get away with it.
It'll be back to the cattle trucks for the lot of us.’
There was force in the argument.
The CO would certainly grudge this delinquent officer any comfort that might mitigate his lot.
By this time, however, the Sergeant was not at all reconciled to the original lodgings for the platoon.
‘Ah but, sir, if we practice a mite of deception, they won't get the change.
Because we fix up dummy alternative quarters, see, an’ call that Platoon HQ We keep it manned — I'll see to that — an' if they come nosin' around lookin' for you, you're out on patrol of course, see.
We send a runner for you.
Easy.’
They laughed happily about the possibilities of this idea and Charles felt much better.
He really was very lucky to have such agreeable people to share his exile.
‘You're very understanding, Sergeant.’
‘May I return the compliment, sir.’
‘And magnificently wicked.’
‘I dunno, sir.
Bit o’ camouflage makes Army life more interesting.’
In her office in the Ministry of Information, Charity was dealing with a visitor.
He'd just been shown in by a messenger, and the moment the uniformed official had withdrawn, had expressed surprise and displeasure at finding her to be his interviewer.
He'd been ordered to report to the Ministry by his Adjutant, and either there had been some colossal mistake or he'd been sent for under false pretences.
‘False pretences are no part of our work here, Charles.’
‘Nevertheless, it's a conspiracy of some sort.’
Charity agreed coolly that in a way she supposed it was.
The cooler Charity's answers, the more indignant Charles's requests for an explanation.
He'd looked forward to being interviewed on a subject of some importance to him.
‘After all, I've come to see someone about volunteering to go on a special mission to America.’
‘No, you haven't.
You've come to see me and I'm sorry if you find it disappointing.’
‘No mission?’
‘No mission.’
‘But, the Adjutant…‘
‘I simply rang him up and got you an evening off.’
‘How?’
‘We're fairly influential at the Ministry.
And here you are.
Be grateful.’
‘Why?’
‘Do stop asking questions, Charles.’
But when she announced in a maddeningly off-hand way that she had been deputed to look after him while Clarissa was away, she  got another very swift question indeed.
‘She said that?’
‘Oh not in so many words, idiot.’
Which seemed to Charles an extremely lame answer in view of the history of the acquaintanceship.
He got quite angry at the impossibility of Clarissa having given any such instructions.
‘Not bloody likely!’
He laughed bitterly and prepared to leave the office.
Without appearing to show any discomposure, Charity conceded the point.
‘It was Mona who put me in touch with you to be honest.’
‘Mona?
Mona…at the Jermyn Street Hotel?’
Charity hardly bothered to reply.
Just looked steadily back at him with the faintest trace of a smile.
Charles had someone else to denounce.
‘You wait till I tear a very ugly strip off the old girl.
Throwing me in the way of a reformed Fascist!
Comes of telephoning her, telling her I was lonely with Clarissa away and stuck out at Willesden.
I'll savage Mona when I see her.’
‘Let's go along there now.
Then you can.’
‘Her business to find me a pretty and agreeable companion, that's what she said.’
‘Will I do?’
‘You know you won't.’
‘We can't get into much trouble at Mona's.’
The prospect of any trouble at all that didn't involve demoralisation at Willesden suddenly seemed to Charles a welcome change.
It would be fun to see Mona again.
A happy smile had quickly to be adjusted to a more serious expression as he turned to Charity.
‘Well then, if you can promise it'll be alright at Mona's, let's toddle along there.’
Within the shortest space of time, they were walking into the lounge of an hotel that had seen better days but was still surprisingly well patronised; by a variety of habitués, mostly male, and all, whether uniformed or civilian, contriving to give the place an air of distinction.
If the atmosphere was discreet, the welcome accorded Charity and Charles by the lady of advanced age with the assurance of a  flawed duchess, was less so.
‘Come in my children.
What a divine pair you make and wasn't I the wicked schemer?
You shall have buckets of champagne.
Bumface will pay.’
‘Who is Bumface?’
Mona's habit of using her guests' nicknames indiscriminately could be confusing.
She made no distinction between callow youth and Cabinet Minister.
‘A dear friend of long standing.
Come through into my private room.’
In an aside to Charity, Charles asked if this was all part of the conspiracy.
‘Absolutely not.
I'm blameless for Bumface.’
‘Here we are, my pet.’
Mona flung open the door of her inner sanctum and ushered the new arrivals in with a flourish.
‘Two pretty young people to cheer you up.
Sit down, my darlings.
What is it, my child?
You're not afraid of Colonel Bumface?’
‘Mona!
We'd better go.’
Charles felt extremely faint.
‘Sorry, sir.’
The figure in the armchair by the fire merely glowered.
‘What's the dratted boy talkin' about?
Bumface, don't frown so.
This is Charles Willoughby and the beauty is Charity Rainham.
Pour them some wine.’
Charity's beauty got only distant acknowledgement.
‘How do you do?’
Bumface's sternest tones were reserved for Charles.
‘Willoughby, what on earth are you doing here?’
Don't tell me you've met Colonel Bumface before, boy?
‘He's my Commanding Officer.’
‘Lovely, lovely surprise!
Aren't I clever?
Calls for another bottle.
Come along, Charity angel, I want to talk secrets with you.
We'll leave the boys together.
They must have lots in common.’
The second the door shut behind the two women, Bumface attacked.
‘You'd better get off straight back to Willesden, Willoughby.
No business to be in London, and you know it.’
No, sir, I mean yes, sir…
I'm off duty…
Adjutant's permission….’
He had no great faith in the excuse.
‘We'll go into that in the morning.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘And the young woman you're with — she's a notorious Nazi sympathiser.’
‘Oh no sir she's very anti nowadays.
She's in the Ministry of Information.’
‘I hope you haven't given her any.’
‘We're rather short of news at Willesden.’
‘So much the better.’
The Colonel looked grimmer than ever but before he could complete the discomfort of Charles, Mona was back clutching a magnum.
‘Weren't we swift as lightning, duckies?
Now do make yourself useful, Bumface, and open the bubbly.
The children are dying of thirst.’
‘You'll have to excuse me, Mona.’
Bumface got stiffly to his feet and straightened his tunic.
‘As soon as I've rung my Orderly Officer to give him certain instructions, I'll have to get off back.’
‘Too bad of you, Colonel dear.’
Charity practically cooed.
‘I was counting on a serious heart to heart with Charles's CO.
Won't you sit down again and tell me something I'm dying to ask you?’
Very hurriedly, Charles tried to save a situation that threatened to end his whole career.
‘Charity, the Colonel's right.
Don't you think we'd better…that is, I'd better…‘
‘High time.’
The CO strode to the door.
‘You've neglected your duty long enough.’
Mona reached it before he could fling it open and order Charles out.
‘Oh stow it, Bumface.
You're not on parade now.
Here, Charles, you open it.
I brought it for you and it's your duty to see it put away in a decent fashion.’
She held up a pacifying hand to the affronted CO.
‘Alright, alright, leave us by all means if you must, Bumface.
Come back and see me when you're less grumpy.
And here…sign this blank cheque for what you owe.
I'll fill in the figures.
You needn't think you're getting away with a thing.
The champagne's on you.’
For the two women, Bumface's dismissal merited no more than perfunctory laughter and a slight impatience with Charles for not getting on with the business of bottle opening.
He stood like a man turned into a pillar of salt, his  mouth open, his eyes distraught.
The bottle dangled hopelessly from the hand into which Mona had thrust it.
Charity relieved him of it carefully and set about the operation with skill and familiarity.
Charles's nerves were so taut, he jumped when the cork popped.
‘Relax, Charles dear soul, and stop wilting, do.
Bumface has bunked.’
‘Sh!
Sh!
We don't call him that, at least never to his face.
Sir, sir, he's sir.’
He accepted his glass of wine almost unwillingly.
‘Oh what ghastly luck.’
They treated him like a child trying champagne for the first time.
‘See the pretty bubbles winking at the brim and forget it.’
But Charles could only sip absently and put the glass down.
‘Yes, thank you, thank you, but my hash has just been settled, can't you see?’
Mona asked what the dear child was burbling about, and led him to Bumface's vacant chair by the fire.
‘Even if he doesn't send me to the Glasshouse, I'm done for.
Willesden will be a pleasant dream compared with….
As for volunteering for a move to somewhere more exciting, next time he'll flay me, flay me, d'you see?
I'm dead mutton.’
Mona and Charity exchanged expressions of incomprehension but pounced on the only word they could understand.
‘Dear child, never, never volunteer.
It's always fatal.’
When Charles protested that he was always volunteering, they wanted to know what for.
‘Oh everything — at the drop of a hat.
Anything that might produce a bit of action.
But the CO vetoes me every time.’
He was advised by Charity to brace up because the effect on the Colonel of tonight's little scene might well make him change his mind.
Charles said gloomily that he'd drink to that.
They started to give him more advice.
‘You're so ingenuous.
You tackle things the wrong way.
All it requires is a little homework.’
Devious homework, Mona insisted.
He should never defer to people.
Simply use them.
While Charles listened to all this good advice, he drank up his glass of champagne and felt a bit better.
‘You know what you two are?
Harpies.’
Darling boy, they said it was all so simple.
He must get himself asked for He said he didn't know anyone.
‘Charity does.’
‘Between us we know practically everyone.’
‘And we'll tell whoever is necessary what is wanted of them, won't we, sweetest girl?’
Naturally.
The demand for your services will reach Bumface as an order.
He'll have to comply.’
Charles drank another glass and laughed quite cheerfully.
‘You're marvellous.
Both of you.
I wish I thought the War Office worked that way.’
‘Infant.
It always has.
What d'you want to join?’
This was a game Charles enjoyed playing.
The always therapeutic intake of champagne helped.
The CO and Willesden were sordid matters to return to later.
He left the field wide open for whatever the other players in this charming charade might suggest.
He'd accept anything that didn't involve stumbling about in a greasy morass of railway tracks.
‘And so you shall, poor duck.
I hear of things in my job, you know.’
Smart gambit by Charity.
His next move should be equivocal, so he acknowledged that dark rumours were circulating about the MOI.
‘In fact I could fix you up with something interesting right away.
Can you ski?’
‘Very clever.
Hilarious too.
Ski?’
‘Ever tried it?’
Of course he had, but better play safe.
Charity's friends were hardly likely to accept him on the strength of a short acquaintance with the nursery slopes at Wengen.
‘Excellent.
I can tell them you're experienced.’
He thanked her but countered cunningly with a query about who her friends might be.
She resisted the trap.
‘You'd have to resign your commission, of course.
Still interested?’
‘Steady on!’
He considered Charity was going outside the rules.
‘I'm serious.
You'd be joining a corps d'élite , d'you see?’
Charity looked serious but she was obviously a master at the  game and he must not show he'd been jolted.
He stuck to his question about her friends behind this interesting suggestion.
My Uncle William.
There'll be ski training in the French Alps and so on.’
‘What fun!’
It seemed to be time to play his ace in this particular trick.
‘But I'm certainly not giving up my commission for some possible Winter Sports.’
Charity tried another tactic.
‘Charles, you know I hate the Russians.’
‘I know you love the Germans.’
‘Used to.
I was badly shaken by that pact.
But that was last August.
Now it's January 1940 and it's all much worse.
The Russians are marching into Finland.
‘The Finns are seeing them off, or so the papers say.’
‘They're fighting for their lives, and they need help.
Uncle William is Second in Command of a Ski Battalion being formed at Bordon Camp.’
The game forgotten, Charles was now deadly serious too.
He was also very excited.
Here was a chance to help the Finns and have a crack at Stalin at the same time.
This was something really worth volunteering for.
‘If there's any chance of being selected I must do it.
Real action when not a sausage is happening here.
My skiing isn't too bad, as a matter of fact, but wait…wait.
You say I'd have to revert to the ranks.
Really?
Um.
Private Willoughby.
Needs thinking about.’
‘Guardsman Willoughby.’
‘Oh.
Must have time to think.’
If Clarissa were here, she'd warn him against hasty decisions, impetuosity, all the faults of his character.
Clarissa.
It wouldn't be fair not to consult her.
Supposing he did say goodbye to his commission, supposing he was selected, supposing he went off to Russia or Finland or wherever it was without even seeing her.
‘I wish I could get hold of Clarissa.’
He expected Charity to scoff at such weakness, but surprisingly, she seemed only to be concerned with how that could be arranged.
Getting hold of Clarissa, wherever she was entertaining the troops and having her transported to London, was apparently no more than a mild challenge.
It could easily be done.
‘I'll get on to it tomorrow morning from the Office.
We'll  come and see you in your railway hut and talk it over.’
‘Well, that might be difficult, especially with the CO on my tail and….
Oh Hell, why not?
He's after my guts anyway.
Incidentally, it's better than a railway hut, and perfect for a party.’
Charity said she longed for bangers and mash and mugs of hot sweet tea, but Mona, who had been watching events with a twinkling eye, said rubbish, she'd send over to Fortnum's for a hamper.
No, she wouldn't come to the party.
A silly old woman would be a menace in a marshalling yard.
The hamper would be a present for the three of them and she'd be thinking of them having a jolly evening.
She did so love a feast.
They kissed her and all had another glass of fizz before Charles started the dreary journey back to Willesden on the Underground.
He was to keep in touch with Charity by telephone.
‘Meanwhile, Bumface will be hearing from a cousin of mine at the War Office.
I believe he's called the Under-Secretary of State.’
A hurricane lamp and a pinpoint of light from a torch were all the girls had to guide them across the sleepers and rails.
Apologies from the shepherding sergeant drew from Charity a bitter comment about having discovered Hell on Earth at Willesden.
‘Got to observe strict ARP, you see, Miss, though here we are gettin' on for five months of war and not a peep out of a Jerry plane.
But you're right about Willesden and how you ladies managed to find us in the blackout beats me.’
‘Luckily our taxi-driver shared a sense of missionary zeal with us.’
‘Mind the step up, ladies, here we are at Mr Willoughby's secret HQ.’
He helped them into the railway coach, stood the dark lantern on the floor, checked the blinds and curtains with the torch, slammed the carriage door and flooded the whole place with good old-fashioned electric light.
‘There now!’
There was pride in his voice.
Clarissa gasped and Charity collapsed into the nearest armchair as if stunned.
‘Now this, on the other hand, is absolute Heaven.’
Kicking her shoes off, she rested her head on an antimacassar and gazed up at the chandelier.
‘Don't you love it, Clarissa?’
‘Charles never put up with discomfort for the sake of it, but this is carrying grandeur too far.’
She crossed to investigate an open door into the next compartment.
‘Thought you'd like it, Miss.
That's his bedroom through there.’
‘Do come and look, Charity.’
The bed was like a  catafalque, suspended from the roof by royal blue ropes and hangings.
‘Too exciting, darling.
What possibilities one's mind explores.’
Yet another room beyond contained what the sergeant called ‘all mod con’’.
‘Utter, utter luxury.’
The sergeant told them all about the cattle trucks and how Charles had soon put a stop to that.
When Clarissa wanted to know where Charles was, and was told that he was out with a patrol, she looked puzzled and a little disappointed.
‘When he has guests?
Charles is always so keen.’
‘Mr Willoughby won't be long, Miss.
An’ if you'll pardon the liberty, ladies, I reckon I'd shirk my duty if two pretty young ladies had come all this way special.
Ah but he's never one to neglect his.
And there he is now or I'm a Dutchman.’
Outside a muffled voice could be heard.
‘I say, anyone at home?’
‘That's not Charles.’
‘Sh, miss, no.
That's the blooming Adjutant.’
The sergeant looked even more put out when there was a knock on the outer door and the voice continued.
‘There's someone in here, sir.
Don't seem to be able to make them hear.
Open!’
More knocks.
Charity didn't bother to whisper.
‘How thrilling!’
‘This way, miss, quick.
Along the corridor and into the bedroom.
I'll deal with this.’
‘Certainly not.
I refuse to take part in a French farce.
What do you say, Clarissa?
We sit firmly where we are.’
‘But we mustn't hurt Charles.’
‘Might do him some good.
Show the gentleman in, Sergeant.’
The sergeant hesitated long enough to decide he would be wasting his time by further argument.
The girls heard the door open and clambering steps into the coach.
The voice was cheerful.
‘Looks like somebody's home.
Very comfortable too.
Ah, Sergeant, your quarters?’
‘Good evening, sir.’
Quite a different voice behind the Adjutant was not  nearly so reassuring.
‘What's going on here?’
‘Oh!
The Commanding Officer.
Come in, sir.’
The sergeant was shaken.
‘Where's Mr Willoughby?’
‘Out on patrol, sir.’
‘Good God!’
From her armchair, Charity dispensed verbal hospitality.
‘Hello.
You're Charles's CO, are you not?
We've met.
How nice of you to call.
This is Clarissa Grey of ENSA.’
‘We've also met, Colonel.
The night of the Gate Revue.’
‘Er, yes, so we did.’
The Colonel's frown grew darker at the memory.
He turned to Charity again.
‘Do you mind explaining how and why you are here?’
‘Colonel!
Naughty!
You've forgotten your friend.
And of course I've never been introduced to you properly.’
‘Colonel Bumford…
Captain Perkins.’
The fixed frown made no impression on Charity who became extremely formal.
‘How do you do?
Clarissa, Charles and I ran into Colonel Bumford — Oh Bumford, I see the connection — the other evening at Mona's.’
‘Really?
Do sit down, both of you.
We've come to see Charles, but he's out.’
‘Such a bore to find he's on duty.’
‘The sergeant has been looking after us very beautifully though.
Clarissa waved an arm round the Saloon and smiled at the Adjutant.
‘Did you know this was Edward the Seventh's Royal Coach?’
The Adjutant smiled back delightedly.
‘Yes, but isn't it a pity?
Apparently Charles only uses it to entertain VIPs.
That's why you're here of course, Colonel.’
‘Not exactly.’
Finding Clarissa's brand of artlessness difficult to penetrate, he had another try at Charity.
‘Was Willoughby expecting you?’
‘Oh no.
We're a lovely surprise.
And so is the yummy hamper over there from Fortnum's.
Let's unpack it and all have a drink.’
‘I think not.
Our business with Willoughby is strictly military.’
He was frankly baffled and for a second he  wavered.
Then he caught sight of the sergeant who seemed to be too amused by the situation altogether.
‘The Sergeant will show you out.’
‘Oh you want Platoon HQ, sir, for Mr Willoughby.
He'll be back there by now.
The Adjutant knows the way.’
‘I do.
But this place is so much more pleasant, sir.
The sergeant could go and fetch him.’
‘He'll do no such thing, Perkins.
We'll see him in the…er…proper surroundings.
Come along.
You too, Sergeant.’
‘Must you go so soon?
It's a frantic shame.’
Overdoing a successful method of defence, Charity nearly ruined everything by a palpable display of innocent formality.
Colonel Bumford took his opportunity to win on the last throw.
‘Yes, we must.
And so I'm afraid must you.’
He motioned an unwilling Adjutant and Sergeant out ahead of him and stood by the open door, frowning so deeply that Clarissa would have followed if Charity hadn't risked leaving her defences and staked all on a final devastating attack.
‘Wouldn't think of it, Colonel dear.’
There was steel in the endearment.
‘Quite out of the question till we've seen Charles and given him his hamper…from the divine Mona.
You wouldn't like her to be furiously angry with you next time you pop in.’
The Colonel's vain attempt to get a word in was so sharply smothered and he looked so rattled that Clarissa sat down again.
Charity steamrollered on.
‘No really, just see you send Charles over here when you find him.
And don t be beastly to him.
He's done nothing wrong and you're lucky to have such a conscientious officer.
Off you go and not another word.
Clarissa and I are going to have a tiny foot-up till he arrives.’
Clarissa was worried that this undoubted victory would bring more trouble for Charles.
She didn't really expect to see him again that night.
Even Charity thought she might have gone too far, though she didn't admit it to Clarissa, rallying her with a drink from Mona's hamper.
Charles, however, came rushing in later bubbling with excitement and wanting to know all.
He wanted a drink too and Clarissa told the story while she ministered to him.
‘…and off they went.
Charity was wonderful.’
‘Clarissa was not only wonderful too, but so loyal to you, Charles.
As for your sergeant….’
‘What an actor!’
‘We just hope you're not going to be punished because of us.
What happened when he found you?’
‘Bumface came here to tell me that he was going to fight the War Office and that he was not having the WO Instruction for me to report forthwith to the Ski Battalion at Bordon.
But…between you, you've done the trick.
Let me fill your glasses.’
‘Go on, go on.’
‘But…now, thanks to you, he can't wait to get rid of me.
So, my darling girls, your everlasting good health….’
‘Do get on!’
‘So I'm off.
At last.’
‘Oh Charles.
And your commission?’
‘Goodbye to all that.
As from tomorrow I am Guardsman Willoughby of 4th Scots Guards.’
High above Chamonix on Le Brevent, a mountain from which a towering Mt Blanc looks less intimidating, there is an Alpine hut with particularly good views.
In peacetime the place would be crowded with skiers on their way up or down the mountain.
They would sit out in their deckchairs in brilliant sunshine, surveying snow-covered range after magnificent snow-covered range, and while they took refreshment, take snapshots of one another, and chatter about the delights of a winter sports holiday in the Savoy Alps, the more energetic would be trudging up from below on seal skins or swooping by from above demonstrating their skill.
Far below on the nursery slopes near the great hotels, tiny specks of black on the vast white expanse would be novices and their teachers going about a more painstaking routine.
On this day, early in 1940, the hut was still there and a few deckchairs, but that was about all.
An extraordinary absence of people.
Peregrine, however, was there lying back in his chair and offering himself to the hot sun in rather a shameless way.
He seemed to be in a uniform of some sort, a slightly unconventional get-up but unmistakably an officer.
Beside him, stuck in the snow, were a pair of skis and ski sticks surmounted by gloves of a colourful kind.
He seemed to be asleep.
From far up the mountain came a cry.
‘Attention la piste !!’
There was a swish of skis and a figure came hurtling past the hut, executed a brilliant turn in a flurry of snow and disappeared over the shoulder of the mountain.
Peregrine's attention was captured by this manoeuvre and he swivelled in the chair to watch another skier zig-zagging down towards the hut.
This time the flashing ‘Christiania’ brought its perpetrator to a sliding halt only yards from Peregrine's deck chair.
He acknowledged the new arrival with a languid wave of the hand.
‘Rather a good stop, Charles.
Take your skis off and have a breather.
Hey, garçon!
‘A face appeared from a window of the hut.
‘Vin chaud.
Deux .’.
‘Toute de suite, monsieur .’
‘Take a pew.’
Charles unbuckled his ski straps and stuck skis and sticks in the snow beside Peregrine's.
He enquired if a mere guardsman might really sit down beside his officer, but dragged up a chair as he did so.
‘Anything goes out here, dear boy.
I watched you come down and I'm pleased with you.
You're showing much improved form and you've worked hard on your Christies.
Keep it up and I'll consider promoting you to Lance-corporal unpaid.’
‘Praise from you at last, Peregrine.
I shall send a pretty picture postcard to Charity immediately.’
‘Be careful what you say.’
That quondam Nazi, Peregrine, is now nearly as reformed a character as you are — that's all I'll write.’
‘Censored.’
‘Oh and…
Love from Uncle Willie and that goes for him too.’
‘Insolence to officers will not be tolerated.’
Charles stretched his legs and savoured the view.
Far across the valley the dark tree line cut sharp across a white snow ridge, the sky above it bluer than the summer sea.
‘I suppose there's a war going on somewhere.’
‘Not so as you'd notice it.’
Both relapsed into a contented silence till the waiter appeared with a tray.
‘Voilà, m'sieurs.
Deux vins chauds.
Et pour dégustation un peu de fromage en croûte .’
Peregrine said that was terrific.
Small grunts of satisfaction broke another long silence.
When Charles spoke at last, the words came dreamily.
‘Here we are, silent on a peak above Chamonix, in a  hot sun…gazing at the Alps….’
‘My idea of bliss…‘
‘…with a glass of Glüwein to hand….
All so madly unreal….’
‘Heaven will seem just as unreal….’
‘All the same…hardly the right training for the rigours of the Steppes….
‘Oh I don't know.
…Never face discomfort until absolutely necessary.’
He gave it the significance of a personal belief and turning lazily in his chair to inform Charles with more than a trace of arrogance, ‘Old Guards’ proverb.’
‘That may be, but all this schussing down mountains — Finland's quite flat and full of pine forests.’
‘You wait, you'll get your bellyful of langlauf next week — and carbine practice — and tommy gun — all on the flat.
Which reminds me that the Jocks — I mean the real guardsmen who arrived from England this morning to make up the complement, not you phoney chaps, are going to be given their first lesson this afternoon.
Skiing without tears, I hardly think.
Mustn't miss that.
Should be sensational.’
Charles called Peregrine a sadist and asked what point there was in teaching cooks and clerks to ski.
They wouldn't take part in operations.
‘They'll probably be kept back in some administrative area near roads.
Downhill running will be torture for them, poor devils.’
‘Do try to remember, dear lad, that even odds and sods have to get about…in those miles and miles of deep snow-covered fuck all.
Drink up, Guardsman Willoughby!
Got to see those novices.
Skis on!
Race you down to the nursery slopes!’
Others had had the same idea.
Members of the Battalion were converging on the broad slope above the empty resort.
They were forming up one below the other, skis parallel to the hill.
Peregrine and Charles sped down to join spectators all of whom knew the difficulties presented by first steps in skiing, and who were now gathering to watch their less proficient comrades make fools of themselves.
Peregrine performed an unnecessary jump turn and a particularly flashing stop ‘christie’, as he swooped into position.
‘There they are — the Jocks. all lined up and raring to go.
Charles shook his head sadly.
‘Poor devils all look shit-scared.’
Along the top of the ridge near the ski-lift station where they'd just been assembled and accoutred, forty of fifty unwilling looking soldiers were strung out in a line attempting to obey orders and words of command from Non-Commissioned Officers who had sensibly omitted to incommode themselves with skis.
‘Stand steady and keep your dressing!’
‘Dressing!
What a hope!’
Even Peregrine was beginning to have qualms about the outcome.
‘Steady I said.
Stop waddlin' about the lot of yer!’
‘Dear God, will you look at that Drill Sergeant with his pacing stick.
He must think they're square-bashing at Caterham.’
The Drill Sergeant stayed firmly on his reliable duck board and puffed out a chest with red sash across khaki tunic.
Dress for Wellington Barracks with no concessions to snow or winter sporting.
‘Like a lot of bloody ducks….
Stand still!’
He stood rigid, pacing stick under his arm.
‘Now wait for it…
HQ Company — straight down the slope — BY THE LEFT…
SKI!’
They were off on a collision course with the beaten snow, their equipment and one another.
Writhing bodies and contorted patterns of skis and sticks cluttered the terrain.
Many unattached skis went sliding off down the hill at incredible speed.
There were furious shouts, hoarse cries and the noise of splintering wood all round.
The din and chaos continued for some time after help arrived from the êchelon of spectators, Charles and Peregrine among them.
‘Holy Moses!’
Peregrine had murmured the words seconds after the catastrophe happened.
‘By the left — ski.
Imbecile initiation.’
Charles was speaking seriously to Peregrine later.
Equally bemused, Peregrine could only think aloud.
‘A battlefield must look just like that.
That must be a record shambles…even for the British Army.’
Back in England when the 4th Scots Guards had finished ski training and were waiting to put what they'd learned  into practice, Charles had by no means forgotten events on the nursery slopes of Chamonix.
He was on a short Embarkation Leave and told the whole story once again to Clarissa.
Where there many casualties?’
He was able to assure her that in spite of a few twisted ankles and bruised limbs, those same Jocks were skiing not half badly by the time that strange wartime holiday was over.
‘Shows what discipline can do.
Guards’ discipline.’
‘You're happy at last, my darling, aren't you?’
‘Fabulous lot of chaps to go to war with.
I hope we do well.’
Clarissa could only say glumly that according to the newspapers, the Finns were doing very well at any rate, and how mean Charles's officers were not to give him a bit more Embarkation Leave.
She also made him promise the usual things like writing to her every day and keeping warm.
She wasn't at all good at concealing how worried she was for his safety.
In the circumstances, it was a little cruel of Charles to return to his battalion at Bordon Camp by an earlier train than he need have taken.
He wanted to be quite sure of not missing anything that might be going on there.
To be based in London would, under normal circumstances, have been a highly desirable alternative to dashing about the Midlands and the North of England doing one night shows for the troops in draughty halls and freezing aircraft hangers.
The week since Charles's departure, however, had been a bleak one, and Clarissa found the familiarity of her flat a disadvantage.
There were reminders in every cupboard and corner of how much she was missing Charles and how worried she was about this expedition to a country she knew nothing about and which she hardly knew where to find on a map.
Clarissa was forlorn.
So when her doorbell rang, she went thankfully to the door to let in her expected visitor.
She and Charity had spoken several times on the telephone, but both being so busy, no meeting could be arranged until today.
She opened the door to find not Charity but Charles.
The shock nearly prostrated her.
‘Charles!
How?
Why?
Oh I think I'm going to faint…
Charles, what's happened?
Why are you back so soon?’
He dumped his kitbag and led her to an armchair, but she clung to him in a state of possessive disbelief which upset Charles even more than the deep depression he'd been suffering from when he entered the flat.
‘I say, steady, Clarissa, steady, darling.
Better sit down.
Sorry if I took you by surprise.
Have you got some brandy or something to brace you up?’
‘No, no.
It doesn't matter.
Tell me why you're here?’
‘I've had it, that's all.
Bitched, buggered, and bewildered.’
‘What?’
She was so bewildered herself, she felt fainter than ever.
‘Yes, I must sit down, I feel so wobbly.
It's  wonderful to see you but I don't understand.
Tell me everything.’
Hopeless tale.
We were rushed up to Scotland.
But we sat up there in the mouth of the Clyde — off Greenock — in our troopers for three whole days — seemed like three years.’
‘What were you doing?’
‘Doing?
Nothing.
Sleeping, playing interminable cards, getting more and more browned-off.
When we were all on the point of going mad or bolshie, there was a shattering announcement on the blower — intercom — sort of loudhailer.
Oh well, if you don't know what I'm talking about, it doesn't matter.
Anyway…they told us to hand in all our Arctic kit, fur parkas, white camouflage, etc.’
‘But why?’
‘The Finns have asked for an armistice, and the war there is over.’
‘It's not in the papers.’
‘Can't help that.
It will be when it suits the MOI, Charity's lot.’
‘Charity?
I'm expecting her.
Any minute.
I thought you were her.’
‘She.
She'll have heard through the family grapevine.
Uncle Willie, you know.
A pretty outcome.
Not Charity's fault.
Just my usual sort of luck.
Oh damn everything!’
Clarissa was very far from damning such good news.
She was feeling a great deal better about everything, but knew better than to say so.
She sat there looking much less pale and thanking God privately that He'd stopped that horrid war in Finland and brought Charles back to her.
‘Where are you stationed now?
London?
That would be expecting too much, surely, but she said a small prayer to herself that it might be so.
‘They gave us all railway warrants back to our homes.
I'm on indefinite leave.
He sounded utterly joyless.
‘That's marvellous.
Oh Thank God!’
She was so happy, she couldn't help giving grateful thanks out loud for such a quick answer to her prayer.
‘That s all very well but I'm worse off than I was before.
Fourth Scots Guards is disbanded.’
Although she didn't quite know exactly what that  entailed, he looked so depressed she murmured words of sympathy while her heart went on singing inside.
She never had liked his keenness on the Guards.
Always sent fighting before anyone else.
Perhaps he'd go back to nice safe Willesden again.
Uncomfortable but safe.
Charles was grumbling on.
‘No unit to go to and no hope of getting my Commission back.
None whatever.’
Go and see Colonel Bumford.
‘Fat lot of use that would be.
I telephoned the Adjutant from Glasgow.
He did his best but Bumface wouldn't even speak to me.
He's washed his hands of me.
No, I'm just a Jock — Guardsman Willoughby — and a Jock I look like staying till the end of the war.’
Nothing could cheer him up.
The prospect of indefinite leave was anathema.
He muttered over and over again that he was stymied.
Clarissa racked her brains.
‘I know.
Put in for ENSA.
They'd love to have you.’
‘Clarissa darling, please.
Entertainment is out.’
‘Then wait, wait.
Here's Charity at last.
She'll know what to do.’
Immediately she was told the situation — she knew the strategic implications already of the cancellation of the Finnish Expedition — Charity was full of practical ideas for the reinstatement of Charles.
She reviewed possible officials who might be contacted with profit, various other relations including her Uncle Willie, and influential members of the House of Lords.
Charles became quite hopeful again when she promised to give the matter her attention the very next morning.
She seemed so sanguine that he started to enjoy his leave and they all three went off to see Mona in Jermyn Street, who greeted them with her usual generous hospitality, very little of which was at her or their expense, but who had not seen Charles since his transformation from 2nd Lieutenant to Guardsman.
She disapproved.
‘We can just tolerate rankers in here, my dearest boy.
Some of them are sons of friends I've known for years.
But like their fathers they all have aspirations to do better things.
Like waiting to go to OCTU or that place at Brighton for young Naval Officers.
You mustn't sit down under this.
We'll all help you but you must make a real effort too.
Go and see Bumface for a start, my duck.’
She wouldn't be satisfied with Charles's explanation that he had already tried.
‘On the telephone?
From Glasgow?
What did you expect, sweetest boy?
Tackle him in person.
I know my Bumface.
He can be persuaded.
He's an old donkey, so stubborn.
But he can be persuaded.
With carrots.
Or sometimes with a sharp crack of the whip close to his flanks.
He's susceptible.
I'll talk to him, but only on one condition.
You go along to see him first thing tomorrow.’
Charles had reluctantly to agree.
His spirits sank again at the prospect and although he went out to Ruislip where his former battalion now had its headquarters, and although he was received by Colonel Bumford, his spirits were at zero three days later when Charity spoke to him on the telephone.
‘Charles?
I'm finding it very difficult.
Even my cousin who sort of runs the War Office says there's not much he can do.
You see, he can't make Bumface take you back.
You grovelled to him?
How ghastly!
I have to tell you that even Mona made no impression on him…
No she didn't grovel to him, but she knows who he grovels to, it seems.
Listen, there's just one hope for you and that's all I can see….
No, you don't have to do anything, but Mummy may.
Yes I do mean my mother.
I'll explain.
You see, Bumface's superior boss, your old Brigade Commander…
That's right, Bradshaw, Brigadier Bradshaw, Boy Bradshaw Mummy calls him.
Well he happens to be an old flame of Mummy's.
Yes.
So of course we've asked him to dinner.
Mummy and I will bring our guns to bear.
But so must you…
Yes, you and Clarissa are invited to meet him.’
The dinner party, when it took place, was a disaster.
At first Charles felt inhibited.
Lord and Lady Southdown were friendly if a little distant.
The Brigadier, red-tabbed and resplendent, made him feel scruffy in his battle dress, however well pressed it was after Clarissa's loving efforts.
Moreover the Brigadier was far too busy reminiscing with Lady Southdown, talking politics with Lord Southdown, and flirting mildly with Clarissa on his other side.
Charles was hardly noticed.
He sat next to Charity and opposite the Brigadier.
Dinner was nearly over and the ladies about to leave the room, when Charity in a low urgent aside, tried to  make Charles give some impression of a man worthy of consideration.
The Brigadier, a little flushed with good wine, was holding forth about the qualities of modern officers.
‘You've hardly opened your mouth, Charles dear.
You can't expect Mummy and me to do all the talking about you know what.
At least answer the Brigadier's tirade against temporary officers.
He obviously thinks you were one.
Agree with him.
Butter him up a bit.
Do try.’
Charles whispered back that it was utter tripe the Brigadier was waffling.
He thought for a second about the Brigadier's last biased pronouncement, found himself immediately incensed, and launched impetuously into a passionate rebuttal.
‘You're simply damning temporary officers as opposed to regular, sir.
I was a Territorial, a very different animal.
I suppose one can't blame the regular officer trained in peacetime for being orthodox and cautious.
As a matter of fact, my last CO is a good example.
Colonel Bumford.
I think he's spoken to you about me, and I'm sorry he considers me to be unreliable: happy-go-lucky was how he described me, I imagine.
Now, Colonel Bumford is very typical of the type of regular officer, who is so orthodox and cautious, he finds it safer to put off making decisions rather than risk wrong ones.’
The company looked stunned and he went on.
‘But sir, volunteer soldiers like me joined with the determination to resist any attack upon our country.
If this damn war ever starts, chaps like me will be, must be, uncompromising about decisions to the point of making them on the spot.
If sometimes they're the wrong decisions…too bad.
At least we won't dally — no humming and hawing — no referring the matter to superiors and wasting valuable time.
Territorial officers, such as I was…inject precious verve into the tired old army carcass…and God knows it needs a face-lift!’
Charity and Clarissa looked dismayed.
Both said ‘Charles!’ together.
Lord Southdown reminded him evenly that the port decanter was stuck at him and would he pass it please?
Lady Southdown rose to her feet and the girls followed her out of the room.
The Brigadier seemed to be thinking furiously as he helped himself to another glass of port.
Charles felt something more needed to be said.
‘Perhaps I'm talking too much’ No-one disagreed.
‘Yes, far too much, No reaction ‘So I'll shut up’ And he did for
On the way home, Clarissa was not only talkative but, for her, extremely voluble on the subject of good manners.
If Charles chose to throw an opportunity away, that was no reason to throw every scrap of decent behaviour away too.
Especially when Charity and her mother had done their very best to help with a problem that need not have concerned them at all.
He'd let them down disgracefully, ruining a dinner party that was given entirely for his benefit.
She, Clarissa, was not looking forward to telephoning Lady Southdown, as she was bound to do, to thank her for a lovely evening.
There was bickering the next morning too.
On Clarissa's part, because she kept putting off the dreaded bread and butter telephone call, and that made her feel guilty and irritable.
On Charles's side, he knew his old failing, impetuosity, had landed him in trouble once more, so he kept trying to justify himself.
It was an unhappy morning, and a sulky afternoon, and when towards evening Clarissa had collected enough moral courage to approach the telephone, it rang for an incoming call before she could pick it up.
‘You answer it.
I'm having nothing to do with casual callers.
It's too bad, just as I'd plucked up….’
Before she could finish her sentence, Charles had stepped briskly across the room and snatched up the receiver.
He snapped out the number.
‘Flaxman 3822.’
The next instant he had his hand over the receiver and his hoarse whisper to Clarissa was ominous.
‘It's Charity.’
Then he poured profuse apologies into the mouthpiece until a very surprised Charity managed to get a word from the other end of the line.
What she had to say was said with some surprise as well.
‘On the contrary, darling boy, Boy Bradshaw was profoundly impressed with your boldness.
A young man with original ideas — that's how he sees you.’
‘He's barmy.
I…
I mean to say…
I was trundling out the obvious.’
‘I must say you shook Mummy and me.’
‘Clarissa's had the knackers off me.’
‘Oh I hope not.
Anyway…off Boy Bradshaw beetled to see Colonel Bumface….’
‘No!’
‘…and fairly lambasted him about young officers being allowed to make mistakes, learn from experience, and not be penalised etc etc.’
That wouldn't shift him.
Charles thought he knew his Bumface.
‘It didn't.
You are a dangerous rebel.
Unamenable to discipline.
You're out.’
‘Oh well, thanks for trying.
All of you.’
‘Yes, but Bumface isn't any of those things.’
Charity paused for effect.
A puzzled Charles omitted to intervene.
‘Boy Bradshaw was able to outrank him, d'you follow?
He made Bumface grovel….
This time Charles couldn't resist the intervention.
He chuckled.
‘Good show!’
‘And to some purpose.
You're to have your Commission restored.
Don't interrupt.
Provided Boy arranges a new posting for you as far away from Bumface as poss.’
‘No?
Clarissa!
My Commission!
I'm getting it back!
Come and listen!’
Are you there?
Hullo!
‘We're here.
Carry on.’
‘You are being packed off immediately on attachment to Boy's own old regiment.’
‘That's the best news since barbed wire!’
Clarissa snatched the telephone from him.
‘Charity?
Hullo, it's me.
He doesn't deserve it.
It's all thanks to you and your mother.’
‘Yes, yes.’
Charles snatched it back.
‘Charity?
But Boy was in the Brigade.
Did he mean it?
What regiment?’
Of course, idiot.
Second Grenadiers.’
‘Gosh!
Do you know where they are?
Palestine, Egypt, or only somewhere in England?’
‘Somewhere in France.’
Even at the peak of excitement, Charles remembered his Security training.
His whisper to Clarissa was a bellow to delight any eavesdropping agent in the Flaxman Exchange.
‘The BEF!’
At the other end, Charity smiled and waited for her listeners to come back to her.
Then she addressed the microphone drily.
‘We don't want to lose you but we know you want to go.’
A short blast on the ship's siren to warn the dockyard staff ashore was followed by the thrashing of its propeller, as the transport began to manoeuvre in to the jetty.
From the bridge a loud hailer cleared its throat.
Attention please.
OC Ship here.
All officers of BEF Draft 102, please assemble on the foredeck for disembarkation.
We shall shortly tie up at Le Havre and you may go ashore independently.
L of C train via Rouen departs Main Station at 1530.
GHQ passes and Movement Orders to RTO before boarding.
There will be a meal at Rouen for those proceeding to Railhead.
ETA Railhead 2000 hours.
As you might expect, there are a number of excellent restaurants in Le Havre.
Plus…various establishments catering for other tastes, so….
Have a good lunch.
Keep out of trouble.
And don't miss the train.
Thank you.’
It was an orderly assembly of officers on the foredeck.
Above the decorous chat, the familiar bray of Peregrine's voice could be heard.
He shouldered his way towards Charles.
‘How extraordinary and incongruous!
You stick out like a sore thumb in that ghastly uniform, Charles.
What d you think you're doing among officers of proper regiments?’
Several companions followed Peregrine through the congestion of officers and baggage.
There were introductions.
Charles was referred to as Ex-Guardsman Willoughby masquerading as an officer.
All the young men wore identical uniform and badges of rank.
They were Ensigns in the Grenadiers.
‘You switch regiments so quickly, Peregrine — Scots  Guards to Grenadiers.’
‘My original gazetting.’
‘Are you on the way up to join them?’
If they were, he was going to be very much odd man out, he feared.
‘Eventually.
About a dozen of us, all Grenadiers.
Posted to the Reserve Pool at Rouen.
And you?’
‘Going on to Railhead.
Attachment to your Second Battalion.’
‘You stinker!
You're not even in the Regiment.
Why not the rest of us?’
‘Influence, old fellow.’
He felt unaccountably relieved that Peregrine was staying behind at Base.
The prospect of joining his new unit alone somehow made it much less daunting.
Even though he was only on attachment from another regiment.
Or perhaps because of it.
In any event he could afford to relax.
‘Where are you lunching?’
He was told that by general consent of Grenadiers, La Grosse Tonne was the best, especially as it was bang next door to one of those establishments to which OC Ship referred.
‘So what about a juicy bit of exhibition Speciale before catching the train?’
‘No thanks.
I don't feel deprived…yet.’
Pi.
That s your trouble.
Come and lunch with us, at any rate.
You may be able to keep us to the straight and narrow.
We, in return, had better give you a few tips on how to behave in a Grenadier battalion or you'll come badly unstuck.’
He led the way down the gangplank complaining vaguely to his friends that there had been some disgusting favouritism somewhere.
‘So you ran into Peregrine.’
The tall major who was to be Charles's Company Commander opened elegant french windows onto a terrace.
‘He and his friends will be kicking their heels in the Pool till we have a few casualties.
Weeks, months probably.
Until something happens.
April, nearly May now and not a sign of it.’
The driver of the truck sent to meet Charles and his baggage at the railhead south of Arras, had told him that Lord Christopher — Charles didn't ask the surname — was waiting for him in the Officers' Mess of 2nd Grenadiers.
He hadn't expected to find such a quiet unassuming man.
The face was fine and a little gaunt, more that of a poet than a soldier.
He hadn't expected either that the Mess would be in a château, that the furniture would be impressively of its period — no worn armchairs or bits of junk in a state of collapse from subalterns' games, as so often to be found in the messes of his experience, or indeed that his welcome would be so unaffectedly cordial.
On the terrace, light from the rising moon showed a balustrade and steps to the lawns, stone urns, a fountain, and in the shrubberies beyond glimpses of statuary.
It was a still night and the tall trees stood silently against the stars.
Charles turned to consider the garden façade of the house.
It had a pale beauty in the moonlight that gave him more unexpected enchantment.
‘Late eighteenth century.’
Lord Christopher nodded towards the house and then cocked an ear back to the shadowy garden.
‘D'you hear the nightingales?’
‘Nightingales, yes.
How peaceful they sound.’
‘Deafeningly peaceful.
All over Northern France.
All is peace right enough.’
Oh.
Masterly inactivity is our sole occupation.’
They stood listening to the nightingales beyond the trees.
Lord Christopher looked up at the château again.
‘Yes, built brand new for The Revolution, no doubt, and now it makes a very decent little mess.
Come along.
I've found rather a comfortable billet for you.’
Charles realised with a jolt that he was not to be given a room in the château.
‘My baggage?’
‘Oh, your servant's seen to that.
Very agreeable private family in a large house just outside the village.
By the way, the village is Hem, H-E-M.
Only about eight miles from Lille.
Extremely convenient for dining etc., Lille.’
On the way through the village, nightingales were still busy in woods close by.
Charles thought he ought to show an interest in more mundane, soldierly matters.
‘I suppose you're doing a lot of training, sir.’
‘Not really.
We're supposed to be trained.’
‘Of course.’
‘Dig a bit— the Gort Line you've probably read about.
Night marches now and then to keep the men fit — not exactly a picnic doing twenty miles at night over cobbles.
And that's about all.
Oh of course there's golf and riding, football for the troops…and a lot of fun in the evenings.
You'll like Lille.’
It was difficult for Charles to keep a hint of disappointment out of his voice.
‘A kind of peacetime existence.’
‘Oh it is, it is.
But what can one do?
Never face discomfort till it's staring you in the face.’
‘Old Guards’ proverb.
I've heard it before, sir.’
His Company Commander laughed softly.
‘Good for you.
I can see you'll get on splendidly with the Grenadiers.’
Before he was shown his room and could get to bed, Charles had to spend half an hour with his French host and hostess, drinking coffee and little glasses of Framboise which he found nauseating.
The five children of the household — all under twelve — sat staring at him and from time to time discussed him with one another in rapid French, which in spite of his recent visit to the country as a  ski soldier, totally escaped his capacity to understand.
With the mother and father, whose knowledge of English was vestigial, he managed rather better, but longed for a rest from mental agility, for a bed to sleep away the exhaustion of his night and a day on the long Lines of Communication from England.
A conducted tour of the house by the whole family, brought him at last to the top floor where his bedroom was proudly displayed, which, though huge and filled with awesome furniture of hideous elaboration, impressed him less than the meticulous care with which his soldier servant — batman was apparently a naughty word in the Guards — had unpacked his belongings and laid all essentials neatly in the right places.
He opened one eye at 6.30 am the following morning and there stood that efficient individual dispensing bright conversation and a cup of steaming, over-sweet tea.
Outside the Company Office, Charles was given a walking stick and marched up and down the stone courtyard with other officers between the granary in which the platoons were barracked and long low buildings nearby, previously the administrative block and now being used for the same purpose in military terms.
The men of the Company stood on parade while their officers perambulated.
Though in fatigue uniform, they were almost as smart and well turned out as Charles had seen such soldiers in peace time behind the railings of Wellington Barracks.
On the appearance of Lord Christopher from his office, accompanied by the Company Sergeant Major, several minutes of incomprehensible manoeuvres by his fellow officers, left Charles trailing.
‘Sarn-Major tells me there's nothing for Memoranda this morning, so officers can fall out.’
Walking stick drill was quite new to Charles.
He shuffled his feet as he copied the true exponents and saluted seconds after the others had finished.
‘May see you all at luncheon.
By the way, it's laid on at La Motte today, that large farm near the digging ops.
We've taken it over for a week or so.
The mess servants will be ready to dispense drinks etc. there from midday.
But I want all Ensigns to put in at least half an hour's hard  digging with the troops between now and then.
Right.
I want Charles Willoughby to stay behind.
Come into the Company Office.’
The other officers drifted away, and Charles following into the office was relieved to see that it hardly differed from those he had known.
Trestle tables and grey blankets, in-trays, out-trays, maps on the wall and scrubbed chairs.
‘Do sit down.
All a bit perplexing, I expect.
You'll soon get used to our jargon, and the Drill-Sarn holds a parade every week for all officers in the battalion below Captain.
We're rather keen on drill.
Black button regiments do it differently I'm told.’
Charles could tell that he wasn't expected to do other than murmur politely.
He waited to be instructed what else a Rifleman could do to be less like a fish out of water in a battalion of Grenadiers.
‘Censorship of letters.
You'll be expected to do your share.
Not a pleasant task but the men get a bit browned-off sitting on their hunkers here, doing precious little but dig, and insecure grumbles to their wives and girl friends creep in from time to time.
Otherwise it's mostly sex — I hope you're not easily shocked.’
‘Unlikely, Sir.’
‘My name's Christopher.
Officers of course censor their own letters.
However, I have to confess that as you were a new arrival and not one of us into the bargain, I thought I should glance at your first letter or two home…
I'm sure you understand.’
‘Of course.
I wrote some letters on the train and gave them to my…servant to post.
I write every day to the same girl, but I'm not insecure, am I?’
‘No, no, no, no.
Good Heavens, no.
It's just that you wrote one to another girl.
Charity Rainham.’
‘She's not what you think, Sir.
Not now.
She's working in the Ministry of Information.’
‘Is she indeed?
What d'you mean not what I think?
Are you suggesting I think she s immoral?
‘Oh no, sir.
Pro-German.
She's changed.’
‘Oh that I'd perfectly understood.’
The soft laugh reassured Charles to some degree, but something must be wrong about writing to Charity.
What could it possibly be?
Lord Christopher leant back in his chair and offered Charles a Turkish cigarette from a box on another grey blanketed table behind him.
Charles didn't smoke but he took one.
Sullivan, he noticed.
He was expected to own a lighter, but he even had no matches.
‘We all had German friends before the war and we've all changed.
Professional soldiers simply do a job.
Officers of the Household Brigade serve the monarch additionally.
Lost your lighter?
Have mine.
No, no, but fancy you knowing Charity as well as you obviously do.’
‘I owe her a great deal.’
Don t we all?
I've always been dippy about Charity from a child.
Our nannies were friends in the Park.
Fascinating girl.
I'd like to have a long talk to you about her.’
‘Certainly, sir.
‘Christopher.’
‘Christopher, sorry.’
‘I long to see Charity again but I'm not due for home leave yet awhile.
Tell you what…
’ He puffed blue smoke towards the ceiling,…we'll skip lunch at La Motte Farm.
Motor into Lille.
The Huiterie is top class.
I hope you like oysters.
And the trout is famous.
Are you on?’
It seemed very rude to remind his Company Commander about his own orders.
Digging might not be classed as essential training, but he'd been sent on attachment to learn all about real soldiering.
Could a jolly day out in Lille teach him anything he didn't already know?
‘Yes, I'd…
I'd like that….’
‘Tremendous.
You'd better go along and have a bit of a dig first.
I'll send your servant along to La Motte with a change of clothes and pick you up there in my motor.
We'll discuss my brilliant notion in more elegant surroundings.’
Nobody appeared to show the least surprise when Charles appeared in Service Dress after his servant had arranged a room at the farm for the change and a hot water wash after a little light work on the trench system, trenches that bore every resemblance to those he had seen and read about as constructed in the First War.
Christopher arrived for a Dry Martini with his officers, some in battle-dress, some in denim fatigues like their men.
His staff car and driver waited in the farm yard.
There seemed to be no sign of the  farmer and his wife.
Hayboxes were being carried into the principal rooms by the Mess staff, direct from the cooks back in the château.
Charles was reminded of the wars of the Spanish Succession when the mellow red brick of Flemish farm houses exactly like this one, housed the dandified officers, all feathers and lace, of the Spanish Imperial Army.
Lunch was everything Christopher had promised.
‘Sommelier, s'il vous plait.
Encore une bouteille de Montrachet.’
‘Bien, milord.
Mais…
Mont-rachet.
Jamais, Jamais Montrachet.
Si vous m'excusez, Milor.’
‘Comme vous avez raison, raison, raison.
Je parle votre langue comme un cochon.
Montrachet.
Mille remerciments.
Mille remerciments.
I'll remember and fairly faire éblouir tous les officiers Anglais.
What d'you think of my plot, Charles?’
‘Well, having just arrived in France, Christopher, I find it a bit overwhelming.
This very weekend?’
‘Or next.
Time is of little consequence out here.
The main thing is that I can do it through official channels.
Oh easily.’
The wine waiter came bustling along with the second bottle, compliments were exchanged over the wine, trout was selected and discussed.
During it all, Charles wondered how he could put his friend off such a highly improper plan as he had devised.
He could imagine its reception in England, particularly from Clarissa, who was intrinsically a very sensible girl, not given to ideas of fantasy.
‘Clarissa will….’
He hesitated, simply not knowing what to say to the elegant figure opposite him who was so evidently determined, and to whom fantasy seemed to be very close to ordinary life.
‘Of course she will.
We meet Charity and your friend Clarissa at the Ritz Bar in Paris on the Saturday morning in time for luncheon.
Then we'll have most of our forty-eight hour local leave to fix up the deal.’
‘The ENSA deal.’
‘Quite so.
That among others.
Tell me you're on.’
Charles hedged by saying that he'd never imagined the BEF would be at all like this.
Christopher then embarked on a diatribe about the difficulties of an expeditionary force in hiatus.
It lasted through the pudding, a rich mixture of  chestnut purée and cream called Mont Blanc.
Christopher hadn't heard of the ski interlude at Chamonix under the famous mountain.
He was diverted during coffee by a thumb nail sketch of that fruitless expedition, but by the time the sommelier had visited the table with Cognac a second time, he was back to the great danger of ennui in the BEF, and 2nd Grenadiers’ seven months in France spent cultivating a defensive mentality which could well be disastrous if hostilities ever broke out.
‘We've got to keep the energies from flagging, don't you know, the brain ticking over.
Setting up a programme for a tricky expedition to Paris, timetables, rendezvous, plans of campaign, all good training for war, my dear Charles.
Besides, unorthodox planning is what Charity dotes on.’
He raised his brandy glass in salute.
‘And I do really rather pine for her, you know.’
Back in England, there was a mixed reception for Christopher's plan.
Charity was against it, an attitude that astonished Clarissa at first, until it became plain that the strength of Charity's reluctance was a measure of how much the pros and cons of the projected week-end in Paris meant for her.
For once, Clarissa made an effort to take charge.
She herself had certain commitments difficult to postpone.
For the following two weeks she was to be part of an ENSA company touring remote army camps in Wales.
Rehearsals were nearly complete and a replacement for her was out of the question at such short notice.
However, she saw no reason whatsoever to refuse the Paris invitation if it could be put off till she was ready to go.
She said so quite vehemently.
She had a plan of her own for the visit, though she decided not to tell Charity about that at this stage.
What she did decide to do was to enquire the reason for this unexpected obstinacy against Paris and Charles s new friend.
‘Is it that you don't like Lord Christopher?
If that's the case, of course I understand.
I'll write to Charles and explain I'm too busy.
But as far as ENSA is concerned, the whole thing is on an official level.
In fact they're mad keen to fix up more visits to the BEF by ENSA parties.
So far only men entertainers have been allowed — music hall acts and that sort of thing.
The high-ups at Drury Lane are anxious to send whole companies — actresses as well as actors — in plays that have been popular London successes.’
‘Oh the MOI's dead keen for me to go too.
There are  people to see at the Embassy, a number of them friends of mine.
It would be in the nature of a liaison visit.
But don't you see that's not how Christopher sees my part in the business.
Of course I like him.
I've known him all my life.
Not only is he possibly the best friend I have, man friend, but ever since I ‘came out’, he's wanted to be rather more than that.’
‘I see.
And that s wrong of him?
‘Not at all.
He's years older than me, but that doesn't matter either.
No, I can't see a weekend in Paris improving the situation…with all that it would obviously lead to.
That's all.
Can we leave it at that?
You're going to be disappointed though.
I can tell.’
‘Of course we won't go.’
She pretended not to be disappointed and there for the moment the matter rested.
But not for long.
A wrestle with her conscience drove Charity to Mona's that evening.
She seldom asked for advice and never took it, but Mona knew how to disguise mere advice by scoffing at any other conclusion but her own.
She turned everyone else out of her room and set about it.
‘It's no good coming the big enigma with me my girl.
You're as transparent as a crépe de chine nightie.
Why, for Heaven's sake, do you think you're not married yet?
Because you've been crackers about Christopher, in love with him from the cradle.
And he with you.
Not from his cradle of course, since his sailor suit days.
He's honest even if you're not.
All that crazy calf love of Adolph and his Nazis.
That's all it was, calf love, whatever you say.
A young adolescent girl's romantic twaddle.
Now you're over it, you know where you are, but you're still afraid…afraid of losing you independence.
You're as bad as the Suffragettes.
You don't want equality for women.
You want to dominate men.
Always have.
And it's time you changed, my duck.
There'll never be anyone to come your way as right for you as Christopher.
You'd be mad not to go over to Paris and settle it.
Once and for all.
You'll never regret that.
That's it, that's my big speech for today and it's made me thirsty.
I'm going to call those young fellows in again and see what they can do about it.’
A note through her letter box was waiting for Clarissa  when she got back late from rehearsal.
The two girls stayed up for hours, and by the end of the evening a date had been arranged for the Paris adventure, and Clarissa had confided her plan for the Saturday afternoon of the visit.
Could Charity help her, perhaps through the British Embassy, to get her married to Charles?
It might be a surprise that she didn't think would displease him.
The exercise of her bent for administration, and her own newly acquired peace of mind, sent Charity, no less than Clarissa to bed happy.
There was drilling and digging, marching and TEWTs — Tactical Exercises without Troops — for Charles and the other officers of 2nd Grenadiers, in the country between Hem and the Belgian border.
Visits to Lille and visits from such important people as the Duke of Gloucester, the C-in-C, Lord Gort, and the Divisional Commander, a little Major-General called Montgomery who didn't seem to be to the liking of the younger officers.
On his visit to the château and lunch in the mess there, he singled out Charles with his black buttons and strange headdress and commiserated with him for having to put up with an attachment to what he called ‘These rather superior beings’.
In a way, Charles agreed with him, although he didn't say so.
The previous evening mess bills had been casually referred to by a major from another company as officers assembled for dinner.
The members of the Battalion mess were so superior, it seemed, that they were expected to have unlimited funds at their disposal.
There was no question of simply paying for what a member himself had consumed, whether of drinks, tobacco or anything else.
The major made that very clear.
‘We've spent x Francs in the last accounting period which is y pounds.
Split among us all equally, that comes to z Pounds each.
So will you be good enough to ante up, please chaps.’
He emptied a bottle of champagne into the Commanding Officer's silver tankard, and reached for another.
Vintage Krug, Charles noticed.
‘I'll take francs or sterling.
Rather not have cheques.
There are local supplies to buy and a certain amount from the NAAFI.
Oh and I've  ordered more port and cigars from London.’
Charles winced and foresaw a painful visit to the field cashier in Lille.
The absence of distinction between a Lieutenant Colonel's comparative wealth and a newly joined Ensign on a pittance, made him sorrowfully aware that he alone in this very superior mess, was unendowed with private means.
Where on earth was he to get the funds for Paris amusements?
Christopher had all the details fixed.
Meanwhile the gilded peacetime existence was only disturbed by occasional night raids of German Bombers, so light and haphazard they presented more of a diversion than a threat.
The terrace of the château made an admirable grandstand one evening when a heavier raid than usual was in progress.
Officers sat on the balustrade with their brandy and cigars after dinner, watching the anti-aircraft batteries around Lille piercing the night sky with brilliantly coloured tracer shells.
‘Sir! sir!
Wake up, sir!’
‘Go away.
It's the middle of the night.’
Charles drew the bedclothes around him.
He could hear the dawn chorus in full concert, and when he opened his eyes unwillingly light was filtering faintly through the curtains.
‘What time is it?’
Just on five, sir, and the war s begun.
‘What?’
He was on his elbows.
‘Germans marched into Belgium, sir.
That bombing last night should have warned us.’
‘I'll get dressed.
He swung his legs out of the bed and realised with a shock what day it was.
‘Gosh!
Lord Christopher and I were supposed to be going on weekend leave to Paris.’
‘Not now you're not, sir.
We're to get packed and ready to move.
Company Commander's Orders at 0530.’
‘Crumbs!’
‘CSM says we're off into Belgium to meet Jerry.’
Notebooks ready and pencils poised, officers and senior NCOs of the Company stood before their Company Commander dressed in full marching order.
Gasmasks, not always slung hitherto, were now very much in evidence, neatly rolled gas capes above the shoulder blades ready to unfurl.
Christopher sat easily on the corner of his office  table his Company Sergeant Major ramrod stiff a pace behind on his right.
‘The Commanding Officer wants us to think of this operation as a five furlong sprint.
We aim to reach the line of the River Dyle before the enemy can cross it.
Seventh Guards Brigade forms the vanguard of the whole Corps, and we are the leading Infantry battalion.
Twelfth Lancers and a Machine Gun regiment, the Middlesex, are already across the frontier.
Platoons all ready to embuss?’
‘On parade ready, sir.’
A bark from the CSM.
‘I want a fifteen hundredweight truck to the Officers ' Mess immediately.’
‘Done, sir.’
The Company Quartermaster Sergeant, called the Pay Sergeant in the Brigade.
‘It is now 0548.
Synchronise watches.
We join the Battalion Order of March at 0610.
Any questions?
None.
Right.
From now on— offensive rather than defensive action is the key note.
Remember that.
The only way to beat the Hun is by attacking him.
Get busy.
Charles!’
Charles stopped at the door as the others filed out.
‘Here, Christopher.’
‘Sorry about our trip.
Another time, eh?’
He smiled kindly.
‘You could go alone though, because you won't be coming with us I'm afraid.’
Charles was so thunderstruck his voice sounded faint.
‘What?’
‘Orders.
Attached officers go back to their units.’
‘I can't.
I haven't got one.
Christopher, please let me stay.’
The smile had disappeared and Christopher looked stern.
‘England for you Charles.
Via Paris if you like.
Go and see the Pay Sergeant.
He has your warrant.
And now, goodbye and good luck.
I have one or two things to see to before the off.’
He walked quickly out of the bare office followed by a speechless Charles.
Slinking past the animated scene outside Company HQ.
Charles wandered slowly up the village street in search of his valise.
The Pay Sergeant had thrust a Railway Warrant into his hand and told him where the baggage had been dumped.
‘London by any route available.
That's what it says, sir.’
He nodded sympathetically before hurrying off to discharge more pressing duties.
Other Companies of the Battalion were already moving off in time to take their appropriate places in the March Table.
Charles tried not to look like the outcast he was feeling and quickened his pace to simulate important last minute business at the Officers' Mess.
The curé shook his hand as he strode past.
‘Bonjour, m'sieur.
Bonne chance.
Dieu vous protéqe .’
Outside the chateau, trucks were loading, among them a fifteen hundredweight into which his servant was busy stowing crates.
‘Gently does it.
Gently.
The bleedin' stuff's not to be shaken up.’
Charles enquired what was going on, adding to himself, ‘as if I cared now.’
‘Mr Willoughby, sir, your baggage is ready in the hall in there.
Loadin' up with champagne.
His Lordship's orders.’
‘Champagne?
He can't have meant it.
Only two Company trucks and you're taking up all that valuable space with fizz?
‘You're going to war.’
‘Can't help that, sir.
As many cases as poss he says an’ nothin' else in this truck.
I'm to go with it now we've lost you.’
On the spur of the moment as so often before, Charles made a decision.
He leapt up the steps, grabbed his valise and hastened down again to the truck.
‘You haven't.’
‘Beg pardon, sir?’
‘Put my baggage aboard.
I'm coming with you….
‘But blimy, sir…‘
‘You know nothing about it.’
He scrambled over the tail of the fifteen hundredweight.
‘Just see I'm decently covered by the cases.
Thank you.
Am I hidden?
Good.
See you the other end.’
It was a journey of extreme discomfort, particularly over the cobble stones to the frontier and until the column struck the main road to Brussels at Tournai.
Charles, under his tarpaulin, knew nothing of direction or topography, but he did see his servant again before the nightmare ride was over.
He had actually dozed off, perhaps from the fumes of the exhaust, when dive-bombers screamed above and bombs began to fall.
The column stopped abruptly and when the noise of aircraft climbing away from the raid faded into the distance there was a short silence during which only the chug-chug of many stationary vehicles could be heard.
‘Sir, sir, you okay?
Into the ditch, sir!
Dive-bombers!’
‘Bit late.’
It was a muffled voice to the Guardsman who raised the tarpaulin.
‘What you say, sir?
They'll be back.’
Charles lifted his head, took a thankful breath of fresh air and relapsed among the crates.
‘I'm staying here.’
‘Good luck then.
Must be crazy…all them bottles and glass…dangerous.’
‘More dangerous for me if I'm spotted.
Cover me up.
Why have we stopped?’
‘Whole column halted, sir.
Miles and miles of transport.
Road's blocked ahead by bleedin' refugees…carts, prams, chaos.
We've passed thousands of' em.’
‘Any officers about?’
A demand from his bladder gave him a happy idea.
Company Commander coming this way now.
‘Go away then!
Back to your ditch.’
Christopher could indeed be heard approaching, calling calmly to the occupants of each of the vehicles under his command.
‘Dive-bombers only have scare value.
Odds against a direct hit.
Do very little damage.
Have your rifles and LMGs ready for the next attack.
Try and bring the bastards down.’
As he moved away past the fifteen hundredweight and on down the line, his receding words of assurance were interrupted by warning shouts.
‘Attack coming, sir!
Fire in your own time!
Let 'em have it.’
The terrifying scream of the dive reached an intensity very nearly intolerable.
Bombs fell close and other roars and screeches followed as aircraft after aircraft straffed the halted column.
Rifle and machine-gun fire met each attack with a courageous determination that Charles envied.
Easier to have a go than lie waiting for doom in the dark among additional hazards.
When at last it was all over he felt quite sick from the shock.
Vehicles started up again and a familiar voice shouted to him from the side of the truck.
‘Nearly there they say, sir.
All right are you still?
No damage to us but someone caught it further up.
The MO's been by.’
‘I'm a bit cramped but there's just one thing.
I'm in desperate need of a pee.’
‘You'll have to hold it, sir.
We're off again.’
Discovery was inevitable and when it came at last there were reasons to rejoice, but not at the reunion with Christopher.
It was a summer evening in a wood not very far West of the River Dyle.
Charles was aware of bird song, chiff-chaff, blackbird, and a crooning wood pigeon.
He was very much aware too, of the stern expression on Christopher's face.
‘So you cadged a lift in my champagne truck, did you, Charles?
Highly amusing but actionable.’
It seemed best to counter a possible storm by innocent guile.
‘I now see the meaning of that old Guards’ proverb about comfort.’
‘I shall be extremely gritty if you've pinched a single one of my precious bottles.
They're to keep up my officers’ morale.’
‘And thus the mens’.
I followed the argument.
‘Well, you'd have had the lot pilfered if I hadn't been guarding them and suffered the most ghastly discomfort in the process.
Here I am though.
I hope I can stay and be useful.’
There was no relaxation at all in the stern expression.
‘You show a commendable sporting spirit, Charles.
But the answer is still NO.’
The bird song hushed and even the slight breeze ruffling the leaves of the willows seemed all at once to die.
‘Good God, after I've come all this way?’
It was a ludicrous remark and deserved what it got.
‘I will not be responsible for you against orders.
You've disobeyed mine and you could be hotted for it.
But we're in contact with the enemy so you're lucky….’
It was now or never.
Time to take advantage of any loose word like lucky and make a last effort to change the serious situation building up.
‘Thank you.
Tell me what to do to help.’
For a second a smile hovered and the voice changed.
‘Charles, you're incorrigible.
Do try to understand.
That'll help.
The Germans are just over the river there — I'm off on a recce directly — and I haven't time to muck about.
You're an infernal nuisance.’
‘Surely there's something I can do….’
It was obstinate and also rather feeble.
Christopher was obstinate too, but very strong.
‘Hop it, Charles.
You're not a Grenadier.’
That was the final salvo to which Charles had no counter.
Christopher knew it and was able to send him away with words that showed a very personal friendliness.
‘We've managed to find a taxi for you, Heaven knows how.
Take it to the nearest station and get the Hell out of here before I change my mind about carting you.
Oh, and give this bottle of Krug with my love to Charity when you see her.
And here's another for yourself.
Now hop it fast.’
A mortar bomb exploded some distance away.
The taxi cab skidded to a halt with a screech of brakes.
‘Voici la gare, m'sieu.
Vite vite !’
Louvain Station?
He bundled out of the cab dragging the heavy valise.
‘Bon.
ça fait combien ?’
The taxi driver pocketed the note and crashed into first gear.
It was not a day for arguing about the size of tips.
‘A Paris quel quai ?’
‘J'n'sais pas du tout, quoi.
Mais vite, allez vite .’
Another mortar bomb exploded beyond the station.
‘Merde !
Les Boches n'sont pas loin.
Adieu, adieu.
J'm'en fou des soldats .’
A figure in khaki ran towards the cab shouting, as a couple more bombs crashed down not far away.
‘Hey taxi!
Taxi!’
‘Va t'en, imbécile !’
The cabby was already leaving rapidly.
Peregrine stood fuming on the pavement, bawling furiously after him.
‘Bloody frog!’
‘Peregrine, for God's sake.’
‘Hullo, Charles.
Confounded mortars.’
He seemed more surprised by intrusive bombs than by the unexpected meeting.
‘Running away already?’
‘Perhaps I am.
But if I'm supposed to be catching a train to Paris, where the Hell d'you think you're off to?’
They flattened themselves on the pavement as a bomb came whistling down.
It fell some way up the street.
Glass crashed into the roadway from upper storeys.
‘Better take some sort of cover.
One of those infernal mortars copped my truck.
Only blast, but it's kaput.
Making my way to Second Grenadiers.
Know where they  are?’
‘Damn the trains I'll show you.’
He stood up, fired with the double intention of leaving this dangerous location and having yet one more try of his luck.
Another bomb fell and he was back in the gutter beside Peregrine, convinced that anything was preferable to being killed while waiting for an improbable train.
‘There won't be another taxi.
I'm afraid.
The bombs scared the chap.’
‘They scare me.’
Rifle and tommy gun fire could be heard from several directions at once.
They beat a retreat up the steps and into the station.
‘We seem to be in the middle of something.
Which way are our people?
Seen any of our chaps?’
‘Saw some Jocks of all people on the way to the station just now.
Made me feel quite nostalgic….’
‘There they go along the street…not Jocks though…wrong sort of…
Quiet!
Look out, get down behind the baggage.
We must keep out of sight….’
‘No quick…through here.’
Charles grabbed his valise and sought sanctuary in the booking hall.
They lay gasping for breath behind some wooden benches.
A burst of fire in the street outside, uncomfortably close, could only have been discharged from very near their original position in the gutter.
‘Those were Huns.
Dozens of 'em.’
‘Grey green.
Yes.
Pretty purposeful they looked.’
‘What do we do now?
Know the name of this station?’
‘Louvain Station.
But no trains.’
Peregrine had recovered some of his former poise.
‘And not a porter in sight.
Disgraceful.
Typical Frog funks.
This must be what they call the fog of war.’
‘There's a gents over there beyond the booking hall.
Let's belt for it.
Give us time to think.’
‘Dump our baggage in one of the bogs.
Good idea.
And those bottles you're hugging.
Come on.’
It was quiet in the lavatories.
No sounds of war penetrated.
They took turns with a champagne bottle.
Charles apologised for the wine's lukewarmth, but both agreed that it was nevertheless rehabilitating.
‘Lovely Champers.
Goes right to the spot.
I could cope with an Army Corps of Germans.
Shall we breach the other  bottle?’
‘That's for Charity.
I'm taking it to her in Paris.’
‘You've got a hope.’
From somewhere beyond the walls of the lavatory, faint, sporadic rifle fire caught Peregrine's attention.
‘Perhaps the Jocks are counter-attacking.’
He looked up at the window of the nearest compartment.
It was high up and narrow.
Charles volunteered to have a look out and clambered on to the seat, testing the strength of the pipe running up the wall.
Peregrine gave instructions from below.
‘Right foot on the roll of bumph.
I think the contraption will take your weight.’
‘Tricky….
Hell, it's revolving.’
Peregrine rushed to the rescue.
‘Grab the window ledge and stand on my shoulders then.
All right?’
Charles said he was fine and he was able to see out of the window, although it was remarkably small.
He was looking at a completely empty street, so lacking in signs of life that it might be a convenient escape route.
‘If I can get through the window.
Bit of a squeeze, but if I can get through, you can follow, and we'll make a dash.’
Hurry then.
‘Hand me up the other bottle.’
‘No good clutching that.
I'll bring it when I come up.’
‘No fear.
I don't trust you with it.
Hand it up.
It's coming with me.’
He set about struggling through the narrow window, one hand clutching the Champagne by its neck.
The giver of the present would by no means have approved of the shaking it was getting.
‘It s a Hell of a squeeze, but I think I can wriggle through.
No, blast, I'm stuck…amidships.
My damned hips….
‘I'll pull your legs.’
‘No, don't.
Push 'em.
If I can lever myself by hanging on to this….
No, God, that's worse, much worse.
You'll have to pull my legs.
I'm absolutely stuck fast.’
‘You can't be.
No use, you won't budge now.
What's the next move?’
‘Damn silly question.
Better have a breather.
Yes, and get rid of this other bottle.
I'll open it.
Glad I had the foresight  to keep hold of it.’
He was able to use both hands with the business of foil and wire.
Inside the gentlemens' lavatory, Peregrine became importunate.
‘Leave some for me.’
‘Don't see how I can unless I manage to shift one way or the other, and I need both hands for that.
I'll give you a running commentary, though.
Cork's just about to pop.
The wine's a bit frothy in there.
All this shaking.’
The cork blew out with a loud report.
‘There she blows with a distance record for corks.’
While he was plugging the bottle with his thumb and before even having a gulp, running footsteps brought a party of soldiers into Charles's view, fifty yards away.
‘Peregrine!
The pop's brought Huns running.
Pull, pull as hard as you can.
Damn!
To late.
I've had it.
You get away through the station while they're investigating me.’
‘No.
Heave.’
The Germans were crouched in doorways down the street, rifles at the ready.
No amount of struggle availed Charles one way or the other.
‘Peregrine, no good.
I've had it.
Run, run!’
A German officer, pistol in hand, took station along the wall below.
He appeared to be very perplexed and more than a little frightened by what he saw in the lavatory window above him.
He spoke loudly in rapid German.
Charles thought it best to allay his fears and save any unnecessary trouble by replying quite calmly.
‘Nicht sprechen Deutch , so I should save your breath.’
He inclined the bottle towards the German in the manner of a toast.
‘Prosit .
But none for you.
You can damn well wait till I've finished the bottle.’
The German officer took careful aim and fired.
Glass tinkled on the roadway.
Champagne and blood ran down the wall.
The telephone was ringing in Charity's flat.
‘Hullo.
Charity?
It's me, Clarissa.
Can I come round?’
‘Of course.
What is it?
You sound distraught.’
It was difficult for Charity to make sense of the emotional jumble at the other end.
There was some reference to a letter and that was quite enough to make Charity cut in at once.
She told Clarissa to stay put and say no more until she herself came round to Clarissa's flat.
It would be better that way because she had someone with her and they ought to talk alone.
She was going to put the receiver down and come straight over.
‘Oh dear, Peregrine.
Bad news for Clarissa, I'm afraid.’
Bad news was a daily ration in June 1940.
It was tragic for Clarissa and, Peregrine observed sadly, tragic for Charity too, who had already had her full share of bad news since the BEF got back from France.
‘God knows you have.
All the same, I didn't believe Charles was a gonner when they posted him missing.
Poor Clarissa.’
They agreed that the letter about which Clarissa was so upset must be from the War Office, and Peregrine said it made him feel almost cowardly to have survived the German breakthrough, the evacuation of the beaches and now this latest blow on the very day the capitulation of France was announced.
‘Don't go away.
I'll ring you from her flat.
You may be a help later.’
Clarissa opened her door and said she was sorry for being so hopeless on the telephone.
Ignoring the excuse for  hysteria, Charity came straight to the point.
It was better for both of them that she should.
‘You've had a letter?
From the War Office.’
She answered her own question to make it easier for Clarissa's essential information.
‘From Charles.
I keep wanting to cry.’
Although ready for a shock, Charity had not expected this particular one.
She turned away to hide her own tears, and spoke for herself as much as for Clarissa.
‘Well, of course you do.’
She was her matter-of-fact self again the moment Clarissa clung to her and really cried.
‘He's alive.
How thrilling for you.
But there's really no need for us to go on howling, is there?
If it's not from the War Office, where's the letter from?’
‘An oflag .
In Germany.’
‘Oh thank God, a prisoner of war and safe.
What a relief!’
She said how right Peregrine was not to believe Charles had been killed.
‘Peregrine's back?’
‘He's in my flat waiting to be telephoned.
Shall I?
He's full of extravagant tales.’
A rather less ebullient Peregrine hurried round complaining of not being allowed to set foot in London since his recent Channel crossing.
This was the first time.
They'd kept him in a kiosk on Brighton front day and night waiting for the Germans to invade.
The story of his meeting with Charles at Louvain Station was just what Clarissa wanted to hear.
It filled in an important gap in her information.
But there was some hesitation when she enquired after Christopher whom she badly wanted to see when he could manage to get some leave.
‘Charles worshipped him.
He says so in his letter.’
Charity took over and said quietly and very casually, ‘Christopher was killed.’
There was another small silence which Clarissa found she could not be the first to break.
She touched Charity's hand, and Charity went on flatly after a moment.
‘Even I could have.’
‘…worshipped him.
Oh Charity, even you.’
There had been some appalling bad luck at a place not far from Dunkerque called Furnes.
The whole Battalion  Order Group of 2nd Grenadiers, the Commanding Officer and all the Company Commanders had been wiped out at one go.
Charity explained that she had decided not to tell Clarissa until the news about Charles was definite too.
Clarissa could think of nothing constructive to say except that she was so sorry.
‘Yes.
Poor Christopher.’
It was time for a change of subject.
Charity asked to have Charles's letter read to her.
There was a great deal about Christopher in it which was hard for Clarissa.
She was on easier ground later on.
‘Give Charity my love, bags of it.
Isn't it funny she's now our greatest friend.
I wasn't at all worried about you both getting back safely from Paris with her in charge.
Here I am all in one piece if tiny pock-marked from a flying bottle, and trying to settle down and see the war out without firing a shot.
Only a ‘Phoney War’ to show for all my efforts, and to crown the lot, they've made me Camp Entertainment Officer.
Charity with enough resilience to laugh, thought it unlikely that Charles would make a particularly docile prisoner and Clarissa said she'd write and tell him to behave himself.
If he did, she'd wait for him forever.
‘He may be safer there than some of us here.’
Peregrine wasn't smiling.
‘Sobering business waiting to be invaded.
Especially without much equipment left to resist it.
Had to leave it all behind t other side, d you see?
It s going to take a bit of time for the factories to dole us out some more.
Meanwhile, Adolph's got us all on a plate.’
When asked if he thought that Britain had any chance at all, he was more reassuring.
‘Heavens yes.
Amazing spirit among the soldiers.
‘Not much imagination, however.’
‘None at all, thank the Lord.’
The mirthless chuckle made Peregrine sound more serious than the two girls had every known him.
‘The blood and the sweat and the tears look like washing away the world as we know it.’
Charity said quietly, ‘For ever and for everybody.
Goodbye to all that for the second and last time.’
‘No more happy returns, Charity?’
‘Who knows, Clarissa?
Happiness is no laughing matter.’