

HOMICIDE
This chapter deals with the approach of the criminal law to behaviour which causes or risks causing death.
Murder, manslaughter, and several other offences are discussed, and one recurrent issue here is whether English law responds proportionately to the different degrees of culpability manifested in cases where death is caused.
7.1 DEATH AND FINALITY
For practical purposes, the culpable causing of another person's death may fairly be regarded as the most serious offence in the criminal calendar.
There is an argument that treason is a more serious offence, since it strikes at the very foundations of the State and its social organizations, but treason is so rare that it is surely permissible to treat homicide as the most serious form of crime.
The reason for this is not difficult to find: the harm caused by many other crimes is remediable to a degree, whereas the harm caused by homicide is absolutely irremediable.
Even in crimes of violence which leave some permanent physical disfigurement or psychological effects, the victim retains his or her life and, therefore, the possibility of further pleasures and achievements, whereas death is final.
This finality makes it proper to regard death as the most serious harm that may be inflicted on another, and to regard a person who chooses to inflict that harm as the most culpable of offenders, in the absence of some excuse or justification.
Although many deaths arise from natural causes, and many others from illnesses and diseases, each year sees a large number of deaths caused by ‘accidents’, and also a number caused by acts or omissions which amount to some form of homicide in English law.
For 1987 the statistics show that there were some 20,000 accidental deaths, of which some 7,000 occurred in the home, 6,000 at work, and 5,000 on the roads.
By comparison, the number of deaths recorded as criminal homicide was 600, which includes all the  murders and manslaughters.
This figure is relatively small when compared with many American cities, but that is no cause for satisfaction.
There are still awkward questions to be confronted.
For example, are we satisfied that the 600 deaths recorded as homicide are in fact more culpable than all, or even most, of the deaths recorded as accidents?
In other words, does English criminal law pick out the most heinous forms of killing as murders and manslaughters, or are the boundaries frozen by tradition?
Another question is whether the criminal law ought not to be wider in its application to activities which carry some risk of causing death than in other spheres.
Thus, even if it would be excessive to sweep large numbers of the deaths now recorded as ‘accidents’ into the law of homicide, there may be sufficient justification for creating or enforcing offences designed to ensure safe conditions of work, safe goods, safe buildings, and so on.
It was argued in Chapter 2 that the criminal law ought to spread its net wider where the potential harm is greater.
It will be seen that English law does this up to a point, and in the process seems to accept social-defence arguments as reasons for departing from several of the principles set out in Chapter 3.
7.2 REQUIREMENTS OF CRIMINAL HOMICIDE
English law distinguishes between the offences of murder and manslaughter, as we shall see, but the two crimes do have certain common elements.
It must be proved that the defendant's act or omission caused the death of the victim within a year and a day.
(The requirements of causation in the criminal law are discussed elsewhere.)
The ‘year and a day’ rule is a legacy of times when medical science was so rudimentary that, if there was a substantial lapse of time between injury and death, it was unsafe to pronounce on whether the defendant's conduct or some other event caused the death.
Nowadays the problem is quite the reverse: medical science is generally able to determine whether D's conduct caused the death, and innovations such as life-support machines mean that life can be prolonged for months and years in some instances.
In one recent case the victim of a stabbing died two and a half years after  the incident, having been kept on a life-support machine for almost the entire time.
In principle, it seems unjust that a homicide conviction should not be possible in such a case, if all the other elements can be established and only the ‘year and a day’ rule stands in the way.
But the rule was confirmed by the Criminal Law Revision Committee in 1980, on the ground that a defendant should not be left in peril of a homicide conviction indefinitely.
Surely prosecutorial discretion should be enough to prevent unfair convictions years after the event.
The rule itself is out of accord with modern medical conditions and should be abolished.
DEFINING MURDER: THE INCLUSIONARY QUESTION
(a) The Procedural Context
If causing death is to be regarded as the most serious harm that can be inflicted, it would seem to follow that the most blameworthy form of homicide should result in the highest sentences imposed by the courts.
Indeed, many systems of criminal law impose a mandatory sentence for murder (or whatever the highest form of homicide is called in that system).
In some jurisdictions this is a mandatory sentence of death.
In others, such as those in the United Kingdom, it is the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment.
Why should this penalty be mandatory, and not at the discretion of the court as in other offences?
One argument in favour of the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment is that it amounts to a symbolic indication of the unique heinousness of murder.
It places the offender under the State's control, as it were, for the remainder of his or her life.
This is often linked with a supposed denunciatory effect — the idea that the mandatory life sentence denounces murder as emphatically as possible — and with a supposed general deterrent effect, in declaring that there is no mitigation of sentence available for this crime.
It might also be argued that the mandatory life sentence makes a substantial contribution to public safety.
None of these arguments is notably strong, let alone conclusive.
The mandatory penalty does indeed serve to mark out murder from other crimes, but whether the definition of murder is  sufficiently refined to capture the worst killings, and only the worst killings, remains to be discussed below.
Whether the life sentence is regarded as a sufficient denunciation in society depends on the public's perception of what life imprisonment means: if it is widely believed that it results in an average of nine years' imprisonment, the effect will be somewhat blunted.
The same applies to the general deterrent argument: its effectiveness depends on whether the penalty for murder affects the calculations of potential killers at all, and, if it does, whether life imprisonment is seen as significantly more or less severe than the alternative of a long, fixed-term sentence.
As for public protection, this depends on executive decisions with regard to release; it fails to take into account whether it is necessary for public protection to keep ‘lifers’ in for so long.
This brings the discussion to a crucial point: what does the sentence of life imprisonment mean in practice, and what would be the alternative?
What it means is that the time of release from prison is determined by the Home Secretary, on the advice of the Parole Board and the Lord Chief Justice, rather than by the judge at the trial.
In procedural terms, therefore, the life sentence involves a transfer of function: normally it is the judge who determines the sentence (or at least its upper limit, since earlier release on parole may be possible), whereas a life sentence entrusts that function to the executive, who must first ascertain the opinions of the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge.
The Home Office is not bound by those opinions, and appears to depart from them frequently.
In 1983 the Home Secretary imposed restrictions on the release of persons serving life for murders of police- and prison-officers, terrorist killings, murder during robbery, and the sadistic or sexual murder of young children, fixing a minimum of twenty years' imprisonment for these offenders.
Whatever the justifications for introducing this policy, it serves to underline the fact that sentencing in murder cases is enacted without each case being considered individually, after hearing representations from the offender's counsel, and without a sentence announced in court and subject to appeal.
At present, the executive takes decisions to release some murderers after only a few years and to keep others in prison for extremely long periods.
Should those decisions not be taken by the courts, in  the same way as other sentencing decisions?
The answer sometimes given is that murderers should be treated differently because they are particularly dangerous: anyone who chooses to kill once can choose to kill again.
But this argument will seem less persuasive when we have discussed cases of manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility: where a murder is reduced to manslaughter, the judge has a wide sentencing discretion and may, according to the facts of the case, select a determinate prison sentence, a hospital order, or life imprisonment.
Those who kill and are convicted of manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility are no less dangerous than those convicted of murder, and yet the judge has sentencing discretion in one case and not in the other.
Considerations of this kind have led the House of Lords Select Committee on Murder and Life Imprisonment to recommend the abolition of the mandatory sentence for murder.
In its place would be a sentencing discretion, which judges would use, in many cases, to mark the relative heinousness of the murder by a determinate prison sentence.
In cases where life imprisonment was thought to be the appropriate sentence, the trial judge would still specify — in open court — the number of years to be spent in prison, taking the gravity of the offence into account, and release would be determined by a judicial tribunal.
Such a reform would bring improvements in natural justice without loss of public protection.
(b) Degrees of Homicide
English criminal law has two degrees of homicide, murder and manslaughter.
Many American jurisdictions have three degrees of murder — first-degree murder, requiring premeditation, and second- and third-degree murder, covering lesser shades of culpability.
In England there has been a proposal that we should do away with all these distinctions, leaving a single offence of criminal homicide.
That proposal, if implemented, would shift almost all the decision-making in homicide cases from the trial to the sentencing stage: the  only issue of any consequence in most cases would be the sentence to be imposed, and all the distinctions now drawn at the stage of criminal liability would be reflected in the sentence alone.
The jury would have no role in most homicide cases, since a plea of guilty would be the norm.
Contrast this with the position in jurisdictions where there are three or more degrees of homicide: pleas of guilty to first- and second-degree murders would be less frequent, since there would be the possibility of argument in court (if no bargain was struck beforehand between prosecution and defence), and the defence might succeed in persuading the jury to reduce the degree of the killing.
Moreover, the borderlines between the various degrees would raise questions of law, which would provide much opportunity for legal argument and for appeals.
The result would be that killings were classified and labelled in a more refined way, but at the cost of lengthy trials and mounting legal-aid bills.
That cost is not difficult to justify where capital punishment is the penalty for first-degree murder.
Where there is no capital punishment, however, the question of how many degrees of homicide it is desirable to have calls for careful weighing of the principle of fair labelling (see Chapter 3.3 (l)) against the cost and time arguments mobilised by the policy of efficient administration (see Chapter 3.3 (m)).
The structure of the English law of homicide is rather strange.
Although there are two offences, murder and manslaughter, the latter includes two distinct varieties: ‘voluntary’ manslaughter (killings which would be murder but for the existence of defined extenuating circumstances); and ‘involuntary’manslaughter (killings for which there is no need to prove any awareness of the risk of death being caused, but for which there is thought to be sufficient fault to justify criminal liability).
The arguments therefore tend to focus on three borderline questions: What is the minimum fault required for conviction of murder?
What conditions are needed to reduce murder to manslaughter?
And what is the minimum fault required for a conviction of manslaughter.
(c) Requirements for Murder
In English criminal law there are now two alternative fault requirements for murder: an intent to kill, or an intent to cause grievous bodily harm.
What do these requirements mean?
Do they extend the definition of murder too far, or are they too narrow.
Intent to kill may be regarded as the most obvious and indisputable form of fault element for murder, but to some extent that depends  on the meaning of ‘intent’.
This has been the subject of a number of House of Lords decisions, and yet the definition is still not clear and settled.
Probably the most accurate statement would be that a person intends to kill if it is his or her purpose to kill by the act or omission charged, or if he or she foresees that death is practically certain to follow from that act or omission.
In this way, both purpose and foresight of practical certainty are regarded as part of the definition of intent, although there are other statements suggesting that foresight of practical or ‘virtual’ certainty is merely evidence from which intent may be inferred.
How would this test be applied?
In many cases the word ‘intent’ is used without elaboration, but there are some for which a full explanation of the meaning of intention is necessary.
A fairly typical set of facts is provided by Nedrick (1986), where D had a grudge against a woman and had threatened to ‘burn her out’.
One night he went to her house, poured paraffin through the letter-box and on to the front door, and set it alight.
One of the woman's children died in the ensuing fire.
When asked why he did it, D replied: ‘Just to wake her up and frighten her.’
A defence of this kind, a claim that the purpose was only to frighten and not to cause harm, requires the full definition to be put to the jury.
The question is: granted that D's purpose was to frighten, did he nonetheless realize that it was practically certain that his act would cause death or grievous bodily harm to someone?
The jury should answer this by drawing inferences from the evidence in the case and from the surrounding circumstances.
What about the alternative element in the definition, an intent to cause grievous bodily harm?
This has considerable practical importance, since this is all that the prosecution has to prove in order to obtain a verdict of guilty of murder.
It must be shown that the defendant intended (which, again, includes both purpose and awareness of practical certainty) to cause really serious injury to someone.
The House of Lords confirmed this rule in Cunningham (1981): D struck his victim on the head a number of times with a chair, causing injuries from which the victim died a week later.
D maintained throughout that he had not intended to kill, but there was evidence from which the jury could infer — and did infer — that he intended to cause grievous bodily harm.
The House of Lords  upheld D's conviction for murder: an intent to cause really serious injury is sufficient for murder, without any proof that the defendant intended, or even contemplated, the possibility that death would result.
Does the ‘grievous bodily harm’ rule extend the definition of murder too far?
If the point of distinguishing murder from manslaughter is to mark out the most heinous group of killings for the extra stigma of a murder conviction, it can be argued that the ‘grievous bodily harm’ rule draws the line too low.
In terms of principle, the rule requires justification because it departs from the principle of correspondence (see Chapter 5.2(a)), namely that the fault element in a crime should relate to the consequences prohibited by that crime.
By allowing an intent to cause grievous bodily harm to suffice for a murder conviction, the law is violating a general principle, turning the most serious of its offences into a constructive crime.
Why should it be necessary to ‘construct’ a murder conviction out of this lesser intent?
There are arguments in favour of this: death is final, murder is the gravest crime, and there is no significant moral difference between someone who chooses to cause really serious injury and someone who sets out to kill.
No one can predict whether a serious injury will result in death — that may depend on the victim's physique, on the speed of an ambulance, on the distance from the hospital, and on a range of other medical and individual matters.
If one person chooses to cause serious injury to another, it should be presumed that he or she realizes that there is always a risk of death, and such cases show a sufficiently wanton disregard for life as to warrant the label ‘murder’ if death results.
The counter-arguments, which would uphold the principle of correspondence, are that breach of that principle is unnecessary when the amplitude of the crime of manslaughter lies beneath murder, and also that the definition of grievous bodily harm includes a number of injuries which are most unlikely to put the victim's life at risk.
In the leading case of Cunningham Lord Edmund-Davies (dissenting) gave the example of breaking someone's arm: that is a really serious injury, but one which is unlikely to endanger the victim's life.
So in practice the ‘grievous bodily harm’ rule goes further than the arguments of its protagonists would support.
Would it be right, then, to confine the fault element in murder to an intent to kill?
That would have the merit of simplicity, but would  it strike the right note socially?
There are powerful arguments in favour of saying that there are other killings where an intent to kill cannot be established, and yet where the moral or social culpability is equal to that in most intentional killings.
Of course, one cannot be adamant about whether they merit the label ‘murder’, because that is a question of drawing the line between murder and manslaughter, which is not susceptible of any precise resolution.
It is hard to argue conclusively that the category of murder should be smaller or larger (unless the death penalty or a mandatory life sentence follows); it is a question of social judgment.
Let us briefly consider some of the possibilities.
The fault element for many serious offences is intent or recklessness: why should this not suffice for murder?
The question is whether all killings in which the defendant is aware of the risk of death are sufficiently serious to warrant the term ‘murder’.
One answer sometimes given is that they are not, because a driver who overtakes on a bend, knowingly taking the risk that there is a car travelling in the opposite direction, should not be labelled a murderer if a collision and death happen to ensue.
This example assumes that a sympathy for motorists with overwhelm any tendency to logical analysis.
One might ask whether motorists are ever justified in knowingly taking risks with other people's lives.
Yet if the example is modified a little, so that the overtaking is on a country road at night and the risk is known to be slight, it becomes questionable whether the causing of death in these circumstances should be labelled in the same way as intentional killings.
This is not to suggest that motorists should be treated differently.
The point is rather that, even though knowingly taking risks with other people's lives is usually unjustifiable, taking a slight risk is less serious than intentionally causing death.
In discussing the boundaries of murder, we are concerned with classification, not exculpation.
To classify all reckless killings as murder might be too broad, but the point remains that some reckless killings may be thought no less heinous than intentional killings.
Can a satisfactory line be drawn here?
One approach would be to draw the line by reference to the degree of probability.
Murder is committed in those situations where D caused death by an act or omission which he knew had death as the probable or highly probable result.
A version of this test of foresight of high probability is used in several other European  countries; it was introduced into English law by the decision in Hyam v. 
DPP (1975), but abandoned in Moloney (1985) on grounds of uncertainty.
A second approach is to frame the law in such a way as to make it clear that the court should make a moral judgment on the gravity of the defendant's conduct.
Section 210.2 of the Model Penal Code includes within murder those reckless killings which manifest ‘extreme indifference to the value of human life’.
Scots law treats as murder killings with ‘wicked recklessness’, a phrase which directs the court's attention to the circumstances of the killing.
Both the Model Penal Code test and the Scots test may be reduced to circularity, however, for when one asks how extreme or how wicked the recklessness should be, the only possible answer is: ‘wicked or extreme enough to justify the stigma of a murder conviction’.
Admittedly, the Model Penal Code does contain a list of circumstances which may amount to extreme indifference, which assists the courts and increases the predictability of verdicts in a way that Scots law does not, but the essence of both approaches is that there is no precise way of describing those non-intentional killings which are as heinous as intentional killings.
Their protagonists argue that the law of murder is so important socially that derogation from the principle of maximum certainty should be allowed in favour of more accurate labelling by the courts; opponents argue that the principle of maximum certainty is needed here specifically to reduce the risk of verdicts based on discriminatory or irrelevant factors, such as distaste for the defendant's background, allegiance, or other activities.
A third, more precise formulation derives from the recommendations of the Criminal Law Revision Committee in 1980, namely, that a killing should be classified as murder in those situations where there is an intention to cause serious injury coupled with awareness of the risk of death.
Neither an intention to cause serious injury  nor recklessness as to death should be sufficient on its own, but together they restrict one another, producing a test which both satisfies the criterion of certainty and marks out some heinous but non-intended killings.
A fourth approach, adopted by English law until 1957 and still in force in many American jurisdictions, is some form of felony-murder rule: anyone who kills during the course of a felony (or, more restrictively, a serious crime of violence) or whilst resisting arrest should be convicted of murder.
Thus stated, there is no reference to the defendant's intention or awareness of the risks: the fact that D has chosen to commit rape, robbery, or another serious offence, and has caused death thereby, is held to constitute sufficient moral grounds for placing the killing in the highest category.
Plainly, this is a form of constructive criminal liability: the murder conviction is constructed out of the ingredients of a lesser offence.
Presumably the justification is that D has already crossed a high moral/social threshold in choosing to commit such a serious offence, and should therefore be held liable for whatever consequences ensue, however unforeseeable they may be.
The objections would be reduced if awareness of the risk of death was also required: in other words, if the test were the commission of a serious offence of violence plus recklessness as to death.
The effect of that test would be to pick out those reckless killings which occurred when D had already manifested substantial moral and legal culpability, and to classify them as murder.
Four alternative approaches have been described, and many others could be listed.
The point is that the traditional concepts of intention and recklessness do not, of themselves, appear to be sufficiently well focused to mark out those killings which are the most heinous.
The law must resort to some kind of moral and social evaluation of conduct if it is to identify and separate out the most heinous killings.
Many people might think that a person who causes death whilst using an unlawfully held firearm or explosives ought to be convicted of murder because there is, generally speaking, no excuse for using such dangerous equipment.
Some of the people thus covered would be armed robbers, others would be terrorists.
The armed robber might say that he had no intention of using the firearm, that he carried it with him simply to frighten the victim, and  that it went off accidentally: if the jury believes that, should he be convicted of murder?
The terrorist might say that he gave sufficient warning of the bomb for the area to be cleared, and that it was unforeseeable that a deaf person should remain on the premises and be killed in the explosion, which was intended only to cause damage.
If the jury believes that, should he be convicted of murder?
It is possible that juries would prefer to convict of murder in such cases so as to register their abhorrence of the defendant's activities in general.
If so, this would suggest a social preference for regarding killings of these kinds as among the worst because of the circumstances in which they occur, rather than because of the defendant's awareness of the possible consequences.
However, the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment, which reviewed the matter thoroughly in the early 1950s, and later law-reform committees have accorded preference to the ‘general principle’ that ‘persons ought not to be punished for consequences of their acts which they did not intend or foresee’.
A conviction for manslaughter would be sufficient to mark the gravity of those cases in which D was not aware of the risk of death, and the court would have ample discretion in sentencing to reflect the blameworthiness of D's conduct.
However, there would have to be clear parameters of sentencing in order to avoid the intrusion of discriminatory or irrelevant factors at this stage.
To summarize: the existing English law classifies as murder those killings where there was an intent to kill or an intent to cause grievous bodily harm.
The reason for distinguishing between murder and manslaughter must be to identify and to label the most heinous killings as murder, and it has been questioned whether English law succeeds in this.
There are issues of general principle at stake, but it is also true to say that there can be no absolutely right place in which to draw the line.
The issue assumes special significance when conviction for murder carries a mandatory penalty, particularly when that penalty is death.
7.4 DEFINING MURDER: THE EXCLUSIONARY QUESTION
Even in a legal system which had the narrowest of definitions of murder — say, premeditated intention to kill — there would still be an argument that some cases which fulfil that criterion should have their label reduced from murder to manslaughter because of extenuating circumstances.
Just as the discussion of the inclusionary aspect of the definition of murder travelled beyond the concepts of intent and recklessness, so the discussion of the exclusionary aspect (i.e. which killings fulfilling the definition should be classified as manslaughter rather than murder?) must consider the circumstances in which the killing took place and the culpability of the killer.
(a) The Mandatory Penalty
It is sometimes argued that the main reason for allowing such matters as provocation to reduce murder to manslaughter is to avoid the mandatory penalty for murder.
Thus, if the mandatory penalty were abolished, it would be sufficient to take account of provocation when sentencing for murder.
This argument neglects the symbolic function of the labels applied by the law and by courts to criminal conduct.
Surely it is possible that a jury might decline to convict of murder a person who intentionally killed under gross provocation, even though they knew that the judge could give a lenient sentence, because they wished to signify the reduction in the defendant's culpability by using the less stigmatic label of manslaughter.
Since there are two offences — and particularly in jurisdictions where there are three or more grades of homicide — surely it is right and proper to use the lesser offence to mark significant differences in culpability.
This may be seen as an application of the principle of fair labelling.
The lesser verdict may also assist the judge in sentencing, and help the public to understand the sentence imposed.
However, this reasoning is not accepted in English law for non-homicide offences, and provocation is not generally allowed to reduce a more serious offence to a less serious offence — probably for reasons associated with the policy of efficient administration (see Chapter 3.3(m)), which the significance of death is thought to outweigh in homicide cases.
(b) Manslaughter upon Provocation
Provoked killings are generally thought to be less heinous than unprovoked killings, and provocation has long been accepted as a ground for reducing to manslaughter a killing which would otherwise fulfil the definition of murder.
From time to time there are cases where the provocation is so gross and so strong that a court imposes a very short prison sentence or even a suspended sentence for the manslaughter — typically, cases where a wife, son, or daughter kills a persistently bullying husband or father — and such cases raise the more general question of whether provocation should ever be a complete defence to homicide or to other crimes.
That question was discussed in Chapter 6.5 above.
The issue here is whether provocation should remain a qualified defence to murder, and, if so, how far it should extend.
In English law the doctrine of provocation has two main elements, both of which are laid down in section 3 of the Homicide Act 1957.
First, there must be evidence that D was provoked to lose self-control and kill.
Second, the jury must decide whether the provocation was enough to make a reasonable man do as D did.
D is not required to prove any of this: in a murder trial, if there is sufficient evidence that D was provoked to lose self-control, the judge is bound to leave provocation to the jury, and the burden of disproving it beyond reasonable doubt lies upon the prosecution.
(i)The Subjective Requirement .
The first requirement of the qualified defence of provocation is predominantly subjective — evidence that D was provoked to lose self-control and kill.
This requirement contributes to the excusing element in the provocation doctrine, the idea being that a person who has lost self-control is less responsible for subsequent conduct.
Without this element, there would be no way of excluding planned revenge killings, and the argument is that they should be excluded from the defence because a person who plans a response to an affront or a wrong ought to ensure that the response conforms with the law.
The genuinely provoked killer, on the other hand, is in such a disturbed state of mind that such calculation does not occur.
How disturbed does this state of mind have to be?
The concept of loss of self-control has received little close attention from lawyers.
Such phrases as ‘loss of temper’ or ‘heat of passion’are treated  as useful synonyms, for which angry or apparently uncontrolled reactions may be treated as evidence.
One matter which is viewed as significant is a short space of time between the provocation and the killing, and there are some judicial statements which treat this as a matter of law: the loss of self-control must, it is sometimes held, be ‘sudden and temporary’.
Thus in Ibrams (1982) there had been considerable ill-treatment and violence by the deceased towards D and his girlfriend, and this led them eventually to plan and carry out a night-time raid on the deceased's flat, during which they attacked and killed him.
The Court of Appeal confirmed that the defence of provocation was unavailable; even if D had lost his self-control at the time, it was hardly a sudden and temporary response to an act of the deceased, who was asleep when D struck him.
Differing slightly from Ibrams are the many cases where ‘cumulative provocation’ has been directed towards D over a period of time, and then some minor act sparks off the loss of self-control and killing.
In cases of this kind (which rarely come before the Court of Appeal except on appeal against sentence), the last act of the provoker, even though minor in itself, may be placed in the context of the previous provocation, and may itself be treated as sufficient to show that the loss of self-control was ‘sudden and temporary’.
However, there is no reference to a requirement of ‘suddenness’ in the Homicide Act 1957, and the courts have in effect restricted the defence to people with certain kinds of temperament.
It is one thing to exclude cases like Ibrams from the defence — the gap of some five days between provocation and killing savours of considered revenge; it is another thing to exclude defendants with slow-burning temperaments, who do not react straight away to an insult or wrong, but go away and then react after hours of festering anger.
Should a court be prevented from hearing and acting on evidence that, despite the lapse of a few hours, a defendant's temperament was such that it is fair to say that he or she was provoked to lose self-control, and that it was not calculated revenge?
The Homicide Act requires evidence that D was provoked to lose self-control: this is wide enough to include things said or done by persons other than the deceased, and acts done against persons other than D (e.g. where D is provoked to kill someone who has just committed a sexual offence upon D's son, daughter, wife, etc.).
But  the word ‘provoked’ does seem to require a human act rather than a natural event which leads D to lose self-control.
Thus, in Doughty (1986), the crying of a 17-day-old child was held to be sufficient to fall within the requirement (even though such an infant is not aware of the significance of what he or she is doing), whereas someone who loses self-control after a storm or explosion has destroyed his property would be outside the requirement.
These restrictions show that the subjective element is merely preparing the ground for the objective element; it is not part of a broader defence of emotional pressure of the kind discussed in Chapter 6.5(c) above.
(ii)The Objective Condition .
Once the court is satisfied that there is evidence that D was provoked to lose self-control, it must go on to consider the second requirement: was the provocation enough to make a reasonable man do as D did?
This is English law's rather clumsy attempt to reflect the element of partial justification in the doctrine of provocation.
The clumsiness is evident in the standard of ‘the reasonable man’, an anthropomorphic (and male) standard which might be taken to suggest a paragon of virtue if it were not for the context of partially exculpating a killing by such a person.
The underlying point is that it is not every act of provocation which should be allowed to reduce murder to manslaughter, but only those serious enough to unbalance the behaviour of a person with reasonable self-control.
In earlier times the judge would rule on the sufficiency of the provocation, and the result of this was rather narrow and legalistic categories of sufficiency (e.g. violence or finding a spouse in adultery were enough, but words or a confession of adultery were not).
The Homicide Act 1957 deprived judges of their power to give authoritative rulings on the sufficiency of provocation, and the question must now be left to the jury, which should apply the test of the ‘reasonable man’ to everything said or done before the killing which might amount to provocation.
There appears to be no time-limit on the matters to be considered, so that not only the final act but a whole course of conduct may be taken into account.
If this is correct, it goes some way towards dealing with cases of ‘cumulative provocation’, and towards a broader defence of emotional pressure.
How has the ‘reasonable man’ test been interpreted by the courts?
In Bedder v. 
DPP (1954) D, who was sexually impotent, was taunted about his impotence and kicked in the groin by a prostitute with whom he had been attempting to have sexual intercourse, whereupon he lost self-control and killed her.
The House of Lords held that the jury should consider the effect of these acts on a reasonable man, without regard to the sexual impotence.
The court seemed to be afraid that if it allowed the jury to take account of one characteristic, such as sexual impotence, then it would be illogical to direct them not to take account of another characteristic, such as irascibility or bad temper.
It is no less illogical, however, to ask a jury to consider the effect of taunts of impotence on a reasonable person who is not impotent, and the Bedder approach was overruled by the House of Lords in DPP v. 
Camplin (1978).
A court should now consider the effect of the provocation on ‘a person having the power of self-control to be expected of an ordinary person of the sex and age of the accused, but in other respects sharing such of the accused's characteristics as they think would affect the gravity of the provocation to him’.
This test demonstrates that the illogicality alleged in Bedder does not exist: some characteristics of each individual defendant must be considered by the jury in assessing the gravity of the provocation, but the level of self-control must be kept constant.
Bad temper could not be taken into account, for that is plainly inconsistent with the standard of reasonable self-control.
Mental imbalance should also be excluded, since that seems inconsistent with the idea of an ‘ordinary person’, and the defence should be one of diminished responsibility.
Intoxication is plainly outside the test: if the provocation was not enough to lead an ordinary sober person to do as D did, then the essence of D's defence is intoxication rather than provocation.
The criteria adopted by the Court of Appeal in Newell (1980) were that courts should only take account of characteristics with which the provocation was concerned; permanent characteristics such as race and, probably, religion may be taken into account, but transient conditions such as intoxication and exhaustion may not.
The underlying idea is that citizens are expected to keep control over their behaviour, but that in circumstances where even a person of normal self-control might be provoked, the offence may be reduced from murder to manslaughter.
The required standard of self-control is kept fairly constant, but in order to assess the strength of the provocation, it is necessary to consider the relevant personal  characteristics.
This demonstrates the interaction between the excusing elements in provocation (not just the loss of self-control, but the degree of provocation experienced) and the justificatory elements (to an extent, D was right to react angrily to what had been said or done, unless the alleged provocation was self-induced or was a legally justified act).
The interaction between these elements is a complex one, as we saw in Chapter 6.5.
Thus, the standard of self-control is not constant but may vary, according to Camplin , with the age and sex of the defendant.
To modify the standard where D is very young (Camplin was 15) is understandable: it is not fair to expect a youth to show the same level of self-restraint as an adult.
The idea of having different standards for males and females has not been elaborated by the English courts.
Clearly, sex may be a relevant characteristic in some cases, for some provocations are specific to one sex, but is there an argument for different standards of self-control for males and females?
Does the plight of battered wives who kill after a spate of ill-treatment warrant special treatment by the law?
(iii)A Further Requirement?
At common law the famous case of Mancini v. 
DPP (1942) held that the retaliation must bear a reasonable relationship to the provocation.
The idea was that only an extremely grave provocation ought to mitigate a killing with a deadly weapon, whereas a lesser provocation might be allowed to mitigate other killings.
This rule seemed to be modelled on the proportionality requirement in self-defence, and was criticized as quite unsuitable for cases of provocation, where loss of self-control intervenes between the provocation and the retaliation.
Is it not both illogical and unreasonable to require a person who has lost self-control to ensure, none the less, that his response is not disproportionate?
This counter-argument has been given some recognition by the courts, in that the ‘reasonable relationship rule’ is no longer a rule of law.
But traces of it remain, since a jury must still be asked not merely whether the reasonable man would be provoked to lose self-control, but also ‘whether he would react to the provocation as the accused did’.
The precise meaning of this formulation is unclear — does it mean ‘lose self-control and kill’, or  ‘lose self-control and kill in the way D did’— but it seems to derive from the notion that there are degrees of loss of self-control.
If that is the underlying proposition, it is important to dissociate it from the unacceptable idea that a person's acts after loss of self-control should still be measured on an objective scale.
(iv)Provocation and Murder .
The two key questions here are: first, whether provocation ought to reduce murder to manslaughter; and, second, how wide the qualified defence should be.
The answer to the first question is closely related to issues of stigma, labelling, and widely held opinions about culpability.
It was argued above that it is unacceptable to claim that the mandatory penalty for murder supplies the raison d'être for the qualified defence of provocation: the label ‘murder’ should be reserved for the most heinous of killings, and there is a widely held belief that provoked killings are not in this group.
The second question, the proper ambit of the provocation defence, is more troublesome.
It would be possible to absorb provocation into a wider notion of ‘extreme emotional disturbance’, as the American Model Penal Code does, so that the key to mitigation would be the extent of the defendant's psychological disturbance at the time of the killing rather than the reasons for it.
One way of accomplishing this in English law would be to merge provocation into a widened doctrine of diminished responsibility.
However, a central element in the common-law doctrine of provocation is the reason for the loss of self-control.
If the explanation for the violent outburst lies in something which might understandably lead a person to be so angry as to lose self-control, then this supplies an added reason for mitigating the offence and the sentence.
Thus the court must first ascertain the gravity of the provocation experienced by the defendant, and then consider whether this provides some excuse for the loss of control.
This does not gainsay the fundamental proposition that it is every citizen's duty to retain self-control — at least to the extent of not violating other people's interests — but it does open the way to a manslaughter verdict and to sentences which are rarely longer than eight years' imprisonment (less than half as long as the time served by many convicted of murder) and may be considerably shorter.
However, the significant reduction in sentence is probably connected with the normative elements in the provocation doctrine, the elements of ‘partial justification’.
In the existing law  this is shown by the requirement of reasonable self-control, and by the (probable) exclusion of conduct known to be legally justified from the category of sufficient provocation.
Surely it is the combination of the elements of partial excuse and partial justification (see Chapter 6.5 above) which raises sufficient exculpation to warrant a reduction to manslaughter.
(c) Duress as a Qualified Defence
In 1987 the House of Lords (in Howe ) held that duress should not be available as a defence to murder.
Their Lordships devoted little of their speeches to the possibility of allowing duress to function as a qualified defence to murder, reducing the crime to manslaughter and leaving the judge to pass an appropriate sentence.
This would preserve the principle that a person who is threatened must be prepared to undergo heroic self-sacrifice rather than take the life of a third party, just as the provocation doctrine preserves the principle that citizens ought always to retain self-control.
However, the House of Lords preferred to see a conviction for murder in these cases, with the use of executive discretion to secure an early release from the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment for offenders who killed when under duress, and thus appear to have reduced culpability.
This is surely an unsatisfactory way of dealing with these cases, where the degree of emotional disturbance is likely to be no less than that involved in most provocation cases.
The normative requirements of the defence of duress (discussed in detail in Chapter 6.4) ensure that it is restricted to dire and realistic threats which a citizen of reasonable firmness could not be expected to resist.
The degree of emotional pressure on the defendant can almost be taken for granted in these cases.
‘If murder is to be reserved for those homicides which are most deserving of stigma, this does not seem to be one of them.’
If duress is not to be allowed as a complete defence to murder, the reduction in culpability should surely be reflected by reducing the conviction to manslaughter.
(d) Killings by the Use of Excessive Force on a Justified Occasion
Just as it seems strange and unnecessary that the law should have to choose between duress as a complete defence to murder, and duress  as no defence at all, so it seems strange and unnecessary that a killing which narrowly fails to come within the requirements of self-defence or other justifiable force should then be classified as murder.
The Australian case of McKay (1957) involved a chicken farmer who, when he found an intruder stealing chickens, shot at him five times, killing him.
The farmer's defence was that he intended only to wound the thief, and thought he was entitled to do so.
In another Australian case,Howe (1958), D was attacked by a man, in an isolated place, whom he believed was trying to force him to commit sodomy.
D took a gun and, fearing that this stronger man would renew his attack, shot and killed him.
In both these cases it was held that the alternative of a manslaughter verdict ought to be left to the jury where the occasion justifies action in self-defence, or to prevent a crime, or to apprehend an offender, but where the defendant acts beyond the necessity of that occasion.
Three reasons may be advanced for labelling these cases as manslaughter rather than murder.
First, cases of ‘excessive defence’ have a grounding in legal justification, in that the occasion was one which justified the use of some force, and this places them on a higher social plateau than killings with no element of justification at all.
Second, the defendant has what one might term the ‘lawful motivation’, believing that the actions taken were right and proper.
This is a subjective, motivational factor which corresponds to the objective moral distinction identified as the first reason.
Third, in some cases the defendant acts instinctively in response to an unexpected situation, completely misjudging the proper reactions in the heat of the moment: this is a similar reason to the second, but adds the element of emotional disturbance, which may explain the over-reaction in certain cases.
Both the second and, more strongly, the third reason show that the doctrine of excessive defence may include a substantial element of excuse in its rationale, even though its theoretical foundation lies unmistakably in the concept of legal justification.
The Australian initiative was rejected both by the Privy Council and the English courts, largely on the grounds that the common-law precedents were not compelling, that the full defence of self-defence should be applied indulgently in favour of those who use such force as they instinctively think necessary, and that the doctrine  of provocation might be used to accommodate other cases.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee disagreed, recommending that a verdict of manslaughter should be possible where the use of some force was justified by the occasion and where D honestly believed that the force he used was reasonable in the circumstances.
History then took a strange twist, for in Zecevic v. 
DPP (1987) the Australian High Court denounced the doctrine of excessive force as too complicated for juries and removed it from Australian law.
There is surely a strong social argument for regarding those who kill by using excessive force on an occasion which justifies the use of some force as less culpable than the ordinary run of murderers.
Whether this moral — social distinction should be reflected in the law by introducing a doctrine of manslaughter by excessive defence depends on the importance attached to the principle of fair labelling (see Chapter 3.3 (l )).
It is assumed here that juries and others do attach considerable importance to the label when it is a question of homicide, and therefore that the excessive use of force in self-defence is a matter which is properly reflected by a separate qualified defence, rather than being left to sentencing (which means executive discretion, if the mandatory penalty for murder remains) or forced artificially into the doctrine of provocation (when there may be no real evidence of loss of self-control).
The problem encountered in Australia, of the doctrine being too complicated for juries, was the result of a six-stage direction which the courts developed; surely the essence of the doctrine can be conveyed more simply than that, rather than destroying it entirely.
(e) Manslaughter by Reason of Diminished Responsibility
Of the qualified defences to murder in English law, diminished responsibility is the most frequently used.
From 1977 to 1986 there were about half as many convictions for manslaughter on grounds of diminished responsibility as there were murder convictions.
The phenomenon is a relatively recent one, since diminished responsibility was only introduced into English law in 1957, in response to long-standing dissatisfaction with the insanity defence.
Insanity was, and still is, a complete defence to crime, as we saw in Chapter 6.2 above, but its confines are narrow, and some persons  obviously suffering from mental disorder came to be sentenced to death for murder before 1957.
Diminished responsibility has a wider ambit, but its effect is merely to reduce murder to manslaughter, giving the judge discretion on sentencing or other disposal.
The wording with which section 2 of the Homicide Act 1957 introduced diminished responsibility is rather unsatisfactory, but judges, counsel, doctors, and juries have approached it with a compassionate pragmatism rather than with the rarefied verbal analysis too frequently encountered in English criminal law.
The mainstay of section 2 is a wide concept of ‘abnormality of mind’, interpreted in the leading case of Byrne (1960) as
a state of mind so different from that of ordinary human beings that the reasonable man would term it abnormal.
It appears to us to be wide enough to cover the mind's activities in all its aspects, not only the perception of physical acts and matters and the ability to form a rational judgment whether an act is right or wrong, but also the ability to exercise will-power to control physical acts in accordance with that rational judgment.
Section 2 does require that the abnormality of mind should be one ‘arising from a condition of arrested or retarded development of mind or any inherent causes or induced by disease or injury’, but this range of admissible causes is sufficiently general to encourage a broad construction of the defence.
The court must, lastly, be satisfied that the mental abnormality ‘substantially impaired his [D's]mental responsibility’ for the killing.
The formulation is strange, since it suggests that one can measure a person's ability to conform to the law.
In practice, it has been taken as allowing the jury to assess whether the mental abnormality was such a significant factor in the killing as to reduce D's culpability to the extent that the offence should be reduced from murder to manslaughter.
In most cases it is not the jury who takes this decision but the prosecution, who, with the judge's agreement, accepts the defendant's plea of guilty to manslaughter under section 2.
Some 80 per cent of diminished-responsibility defences are accepted by the prosecution, and only in around 13 per cent of cases does the prosecution contest the defence evidence and thus require the jury to apply section 2.
What is the practical effect of a successful section 2 defence?
In the three years from 1984 to 1986 there were some 229 such cases, of which almost half were dealt with by a hospital order under the  Mental Health Act 1983 (with or without restrictions).
Ten per cent received life imprisonment, 15 per cent were given determinate prison sentences of between four and ten years, 10 per cent were given prison sentences below four years, and 15 per cent were given probation orders (with or without a condition of psychiatric treatment).
These figures show the diversity of the cases dealt with under section 2, and they also represent a significant shift from policy in the 1960s, when around 70 per cent of diminished-responsibility offenders were given hospital orders.
The decline in hospital orders and the rise of prison sentences are traceable formally to the practice of modern psychiatrists of recommending fewer hospital orders, and in reality to the more restrictive policy on admission to special hospitals being pursued by the DHSS, and also to the higher proportion of defendants who are declared to have ‘recovered’ by the time of the trial.
No hospital order will be made where the defendant is said to have recovered, and the courts often feel it necessary to impose a prison sentence in such cases.
Delays before trial can therefore affect the result, for a defendant who is committed to hospital and recovers there would usually be released back into the community fairly swiftly.
Also receiving determinate prison sentences are those whose offence is reduced to manslaughter on a combined plea of provocation and diminished responsibility.
Among those receiving probation orders will be those for whom the section 2 defence is used to mitigate a mercy killing.
Should the qualified defence of diminished responsibility be retained?
In answering this question, one has to contend with two muddles in English law, a general muddle about mental disorder and criminal responsibility, and a specific muddle about murder and manslaughter.
The general muddle was discussed in Chapter 6.2(c) above: in principle, a person whose conduct was caused by mental disorder should not be liable to criminal conviction, but in practice the narrow and antiquated defence of insanity is rarely invoked in England (a handful of cases each year), and the courts normally proceed to conviction and then select a medical disposal where appropriate.
The muddle could — and should — be cleared by introducing a workable mental-disorder defence, along the lines recommended by the Butler Committee in 1975.
If such a defence were  available in murder cases — and the consequence of a successful plea would be to give the court a limited discretion as to the order to be made — the case for a separate doctrine of diminished responsibility would be weak.
The second muddle concerns murder and manslaughter specifically, namely, that since there is no workable defence of insanity, it is often assumed that the existence of the mandatory penalty for murder is the essential reason for the section 2 defence.
The Butler Committee argued that relatively minor mental disorders may be regarded as falling within section 2 simply because this outcome is thought to be preferable to mandatory life imprisonment.
‘The medical profession is humane’, commented the Butler Committee, ‘and the evidence is often stretched.’
That may be so, but it may be suggested that as much depends on the surrounding legal rules as on the mandatory penalty.
If there is no workable defence of insanity, it is surely wrong to convict a grossly disordered killer of murder when the less stigmatic offence of manslaughter is at hand.
And if the law of homicide makes no special provision for mercy killings (see Chapter 7.4(h) below) or for killings during extreme emotional disturbance, despite a widely held view that such cases ought to be treated as less culpable than ‘ordinary’ murders, is there not an argument for a fairly broadly defined qualified defence?
(f) Infanticide
This is a separate offence from manslaughter, but it is relevant here because of its close links with diminished responsibility.
By the Infanticide Act 1922 Parliament mitigated the application of the law of murder to mothers who killed their new-born babies whilst suffering from the effects of childbirth.
Doubts arose over the length of time which might elapse before the child ceased to be regarded as ‘newly born’, and the Infanticide Act 1938 extended the definition to the killing of a child within twelve months of its birth by a mother whose mind is disturbed either by reason of her not having fully recovered from the effect of giving birth to the child or by reason of the effect of lactation consequent upon the birth of the child.
Infanticide is a defence to murder, but it is more usual to charge infanticide in the first place.
The maximum penalty remains  life imprisonment, although almost all the cases each year (twenty or so) are dealt with non-custodially, usually by a probation order.
Three interconnected criticisms of the law may be considered here.
first, the definition of infanticide is limited to the killing of the child most recently born, which means that when a mother in a disturbed state kills both her last-born child and another slightly older child, the one killing is infanticide and the other may be murder, whereas the defendant's culpability is surely the same in both cases.
If the essence of infanticide lies in the effects of the stresses consequent upon recent childbirth, then it is this, and not the age of the victim, which should be the basis of the law.
Second, the law is gender-specific, singling out women for more lenient treatment.
Some people take exception to this on the ground that it may imply that women generally have weaker characters and are less responsible for their behaviour.
There is also the argument that the fathers of children may kill whilst overwhelmed by the stress consequent upon the arrival of a new child, and they should be not be left outside the law of infanticide.
The third criticism is that the medical basis of the Infanticide Act 1938 is now discredited: the reference to the effect of lactation is without foundation, and it is acknowledged that the social pressures consequent upon the arrival of a new child (such as financial demands, unsuitable housing, effects on family relationships) may be just as likely to lead to the mental disturbance manifest in these cases as any condition linked specifically with the event of giving birth.
In their evidence to the Criminal Law Revision Committee, the Royal College of Psychiatrists pressed for legal recognition of these wider social and situational factors.
The Committee was equivocal on this, but recommended a formulation which would be broad enough to encompass these wider factors —‘the balance of the woman's mind was disturbed by reason of the effect of giving birth or circumstances consequent upon that birth’.
Would it not be preferable to absorb infanticide into the doctrine of diminished responsibility and allow the prosecution to charge manslaughter in such cases?
This would have the advantage of removing both the restriction as to the victim and the limitation to  women, but the Criminal Law Revision Committee thought that this would lead to an effective narrowing of the scope of infanticide.
There might be cases of killings by mothers burdened by ‘social and emotional pressures’ which could not be brought within the definition of mental disorder which would be the basis of a reformed defence of diminished responsibility.
Of course, doctors might be prepared to stretch those definitions in order to bring such cases within diminished responsibility, but that is an unsatisfactory basis on which to reform the law, and it provides the defendant with no legal protection against a murder verdict.
The Committee's solution was to persist with a separate offence of infanticide.
Would it not be preferable to broaden the defence of diminished responsibility so as to convert it into a defence of extreme emotional disturbance, applicable to both sexes?
(g) Killing in Pursuance of a Suicide Pact
Section 4 of the Homicide Act 1957 provides that a person who kills another in pursuance of a suicide pact is guilty of manslaughter not murder.
A suicide pact exists where two or more people, each having a settled intention of dying, reach an agreement which has as its object the death of both or all.
This may be said to amount to a mutual exercise of the individuals' rights of self-determination.
Cases are infrequent, tending to occur in circumstances which evoke compassion rather than condemnation.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee recommended that killings in pursuance of a suicide pact should be a separate offence, on the ground that the stigma and maximum penalty for manslaughter are inappropriate in these cases.
Suicide and attempted suicide ceased to be a crime when the Suicide Act 1961 became law, in recognition of the right to self-determination, but there remains an offence of aiding, abetting, counselling, or procuring the suicide of another which carries a maximum penalty of fourteen years' imprisonment.
Many of the cases involve compassionate assistance, of the kind which may be necessary and justifiable if the right to self-determination is to have any meaning for those who are weak or bedridden (e.g. responding to a request to bring pills), but not all are like this.
In McShane (1977) a woman was convicted of an attempt to counsel her  mother's suicide by repeatedly encouraging her to take an overdose, and it was shown that the mother's death would greatly alleviate the defendant's financial problems.
It is for cases of this kind, where the evidence shows that there was active persuasion rather than compassionate assistance to someone already determined to commit suicide, that a substantial maximum penalty is thought necessary.
For this offence and for the proposed suicide-pact offence, the Criminal Law Revision Committee (CLRC) recommended a maximum of seven years' imprisonment.
This grading of the offences may be seen as a compromise between the compassionate elements in the offences, which are related to the right to self-determination, and the need to protect the vulnerable from persuasion on such a crucial matter as the ending of life, an argument also derived from the right to self-determination.
(h) Mercy Killing
This concept has no special significance in English criminal law.
Where a clear case of mercy killing emerges in practice, the usual response is that ‘legal and medical consciences are stretched to bring about a verdict of manslaughter by diminished responsibility’.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee regarded this bending of the law as unsatisfactory, and tentatively proposed a new offence of mercy killing where a person, out of compassion, unlawfully kills another who is, or is believed by him to be, permanently helpless or in great pain.
The proposal attracted strong opposition, some arguing that it might withdraw legal protection from the weak and vulnerable, others arguing that the fundamental ethical problems could not be satisfactorily resolved by legal definition.
The difficulty with the counter-arguments is that the practice of ‘stretching’ diminished responsibility gives a de facto defence to mercy killers already.
Thus, in Dell's sample of diminished responsibility cases there were some ten cases with a mercy-killing element.
Most of them involved ‘killings committed impulsively with whatever means were at hand’, usually by ‘men in their 60s or 70s [who]had reached breaking point under the continuing strain of looking after wives with severe mental or physical illness’.
In some of these cases the  defendant appeared mentally normal when examined by the doctor, but the doctor was none the less willing to infer from the circumstances that there had been abnormality of mind at the time of the killing, and to write a report which brought this within section 2.
Practitioners seem to accept that worthy cases of mercy killing invariably have this outcome, but this informal approach provides the defendant with no legal basis for a defence — he or she is truly at the mercy of the psychiatrists, the prosecutor, and the judge.
Thus, to return to the arguments mobilized against the CLRC's proposal: the chief difference in protection of the vulnerable between the present system and the CLRC's is that the latter had a maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment, whereas life imprisonment is available where a defence of diminished responsibility succeeds; and the fundamental ethical problems are now swept under the carpet by a combination of a stretched diagnosis of ‘abnormality of mind’ and the ample judicial sentencing discretion, whereas the CLRC's proposal attempted to make the issues justiciable.
If, however, the CLRC's proposal were altered so as to make mercy killing into a new qualified defence to murder, with the normal maximum sentence of life imprisonment, the central plank of the opposition to an explicit recognition of this mitigation in English law would disappear.
Beneath these arguments about legal form lie the wider issues of self-determination.
English law might be said to recognize a right to self-determination, inasmuch as suicide is no longer a crime, but that right does not yield a clear answer to the present difficulty.
The right to self-determination might realistically be extended to cover those who desire their own death but lack the resources or the strength to accomplish it: this is a strong argument for a mercy-killing defence or offence.
Yet, recognition of that extension might at the same time open up the possibility that vulnerable people who do not desire death, despite their suffering, might be killed by others for reasons of their own: this would subvert the right to self-determination, and is an argument against a mercy-killing defence or offence.
It seems probable that some doctors carry out mercy killings by administering large doses of pain-killing drugs which shorten life significantly, and the law may well protect them from  liability.
However, such trust is not shown towards relatives and friends who assist suffering people in this way: they must run the gauntlet of a legal process which accords no formal recognition to the circumstances under which they killed.
(i) Conclusion: the Murder-Manslaughter Boundary
The basic legal distinction between murder and manslaughter lies in the mental element, but English law has now developed qualified defences to murder which mark out cases where, despite the presence of the mental element for murder, culpability is thought to be sufficiently reduced to warrant a reduction in the class of offence.
Our discussion has taken a broad view of qualified defences, commenting also on some qualified defences which might be recognized but which do not feature in contemporary English law.
Various reasons have been advanced for recognizing qualified defences to murder.
Some regard the mandatory penalty for murder as the chief, even the sole, reason for these doctrines.
It has been suggested here that the mandatory penalty is relevant but not critical.
The key issues are, on the one hand, the proper legal classification of an offence which contains some exculpatory features, and, on the other, the distribution of decision-making power between the judge, the jury, and the executive.
The label ‘murder’, and the stigma thought to accompany it, should be reserved for the most heinous group of killings; there is a well-recognized offence of manslaughter beneath murder, and this should be used for offences where the culpability is significantly lower.
The mandatory penalty of life imprisonment for murder makes issues of relative culpability non-justiciable at present, since the length of imprisonment is ‘determined or partly determined behind the scenes by someone who has not heard any representations by or on behalf of the prisoner on grounds which the prisoner does not know’.
If, on the other hand, Lord Kilbrandon's suggestion of a single offence of unlawful homicide were adopted, the crucial questions of culpability would be decided solely at the sentencing stage by the judge.
The jury would have no role in this; the judge would derive no assistance from their verdict.
What, then, should be the proper division of functions between judge and jury in homicide cases?
The arguments in favour of some  seven qualified defences have been considered above.
Since it is possible that more than one defence might be raised in each case, sometimes in combination with a defence of lack of intent, a system of criminal law which offers seven qualified defences to murder risks undue complication and confusion in contested cases.
The merit of separate qualified defences is that they focus the evidence and the legal argument, giving the jury (in contested cases) an opportunity to assess the defence, and giving the judge fairly precise guidance on the basis for sentencing: this might be thought to ensure that each defendant is dealt with more fairly, but the risk of confusing the jury in a contested case might tend to erode that protection.
One approach would be to consider amalgamating some of the defences.
This is not to condone ‘stretching’ defences, using diminished responsibility to cover mercy killing, for example, or provocation to cover excessive defence, but rather to examine whether the defences have common rationales which can be drawn together.
Three of the qualified defences discussed above have an element of justification — provocation, excessive defence, and some cases of duress.
Most of the qualified defences have an element of excuse — provocation, diminished responsibility, most duress cases, infanticide, mercy killing, and suicide pacts.
One possibility would be to evolve a qualified defence of killing under extreme emotional disturbance, following the lead of the Model Penal Code.
This might encompass all those qualified defences with an element of excuse in them.
A provoked loss of self-control could fall within this new doctrine — as, indeed, could losses of self-control stemming from non-human sources such as a natural disaster or financial ruin.
Diminished responsibility could also be accommodated, although a general defence of mental disorder remains a better way of labelling and dealing with cases of clinical mental disorder.
Cases now treated as infanticide often involve extreme emotional disturbance, as do mercy killings, suicide pacts, and cases of duress.
One advantage of this amalgamation might be that there would be less potential for the jury to become confused, and yet the jury would still be empowered to reduce murder to manslaughter in appropriate cases.
One disadvantage of the change might be that the more precise moral distinctions currently incorporated within the law would become submerged within the sentencing discretion, where the signposts are less clear and the arguments less structured.
This might be the case with provocation, for example: there may be objections to some of the distinctions now drawn by the law of  provocation, but a broader defence of extreme emotional disturbance might provide for reduction of the offence in cases of loss of self-control when caring for a baby or when arrested by a police-officer known to be acting lawfully, and some might feel that there are strong arguments against this.
However, such disadvantages could be minimized by elaborating the definition of extreme emotional disturbance so as to clarify its extent and its limitations, and by evolving sentencing guidelines which set out the major determinants of culpability.
This would attribute some weight to the principle of maximum certainty (see Chapter 3.3(i)) in this important area of the law.
Yet there would undoubtedly remain a considerable amount of discretion, both for judges and juries applying the law, if the words ‘sufficient to reduce the offence from murder to manslaughter’ were retained, and at the sentencing stage, in response to the particular combination of factors in each case.
Such a reformulated qualified defence would not encompass cases of excessive self-defence, since they may involve a genuine and unhurried misjudgment of the amount of force permissible, and so they would have to be the subject of a separate qualified defence.
But the question remains whether, in practice and in theory, it would not be fairer to retain several separate qualified defences which labelled the circumstances of each mitigated killing more accurately.
7.5 ‘INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER’
The category of killings which has come to be known as involuntary manslaughter has nothing to do with involuntariness, properly so called.
These are not cases where the accused has caused death while in an involuntary state.
These are cases where death has been caused with insufficient fault to justify labelling it as murder, but with sufficient fault for a manslaughter verdict.
The word ‘involuntary’ is therefore used merely to distinguish these killings from ones which have the necessary intent for murder but which are reduced to manslaughter by one of the doctrines just considered, such as provocation or diminished responsibility.
The legal debate in involuntary manslaughter is over the lower threshold of homicide liability — where to draw the line between manslaughter and killings which should be ascribed to mere accident.
There is, however, a large variety of killings which lie above that line but  below the line demarcating murder: a killing in which D knew there was a risk of death, but was held not to have intended death or grievous bodily harm, would fall within involuntary manslaughter and might justify a high sentence; whereas a killing in which D pushed a person during an argument in the street and the person fell backwards, cracking his head on the kerb and dying from a brain haemorrhage, might also fall within involuntary manslaughter and might justify a low sentence.
The offence, as now defined in English law, covers a wide spectrum of culpability.
Beneath the law of involuntary manslaughter lie some deep issues of general principle.
For example, the offence includes a species of constructive liability, which was criticized in Chapter 5.2(b).
Can this be justified by reference to the magnitude of the harm resulting, i.e. death?
Or would it be fairer to convict the harm-doer of a lesser offence, thus ignoring the chance result?
Another problem is the more general one of liability for negligence: as we saw in Chapter 5.3 (f ), this is regarded as insufficient for liability for most serious offences, and yet it may be sufficient for manslaughter.
Is it right that liability for the second most heinous crime in English law, which carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, should be satisfied by this relatively low grade of fault?
These questions will be discussed in more detail once the elements of the offence have been outlined.
(a) Manslaughter by an Unlawful and Dangerous Act
This species of involuntary manslaughter is based upon constructive liability.
In broad terms, the law constructs liability out of the lesser crime which D was committing, and which happened to cause death.
In fact, the courts have progressively narrowed this species of manslaughter over the last century or so: there was a time when the mere commission of a tort or civil wrong sufficed as the ‘unlawful act’, and when there was no additional requirement of ‘dangerousness’ to be satisfied.
What the prosecution must now prove is that D was committing a crime (not being a crime of negligence or a crime of omission), that in committing this crime he caused V's death, and that what he did when committing this crime was objectively dangerous.
Let us examine each of these requirements in turn.
First, D must have been committing a crime.
In many cases the crime which constitutes the ‘unlawful act’ will be a battery or an  assault occasioning actual bodily harm, arising from a push, a punch, or a kick.
The prosecution must establish that all the elements of the crime relied upon as the unlawful act were present, and this includes the mental elements of intent or recklessness in assault or battery.
To that extent there may be said to be a mental element required for this variety of manslaughter, but it is a manifestly low mental element compared with the death which results.
If the unlawful act is arson (criminal damage by fire), the fault element will be intention or Caldwell recklessness, and the latter does not require any subjective awareness on the defendant's part.
Where D was intoxicated when committing the ‘unlawful act’, it is likely that he would be liable to conviction for that offence despite his intoxicated state.
If so, the offence is sufficient to fulfil the ‘unlawful act’ requirement for manslaughter.
There are two types of crime which will not suffice as the unlawful act: crimes of negligence and crimes of omission.
The reasons for excluding crimes of omission are examined in section 7.5(d) below.
The reasons for excluding crimes of negligence were stated in.
Andrews v. 
DPP (1937), where a driver had killed a pedestrian whilst overtaking another car.
There was little dispute that D had committed the offence of dangerous driving, but did that automatically make him guilty of manslaughter when death resulted?
The House of Lords held that it did not: since the essence of dangerous driving was negligence, a driver should only be convicted of manslaughter if his driving was so bad as to amount to the gross negligence required under the third head of involuntary manslaughter (see below).
Whether or not the decision was motivated by tenderness towards motorists is hard to tell, but there was certainly some logic in keeping offences of negligence out of the ‘unlawful act’ doctrine when a separate head of manslaughter by gross negligence already existed.
Once it has been established that D was committing a criminal offence, the second step is to establish that this caused the death.
In most cases of battery or actual bodily harm the causal connection will be plain, but cases involving drugs have presented difficulties.
In Cato (1976) the Court of Appeal was prepared to hold that the offence of possessing controlled drugs was sufficient, together with the act of injecting another with these drugs, even though it is difficult to see how mere possession (which is the offence) can cause  death.
In Dalby (1982) the unlawful act was the supplying of controlled drugs to V, who then took them.
The Court of Appeal held that the supplying was insufficient as an unlawful act because it was not ‘directed at’ V. Subsequent decisions are unclear whether the ‘directed at’test remains good law, and a better approach to the facts of Dalby would be to hold that the supplying of drugs did not cause the death because V took them himself.
The third requirement is that the defendant's conduct in committing the crime must have been objectively dangerous.
This was seen as a slight restriction of the doctrine when it was imposed in Church (1966), where the court held that ‘The unlawful act must be such as all sober and reasonable people would inevitably recognize must subject the other person to, at least, the risk of some harm resulting therefrom, albeit not serious harm.’
The House of Lords has declined to narrow this requirement by demanding that D recognized the risk, and it has also been held that the dangerousness should be judged on the actual circumstances, ignoring D's mistaken belief about the facts.
The Church test therefore appears to be broad and readily fulfilled, but the phrase ‘some harm…albeit not serious harm’ has been construed restrictively in one sense.
In Dawson (1985) D, wearing a mask and carrying a pickaxe handle, approached a petrol-station attendant and demanded money; D fled when the attendant pressed the alarm bell, but the attendant then suffered a heart attack and died.
The Court of Appeal held that the unlawful act would only be regarded as ‘dangerous’ if it was likely to cause physical harm, not if mere emotional shock (unaccompanied by physical harm) was foreseeable.
(b) Manslaughter by Recklessness
The most recent development in the law of involuntary manslaughter is the doctrine of manslaughter by recklessness.
Although the word ‘reckless’ had been used many times before in the context of manslaughter, a distinctive doctrine was established in Seymour (1983).
4 After an argument with the woman with whom he had been living, D drove his lorry into her car and crushed her to death.
The House of Lords held that this was manslaughter if there was an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to some other person, and D had either failed to give any thought to this risk or, having recognised the risk, nonetheless went on to take it.
It will be seen that this is the Caldwell/Lawrence formula for recklessness (analysed in Chapter 5.3 (c )), and is virtually the same as the test for the separate offence of causing death by reckless driving.
The House of Lords accepted that the definitions of the two offences are the same, merely adding that the prosecutor should charge manslaughter when the maximum penalty for the offence of causing death by reckless driving (five years) might be insufficient.
In Seymour the House of Lords seemed to be principally concerned with manslaughter committed with a motor vehicle, but subsequent cases establish that the test of ‘obvious and serious risk of physical injury to some person’ is applicable to offences using different methods, such as fire.
(c) Manslaughter by Gross Negligence
Although the authorities conflict, it has been laid down that the new doctrine of reckless manslaughter supersedes the older doctrine of manslaughter by gross negligence.
Many of the old cases could indeed be subsumed within the new doctrine, but it does not cover them all.
In the case of Finney (1974), where an attendant at a mental hospital caused the death of a patient by releasing a flow of boiling water into a bath, the test was whether he was grossly negligent.
In Bateman (1925), where a doctor had attended the confinement of a woman who died whilst giving birth, the Court of Criminal Appeal held that there must be negligence over and above that which is sufficient to establish civil liability, and which shows ‘such disregard for the life and safety of others’ as to deserve punishment.
Both these cases might be decided similarly on the Seymour test, but that cannot be said of Lamb (1967).
Here two young men were joking with a gun; D pointed it at V and pulled the trigger, believing that it would not fire because neither bullet was opposite the barrel.
The gun was a revolver, however, and it did  fire, killing V. The Court of Appeal held that D might properly be convicted if his belief that there was no danger of the gun firing was formed in a criminally negligent way.
However, under the test derived from Caldwell , a person is not reckless if he thinks about the possible risk but decides that it does not obtain.
This is the Caldwell gap, and Lamb is a case which might have fallen into it.
It therefore follows that, if the courts have indeed replaced manslaughter by gross negligence with manslaughter by recklessness, they have narrowed the law slightly.
It is more likely, however, that manslaughter by gross negligence remains in addition to reckless manslaughter.
(c) Manslaughter by Omission
The courts have been reluctant to bring omissions cases within the above categories, manifesting once again their belief in the separate moral and legal status of omissions.
This was not always so: in Senior (1899) a man who belonged to a religious sect called the Peculiar People refused to call a doctor to his child, who subsequently died; he was held guilty of manslaughter on the ground that he had committed an unlawful act (wilful neglect of the child) which caused death.
However, this very reasoning was abjured in Lowe (1973), where D failed to ensure that medical help was summoned to his child, and it died.
The Court of Appeal held that a manslaughter verdict would not necessarily follow from a conviction for wilful neglect:
if I strike a child in a manner likely to cause harm it is right that if the child dies I may be charged with manslaughter.
If, however, I omit to do something with the result that it suffers injury to health which results in death, we think that a charge of manslaughter should not be an inevitable consequence, even if the omission is deliberate.
This passage suggests that the law should, and does, draw a distinction between the blameworthiness of acts and omissions, even where the omission is deliberate.
And yet the connection between withholding medical aid and subsequent death is surely closer than that between striking a child once and subsequent death.
The father's duty in Senior and in Lowe is manifest and incontrovertible.
If the ‘unlawful act’ doctrine is thought sound, these cases should fall squarely within it.
If the doctrine is thought unsound, both the omissions  cases and the act cases should be taken out of it.
A distinction between them is morally untenable.
Omissions cases falling within manslaughter by recklessness or gross negligence have also been set apart from cases of positive acts.
The leading modern case is Stone and Dobinson (1977), where two people were convicted of manslaughter for allowing a sick relative, whom they had permitted to live in their house, to die without medical attention.
The Court of Appeal's grounds for finding a duty of care in this case are scrutinized elsewhere.
Once the duty is established, the fault element required was expressed as recklessness, and defined thus: ‘a reckless disregard of danger to the health and welfare of the infirm person.
Mere inadvertence is not enough.
The defendant must be proved to have been indifferent to an obvious risk of injury to health, or actually to have foreseen the risk but to have determined nevertheless to run it.’
This passage is rendered ambiguous by the use of the word ‘indifferent’: if that connotes failure to realize an obvious risk, the test is similar to Caldwell but probably inconsistent with the earlier assertion that ‘mere inadvertence is not enough’.
If the Caldwell test of recklessness does indeed apply, then this form of omissions liability could be assimilated within the general doctrine of manslaughter by recklessness.
The only difference would be that Seymour required an obvious risk of physical injury to another, whereas Stone and Dobinson required a risk of injury to health, and the difference may be more apparent than real.
(e) The Contours of Manslaughter
The English law of manslaughter exhibits a tension between various principles of fairness to the defendant and the significance of the harm caused.
It is the resulting harm (death) which still dominates, as is evident from the fact that many forms of conduct fall within the law of manslaughter if death happens to result, whereas they would not even amount to a serious offence if a consequence less than death had ensued.
Thus ‘unlawful act’ manslaughter, which can be committed by virtue of a mere assault or battery, is an example of constructive liability (see Chapter 5.2 (a) and (b)); it is only luck which makes the difference between the summary offence of common assault (maximum, six months' imprisonment) and the grave  offence of manslaughter (maximum, life imprisonment).
‘Reckless’ manslaughter is also an example of constructive liability; even if Caldwell recklessness is justifiable as a standard, it is only an obvious risk of injury which must have been foreseeable.
Can these derogations from principle be justified?
Reasons can only be found in the unique significance of human life and in the need to mark out, and to prevent, conduct which causes its loss.
In considering whether these reasons are strong enough, we should not neglect the fact that some offences of manslaughter lie well above the lower boundaries of liability and fall little short of murder.
There is no doubting the substantial culpability of the person who embarks on a course of conduct knowing that there is a risk of death to another (e.g. the man who administered chloroform in Pike ), and the person who foresees the risk of really serious harm to another from the course of conduct being pursued.
The offence of murder is restricted to intent, and it would seem natural that recklessness as to the same consequences should amount to the lesser offence of manslaughter.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee, which found much of the English law of manslaughter unsupportable, argued that there is a need for a homicide offence beneath murder to encompass those who cause death when reckless as to death or serious injury.
But what about the lower threshold of manslaughter, where its minimum requirements form the boundary with accidental (non-criminal) homicide?
Surely, to apply the label ‘manslaughter’ to the conduct of a person who envisaged no more than a common assault, e. g. by a single punch, is both disproportionate and unfair.
It grossly exaggerates the amount of subjective culpability.
And, viewed objectively, the risk of death from a single punch is far too remote to enter into one's reasonable contemplation.
The present law attributes too much weight to chance: ‘the offender's fault falls too far short of the unlucky result.
So serious an offence as manslaughter should not be a lottery.’
To support manslaughter liability in these cases one would have to espouse the draconian principle that a person should be held liable for all the consequences of any wrongful act.
A refusal to espouse that principle is perhaps the only ground on which the omissions cases (see 7.5(d) above) can be defended, since their  distinction between acts and omissions is unconvincing.
Different considerations press forward, however, when we move on to the various situations in which known risks ought to be guarded against: bad driving of a motor vehicle may carry an obvious risk of causing death or serious injury, as may bad navigation of a ship or an aircraft, bad driving of a train, setting fire to a residential building, and the handling of firearms.
These risks are widely known, distinguished as much by the possibility of one or several deaths occurring as by the frequency with which the risk materializes.
Those who deal with firearms are generally aware of the attendant risks, and the days when those involved in motoring and other forms of transport could make light of the risks to life have now long passed, as various air, sea, rail, and road disasters have occurred.
In spheres of conduct such as these, where the risks are widely known, there are strong reasons for broadening the basis of criminal liability so as to encompass negligence.
This still falls well short of supporting the English law of manslaughter, where the ‘unlawful act’ doctrine allows a manslaughter conviction if death results from a mere assault or battery.
It also fails to substantiate the claim that death-causing acts or omissions in these situations of known danger should fall within the law of manslaughter rather than some other offence.
Thus it remains for discussion whether it would not be preferable to criminalize them by means of special ‘endangerment’ offences.
One advantage of that approach would be to direct attention to the particular source of danger, thus labelling the offence in a way which both describes the circumstances of the offence and serves an educative or even deterrent purpose.
A possible disadvantage is that, since such offences may lack the stigma of the word ‘manslaughter’, they may tend to underplay the gravity of the behaviour involved.
On the other hand, the social significance of the offences is likely to be set as much by prosecution policy and sentencing policy as by the label of the offence.
These tensions behind the law of manslaughter are evident in the decisions of the courts during this century, many of which have narrowed the offence, but some of which have extended it.
However, only the legislature can create new offences of endangerment.
What progress has it made towards this?
7.6 ENDANGERMENT ON THE ROADS
English law contains a number of offences which penalize the driving of a car on a road in a manner which may cause harm.
There is the offence of driving recklessly (contrary to section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972), and there are also the lesser offences of driving without due care and attention, and driving without reasonable consideration for other persons using the road (contrary to section 3 of the 1972 Act).
Clearly, the difference between reckless driving and careless driving is one of degree.
In the leading case of Lawrence (1981) it was held that reckless driving consists of driving which creates an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to some other person who might be happening to use the road or of doing substantial damage to property, and that the fault element is that the driver either failed to give any thought to the possibility of such a risk or, having recognized the existence of a risk, went on to take it.
Many of the cases falling within this offence may involve serious fault — where there is racing on the highway, for example, or a prolonged course of very bad driving, or bad driving in order to avoid apprehension.
Some less culpable forms of bad driving might also be labelled ‘reckless’, such as a momentary dozing-off at the wheel, or the failure to notice a pedestrian on a crossing.
In addition to these two offences, there is a homicide offence of causing death by reckless driving (contrary to section 1 of the 1972 Act).
The elements of the offence are exactly the same as for reckless driving, with the extra element of causing death.
It will readily be noticed that the elements of causing death by reckless driving are virtually the same as those of ‘reckless manslaughter’: indeed, in Seymour (1983) the House of Lords held that they are the same, and the only doubt arises over the reference to ‘substantial damage to property’ in the Lawrence test.
An obvious risk of property damage alone is insufficient for manslaughter, but may suffice for the driving offences.
The driving offence of ‘causing death’ was first introduced in 1956, largely because juries were unwilling to convict culpable motorists of such a serious-sounding offence as manslaughter.
The  position now seems to be that the two offences have the same legal definition, and that the prosecution should prefer the charge of manslaughter when the case is a bad one which might merit a sentence in excess of the five-year maximum for causing death by reckless driving.
Ever since the offence of causing death by reckless driving was introduced (it formerly included causing death by dangerous driving, too), there have been those who have pointed to its ‘illogicality’.
The difference between an offence of reckless driving (maximum penalty of two years) and one of causing death by reckless driving (maximum penalty of five years) may simply be one of chance.
Bad driving may or may not lead to an accident, depending on the chance conjunction of other factors and other people's behaviour.
And an accident may lead to death (in which case the more serious offence is committed) or merely to serious injuries or to minor damage.
The response to this ‘illogicality’— which is, of course, the very problem with the law of involuntary manslaughter too — has varied in recent English proposals.
Both the James Committee in 1976 and the Criminal Law Revision Committee in 1980 recommended the abolition of the offence of causing death by reckless driving, thereby accepting the ‘illogicality’ argument.
This accords with the CLRC's proposal that both ‘unlawful act’ manslaughter and reckless manslaughter should be abolished.
However, the report of the Road Traffic Law Review has reversed this trend.
The Review accepts the general principle that persons should be judged according to the intrinsic quality of their driving rather than its consequences, but argues that the law should depart from this in cases where death is caused and the driver's culpability is already high.
This is a frank recognition of the tension created by cases where there is the supreme harm (death) combined with some culpability but no foresight of the risk of death.
There is a well-known risk in motoring that certain kinds of driving may cause accidents, and that accidents may cause death.
The rules of the road are designed not only to produce the orderly and unhampered movement of traffic, but also to protect property, safety, and lives.
One who deviates so manifestly from these rules as to drive recklessly  ought to realize — because the driving test requires a driver to realize — that there is a considerable risk of an accident.
If an accident happens as a result of driving which deviates from the proper standard, then that may well be a case of negligence even if the driver had never thought of the risk in that particular case, because the driver is presumed to know the Highway Code.
It is this negligence which is termed ‘recklessness’ by the decisions in Caldwell and Lawrence .
There is, however, another dimension to the debate, and this appears from the CLRC's view that, where reckless driving causes death, this should not affect the label of the offence but may be treated as an aggravating factor in sentencing in appropriate cases.
This assumes that there is a tension between the causing of serious harm (death) and the relatively low fault (‘recklessness’, as here defined), and that this tension should be resolved in favour of the fault element when we are deciding on the labels of offences, thereby making no reference to the result, but should be resolved in favour of the serious harm when sentencing, increasing the sentence according to the gravity of the resulting harm.
In short, we should call the offence reckless driving, but the occurrence of death, even though it may be regarded as bad luck, should aggravate the sentence.
Is it defensible to have different principles for sentencing and for the labelling of offences?
Much depends on the social function of labelling criminal offences, and on the particular labels chosen.
We are referring here to the offence of causing death by reckless driving, not to manslaughter.
It is therefore, one may assume, a label of intermediate stigma (falling short of the stigma attached to the offence of manslaughter).
The fault element is fairly substantial, since the Lawrence definition refers to an obvious and serious risk of at least substantial damage to property: there will be few cases where only such damage, and no risk to personal safety, is involved; moreover, as argued above, a major reason for having rules of the road which all drivers should know is to reduce the risk of injuries and deaths resulting.
Retaining the more serious label which refers to the causing of death may therefore perform a useful educative function; it is hardly unfair to the driver, since this is the very risk against which the rules are intended to guard.
As for sentencing, English courts have been unclear about the proper approach.
In Krawec (1984), a case of  careless driving where a death resulted, the Court of Appeal held that the proper basis for sentence is ‘the quality of driving, the extent to which the appellant on the particular occasion fell below the standard of the reasonably competent driver’, to which ‘the unforeseen and unexpected results of the carelessness’ are not relevant.
However, there are other decisions which have taken account of unexpected and chance results as aggravating factors.
The problem, surely, is to find a satisfactory starting-point for the level of sentences.
The degree of risk created by the bad driving should be regarded as the crucial factor; it is not so much a question of whether the sentence should be more severe when the risk eventuates, as whether the sentence should be more lenient when the risk does not materialize.
If the aim of the rules of the road is to protect safety, and if the driver broke those rules in a way which may be labelled ‘reckless’, then the risk has been taken and the sentence should not be affected significantly by the materialization or non-materialization of the risk.
But, as a risk to safety taken recklessly, the offence deserves a penalty which places it above many intentional offences against property.
The argument, then, is that the causing of death by bad driving should not be regarded as a significant aggravating factor, but nor should the non-causing of death or injury be regarded as a significant mitigating factor.
The level of sentence should be set primarily, as the Lord Chief Justice stated in Krawec , according to‘the degree of carelessness and culpability’.
It will therefore be seen that many of the issues involved here are similar to those raised by the law of involuntary manslaughter, save for the fact that driving offences constitute deviations from a code of conduct on which all persons are tested before they are granted driving-licences.
This factor serves to distinguish driving cases from those of deaths resulting from a single punch, and also to bolster the argument that the penalties for the former should be higher than for the latter.
7.7 ENDANGERMENT IN OTHER SITUATIONS
Our discussion so far has stressed the relationship between endangerment on the roads and the detailed rules of the road, including the driving test.
Some preventive rules, together with  endangerment offences, can be seen in a variety of other situations, but nowhere is there such a detailed and fairly widely known set of standards as that applicable to drivers on the roads.
For example, there are regulations about the storage of explosives, and the dangers of handling explosives are well known.
The main thrust of the Explosives Act 1883, however, is contained in the offences of causing an explosion likely to endanger life (section 2), and the possession of explosives with intent to endanger life (section 3).
The latter offence is an inchoate offence of a familiar kind: possession with intent, in circumstances where an innocent reason for possessing explosives is fairly hard to come by (unless the defendant is engaged in quarrying or another business in which explosives are used).
The justification for the possession offence is preventive, and there is little difficulty in holding that a person caught in possession of explosives with intent to endanger life has sufficiently crossed the threshold of criminality to justify punishment.
True, there may yet be the possibility of repentance as the time for using the explosives draws near, but the very step of taking explosives into one's Possession with this intent is culpable.
As for the endangerment offence itself, two features in section 2 of the 1883 Act stand out.
One is that no actual endangerment is required: the explosion need only have been inherently likely to endanger life, and the offence is committed whether or not anyone's life was put in danger.
In its style of labelling, therefore, this differs from the present driving law, with its separate offences of reckless driving and causing death by reckless driving: the equivalent would be a single offence of driving in a manner likely to endanger life.
The second feature of the offence of causing an explosion likely to endanger life is that there appears to be no distinct fault requirement.
So long as the prosecution proves that D caused the explosion, and that the explosion was likely to endanger life, that would suffice for conviction.
The reason for this must be that one can hardly cause an explosion without realizing that one is about to do so, and that explosions usually create danger and must be known to do so, unless they are carefully controlled in an area away from members of the public.
However, these arguments are not particularly strong, for, if the inference of fault is so great, why not include a requirement of proof of fault, at least at the level of subjective recklessness?
Further offences of endangerment may be found in the Firearms  Act 1968.
Section 16 contains an offence of possessing a firearm with intent to endanger life, which corresponds to the offence under section 3 of the Explosives Act.
Again, the circumstances of the possession are likely to raise an inference of intent, unless the possession was clearly connected with some authorised shooting activity.
There are then three possession offences of a slightly different type.
Section 18 penalizes the possession of a firearm with intent to commit a crime or to resist arrest: this is a more specific variation of section 16, catering for the defence that the firearm was being carried for use in a robbery but with no intention that it would actually be used to endanger anyone, only to frighten — that would be a section 18 offence.
Section 19 penalises possession of a loaded firearm in a public place, presumably in circumstances where the section 16 offence cannot be proved, but on the argument that the mere possession is sufficiently dangerous because accidents can happen with loaded guns, and the consequences might be life-endangering.
Section 20 penalizes possession of a firearm when trespassing: again, there might be a defence to a section 16 charge if D was merely intending to shoot animals or fowl, but the gun could be turned on a human being and therefore represents a source of danger.
What these firearms offences appear to amount to is a criminalization of the carrying of firearms in all but the most innocent of contexts.
If the firearm is discharged and property is damaged, then an offence of criminal damage may be charged.
If it is discharged and a person is injured or killed, the appropriate offence against the person can be charged.
What the Firearms Act provides is a series of inchoate or preventive offences which criminalize conduct even before it has reached the stage of an attempt to commit some substantive offence.
The offences do not require any endangerment at all: that is taken to be inherent in the carrying of firearms, since their potentialities are grave and the risk of accidents as well as deliberate use is well known.
Offences relating to the operation of aircraft, ships, and railways have not been prominent in the practice of English criminal law.
But the law does contain such offences, and it is more a matter of prosecutors making little use of them.
It is true that over the years a few railway signalmen have been convicted of manslaughter for wrongful acts and omissions leading to fatal train crashes, but there is not the natural resort to the criminal law which is now a feature of road-traffic cases.
In a sense, greater values are at stake in the operation of aircraft, ships, and railways, because many lives are  involved, more than would normally be risked by the bad driving of a motor vehicle (although there is an important exception here in the operation of buses and coaches, which are more akin to planes, boats, and trains).
But there is another significant difference between the individual driving a car or a lorry and all these other forms of transport, and that is the chain of responsibility.
A company's management policies might be just as much to blame for a particular ‘accident’ as the actions of the driver, pilot, or captain: Sheen J made this point in his report on the Zeebrugge ferry disaster, but English prosecution practice has tended not to invoke the criminal law against managers of transport systems.
One reason for this may be the doctrine of corporate liability in English criminal law (discussed in Chapter 4.3, and found to be unsatisfactory); in particular, it may be difficult to establish the fault necessary for manslaughter, although easier to secure a conviction under legislation on railways or merchant shipping.
There may also be a reluctance among prosecutors to look beyond the individual driver, pilot, or captain in each case.
It is not just the operation of systems of transport which is a source of endangerment: the actions of individuals may be designed to take advantage of the possibility of causing several deaths at once.
The longest determinate prison sentence ever upheld by English courts was the sentence of forty-five years' imprisonment in the case of Hindawi (1988), a man who sent his pregnant girlfriend on a flight with a bag which contained a bomb timed to destroy the aircraft and its 350 passengers in mid-flight.
The offence in this was ‘an attempt to place on an aircraft a device likely to destroy or damage the aircraft, contrary to the Aviation Security Act 1982’— an inchoate offence, and one worded without any express reference to the endangerment of lives.
The sentence, however, was intended to reflect the attempt to kill so many people.
Injuries and deaths at work are a significant and reducible source of danger to the citizen, and the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 provides the framework for the regulation of safety in work-places with an offence of failing to ensure that, ‘so far as is reasonably practicable’, employees are not exposed to risks to their health or safety.
Other fragmentary legislation is to be found in recent years, e.g. the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
However, in addition to all these specific offences of endangerment, English law does contain one fairly wide-ranging offence, and that is the aggravated offence of criminal damage.
Under section 1(2) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 it is an offence — punishable with life imprisonment — to damage property ‘intending by the destruction or damage to endanger the life of another or being reckless whether the life of another would be thereby endangered’.
Criminal damage itself is an offence carrying up to ten years' imprisonment, but this is a more serious offence — more of an offence against the person.
One might well ask how important the element of criminal damage is to the rationale of the aggravated offence.
One answer could be that, where the damage is caused by fire, the consequent danger to life may be similar to that created by an explosion, and the inferences may be the same: who could cause such a fire in such a place without appreciating the danger to others?
However, the major question raised by section I(2) of the Criminal Damage Act is why English law does not have a general offence of endangerment.
Why should the fact that D was engaged on causing damage to property at the time (even damage to D's own property) make his conduct into an offence punishable with life imprisonment when, if D were engaged on some other activity, it would not be punishable as such and would only amount to manslaughter if a death happened to be caused?
Section 211.2 of the Model Penal Code has been enacted into the laws of many American states, providing a general endangerment offence.
The offence is committed where a person recklessly engages in conduct which places another person in danger of death or serious bodily injury.
It does not require any result, although it does require actual danger.
Its great merit is that it is not confined to particular activities, and therefore has an across-the-board application to different sources of endangerment.
On the other hand, such a general offence does not fulfil the educative function of singling out situations which carry a particular risk of danger.
For that reason, it would be wise to retain a special offence for road-traffic cases, and there may be merit in retaining offences with particular labels in other spheres.
What is more pertinent is whether the different styles of the offences discussed above have some justification.
Should the fault standard require D's actual awareness, or merely an objective probability of danger?
Should there be proof of actual danger to someone, or is potential danger enough?
NON-FATAL VIOLATIONS OF THE PERSON
8.1 VARIETIES OF PHYSICAL VIOLATION
In this chapter we shall be discussing two main forms of physical violation: the use of physical force, and sexual assaults.
It is quite obvious that each type of violence varies considerably in its degree: physical force can be anything from a mere push to a brutal beating which leaves the victim close to death, and a sexual assault may be anything from a brief touching to a gross form of sexual violation.
One problem which the criminal law has to confront, therefore, when dealing with physical violation, is how to grade the seriousness of the conduct.
The variations are so wide that it would contravene both the principle of fair labelling (see Chapter 3.3 (1)) and the principle of maximum certainty (see Chapter 3.3 (i)) if there were just a single offence of non-fatal harm and a single offence of sexual assault: this would often leave little to be decided at the trial and would transfer the effective decision to the sentencing stage.
Given that it would be unsatisfactory to have a single offence, then the question is how best to divide up the forms and degrees of physical violation and of sexual assault.
We shall look first at physical violation.
Although many cases of sexual assault also involve significant physical violation, this is not always so, and the essence of many sexual assaults lies in their destruction of the freedom of choice in the most intimate area of personality, and in psychological damage.
By considering physical violations first, this will enable us to identify more accurately the distinctive element in sexual assaults.
The general term ‘sexual assault’ is used here to include non-consensual sexual offences: there are various forms of sexual activity which are criminal even if they are indulged in consensually by adults of sound mind, and there was a brief discussion of these in Chapter 2.1 and 2.4 (b).
8.2 REPORTED PHYSICAL VIOLATIONS
Recent decades have seen significant increases in the numbers of offences of violence reported to, and recorded by, the police.
Between 1974 and 1984 the rise was 72 per cent, slightly above that for all recorded offences (69 per cent ).
The increases were lowest in the most serious forms of violent offences, and highest in the less serious offences of violence and in robbery.
Three-quarters of these offences each year are ‘cleared up’, and it transpires that most of them are committed by young males aged between 14 and 29.
It seems that the use of a weapon is important in determining the legal classification of offences (not surprisingly, since offences involving weapons may tend to have more serious consequences): some three-quarters of the serious woundings involved a weapon, whereas the proportion was only one-fifth for the less serious offences.
Patterns of victimization vary: females are more likely to fall victim to violence in their homes; whilst males are more likely to fall victim to violence in a ‘road, street or park’, or in a place of recreation.
This trend may in fact be more marked, since it is acknowledged that victims may be considerably reluctant to report, and police to record, offences of violence committed in the home.
Recent studies are beginning to uncover the true extent of so-called ‘domestic’ violence, and many police forces have adopted more consistent policies of recording such incidents and dealing with them as true offences of violence.
Two particular points may be made about offences of physical violation.
First, there is evidence of a strong correlation between drinking and violence, in the sense that large numbers of violent offences are committed after consuming alcohol.
It may be added, of course, that most of those who drink alcohol do not commit offences of violence thereafter.
But the first point remains, and means that the special rules relating to fault and intoxication, discussed in Chapter 6.3, come into play.
A second general point is  that many offences of violence have consequences for the victim which extend well beyond any injury caused.
There are psychological effects of fear and depression, which may significantly impair the victim's enjoyment of life long after the physical wounds have healed.
Such effects are well documented in the case of female victims of ‘domestic’ violence.
The values which underlie the offences of physical violation are not far to seek.
They are the values of physical autonomy and freedom from molestation, the liberty to decide for oneself the level of pain to subject one's body to (e.g. in sport).
The value of privacy is central here: the body is part of one's private identity, and, apart from any physical hurt inflicted by violence, a violent assault constitutes a challenge to one's personal identity, peace, and wellbeing.
OFFENCES OF NON-FATAL PHYSICAL VIOLATION
We have seen something of the various situations in which non-fatal physical harm might occur.
How does the law classify its offences?
How should it respond to these various invasions of physical integrity, a quality which is highly valued by most citizens?
One approach would be to create separate offences to cover many of the situations in which violence occurs, and to single out those situations in which there is some element of aggravation, such as attacks on law-enforcement officers.
This was the nineteenth-century English approach, and many such offences still survive in the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (relating, for example, to injuries caused by gunpowder, throwing corrosive fluid, failing to provide food for apprentices, setting spring guns).
A second approach would be to attempt to rank the offences by reference to the degree of harm caused and the degree of fault in the person causing it.
The 1861 Act also contains some offences of this kind, but, as we shall see below, its ranking is impaired by obscure terms, uncertainties in the fault requirements, and some overlapping.
Thorough reform of the law is long overdue.
(a) Attempted Murder
If we were to construct a ‘ladder’ of non-fatal offences, starting with the most serious and moving down to the least serious, the offence  of attempted murder should be placed at the top.
There is an immediate paradox here though: attempted murder may not involve the infliction of any harm at all, since a person who shoots at another and misses may still be held guilty of attempted murder.
What distinguishes this offence is proof of an intention to kill, not the occurrence of any particular harm.
The fault element for attempted murder is therefore high — higher than for murder, under English law, since murder may be committed by someone who merely intended to cause really serious injury and not death.
An intention to kill must be proved in order to convict someone of attempted murder.
Beyond that, all that is necessary is proof that D did something which was ‘more than merely preparatory’ towards the murder.
Although a conviction is perfectly possible where no harm results — and such a case might still be regarded as a most serious non-fatal offence, since D tried to cause death, and the subjective principles confirm the high guilt — there are also cases where D's attempt to kill results in serious injury to the victim.
In such cases a prosecution might be brought for attempted murder — and will succeed if the intention to kill can be proved.
However, the court might not be satisfied of that ‘beyond reasonable doubt’, and might find that D only intended to cause grievous bodily harm.
In that event, the conviction will be for the offence of causing grievous bodily harm, but both offences carry the same maximum punishment — life imprisonment.
(b) Wounding or Grievous Bodily Harm (GBH) with Intent
Section 18 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 creates a serious offence which may be committed in a number of different ways.
There are two alternative forms of conduct, and either of two forms of intent will suffice.
The conduct may be either causing a wound or causing grievous bodily harm.
A wound has been defined as an injury which breaks both the outer and inner skin — a bruise or a burst blood-vessel in an eye would not amount to a wound.
Grievous bodily harm has never been defined with any precision, and the authoritative description is ‘really serious harm’.
Turning  to the fault requirements, the one most commonly relied on in prosecutions is ‘with intent to cause grievous bodily harm’.
The meaning of ‘intention’ here is the same as outlined earlier.
It was observed above that most serious woundings involve the use of a weapon, and that may make it easier to establish intention.
Where the prosecution fails to establish intention, the offence will be reduced to the lower category, to be considered in section 8.3 (c) below, so long as recklessness is proved.
But there is an alternative fault element: ‘with intent to prevent the lawful apprehension or detainer of any person’.
Whilst the policy of this requirement — classifying attacks on persons engaged in law enforcement as especially serious — is perfectly understandable, one result of the wording of section 18 of the 1861 Act is that D can be convicted of this offence (with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment) if he simply pushes a police-officer in order to prevent an arrest, and the officer loses balance, falls awkwardly, and suffers serious injury.
There is no requirement that such serious results should have been foreseen or foreseeable, so long as D was trying to prevent an arrest.
This is a stark example of constructive criminal liability.
(c) Reckless Wounding or GBH
Section 20 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 creates the offence of unlawfully and maliciously wounding or inflicting grievous bodily harm.
The conduct element in this offence is similar to that for the more serious offence under section 18, and the meanings of ‘wound’ and ‘grievous bodily harm’are no different.
Considerable attention has been focused on the distinction between causing grievous bodily harm (section 18) and inflicting grievous bodily harm (section 20): for many years it was believed that the more restrictive word ‘inflict’ meant that section 20 required proof of a sufficiently direct action by D to constitute an assault, but the House of Lords has now decided that there can be an ‘infliction’of GBH without proof of an assault.
The decision is controversial in its reasoning, but it may be explained as an attempt by the judiciary to improve the workability of an ageing legal structure.
The main difference between sections 18 and 20 lies in the fault element, and it is a considerable difference.
Section 18 requires intention.
Section 20 requires recklessness, in the common-law sense of the conscious taking of an unjustified risk.
The fault element in section 20 has been further broadened by the decision in Mowatt (1968): there is no need to prove recklessness as to wounding or grievous bodily harm, so long as the court is satisfied that D was reckless as to some physical harm to some person, albeit of a minor character.
This is another example of constructive liability, and it is particularly inappropriate here, in so far as the law is aiming to produce a ‘ladder’ of offences graded in terms of relative seriousness.
However, even without the Mowatt extension, one might ask whether the distinction between intention (section 18) and recklessness (section 20) is so wide in crimes of violence, often impulsive reactions to events, as to warrant the difference in maximum penalties between life imprisonment and five years' imprisonment.
(d) Aggravated Assaults
Common assault is the lowest rung of the ‘ladder’ of non-fatal offences, with a maximum penalty of six months' imprisonment, and it is discussed in more detail below.
But certain aggravated assaults are singled out by the law for higher maximum penalties, and three of them may be mentioned here.
One is assault with intent to rob, which, like robbery, carries a maximum of life imprisonment: it is, in effect, an offence of attempted robbery.
Another aggravated offence is assault with intent to resist arrest or to prevent a lawful arrest, contrary to section 38 of the 1861 Act and carrying a maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment.
The third, which is usually regarded as representing the rung of the ‘ladder’ below reckless wounding or GBH (contrary to section 20) but above common assault, is assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
The conduct element is causing ‘actual bodily harm’, which has been given the wide definition of ‘any hurt or injury calculated to interfere with the health or comfort of the victim’ so long as it is not merely transient or trifling'.
One consequence of the breadth of this  definition is that it has been held to cover psychological harm — where D causes V to become hysterical or to suffer substantial fear or fright, for example.
24 Since research shows that this is a frequent and long-lasting result of many attacks, it is important that it be given some recognition.
The fault required for the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, contrary to section 47 of the 1861 Act, is now in doubt.
Formerly, all that needed to be established was the fault required for common assault, i.e. intent or recklessness as to the application of some unlawful force to another.
This was open to the criticism that it imposed constructive liability: a person who risked a minor assault might be held guilty of a more serious offence if ‘actual bodily harm’ happened to result.
Moreover, the maximum penalty for the section 47 offence is five years' imprisonment, with no apparent justification for the strange approach of making the penalty equivalent to the higher offence on the ‘ladder’(the section 20 offence), and the fault requirement equivalent to the lower offence on the ‘ladder’(common assault, with a maximum of six months' imprisonment).
However, the Court of Appeal has now attempted to rectify the anomaly by holding that the prosecution must prove intention or recklessness as to physical harm, not as to a mere assault.
The Court was critical of the antiquated and illogical structure of the 1861 Act, which causes practical problems and yet remains unreformed.
Section 51 of the Police Act 1964 contains the offence of assaulting a police-officer in the execution of his or her duty.
Procedurally speaking, this is not an aggravated assault, since it carries the same maximum penalty as common assault (six months' imprisonment) and is also triable summarily only.
However, in practice the courts tend to impose higher sentences for assaults on the police, and it is therefore worth noting that this offence is committed even though D was unaware that he was striking a police-officer.
A decision by a single judge on assize in 1865 is still regarded as authority for this proposition, but there is surely little justification for this today.
The  proper approach should be to convict D of the aggravated offence only where he knew that V was, or might be, a police-officer.
Otherwise, a conviction for common assault is more appropriate.
(e) Common Assault
The lowest offence on the ‘ladder’ is what is known as common assault.
Strictly speaking, the term ‘assault’ is used here in its generic sense, as including two separate types of offence, assault and battery.
In simple terms, battery is the application of unlawful force to another person, whereas assault consists of causing another person to apprehend or expect the application of unlawful force.
Most batteries involve an assault, and the tendency is to refer generically to ‘assaults’, but the exposition of the law is clearer if the two offences are kept separate.
The essence of a battery is the application of any unlawful force to another.
Examples might include a push, a kiss, or throwing a projectile or water which lands on another person's body.
Indeed, it seems that the merest touching of another may constitute a battery, and this prompts the question of whether the criminal law ought to extend to such trivial incidents.
The traditional justification is that there is no other sensible dividing line, and that this at least declares the law's regard for the physical integrity of citizens.
As Blackstone put it: ‘the law cannot draw the line between different degrees of violence, and therefore totally prohibits the first and lowest stage of it; every man's person being sacred, and no other having a right to meddle with it, in any the slightest manner.’
Many unwanted touchings are ‘technical’ batteries, and prosecutors are relied upon to avoid prosecutions of minor incidents.
One might be able to construct a law which penalized only those batteries which cause, or are likely to cause, significant annoyance, but it is doubtful whether the insertion of a (necessarily vague) standard would alter the nature of the problem.
Individuals have a right not to be touched if they do not wish to be touched, since the body is private.
Someone who knowingly touches another without his consent violates this personal right as surely as if he had taken his property.
This is most evident in cases of indecent assault, which may be committed by the least unwanted touching or stroking of one person's body by another.
These are culpable acts, often regarded as being more serious than thefts of property.
If the law is  to recognise the significance of the individual's physical integrity, then it must provide for offences of this kind even if some of the conduct falling within the definition of the offence is properly kept out of the courts by prosecutorial discretion.
There are a number of disputed points about the ambit of the offence of battery.
There is no clear decision on whether battery can be committed by the indirect application of force by digging a hole into which people subsequently fall, for example, but there are judicial statements in favour of including indirect force.
One major problem is that if the offence is defined so as to include all touchings to which the victim does not consent, it seems difficult to exclude everyday physical contact with others.
This could be resolved by assuming that all citizens impliedly consent to those touchings which are incidental to ordinary everyday life and travel; but the judicial preference seems to be to create an exception for ‘all physical contact which is generally acceptable in the ordinary conduct of daily life’.
The cases decide that this exception extends to touching a person in order to attract attention, although there can be no exception when the person touched has made it clear that he or she does not wish to be touched again.
The problem arose in Collins v. 
Wilcock (1984), where a police — officer, not empowered to arrest D, touched D in order to attract her attention and then subsequently took hold of D's arm.
D proceeded to scratch the police — officer's arm, having previously made it clear — in colourful language — that she did not wish to talk to the police — officer.
The Divisional Court quashed D's conviction for assaulting a police-officer in the execution of her duty, on the ground that the officer herself had assaulted D by taking hold of D's arm.
The key issue here was D's obvious refusal of consent to any touching; in other cases there might be a general issue of whether the touching goes ‘beyond generally acceptable standards of conduct’.
A number of decisions have suggested what appears to be an alternative Approach: to ask whether D's touching was ‘hostile’.
This seems to be an inferior method of identifying the question of the boundaries of permissible conduct, and it is arguable whether this requirement forms part of the criminal law.
The essence of the crime of assault, as distinct from battery, is that it involves an apprehension of the immediate application of unlawful force.
It is therefore possible to have a battery without an assault (e.g. where D strikes V from behind), as well as an assault without a battery (e.g. where D threatens to strike V but is prevented from doing so), but most cases involve both.
One disputed point is whether words alone can constitute an assault: the preponderance of authority is probably that mere words, unaccompanied by any threatening conduct, cannot amount to an assault, but if the point of the offence is to penalize the creation of fear of imminent attack, it is difficult to see why utterances such as‘Get out the knives’ or ‘Let's hit them’should be regarded more indulgently than a raised hand.
Another disputed issue concerns the ambit of immediacy.
In one case the Divisional Court held that assault was committed where a woman was frightened by the sight of a man looking in through the window of her house, although there seems to have been little suggestion that the man was threatening to apply force either immediately or at all.
The decision might be explained as an attempt to remedy the absence of an offence which penalizes such voyeurs .
It is a different matter if D intends to cause, and does cause V to apprehend the immediate application of force in a case where none is objectively likely (e.g. the gun which D points at V is a toy).
That clearly fulfils the definition of assault, and rightly so.
What fault element is required for assault and battery?
The law is now settled that either intention or recklessness as to the respective conduct elements is sufficient.
After a brief period of uncertainty, it is now clear that common-law recklessness, not Caldwell recklessness, is the relevant test.
There remains, however, a question of principle which has not been fully considered: should the fault element in offences against the person be widened so as to criminalize some negligent causing of physical harm?
If physical integrity is so highly valued, would it be inappropriate to make it clear that an  offence would be committed by any normal adult who failed to see an obvious risk of physical harm to another?
(f) Questions of Consent
In order to explain why offences of violence are regarded so seriously, reference has been made to the value a of privacy and physical integrity.
However, if individual autonomy is to be regarded as one of the fundamental values, the question arises of whether individuals might consent to the infliction of physical harm on themselves.
The owner of property can consent to someone destroying or damaging that property.
We shall see below that consent may constitute the difference between the sexual expression of shared love between two people and the serious offence of rape.
If a person wishes to give up his physical integrity in certain circumstances, or to risk it for the sake of sport or excitement, should the criminal law allow the consent to negative what would otherwise be a crime?
The Court of Appeal was asked to rule on this question in Attorney-General's Reference (No. 
1 of 1980 ).
The reference concerned a fight in the street between two youths to settle an argument.
The essence of the court's answer was that ‘It is not in the public interest that people should try to cause or should cause each other actual bodily harm for no good reason.’
In other words, the Court held that, if the fight merely involves assault or battery, consent can be effective as a defence.
But if the results constitute actual bodily harm — which extends to ‘any hurt or injury calculated to interfere with the health or comfort of the victim’— consent cannot be a defence.
This applies whether the fight takes place in public or in private.
The Lord Chief Justice added that:
Nothing which we have said is intended to cast doubt on the accepted legality of properly conducted games and sports, lawful chastisement or correction, reasonable surgical interference, dangerous exhibitions, etc.
These apparent exceptions can be justified as involving the exercise of a legal right, in the case of chastisement or correction, or as needed in the public interest, in the other cases.
This passage is somewhat unsatisfactory in its lack of certainty and in the wide discretion it appears to leave to the courts.
It is true that the Attorney-General's Reference did not confront these particular issues directly, and the Lord Chief Justice perhaps intended no more than a sweeping reference to other kindred situations.
But the allusion to ‘properly conducted’ games or sports is vague, and the notion that such dangerous exhibitions as circus acts or trying to vault over twelve buses on a motorcycle are ‘needed’in the public interest seems strained.
Beneath all these particular situations there are conflicting values which claim the law's attention.
Fundamental respect for individuals as autonomous, rational beings suggests that their liberty to risk injury or to undergo assaults, however serious, ought also to be respected.
It is an aspect of self-determination: the point is conceded in the fact that suicide is no longer an offence, and it should therefore follow that consent to injury should negative any offence.
That argument is not watertight, however, because existing law does not allow euthanasia.
What distinguishes suicide from euthanasia is that the former is the individual's own act, whereas the latter involves the direct act of another.
Why should this make so great a difference?
It seems that problems of proof loom large here: there is a fear that the unscrupulous would manipulate any law permitting ‘mercy killings’, and the argument is presumably that this would put at risk more unwilling parties than a law allowing euthanasia would benefit willing parties.
There are those, however, who find it objectionable that one person should ever be permitted to take the life of another.
If we bring the argument back to consent to non-fatal physical harm, we may recall that the Lord Chief Justice relied on the phrase ‘not in the public interest’ to justify the restrictions.
This phrase must be regarded as the starting-point for analysis rather than as an explanation.
One reason that he ruled out was the argument, derived from earlier cases, that fights in public should be prohibited because they tend to create disorder.
This may be true, but there are other offences to deal with that aspect, and, in any case, violence in private raises the same issues of physical integrity and self-determination.
Another old argument is that ‘manly sports’ help to keep people fit to fight for the Crown if necessary, whereas fights which involve maiming rob the Crown of able-bodied men for  the armed forces.
Although this precise reasoning is of doubtful relevance today, it contains the seeds of an argument to the effect that the public interest lies in having a society with fit and healthy citizens.
Several laws have been passed in modern times to restrict dangerous activities and to impose criminal sanctions on citizens who fail to protect themselves against injury — for example, the offences of failing to wear a safety helmet when riding a motor cycle, and failing to wear a safety harness when travelling in the front seat of a car.
Such laws are partly paternalistic, based on the argument that the State is in a better position to assess the risks of injury, and partly economic, in the sense that conformity with the law would save millions of pounds in medical expenses (as well as much grief for citizens).
Thus one social argument which might be mobilised in favour of the rule in the Attorney-General's Reference case is that the savings of medical expenses resulting from conformity with the law are more important than the liberty of individual citizens to engage in fights.
That is a matter for debate.
A further paternalistic argument is that a law restricting consent helps to protect individual citizens from themselves by counteracting some of the social pressures and shame which might otherwise occur.
The criminal law took a strong line against duelling in the nineteenth century, despite the notions of honour which still regarded it as appropriate or correct for settling certain disputes.
Similar pressures might be felt by some people today — to fight, or to risk injury in certain situations, and so on.
On the other hand, the extent to which judicial decisions can influence patterns of social behaviour must remain an open question.
Physical sports would probably be widely accepted as an exception to restrictive rules on consent, but two points must be borne in mind.
First, there has been a growing number of prosecutions in recent years for injuries resulting from organized matches of Association and Rugby football.
It is accepted that not every ‘foul’ committed in breach of the rules amounts to a crime, and it seems to be assumed that players do, and may lawfully, consent to physical force over and above the minimum permitted by the rules.
But this does not exclude the possibility of convictions for the use of physical  force well beyond that which may reasonably be expected in a game: the borderline is vague, but presumably the courts will decide particular cases by reference to the degree of violence used, its relation to the play in the game, any evidence of intent, and so on.
Second, there should be constant reappraisal of the suitability of certain forms of ‘sport’.
Advances in medical knowledge might lead to the conclusion that some are simply too dangerous: there has long been a debate about the status of boxing, with increasing knowledge of the risks of brain damage to boxers.
Here, as elsewhere, there are difficult questions to be answered: whether membership of a society should involve a positive duty to take care of one's body for the general social good, either to avoid becoming a burden on other members of the community or even to preserve oneself as a positive contributor to that community.
The question of ‘positive contribution’ raises again the issue of the social worth of sport, recreation and dangerous exhibitions.
(g) Offences under the Public Order Act 1986
Despite its title, the Public Order Act creates some offences which apply whether the conduct takes place in a public or a private place.
Of particular relevance here are those offences which involve violence or the threat of violence.
The Act provides a ‘ladder’ of offences, of which the most serious is riot (section i).
The essence of riot is the use of unlawful violence by two or more persons in a group of at least twelve persons who are using or threatening violence.
The maximum penalty is ten years' imprisonment, compared with a maximum of five years for the lesser offence of violent disorder.
The essence of violent disorder (section 2) is the use or threat of unlawful violence in a group of at least three persons who are using or threatening violence.
Beneath violent disorder comes the crime of affray (section 3), now defined in terms of threatening or using unlawful violence towards another, and carrying a maximum of three years' imprisonment.
Affray may be committed by one individual, and, like the other offences, it may be committed in a private place.
The term ‘violence’ includes conduct intended to cause physical harm and conduct which might cause harm (such as throwing a missile towards someone); and, for the two most serious offences of riot and violent disorder, ‘violence’bears an extended meaning which includes violent conduct towards property.
Is it necessary to have an extra ladder of offences so closely linked with the general ladder of offences of violence?
One reason might be the unsatisfactory state of the law under the Offences against the Person Act 1861: that Act fails to provide both a clear and defensible gradation of offences and any general offences of threatening violence against another.
The provisions of the Public Order Act are, however, usually justified on other grounds.
One supposed justification is that these extra offences are needed to cope with ‘group offending’, which causes fear in ordinary citizens, and extra difficulties for the police and for prosecutors (in obtaining persuasive evidence).
Offences committed by groups may well occasion greater fear than offences committed by individuals, and it may also be true that groups have a tendency to do things which individuals might not do: there is a group bravado, a group pressure, which may lead to excesses.
On the other hand, the criminal law already makes some provision for such cases.
The law of conspiracy is aimed at group offending, but conviction depends on proof of some prior agreement.
The law of complicity enables the conviction of people who aid and abet others to commit offences, and spreads a fairly wide net in doing so.
However, the law of complicity is technical, and the 1986 Public Order Act is a response to the call for a simplified and more ‘practical’ scheme of offences for dealing with public disorder.
Thus the Act goes a long way in smoothing the path of the prosecutor.
It is indeed an element of all three offences that the conduct must be such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness, present at the scene, to fear for his personal safety; and yet it is provided, for each offence, that ‘no person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be likely to be, present at the scene’.
This not only removes the need for the prosecutor to prove this element, but also removes part of the rationale for the offences.
This is ‘practical’ in the sense that the prosecution need not rely on members of the public to come forward and give evidence, which there is often a reluctance to do.
But one effect of this is to limit the opportunities for the defence to contest the issue.
Another justification for having separate ‘public order’ offences is that group activities of this kind may, over and above the features discussed above, constitute a special threat to law enforcement and the political system.
This argument comes close to a constitutional paradox — that people who are protesting against the fairness of the political system may find themselves convicted of serious offences because their mode of protest is a realistic one.
There ought to be a right to protest in public, it might be argued, and where the bona fide exercise of this right happens to lead to some form of disorder, it is wrong to visit the perpetrators with severe sanctions.
The counter-argument is that peaceful protest is one thing but violent protest crosses the boundaries of acceptability; the value of physical integrity is such that violence and threats of violence ought not to be downgraded simply because their origins lie in some political protest.
One problem here is that the two most serious offences include violence against property, so that conviction may result from threats against a person's property.
Another issue is whether a refurbished general code of offences against the person, including clearly graded offences and ‘threats’ offences, would not cater adequately for these occasions.
This brings the argument back to the justifications for those provisions of the Public Order Act which smooth the path of the prosecutor with dispensations from proof.
And yet there remains the fact, noted at the outset, that the Act applies to violence and violent threats in private .
Practical experience will determine whether this heralds an assimilation of prosecution policy within public disorder and private or ‘domestic’ violence.
Would this strengthen the case for a set of offences skewed towards the prosecution?
(h) Causing Illness
The Offences against the Person Act 1861 contains a number of crimes concerned with the administration of noxious or toxic substances.
Section 22 penalizes the use of any overpowering drug or substance ‘with intent to enable the commission of an arrestable offence’(maximum sentence of life imprisonment).
Section 23 penalizes the intentional or reckless administration of any poison or noxious thing which results in danger to the victim's life or grievous bodily harm (maximum sentence of ten years' imprisonment).
Section 24 penalizes the administration of any poison or noxious  thing, ‘with intent to injure, aggrieve or annoy the victim’(maximum sentence of five years).
This section has been applied so as to cover the administration of a drug which causes harm to the victim's metabolism by overstimulation, if D's motive for this is malevolent rather than benevolent.
The three offences seem to provide a ‘ladder’ but, once again, the distinctions between them vary considerably, with section 23 being more concerned about the result than about D's fault.
It seems likely that a redefinition of the principal crimes of physical violation would cover most of these cases anyway, and the Criminal Law Revision Committee saw the need to supplement the general offences with only one special offence — administering to another, without his consent, any substance which D knows to be capable of interfering substantially with the other's bodily functions.
(i) Neglect of Duty
Several of the offences discussed above may be committed by omission.
One can cause grievous bodily harm by omission, and a person who does so intentionally in a case where a duty of care exists may be convicted under section 18 of the 1861 Act.
An example would be starving a child for whom one has parental responsibility, with the result that the child suffers serious harm.
It is unclear whether battery can be committed by omission, but it is certainly possible to convict of battery someone who accidentally causes the unlawful application of force to another and then intentionally desists from stopping that application of force.
The example is the famous case in which a man unintentionally drove his car on to a police-officer's foot and then declined to remove it, for a minute or two, when asked.
There are also cases in which the criminal law creates special offences attached to certain duties of care, of which the parent's duty towards a child is one example.
Section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 contains an elaborately worded offence which may be termed ‘child neglect’.
It consists, essentially, of wilfully assaulting, ill-treating, neglecting, abandoning, or exposing a child in a manner likely to cause unnecessary suffering or injury  to health.
The maximum penalty for child neglect is now ten years' imprisonment, which should be sufficient to deal with cases involving considerable fault and actually or potentially serious consequences.
The Mental Health Act 1983 contains a somewhat similar offence of ill-treating or wilfully neglecting a patient in a mental hospital, which has a maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment.
(j) Weapons, Motor Vehicles, and Endangerment
Most of the offences considered above involve the occurrence of physical harm plus intention or recklessness.
It is also justifiable, however, for the criminal law to penalise conduct which may lead to the causing of physical harm, particularly in situations where the conduct has little social utility or where the risk is well known.
In fact, English criminal law has a wide range of such offences, of which those involving firearms, offensive weapons, motor vehicles, and other endangerment will be outlined here.
The Firearms Act 1968 sets out to control the possession of firearms and ammunition, and contains several offences.
The basic offence in section 1 is that of possessing a firearm without a certificate, an offence which (despite elements of strict liability) carries a maximum of three years' imprisonment.
The Act also contains a number of aggravated offences of possessing a firearm with various intents, and these were set out in Chapter 7.7 above.
Lower down the scale comes the offence of possessing an offensive weapon without lawful authority or excuse, contrary to the Prevention of Crime Act 1953.
This offence, with its maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment, encompasses two classes of weapon: first, an article made or adapted for use as a weapon; and second, any article intended for such use.
Much attention has been focused on the concept of ‘reasonable excuse’, where the courts have attempted to impose a fairly stringent test on persons whose reason for carrying a weapon is said to be fear of attack.
Where motor vehicles are concerned, the problems are different.
Although they are no less lethal than firearms in their potential to cause injury or even death, their considerable social utility (indeed, the dependence of much social interaction on them) indicates the need for a different approach.
That approach consists of a code of good practice (The Highway Code), a requirement that drivers pass a qualifying test, and a network of offences to penalize those who deviate from proper standards.
Leaving aside manslaughter and causing death by reckless driving, offences discussed in the previous chapter, the ladder of offences runs from reckless driving, through drunken driving and careless driving, down to various offences of failure to obey traffic signs and failure to maintain a vehicle in a roadworthy state.
Reckless driving, contrary to section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972, is committed where D's driving creates an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to some other person or of doing substantial damage to property, and where D either saw the risk or failed to give any thought to the risk.
This is the test of Caldwell and Lawrence .
The effect of restricting the offence to reckless driving, a restriction which was enacted in 1977 (previously it had included dangerous driving, a less demanding standard), has been that relatively few convictions for this offence are obtained.
The offence immediately below is careless driving contrary to section 3 of the Road Traffic Act 1972, which is committed by anyone who drives without due care and attention.
This offence is punishable only with a fine, whereas reckless driving carries a maximum of two years' imprisonment.
The gap between the two offences is therefore considerable.
The other major offence is drunken driving, an offence bristling with technicalities which carries a maximum prison sentence of six months' and a minimum period twelve months' disqualification from driving.
This structure of serious road-traffic offences was recently examined by the North Committee, which came to the conclusion that the criminal law does not treat traffic offences with the gravity they deserve, given the potential consequences of any deviation from proper standards of driving.
During the 1980s there was evidence of harsher  punishments being handed out to reckless drivers, and of a wider appreciation of the risks created and the misery inflicted by deviations from proper standards of driving.
The North Committee recommended a reformulation of the offence of reckless driving so as to encompass ‘very bad driving’ of a wider kind, retaining careless driving as the lower offence.
The essence of both offences would be the intrinsic quality of the driving and its deviation from the proper standard, not the consequences which happen to result or happen not to result in a particular case.
However, the Committee did accept the relevance of resulting harm in one sphere, namely, in its proposal of a new offence of causing death by careless driving when over the alcohol limit.
This might be justified as a means of signalling the connection between drunken driving and fatal accidents.
It is open to the obvious objection that it focuses on an outcome which may be a matter of pure chance: if such driving happens not to result in death, the charge will merely be drunken driving.
One reply to this is that most offences of bad driving have the potential to cause death or serious injury; and that the North Committee's proposals undervalue the element of endangerment where no harm occurs rather than over -value the resulting harm where it does occur.
The question of endangerment has already been raised in a more general fashion in Chapter 7.7.
English criminal law contains a number of discrete offences of endangerment, created in particular circumstances to deal with particular problems.
For example, in addition to the road-traffic offences, there are offences under sections 32 and 33 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 of endangering railway passengers; there are the offences under section 1(2) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 of endangering the lives of others by causing damage to property (usually by fire); the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 penalizes employers for failure to ensure that employees are not exposed to risks to their health or safety; and there are offences, such as that under section 12 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, of selling goods in contravention of safety regulations.
These are all offences of endangerment, in the  sense that no harm need have resulted from the dangerous behaviour.
Their importance lies in the value of the interest in freedom from physical violation.
However, they do not accord with traditional conceptions of crime — perhaps because many of the offences may be committed in ‘normal’, situations, such as driving a car or conducting a business — and this may tend to obscure their direct relation to the issue of physical safety.
It was argued in Chapter 2.5 and 2.6 that social attitudes towards various sources of harm are too hidebound by convention and ought to be re-examined.
Chapter 7.7 commended the approach of the American Model Penal Code in creating a general offence of endangerment.
A different approach would be to introduce Caldwell recklessness into the non-fatal offences of causing injury, with a view to labelling cases of endangerment in the same way as ‘traditional’ crimes.
This would only be effective if it were accompanied by changes in policing practice and prosecution policy.
The advantage would be that the law would move closer towards proportionality based on degree of harm and degree of risk, untrammelled by conventional views of what does and what does not count as ‘crime’.
(k) The Structure of the Non-Fatal Offences
This survey has shown that, generally speaking, the existing range of offences seems to emphasize the result, the degree of foresight and the status of the victim as the critical issues in grading crimes of physical violation.
The crimes in the 1861 Act form a somewhat shakily constructed ladder, with rather more overlapping of offences and elements of constructive liability than is necessary.
Factors which undoubtedly influence judgments of seriousness, such as the existence of provocation, or the difference between premeditated and impulsive violence, are accorded no legal significance and are left to the sentencing stage.
The main exception to this concerns the status of the victim, with separate offences for assaults on police-officers and wilful neglect of children, for example.
How might the non-fatal offences be reformed so as to conform with the principle of fair labelling?
The approach recommended by  the Criminal Law Revision Committee illustrates the difficulties.
The Committee proposed three major offences in the field between attempted murder and common assault: causing serious injury with intent to cause serious injury; causing serious injury recklessly; and causing injury either with intent or recklessly.
Separate offences for cases involving police-officers and children would be retained, to mark out the extra heinousness of such crimes in general.
The scheme depends chiefly on the seriousness of the harm caused and the degree of foresight, though in a much more structured fashion than the 1861 Act.
There are three obvious difficulties.
First, what is the meaning of ‘injury’?
The only element specifically defined is that it includes unconsciousness; otherwise, its definition remains vague.
Second what is the distinction between injury and serious injury?
Once again, it is left to the courts to draw the line according to their overall judgment of the facts.
These are two respects in which the reformed law would not achieve maximum certainty, and those who argue that the terms would ‘cause little problem of interpretation’ are surely giving way to unwarranted optimism.
Third, why are there two separate offences of causing serious injury — with intent, or recklessly — when the two mental states are combined in a single offence for mere injury?
The Committee's view was that there is ‘a definite moral and psychological difference’ between causing serious injury with intent and causing serious injury recklessly, and that this difference should be reflected in separate offences.
However, since it is ‘not an easy distinction for the police, magistrates and juries to have to make’, no attempt should be made to draw such a legal distinction at the lower level of ‘injury’ offences.
In order to support this position, one has to accept:(i) that the intention — recklessness distinction is the most significant dividing line for serious injuries, more relevant than factors such as premeditation or provocation;(ii) that this is a workable distinction for the courts, especially in impulsive crimes, where the definition of intention may be fulfilled by a momentary realization of what is happening;(iii) that it is so significant that a difference in maximum penalties between life imprisonment and five years' imprisonment is appropriate; and (iv) that there is not a strong case for phrasing the  offences in terms of endangerment rather than of causing physical harm.
The Committee's proposals are a distinct improvement on the anomalies of the 1861 Act, but they leave these four issues open to doubt.
8.4 REPORTED SEXUAL ASSAULTS
The kinds of sexual assault reported to the police cover an enormous range of conduct.
Among the most serious are those now defined as rape (sexual intercourse without consent), and about one-sixth of these cases involve the perpetration of further sexual indignities upon the victim.
Reported rapes have increased considerably in the 1980s, but it is difficult to tell to what extent this represents a real increase in the number of rapes or an increase in the reporting of them.
The approach of the police to the investigation of rape cases has been subject to much criticism — and then to considerable improvement — and it seems quite possible that these improvements, together with the advent of rape-crisis centres and victim-support facilities, have led more women to report rapes than did so formerly.
Reporting a rape remains a strenuous and harrowing experience, however, and it is likely to continue as an underreported offence.
Another serious offence is buggery (intercourse per anum), but that constitutes a crime whether committed consensually or non-consensually, and it is the non-consensual form which ranks as a serious sexual assault.
Many of the other forms of sexual assault on males or females do not take the form of sexual intercourse as defined in the offences of rape and buggery, and English law classifies these as indecent assaults.
This offence, with a maximum penalty of ten years' imprisonment, covers a wide range of conduct, from a stolen kiss on the cheek to forced fellatio (oral sex).
Then there is a group of offences which prohibit sexual activities with young people, whether they appear to consent or not: whilst there is little dispute about the need for some such offences, there is room for disagreement on the proper boundaries of the criminal law and on the role of prosecutorial discretion.
The offence of incest prohibits certain sexual relations within the family, thus providing a distinct label for some forms of child sexual abuse by  parents and grandparents, although it also covers brother — sister relationships.
Before we consider each of these offences in outline, let us examine the practical and theoretical foundations for them.
The practical effects of sexual assault can be considerable.
There are well-documented consequences of rape victimization: some authorities write of a ‘rape trauma syndrome’, signifying deep disruption of the victim's life-pattern and thought-processes not just in terms of the physical effects of rape (physical pain, inability to sleep, prolonged distress), but also in terms of the effects on well-being (new-found fears, mistrust of surroundings and other people, embarrassment, and so on).
Young's New Zealand report concludes that ‘rape is an experience which shakes the foundations of the lives of the victims.
For many its effect is a long-term one, impairing their capacity for personal relationships, altering their behaviour and values and generating fear.’
There is no reason to suppose that such effects are confined to the victims of rape as traditionally defined: although sexual assaults vary in their degree, there may be many other forms of sexual assault which are serious enough to create such profound physical and psychological after-effects.
What, then, are the interests typically threatened or destroyed by sexual assaults?
They may be described generally in terms of sexual autonomy and sexual choice.
The argument must begin from the proposition that our body is our own: it is our private zone, and respect for privacy and personal autonomy both support this.
Since these values are high among those which the criminal law ought to respect, no further demonstration of this starting-point is necessary.
Each citizen may be said to have the right not to have sexual choices imposed on him or her; whether the law should go further, and hold that each citizen has the right to pursue his or her sexual choices consensually with another (subject to public-decency laws and to the protection of the young), is a question to be considered separately.
Is respect for sexual choice any more important than respect for another's property rights?
The answer to this requires us to assess the relative centrality of sexual choice to life choices and living standards.
It may be argued that sexuality has a certain uniqueness which is absent from much property: sexuality is an intrinsic part of one's personality, it is a mode of expressing that personality in relation to others, and it is therefore fundamental that one should  be able to choose whether to express oneself in this way — and, if so, towards and with whom.
The essence of such self-expression is that it should be voluntary.
Thus, even where a sexual assault involves no significant physical force, it constitutes harm in the sense that it invades a deeply personal zone, gaining non-consensually that which should only be shared consensually.
In case this formulation of ‘taking without permission’ sounds too close to an analogy with theft, it must be emphasized that the crucial element in sexual assault resides in the close interrelationship between the body and the personality.
This close relationship, some would say identity, emphasizes that central values such as autonomy and privacy are bound up in all sexual cases.
It is the threat to these values which brings the real, deep, and sometimes long-lasting effects of sexual assault.
There can therefore be little doubt that, in general, sexual assaults constitute a substantially more serious form of harm than mere property offences — which is not to deny that some forms of theft or destruction of property can be more serious than some minor sexual assaults.
There is much to suggest that the attitudes of society towards sexual offences, particularly the attitudes of many men (who hold most of the leading posts in the making of policy and law), have tended to undervalue the seriousness of sexual assaults.
Among the manifestations of these attitudes are the statements of some defendants in rape trials, which may show an indifference towards the wishes of women, or a belief that the wearing of attractive clothes or an invitation to coffee is a sure sign of willingness to engage in sex; and the attitudes of some police-officers in the early 1980s, influenced by any one of a number of assumptions about the prevalence of false complaints of rape, about the ‘typical’ rape as an attack by a stranger, about the presence of injuries or bruises in ‘genuine’rapes, and so forth.
Recent years have seen a growing awareness that most of these assumptions about rape are myths.
The police have improved both their procedures and their training, but it is not known whether social attitudes in general have changed greatly.
Studies of rape in England and Wales suggest that two-thirds of rapes take place in the home of the victim or the offender, and that only one-third involve strangers; that two-fifths of victims suffer physical violence as well as rape, and one-sixth suffer additional  sexual indignities; that recent years have seen an increase in the reporting of rapes between acquaintances, and that rapes are increasing a little in their intrinsic seriousness (i.e. in terms of the violence used, other sexual acts, etc), but that the most significant rise has been in the average length of sentences imposed on rapists by the courts.
Longer sentences may be applauded by some, but it is doubtful whether they will make any significant contribution to the protection of women.
A recent Home Office survey concludes that there is no simple solution to the prevention of rape, other than‘the willingness both to question and to change the pattern of social life’.
The argument is that serious sexual assaults, and the attitude of many men towards them, derive from a male-dominated approach to sexuality in which aggressive sexual behaviour by males is praised or condoned whilst women are associated with passivity.
To alter this cluster of attitudes to one in which sexuality is seen as an expression of an equal, sharing relationship will require a widespread change in social attitudes through education and other media.
8.5 NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUAL INTERCOURSE
The structure of sexual offences in English criminal law places rape and buggery at the top of the ‘ladder’, each carrying a maximum of life imprisonment, with the offences of attempted rape (maximum penalty of life imprisonment) and indecent assault (maximum penalty of ten years) beneath them.
The conduct which constitutes rape is unlawful sexual intercourse with a woman without her consent; the fault element required is that the man intends to have sexual intercourse, and either knows that the woman is not consenting or ‘could not care less’ whether she is not consenting.
A number of issues arise for discussion.
(a) The concept of ‘Sexual Intercourse’
Rape is only committed where the man has sexual intercourse with the woman without her consent.
Sexual intercourse is defined as the penetration of the penis into the vagina: ejaculation is not required, and the offence is committed as soon as penetration takes place, although it has been held that the offence continues throughout penetration (so that if the woman revokes her consent during intercourse and the man fails to withdraw, he commits rape).
Is English law right to define rape in this way, and thereby to exclude from this offence such conduct as forced oral sex (fellatio), cunnilingus, and buggery?
It can be argued that these offences may be no less traumatic for the victim than ‘conventional’ rape, and therefore that any attempt to classify sexual offences by reference to their seriousness should place these forms of sexual assault in the highest category.
In its review of sexual offences the Criminal Law Revision Committee argued in favour of preserving the existing classification, on the basis that rape has a settled popular meaning and that the distinguishing feature of ‘conventional’ rape is the risk of pregnancy.
However, the latter point fails to take account of the fact that rape is committed even if there is no ejaculation, and even if the woman is infertile, and it has been strongly argued that ‘penetration involving the penis, vagina or anus is perceived differently and regarded more seriously than other forms of penetration’.
It may therefore be questioned whether English law takes the right approach in confining its most serious sexual offence, rape, so narrowly.
(b) Marital Rape
Rape is only held to have been committed in English law where the sexual intercourse is ‘unlawful’, and it is generally assumed that the function of that term is to remove non-consensual intercourse between a man and his wife from the ambit of rape.
If the man uses force or inflicts emotional shock on his wife in order to obtain sex, he is liable to conviction for assault occasioning actual bodily harm or some other offence against the person.
But if he obtains his wife's submission to intercourse without resort to those means, there is no offence.
The origins of this marital-rape exemption seem to lie in the notion that the wife is the husband's property, or that the wife promises intercourse on demand, but it has been defended in modern times on the basis that such cases raise essentially family matters, better suited to examination in a non-criminal court, and that in any case proof would be difficult.
However, it is questionable whether the doors of the family home should be closed to the criminal law when so many offences of wife-battering, child battering, and sexual abuse of wives and children seem to go on behind them.
Are persons who inflict physical or sexual assault in the domestic context really less blameworthy than their counterparts on the street?
Are victims within the family any less worthy of the protection of the criminal law?
Should the criminal law really distinguish between unmarried and married couples when it comes to dealing with rape?
It is perhaps in recognition of the awkward position of English law that exceptions have been made to the marital-rape exemption in recent years.
Where the court is able to conclude that the wife's ‘implied consent to marital intercourse’ has been formally revoked, non-consensual intercourse by the husband amounts to rape.
This may be the case where there has been a separation order, a decree nisi for divorce, a non-molestation order, or a separation agreement between the parties.
However, these particular instances do not meet the general proposition that if the husband and wife have drifted apart, and the woman has made it known that she no longer wants to have sex with her husband, it is wrong that the husband who has sex with her without her consent is exempt from conviction for rape.
There may be many reasons why the husband and wife do not make any formal agreement about separation, but this should not entitle a husband to return and force himself upon his wife weeks, months, or even years since he last saw her.
The inadequacy of this part of English law was signalled recently in Kowalski (1988), where the Court of Appeal upheld an estranged husband's conviction for indecently assaulting his wife by forcing her to have oral sex with him.
The defence argument was that this  was a preliminary to ‘conventional’ intercourse, and that if the husband was exempt from liability for rape, he should equally be exempt from liability for indecent assault.
The Court held that marriage does not imply consent to fellatio.
This decision goes a long way towards demonstrating the untenability of the marital-rape exemption in modern times.
The Law Commission has now proposed the abolition of the marital-rape exemption, bringing English law into accord with the many other jurisdictions where it does constitute rape for a husband to have non-consensual sexual intercourse with his wife.
Reported cases are small in number, and it may be true that in some (not all) of these cases the degree of trauma suffered by the wife is less than if the rape had been by another man; but abolition of the marital-rape exemption is surely important as a statement of the married woman's autonomy and freedom of choice in sexual matters.
These fundamental values should not be jettisoned simply because marriage is a factor in the case, as indeed the Court of Appeal affirmed when holding that a husband may be convicted of kidnapping his wife.
(c) Mistaken Belief in Consent
The fault element in rape is that the man knows that the woman is not consenting or ‘could not care less’ that she is not consenting.
It would seem to follow from this that a man who believes that the woman is consenting, even though she is not, ought to be acquitted.
Lord Hailsham, in the leading decision of DPP v Morgan (16) held that this follows as a matter of ‘inexorable logic’.
It is not, then, a question of deciding on the elements of a ‘defence’ of mistake, because, where the man is mistaken, this means that he quite simply lacks the fault element required for the offence.
It is not a ‘defence’ so much as the negation of the elements of the crime.
So where, as in Morgan , defendants claim that they believed the woman was consenting, because her husband (who was present) had told them that she enjoyed a struggle, their case is simply that they lacked the fault element required for the crime.
The decision in Morgan has been hailed as a turning-point in English criminal law, inasmuch as the House of Lords resoundingly  affirmed the subjective principle of guilt.
Fairness requires that we judge a defendant on the facts as he or she believes them to be .
Previous decisions had held that a mistake must be based on reasonable grounds if it is to excuse, a doctrine which is illogical for the reason given by Lord Hailsham.
Where a crime requires knowledge or recklessness as to a certain circumstance, and the defendant holds a mistaken belief about that circumstance, logic demands that an acquittal should follow.
Moreover, the supporters of Morgan add, this should not lead to unmeritorious acquittals, because juries will not allow bogus defences to succeed: in Morgan itself the House of Lords was satisfied that the basis for the defence was so weak that a correctly directed jury would have found the defendants guilty.
However, it is possible to concede that defendants should be judged on the facts as they believe them to be, and yet to argue in favour of an exception in rape cases.
This would be a bold argument, since its thrust would be that Morgan is correct as a case on general principles but wrong as a rape decision.
How might the argument run?
One could argue that there are certain situations in which the risk of serious harm is so obvious that it would be right for the law to impose a duty to take care to ascertain the facts before proceeding.
In other words, mistakes must be based on reasonable grounds where the offences are serious — which would cover not only rape but also cases involving a risk of death or serious injury, such as the use of force in self-defence.
One drawback of this style of argument is that not only is the harm serious for the victim, but conviction for such an offence is serious for the defendant: a single class of offenders (rapists, serious wounders) would contain not only those with subjective fault but also those who merely failed to take proper care, all of whom would be convict.ed of a grave offence carrying a maximum of life imprisonment.
Perhaps a more fruitful line of argument is to emphasize that not only is rape a serious matter for the victim, but the ascertainment of one vital fact — consent — is a relatively easy matter for the man.
There is a clear contrast here between cases of the use of serious force in self-defence, where there may be a need to act instantaneously on a hastily formed view of the situation, and sexual intercourse with another, where consent or non-consent is the essence of the crime and can be ascertained by asking a plain question of the victim.
Thus the argument is that the victim's right to autonomy and freedom of sexual choice does not need to yield to the principle that a defendant should be judged on the facts as he believes them to be; it would be so simple (because of the inevitable physical proximity of the man and woman) for the man to ascertain the facts here.
Of course, this involves a departure from the general subjective principle of criminal liability, since it involves imposing a duty on the defendant to ask about the victim's consent before continuing with his conduct.
But compared with the potential sacrifice of victims' rights, this duty is so undemanding that the arguments in its favour are powerful.
Critics will say that it converts rape into an offence of negligence, in one respect at least.
The answer is that it does, and that the justifications for doing so have been set out above — not so much because rape is a serious offence, but rather because ascertainment of the facts is so easy that there should be little substantive unfairness to defendants.
If the criminal law is to impose further duties on citizens, it is important to take account of the legality principles, particularly the principle of maximum certainty (see Chapter 3.3 (i) and (g)).
This brings the discussion back to whether changes in social attitudes are the most effective way of preventing sexual victimization.
There is no shortage of examples of defendants in rape cases who assumed that a woman who said no really meant yes, or who inferred from other supposed clues (make-up, clothing, accepting a drink) that the victim had consented, despite her apparent protests.
Changing the law on mistake in rape could help to change these social attitudes, even though for some time to come defendants might find themselves charged with rape because of such ingrained attitudes towards women.
(d) Reckless Rapes
One of the many reactions to the decision of the House of Lords in Caldwell (1982) was that it went against DPP v. 
Morgan and cut down its ambit.
In fact, although the two decisions are opposed in spirit, their practical spheres of operation can be separated.
For one thing,Caldwell deals with cases where D has either recognized the risk or has failed to give any thought to it, whereas Morgan applies only where D has formed a distinct belief that the victim is consenting, a situation not explicitly covered by Caldwell .
It may also be said that Caldwell is concerned with foresight of consequences, whereas Morgan is concerned with knowledge of circumstances.
It is doubtful whether either of these distinctions would bear scrutiny  on the broader canvas of moral and social philosophy: the moral thrust of Caldwell is that people are often just as much to blame for failing to think as they are for thinking about their actions and its consequences, and this very argument was applied to rape in the paragraphs above.
In fact, the Caldwell definition of recklessness has not been followed in rape cases, even though that offence would seem to fulfil the criterion of being a modern statute in which the term ‘reckless’ is used.
The Court of Appeal's decisions have wavered somewhat, but the test which they now favour is that D is reckless if he ‘could not care less’ whether the woman is not consenting.
This test is ambiguous as to whether or not D must have thought about whether the woman is consenting, but there are those who argue that one cannot be said ‘not to care less’ about something unless one has considered it.
There are arguments here, as there are in relation to mistake, that the law should impose a duty on men to consider consent, and therefore should treat them as reckless if they have failed to give any thought to the matter.
Plausible cases are likely to be extremely rare in practice.
(e) Fraud, Deception, and Consent
How should the law deal with cases where the woman's consent to sexual intercourse stemmed from a mistake on her part?
English law has tended to confine narrowly the situations in which a mistake is held to negative the consent apparently given by the woman: only where the victim was made to believe that the man was her husband, or that the act to which she was being asked to consent was not sexual intercourse, is the mistake sufficiently fundamental to convert the apparently consensual sex into rape.
The latter question has arisen where young girls have been invited to submit to acts in order to train their voice or to improve their breathing — unbeknown to them, the act which they were permitting was sexual intercourse.
Other types of fraud and mistake are held to be insufficient for the offence of rape, and bring the case within the lesser offence of procuring a woman by false pretences or false representations to have unlawful sexual intercourse (section 3, Sexual Offences Act 1956, carrying a maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment).
Does the existing dividing line reflect the relative seriousness of  these mistake-related offences?
Since the identity of one's sexual partner may be assumed to be of fundamental significance, it is surely unjustified to give effect to this only where the mistake concerns whether the man is the woman's husband?
But there are wider issues here, too, implicit in the promiscuous use of the words ‘mistake’, ‘false representations’, ‘fraud’, and so on.
Analogies with the effect of mistake in the law of contract may appear obvious, but it is questionable whether they are appropriate.
The issues are: when the defendant should be convicted of a crime; how the crime should be labelled; and how seriously it should be viewed.
It could be argued, therefore, that the focus should not be the victim's mental state but the defendant's intentions.
If D set out to trick V into having sex, realising that she probably would not consent otherwise, are not his intention and his method sufficient to condemn him for rape, as they would be for obtaining property by deception?
Similarly, if D knowingly takes advantage of the fact that V is labouring under a mistaken belief in order to have sex with her, when (as he realises) she probably would not consent otherwise, should this not be sufficient?
The answer to those questions may be said to depend on whether it is generally as serious to obtain sex by deception as it is by other means (threats, force, fear).
In England the Criminal Law Revision Committee took the view that it is not, and therefore supported the division between fundamental deceptions (as to identity or the nature of the act) and lesser deceptions, placing the latter within the less serious category of procuring sex by deception.
According to this view, the woman who agrees to have sex with D only when he promises to marry her (never intending to keep this promise)— and because he has promised to marry her — is a victim not of rape but of the lesser offence of procuring sexual intercourse by false representations.
The Committee proposed to raise the maximum penalty for this offence to five years, but limited its recommendation to cases where D actively deceives V and failed to make any provision for cases where D takes advantage of a known mistake.
(f) Threats, Fear and Consent
More frequent in practice, and more problematic, are the cases involving threats and fear.
At one time it was the law that rape is  committed only where the woman submits through force, fear, or fraud.
This is no longer a requirement, because decisions in the nineteenth century made it clear that rape can be committed whenever the woman does not consent — is asleep, for example, or too drunk to consent.
However, there are both practical and legal problems in cases where the woman says that she consented through fear only: she did not resist, because she thought that it would be hopeless in the circumstances, she was terrified, or she feared serious violence.
The practical problems are that there may be no evidence of violence on the woman's body, which usually means that the case will be a question of the victim's word against the defendant's; this may lead the police to be sceptical of the woman's complaint, or may incline the prosecutor to accept a plea of guilty to the lesser charge of indecent assault.
The legal problems are similar to those in the cases of mistake and deception: are all threats serious enough to justify regarding the crime as a rape, or should some threats be accommodated within a lesser offence?
English law has the lesser crime of procuring unlawful sexual intercourse by threats or intimidation, and appears to limit rape to those cases where there is a threat of violence.
However, there is a wider dimension to the question, which encompasses fear as well as threats, and this hinges on the distinction between submission and consent.
In the case of Olugboja (1981) two girls were picked up by two men and taken to a remote house.
The victim was already distressed after being raped by the other man when D announced his intention to have sex with her.
She asked him why he could not leave her alone, in view of what the other man had already done to her, but he turned off the lights and told her to undress.
She did not resist.
The Court of Appeal rejected the defence argument that there must be actual violence or threats of violence for the offence to be classified as rape.
It also rejected the Crown's argument that the issue of consent should be left to the jury — in the same way as the question of dishonesty is left to them in theft cases — but its actual decision comes fairly close to this position.
Thus, the jury should be instructed that the term ‘consent’ covers a whole range of situations from actual desire to reluctant acquiescence, and that the dividing line between real consent and mere submission must be drawn by the jury by applying its knowledge of human nature to the facts of the case.
The law of rape may therefore extend to threats other than threats of violence, but its boundaries are most uncertain.
Resort to such concepts as ‘common sense’ and ‘knowledge of human nature’, is little more than a veiled admission that no satisfactory criteria have been found.
The narrowest position is to say that rape is committed only where D threatens violence or knows that V is in fear of violence, and that any other threat must fall within the lesser offence of procuring sex by threats.
A broad position would be to hold that any threat may negative consent, and this might include a threat to send a compromising photograph to someone, a threat to report a driver for exceeding the speed limit, and so on.
Among intermediate positions, one possibility is to draw an analogy with the offence of blackmail, holding that any unwarranted demand for sex with menaces should amount to rape, the menaces being either sufficient to influence an ordinary person or sufficient to influence the mind of this victim.
But the difficulty with this discussion is that it lacks a firm point of reference because it cannot be taken for granted that there should be two levels of offence, rape and procuring sex by threats.
If there is to be a single offence of serious sexual assault, there are arguments for including all cases of obtaining sex by fear or threats within that.
If the present division is regarded as desirable, the next step is to ensure that the maximum penalty for the lesser offence is sufficient to deal with cases of serious threats which are not enough to negative consent in rape.
Then one can address the question of whether rape should be confined to cases where submission arises from a threat or fear of violence, or whether it should be phrased more widely.
At that stage, questions about the appropriateness of labels, sentencing powers, and the principle of legality (in terms of certainty requirements) come to the fore.
These questions will be considered on a broader canvas in section 8.7 below.
8.6 OTHER NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUAL OFFENCES
So far the discussion has focused on the offence of rape in English law, which is confined to cases of ‘sexual intercourse’ where the penis penetrates the vagina.
Other kinds of sexual assault are classified in English law as buggery, attempted buggery or rape, or  indecent assault, and there are also offences against young people and the mentally disordered.
These will be considered briefly before the general subject of sexual offences is re-examined.
(a) Buggery
One of the circumstances constituting this offence is where the penis penetrate the anus of a male or a female, and the maximum penalty is life imprisonment.
The law therefore allows the offence to be treated just as seriously as rape, and we have seen how some would argue that it should be included as a form of rape, or at least as a form of the most serious offence of sexual assault, in any reformed law.
In ordinary parlance one might say that anyone who has been forcibly subjected to this offence has been raped; the psychological effects are likely to be deep, and even if there is no risk of pregnancy (as there is not from some rapes, since ejaculation is not part of the definition), there may be the risk of disease.
(b) Attempted Rape or Attempted Buggery
If a defendant fulfils the requirements for the offence of rape or buggery but failed to achieve penetration, liability for attempted rape or attempted buggery may be possible.
These are serious offences, carrying the same maximum penalty as the full offences.
A survey in the 1970s showed that almost one-third of rape charges resulted in conviction of attempted rape.
According to the law of attempts, the least that a defendant must be proved to have done is something ‘more than merely preparatory’ to sexual intercourse, with intent to have unlawful sexual intercourse without the woman's consent.
Whether the prosecution can prove attempted rape rather than the lesser offence of indecent assault will often depend on proof of the defendant's intention to go beyond the indecent acts already committed.
A legal problem has arisen here in respect of defendants who ‘could not care less’ whether the woman was not consenting: we have seen that such men can be convicted of rape in cases where they achieve penetration, but there is a problem in convicting them of attempted rape where they fail to achieve penetration but clearly intended to do so.
The problem is that  conviction for an attempted crime requires an intent to commit the full offence whereas the ‘reckless’ attempted rapist intends to have sexual intercourse but is merely reckless as to the woman's non-consent.
The strong argument in favour of classifying such offences as attempted rape rather than merely indecent assault has now been recognized by the Law Commission's draft Criminal Code, and the Court of Appeal has recently found its way to this conclusion by ‘interpreting’ the Criminal Attempts Act 1981.
(c) Indecent Assault
In English law the offence of indecent assault is charged for all forms of sexual assault other than rape, buggery, and attempts to commit those crimes.
Until 1985 the maximum penalty for indecent assault on a female was two years' imprisonment, compared with ten years for indecent assault on a male — a legacy of the horror with which homosexuality was viewed, and of the undervaluing of female sexual and physical autonomy — but the maximum penalty for both forms of indecent assault is now ten years.
This is a far more realistic maximum for cases involving forced oral sex and other indignities, but the real question is whether such serious forms of sexual assault should be classified differently.
At present they ‘share’ the offence of indecent assault with many minor forms of misconduct, such as giving an unwanted kiss or fondling clothes being worn by someone else, for which the penalty is likely to be a long way down the scale.
This suggests that there is a strong argument for having two grades of indecent assault in English law, or for moving some of the more serious forms of the crime (such as forced fellatio or cunnilingus) into a broadened crime of rape or ‘serious sexual assault’.
Most of the technical legal controversy has concerned not the more serious varieties of indecent assault but the more ambiguous forms, where the element of indecency is used to separate the sexual offence from the non-sexual.
In Court (1988) the House of Lords upheld the conviction of a man who had spanked a young girl several times on the seat of her shorts.
The House distinguished, in effect, three types of case.
First, where the conduct would not be thought indecent by any right-minded observer, indecent assault  could not be committed.
Second, where right-minded observers would agree that the conduct was indecent, that would be an indecent assault.
In a third class of cases, where the right-minded observer would be unsure, the court would look at the defendant's motive and, only if that was indecent, would the offence be made out.
One result of this is that much will turn on the court's initial characterization of the incident, using the ‘right-minded person’ test.
That test is vague, but could it be improved upon in this context?
Is it possible to predetermine the types of conduct regarded as indecent?
Should the defendant's motive be so crucial in cases where the act is not obviously indecent, in the sense that ‘right-minded persons’ would not unhesitatingly classify it as such?
(One might argue against the concept of ‘right-minded persons’, which moves away from a statistical concept such as‘most people’ or ‘the ordinary citizen’and seems to seek a moral plane which is ‘right-minded’, a question-begging approach in this context.)
Does it matter if a person derives some kind of sexual satisfaction from an act which most people or ‘right-minded persons’ would not regard as indecent?
There is no parallel here with punishment for attempts and other inchoate offences, because there is no proof that the defendant was aiming to do something harmful: the harmfulness of the action is supposedly constituted by the indecent motive, not by anything actually done, or about to be done, to the victim.
The two main issues in the crime of indecent assault are therefore: whether the crime ought to be divided into two grades so that the more serious forms of sexual assault can be labelled separately; and how to draw the line between indecent and non-indecent contact with another.
There is no indecent assault where the other party consents to the conduct, and the fault element for the crime includes knowledge or recklessness as to whether the other party is consenting.
Here, as with rape, it seems sufficient to show that D ‘could not care less’ whether the other party was not consenting.
However, a person under the age of 16 cannot give valid consent.
Thus, if a woman were to have sexual intercourse with a boy under 16, this would be the offence of indecent assault by the woman even if the boy consented to, or instigated, the act.
This restriction on consent is designed for the protection of the young, to which we will now turn.
(d) Sexual Intercourse with Girls under 16
A male commits an offence if he has sexual intercourse with a girl under 16.
Even if she consents in fact, this has no effect in law and the offence is still committed.
If the girl is under 13, the maximum penalty is life imprisonment, since a girl of 12 or under cannot have sufficient knowledge of the consequences of sex, or sufficient maturity of judgment to take decisions on those consequences.
Where the girl is aged 13 to 15, the maximum penalty is two years.
There is a defence for a young man under 24 who has not previously been charged with a similar offence and who believes that the girl is 16 years old.
In practice, the vast majority of reported offences of unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl of 16 involve young men of a similar age or a few years older, and the general trend is to administer a formal caution to such persons rather than to prosecute them.
Prosecution is thus reserved for the cases in which some unfair advantage has been taken of the girl, particularly where the girl is under 13 (when lack of proper understanding is assumed), where the man is considerably older than the girl, where the man held some position of trust in relation to the girl, and where there is some element of deception involved.
The law does not specify any of these elements: everything is left to prosecutorial discretion.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee took the view that, if the law did try to restrict the offence in this way, it would inevitably legalize some cases which should remain contrary to the law.
Thus the law continues to sacrifice the principle of maximum certainty (see Chapter 3.3 (i)) to the supposed dictates of practicality.
The law is framed widely, in the expectation that it will be enforced selectively.
In one particular sphere, however, other legal systems seem to disagree with the practicality argument: namely, cases of sexual intercourse with a girl under 16 committed by a person in a position of trust towards her.
Many countries have an offence of ‘abuse of authority’ to differentiate these crimes, in accord with the principle of fair labelling (Chapter 3.3 (1)), but anxieties about the problem of listing the types of authority (should it include persons undertaking voluntary responsibility, such as choirmasters and youth-club leaders?) have led to the continuation of the pragmatic all-encompassing provisions in England and Wales.
There are sharp divisions about the fault element for the offence of unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under 16.
The limited ‘defence’ of mistake about the girl's age, available to young men under 24, was explained above, and the reason for creating such a limited ‘defence’is that in general it has been held that the crime does not require any fault element as regards the girl's age.
For many years the decision in Prince (1875), in effect that the man is strictly liable when the girl is under 16, has been paraded by academic lawyers as the acme of injustice.
The decision may certainly be said to be out of line with the recent trend, that a defendant should be judged on the facts as he believes them to be; and this led the Criminal Law Revision Committee to recommend that the rules should be harmonized and that the prosecution should prove that the man realized that the girl was under 16.
Once again, one must question whether consistency is the highest value here.
Critics argue that the whole point of this offence is to provide protection for young girls, and that this will be undermined if it is open to men to seek an acquittal on the ground that the girl looked 16.
Without directly embracing the ‘protection’ element in this argument, it can be suggested that there should he a duty on the man to ask the girl about her age before entering into sexual relations, even though the answers may be untruthful in some cases.
(e) Other Rules against Exploitation of the Vulnerable
Mention might be made of four other special rules relating to the involvement of vulnerable persons in sexual activity.
The Prince rule of strict liability as to age, which applies equally to indecent assault, has already been noticed.
Another judge-made rule is that in Tyrrell (1894), which provides that a person cannot be convicted as a party to an offence if the offence was created for the protection of such persons.
Thus, in cases where a young girl or young boy of 15 leads an adult into sexual activity, the youth cannot be convicted as a party to either unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under 16 or indecent assault (as the case may be).
The adult commits the offence; the law imposes on him or her the duty to resist whatever temptation is provided by the under-age person.
Among the specific offences designed to protect the vulnerable, there are various offences of sexual relations with mentally handicapped persons.
There is a crime of gross indecency with or towards a child under 14, which may be committed even though there is no indecent assault on the child by the adult — by inviting the child to touch the genitalia of the adult, for example.
However, there seems little reason for limiting the offence to cases involving children under 14 when the general age of consent to sexual activity stands at 16.
And it is an offence for a man to commit gross indecency with another man: this offence usually concerns mutual masturbation or oral sex between two males (there is no equivalent offence between females).
The reason for discussing it here is that, under the Sexual Offences Act 1967, this offence is not committed where the act is done in private, between consenting males, both aged 21 or over.
This means that it is regarded as criminal for a man of 21 to commit this offence with a consenting male under 21.
The age of 21 seems exceptionally high, since a person has the right to vote at 18 and the age of consent for other sexual conduct is 16.
Logic suggests that 16 should be the age of consent for this conduct, too, but the CLRC took the view that young men of 16 and 17 need protection from this kind of behaviour, whereas they do not from other kinds of sexual contact.
The anomaly is increased by the fact that, under the present law, two young men under 21 who consensually commit ‘gross indecency’ are both liable to conviction for the offence: the rule in Tyrrell is inapplicable here, but the maximum penalty is two years' imprisonment where the offender is under 21, compared with five years where he is over 21.
8.7 INCEST
A parent or grandparent who has sexual contact with a child or grandchild may well be guilty of one of the offences already considered — rape, if there is sexual intercourse without consent; indecent assault, if there is sexual contact with a child under 16; and even gross indecency with or towards a child, if the child is under 14.
These other offences do not cover all eventualities, and, moreover, it may be argued with some force that child sexual abuse at home  ought to be labelled separately.
It is not merely a sexual offence, but one of the deepest breaches of trust which can take place in a family-based society.
The home ought to be a safe haven, the place where people go to get away from fear and violence, and it is this fundamental feeling of safety which can be destroyed by child sexual abuse.
Incest was introduced into English law as a distinct offence by the Punishment of Incest Act 1908.
Although the eugenic risk (that the child of an incestuous relationship between father — daughter or brother — sister will have congenital defects) was known at the time and was probably a factor, most of the arguments of the reformers were based on the protection of children from sexual exploitation.
Those arguments have great force today, as increasing evidence of child sexual abuse within the family comes to that power to lead a daughter into sexual activity from a relatively early age.
All kinds of pressure may be exerted on the child to keep quiet about the behaviour, with sometimes disastrous effects on his or her emotional development.
Indeed, the primacy of this anti-exploitation rationale over eugenic reasons makes it desirable to extend the offence to cover adopted children as well as blood-relationships.
The offence of incest is committed by a man who has sexual intercourse with a person whom he knows to be his granddaughter, daughter, sister or mother, and by a woman aged 16 or over who permits her grandfather, father, brother, or son to have sexual intercourse with her.
The first thing to notice about this definition is that, like the offence of rape, it is restricted to ‘sexual intercourse’.
In the context of incest this is even less defensible — first, because eugenic reasons no longer provide the main grounds for criminalization; and second because the primary rationale of punishing the sexual exploitation of children within the family applies no less to other serious sexual behaviour, such as oral and anal sex.
Surely the offence of incest should cover all cases of vaginal or anal penetration or penetration involving the penis.
Another feature of the offence is that it applies irrespective of the ages of the parties (save that a woman cannot commit the offence of ‘permitting’ intercourse unless she is aged 16 or over).
Thus the crime of incest covers sexual relations by mature adults, in situations where the rationale of punishing exploitation of the young should no longer apply.
One question, therefore, is whether the age should be reduced to 16, which is the general age of consent for sexual activity.
There might appear to be an argument in favour of consistency here, but it is surely eclipsed by the need to recognize that many children remain dependent on their parents until they are at least 18.
Indeed, the CLRC recommended that the age should be no lower than 21.
Another issue is whether brother — sister incest should remain criminal where both parties are aged 18 or over: when sentencing, the courts treat this as a much less serious form of the offence than father — daughter incest, and a majority of the CLRC accepted that brother — sister incest should cease to be an offence when both parties are aged 21 or over.
The reasoning behind this proposal seems to be that the two parties are adult, and any exploitation deriving from the family tie seems no more likely than in other adult relationships.
However, adulthood begins at 18 rather than 21, and once again we have an example of a desire to shield those aged under 21 which may actually lead to the penalization of some brothers and sisters of that age.
8.8 PARAMETERS OF THE LAW ON SEXUAL ASSAULT
It is evident from this survey of English law on sexual assault that the parameters are open to considerable argument.
Rules of antiquity (such as the definition of rape, and the marital exemption), of modernity (such as the definition of incest), and of recent creation (such as the doctrine of mistake in rape) are being called into question.
There can be little doubt that the administration of criminal justice has paid insufficient attention to problems of sexual abuse over the years, and recent improvements in police procedures and in services for victims are to be welcomed.
The difficult issue is how far this movement should be taken: changes which make it easier to convict men of sexual assault on women, or parents of the sexual abuse of children, cannot be welcomed unless one has a clear conception of the rights of defendants as well as the rights of victims.
It is one thing to maintain that victims of sexual assault have  in the past suffered oppressive questioning by the police and oppressive cross-examination in court.
It is quite another thing to suggest that it is therefore proper to place higher burdens of proof on defendants, and to restrict the presentation of the defence.
Each of these proposals deserves careful examination from both points of view.
The starting-point must be the empirical evidence of the effects of sexual assaults.
These are variable, of course, but in many cases there are severe psychological after-effects — trauma, fear, and mistrust — which deeply affect the victim's ability to lead a normal life for some time to come.
It is not suggested that each offence should be ranked according to the seriousness of its after-effects on the particular victim — although there is an argument for assuming that young victims will be particularly damaged by unwanted sexual experiences, and therefore for regarding such offences as more serious.
To transfer this judgment of seriousness into desirable legal responses is no easy matter, however, for two powerful reasons.
First, children might refrain from reporting or at least giving evidence if they know that a substantial prison sentence for a member of their family is the probable outcome.
Second, defendants might defend cases more vigorously, causing greater trauma to child witnesses, if substantial imprisonment is probable.
It can therefore be argued that, serious as the offence usually is, a policy of non-custodial treatment might be preferable in view of the effects on child victims.
So far as ranking the relative seriousness of sexual assaults is concerned, however, full account should be taken of the psychological effects of such offences.
Above all, one must avoid any tendency to equate the degree of harm with the degree of physical injury in a particular case, since the psychological harm may be far more severe.
This chapter has dealt chiefly with the non-consensual offences, and this is important, because it is the absence of consent which is the crucial factor in many cases of sexual assault.
Such offences attack the principle of freedom of choice in sexual matters, and this, together with the punishment of those who exploit the young, the mentally handicapped, and those for whom they have responsibility, should form the bedrock of the scheme of offences.
This is not the place to embark upon detailed discussion of possible schemes for grading sexual assaults, but questions have been raised about the exclusion from the English offence of rape of oral and anal intercourse and penetration of the vagina by other objects.
There is evidence to suggest that victims of these other forms of serious sexual assault regard them as no less serious than rape (narrowly defined).
There is a strong argument for extending the offence of rape to cover these other sexual indignities, or for restructuring the law so that there are degrees of sexual assault.
The sentencing decision in Billam (1986) marks out some of the more serious varieties of sexual assault, and this could be used as a basis for introducing a new scheme of three or four graded offences: there are precedents for this in other countries.
One approach would be to have first-degree sexual assault defined so as to include penetration involving the penis, vagina, or anus, together with the threat or infliction of grievous bodily harm; then a second-degree offence of the same nature involving a threat or infliction of actual bodily harm; and then a third-degree offence covering all other sexual assaults involving penetration, and a fourth offence to cover indecent assaults not involving penetration.
The CLRC did give serious consideration to dividing indecent assault into two grades, so the idea of grading is not entirely alien to England.
One argument sometimes raised against it is that it would lead to plea-bargaining, and thus to offenders escaping with lesser convictions and lesser sentences.
The fact is that this is a prominent feature of the existing law, in which there are only two major offences (rape and indecent assault) and in which some 42 per cent of those charged with rape have a plea of guilty to indecent assault accepted by the court.
A more refined gradation of offences could not be worse in this respect, and might improve the fairness of the labels and sentences imposed on sexual offenders.
One other consequence of a fresh gradation of sexual offences might be that they would cease to be gender-specific: there are some strange inconsistencies in the law at present, and it is not at all difficult to draft offences which might be committed by males or females against males or females.
One feature of the discussion in this chapter has been to challenge the use of the concepts of consistency and ‘inexorable logic’ as  unanswerable standards of appraisal of the law.
This is not to suggest that consistency is an unworthy value: the argument is rather that there is a need to decide upon the categories to which the argument of consistency is being applied, and above all to recognize that simple resort to the allegation of inconsistency might serve to conceal the conflict between a number of social interests or principles.
One example is the doctrine of mistake in rape: it might appear to be ‘inexorable logic’ that if the offence of rape is only committed where D knew that the woman was not consenting or was reckless as to her non-consent, a mistaken belief that she was consenting would lead to an acquittal.
The inexorable logic does not, however, establish that the result is morally or socially desirable.
There is a powerful argument that as far as sexual behaviour is concerned, an area in which consent makes the difference between gross violation and shared pleasure, and in which physical proximity makes it relatively easy to ask about consent, the law should in effect impose a duty to enquire.
This would be done by limiting exculpatory mistakes to those based on reasonable grounds.
It would partly alter the definition of rape or serious sexual assault; it would introduce an element of negligence liability; and it would also make D liable for an omission.
But all those changes could be justified out of respect for the principle of freedom of choice in sexual matters, particularly where the enquiry is so straightforward.
A similar argument could be mounted in relation to mistakes about age in the offences against girls and boys under 16: the basic principle of fairness to defendants underpins the subjective requirement of fault, but there is also the social policy against exploitation of the young and vulnerable.
This social policy might support a duty to enquire about age wherever there might be room for doubt, and the ease of compliance (because of the inevitable physical proximity of the parties) again favours the requirement.
In practice, there might be situations of doubt; a man might claim that there was nothing to alert him to the girl's age (e.g. a 15-year-old girl, who looks much older, soliciting in a street with other prostitutes).
Moreover, if the criminal law is to impose duties of these kinds, it should publicize them widely, so as to ensure compliance with the principle of legality.
The point of this argument is not to maintain that there would be no practical problems, but to demonstrate that there are weighty issues of principle on both sides.
Appeal to ‘inexorable logic’ or consistency cannot conclude the argument: it over-simplifies the issues.
One policy, already mentioned, which should continue to shape  the law of sexual offences is the criminalization of those who exploit the young and vulnerable.
This is achieved through special offences and through rules invalidating apparent consent given by those under 16, and it is supported by the Tyrrell rule against convicting a participant who falls within the class protected by the offence concerned.
The relevant ages of consent in English law vary: 16 seems to be the general age, but the offence of gross indecency with or towards children only applies where the child is under 14, and the age of consent for homosexual offences is 21 and the recommendation is to lower it only to 18.
Once again, consistency is a proper starting-point for critical appraisal, but it is important to examine any special circumstances attendant on particular offences.
For example, is there any substance in the claim that young men of 16 and 17 are more vulnerable, socially and psychologically, than young women of a similar age?
Certainly there appears to be some sense in restricting any changes in the law of incest so that it continues to be an offence for a parent or grandparent to have sexual relations with a child aged 16 or 17, because children of that age are often dependent and living at home, and so the conditions for exploitation are still present at that age.
Once again, the policy of using the law against those who indulge in sexual exploitation of the vulnerable may conflict with the ‘logic’ of overall consistency in age-limits, and this conflict must be acknowledged and confronted.