

1980–1990 WE'RE TEN YEARS OLD
The first issue of THE FACE appeared in May 1980.
With this issue we are ten years old.
So you'll excuse us if we take a second here to pat ourselves on the back; it's our birthday and we'll do what we like.
Those with no stomach for sentimentality should leave this page now and turn instead to Sean O'Hagan's report on Hothouse Flowers and the hippies of Dublin (the City That Time Forgot), to Cynthia Rose's penetrating profile of American TV megastar Arsenio Hall, or to the exclusive on-set report on the making of the Madonna/Warren Beatty film,Dick Tracy .
Here we're about to get mawkish.
Launched on a miniscule budget and a surge of dubious optimism, held together in the first eighteen months by a poultice of desperation and blind faith (not to mention liberal applications of cow gum and sellotape), still independent after a decade of brinkmanship publishing this is a tremendous achievement.
So our thanks to those people past and present, sung and unsung, who've worked with us and for us through ten demanding, deadline-defying years.
And our thanks to the readers who have given us their continuing support.
Without you we could all go off and live normal, sensible lives.
Now there's a thought…
Madonna gives us ten: photographed exclusively for The Face by Jean Baptiste Mondino
I love Leeds
According to FACE 20, Leeds is notable for being Britain's most boring city.
Perhaps that's why, unlike nearly every other urban area in the country, the population is actually increasing.
Perhaps that is why Leeds is now the major financial and commercial centre in the North of England.
As for the social scene, there is nothing depressing about the Warehouse, Ricci's, Joy or the excellent Gallery.
Leeds is a thriving, vibrant and prosperous city and I'm sure 740,000 fellow Leeds lovers would agree with me.
 Paul Latham Leeds 
Horne blower
I'm writing in response to the letter by Ben Horne (FACE 18).
Who do you think you are?
God?
Just because you don't like The Stone Roses and Happy Mondays doesn't mean that everyone else shouldn't.
I suppose you listen to ‘real’ music like U2 and Tina Turner?
Crap.
And finally, you don't have to be high.
I personally do not touch any drugs, alcohol or smoking materials, yet I still think that this music is the best in a long time.
 LEIGH ‘MR.
 CLEAN’ JONES BARNSLEY 
Slipped Disc
Re Mersey Bleat (FACE 19).
Being a bit of a Pink Floyd and a club scene fan, I was joyous to hear a sample of the Floyd's ‘Shine On You Crazy Diamond’ with a Soul II Soul beat on the radio.
I was even happier to discover from John McCready's article on The Farm that it was called ‘Natural Thing’ by Innocence.
So, like a mug, I went out and bought it, only to find that it isn't anything like Pink Floyd.
So please can anybody tell me what the Pink Floyd sample record is really called?
 S. MONTGOMERY BELFAST 
’ Natural Thing’does sample Pink Floyd, so much so that one D. Gilmour shares the writing credit.
Honest!
Down on The Farm
Re Mersey Bleat.
The Farm are a bunch of Scally wankers who sound like the sort of people who should be walking round town with bull terriers.
Total chads!
Any bands that sack a bass player for not spending enough money on the right clothes, especially when ‘he was a good musician as well’, has got to be brain dead.
Oh, and just a small point: when did music and football ever mix?
Never to my knowledge.
The Farm wanted for talking through their collective arse.
 RAY BRODRICK MAIDSTONE 
Argy bargy
Re FACE 19.
On p14 there was a brief note about David Puttnam's recent work on Isabel Allende's novel The House of The Spirits .
It seems you confuse Third World countries.
Allende's novel is not Argentine-based.
It's set in Chile same continent, different country.
 HAROLD BERG BARCELONA 
Club culture
Writing a thesis on dance clubs is not as easy as it may sound.
So I was wondering whether FACE readers would write to me to help me with my research.
The question I'm puzzling over, which perhaps proves that sociology is the study of the bleeding obvious, is why do you, or don't you go to clubs?
What is their appeal?
The music, the crowd, dancing, drinking, drugs, hiding out, watching or being seen?
What has been your best club or warehouse experience?
Please rave, review and write to me at the address below.
 SARAH THORNTON 15 NORTH GARDNER ST GLASGOW G11 5BU 
Insider dealer
I was disgusted to read your snide attack (Disinformation, FACE 19) on ‘White South African Musician Johnny Clegg’, who is one of the only white artistes in that country who has been fighting apartheid and trying to deal with it on the inside.
he's been arrested and jailed for fighting white racism.
The only concerts he plays with Savuka are those which are freely open to all races.
As far as the rift with the Musicians Union is concerned if they are so shortsighted as to condemn and ban everything that has the tag ‘South African’, without even trying to understand, I don't see much point in having anything to do with them.
I think you owe an apology to Clegg.
Better — why not interview him and get the real story?
 SAM YADA CANAROZZI LYONS 
Brotherly love
We hate:The Blues Brothers ; people who like The Blues Brothers ; people who think it's cool to like The Blues Brothers ; people to have seen The Blues Brothers 20 times; people who know every word of The Blues Brothers ; people who quote The Blues Brothers ; fake cover versions of Seventies soul classics.
 DWIGHT FRY COLCHESTER 
BULLETIN
The show lasts almost two hours, features seven dancers and costumes by Jean Paul Gaultier (see sketch).
Madonna's Blonde Ambition tour comes to Wembley Stadium July 10–22.
Tour preview, plus exclusive report from the set of Dick Tracy , p36.
He rebuked a young Miles Davis for his dress sense, played with the greats, and recorded some classic albums.
Tenor saxman Dexter Gordon died April 25, aged 67.
In the 1986 film Round Midnight he starred as a jazz musician who, like Gordon himself in the Sixties, sought refuge in Europe.
If you haven't seen it, hire the video.
Billed as Europe's biggest free street party,The Big Day has music from Hue and Cry, Tommy Smith, Courtney Pine, The Associates and more.
In Glasgow and live on Channel 4 Sunday June 3.
Set to sort the bona fide green retailers from the bandwagon jumpers, the first Green Consumer Exhibition takes place at London's Royal Horticultural Halls, May 24–28.
You can now save the rainforest by eating it.
Upmarket chef Anton Mosimann has created a special dinner incorporating ingredients from the rainforest (vegetarian?) as part of the Friends of the Earth Rainforest Festival, which will also include a fashion show.
From May 20–June 5; details on 071 490 4734.
Promising an all star line-up of DJs in the weeks to come (Paul Oakenfold, Mike Pickering, Norman Cook etc), Brighton's Escape Club reopens from June 9.
A consolation for all those waiting for the repeats of Up Pompeii .
Frankie Howerd is the subject of an Arena biography tracing his comic progress from gangly young man in the Fifties to his recent canonisation by the likes of Jonathan Ross.
See it on BBC2, June 1.
Frank Miller, the writer responsible for The Dark Knight Returns (and the script for Robocop 2 ) teams up with Watchmen artist Dave Gibbons for the bi-monthly comic Give Me Liberty , a politically sussed futuristic take on the dilapidated American Dream.
The latest book of pop cultural theory,The End of the Century Party (MUP, £9.95) coves the last ten years including you've guessed it The Stone Roses, The Hacienda and the indie dance scene.
Written by the fastest academic on the block, Manchester Poly lecturer Steve Redhead.
What next: BA degrees in Manchester Studies?
For all those for whom Baywatch just isn't enough, 7 Sport's World Beach Volleyball Championship in Rio de Janeiro features sun and sand, bronzed babes and beachboy beefcake, and occasionally a little sport.
On Channel 4, Sundays at 5.30pm
Profits from perestroika: launching here this month and in the USA next year is MNP (pronounced ‘meer’), a fizzy, clear version of a ‘traditional Russian recipe’ that contains less sugar and additives than most gassies.
The name means ‘world and peace’ in Russian, and the British manufacturers are members of the Anglo-Soviet Group On Food, Processing And Packaging.
What does freedom taste like?
Somewhere between ginger, orange, peppermint and chewing gum.
A less ambitious cash-in is the Gorby blaster, above right: the head flashes red and wails when pressed.
A mere 99p from your local tack emporium
Dolcis is launching a club tour.
Tizer is sponsoring hip hop gigs.
What's going on?
Previously naff companies are suddenly revamping their image by involving themselves in dance music.
The Outlaw Posse's Tizer-sponsored under 18s kicks off at Brighton's Zap Club on June 1, then travels to Manchester Konspiracy (9), Birmingham Hummingbird (10) and London Fridge (23)
Julian Clary has released his version of ‘I was Born Under a Wandrin' Star’(Wonderdog), an unlikely hit for Lee Marvin in 1970.
Hear the record and the amiable bitching live at the Liverpool Empire (May 21), Chatham Central Hall (23), Cambridge Corn Exchange (24), Reading Hexagon (25), Southampton Mayflower (26), Northampton Derngate (27), Stevenage Gordon Craig Theatre (28–29), Crawley Hawth Centre (30) and Brighton Dome (31).
Clary winds up his tour with three nights at London's Hackney Empire (June 1–3)
Romeo and Juliet Get Laid?
Linking up with Daphne Hayar as Shakespeare's star-crossed lovers, Fine Young Cannibal singer Roland Gift makes his London stage debut, courtesy of Hull Truck Theatre Company, at the Shaw Theatre, June 4–30 before embarking on national tour
Showcasing artwork influenced by chaos theory, ‘Earth Signals’ features fractal environments, performance happenings, computer graphics, films and ‘air ghosts’(above) created by event organiser Paul Friendlander.
At London's Omphalos Gallery, 26 Boundary Rd, London NW8, June 11–17
In America, Bart Simpson is hipper than De La Soul, Air Jordans and African pendants.
For a drawing, that's an achievement.
The Simpsons started life as animated shorts breaking up the sketches on The Tracey Ullman Show .
(The BBC, in its infinite wisdom, bought Ullman's series but cut the Simpsons from it.)
By Christmas ‘89 they were so popular with American viewers that a special became inevitable.
Now on Fox-TV for 30 minutes every Sunday night the first prime-time cartoon since The Jetsons in the Sixties the show is essential viewing for Yank youth.
Drawn by Matt Groening, the Simpson make the Flintstones look stone age.
The format is simple middle-American family dealing with the tribulations of modern life but the style is anarchic.
Homer, the grumpy dad, works in a nuclear plant and is a sentimental slob.
Marge, his wife with a metre-high blue beehive, keeps the family together.
Bart (anagram: Brat), a kid with a spiky flat-top, is perpetually in trouble: he enjoys taking snapshots of his own butt, and loses his dad's job for him.
Lisa plays the baritone sax and aims to get everyone in the poop as often as possible.
Maggie is a gooey, dummy-chewing infant.
All have mouths that swallow their faces when they open them.
The pace is utterly manic, the bickering relentless and the colour lurid; to some The Simpsons is a half-hour headache.
No UK broadcast date has been fixed, but Sky are picking it up for autumn., In the meantime, Bart is appearing in bootlegged form on American dance flyers and T-shirts everywhere.
If that's not a sign of a legend in the making, nothing is.
Ian McCann 
MUSIC
Purely in the spirit of scientific advancement, I quote this line from a sleeve-note:’…closing the gap between songs and instrumentals towards a point at which the listener could trip out and boogie at the same time!’
This puts me in mind of the last Top of The Pops I watched, a show replete with beflared, poncho'd, kaftan'd persons doing psychotropic ‘dances’, tripping out and boogieing at the same time.
Well, nothing is real, we are fortunate to have been reminded by Candy Flip, so who was that quote referring to?
Why, Hawkwind, of course.
Let us take it as read that Hawkwind started quite a few trends in their time.
Ladbroke Grove urban guerilla psychedelic sci-fi warriors probably sums it up.
The low-brow idiot dancer's solution to the conundrums of the universe, they paved the way for today's convoy and festival people and established a lifestyle model for the scoring, squatting, anarcho-hippie classes.
The thing is, does anybody know what they sounded like?
A new compilation has arrived to clear the windmills of our minds.
‘Stasis’ is a collection of tracks recorded between 1971 and 1975, and I'm here to tell you that most of it is pretty awful stuff.
The sleeve pictures of the band are priceless, naturally, but forget fashion notes for a moment.
Concentrate on the music.
Bass playing out of New Order, squiggly sensory overloading out of The Shamen, ambience out of The Orb, guitars out of a host of Scallydelic outfits; set the controls for the heart of the crash pad and pass the pipe.
‘Space does not care,’ somebody intones on a live recording of ‘The Black Corridor’against a backdrop of bloopy electronic noises.
Do you?
David Toop
SINGLES
MC TUNES/808 STATE The Only Rhyme That Bites (WEA) Loud rap,The Big Country , and a sound that's miles away from‘Pacific State’
BIG HARD EXCELLENT FISH Imperfect List (One Little Indian) Eerie synth chords and a list of unpleasant things recited by Scouse poet Josie Jones.
Sounds tedious, but is brilliant
DIANA BROWN Masterplan (London) Welcome return for a singer who really should be a star
TOUCH OF SOUL We Get The Love (Cooltempo) An unbearably cute kid recites the ten commandments over a standard house piano riff/female wail.
Twee yet somehow irresistible
RICHARD ROGERS Can't Stop Loving You (BCM)‘Written and produced by Marshall Jefferson’ says the sticker on the US version, explaining why this is already doing business on import.
A storming, Seventies soul-style dance track
MORRISSEY November Spawned A Monster (Parlophone) A guest vocal from the wonderful Mary Margaret O'Hara still can't hide the fact that this is not the miserable one at his best 
The Simpsons are a legend in the making: the all-American cartoon gone bad
Rumour has it that Stevo (below) signed some of his first acts, including Soft Cell, while standing on his head.
It's now ten years since he set up Some Bizzare, and in that time he has enticed Matt Johnson, You've Got Foetus On Your Breath, Psychic TV, Einstuerzende Neubauten and Berlin-born cabaret singer Anges Bernelle into his entourage.
‘I'm tidying up the last ten years by releasing two compilation albums,’ he says.
‘One aggressive, the other more obscure.’
Some Bizzare ‘came through boredom,’ he says.
‘It was born out of frustration, to explore new instrumental structures.’
Now preparing for the next ten years, Stevo refuses to be predictable.
‘We always tried to be one step ahead, but it's almost its own pigeon hole now.
We'll be going far away from what people expect of us.
I want to make people feel good’
Where can you find copies of THE FACE displayed next to a Littlewoods catalogue?
A poster for Durex next to one for Billy Graham?
A Lacroix gown and Moschino bra dress?
At the V&A museum's ‘Collecting For The Future: A Decade of Contemporary Acquisitions’, June 6 through to Aug 12
Slurp not sip.
Jelly has come to town.
Jelloshots are tubs of lemon, blackcurrant, strawberry and lime jelly laced with vodka.
Served in tubs, they're easy to consume.
Flip the lid and down it in one, like an oyster.
The idea came to Jamie Gordon and Ali of Reunion Foods.
Earlier this year they threw a party and got their mates round to sample the goods.
The wobbly clamour was for more, and now they're going into full production.
Available from selected bars and clubs across town, details on 071 497 2130.
Jo Denbury 
FILM
A very loose remake of a Fifties film of the same name,We're No Angels comes to the screen courtesy of two big name double-acts.
Out front, Robert de Niro and Sean Penn at witless escaped convicts mistaken for iconoclastic priests; backstage, writer David Mamet and director Neil Jordan have joined forces to create this misconceived project.
The former pairing has been on the cards ever since critics fingered Penn as the brat who would be Bob but the latter seems less plausible.
Mamet's street theatre of small gestures and significant silences is a world away from Jordan's big picture symbolics.
So it's surprising that Angels works at all.
That it does is mainly down to the script.
A variation on Mamet's last directional effort,Things Change , it creates a predictable but effective comedy from the convicts' progress to ‘salvation’, as real priests and ordinary folk take Penn's stumbling idiocies and de Niro's low-rent growls for down-to-earth spiritual lessons, and gives Jordan the space to pump up the religious allegory the film opens in prison Hell and ends with a life saving plunge into regenerative waters.
But though he handles this well, Jordan fumbles everything else, mistiming the comedy and drawing an unbelievably bad performance out of de Niro.
Surprisingly, it's Penn who comes out best: his stuttering shyness, gauche pout and holy fool looks quietly convincing.
Time to stop making all those jokes about Little Bob.
Jim McClellan 
Robert de Niro makes an unholy mess in We're No Angels 
TROUBLE in the S'Xpress camp?
Mark Moore seems to be shedding vocalists at an alarming rate.
Original members Michelle and Linda Love (above) have left to follow solo careers, and Linda's debut single, a rock/dance groove called ‘Ain't Losing Control’, is out this month on Polydor.
Another Linda passed through but is now recording her own material under the name Planet X. Moore's new singing partner Sonique (see p55) is hopefully there to stay.
THE LATEST Musician's Union bulletin has some interesting members.
Rapper Derek B and singers Lizzie Tear and Princess have failed to pay their dues, as has Rowland Rivron and Sigue Sigue Sputnik drummer Ray Mayhew.
But surely the Richard Jobson listed could not be the Richard Jobson, singer, model, TV presenter poet etc etc?
BRISTOL should make its mark in 1990.
Following Smith and Mighty's record releases (see FACE 20), The Massive Attack have signed to Virgin subsidiary Circa.
With support from Neneh Cherry's management, they are working on an album combining ragga, soul and hip hop.
PRINT
This is how Jonathan Coe's new novel The Dwarves of Death (Fourth Estate, £12.95) got its name: ‘The title came from a headline in the News of The World , a story about midget matadors in Spain.
I thought it was a great phrase.’
The novel features, amongst other things, an obscure Glaswegian punk band, though Coe hardly looks like a punk survivor.
He's a well-scrubbed type who looks pretty much like the Guardian book reviewer he is neatly dressed with a sensible fringe.
At 28 he's some way younger than most of our fashionable young novelist types.
But he is certainly not interested in exploiting this angle and is bemused to be asked about his background: ‘Well…
I'm from a very middle class, very academic background.
I went to university at Warwick and spun out my time there till I had a novel written.
Then in 1986 I moved down to London, played keyboards with a cabaret group and worked on my second book.’
During this time Coe was on the dole and living in Bermondsey, and it is this period of his life that gave him the basis for The Dwarves of Death .
Following the adventure of the hapless William, a lovelorn Bermondsey-based piano player, as he becomes progressively entangled in a baroque revenge plot, it is a strange mixture of sentimental education/rites of passage novel and comedy thriller.
Coe tells me that he was attracted to writing some kind of thriller because it would help him tighten up his plotting, but he still has some way to go; the book's resolution is simply too arbitrary and fanatical.
But still, Coe says he enjoyed writing this one far more than his previous books, and it shows;The Dwarves of Death is a light and pacey piece of whimsical London noir.
John Williams 
The location holds little promise, the time slot is unlikely, yet for over two years now the Sunday afternoon sessions at the Queens Club near Slough have been packed out with those who just can't stop after Saturday night.
Inside, the venue is dark, sweaty, with a pounding house beat from a rota of name DJs such as Alfredo, Danny Rampling and Andy Weatherall.
Outside, a barbecue sizzles and windsurfers sweep across the reservoir towards Windsor Castle.
‘It's a mixed, friendly crowd,’ says promoter Charlie Cheshire.
‘I'd rather turn people away than ruin the atmosphere.’
SG 
Queens Club, Queen Mother Reservoir, Horton Rd, Colnbrook, nr Slough, from noon to 5pm.
The club closes after May 27 to go to Ibiza, but reopens with an all-dayer on July 1.
Sunday afternoon at Queens after the Saturday night before
At one huge rave last summer, the DJ announced, ‘Respect is due to the visuals’, and everyone broke out in a massive round of applause.
You don't get 5,000 people in a gallery giving you a cheer.’
Led by Frenchman Yann Sylvian, Halo is a group of artists, sculptors, photographers and technicians who make art you can dance to.
If you've been to any of the major house parties, you'd know them by sight, if not by name.
Their multiscreen projections of slides and film loops have featured in orbital parties, at the Astoria and Heaven, in Rifat Ozbek's 1988/89 fashion shows, and at Energy's recent Docklands all-dayer.
From their residency at the Fridge during the first summer of love, Halo used slide and film projectors to throw up a collage of op-art patterns, film loops of dancers like E-Boy and Wumni, and unique fractals derived from video feedback.
‘We're not aware of creating a visual identify for the house scene, because we're right in there.
We see a dancer at a rave, film him later that week, and project him at the next rave.’
Ben Lewis Halo can be contacted on 071 738 3248.
Art you can dance to from the creative group called Halo
FILM
After waiting two years on the back-burner for Batmania to boil itself dry Clean and Sober is finally getting a UK release, allowing Michael Keaton to do his twitching and snorting coke fiend routine without risk of dirtying the caped crusader's pristine image.
It's hard to understand what all the worrying was about.
The movie's message is plain and unequivocal: do drugs and die.
The only way to redeem yourself is to check into a rehab clinic, suffer the torments of the damned and make a final public confession of your sins.
That's the plot in cut and dried form, though there's the added twist of Keaton initially agreeing to undergo treatment only as a means of outmanouevring his creditors.
There's also a shot of doomy love interest (Keaton trying to get fellow addict Katy Baker off) and dopey oedipal sparring (Keaton trying to get counsellor M Emmet Walsh on), but in the end any attempt at getting a fix on using as a way of life is elbowed puritanically aside.
It seems that drug abuse just can't be tolerated by American politics.
Steve Beard 
Michael Keaton becomes clean and pristine once more ARE YOU listening Tony Colston-Hayter?
The Takashimaya department store in Tokyo has an oxygen bar.
Five litres of clean air will cost you 50p; different ‘flavours’ are produced by putting a drop of scented extract into the mask: lemon, orange, coffee, mint.
A Santa Monica health club is so far the only place where Americans can switch E for O. In Hungary, however, such matters are more of an imperative than a luxury; over 10 per cent of the country's deaths are pollution-related.
Citizens of Budapest queue for 15-minute sessions in ‘inhalatoriums’, phone booty-type structures where clean air can be breathed.
THE SOLUTION to that perennial trainer problem, what to do with the laces, may be nigh.
The new Converse leather hi top basketball shoes cost £69.95 and have an ankle support that pulls back to let the foot in.
Some may baulk at the name though: Converse Rear Entry.
OVER THERE, but thankfully not expected here in the near future: US TV audiences are bracing themselves for Roseanne : the cartoon, and an animated series featuring New Kids On The Block…
FILM
The big news recently for SF films buffs was that CBS/Fox in Britain were planning to release James Cameron's director's cuts form Aliens on video.
Entitled The Special Edition , it restored around 17 minutes of original unscreened footage, filling in more background to Ripley's material angst and showing exactly what happened to Newt's parents and the other settlers on the Alien's planet.
The press was done, the review tapes sent out.
Then head office in Hollywood nixed the project for ‘strategic reasons’.
Rumours have been circulating that they wanted to hold it to tie in with Aliens 3 , although with that still way off in the future, it's more likely that a full-scale theatrical release of The Special Edition is planned for the distant future.
It seems that in his habit of making films that are considered too long for the US cinema circuits, Cameron may have unwittingly provided film companies with a money-spinning way of making people pay to see the same movie twice.
(CBS/Fox over her anticipated selling over 70,000 copies of the video in the first month alone.)
Apparently, director's cuts of both The Terminator and The Abyss are in existence, the latter featuring a different ending and £8 million of special effects that had to be dropped for space.
Alternative endings might provide film companies with more opportunities to maximise the profit potential of cult items.
The first ending to Bladerunner , cut because it was too depressing, had Harrison Ford's detective discovering that he too was a replicant.
Similarly,Fatal Attraction has to endings, although this is denied by UIP.
The version shown in Japan had Glenn Close committing suicide, framing Michael Douglas for her murder.
Although popular in Japan, the sight of Douglas being sent to prison was deemed too ‘down’ for Western audiences.
 Jim McClellan 
ALBUMS
SOUL II SOUL Soul II Soul Volume 2: 1990 A New Decade (Ten) Courteney Pine, Fab Five Freddy and Kym Mazelle on a refreshingly varied album which avoids the hit formula in favour of jazz, African, rap and soul influences.
Pick of the bunch: ‘1990’ and ‘Courtney Blows’
OUTLAW POSSE My Afro's On Fire (Gee Street) Thoughtful lyrics and funky beats from London's new school of hip hop.
Includes the single ‘Stop The Negativity’
NO SMOKE International Smoke Signals (Warrior's Dance) Following the 4 single ‘Koro Koro’, this Paris-based outfit bring us more afro-house and spacey dub.
Features the excellent Mali Singers on vocals.
NEUTRON 9000 The Greenhouse Effect (Profile) Pleasant techno twiddles from Profile's first British signing Dominic Woosey: cyberpunk meets the new age
A TRIBE CALLED QUEST People's Instinctive Travels And The Paths Of Rhythm (Jive) Eccentric, inventive Afro-centric rap along the lines of the Jungle Bros and De La Soul
Robert Owens speaks with understandable caution.
The owner of one of the most spiritual voices in music, he's seen success beckon before only to give him the finger once he started to trust.
It was Owens who added the emotional element to Fingers Inc, but he and partners, Larry Heard and Ron Wilson, could only watch as the innovations they brought to house became a saleable commodity 18 months after business problems forced the group to disband.
Feted as a solo artist in England, his material with Bang The Party failed dismally to attract record company sponsorship.
In Chicago everyone knew Fingers but none of the promoters thought they were worth taking a risk on.
Perhaps disgusted with the business, Owens retreated and wondered if he should take a day job.
Unknown to the singer, Frankie Knuckles, the New York-born, Chicago-made DJ producer, was now back in his birthplace and calling Chicago to ask friends where Robert's beautiful voice had vanished to.
Eventually the pair connected, and Knuckles presented Owens with a track he had been working on with Japanese musician Satoshi Tomii.
The result was 1989's shimmering ‘Tears’, issued on ffrr in London and through Knuckles' Def Mix in America.
Then Owens, Knuckles and David Morales delivered ‘Rhythms In Me’, the singer's debut solo set, signed by 4th & Broadway for worldwide release, and preceded this month by a single ‘Visions’.
The fame of mind I've been in from the beginning,’ he says, ‘is a belief in the spirit: it moves me, it's in my heart.
I want to relay that in the music, in my lyrics.
For me, that's what house is all about.
That's not something that the record companies have been ready to promote, and I'm not willing to sell that short.’
From now on, with luck, he won't have to.
Ian McCann 
Robert Owens, a singer with a spirit that he won't sell short
BATMAN 2 (can you stand the anticipation?) starts shooting in Mexico later this year, much to the displeasure of the British film industry: the original Pinewood set has been kept intact since last year at a cost of £60,000 per month.
Meanwhile, the Oscar-winning designer of Gotham City, Anton Furst (see FACE 5), has been hired by Columbia Pictures' new silly money bosses Jon peters and Peter Guber to make the old MGM film lot cosy for them.
HOLLYWOOD FADS: after the body-swaps baby movies, underwater adventures, the upcoming rash of biker movies and interracial love stories, get ready for…
Robin Hood films.
Die Hard director John McTiernan is putting one together at Fox (’ Grab that Uzi, Maid Marion!’), and production company Morgan Creek has just shelled out £1.2m for Prince Of Thieves , a reworking of the Sherwood Forest legend.
ODD, very odd.
Avant-metal director Penelope Spheeris recently took a TV script editor job on Roseanne .
Meanwhile, though rumours of a Spinal Tap sequel are exaggerated, the band do plan a London concert this summer.
As bassist Derek Smalls (aka Harry Sherer) says, ‘You can take the rock'n'roll out of the boys, but you can't take the boys out of rock'n'roll.’
Er, yes.
FILM: ON RELEASE
In Notebook On Cities And Clothes, designer fashion meets auteurist angst, the documentary travelogue meets postmodern theory and Yohji Yamamoto shoots pool with Wim Wenders.
Hemming around the former's minimal asymmetric couture with yards of decorative musing on fashion and identity, Wenders concludes that Yamamoto isn't just a designer but an author in cloth.
Sure, and Wenders is an expert in flannel.
Nice to look at though, and Yohji won the game.
Considering the mess Hollywood might have been made of Triumph Of The Spirit (Rocky in the Death Camps ?), we should be grateful this true life biopic about a Greek boxer imprisoned in Auschwitz and forced to fight for his captors' entertainment has ended up the way it has dignified but dull, lacking any real historical punch.
In the lead Willem Dafoe is excellent, but some questions should be asked about the filmmakers' decision to turn the real Auschwitz into a ‘period’ location set.
Delayed for over four years, Nagisa Oshima's Max Mon Amour features Charlotte Rampling indulging in extramarital horseplay, or rather between-the-sheets monkey business with her lover Max, a chimp.
But not on camera.
Unsurprisingly, Oshima avoids the temptation to make an X-rated Gorillas In The Mist , turning in a deadpan satire about desire, jealousy and voyeurism.
Poised, suggestive, but nowhere near as funny or as savage as it should have been.
Nuns On The Run is a farcical Carry On-style Hand Made film where Robbie Coltrane and Eric Idle have a perfect licence to prance around in stuffed bras and habits.
As two likeable gangsters running away from a vicious killer and the crack-selling Triads, Coltrane and Idle hide in a convent, where, inevitably, they find themselves in 101 dodgy situations.
Loverboy tries hard to be hilarious, but raises no more than a few laughs.
Patrick Dempsey, who looks like Sean Penn without a scowl, plays Randy Bodek, a pizza delivery boy who ends up as a toy boy serving Beverly Hills women with ‘extra anchovies’.
A disappointing offering from Crossing Delancy director Joan Micklin Silver.
The Netherlands has contributed a lot on the side to Hollywood in recent years, what with the success of Paul (Robocop ) Verhoeven and, of course, Rutger Hauer.
The Vanishing puts this vibe to good use by matching the metaphysical feel of the European road movie with the narrative pace of the post-Hitchcock thriller to come up with an intriguing, slightly disjointed meditation on death, desire and motorway café culture.
Literate, cleverly comedic, best appreciated as an elaborate twisted tale.
Costa-Gavras' last movie, Music Box, finds Hollywood's last professional liberal retiring from the political frontline to the relative calm of the Holocaust.
You can get steamed up over Central America (Missing ) or racism (Betrayed ), but there's no arguing with the death camps.
Making it all the stranger that he should decide to lug his camera down the well-worn path of the court room drama.
Tightly sprung performances from Jessica Lange and Armin Mueller-Stahl fail to disguise the padding.
Hard to Kill is a stuttering con-on-the-run action thriller squeezing second division Hollywood couple Steven Seagal and Kelly LeBrock into a third-rate corruption and conspiracy plot.
Seagal used to be a martial arts expert, so at least the stunts are worth watching, even if the principals aren't (Seagal looks like Chuck Norris on Mogadon and LeBrock really shouldn't be wearing such a tight skirt).
 Steve Beard/Jim McClellan/Amy Raphael 
BACK in the Gdansk shipyards, one of the first Western thrillers ever filmed in Poland,Eminent Domain , stars Donald Sutherland (Kiefer's dad) and Anne Archer from Fatal Attraction 
SEAN OLIVER
Sean Oliver, musician, producer and Ladbroke Grove bohemian, died in the early hours of March 30, aged 28.
Born of Antiguan parents, Oliver founded his spiritual and musical home in West London's ragged musical community.
Briefly with post-punk iconoclasts The Pop Group he helped form Rip Rig And Panic, the quintessential early Eighties boho beat group.
Rip Rig created a heady hybrid out of the bare bones of jazz improvisation, dub-funk rhythms and punk attitude.
While singer Neneh Cherry moved on to crossover fame, her fellow conspirators took a back seat.
Sean, his sister Andrew (p59) and Bruce Smith briefly hosted The Hot Sty, a London club that offered up an eclectic and inspiring mix.
Then Float Up CP emerged out of the debris of Rip Rig, but the moment had passed.
Until his death Sean Oliver pursued his own music with the self belief and discipline of his jazz mentors, foregoing compromise.
He co-wrote Terence Trent D'Arby's hit ‘Wishing Well’, produced clubland duo Oldland Montana, and was working on new solo material when he died.
For years, he had been prone to recurring attacks of Sickle Cell Anaemia, a rare and debilitating blood disorder that eventually triggered a premature heart attack.
Around Ladbroke Grove, Soho, and everywhere that was touched by his singular energy, the streets seem somehow emptier of life.
A free spirit has been and gone.
 Sean O'Hagan 
Graphic Design, Illustration and Animation finalists at Middlesex Poly have spent two years raising money to put on their degree show.
So far they've got £8,000 together by putting on raves, but they still need £2,000.
Student Kevin Bayliss said raising the money was ‘extremely difficult’ and expressed concern for this years' first and second year.
Education cuts have meant a reduction in the facilities, materials and funds available, and the students also feel that being ‘out of town’ results in a lack of attention.
The degree show gives them a chance to exhibit their work publicly in central London.
Bayliss' own work includes ‘Ten Green Bottles’(above).
Taking tap water samples from each of the ten water authorities, he packaged them in the form of a consumer product as ‘a response to privatisation, and to draw attention to contamination in our water supplies.’
Amy Raphael 
The Degree Show is at Smith's Gallery, Covent Garden, from June 4 to 9 
Ten Green Bottles brave the education cuts
THE early rap revival continues at Old Skool, every other Monday next (next one June 4) at Le Scandale, 53–54 Berwick St, London W1.
With DJs Fetisch, Frazer and Rob rocking in a Sugarhill style and sporadic bursts of break dancing from an enthusiastic crowd, it's worth checking.
Dress code: Adidas tracksuits and shells (fat laces, of course) Kangols and Westwood Buffalo hats (which were quite silly enough the first time round as far as we're concerned).
THE monthly club Muthaland is run by female music journalists and DJs, including Miss Bliss of EC1 Express.
The opening night drew a mix of media and hip hop people in an unusual venue which, we're told, is not unlike ‘somebody's living room’.
Next one on May 28 at Woody's, Woodfield Road, London W9.
LIVERPOOL, meanwhile, is throbbing to the indie beat at Temptation.
Playing a mix of music from Hendrix to Inspiral Carpets and De La Soul and offering ‘surprise bands’, Temptation is on Friday nights at Macmillans, Liverpool.
The same DJs also play Wednesday at The Ritz, Manchester and Monday at High Society, chester.
OFFERING ‘mad go go dancers’, Orange at Choice, 25 Royal Exchange Square, Glasgow, is a new night promising ‘a live drag show featuring queen of queens Shahbaz’.
Guest passes come in the form of rather fetching hospital wrist bands.
LONDON listings magazine City Limits is circulating pound coins with a ‘Swamp Me For A City Limits’ stickers on them.
The black and gold stickers are legal as long as they don't cover the Queen's head.
Coins are being distributed through London entertainment centres including the Electric Ballroom and Dingwalls in Camden.
10,000 stickers have been printed, says marketing manager Matt Preston.
‘I think you'll find them around for quite some time’.
CONTRIBUTORS: Stephen Daly, Lindsay Baker, Ian McCann, Amy Raphael, Chris Taggart, John Williams.
The outlook for the bedroom musician has never been brighter: technology that was once the exclusive domain of Tangerine Dream or the Art Of Noise is now within reach of almost everyone.
But has the sampler drive creativity to near extinction?
London due Ubik think not.
Part of a growing culture of cottage industry dance labels thriving in most British cities, they recorded their 4-track EP, ‘Techno Prisoners’, straight on to DAT at home, and released it on Zoom, a label run by a Camden Town record shop.
‘The major labels and studios will become increasingly redundant as computers become more accessible,’ they say.
As house becomes a serious commercial proposition (in a recent poll of 13- to 17-year-olds, nearly 40 per cent made ‘acid house’ their musical preference), many are going underground, viewing dance music as an art form rather than a way to generate karma with bank managers.
‘Two years ago, the media conspired to kill off acid,’ say Ubik.
‘Now we're entering an era of home-grown technological exploration that will defy categorisation.
The prospects are infinite.’
Maddie Kitchen )
London house duo Ubik: one of a new breed of bedroom boffins
BOOKS
SARA PARETSKY Burn Marks (Chatto £12.99)
Her sixth novel featuring female Private Eye V.I.
Warshawski is her best yet.
The Chicago settings are authentically bleak and the plotting subtle and incisive.
Brave and entertaining.
JEREMY CLARKE God is Love (Get It In Writing)(Fourth Estate –12.95)
New book from ex-Barracuda author of Necrotrivia Vs Skull .
This time he's kept the somewhat wiggy feel and the one-liners but streamlined the satire and woken up to the necessities of plotting and dialogue.
File under: much-improved-but-still-trashy.
TERRY WILLIAMS The Cocaine Kids (Bloomsbury £12.99)
Solid, unsensational book written by a black New York sociologist who spent several years with Hispanic and black teenage cocaine dealers.
Unhysterically told, the message is that the cocaine trade is the one branch of American commerce that these thoroughly American kids are allowed into.
PHILIP KERR March Violets (Penguin £3.99)
Private eye novel set in late Thirties Berlin.
The reference points are perhaps more cinema than fiction: reads like a fusion of Chinatown and Visconti's The Damned .
Surprisingly worthwhile.
Two years ago Mark Dumais' band Crash split, after moving to London from New York because they liked groups like the Mary Chain.
The London live scene was dead so like everyone else he drifted into the raves for excitement, and like everyone else it changed him.
The result was last spring's ‘Sunburst’, a single that put his ‘group’ Tangerine ahead of the indie pack, though no one noticed; it was not hardcore dance and the flip was superior, a bizarre Tommy James freak-out cover ‘I Am A Tangerine’.
Tangerine were one person, but that didn't last.
‘I got read tired of being indulgent,’ says Mark, so he sought ‘a sweet voice to sing the hard songs, and vice-versa to mess it up a bit.
It didn't work out that way.’
What worked out was Jim Brooks, a rave type, and Julie Davide, who auditioned with a song she learnt with a gospel choir.
Mark admits he could not imagine the result, but the album, ‘tangerine’(Creation), is an alluring mixture.
It hasn't got the Stone Roses' laddish edge or the Beloved's slickness, but that's the appeal.
A more gelled next album is likely and rock-dance doyen Andy Weatherall is expected to refashion ‘I'm Tellin' Lies’ for single release.
Laughs Mark; ‘It's still fresh, we're still working out what we're doing.’
Ian McCann 
Tangerine's dance dreams started in last summer's raves
TELEVISION
The BBC to show adverts?
Only for one week in May, when the Corporation screens ‘commercials for the plant’, a series of brief ‘infobites’ made by top ad agencies to draw attention to environmental issues.
May 20–26 has been designated ‘One World’ week by 18 national TV stations: it kicks off with a German production,The World In Our Hands , which highlights global issues from pollution to Third World debt, and ends with One World, One Voice , a two-hour musical chain letter masterminded by Kevin Godley and featuring 150 international musicians.
Audiences of up to 500 million are anticipated for programmes that are designed to ‘inspire and inform’, hopefully including a live satellite debate between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev and the UN's Perez De Cuellar.
‘It's about the future of all mankind,’ says Godley of the project.
A genuine initiative, or just another excuse for backslapping and all-star music line-ups?
In the end, that depends on how you react after watching it.
SG 
CULT DIRECTOR John Waters moved still further into the mainstream with the US success of Cry-Baby , due here in Sept.
There are also plans to turn his last film Hairspray into a Broadway musical, but we Brits can now enjoy it at home:Hairspray, Polyester , and Female Trouble are all out on video at £9.99 each.
We have five sets of three to give away, so answer the following question on a postcard to Kitsch Camp, The Face, The Old Laundry, Ossington Buildings, Moxon St, London W1.
Who starred in all three movies?
a.
Danny La Rue
b.
Kylie Minogue
c.
Divine
First five out of the hat on June 15 get the prize.
MANCHESTER fanzine Bop City comes with a free tape, plus a tiny piece of the Berlin Wall.
The editorial draws a comparison between East and West Germany and the North/South divide in England.
‘The West is like London only worse.
Perhaps an impenetrable divide between such areas isn't a bad idea after all.’
With features on Northside, Levi Tafari and designers Johnson/Panas, it's a good read, particularly for Southerner-bashers.
£3 from 23 New Mount St, Manchester M4 4DE.
AT THE somewhat arbitrary price of 51p,Manchester La La La features the Snapdragons, The Charlatans, The Exuberants, Mr Robinson and, inexplicably, an article on wrestling.
Definitely one for the earnest indie-heads, who can obtain copies from 53 Buckingham Rd, Chorlton-Cum-Hardy, Manchester M21 15B.
VIDEO
PET SEMATARY (CBS/Fox)
Stephen King wrote the book and the screenplay, but heavy-handed direction kills what little life there is in this tale of a cursed Indian burial ground and demonic possessed pussies.
I'M GONNA GET YOU SUCKA (Warners)
Slow start but in the end realises ambition to be to blaxpoitation movies what Airplane was to disaster movies.
DANCIN' THROUGH THE DARK (Palace)
Willy Russell's Liverpool-based woman-at-play film has more than a passing resemblance to Letter to Brezhnev but is none the worse for that.
Entertaining and at times moving.
DEAD CALM (Warners)
Tense thriller concocted out of the most unpromising elements: three characters, two boats, and a lot of water.
Psycho at sea.
LICENCE TO KILL (Warners)
Licence Revoked was originally going to be the title for this last Bond film, and if only they had.
Wooden acting, appalling script and routine stunts.
MYSTIC PIZZA (Virgin)
In which three sisters working in a traditional pizza parlour in the Connecticut fishing village of Mystic discover some home truths about men, life and pizza sauces.
At times slight, but warm, gentle and atmospheric.
Created from scrap metal, Technotribe's Garden Of Eden rainforest sculpture currently adorns the Garage indoor market in Chelsea's Kings Road.
Originally designed for an exhibition at the Submarine Gallery, it was created when the plight of the waning rainforest began to hit the news.
A twist of irony informs the design, says sculptor Jason Greenwood.
‘The materials used are from building sites and they're all associated with destruction.’
After three years working as a photographer's assistant, Jason decided to get out of the ‘rat race’ and joined ecologically-minded art group Reactivart.
Having designed the striking semi-concrete bar at Soho's Brain club, Jason now concentrates on furniture, using waste materials to create everything from chandeliers and tables to mirrors.
He can be contacted on O71 372 0201.
LB 
Technotribe's ecologically sound scrap metal forest
Compiled by Lindsay Baker, assisted by Karl and Derick of UTO 
The hype begins Dick Tracy , this year's answer to Batman , will inevitably spawn similar quantities of merchandise of varying degrees of tastefulness.
These watches are from a range of six that includes a replica of the timeplace Dick uses to communicate with base, complete with speaking microchip.
The watches, desk and wall clocks will be in H. Samuels, Ratners and all leading high street jewellers in July.
priced from £17.95 to £25.
Much beloved of New York homeboys, the Cuccini hat looks set to replace the old school Kangol.
It'll set you back £19.90 from Passenger in Beak St, London W1, and also comes in baseball, beret and bush hat variations.
Paul Dart, set designer for the Royal Opera House, created this shop display at Obsessions using revolving mobiles and disco lights.
Selling home fittings, menswear and accessories, Obsessions is at Coleherne Rd, London SW10.
You may have thought the film Animal House was a joke, but in the US college fraternities are a serious business.
Named after Greek letters, fraternities and the female sororities are an essential part of campus life.
London company Alpha Beta hope that academic chic will be ‘the next step up from sportswear’, and cater to the frat pack with of embroidered jackets, T-shirts, bush hats and pendants.
Secret handshakes an optional extra.
Sunglasses from The Vision Gallery Chiltern St, London W1; shorts from Passenger, as before, £19.95; Alpha Beta long and short-sleeves T-shirts (£45 and £30), hats (£20) and pendants (£10) from Jones in London, Geese in Manchester, Hip in Leeds, Arena in Wanstead, Midnites in Ilford or call 081-952 5035
These perspex pendants from prop maker Katherine Coombes cost £8 for hearts, crosses and numbers and £12 for flowers, spaceships, crowns and fake crystals.
From Bond, 10 Newburgh St, London W1: Sign O' the Times at Kensington Market and Hyper Hyper, Kensington High St, W8
T-shirts of the cult US cartoon show The Simpsons (see p16) are becoming standard club wear in America.
Quick off the mark, Passenger of Beak St and Floral St, London, are stocking them at £15.
MONITOR
THREE-MINUTE WONDERS
See the trailer, skip the film, says Jim McClellan
Recently you may have had the misfortune to sit through John Hughes' latest slice of suburban comedy,Uncle Buck .
More than likely, you came out of the cinema wondering why you went in the first place.
None of the reviews were great, and John Candy isn't one of those must-see stars so why did you bother?
Blame the trailer.
Where the actual film is unfocused, slack and sentimental, the trailer for Uncle Buck is a minor masterpiece.
Crash-cutting the best of the sight gags to a bass-heavy mix of Tone Loc's ‘Wild Thing’, editing the pedestrian plot down to is essential equation (relaxed grown-up sorts out uptight kid note the difference to the standard Hughes formula: relaxed kids sort out uptight grown-up), it's three minutes of pure cinematic bliss.
It's also something of a con.
It convinces you that you have to see this film.
But the truth is that Uncle Buck , the film, has been rendered totally superfluous once you've seen the trailer you have seen the film.
Uncle Buck isn't an isolated case.
Increasingly trailers are more interesting, stimulating and amusing than the films they're supposed to trail.
For some time ‘provocatively perverse’ critics have been saying something similar about TV (ie, that ads are better than programmes).
But the rise of the trailer as self-sufficient form is new.
Over the last ten years the act of consuming a film has changed radically.
A ‘film’ is no longer just 90 minutes of celluloid:Batman proved that once and for all.
Today a film is a spiralling serial event.
It's the sneak preview magazine article, the trailer, the review, the comic/book/T-shirt/toy of the film, the TV special about the making of the film, the spin-off series, the re-edited video release and finally the sequel, which starts it all off again.
Technology is partly to blame: celluloid prints have been superseded by the smooth replications of digital imaging, and for modern Hollywood, as for the music biz, there is no such thing as the original cut just a series of alternative ‘takes’ or mixes.
Which one you finally consume is up to you.
But the idea that you have to see the original film is misplaced and outmoded.
It takes time and effort which might usefully be spent doing something else.
Why not leave slogging through all that real-time stuff to the critics, and just make do with the flashy emptiness of the trailer?
Afterwards, if you're still worried about what it all means, read the reviews.
Trailers are perfect for films that you can only really put up with if you don't know what they ‘mean’.
Take the ultraviolent muscleboy movies of the Eighties.
Watch those in their full two-hour glory and you get a bucketful of pernicious politics and bad acting.
In the form of a trailer, Sly Dolph and Arnie's inflated physical jerks are depoliticised into fairly watchable read life.
Tex Avery cartoons of comic book bodies and slapstick violence.
Obviously not all films look better as trailers.
No one would want to swap the full-length Blue Velvet ,Raging Bull or Dead Ringers for the three-minute version.
But these films are becoming the exception.
Most MTV Hollywood films are just trailers with delusions of grandeur, taking their cues from pop videos and ads in an attempt to accommodate a generation raised on channel hopping and the fast-forward button.
Over two hours, this can be wearing for two minutes it's fine.
Uncle Buck is the obvious example, but the same can be said about brat pack action movies like Young Guns , family comedies like Parenthood , even blockbuster action like The Abyss double recommended as a trailer because you don't have to put up with those awful cute aliens that turn up at the end of the film.
In fact with product placement turning the feature film into a series of disguised commercials, it's actually quite appropriate that most modern Hollywood product is best consumed as an advert.
You could even argue that the trailer is the last remnant of a ‘pure’ cinema.
When a film has only three minutes to sell itself, at least you can be sure it's not going to waste time trying to sell you anything else.
Perhaps in the future, highbrow critics will wake up to this.
Maybe we'll see festival programmes finding space for trailers, critics picking over the relative merits of Ridley Scott's trailers, ads and films.
And it is possible to make distinctions not all trailers are the same.
Aside from mainstream Hollywood's imitation pop videos, there are trash trailers (all corny strap lines and gruff hormonal voice-overs), and old-style hard sell, like the preview for Dick Tracy , with its irritatingly memorable chorus of ‘Tracy, Tracy, Tracy’.
These are auteurist trailers like the preview for Mystery Train which accurately reflects Jarmusch's cinema of slow dissolves and drifting pans, and is only a minute long perfect, the minimal trailer.
There are clever conceptual numbers like Scenes From the Class Struggle In Beverley Hills , which has director Paul Bartel visiting the censor to find out which risqué jokes he can keep in.
There are even trailers which are so hip to their self-sufficient status they include sequences which aren't actually in the long version.
The preview for Dirty Rotten Scoundrels shows con man Steven Martin suavely pushing a hapless granny into the sea, but the final film doesn't: perhaps it was too funny to be included.
Then finally there's the hyper-trailer, the best example of which is a trade promo put together to push the launch of new video distribution company 20/20.
Scrambling the whole of its release schedule of 15 or so films into a sublimely muddled montage of fast edits and visual ‘high's, it's incomprehensible but hypnotic.
It lasts for around five minutes and you can't work out exactly what it's selling, but it leaves you wishing it carried on for hours.
BAROMETER
UP
Lucozade Sweets
Clubland's favourite tipple, now out in tablets you can take in clubs
Bruce Willis’ bank balance
Die Hard II is $20m over budget; Brucie's wages alone account for $8m
Paul Gascoigne
Everyone except Robson knew all along he was world class
London phone numbers
Now up to ten figures; 071 homes get instant added snob appeal
Nigel Benn
Laughed at when his US promoter described him as ‘the new Marvin Hagler’; now having the last laugh back home in Ilford
Northside
Proving there's substance behind the Manchester hype with their debut single
DOWN
Timberland boots
Too sweaty for summer feet
Imelda Marcos
Swapping her stilettoes for court shoes
The Lambada
Three films in production, more records on the way but still looking like Come Dancing showing its knickers
Gorbachev
Booed by his own people at May Day parade
Jesse Jackson's credibility
At an all-time low after the Mandela concert, when he cheered for the benefit of the TV cameras only
Guru Josh
Coming out as a poll tax superstar.
He claims to be mad, but that's plain sick 
John Candy is Uncle Buck 
JUST WALLABEE FREE
Simon Dudfield rails against musical elitism
The house scene is dead, we're told by the older club cognoscenti; in fact ‘before you could say Happy Flowered Roses, it was all over’(NME).
The point being made, I think is that the indie bands and football thugs have killed it.
Happy Mondays, The Stone Roses, Flowered Up, Primal Scream and The Paris Angels have no real feel for club music; they've brought in the ‘wrong’ element, and so the purists and the elitists are changing direction and looking for an alternative.
To me, ti just looks like the fools are running scared.
Let's not forget, these are the same people who bemoan the fact that the house scene has been lost on the high street, that a ‘nation of lilac clad youths’, have taken its energy (i-D).
These are the people who don't consider what's going on in your mind, merely what goes on your feet (the London club Kazoo turns people away if they happen to be wearing Wallabees).
But at the beginning, at clubs like Shoom and Future, the music went beyond classification: it was simply good music.
It may have been ‘Jesus On The Payroll’ by Thrashing Doves or ‘Acid Tax’by Phuture, it didn't matter.
Yet now we're told indie bands shouldn't be allowed to make dance records (because they don't understand it), that at the start these bands wee quite rightly isolated by house (’ Here was the nation's party in full swing and they couldn't get in’).
Sad claims, but nothing compared to an NME reviewer's view that the band Flowered Up shouldn't be allowed to play in clubs, because black music has always been the mainstay there, and Flowered Up have their roots in rock.
He probably could have argued that I don't belong in these clubs either, because I haven't got a soul/funk background.
Yes, I agree, ‘if you mentioned clubs to most indie bands 18 months ago they would have spat in your face’, but only because the elitists controlled it.
When it became open house, more people were touched and inspired.
A whole new generation of music sprouted up, the best I can remember.
Happy Mondays, The Stone Roses and The Beloved opened up a truly wonderful world, available to everyone.
But I'm worried now because elitism is rearing its ugly head again.
A year ago, when your trousers didn't condemn you as a person, Bobby Gillespie started going to house clubs; he wore ripped jeans and a sad top, but was truly touched by what was happening around him.
So when his band Primal Scream released ‘Loaded’, one of the best winter dance records, everything seemed sweet.
But if Bobby wanted to get in on it now, he'd have been turned away at the door: the elitists would have laughed at him for being in an indie band and ‘Loaded’ might never have been produced.
It saddens me to think that as the elitists worry about the ‘wrong’ people getting into their clubs, and so tighten up their door policies, the indie kids, the hooligans, the ‘lilac clad youths’are all denied the chance to hear the music that could damage their lives.
These people could, after all, be the creators of the best house record of the summer.
Bobby Gillespie was right when he told me, ‘I used to go stand where all the young kids stood in the corner.
The energy was incredible…all those teenagers letting go.
I don't agree with this new elitism it's what in your mind that counts, you shouldn't deny anyone anything.’
Yes he's right: the house scene of the future will come from the hooligans, the indie kids, the lilac clad youths.
They won't be the ones to kill it; the elitists should see to that.
THE DEATH OF SCIENCE
Mark Sinker doesn't trust the men in white coats
Minamata, Seveso, Love Canal, Bhopal, Chernobyl.
If this were a list of localities where an industrial plant unleashed disaster on the folks next door, that would be bad enough.
But it is worse it's also a history of mechanical idealism excusing criminal stupidity.
In each case there must have been a scientist employed.
No top-ranking genius, but no idiot either.
Probably his children loved him and perhaps his neighbours liked him too.
Even afterwards, when the worst was known, he certainly still thought he was a better man than Mengele; perhaps even the nuclear physicist Edward Teller (Father of the Hydrogen Bomb, Wicked Uncle to Star Wars).
Unlike Mengele, a freelance monster exploiting opportunities only the Nazis could give him, and unlike Teller, so openly fronting for the Pentagon, our anonymous scientist would acknowledge his dreadful error, his responsibility.
But at least , he would console himself,I wasn't driven to it by ideology, by politics, religion or prejudice .
Science clambered out of the 19th century more respected than anything else around.
Unlike religion, science promised the final authority, the shape of things to come.
It's built round itself an aura of godlike objectivity.
Above all, it brooked no argument.
Yet today, when a flustered and obviously intelligent man in spectacles starts to argue that the link, say, between radioactive emissions and leukaemia clusters is not yet proven , we can see the untruth in him, the wads of tainted cash tumbling from his lab-coat pockets.
Somehow, in a little over 100 years, science has let its hard-won reputation be whored down to a point where its priests might as well be selling chocolate or cars.
It won't be won back.
This is the new age: democratic, bored, thrill-hungry.
A few throwbacks Christian, Muslim, rationalist, racist, even Green still call for a ‘return’ to their own values, but without an army they won't get it.
Science is no more dead than any of its rivals, but flip through Omni , the most successful science glossy, and it's clear that the appeal has changed.
It can't sell itself through purity of motive nothing can.
It's much too late to make a pitch on consistency no one person knows or understands more than a fraction of one discipline among many anymore.
It promises, not a bedrock to philosophy and lifestyle, but a feast of weird explanations, a mental trip.
Boffins aren't demigods anymore, they're acid rock.
Fractals, quarks and chaos theory share space with morphic resonance, channelling and UFO-lore.
The only maxim that connects it all formulated in California, now available near you is if it feels good, believe it .
Science is the pop of the Nineties; beyond truth or fable, good or evil, it exists solely to stimulate.
And that may not be as bad as it first sounds.
When Professor Hans Eysenck jumps up with his revised IQ results, 20 years on, still ‘proving’ that blacks are ‘genetically inferior’, he calls himself courageous, a knight hunting for rational truths when all around him cling to myths (the ‘myth of equality’, in his words).
Twenty years ago, there was uproar.
Eysenck was shouted out of universities, spat at, despised.
Now, nothing.
But it isn't because of some secret triumph of racism it's because the claim he's making has been emptied of meaning.
‘Science shows us this’ he yells.
‘So much for science, in that case,’ we reply.
‘It's obviously as stupid as everything else.’
In the end, in the age of market research, we only trust ourselves, our own pleasure responses.
If anyone claims to offer something else, we switch channels, the ultimate vote against.
Eysenck is the Uri Geller of psychology the only people who believe in his ‘science’ are the people who always already believed what it ‘proves’.
But before you get too comfortable, remember there are other Geller-Tellers, making secret decisions about our future, trapped by the science inside their own silly heads.
No one should be asking them ‘True or false?’: they fool themselves this way, so they can easily fool us.
The real question has always been ‘Crap or brilliant?’ that's the only genuine public morality.
If you doubt this, just whisper to yourself this fast-acting mantra: Minamata, Severso, Love Canal, Bhopal, Chernobyl…
WORLD CUP FOR BEGINNERS A conversational primer
Before any game involving home teams
‘They've got to get the ball into the box /to the byline /to the wide men’
After the above
‘He shouldn't have played with five men at the back /four in the middle /two up front /three in a boat’
Before England's first game
‘If Barnes, Waddle, Lineker play to form, and please God he gives Gascoigne a free role, we're a match for anyone’
Before England's second game
‘He's got to put Des Walker on Van Basten’
Before England's third game, calculator in hand
‘If we can put seven past Egypt, and if the Irish hold the Dutch to a draw, we can go through as third best first-round losers’
Of the goal that puts Scotland out of the tournament
‘He was fookin' miles offside’
Personal abuse
‘Peter Beardsley /Jim Leighton?
A face only a mother could love.’
‘He wouldn't last five minutes in the English league.’
‘If you think Waddle's haircut is stupid, wait until you see Valderrama.’
At half-time
‘What the fuck does Jimmy Hill know about football?’
‘Uh-oh, Cloughie thinks we're home and dry.’
‘If Ron Atkinson talks about ‘sticks’ again I'm gonna walk all the way to Cagliari and poke that TV set up his arse.’
General
‘Jammy fucking Germans.’
Of South American goals
‘He must have been all of 40, 50…at least 60 yards out.’
Of the Roman nightclub fracas that scandalises the American squad
‘There was a misunderstanding between the full backs.’
In defeat
‘It took a deflection.’
‘Shilton was unsighted.’
‘We played like schoolgirls.’
In dreams
‘There are people on the pitch who think it's over it is now!’
Technical
‘Even my grannie could have scored from there!’
‘Fuckwit!’
‘Tosser!’
‘Donkey!’
‘Butcher you twat.’
Flowered Up, a band with rock roots and Wallabee-shod fans
DARING TO BE DIFFERENT
Debbie Barratt on David Lynch's new TV drama
Hailed as the weird and wonderful show that dared to be different, the media couldn't lavish enough praise on David Lynch's Twin Peaks when it debuted on American television in April.
‘Like nothing you've seen in prime time or on God's earth,’Time magazine raved.
‘It's miraculously good,’ concurred the New Yorker , which hasn't reviewed a television show since 1982.
But while the critics gave the ABC network points for taking such an expensive programming risk, most predicted the show was too slow moving, too strange in short, too good to woo America's couch potatoes.
As in the box office triumph Blue Velvet , director David Lynch creates a small town with hidden secrets, a strangeness lurking just below the surface normality.
Everyone in Twin Peaks , from the policeman who cries at the scene of a crime to the lady who appears in certain scenes inexplicably carrying a log, is well, a little weird .
‘It's television at its best climax building, and climaxing again, ever drawing the viewer into its intrigue.
The problem with Twin Peaks is not the show.
The problem here is the viewer, and it's unavoidable.
For as classy, clever and well-spun as Twin Peaks is, it makes the mistake of presuming the viewer will watch and listen and perceive.
Not so.
Concentration is such a rare event in television viewing that any hope of following the intricacy of Twin Peaks is a dream…sad but true,’ wrote the Hollywood Reporter .
The sceptics couldn't be more off the mark.
Almost 35 million Americans tuned in to the first, two-hour pilot, making it the most watched TV movie of the season.
And although ratings have dropped since the show began airing regularly,Twin Peaks remains something of a national passion.
A computermail database network has even been set up around the country for fans to debate the killer of Laura Palmer, the lovely blonde homecoming queen whose body mysteriously washes onto a river bank near a lumbermill in the fictional Pacific northwest town of Twin Peaks.
Laura's murder brings to town eccentric FBI agent Dale Cooper, played by Kyle MacLachlan, the hero of Blue Velvet , who leads the search for the killer.
Agent Cooper, who is forever dictating into a pocket tape recorder to an unseen associate named Diane, lends the show much of its deadpan humour as when he rhapsodizes about the aroma of the Douglas Fir or the savoury charms of a piece of pie with the glass-eyed earnestness of a Boy Scout on ecstasy.
With the help of the town's sheriff, the oddly-named Harry Truman, Agent Cooper makes the acquaintance of those who have known and may have killed Laura, an intriguing cast of more than 30 suspects who include her cocaine-dealing, football star boyfriend; her shy biker lover; her crazy psychiatrist; her teenage vamp classmate; her beautiful best friend; and the gorgeous Oriental window who took English lessons from the dead girl.
As the clues trickle out and the town's secrets are slowly unmasked, Lynch luxuriates over the images onscreen, focusing on tiny details a motorcycle reflected in the pupil of Laura's eye in an old home video; a cryptic letter ‘R’ dug out from underneath her fingernail in a morgue whose fluorescent lights flicker nervously that makes the show such a visual delight.
Lynch in fact, directed only the pilot and one of the subsequent eight one-hour episodes, turning the scripts he co-wrote with former Hill Street Blues man Mark Frost over to guest directors including Tim Hunter (River's Edge ) and Caleb Deschanel (Crusoe ).
Whether further episodes will appear depends on the ratings.
If they continue to drop, it is likely that US viewers will discover the identify of Laura's killer at the end of May; if the contract is renewed, who knows when they will find out.
British viewers already have one answer available to them: the first episode has been released here on video by Warners, with a strange, abrupt ending tacked on to offer one solution to the mystery.
To see the full series, we will have to wait on the BBC, who have bought Twin Peaks with the rights to show it anytime after November.
Perhaps the most lasting effect of Lynch's excursion into TV drama will be on the notoriously conservative US networks.
After the success of Twin Peaks , ABC executives are reportedly considering more high risk shows including CopRock , the first police show to be done as a musical in the pilot, a jury signs the verdict in a song composed by Randy Newman.
Teenager Laura Palma, whose mysterious death triggers Twin Peaks 
MADONNA
DICK TRACY
Text JOAN GOODMAN
Mini Marilyn, Baby Dietrich: all through her career, Madonna has flirted with images of movie greats.
Does she have the muscle to become a leading lady in her own right?
Her role in summer blockbuster Dick Tracy may settle doubts.
The hype on Dick Tracy is starting to roll out of Hollywood like liquid gold.
The Warren Beatty film which has been a year in the making and give years in the planning is this summer's hot ticket.
Not because of Beatty as the studio publicity suggests, or the fact that cast and crew have 68 Oscar nominations between them, nor even because Al Pacino and Dustin Hoffman have uncredited, subordinate roles in the movie.
All the heat is on Madonna who stars as Breathless Mahoney, the quintessential good/bad girl in yet another bid for Hollywood stardom.
According to Madonna, ‘I always wanted to be a movie star.
Even when I was a child, I behaved as if I were one.’
Dick Tracy is Madonna's first screen outing in three years.
Apart from a cameo role in the ill-fated and so far unreleased Bloodhounds of Broadway , she has not taken a film role since the poorly conceived Shanghai Express and Who's That Girl .
Burned by those experiences, she's been noticeably movie camera shy.
She was waiting, she says, until she was sure she had the right project with the right people.
She turned down The Fabulous Baker Boys , a film which made Michelle Pfeiffer an international superstar and an Oscar nominee, because ‘I felt it wasn't right for me’.
But any doubts about Dick Tracy being the right film at the right time or reservations over whether Breathless Mahoney is the right part for the 31-year-old star are dispelled in the first ten minutes of the movie.
The scene is the Ritz Club, the prototype of a sophisticated Thirties nightclub in dazzling primary colours set off by a sleek black bar.
The camera hones in on a platinum blonde Madonna, poured into a slinky, strapless white dress that she swears ‘took more fittings than I had shooting days in the movie’.
She's singing ‘More’, a torch song written for her by Stephen Sondheim, a haunting, soul-wrenching tale of unrequited love.
Her inner emotions are clearly at odds with her brassy, audacious exterior.
Her white blonde hair and bright red lips, the blatant hard-bitten sex appeal and the coiled danger camouflage a vulnerable woman underneath.
Sitting at a table sipping champagne is club owner Lips Manlis (Paul Sorvino), a hood with muscle one of those leftovers from Prohibition days who, despite his fancy clothes and expensive cigars, remains a lug.
Breathless is his chattel and he orders her to his table.
She comes with the reluctant insouciance that says, ‘You may have paid for me but you don't own me.’
The role of Breathless was written for Madonna.
She was not a character in the original Dick Tracy comic strip created by Chester Gould in 1931.
Syndicated in newspapers across the States, the square-jawed, morally upright, crime-fighting detective became a national American institution.
He regularly outwitted a host of cartoon criminals with colourful names and faces to match: Pruneface, Shoulders, The Rodent, Itchy, Mumbles and Flat Top all of whom put in an appearance in the film, their prosthetics and make-up masking well-known faces.
Like Tracy's long-suffering sweetheart of record, Tess Trueheart (Glenne Headly), Madonna wears no prosthetics.
(’ We're all wearing makeup except the women and Warren and we're all ugly as hell,’says Paul Sorvino.
‘We've got huge lips, big noses or twisted mouths and Warren looks wonderful.
It's a Warren Beatty dream.’)
Says a studio executive, ‘Breathless was added for the dramatic story line she gives the film but she is faithful in style and tone to the original.’
However, the character of Breathless only assumed its current prominence after a shrewd Warren Beatty snagged Madonna for the role.
‘Even then,’ says one of the filmmakers, ‘Breathless was dramatically different than she is in the final script.
Madonna and Warren worked on her lines all the way through.
At first her dialogue was more brittle, her personality harder, there was less humour.
Madonna added the irony.
She comes across now like a modern day Mae West, with tongue-in-cheek and wise-ass lines.
But she's also a little sad.
You feel sorry for her, for what might have been.’
Madonna herself describes Breathless as ‘scarred, vulnerable, in a lot of pain but tough.’
The final script reflects this.
When Breathless first comes on to Tracy, her dialogue is hip and sassy ‘What does a girl have to do to get to know you better?
Get arrested?’ while songs like ‘I Always Get My Man’and ‘What Can You Lose’carry the undertones of her yearning.
She captures our hearts.
Gossip has it that Madonna has also captured Beatty's heart.
She's added credence to the rumours by telling a Vanity Fair writer: ‘I have moments when I'm really romantic, and think we're just perfect together.’
Beatty is characteristically silent on the subject.
This lends itself to excessive speculation in Hollywood.
Cynics are betting that the romance is a huge publicity stunt to help sell the firm: ‘The relationship will last as long as they can use each other,’ says one.
Yet a cast member raises his eyebrows in disbelief when the quote is repeated.
‘I don't know how serious they are, but Warren and Madonna certainty had the hots for one another.
It was obvious on the set.’
A more dispassionate observer insists that ‘The work came first.
Before there was any personal involvement, they settled the business.
They each knew what they were bringing to the project.
For Warren, Madonna was insurance that Dick Tracy would be a hit and he needed a hit after Ishtar .
Dustin Hoffman had come back with Rainman , but Warren hadn't done anything.
With Madonna he bought himself a whole new audience, kids under 21 who had never even heard of him.
I don't think he did this cynically.
I think he has a genuine appreciation of Madonna's talent.’
Beatty confirms this.
‘Madonna has beauty, energy, intelligence.
I think she's artistically courageous.
I can't think of anyone who does as many things as Madonna can do as well.’
It was this basic respect from Beatty that gave the singer confidence to turn over control to him.
‘I'm a control freak,’ she readily admits, ‘but Warren has so much experience, such an overview.
He made me feel protected.’
If she gave him box office, Beatty gave her security.
Says our observer, ‘Madonna has made herself what she is by ambition, not by training.
She didn't take five years out and say to herself, ‘I'm really going to learn music.’
She did it on nerve and instinct and guts by creating and recreating herself.
There's a kind of protective arrogance that comes out of that.
It doesn't work on a movie set.
As an actor you have to drop your guard.
You have to trust someone.
You need someone there who you can go back to sand say, ‘Is it OK?’
Warren gave her that.’
He also surrounded here with the best talent in the business.
He got Stephen Sondheim to write three songs for her, a collaboration that began very tentatively.
‘I wasn't sure it would work,’ Madonna confesses.
‘Stephen's music is very complex.
I wasn't sure I could do it justice and he wasn't sure either.
The first day in the studio I was so intimidated.’
Sondheim had misgivings as well.
He took on the work, he says, ‘because Warren asked me to.
I had done the score for Warren for Reds and I'd never quite finished it, so I always felt I owed him one.’
But in the end, Madonna proved a diligent pupil.
The three Sondheim songs are the highlights of the film.
One, a plaintive song of lost love, is a duet with Mandy Patinkin (a Tony Award winner as Che in the Broadway production of Evita and Sondheim's artist of choice for his Pulitzer Prize winning musical Sunday In The Park With George ), who plays her accompanist 88 Keys in the movie.
There's also a kind of bluesy number, ‘I Always Get My Man’, which, says Madonna, ‘was incredible to sing.
It was a great learning experience for me.
I remember when I first heard the music I panicked.
I thought I can't sing these.
They're too difficult.
But Stephen was very helpful and gave me a lot of encouragement.’
Beatty, arguably one of the most powerful people in Hollywood and clearly one of the best producers, could call on the best technical people available for his film.
Vittorio Storao (Apocalypse Now ,The Last Emperor ) is the cinematographer, Milana Canonero (Chariots Of Fire ) the costume designer and Jeff Hornaday (Flashdance ) the choreographer.
The cast, too, reads like a laundry list of Hollywood's finest.
In a business known for its egos, Beatty has somehow persuaded major starts to show up almost incognito.
Al Pacino as Big Boy Caprice, Tracy's arch enemy, has been transformed into a hunchback dwarf.
Dustin Hoffman is nearly unrecognisable as Mumbles, a whining stool pigeon with a twisted mouth that completely changes his face.
Then there's Jams Caan, Charles Durning, Dick Van Dyke, Ed O'Ross and Michael J. Pollard.
‘The prosthetics were a bitch,’ says Ed O'Ross, who plays Itchy, a henchman with a taste for violence.
His most recent credits include Another 48 Hours with Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte.
‘I had a false nose and chin that were amazing they looked so real.
John Caglione and Doug Drexler did the special effects make-up and are the best in the business.
It took three hours to get in character every morning and another three to get out at night.’
For his part, FX man John Caglione says it was a nightmare to keep the actors from ruining the delicate facial appliances.
‘At one point things got out of hand and we had to organise a group of MPs a Make-up Patrol crew to follow the actors around to see that they didn't eat anything or do anything that would affect the prosthetic face gear.’
‘Nothing takes make-up off faster than chicken grease so we had to keep them away from that,’ continues Drexler.
‘Heat was also a problem it melted the false faces like candle wax.’
Costumes for Madonna were equally tricky.
Besides the fittings which required more patience than she possessed (’ My worst fault is impatience.
Nothing goes as fast as I want it’), there were problems with design.
At one point tempers flared over the black beaded gown Madonna wears in a nightclub scene.
‘Too much is made of something like that,’ says a cast member who witnessed the row.
‘Sure Madonna complained when a costume wasn't right.
But remember, she's a trendsetter.
What she wears is important.
It's important how she looks and what feels comfortable for her to work in.
You can't do your best when you can't move or can't breathe.
Madonna has a lot riding on this film.
She's coming off a couple of losers, and Hollywood is watching her.’
The big screen has never been noticeably kind to rock stars.
It has always been hard for them to translate their music success into a sustained movie career.
Apart form Elvis, who had an idiosyncratic relationship with the film world, most rock stars have fizzled after one or two tries.
Jagger's only real success was Performance , Bowie gave a critically applauded performance in The Man Who Fell To Earth , Sting made Quadrophenia for Franc Roddam and then drifted into minor, unsuccessful films.
The only unqualified crossover success in recent years has been Cher, and it took a minor miracle for her to get there.
She remembers that she had been knocking on doors for years to be given a chance to act and had been practically laughed out of town.
Madonna's career is not dissimilar to Cher's.
Both started young and had to work through a range of personal problems and private defeats.
They are each outspoken and unconventional a trait that will get you in trouble every time.
Madonna, like Cher, is not everybody's cup of tea.
They complain she is vulgar, her costumes are tasteless, her videos offensive or worse.
She has been denounced as a bad influence on young girls (who adore her), and Pepsi cancelled her commercials.
She had been rejected by co-op boards and insulted by fashion arbiters.
Madonna sits confidently in the eye of the swirling controversy and says, ‘They don't get the joke.’
But maybe we do.
Maybe Madonna is, like Cher, what director Franc Roddam calls ‘a genuine blue collar actress.
One who doesn't look down her nose at anybody.
That's what people like and what they pay to see.’
Hollywood agrees: these days Cher has her pick of scripts.
And, while the jury is still out on Madonna, Hollywood hopes she'll succeed.
They're hoping that her first and only really successful film,Desperately Seeking Susan , was not a fluke.
Theatre critics in new York didn't think so.
They praised her work two years ago in the Broadway production of David Mamet's satire on Hollywood,Speed The Plow .
Madonna herself doesn't think so.
She's formed her own production company, Siren Films, and after her ‘Blonde Ambition’ tour she plans to make Blessing In Disguise with Beatty again at the helm.
There are also rumours that she may take a role in a film directed by David Lynch's daughter Jennifer, which promises to make Blue Velvet look positively staid.
‘Madonna can be as big an actress as she wants to be,’ says Ed O'Ross.
‘She has the desire and she has the talent.
It's a raw talent but she knows how to use it and she's unafraid.
I think we're only beginning to know her.
We've seen some facets of her, but the real woman is still to come.
We've had the rebellion and the lingerie but that was only priming the pump, giving the public what it wants.
If Madonna emerged as a classy lady it wouldn't surprise me.’
My clothes have always been in the same spirit as Madonna.
The inspiration is from me and her, but first of all it's from her.’
It was only a matter of time before the ultimate blonde bombshells of designer fashion and pop joined forces.
The result, Jean Paul Gaultier's designs for Madonna's Blonde Ambition tour, is suitably strong and sexy.
‘Since the beginning with ‘Holiday’, she was wearing tight clothes with a lot of jewellery, very interesting,’ says Gaultier.
‘I make always the same thing, corsets etc.
She loves it.
She'd worn some of my clothes before this.’
Out of 1,500 sketches, Madonna chosen six for her tour.
‘It wasn't easy to make a fitting with her in LA and me in Paris,’ says the designer, though at Christmas Madonna found time to visit him in Paris, where she spent her time ‘jogging and pumping iron’.
During rehearsals for the show, she lost another 12lbs.
‘The clothes were a bit baggy after that, but we rectified it.
She was so slim before: where does she lose the weight from, I wonder!’
Influences for the designs range from the baby doll look to Clockwork Orange -meets- Cabaret and circus chic.
The striped jacket with coned bra she wears for ‘Express Yourself’ is, says Gaultier, ‘a mix of masculine and feminine, suit and sex’.
The opening night of the tour at Tokyo's 40,000 capacity Chiba Marine stadium kicked off on Friday 13 last month amid typhoon conditions.
The rain was so heavy it was ‘like a swimming pool’ but against the odds the show went on.
‘She's completely mature,’ says Gaultier with unconcealed enthusiasm.
‘She sings perfectly, all live, even better than before.
People who liked the video will not be disappointed.’
The show features a new version of ‘Like A Virgin’ and impressive choreography.
‘It's not just her that's sexy, it's the male dancers also.’
Clearly impressed with is new-found walking advertisement, he finds Madonna ‘very easy to get along with.
I don't have to speak to 25 people before I can reach her on the phone.
She doesn't change her mind like other people I've worked with.
She doesn't suddenly think, ‘Oh my God, I look like Liza Minelli!’
But you can't just tell her what to wear.
When I proposed my designs she said ‘yes, no’ very simple.
I saw her with black hair and I told her it was great, but she prefers to be blonde.
Madonna definitely knows what she wants.’
Lindsay Baker 
Madonna photographed exclusively for THE FACE by Jean Baptiste Mondino, and opposite as Breathless Mahoney in Dick Tracy 
When Breathless first comes on to Dick Tracy, her dialogue is hip and sassy.
‘What does a girl have to do got get to know you better?
Get arrested?’
Madonna in waiting on set (opposite), and getting Breathless with Warren Beatty (this page next to the original cartoon Dick Tracy)
Warren Beatty gave Madonna security and the assurance of a credible film role; Madonna gave Beatty (above, behind and in front of the camera) guaranteed box office success after his last, expensive flop,Ishtar .
But is their much-reported ‘romance’ just a publicity stunt?
Better than Gotham?
Dick Tracy's bright lights, big city
Only the women and Warren get away with mere makeup.
Dick Tracy's gallery of villains are disguised with ugly prosthetics.
Some hide famous faces Al Pacino, James Caan, Dustin Hoffman among them
Gaultier's designs in sketch form (above) and on stage (opposite)
HIPPY CITY
Text SEAN O'HAGAN.
Photography STEVE PYKE.
Flares aren't news in Dublin they're still wearing them from that first time round.
In THE CITY THAT TIME FORGOT there is little hip hop, house or club culture.
Instead the guitar rules, and rock musicians flock in to share the vibe.
But will Dublin's insularity prove to be its downfall?
In the beginning was the Word and The Word in Dublin was Vibe.
Take the word ‘vibe’ out of the Dublin hipster's vocabulary and you render him speechless.
‘Vibe’ is both specific and all embracing, criminally over-used and somehow essential.
It can describe ambience and atmosphere or soul and spirit.
But, most of all, vibe is a state of mind.
You go to a certain pub ‘for the vibe’; you don't go to another pub because you're ‘vibed out’.
Those in the know say that ‘vibe’ was a hippy term that disappeared in Dublin during the punk purges but resurfaced in the late Eighties when a town bathing in the warm glow of U2's global ascendancy rediscovered its (hippy?) roots.
As we enter the Nineties, Dublin is a town full of music.
Walk down the pedestrianised Grafton Street and you'll hear a dozen buskers who look like Hothouse Flowers and sound like The Waterboys.
Someone estimated the current number of Dublin bands at around 300.
This isn't necessarily a good thing.
Post U2, the city has a pop industry and infrastructure that increasingly means the once crucial trip to London no longer dictates a band's progress.
Dublin has become one of Europe's music capitals: a hermetically sealed, defiantly rock and roll town, untouched save for the odd house or soul night by the beats per minute hedonism of London, Manchester, Ibiza or New York.
Here, guitars are still the hip young gunslinger's chosen medium, and a good night out means loud rock and roll and Guinness on tap.
But recently, the vibe has become distinctly mellower.
A European boho feel has settled on certain parts of the city.
Terence Trent D'Arby moved here to record his difficult second album, Elvis Costello is resident, Los Angeles cowpunk exile Maria McKee, late of Lone Justice, has a house in Harold's Cross.
For the outsider, however, it's often difficult to tell whether Dublin is undergoing a prolonged rock renaissance or simply wallowing in a lazy, hand-me-down hippiedom that outlived its sell by date everywhere else.
NOUVEAU HIPPIES
The Hothouse Flowers are the band most easily tagged with the title ‘nouveau hippies’.
Ironically, they began as buskers, working the same Irish streets that now offer up a hundred and one variations of their roots' music.
Singer Liam and guitarist Fiachna come from Gaelic speaking families and are steeped in the Irish folk tradition.
The Flowers arrived on the scene two years ago when their London Records LP, ‘People’, became the biggest selling debut in Irish pop history.
It went top ten in Britain, offering a resolutely traditional rock balladry, undercut by hints of blue eyed soul and green eyed folk.
Like U2 before them, the Flowers chose to remain in Dublin, homeboys and heroes to a younger generation who seem to have adopted their outre nouveau hippy image.
Long flowing locks and pony tails spouted out under broad brimmed gypsy hats, colourful patterned shirts billowed out under velvet waistcoats as baggy strides and the occasional Mexican poncho began to displace the ubiquitous utilitarian uniform of black denim and DMs.
The Flowers, alongside The Waterboys now adopted Irish citizens, decamped in the County Galway fishing village of Spiddal have been the biggest visible influence on a generation of urban folk dreamers.
The group has been ‘away’ for a while, recording their new LP, ‘Home’the title, alone, as definitive a statement as any of the continuing importance of their Gaelic roots.
‘Hippy is a superficial word at this stage,’ offers Liam.
‘Dublin people dress more individually than people in London or wherever.
It's consistent, the changes are more subtle.
You might see brightly coloured clothes or long hair but at least you don't see the same shoes, the same jeans or the same jackets by the same designer.
If you look at it that way, it's quite interesting, unique even.’
And how would the Hothouse Flowers define the fabled Dublin vibe?
‘Dublin is laid back and vibrant,’ says guitarist Fiachna O'Braonain.
‘Not as laid back as LA, say, nor as vibrant as New York, but it has that curious mixture of the two that outsiders, as well as Dubliners, are drawn to.
It's small, it has a real community.’
And Dublin's music community is united in the search for the ‘vibe’.
It can bring together polar opposites in a way that would never happen in London or LA, where musicians hang out with their own kind.
Maria McKee recently moved there from Los Angeles, attracted initially by ‘romantic notions of the community and countryside’.
‘The thing I remember about my first visit is that I had never sung so much before.
Musicians play together here all the time, in bars and in their houses as well as on stage.
I came out of the hillbilly punk scene that shook up LA, scene where you hung out with your contemporaries and viewed the established rockers with suspicion.
Over here, I hang out with punks like the Golden Horde and traditional musicians from the folk scene.
There's no snobbery, no ageism.’
‘Dublin,’ according to Maria, ‘is a place where the music scene is all woven together.’
A patchwork quilt of a place where tradition is, has always been, and will always be ‘the root that feeds the branches’.
It's a theory that the Hothouse Flowers subscribe to: Dublin as contemporary musical village where community is all.
VILLAGE VIBE
‘I think the sense of camaraderie among rock musicians comes from the traditional thing of playing together and sitting in on sessions,’ elaborates Liam.
‘I'm very proud of the fact that our music flies in the face of the accepted notions of youth culture and attracts all ages.
Community here is vital for a band.
I don't even think you should think about the music business when you start.
You should aim higher,’ he concludes, without a trace of irony, ‘for the stars, for the celestial beauty of music.
That's the real vibe.’
In a hotel bar, Gavin Friday, erstwhile Virgin Prune and contemporary cabaret singer, is debating the true nature of the word ‘vibe’ with Golden Horde singer, Simon Carmody.
This is a meeting of mavericks.
Friday used to walk around Dublin in a dress and DMs and appear, caked in mud, on a stage festooned with blood-stained pig's heads.
The Virgin Prunes brought sex, shock theatre, androgyny and cross dressing to an island where divorce was (is) taboo.
‘We were Ireland's answer to the Sex Pistols and New York Dolls rolled into one.
Glam punks from hell.
People didn't get it.’
Although The Virgin Prunes are legend in Dublin, nobody took up their mantle.
‘I can understand that,’ says Friday, ‘cos Irish people are into a more communal thing.
They love the idea of community, communal music.
That's why everyone wants to be The Waterboys and nobody wants to be The Virgin Prunes.
Community and confrontation don't go together, which is fair enough but a bit cosy.
The hippy thing is endemic to the culture a pint, a joint and a bit of folk music.
It's very easy on the head.’
Simon Carmody probably mentions the word ‘vibe’ more than anyone else in Dublin.
He has operated on ‘vibe’ for the best part of a decade, stalking the watering holes of Dublin in search of the crack.
He leads The Golden Horde, a post-punk, garage trash outfit who are Dublin's best kept secret and, on a good night, a most abandoned live experience.
Raised on Iggy Pop, Robert Anton Wilson and The Ramones, The Horde are finally threatening to fulfill their true potential.
Their first single on Mother Records, ‘100 Boys’, captures them at full throttle, a Carmody self-dramatisation tied to glorious high energy punk-pop.
They've been around along time, however, and there are those, Gavin Friday included, who would put their meandering career down to a Dublin penchant for beer, bars and general untogetherness.
Whatever, Carmody is an unassailable optimist who has never been seen in anything other than sprayed-on black jeans, winkle-pickered Chelsea boots, leather jacket and cap.
His natural habitat is a mythical boho zone where Carnaby Street fop meets Haight Ashbury hippy in some timeless punk garageland.
It exists inside his head and he has done everything in his power to build a Dublin of the imagination that matches this vision.
‘The vibe about Dublin is that it's a rock'n'roll village,’ he begins, echoing the Flowers' and Maria's communal theory.
‘It's not a hippy town, it's a hip town.
The nouveau hippy thing you see on the surface is down to a trend.
People who don't have a real understanding of vibe are adopting it as a pose.’
Friday
‘I think there's lot of nouveau hippy carry-on in Dublin.
I meet these guys who are six years younger than me and they're going, ‘You gotta check out The Doors, man’.
I tell them to fuck off.
This is 1990, who wants to check out The Doors?
Why don't they check out Brecht or Oscar Wilde pioneers.
There are too many Bob Dylans.
And Mike Scotts (from The Waterboys).
It's too cosy.
Actually, there are too many bands full stop.’
LOVE TOWN
Indeed.
The problem here is too many bands, too few ideas.
The new generation, without exception, all sound second-hand loads of aptitude and not enough attitude.
This problem isn't exclusive to Dublin, of course, but the endemic mistrust of dance music that makes it a rock and roll island also means that the new noises of the Eighties hip hop, house, techno et al have been, at best ignored, at worst patronised.
Dublin may have a healthy homegrown vibe, but it won't produce a hybrid post-dance noise to compare with the messed up trance of, say, Happy Mondays.
‘I think you're right up to a point,’ agrees Friday.
‘Everybody here has studied U2's success and come up with a step by step guide of how to make it in the music business.
There's a band called Moby Dick and everyone hates them ‘cost they sound like a fucked up version of Creedence.
People slag them 'cos they can't play properly and they get it all wrong.
More power to them.
Too many bands here get it right that's what really wrong.
That said, I'm glad it's not Manchester 'cos there's not a scene there except for the media.
Jesus, a few baggy trousers and arseway haircuts and everyone's about the great Manchester scene!’
Carmody
‘There's a real scene in Dublin, a vibe more than a scene.
A scene is something created by others, a vibe is real.
Nobody here can afford to be standoffish.
Creatively, this town is our source and our stimulation.
I think young people might look like hippies but they're not apathetic.’
Friday
‘Then why do they look second-hand?’
Carmody: ‘Everybody does that as a kid.
I believe in community and shared vibe.
I believe in working towards the soul and spirit and beauty of things.
That's the real bottom line.
Music is about out-thereness .
Reality.
Hyperreality.’
Friday
‘Then get real about it.
It's turning into the New Orleans of Europe here, the place where Terence Trent D'Arby comes to get real or Mike Scott comes to find community.
I despise the nouveau hippy attitude.
I want music to frighten me like T Rex or Johnny Rotten: I'll be waiting a long time for that in Dublin.’
Carmody
‘The vibe is real.
It's like U2 called their last tour Love Town.
That's Dublin!’
Friday
‘What!
Ballymun's not fuckin' Love Town!’
Carmody
‘I'm talking on a musical level.
The community.
The rock and roll global village.
Look around you.’
So, caught between a burgeoning rock and roll infrastructure that highlights Irish rock and roll as industry, and a musical community that puts most of its faith in trad values, Dublin enters the Nineties as meeting place of commerce and culture.
Next year, it takes over from Glasgow as cultural capital of a new, ever evolving Europe, with rock and roll as its main commodity and export.
The new rock and roll global village or ‘the New Orleans of Europe’?
At present the answer lies somewhere in between.
Who are these hippies?
The Hothouse Flowers are one of Ireland's bestselling bands.
Above: singer Liam O'Maonlai (left) and guitarist Fiachna O'Braonain; opposite page, bassist Peter O'Toole.
Left, this page: Dublin radical Gavin Friday disapproves of Dublin's cozy retro rock community
Dublin children like Billy (top left), Moses (below, with parents Guggi and Linda) Bono's son Jordon and The Edge's new baby Blue Angel will continue the city's hippy traditions.
Guitarist Sammy Steiger (top right, with friend Emma) and artist Margaret (below right) are part of The Golden Horde's ‘extended family’
Welsh singer Katell Keinig (below) and American Marie McKeen (top) have been attracted by Dublin's sense of community.
The Golden Horde, led by Simon Carmody (opposite page) are the leaders of the vibe)
TAKE TEN
NOVA 10
‘I dance freestyle.
I'm influenced by street, jazz, and I've also been looking at some African dancing’
CANDY 9
Candy takes her loose, fluid style from American dance.
‘English dancers don't seem to have the same enthusiasm’
CHARLIE 8
‘Music has been undergoing a subtle revolution.
It's a powerful political medium’
SONIQUE 7
An athlete as a teenager, Sonique sings with S'Xpress.
But she ‘ain't wearing’ no flares, man!’
BUNTY MATTHIAS 6
Bunty Matthias is back in London after two years in New York.
‘Americans take dance more seriously.
We're more lyrical, more relaxed, less aggressive’
KAREN BINNS 5
Karen Binns worked the door at various Manhattan clubs.
London is like ‘iced water, it's crystal clear and safe’
NENEH CHERRY 4
‘The reason I do what I do is because it's something I can't help.
If I didn't recognise it,’ says Neneh, ‘I'd be an unhappy person.
It's my lifeforce’
ANDREA OLIVER 3
Andrea's band is called Her.
‘Music has got to have passion in it, it's got to have sex in it’
ZOE 2
‘Black people are really up at the moment.
They started the hip hop thing but they're just not getting any recognition from it’
VICTORIA 1
‘Working with Soul II Soul is definitely to this point the most rewarding experience I've had as an artist and as a person’
NOVA
‘I'm doing a bit of everything, probably too much.’
At 17, Nova has dance and drama training at an arts education school.
She has danced with Soul II Soul, Jamie Morgan, Will Downing and Jermaine Stewart, though she feels that she is probably ‘not dedicated enough’ to dance professionally.
Eschewing the military precision of American dancers such as Janet Jackson, Nova favours a more relaxed style.
‘I bought the Rhythm Nation video to have a look, but you don't need any skill for what they do.
You've just got to be co-ordinated and rehearse and rehearse to keep it tight.’
She is also on the books of Premier model agency, ‘to get a little money til I find a proper job’.
She is now resitting her maths GCSE in the hope of gaining a place at college to study theatre, art and English.
A keen writer, she has ambitions to write scripts for film and TV.
‘Not Dynasty -type scripts, just about normal working class families and things that have happened to me’
Black swimsuit by Azzedine Alaia, 27 Fulham Rd, London SW3: black boots, PVC jacket and American Express neck chain, all by Jean Paul Gaultier from Junior Gaultier, Newburgh St, W1; rings by Du Du Du from Paris flea market
CANDY
Candy was brought up dancing to soul and reggae from the age of six in Ladbroke Grove.
Now aged 15 and a hip hop devotee, in between school and modelling for the likes of Rifat Ozbek she has already launched her dancing career.
She performed with fellow West Londoners the Mighty Ethnicz on the recent Ice T tour and also appeared on the last Mantronix video.
She takes her loose fluid style from American influences, and cites MC Hammer as a particular favourite.
‘He does his own moves, he's original.
Most of the good dances, like ‘The Running Man’, originate from America.
English dancers don't seem to have the same enthusiasm as Americans.
When I dance I try to put a lot of enthusiasm into it.’
Candy ultimately would like to work with Public Enemy and 3rd Base.
In the meantime, she plans to sit her GCSEs while also dancing with her friends at school events.
‘It's quite a tight schedule for me to fit both things in.
That's why I don't go out that much’
White feather dress and black gloves by Helmut Lang from Maria Luisa, 2 rue Canbon, Paris; rings by Judy Blame from the House Of Beauty And Culture, 34–35 Stamford St, London N1
CHARLIE
‘I realise that if I was to move to South Africa I would be living a completely different existence.
I think what happens to other people is also our problem, we're all extensions of each other.’
A solo singer and guitarist, Charlie speaks with the same determination and intensity that informs her songs.
She writes ‘mainly about social issues, but I work from emotions.
Sometimes I feel angry so my songs might come out aggressive.’
An admirer of Fela Kuti and any ‘intelligent music’, her style has been compared to everything from Jimi Hendrix to Teena Marie.
As yet without a record deal, Charlie had so far concentrated on live gigs.
‘Record companies and things like that are not my main concern.
I don't see myself as a pop artist.
I just do whatever feels natural and deliver it as sincerely as I can.’
She feels positive about the Nineties.
‘The younger generation of blacks has definitely affected our culture.
People are being made aware of their culture by artists like Public Enemy.
Creativity is learning to feel happy with who you are.’
Jewellery from World, 27 Litchfield St, W1; coat and sheepskin hat form Kensington Market, London W8
SONIQUE
Singer on the new S'Xpress single ‘Supersonic Lover’, Sonique met Mark Moore two years ago.
‘We used to rave together at Shoom and The Trip, then we started working together.
I was the one he was looking for, and he was the one I was looking for.’
The two are now completing an album they've titled ‘Intercourse’.
The early Shoom days were, says Sonique, a strong bond between them.
‘In the early days everyone used to have a good time for real.
Not like now with all these casualties walking around all over the place, getting into fights.’
As a teenager, Sonique was an athlete for the North London borough of Haringay, after which she tried working nine to five but ‘I couldn't do that and be as free as I wanted’.
Soon she was singing with various friends in nearby Crouch End.
The new single is a ‘definite fantasy, it's about space’, though with her animated and robust manner, Sonique hopes to bring a ‘more real’ feel to the group.
‘When I'm singing, I'm feeling it.
On the single I'm actually shouting it.’
She will also be going for a different image.
‘When my mum saw S'Xpress on TV, she said, ‘Oh my God, whatever you do, don't join a band like that!’
I ain't wearin' no flares, man’
Silver leather jacket by Martine Sitbon from Joseph, 26 Sloane St, London SW1; silver lamé shorts by Dominic De Bruxelles from Fusion, The Trocadero, Piccadilly, W1; skull pendant from Katharine Hamnett, 20 Sloane St, SW1; rings by Judy Blame as before
KAREN BINNS
‘Keeping the aesthetic correct’ is, says Karen Binns, her main concern.
With a dry wit and an infectious Brooklyn drawl, Karen, as part of the Flatbush-based Soulboys group of club-runners, was responsible for some of the first illegal parties in New York, as well as having the much-coveted job of doorperson at various Manhattan clubs.
‘I was hired to be social,’ Karen says.
She ‘ran away’ to London in order to get sleep and rest and not have to talk to so many people every day.’
Now settled here, she is helping Bunty Matthias with co-ordination for Harlemation, and has danced on Neneh Cherry's video for ‘Inner City Mama’, putting into practise her experience from the early Manhattan break-dancing scene.
By day she earns her keep as a representative for a make-up management agency.
‘You feel bigger in New York,’ laments Karen, ‘and I miss the convenience of everything.
But London is like iced water, it's crystal clear and safe.
It's a load off my back.
I don't have to look behind me all the time and I'm not buggin' out on anything’
Yellow coat by Andre Walker from Willi Wear, Neal St, London WC2; black silk shirt from Canal Street, New York
BUNTY MATTHIAS
Having danced with influential choreographers Bill T Jones and Arnie Zane in New York for two years and been ‘worked to the bone’ in the process, Bunty Matthias returned to her home turf of London last year in order to do her ‘own thing’.
Classical dance, she feels, needs to be made more accessible.
‘It needs to be drawn away from the snobs and the elitist crowd.
I think black music and dance have given a lot of kids a break, but I'd like to see the kind of dance I'm into opened up just as much.’
Bunty is planning her own show, Harlemations, which she will choreograph and dance in.
With music by DJ Noel Watson and costumes by Andre Walker, the piece was inspired by her time spent living in Harlem last year and by the era of Josephine Baker, Lena Horne and Cab Calloway.
‘It's more entertainment than politics.
It'll be a celebration of Harlem, my interpretation of a 1990s Cotton Club.’
Harlemations will be performed at the Café De Paris, London, on July 25.
For details call 081 969 8209
Striped top and green hat by Andre Walker from Willi Wear, Neal St, London WC’; tights by Walford
NENEH CHERRY
Having topped the charts worldwide and walked away with almost every conceivable music industry honour, Neneh Cherry has nevertheless kept her head screwed on, her priorities clear and her demeanour refreshingly calm and unpretentious.
Motivated by a ‘passion’ for what she does, she still refuses to ‘take it that seriously’, emphasising that, as far as motherhood goes, she will not compromise.
‘The fame thing isn't something that I thrive on, and it isn't where creative energy stems from.’
Describing herself as something of a ‘social victim’, she has temporarily torn herself away from urban distractions in favour of time and space at a ‘country abode’, where she is working on material for a second album, due in November.
Currently lending support to and ‘cheer-leading’ Bristol's Massive Attack, Neneh believes that dance music in the Nineties is ‘gonna to clear’, but her attitude to her own music is relaxed.
‘If things didn't carry on the way they have been, I would carry on enjoying my life.
I still want to have adventures’
Floral St, London WC2: black bra by Azzedine Alaia, 27 Fulham Rd, SW3; black legging by Katharine Hamnett, 20 Sloane St, SW1; jewellery from World, 27 Litchfield St, WC2
ANDREA OLIVER
First seen alongside Neneh Cherry, singing and standing on her head with the early-Eighties cult dance band Rip Rig And Panic, Andrea Oliver has since sung with a variety of outfits and, in between organising and cooking for a weekly night at West London's Globe club, has recently joined forces with Malcolm Joseph (previously with soul band Seventh Heaven) to form new band, Her.
As yet unsigned, they have played a few gigs but are still in the process of ‘refining’ the music.
A formidable and flamboyant performer, Andrea is intent on bringing the energy back to live shows.
‘I get the biggest buzz out of getting on stage.
I'm sick of all these people making great music, but when you put them on stage, they can't hack it, I think that's pretty weak.
I found the acid house thing really disillusioning.
There was a time when I'd go to clubs, feel nothing, get a headache, and have to leave.
It wasn't musicians making music, it was computer operators.
Things are staring to get a little more inspired again now, though.
Music's got to have passion in it, it's got to have sex in it’
Red fake fur dress by Caroline Harris; rings by Jean Paul Gaultier from Junior Gaultier, Newburgh St, London W1; brown shoes by Azzedine Alaia, 27 Fulham Rd, London SW3
ZOE
A self-proclaimed subscriber to the Bohemian way of life.
Zoe describes herself as ‘a chameleon’‘I do what I like and I have a good time doing it.’
Recently, she has been working closely with the stylist Judy Blame, ‘as his sort of taste bud’, styling Neneh Cherry, Tackhead and new artist Harriet.
She is dubious about the mass appropriation of hip hop style in fashion, believing that many stylists are ‘cashing in’.
‘It's becoming just a fashion statement.
I prefer a more personal style anyway.’
Also a writer, dancer, and an aspiring actress, Zoe has a firm idea of the kind of films she would like to act in.
‘I want directors to use black actors and just portray them as ordinary people, not make a big deal about it.
Now is the time for someone to make a movie and show how music and the summer of love has affected everything.
Where I live it's like a real community black, white, half-caste.
It's just such a good spirit, I think that needs to be depicted.
This is our decade’
Sheepskin coat by Vivienne Westwood, 6 Davies St, London W1; rings by Vivienne Westwood (as above) and Jean Paul Gaultier from Junior Gaultier, Newburgh St, London W1
VICTORIA
‘To add to the whole, you have to have your own shit together.’
Victoria Wilson-James does and has.
She came to London from LA in the mid Eighties and sang with various groups, including satirical rap outfit The Ghastly Girls.
Now her powerful, operatic voice appears on Soul II Soul's ‘A Dream's A Dream’ and she is working on a solo album, ‘Glomozon’, to be released on the Soul II Soul label.
In conversation Victoria exudes wit, self-assurance and an amiable openness.
She has, she feels, passed through the narcissistic clubber/good time girl phase and come out of it stronger, more resilient, but also more tolerant.
‘You have to go through your egocentricities, you have to become so absorbed by the whole thing until you reach the point where you say, ‘No, get those sequins away from me!
I don't want to see another fucking rhinestone as long as I live!’
The album's lyrics are largely about women and are autobiographical in places.
‘Some people are told they have to work a nine to five gig or be the trendiest person on earth or whatever.
There's a song, ‘Bright Lights’, which is about doing what you want, outside of the realms of what you were programmed to do and the inner process of achieving those goals’
Jewellery by Sheri Wilson-Gray and Jean Paul Gaultier from Junior Gaultier, Newburgh St, London W1
PROFILE
ROBERT DE NIRO
Manhattan stories.
At the age of 47, Robert De Niro is coming out of a creative crisis and entering a new phase as a movie mogul.
But the new production company has so far been upstaged by his other pet project the opening of his restaurant, the Tribeca Bar & Grill
Robert de Niro has always been case as the Invisible Man of Hollywood.
But back in the mid-Eighties he seemed to be taking his role a little too seriously.
In fact he was in danger of disappearing completely.
His determination to ensure his private life remained private kept him hidden off screen.
But on screen too, he seemed to be deliberately absenting himself, choosing to play only cameo roles in Angel Heart and The Untouchables .
Depending on your interpretation he was either cleverly biding his time, or drifting, baffled as to how he could top his past work.
But all this changed two years back.
Since his appearance as bounty hunter Jack Walsh in 1988's sorely underrated comedy Midnight Run , De Niro hasn't stopped working.
This year alone should see the UK release of four films.
Following the mistimed clerical caper We're No Angels , the stumbling romance Stanley And Irish , co-starring Jane Fonda, is out next month.
Good Fellas , his long-awaited reunion with Martin Scorsese, is due in the autumn, and Awakenings a film about coma victims directed by Penny ‘Big’ Marshall, also starring Robin Williams should appear by winter.
The reason for all this activity?
De Niro's been raising cash for his next serious project.
At the age of 47, he has come out of his creative mid-life crisis and knows how to follow his stunning screen work.
It seems that the ‘most powerful screen actor since Brando’ now wants to reinvent himself as an independent movie mogul.
After testing for the role when he executive-produced We're No Angels , he has taken it up full time, setting up his own company Tribeca Productions and building his own mini-studio in New York.
It's based in an old coffee warehouse, formerly known as the Martinson building, which is situated a block down from his apartment in Tribeca, a vaguely arty district on Manhattan's Lower West Side.
‘I used to walk by and think ‘what a beautiful building,'’ says De Niro.
‘It was like a dream to get a building, that building.’
Now, at a cost of around $7 million, he has, and the dilapidated eight-storey warehouse has become the Tribeca Film Centre, a tailor-made prestige base for De Niro's company, and other East Coast film types: Brian De Palma has offices there, as do Miramax, the independent company that produced sex, lies and videotape .
So they all have somewhere to unwind after work, De Niro has even installed a restaurant downstairs, the deliberately downhome Tribeca Bar and Grill.
Leaving aside the actor's film plans, the restaurant has become something of an epic production in itself.
Start-up costs were almost $3 million, and to raise the cash De Niro put together a group of 23 investors, including celebrity chums like Bill Murray, Sean Penn, Christopher Walken and Mikhail Baryshnikov.
As a restaurant manager he appointed Drew Nieporent, the man behind one of his favourite NY eateries, Montrachet.
Unsurprisingly, as soon as it opened in April, the Tribeca Bar and Grill became the hottest meal ticket in town, and it's currently packed out nightly, with a selection of celebs, wannabes, Wall Street suits and star gazers, who can get a perfect view by sitting at the restaurant's centrepiece, a $15,000 mahogany bar.
A more private kitchen and dining room sit upstairs, joining onto a 70-seater state-of-the-art projection room.
De Niro's diner has been so eagerly anticipated with some magazines printing details of the menu months in advance that it has nearly overshadowed Tribeca Productions, which has quietly put together an impressive list of future projects.
Fourteen films are planned, with eight already in production.
De Niro's directorial debut,Tales Of The Bronx , is schedule for early 1991, but the first film his company has planned is a comedy in which he will co-star with Danny De Vito.
Asked about his move into production, De Niro's reply is characteristically low-key.
‘I've been one side of the camera for long enough,’ he smiles.
‘Now I want to try the other.’
Simple was that.
Numerous journalists, however, have been unable to resist the temptation to compare this current real life role with one of his old screen parts the Thirties movie mogul Monroe Stahr in The Last Tycoon , the film version of F. Scott Fitzgerald's last, unfinished novel.
It may make for some good headlines, but De Niro certainly doesn't come on like a tycoon, talking about his company as not so much a business, more an ‘artistic community’ where people can freely exchange ideas.
His friends have confirmed that, unlike other Hollywood stars (Michael Douglas, Warren Beatty), he has never been drawn to backstage machinations, has never been obsessed with the art of the deal.
For all that, De Niro has managed to set up some favourable financial and distribution arrangements with Tri-Star, Columbia and Miramax films.
You get the feeling that if he wants to play the hard-assed producer, he can.
After all, when he starred as champion boxer Jake La Motta in Raging Bull , he put on 60lbs and is reputed to have done enough training to have earned a place in the top twenty world middleweight rankings.
De Niro's slightly unhinged devotion to detail, the madness in his method, is well documented the best recent example being his insistence on wearing silk underwear from the same store that supplied Al Capone so that his portrayal of the Chicago gangster in The Untouchables felt just right.
The move into production seems the logical outcome of his obsessive nature.
De Niro agrees.
‘Ultimately, it is to have control.
A writer or a painter can control his work, but in the movies it's different.
But also I do get bored when I'm not working.
If I'm not in a movie, I'm devising a movie to be in.
Now I'm in a position to produce, direct and act.
I guess I've earned it.
Thirty years of acting is a long apprenticeship.
De Niro's lengthy career began in small theatre productions at the start of the Sixties, and has included two Academy Awards (for Raging Bull and The Godfather II ) and a collaboration with Martin Scorsese which produced some of the best films to come out of the ‘New Hollywood’ of the Seventies.
It may have provided a perfect ‘apprenticeship’ for building a movie empire.
But it hasn't given him much of a clue about setting up a restaurant.
The actor's approach to setting up his Bar and Grill has been eccentric to say the last.
Drew Nieporent is the only experienced professional involved.
De Niro's other appointments have included: as designer, a friend of a production aide, whose normal line of work is women's wear; as site manager, a former Disney executive; and as architect (20 were interviewed), the relatively unknown Lo-yi Chan, whose inexperience was blamed by some for the renovations to the Martinson building going $350,000 over budget.
Some blame should go to De Niro, most amusingly with his attempt to convince Nieporent that the restaurant should have a sushi bar.
He flew his favourite Japanese sushi chef over from LA specially, but no one remembered to hire an interpreter.
Now it's finally open, nearly two years after De Niro first approached Nieporent with the idea, the Tribeca Bar and Grill will need to turn over more than £1.2 million a year just to break even, something that may prove difficult, given that the average bill for the restaurant's simple fish and pasta dishes is around $40 a head.
All in all, it seems to have diverted De Niro's energies away from the more serious and interesting business of Tribeca Productions, and in future, it may even start to eat into company funds.
So why did Bob bother?
De Niro doesn't seem particularly keen to discuss his reasons for wanting to run a restaurant, and will only say that it's been a vague dream of his for a while.
It's funny how many stars seem to harbour similar buried desires perhaps it's all that time they spend waiting on tables before they get their big break.
The most recent example was Mickey Rourke's cafe/bar, Mickey and Joey's.
Intended as a rough and ready hang-out, where Rourke and other tinseltown bikers could wear their leather and bandannas, it was actually situated in an upscale Beverly Hills mall, and was forced to close when locals complained about the noise made by those big Harleys and equally outsized Hollywood egos.
Like Rourke, De Niro ran into a few problems himself with unsympathetic locals.
When the rats who had taken up residence in his building were ousted.
Tribeca's streets were clogged with a plague of rodents nicknamed ‘Robertos’ by the locals.
The noise and nuisance caused by a decision to keep working on the building on Sundays was also a source of neighbourly discontent.
Since then, De Niro has worked hard to convince local people of his love and respect for the community.
The accusations levelled at him that he was an unwanted invader who would bring the yuppie hordes and tourist armies in his wake clearly hurt.
He has actually lived in Tribeca for ten years now.
It's home, and the film centre and restaurant are his rather grand way of putting down some roots.
He is clearly desperate to fit in, something which turned the renovations into an architectural method trip, with the actor flying back from film shoots to hassle the builders about saving any historical detail they could, no matter how trivial, so that the building retained its local character.
Playing down the trendy aspect of the restaurant, he suggests that it is a family place where locals can come to eat.
He also insists that it won't be a fly-by-night operation, that his commitment to the community is lasting and genuine.
Time (and his bank balance) will tell, but at least now the whole thing's up and running he can retreat out of the public eye.
De Niro may have loosened up a little recently but he's still not happy with the press attention that stardom brings.
‘You can only experience so much fame,’ he says.
‘It's not a question of privacy, but of balance, of what your life's about.’
And what is his life about these days, apart from Tribeca Productions?
Depending on which gossip column you read he's either planning to wed his long-term live-in girlfriend, Toukie Smith, sister of the late fashion designer Willie Smith, or he's secretly dating model Naomi Campbell.
Of course, De Niro isn't about to answer questions about this kind of thing.
‘I don't know why anybody is interested in any of this crap,’ he observes testily.
‘Isn't it enough to look at the work I've produced and leave it at that?’
Perhaps.
But if you just looked at the work he's been churning out lately, without knowing anything about his business activities, you'd wonder what had happened to him.
In Midnight Run he was fine, but since then he's been cranking them out, turning in performances which are almost parodic rehashes of the masculine confusions and bullish challenges of his past roles.
(If you want the perfect example of this, look out for the shoe shop scene in Stanley And Iris ).
The Scorsese film Good Fellas will probably mark a return to form.
But for the moment he's clearly content to coast on-screen and raise capital to support his off-screen dreams.
If he proves half as good a producer and director as he is/was an actor, then this won't look like such a bad deal.
But if he winds up running his film company the way he has so far run his restaurant, he may find himself forced to serve up more and more celluloid ham just to keep things afloat.
Whether the public will want to keep on swallowing it is another matter.
‘Ultimately, I want control.
Now I'm in a position to produce, direct and act, I guess I've earned it.
Thirty years of acting is a long apprenticeship’
TEN YEARS AFTER
Where were you in May 1980?
Chanel, on the opposite page, was three months old.
THE FACE was even younger.
Billing itself as ‘a whole new slant on the modern dance’, it crept cautiously onto the newsstands at the end of May with Jerry Dammers staring out in full, glossy colour.
Chanel is now ten.
She's grown, she's changed, she's had a brilliant time, but her best is yet to come.
Which is pretty much how we feel, too…
Chanel number 10 photographed by Eddie Monsoon/Mitzi Lorenz.
Striped top and leggings by Obebe; white top by Poodle.
Hair and makeup by Jaffa.
TEN PEOPLE WHO OWE IT ALL TO THE FACE (All right then, ten we helped along the way)
1.
Neneh Cherry
2.
Yazz
3.
Sade
4.
Soul II Soul
5.
Nick Kamen
6.
Mickey Rourke
7.
Jean Paul Gaultier
8.
S'Xpress
9.
Neville Brody
1.
Bananarama
TEN PEOPLE WHO'VE HAD MORE THAN ONE FACE COVER
1.
David Bowie
2.
The Specials
3.
Frankies
4.
Sade
5.
Paul Weller
6.
Bryan Ferry
7.
George Michael
8.
Annie Lennox
9.
Ian McCulloch
1.
Madonna
TEN MYTHS ABOUT THE FACE
1.
All the staff wear black polo necks and ripped jeans with the right coloured stitching on the inside.
2.
They live in Grouchos.
3.
They work in a suite of matt black, Japanese-designed offices in Soho.
4.
They all have southern accents.
5.
They buy only records on import from Outer Mongolia and stop playing them as soon as everyone else does; they refuse to watch films without foreign subtitles, never read hardbacks, and will not enter a club if the general public can also get in.
6.
The magazine is put together at a leisurely pace with the staff spending most of their time at London's most fashionable nightspots.
7.
Nick Logan is a strange, reclusive figure rarely seen outside Wanstead, unless accompanied by Ronnie Biggs' biographer.
8.
They operate on around a quarter of the staff of a normal monthly publication.
9.
The only have four phone lines, and so are constantly engaged.
10.
The magazine is about to close down.
1–6 False; 7–9 True; 10 False, though this is the myth we hear most often.
Usually from magazines that consider themselves rivals.
TEN BEST-SELLING COVERS
1.
FACE 100 Special Edition
2.
Mickey Rourke
3.
Beastie Boys
4.
Bomb The Bass
5.
Nick Kamen
6.
David Bowie
7.
Madonna
8.
Pogues
9.
Steve Martin
1.
Stone Roses
TEN LITTLE KNOWN FACTS ABOUT THE FACE
1.
One early issue THE FACE was produced from an itinerant suitcase.
2.
The present office used to be an Victorian laundry (when sales are slow, we take in washing!).
3.
The full time staff of THE FACE could fit into two taxi cabs.
4.
Julie Burchill made her name as a columnist for THE FACE.
5.
Two of our former staffers now edit their own magazines James Truman as Details in New York, Lesley White at Mirabella (UK launch in autumn).
6.
One London street has been mentioned in every issue not South Molton Street but Salisbury Rd, NW6, home of our repro house and typesetters (and mentioned in the small print in every issue).
7.
The Face is printed at Pontygwindy Industrial Estate, Caerphilly, by Seven Valley Press.
8.
Phil Bicker, our art director, never goes home.
9.
No issue of THE FACE has been a doddle to produce (especially this one!)
10.
We're nice people!
TEN FAVOURITE SHEEP BREEDS
Dorset Horn
Swaledale
St Kilda Soay
Scottish Black Face
Welsh Mountain
Scottish Black Face
Shropshire
Wiltshire Horn
Lincoln Long Wool
Cheviot
Clun
Compiled by the KLF, who featured sheep on the cover of their ambient house LP, ‘Chill Out’, and wish to point out that The Farm aren't the only ones into woolly coats.
TEN FAVOURITE UK RAILWAY STATIONS
Paddington
Worksop
Marylebone
Newcastle
Brighton
York
Carlisle
Bristol (Temple Meads)
Stroud
Aberystwyth
Compiled by Iron Maiden frontman/rail enthusiast Bruce Dickinson
TEN GREEN ISSUES
1.
An area the size of two football fields disappears from the Brazilian rainforest every four hours.
This is your oxygen we're talking about.
2.
There have been ten major accidents at nuclear power plants since the first, at Windscale in 1957.
3.
90 million tonnes of poisonous sulphur dioxide (acid rain) are released into the air every year
4.
Our cars pump out 500,000 tonnes of poisonous lead fumes per year.
5.
500 years ago there were two million indians living in the Amazonian rainforests.
Today there are less than 50,000.
6.
Over six million tonnes of oil is dumped into the seas annually.
7.
Dirty water accounts for 80 per cent of the illnesses affecting developing countries.
8.
Global temperatures will increase as much as three degrees centigrade in the next ten years due to damage to the ozone layer.
9.
The dumping of radioactive waste into the sea was banned in 1970.
However, the drums are still on the oceans beds, and many are starting to leak.
10.
In ten years time, more than 600 million people are expected to be severely undernourished.
Better management of the plant's resources could prevent this.
TEN NUMBER 10s
Maradona
John Barnes
Michel Platini
Pele
Ruud Guillit
Glenn Hoddle
Gary Lineker
Geoff Hurst
De Stefano
Puskas
In the beginning there was THE FACE, and THE FACE was Jerry Dammers.
Where were you in 1980?
‘I was in The Specials in 1980.
2-Tone was at its peak, and there was a lot of pressure, a hell of a lot.
There were good things, but it was a bit exhausting, with touring and all.
Although I haven't been making records for the last six years, I have been working behind the scenes at Artists Against Apartheid, and me the Mandela concert last month, seeing that speech go out live on the BBC to all those people, was a culmination of all that work.
It was one of the best days of my life: I never thought it would come to that.
Especially when the crowd sang ‘You'll Never Walk Alone’ it showed a side of the British people that's very positive.
It does follow on from those 2-Tone ideals, and it's funny that, ten years later, the ideals are still more or less intact.’
Jerry Dammers THE FACE'S FIRST COVER STAR
‘I left school and went to the South of France and spent a week sleeping on an electricity generator.
Then I met an Arab who gave me 200 francs and my ambition was never to come back to England again.
Ian Brown THE STONE ROSES
‘I was in Hull trying to get a group together.
I think the band was called World Service or something.
I was very poor and very pissed off.
I felt like I had to be in a group.’
Roland Gift ACTOR/FINE YOUNG CANNIBAL
The Hacidena was a yacht warehouse: the architect Ben Kelly ripped out the interior to build it was a club in 1981/82
Michael Jackson (right), circa 1980: pre-surgery, pre-Bubbles, but already opting out of the lifestyle everyday mortals lead
‘I was at the National Theatre doing a play about a flying picket called Line ‘Em by Nigel Williams.
I was living in Mayfair and was just about to move from there and buy my first flat.
I was wearing mostly stuff that I'd pinched from films I'd done mod gear from Quadropehnia and Take 6-cum-Paul Smith from Breaking Glass .
I was into The Stranglers, Joe Jackson, The Jam and Ian Dury.’
Phil Daniels CURRENTLY IN RSC'S A CLOCKWORK ORANGE 
‘I was 16, busking around London and busy trying to get my first band together.
The Executives.
I remember THE FACE coming out very well — but it took me two years to make the cover.’
George Michael
‘Our company was expanding into overseas markets in leaps and bounds.
That was the year that we first went into Canada and I remember that I picked the Canadian franchise because she didn't war a bra!
It seemed somehow significant for the rest of the decade.’
Anita Roddick BODY SHOP SUPREMO
‘I was a DJ in Chicago.
My club, The Warehouse, was at its peak.
I played soul, Phily R&B.
My favourites were ‘Let No Man Put Asunder’.
‘Found A Cure’ by Ashford and Simpson, ‘I'm Every Woman’and ‘Clouds’by Chaka Khan and ‘A Little Bit Of Jazz’by Nick Straker.
The thought had crossed my mind to get into producing.
It was one of the goals I set myself’.
Frankie Knuckles THE GODFATHER OF THE HOUSE
‘Ten years ago I was a useless layabout.
I was still at school and I partied all the time.
I sang in a band called Rubbish.
We used to play at various pubs, and the Pidar Wakefield in Grays Inn Road with The Pogues.
I wasn't into fashion at all, I used to wear second hand stuff.’
Pam Hogg DESIGNER
‘I'd just finished editing The Dairy Book of Home Management , which eventually sold 1.5m copies, and I was living in the Kings Road.’
Neil Tennant PET SHOP BOY
‘I was taking exams at the end of my second year studying architecture at Liverpool University.’
Chris Lowe PET SHOP BOY
‘I was studying maths at Cambridge University and wondering why none of my friends wanted to be in a glam rock group with me.
I was seriously considering going to India to become a monk but I never got round to it!’
Steve Waddington THE BELOVED
‘In 1980 I was 15 years old and still at school, still a year away from O-levels, and drumming in my first band called Smallprint, playing at SWP benefit gigs!
My immediate aspirations were to own a Ludwig drumkit and to marry Clare Grogan both still sadly unfulfilled!
It was really just the beginning of my interest in things musical, political, cultural etc and a realisation that I was never going to play for Crystal Palace!’
Jon Marsh THE BELOVED (ABOVE)
‘I was playing basketball and football for high school, the Belleville Tigers, in Detroit.
I was real good at sports and I wanted to be a professional football player.
I was into Prince, Parliament, Funkadelic, Tom Tom Club and going out to parties.
Every time I could get away I used to drive down to New York, where I'm originally from, and go to the Paradise Garage.’
Kevin Saunderson INNER CITY
‘I was out of my face.
Lost in space.’
Shane McGowan POGUES
Van Gogh's Sunflowers according to an estimate from James Roundell of Christie's Impressionist department, would have fetched around £4–5 million in 1980 compared to £30 million plus today
Martin Amis in 1980 when his Money couldn't buy him a decent shirt
‘I had just left school and was doing a fashion journalism course at the London College of Fashion.
I wanted to be a writer (hence the course) but was also toying with the idea of the group, which I pursued full time after finishing.
I was living with Keren in a squat above the Sex Pistols rehearsal room in Denmark Street.’
Sara Dallin BANANARAMA
‘I was working in the BBC pensions department and had short-lived aspirations of getting into TV.
By then we were also starting to work on the group.
Home was a squat in Denmark Street where I lived with Sara.’
Keren Woodward BANANARAMA
‘I was fly pitching down Oxford Street and Petticoat Lane I used to rip of Lacoste T-shirts and sell them.
I was out at clubs every night: Munkberry's, The Embassy, Global Village.
In August I stole a sports car and went to the South of France.
I wasn't doing anything constructive, I had no plans.’
Barrie K Sharpe (ABOVE), CLUB RUNNER, CO-OWNER OF THE DUFFER OF ST.
GEORGE, POTENTIAL POP STAR
‘Thursday June 5, 1980.
Houston.
‘We all went to them Cadillac Bar for lunch which was really good Mexican food.
I met Travolta again.
Got an autograph on a napkin.
They all have these big Jerry Hall accents.
And they all love Jerry because they can talk real Texas with her.
We had frogs’ legs and beef and chicken and shrimps, everything barbecued and chilied and guacamoled.
And then we went to a few Western shops to get our costumes for the Urban Cowboy premier.
There were thousands of paparazzi and fans because they'd never had a world premiere in Houston before.
And they were screaming.
‘Andy!
Andy!
Andy!’
And Jerry and I were posing for pictures…’
Andy Warhol The Warhol Diaries (Simon & Shuster)
In 1980 retailer Paul Smith owned one shop in Covent Garden (the first clothing shop in the area) and one in Nottingham, and he had already started selling abroad.
His ambition was to ‘continue moving forward in a positive way’ and he ‘hoped that THE FACE would ask him in ten years’time what he was doing’
Ten years ago Eddie Murphy was aged 19 and had just left a job in a shoe store to start on Saturday Night Live , playing a variety of characters including Buck Wheat, Mr. Rogers and Velvet Jones.
He was living in Long Island.
‘I was living in Gambler Terrace, Liverpool 8 and signing on the dole.
I was a struggling musician at the time, but my ambitions were to win an Oscar, a Nobel prize and a Grammy.’
Holly Johnson
‘When I was 14 I was at comprehensive in Milton Keynes.
I used to wear dinner suits with cufflinks and a top hat.
The headmaster tried to stop me, even though there were punks in dustbin liners and mods and skinheads, because he said I looked different.
I was a video game addict.
I came second in the UK Astroid Championships.
I could play for 13 hours on one 10p.
I was into skateboarding too, and generally getting into trouble.’
Tony Colston Hayter ACID'S MR BIG’
In April 1980, U2 signed to Island in the ladies toilet of the Lyceum.
In May they released their first single, ‘Eleven O'Clock Tick Tock’, and spent the rest of the summer touring Britain.
At the end of the summer they released ‘A Day Without Me’.
In October they released the album ‘Boy’ and single ‘I Will Follow’.
‘In 1980 I was 19 and just coming to the end of The Skids, which I'd been in since I was 15.
I hated the music business they were all fat, cocaine sniffing, pompous bastards.
And I couldn't wait to get out.
I liked writing but was very insecure about it as a lot of people (NME , THE FACE etc) took the piss out of it.
After The Skids, I went into the theatre to write and act.
Looking back I regard it all as fun and I'm not embarrassed by any of it I was happy to get where I was.’
Richard Jobson TV PRESENTER/MODEL
‘My aspirations were then as they are now to make it my business to make clothes.
And what I was doing then was also pretty much the same as now looking forward to the future.
It was a very optimistic year for me.
I started going out in London and I was on the first step of the ladder.’
Nick Coleman DESIGNER
Vivienne Westwood's Kings Road shop changed its name yet again to become World's End, and started showing collections.
The 1980 collection was the pirate look: white frilly shirts and baggy knee length trousers devised for Adam Ant, collected by the V&A, and much favoured by those of a New Romantic persuasion.
‘Ten years ago I was in the tenth grade, my second year in high school.
I was busy trying to figure out if this guy Thomas fancied me.
I was just coming out of my tomboy stage.
And I wanted to sing.’
Adeva
‘I was in Soul II Soul Rico sound system with Jazzie and Daddae Harvey.
We played at Caxton House Youth Club in Archway and various blues parties around the place.
The music we were playing was reggae (Horace Andy, Dillinger) crossing over into Soul (Patrice Rushent, Maze, Crystal) and early electro (Fab 5 Freddy, Grandmaster Flash, Spoonie Gee).
We were all raggas, very street.
I was doing what I was doing because I was born into it.
We've always had drams, but the way it developed was like a natural progression.
You've got to go through the rough before you can get to the smooth.
Nellee was in Bristol with The Wild Bunch, we met him in ‘86.
June 13’
Jazzie Q SOUL II SOUL
‘I was in FBI sound system with Sparky on the Eastside.
We were trying to diverse the music with the mixture of soul and reggae, though it wasn't really the done thing at that point.
We joined Soul II Soul around ‘83.
We're the younger members, except for the real littl'uns we've got now.’
Aitch B SOUL II SOUL
In June 1980, Buster's gonads hadn't grown, Roger Mellie was still an eager trainee at the telly, Sid the sexist was leering at the dinner ladies in junior school and Mrs. Grady wasn't such an old lady.
Viz comic did not yet exist, though to celebrate our 10th birthday they have specially drawn this moving portrait of The Fat Slags at school.
It is clear that Sharon and Tracy were at the cutting edge of fashion even then they were still wearing 1976's Bay City Rollers outfits.
‘I was mourning the demise of punk but preparing to lay siege to the nation's sensibilities with my seminal pop combo Modern Romance.
Finances were riding along the crest of a slump and I lived in a one-room penthouse in Bakers Arms, Leyton (on top of the opticians).
Drink and drugs were de rigeur and sleeping around was still very fashionable.
Well, for me and the lads in the band anyway.’
Geoff Deane WRITER
Kylie Minogue was eleven, at school in Melbourne, and launching her acting career with a mini-series,Skyways .
At that point, she didn't plan to be a singer, though she did enjoy dressing up as Olivia Newton John and singing into her hairbrush in front of the mirror.
Jason Donovan was also eleven, at school in Melbourne and also launching his acting career in Skyways , which he found exciting because it meant he could take some time off school.
‘Ten years ago I was working in Spud-U-Like in the evening and cleaning hotels in the morning.
Seriously?
I got a contract with an Italian company and got really big over there.
Over here I was selling in Harrods, Joseph, Whistles, Harvey Nichols.
I used to go out to clubs a lot.
I've always liked music more than fashion.
I was born into a fashion family.
I was very busy that year.’
Michiko Koshino DESIGNER
‘June 1980, I was pushing 20 and part of Orange Juice, an early stone Roses prototype whose return to music was the resolve for a bad Seventies hangover.
Liverpool and Manchester got it.
Glasgow didn't some things never change.’
Steven Daly OUR MAN IN NEW YORK
‘June 1 1980 was a significant date in the history of the band.
It was the first performance under the name Depeche Mode, and also David Gahan's debut.
The venue was Fletch and Martin's old comprehensive school, St. Nicholas, in Basildon.
David came up with the name Depeche Mode after seeing the french magazine of the same name.’
Depeche Mode
‘In 1980 I moved back to LA from Mammoth Mountain ski resort and started my business, Stussy Surfboards.
The furthest fucking thing from my mind was that I'd be a clothing manufacturer.’
Shawn Stussy SPORTSWEAR DESIGNER
‘Ten years ago I was in the library getting knowledge.
This is one of the few places to take shelter from the streets that was safe to go.
I knew that knowledge was the way to turn situations around.’
KRS-One EDUCATED RAPPER
‘I was just going on 14 and I went to my first gig the Stray Cats.
Lee Rocker threw his towel into the audience and I caught it.
I think it's still in my parents’ attic.
I was doing radio plays for the BBC.
I decided when I was 11 and I started doing drama at school, when I came over from New Zealand, that I wanted to be an actress.’
Gina Bellman BLACKEYES
Having lost his cheque card, Jerry Dammers once came into the Face office for a copy of issue one (previous spread) to prove to the bank teller who he was
Lisa Stansfield looks forward to the Eighties
No.
10 DOWNING STREET.
Letter from Westminster
If there were an election today, the polls say that Labour leader NEIL KINNOCK would move into Number 10 with an overwhelming majority.
Here, he answers our questions in a special letter.
First, can I say congratulations on reaching your tenth anniversary.
Thank you for the invitation to feature in this special edition.
You ask me if I see any changes in the attitudes of young people.
I do believe there is a feeling of real excitement and expectation amongst your generation because of the extraordinary changes we are seeing across the world.
‘Bliss it was that dawn to be alive’ a quote from Wordsworth, but it is how I feel as we embark on this new decade.
That is how I see the Nineties as a possible new dawn.
I think young people around the world, East and West, see it that way too.
Your generation will be the key to shaping the new Europe and seizing the new opportunities that could not be imagined during the Cold War.
You will face enormous challenges, too.
But the spirit and the optimism of young people around the world has been clear: from Czechoslovakia to Romania, in Hungary and Germany, they have been vital to the movements that have brought such change.
If there is a change in attitude, then I think it is that the young of Britain are now more outward looking not only towards Europe, but the wider world too.
Glenys and I recently went to Wembley for Nelson Mandela's freedom celebration.
What a wonderful night: thousands of people, many of them young, black and white, all there is to thank an elderly man who had been in prison longer than many at the concert had even been alive.
I was delighted that the people of Britain gave him such a marvellous reception.
I have no doubt that Nelson Mandela now knows the real voice of Britain is the one which he heard ringing out of Wembley, and not the one he hears calling from Number 10 for the letting up of sanctions.
It was marvellous to see so many young people paying their tribute to this extraordinary man.
Internationally, I think Britain should have a very important role in shaping the new Europe.
We need a government which is not afraid of playing its part, a government that is not clinging to some of the apparent certainties of the Cold War but one that is willing to step off the sidelines and help ensure that through co-operation between East and West we can move from the two old Europes to the one new Europe with stability.
We need a government that will help ensure that across the world we can look forward to peace and progress with stability.
Caution will have to be the watch word, but caution must not be the excuse for shying away from the challenges of this changing continent.
We must play our full part.
There is a great consensus building up between the peoples of East and West as to the sort of Europe they want to see.
They want to a market economy, and they want the right to be able to choose what they and their families consume.
They also recognise the need for competition in producing.
But there is also increasing agreement between East and West about the type of society in which people want to live.
They want to live in socially responsible communities communities where care and opportunity, protection from poverty and crime and pollution, access to transport, housing and education, equal treatment and opportunities for women and men are rights of citizenship and not dependent on individual wealth.
The support for these aims in Britain can be seen in the support the Labour Party is now receiving.
People are also seeing the effects of eleven years of Mrs. Thatcher's free market experiment.
Cardboard city, along with the record number of homeless is just one of the most visible monuments to the Tory government's decade.
Our hospital waiting lists are longer than six years ago.
Britain is now called the dirty man of Europe because of our government's lack of care for the environment.
Mrs Thatcher may talk green, but she keeps acting dirty.
When this is the record of a Prime Minister who said, ‘There is no such thing as society’, then it is clear why people want the priorities that Labour would pursue.
You ask what we would do for young people.
Unlike this government, we would invest in you: every government has a duty to use its resources to extend freedom, opportunity and choice to all its citizens and this is particularly true for the young.
You are our future, and if school leavers are untrained or unskilled, without a home and the economic means to advance, not only has the government failed them, it has failed the country too.
That's why we aim to empower young people to give them the maximum choice to build their own success.
Yes, we'll encourage people to stand on their own two feet, but we'll also seek to aid those who for a variety of reasons need a bit of extra help.
Unlike the present Conservative government, we see young people as a solution not a problem.
When I say we will invest in the young, I mean, for example, that we'll invest far more effectively in education and training.
One aim we have is to double the number of young people in full time study or college-based education and quality training after the age of 16.
We would also improve the opportunities for young people to go on with education and training to reach skill levels and qualifications which will match the best in Europe.
That will give every young person the best start to careers in the new Europe.
Young people in work also need the full protection that the law can offer.
We want to see them receive a contract of employment which would extend their rights, particularly in relation to health and safety.
One of the aims of this proposal would be to reduce the number of accidents at work involving young people.
But earning a living or having the money to be able to continue studying is, I know, just one area of concern for your readers.
Finding a roof over your head has become a real problem for many more thousands of young people seeking a home of their own.
We will extend the security of tenure in private rented accommodation to a similar level to that enjoyed by council tenants.
There are now many homeowners who are under the age of 25.
Giving them and other first-time buyers a higher rate of tax relief for an initial period will help to ease the financial pressures of the early days of home ownership.
Moving on through your questions, you also asked for ten people who have inspired me politically.
There are many more than ten but I would certainly say they include my grandmother Sarah Howells, and Rosa Parks, the black American woman whose protest sparked off the civil rights movement in the United States during the Sixties when she refused to move from a whites-only seat on a bus.
I was very privileged to meet her when I visited Georgia a few years ago: a remarkable and very courageous woman.
Others include Mahatma Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, Abraham Lincoln, Thomas Paine, Martin Luther King, Willy Brandt, Nye Bevan and a woman from my constituency who died very recently: her name was Olive Lloyd.
She was a county councillor and a good friend.
There are many people like Olive who have been an inspiration to me.
They may not have been famous, but their contributions have been vital and never forgotten.
And finally, what was I doing in summer 1980?
I was then Labour's Shadow Secretary of State for Education and I was busy opposing the Government's 1980 Education Act.
And on Saturdays I used to love doing something I miss very much now: coach the London/Welsh Mini rugby team.
How have I changed since then?
I'm ten years older!
But I feel even more optimistic about the future of our world now than I did then.
These are exciting times and you and your readers are very lucky.
Your generation will be the key architects who will help determine and shape the new world which will emerge in the new century.
I wish you well.
AR-SEE-NEE-YO
Text Cynthia Rose
He's the hottest thing in America, the ghetto kid making TV history.
As a black icon welcomed into millions of white homes chat show host ARSENIO HALL exerts unrivalled influence.
Does he know how to use it?
On October 29 1989, just as he did every Sunday, 17-year-old New Yorker Donald White trundled his mother's laundry basket to the local Wash-O-Rama.
Two and a half hours later, he was dead shot in the head and chest.
Donald had forgotten to reset his alarm clock for Daylight Savings Time, and was out in the street at 5.30am: prime drug-dealing time.
White was an hours student due to take his college entrance exams in only days: a place at university was his constant consuming dream.
He slept on a sofa-bed in his family's living room, surrounded by homework and books.
He was a good and devoted son, everything his mother could have wished.
And for his 39-year-old mother Linda, Donald's death was the second bereavement in a fortnight.
It came a week after she buried her mother, who had also shared their home.
Most reports of this incident underlined Mrs White's loss, or used her son as a metaphor for the ‘death of hope’ in a precinct riddled with drugs.
But the death of Donald White an all-American African-American kid who put this faith in his country's most traditional values symbolises something even more tragic.
And that is the growing divide of class within black America.
Through the late Seventies, black America was noted for cultural solidarity of impressive dimensions a shared drive for rights and representation which powered art and music no less than it did the Civil Rights movement.
But, even as the fruits of that movement's success began to be tasted, complex problems arose.
Middle and working class blacks were able to leave the inner cities but, increasingly, those they left behind lost the battle with poverty.
Unemployment and recession increased the decay of inner city social systems, and helped pave the way for the drug-fuelled despair of the late Eighties.
By the mid-Eighties, Americans had started to speak of a black ‘underclass’: now, one-third of the black US is officially classed as poor.
Theirs is an America of hardcore unemployment of gangs, of drugs and guns and struggle to make it from day to day.
Yet this America gave the world hip hop: arts which brag that ghetto values can equal their middle class opposites; music which takes pride in the language of the marginal.
Hip hop has become globally influential.
Yet across the United States, mainstream black radio rejects it.
That rejection is a key to social as much as musical objectives.
Says journalist Salim Muwakkil of Chicago paper in In These Times , ‘This ‘rap gap’ reflects a growing divide within the African-American community.
The income different and social distance between middle class blacks and those classified as poor is now larger than ever before in post-slavery history.’
In support of this, Muwakkil can cite some daunting statistics: in 1986, according to the US Census Bureau, the top fifth of black families received 47 per cent of the total black income in America.
The lowest fifth received, in stark contrast, 3.4 per cent.
Black representation, however, has improved.
Before 1965, America had fewer than 500 black elected officials.
Now there are around 7,000, 300 of them black mayors.
And from Spike Lee to Reverend Jesse Jackson, Michael Jordan to Philip Michael Thomas, black movers and shakers now shape US opinion on more than just race.
For instance: Donald White might have come home with his mother's laundry, read a chunk of Moby Dick , shot a few baskets, and kicked back to watch The Arsenio Hall Show .
Arsenio Hall is a 33-year-old African-American who, in the last year of White's young life, turned his primetime, nightly TV talk show into a transethnic media phenomenon.
Hall has made the covers of Time as well as the Village Voice , and ascended into ratings heaven (only one rival tops his statistics: the evergreen Johnny Carson Show ).
Ar-see-nee-yo embodies the early Nineties black middle class dream he controls as well as stars in his programme, hires his own staff, even wrote his own theme song (’ Hal Or Nothing’).
He's best friends with Eddie Murphy, and co-starts in Murphy's Harlem Nights , just as he did in Coming to America .
Exposure on his show is sought by politicians as well as screen celebrities, authors as well as stand-up comics, athletes and rappers.
And Hall takes the pick of the crop, from comics, athletes and rappers.
And Hall takes the pick of the crop, from Brooke Shields (who whom he posed the question, ‘You came right out and said you were a virgin, right?
Well, how things goin'?’) to Mike Tyson.
This March, I watched as Hall is presented with Soul Train's Sammy Davis Jr Award for ‘Exceptional achievements in the field of entertainment during 1989’.
I'm in Los Angeles with Britain's Soul II Soul, who, nominated for four Soul Train awards, receive a record three.
The following night, they are due to guest on Arsenio's show.
Like Donald White, Hall is a child of the ghetto: the son of a Cleveland preacher, the late Reverend Fred Hall, and his wife Annie.
His parents split, acrimoniously enough to involve guns, threats and beatings, when their son was still in school.
Again like Donald White, young Arsenio grew up in a houseful of women, living with his mother and grandmother.
He poured his energies into study and an ambition for something bigger.
Hall says he was very lonely (’ my friends were Johnny Carson and the guys on all-night radio’), and the role of popular TV talk show host became his personal fantasy.
But unlike Donald White, Hall had been able to turn fantasy into reality.
He became a young magician, who hustled his act onto local TV.
Eventually, he took a degree in communications at Ohio's Kent State University.
Then, after a quick stint in sales, Hall settled in Chicago, determined to make showbiz his life.
His starting point was stand-up comedy the thing he still does best, in 15-minute monologues at the start of every show.
The monologues at the start of every show.
The monologues (for which his writers and two white men and African-American J. Anthony Brown) are funky disquisitions on trivia of the day.
But they differ from any TV personality before him in the extensive use Hall makes of black English and African-American humour.
The ascent of Arsenio Hall has been a low but steady one.
In 1979, singer Nancy Wilson hired him to open her nightclub act.
By 1984, he had performed the same task for showbiz mainstreamers like Robert Goulet, Neil Sedaka and Tina Turner, and landed a job as second host on a short-lived talk show.
Then America's Fox cable network tapped him to replace Joan Rivers on another chatfest,The Late Show .
Back in 1980, Hall had met and been befriended by Eddie Murphy and, by the time The Late Show failed, the two had made Coming to America .
Most US media-watchers agree that Hall's exposure in that film had much to do with his landing a primetime podium of his own.
Nevertheless, Hall's show has made US TV history.
Within weeks of its inception, American homes were reverberating to rap, and watching white celebrities trade sexual energies with their black counterparts.
Hall, it seemed, was closing the rap gap on prime, middle American time; he offered the 2 Live Crew doing ‘Me So Horny’ as well as actor James Caan; Luther Vandross warbling ‘Here And Now’in addition to Glenn Close.
Plus his monologue and repartee with his studio audience, Hall was proud to be street-smart retailing in-jokes and zinging forth slang which is all black, yet hardly all middle class.
Ar-see-nee-yo coaxes boxer Tommy Hearns into imitating James Brown, gets Bobby Brown to do the Running Man, eats fried pies packed by Malcolm Jamal-Warner's loving grandma.
He is a new black American for the Nineties: proud to be upwardly mobile, yet also unashamed of his community's ghetto connections.
The sort of role model a kid like Donald White deserved.
Not all black Americans agree with that assessment.
Spike Lee has called Hall ‘an Uncle Tom’ citing the minimal number of African-American employees at Arsenio Hall Communications.
Then there has been his public struggle with a man named Willis Edwards, President of the Hollywood chapter of American's venerable NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People).
At the beginning of Hall's show in 1988, Edwards, too, complained about a lack of affirmative hiring practices.
Hall claims that Edwards followed his complaints with a ‘demand’ for a $40,000 contribution to his organisation.
When the TV star subsequently referred to him in interviews as ‘an extortionist’ and ‘a tennis show pimp’, the angry Edwards brought two $10 million suits against Hall for defamation suits which were thrown out of court this March.
Such stories come creeping into my mind as I sit on set at Arsenio Hall's Paramount studio, watching Soul II Soul rehearse.
For if truth be told, there aren't many black faces to be seen and there certainly aren't black voices raised when the shots are being called.
Hall's producer Maria Kell Brown, his director Sandy Fullerton, his company's vice-president, Cheryl Bonacci, and his icy publicist, Dana Friendman, are all young white women, power-dressed Hollywood style.
Demeanour around the studio also seems the antithesis of Hall's patented laidback vibe.
The rows of luxury dressing rooms bear fresh gold nameplates and stars (’ Jazzie B’, ‘Soul II Soul Female’, ‘Soul II Soul Male’).
But the UK's headlining musical guests are surprised that none of the staff seem to know their records or videos (shown to the point of saturation on MTV and BET).
An exception is fellow guest Jamie Lee Curtis who shows herself to be a fervent Soul II Soul fan.
Otherwise, the atmosphere at TV's famous primetime party remains distinctly one of cool careerism.
In the lavish green room, a stone-faced young MC regales me with units shifted and ‘captive domestic sales’ statistics.
In the corridors outside, tight-faced women sweep by guests and scheduled performers.
Warm-up man Daley Pike works the enthusiastic crowd, carefully testing the good humour of various individuals.
Later, I notice, Hall approaches the very same guests for his moments of spontaneous chat.
OK, so it's all tightly controlled.
OK, so he drops the charm at every commercial break often deserting a guest to make straight for the waiting make-up girls.
It's weird to see Hall dependent on handwritten cue cards as he gushes over Soul II Soul.
But the band's two numbers look good, the audience loves 'em and, as Jazzie B finished up, Arsenio leaps into shot to embrace him.
What he doesn't do in contrast to his practice with musical guests is to invite Jazzie to talk.
Still, after the recording, Jazzie slips into fresh Armanis to offer Hall a thank-you and a customised Soul II Soul jacket.
And, what a surprise!
Streetsmart Ar-see-nee-yo recoils as if in fear from the guest he embraced only minutes earlier.
While a black floor manager literally holds Hall's protesting publicist back, a confused Jazzie B settles for proffering thanks and sharing a shapshot.
The minute it's taken, though, Hall is off into the VIP trailer from which he walks straight onto the set.
The customised jacket will go back to London.
And, having supplied tonight's hip credentials, Soul II Soul are summarily ushered out.
‘I'll have to explain it later,’ murmurs a tense-looking employee.
‘There's a black-white thing going on.’
What kind of black-white thing?
Couldn't Mr Hall just be having some kind of bad day?
Maybe: maybe not.
Whichever, it seems that Arsenio isn't quite the sort of cultural diplomat I had optimistically pictured.
And, later that evening, I met a black British journalist who agrees.
Currently employed by black music's biggest trade publication Black Radio Exclusive , Dotun Adebayo is on a sabbatical from London paper The Voice .
‘Look,’ he tells me, ‘I'm happy that Arsenio Hall is up there.
Cause if he wasn't there would be no black talk show host.
But the power he's got is scary.
Hall is more powerful than Jesse Jackson; if he has Jesse on the show, he's doing the guy a favour!’
Adebayo pauses.
‘He's got young black America eating out of his hand, because every night he takes their culture, and shoves it in mainstream America's face.
But also I think he rips off that culture.
OK, he's got every right to it.
But his white audience made him, and he loves that audience.
When I spoke to him, Hall said the great thing about his show was that he let black artists speak for themselves, in their own voices.
But who has Louis Farrakhan on his show?
Phil Donohue a white TV host watched mainly by housewives!
Not Arsenio Hall.’
Adebayo laughs.
‘And I didn't hear Jazzie talking, either.’
Adebayo's boss, BRE editor Ruth Robinson, worked with Arsenio Hal in 1985, when he was the house comedian for an NBC series she produced.
More recently, she did a BRE cover story with the star.
‘Personally,’ she says, ‘I don't like Hall or his humour.
I think he's just got a marginal talent he's masterful at exploiting.
Sammy Davis Jr is a close personal friend of mine.
And the idea they gave him the Sammy Davis Jr Award just infuriates me.
They did it because he's got a vast audience they wanted those people to watch their awards on TV.’
As my week-long stay in LA unrolls, I begin to discover that everyone has decided views about Arsenio.
He's gay.
No, he's obsessed with white women.
He's ‘really an affable guy’.
No, he's pretty much of a jerk in his personal dealings’.
He's ‘Eddie's stooge’; no, he's actually ‘Eddie's boyfriend’.
His ego is stunted by terminal insecurity; au contraire, it's bigger than his billboard on Hollywood Boulevard.
Only one thing emerges clearly, and it doesn't concern Arsenio the man.
It's that the class antipathies of black American culture the ‘rap gap’ have grown too wide for any one person, star or politician, to bridge.
Arsenio Hall, like Britain's Jazzie B, is running a multiracial thing to which anyone is welcome.
Both are mould-breaking black role models and both have had to learn to organise and delegate as well as proselytise and promote.
But there, I'm afraid, the parallels diverge.
When it comes to who he can bring with him, Arsenio Hall is no Soul II Soul; he's up there with Farrah and Luther and yuppie power-brokers, not with the guys from the old neighbourhood.
As Dotun Adebayo puts it: ‘The fact is that, offscreen, Arsenio Hall is not so black.
What he really represents is Hollywood.’
Hollywood plays a salient part in how Jazzie B views Soul II Soul's brief encounter with Hall.
‘It's a shame,’ he shrugs, ‘cause I came out here thinkin' we'd be able to sit down and talk.
A black British guy putting his views on US TV what could have been more beautiful?
‘But there's nothing really wrong with what went on.
Say we picture ourselves in a desert and all these people want some water, but one person goes and gets it?
Then it's that person's prerogative it's up to him if he wants to show everyone else where the water is.
He's the water man, cause he had the strength to go out there and find it.’
Jazzie looks at his hotel table, crowded with award statuettes.
Then he look sat me.
‘Now if another geezer were to come along and find another path up to the well…
Well, the water man better look out.
Cause the picture's opening up.’
Except that, in black America, the picture is not getting any brighter.
The week Donald White was shot, New York saw eight similar deaths: black students, good kids in the right place at the wrong moment.
A 1989 report from Washington, DC has just revealed that up to 23 per cent of young African-American men between the ages of 20 and 29 are under some kind of penal supervision.
And, despite the huge increase in black elected officials, the ambitions of African-American politicians do not always serve the needs of their poorest constituents.
‘An accumulation of socioeconomic problems that have been developing for 25 years are closing in on blacks like a vice,’ says veteran African-American author and social theorist Harold Cruse.
Arsenio Hall alone could hardly hope to solve such problems.
Yet, with one foot on each side of the rap gap, his power to affect the world which killed Donald White is very real.
Already, he has had some effect in cooling cultural animosities, in ‘bringing the ghetto to the suburb and the suburb to the ghetto’.
Most white people,’ Hall told Time , ‘have never been to a party at a black person's house.
I want them to say, ‘This one looks nice maybe I'll give it a try’.’
Certainly white folks are flocking to join the party at Hall's place: by February 1990, his show was number one with America's wealthy under-35 demographic.
But, having watched his house being built, I'm not sure I'd buy it.
Arsenio as icon and celebrity, signing autographs in the street (top); and with his best friend Eddie Murphy in Coming to America (left)
Not everyone approves this upwardly mobile black American.
Spike Lee has described him as ‘an Uncle Tom’
Soul II Soul's Jazzie B was left confused.
After posing for this snapshot, Arsenio gave him the brush off.
Arsenio with Jazzie B (right).
Both mould-breaking black role models, but there, it seems, the parallels diverge.
Photo Julian Broad
EXPO STEVEN MEISEL
Five years ago, in our 5th birthday issue, THE FACE named American photographer Steven Meisel (left) as one of the fifteen talented individuals poised to make their mark in the coming decade.
Fashion photography is vastly overrated as a creative medium.
Its role of selling and being informative about clothes is often ill-served when at its most creative; when at its most commercial, it is often less than interesting.
Yet no branch of photography has the fetish status of the fashion image.
This is because within the subject's apparent superficial and narrow concerns, it is possible to create a document that can speak more clearly about its own times than any balanced attempt to view them.
It is the specifics of his vision that the pictures of Steven Meisel excel.
‘There are a lot of different aspects,’ he says.
‘The model, the client, the clothes, the designer.
It's all in my head they're an extension of my life, my images.
It's almost like writing fiction, a love story.’
Working with an elite crew of stylists, hair and make-up artists, Meisel's real talent lies in his ability to consistently focus these elements: the choice of clothes, the use of make-up.
‘It's like directing a film,’ he says.
For Italian Vogue he dyed the skin of Linda Evangelista nearly black and painted Rachel Williams silver not just to produce a great photograph (although he has produced many), but to synthesise a vision of fashion that is more significant than showing clothes.
As well as manipulating external appearances, he has a unique ability to reach inside and find the sex in his subjects.
Not just to show that the girls and boys he photographs are sexually attractive, but somehow to find the greater truth about the nature and variety of sexual attraction as a positive force in us all.
Meisel is beginning to direct videos and says he is losing interest in fashion as a subject: ‘It all seems mediocre to me, uninspiring.
I'm going further with my photography.
Before I was working for magazines now I take pictures for myself.’
The models he works with may be shot by all the big name photographers, but it is the pictures that they do with Steven Meisel that will make them the icons of our times.
Robin Derrick 
Steven Meisel photographed by Stephen Sednaoui
CLUB REPORT
Text DENIS CAMPBELL Photography PATRICK HARRISON
When the rest of Britain is closing for the night, the clubs in GLASGOW are just starting to warm up.
Liberal Year Of Culture licensing laws are giving Glaswegians an unprecedented freedom to party, and the dance scene is rising to the challenge.
GLASGOW
In mid-March this year 18-year-old Jason McCreadie joined two coachloads of fellow Glaswegian clubbers on a Saturday night trip over Hadrian's Wall to sample the delights of Manchester's Hacienda.
The visitors were having a great time until suddenly the lights went up and bar staff started howling, ‘Give us your pots and glasses and start moving on out, PLEASE!’.
It was 2.30am.
None of the regulars batted an eyelid, but the sweaty faces of the dance-crazy Glaswegians fell.
2.30?
That was early,seriously early; far too early to go home.
But Britain being Britain, where the licensing laws are as restrictive as ever, they had no choice.
None of the Glaswegians regretted making the trip, but a few grumbled about what seemed a ludicrously early chucking-out time.
So much for Rave On Madchester.
After all, they reasoned, if this was 2.30 in Glasgow, they would have only just got to a club, ready for a full night's dancing and drinking till the almost daylight hour of 5.30am.
Two weeks later Jason went to Scotland's biggest-ever rave.
Glasgow's massive Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre was packed with 3,500 clubbers.
Adamski, Beats International and a local dance outfit called Rejeuvenation performed live; the Hacienda's Jon Da Silva was among the DJs: and a bar till 1am, plus an all-night juice bar, kept the crowd refreshed till going home time 8am.
About 90 per cent of the ravers were still dancing enthusiastically when closedown finally came.
Apart from the fact that Jason, like many others, had the best night of his life, the 12-hour event passed off uneventfully.
The newspapers in Glasgow didn't run any sensational stories about kids indulging in drugs, mass drunkenness or violence.
Glasgow police, who had given the event their blessing, afterwards had ‘no knowledge of any great hassle’.
And Glasgow City Council even went so far as to make the rave an official 1990 European City of Culture happening.
This tale of two cities neatly illustrates why, virtually unnoticed by the outside world.
Glasgow is fast becoming Britain's undisputed mecca for raving.
Liberal licensing laws brought in to entice European visitors to Culture Club mean Glaswegians are experiencing unprecedented freedom to party.
Throughout 1990 pubs can stay open till 2am, clubs till 5.30am.
Glasgow's close association with the Mr Smiley logo predates acid house by several years, his happy face harnessed in 1983 to sell the world the PR legend, ‘Glasgow's Miles Better’.
In 1990, Glasgow's grin is threatening to crack wide open.
Buoyed by the European-style licensing regime, a co-operative local police force and the growing nationwide popularity of dance music, Glasgow's club scene is booming.
Stuart McMillan and his partner Orde Meikle from the Slam DJ crew, Scotland's most imaginative cub runners.
As well as organising the occasional raves like the SECC event, they host regular Friday and Saturday night clubs at Glasgow's Sub Club and are in constant demand to arrange Slam nights in towns like Stirling, Dundee and Ayr.
Glaswegian clubbers were a bit slow at first to take advantage of the late opening hours, says Stuart, but are now making up for lost time.
‘When most clubs in England are closing, we're just getting busy.
I was DJing at the Hacienda last Wednesday and it closed at 2am: that was very weird.
In Glasgow now it's like the Continent.
People are more relaxed.
And as a DJ it means you can pace the night better, play a lot of different sorts of music and try and create a rave atmosphere in the club.’
About 60 per cent of clubbers at Joy on Friday nights stay till towards the end of the night, Stuart says.
An even higher percentage, about 80 per cent, do so on Saturday ‘because there's no work the next day’.
Those figures, and the number of clubs in Glasgow taking advantage of the late opening four every Friday, seven on Saturdays prove there is a demand for European-style licensing hours.
But another veteran Glasgow club runner, Graham Wilson, disagrees.
‘From an owner's point of view, I don't think it's a good thing.
It means you have to keep club staff there for a lot longer, till about 6.30, and that people spend their money over a longer period of time.
And on Saturday nights most people stay till about 4.30; the crowd starts dwindling after that.’
His new venture, The Champion, opening in early June, will close at the traditional time of 3.30am.
‘I'd rather give people a really good night from 11 to 3.30.
That's better than letting it drag and drag; you lose a lot of the vibe that way.
At the moment people aren't coming in till 1.30 and that makes it harder for the DJ to get an atmosphere going.
Maybe the 5.30 thing every week is too much.
But if you had it once in a while, it means it stays special.’
British pubs and clubs usually face great difficulty securing a late licence on anything approaching a regular basis because of fears that longer hours will mean increased drunken mayhem.
But according to Superintendent Angus Kennedy of Strathclyde Police, Glasgow's experience proves the opposite: that longer hours actually reduce manic ‘binge drinking’ getting a last one or two ‘in’before the bell and encourage people to drink more sensibly.
‘Drinking is a little more relaxed, a little more controlled.
The late hours haven't brought more problems,’ he says.
Significantly, instances of people committing the criminal offence of being ‘drunk and incapable’ in Glasgow's streets have fallen slightly so far this year compared to last.
‘We are facing a greater distribution of a slightly reduced number of offences.
There are still roughly the same amount of people who do get drunk and create a problem, but we are now dealing with the street offences they cause at two or three o'clock rather than ten till midnight.’
Police have had no problems at all with clubbers at 5 or 5.30 in the morning, he says.
Watching the young rave crowd at Soul 2/UFO (Unlimited Freak Out), two-clubs-in-one every Saturday at Tin Pan Alley, it's easy to see why.
Among the club's industrial modernist design, blatantly derivative of a certain club in Manchester, there are as many people drinking Lucozade, Orangina and Purdey's energy drink as there are the Continental bottled lagers.
Jason McCreadie and his mate Matthew Hanna, sweating profusely after 90 minutes' non-stop dancing to the techno rhythms, pull up chairs and open their rucksack.
Out tumble towels, a hairbrush and a melon.
They tuck in appreciatively.
Other clubbers look on with amused curiosity.
Jason says UFO is his favourite night of the week.
He and Matthew come every Saturday as soon as the doors open at 11 so they can dance all night.
‘It's like a rave every week.
There's a really good atmosphere.
I love the music and there's no trouble, unlike the club I used to go to.
There was stabbings there every week.’
In the gents loo, an old guy sits doing the Daily Record crossword while the red-faced clubbers wearing a mixture of sportsgear, the odd Happy Mondays G-Mex sweatshirt, ponchos and flares set to work on their hair with free gel and mousse.
John Miller, 57, is a big Frank Sinatra fan.
He has worked as the men's room assistant for three years.
He says UFO will be busy tonight as usual till about 4.30am.
He seems mystified by the fact that, as he says, ‘most people come here for the dancing and the music.’
In other words, not simply to get steaming.
‘The younger generation now, not nearly so many of them drink or smoke.
They're getting more educated, they can come out and enjoy themselves without that.
They're here for the music and to enjoy themselves.’
As proof, he says 95 per cent of Soul 2/UFO's crowd ‘leave in the same state they came in (ie, not drunk).
You get an isolated few who get smashed.
But the majority are no problem.’
Later, down Atlantis at the Sub Club, keyboard star Mr Monday walks in and straight up to the Slam boys Orde and Stuart at the DJ console.
He is playing later in another club, The Warehouse.
It was packed, further proof that dance music is now threatening to displace rock and pop as the most popular live musical entertainment in Glasgow.
Over the last two years, the amount of hoardings covering by flyers for raves, rather than rock gigs, has spiralled.
Glenn Gibbons, half of Glasgow dance outfit Rejeuvenation (aka Timebomb), confirms times are changing.
He talks of the growing infrastructure of Glasgow's dance music scene: the clubs, the enthusiasm, Mercury Radio pirate station recently back on air and the next move a Glaswegian record label to showcase the talents emerging round the city.
Rejeuvenation and the Slam crew, co-creators of the as yet unnamed label, will be the first to record, then it'll be thrown open to DJs, rappers and dance-inspired indie acts.
Perhaps the most remarkable evidence of Scotland's rapid conversation to dance music is the emergence of clubs in places like Motherwell, Ayr and Saltcoats.
Dance artists are starting to appear regularly in these apparently far-flung corners of Britain.
The Metropolis in Saltcoats, for example, recently pulled off a major coup by securing a live set from Chaka Khan.
The place was packed.
Glenn: ‘People will be like, ‘Where the fuck is Saltcoats?’
Nobody knows where Saltcoats is.
It's a seaside town on the west coast of Scotland and it's getting all these American stars down there all the time.’
Something is clearly going on.
More amazing is the fact that these towns don't have the benefit of City of Culture-style licensing laws, yet are still buzzing.
Jim Muotome, Glenn's partner, says Glasgow is starting to get more and more ravers from down south.
‘People like Mike Pickering and Jon Da Silva are up here DJing all the time and they're telling people down there there's a good scene going on here.’
Meeting clubbers from both Manchester and Liverpool that night in Atlantis proved it wasn't an idle boast.
‘People want to dance all night, that's why the come.
It's simple,’ insists Jim.
Glenn predicts there'll be a ‘massive vibe’ in Glasgow this summer, based on growing awareness of its one-year-only legal rave potential.
‘Everything will be happening legally so kids won't have to worry about what the police are going to stop them doing on the M25 or wherever.
They're going to pay their £15, go to loads of raves, get in OK, get the 12 hours’ worth of dance music they've paid for, and they'll enjoy it.
It'll be comfortable and easy.’
After all, he reasons, Glasgow is closer to London or Manchester than Reykjavik or Ibiza.
Ready for all-night raving, Jason McCreadie and Matthew Hanna (below) tuck in at Soul 2/UFO.
Opposite: early morning at Sub Club
Glasgow, 1990 is like being ‘on the Continent’.
Opposite page: the Sub Club is open to 5.30am, pubs to 2am.
Flyers in the shops bear witness to increased club activity, as do dance outfits like Rejuevenation (bottom right).
This page: Frank Sinatra fan John Miller, an enthusiastic employee at UFO (top), taking a break at Joy (top right), and the Slam crew at the Sub Club (right)
THEY MUST BE RUSSIANS
10 SOVIETS
The west gave them Big Macs and Paul McCartney.
What have the Soviets to offer us in return?
As the Russian new wave moves out into the mainstream, here are ten Soviet names to watch.
ACID COMMUNISM
VOVA SINIY (Cheliabinsk)
Coming from a desperate industrial province in the Ural mountains which lacks any kind of hi-fi electrical equipment.
Vova nevertheless has managed to make some of the funniest and most up-to-date Soviet sound recordings of the mid-Eighties.
The trick was simple; he made loops of Western rhythm tracks (by The B-52s, Talking Heads, The The and many others) and dubbed his own voice on to them, thus pioneering a sampling technique in the Soviet Union by using only two simple tape recorders.
Like many other provincials who took too many chances, he was pursued by local officials and, again like many before him, he was drafted into the army.
Discharged in 1988 he returned to his old job but was soon arrested for possessing cannabis.
He's now on the loose but under strict control.
His latest recording is the acid house track.
‘Acid Communizm’, a title which Vova has earned the right to use.
SIBERIAN SEX PISTOL
ALEXANDER CHIRKIN (Novosibirsk)
The singer of Putti (they claim it means ‘angels’ in Latin), the leaders of the current Siberian punk explosion (other bands include Instruction for Survival, Civil Defence, No Particular Place to Live…
). Their biggest hit was called ‘But I Love Sergeyevitch!’ which was probably the first pop song to treat Mikhail Sergeyevitch Gorbachev in a friendly if rather frivolous manner.
A SOVIET LICHENSTEIN
GEORGY LITICHEVSKY (Moscow)
Nicknamed Zhorik, Litichevsky is very tall, very shy and is the premier cartoon/comics artist in the USSR.
His cartoons do not reflect their creator's peaceful psyche; they are violent, absurdist and occasionally sick frequently described as ‘black humour’ so the press rarely publish them.
Zhorik has also developed an interesting new style: huge sheets with paintings that recall Roy Lichenstein's pictures but executed in a naïve, ethnic style that could be either Russian or New Guinean.
They are extremely funny, suggestive and attractive.
BRUCE LEE OR BROS?
VICTOR TSOY (Leningrad)
Right now he's probably the number one rock star and teen idol in the Soviet Union something impossible to imagine several years ago.
Tsoy is half-Korean and from the underbelly of Leningrad's punk community: he used to accompany the band Swine on rhythm guitar in 1981.
In 1982 he started his band Kino, who have grown into the powerful guitar quartet with a distinctive style; nice pop melodies and hooky chord changes, monotonous vocals and punk drive.
The lyrics deal with teenage frustrations and breaking through to the other side.
Their own breakthrough happened in 1987, with the tremendous success of their ‘Blood Group’ tape and Tsoy's appearances in two cult youth movies Assa , and Rashid Nugmanov's The Needle .
He's brought a brand new character to the anxious Soviet youngsters the image of a lonely hero, an almost Byronic but modern-day romantic with a sympathetic soul and rock'n'roll drive, something like a cross between James Dean and Bruce Lee.
(The latter is Tsoy's biggest hero.)
Fortunately fame hasn't changed Victor Tsoy much he's still a silent loner.
His band play only once a month, although they're offered 15,000 roubles per night.
Kino's international success is pretty doubtful however as the image is nothing new and the lyrics don't really get through.
However, ‘Blood Group’ did get rave reviews in the US music press when it was released on Goldcastle Records in 1989.
RED VELVET
VASILY SHUMOV (Moscow)
The lonely hunter of Moscow rock, often misunderstood but indifferent to public opinion.
A fan of Arthur Rimbaud and The Velvet Underground, his band The Centre are responsible for some of the best rock produced in the Soviet Union, and also for introducing Moscow to punk and new wave music.
They have recorded about 15 tape albums and released one single on Melodia.
In 1989 Barclay Records in France released their eponymous LP and CD, a well-produced greatest hits compilation which was chosen as album of the month by Actuel magazine.
Shumov refuses to sing in English, claiming that his mission is to establish Russian as an international rock language.
RUSSIA'S KID CREOLE
IGOR SUKHACHOV (Moscow)
At the very dawn of his career Igor was fired as lead singer in a band that chose Zhanna Aguzarova in his place.
After two years he was back heading Brigade S, a swing pop band who borrowed much from Kid Creole And The Coconuts.
With their unique dance/chic approach they quickly became very popular and have maintained their following.
One of their cleverest moves was to adopt a distinctive ‘Soviet’ image military outfits, party haircuts and a logo saying ‘Proletarian Jazz Band’.
They're very professional, very entertaining and almost meaningless, all of which augurs well for their chances of succeeding in the West.
ANGST IN THE USSR
ALEXANDER BASHLACHEV (Russia)
It's impossible to say which city Bashlachev belonged to because he was raised in the northern town of Cherepovets, studied at Sverdlovsk University and spent the last few years of his life wandering between Moscow, Leningrad and Siberia.
A poet of unique power and a passionate singer, he created a new universe of Russian roots rock and attracted a huge cult following.
He was never recognised officially, principally because of the painful sincerity of songs that portray the lowest depths of spiritual and material Russia.
Only after he committed suicide in February 1988 did the mass media acknowledge his talents and create a Bashlachev boom.
Posthumous records and books have been released and nowadays Bashlachev is recognised as the only bona fide genius of Russian rock.
EXILE ON GORKY STREET
GEORGY OSTRESOV (Moscow-Paris
Probably the most promising young artist in Moscow during 1987/88, Gosha (his nickname) created deeply ironic but perfectly executed and tasteful artworks in the agit-prop tradition, paintings, tablecloths, ceramics and even costumes.
In late 198 he went to live in France and rumour has it he is now studying orthodox icon painting.
His costumes may be observed every day in Gorky Street, off the Belorussian Station, in the windows of ABV, the first co-operative clothing store in Moscow.
The owner says he is constantly being approached to sell the clothes for hundreds of dollars, but he prefers the publicity they generate.
ROCKABILLY REBEL
ZHANNA AGUZAROVA (Moscow)
Born in Central Asia, raised in Siberia, Zhanna became a vital figure in Moscow's new wave after failing her exams for Theatre College and joining rockabilly group Bravo.
They became an overnight sensation but were arrested for performing illegally in 1984, and Zhanna spent time in jail and in exile.
Since here return in 1985, Bravo have become Very Big in Soviet pop fully recognised by the authorities despite their criminal past.
Zhanna has no rivals as a female rock singer and is now among the top three Soviet women the others are All a Pugachova and Sophia Rotaru who reach the wider pop audience.
In December 1988 she quit Bravo to form a new band less influenced by the Fifties and more inclined towards ethnic music and modern electronic sounds.
Zhanna is exceptionally talented but very difficult, a problem child who may become either a huge international star or a provincial restaurant singer.
NEW JUNK COUTURE
IRENA MURMISTROVA (Moscow)
Of all the Soviet fashion designers, Burmistrova is probably the most ‘alternative’ and least ‘wearable’(see feature in FACE 12).
Her clothes are made from rubber, plastic metal and any other kind of junk and often resemble either Russian wooden dolls (matrioshki) or astronauts' costumes.
They look wild and witty but are only worn at shows for shock value by Gruppa Iren, her small company.
TV loves them as a bunch of token weirdos.
Text ARTEMY TROITSKY Tusokva is Russian for ‘new wave’.
It is also the title of a book by Soviet journalist Artemy Troitsky.
Published by Omnibus (£8.95), it features in-depth interviews with key cultural figures alongside a directory of 100 prominent young designers, artists, musicians and media brats.
This is our selection: over there now, but coming to the new Europe soon.
Two faces from the Russian new wave: artist GEORGY OSTRESOV (opposite) has already left to study in Paris, but designer IRENA BURMISTROVA, whose clothes are shown on this page, is now accepted as one of Moscow's token weirdos.
More breaking glasnost over page
ANIMAL MAGIC
Text MARK SINKER Illustration THE DOUGLAS BROTHERS
In the controversial area of biotechnology, science has stepped into the twilight zone.
We can now mix species to create whole NEW ANIMALS that nature never intended.
Science has given us the technology, but do we have the right to use it?
The Chimera, in classical Greek legend, was a monster, part lion, part dragon, part goat, which laid waste to the region of Lycia.
This fire breathing pest was eventually destroyed by the hero Bellepheron.
In a little field in Cambridge lives a mild-mannered modern-day equivalent, a mix'n'match half-goat, half-sheep.
It's laid waste to nowhere.
It just munches grass, unaware of the ethical storm brewing around it.
In the wake of the gene-splicing revolution, we have the technology but have we the right to make our own animals?
The scientists who brought it into being, at the Institute of Animal Physiology in 1984, call it ‘the Sheep-like Goat Chimera’, a careful, if ominous, name.
Forlornly comical in photos, with its gaunt face and fluffy body, no one else from dusty patent lawyers to impassioned animal rights activists can resist calling it the Gheep.
And with a name like this, of course, it never cut it as Bright Promise, or as Horrid Warning.
Genetic engineering, in the last five years, has thrown up far bolder visions and far darker threats.
In 1953, Francis Crick and James Watson had a discovery that made genetic engineering possible: they uncovered the famous ‘double helix’ structure in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the molecular code for all life and reproduction.
In the following years, scientists discovered the biochemical codings by which cells produced proteins and exactly replicated themselves (the information ‘packets’ in DNA), and the mechanisms of random mutation which had allowed life to evolve to its present complexity and variety.
Then, during the Seventies, the techniques needed to slice and dice DNA accurately were developed.
Science has quietly stepped into the science fiction zone.
Now, in principle, we can invent our own animals.
Not so much in the matter of the Gheep, which is a laborious one-off grown from a composite embryo, but rather by actually shuffling genes.
The genes from elephants could be combined with the genes from worms, bats and angler fish.
As technology improves, adherents claim, we'll be able to engineer cures for hereditary diseases, from baldness to sickle cell anaemia.
For a world that desperately needs to find new ways of feeding itself, there'll be disease-resistant crops, super-woolly sheep and wingless chickens the size of Mini Metros.
SECRECY
This research went on throughout the Eighties, attracting huge investment.
In the US, some 500 companies sprang up to exploit and develop this new technology.
Other countries, including West Germany and Japan, are following, and the UK is a world leader in research, though our country's usual secrecy has kept it out of the headlines.
Some pressure groups the UK Genetics Forum, the Green Alliance, and Compassion in World Farming are already ferociously well-informed, but they're small and their voices don't carry.
The larger organisations are only beginning to wake up.
As a result, experiments with unsettling implications may be going on behind everyone's backs.
In the days of classical agriculture, breeders and stud farmers tricked and cajoled the best features out of many species, focusing on the most economically viable lines for cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry.
Now, though still experimental, the methods of gene-transfer promise to bring about even more productive variations, crossing the species-lines that has stopped nature cold.
This is the science of transgenics.
Supermice have been grown, injected with rat growth hormone; and similar transfer of human genes, for quick growth, to cattle, sheep and pigs became a possibility.
At Edinburgh's Institute for Animal Physiology and Genetics, human genes were introduced into mice and sheep which then produced valuable human proteins, including easily retrievable blood-clotting agents and insulin.
Enzyme and bacteria factories for pharmaceutical products have become hugely advanced.
Experimental mice the ‘SCID-hu mice’(Severe Combined Immune Deficient human tissue mice), which can transmit genetic information for HIV into their offspring have been cultured in America: a potential boon for AIDS research.
This is revolutionary technology, perhaps the most far-reaching ever devised.
It's also very big business.
As early as 1975, at a conference in California, Nobel laureate Paul Berg called for a partial moratorium on certain kinds of experiment.
But then something happened that had simply not happened with an previous ‘miracle’ technology the people demanded a voice.
The people, in the shape of an obstreperous native Chicagoan, Jeremy Rifkin.
Rifkin has been at the forefront of the struggle to make biotechnology accountable to the public since 1977, when he invaded the stage at a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, brandishing a banner reading ‘Don't tread on my genes.’
He formed the Foundation for Economic Trends (FET) that same year, which has since coordinated a stream of public actions designed to embarrass science and the corporations.
FET has been instrumental in blocking experimental release of genetically engineered organisms into the environment; has helped halt a BioWar facility in Utah: and has fought successful court battles with the US Department of Agriculture, the National Institute of Health, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Defence Department.
Rifkin believes that transgenic research raises serious environmental, ethical and social questions.
He charges scientists and corporations involved in it with basic misrepresentation especially when they claim that the techniques are no more than sophisticated extensions of classical breeding skills.
‘That's simply not true.
In classical breeding and in nature, it's possible to cross some species borders, but you cannot cross all species borders as well.’
The dangers of releasing our creations into the world are, he insists, very real.
Because we're massively speeding up the evolutionary process, we may well create destabilisation within the ecosystem.
‘For example, if you start placing human growth hormones into salmon, and they are released into the environment and start overproducing, they could become a real problem to the stability of the environment.’
He also emphasises the ethics: ‘Certainly if anyone were to advocate placing whale genes or elephant growth hormone genes into the genetic code of a human embryo, so that it would grow to sexual maturity at age six, and twice as tall…
I suspect most people would find that to be ethically unacceptable.
I don't understand why we don't apply the same logic to other mammals.
‘Also, it changes our view of ourselves and nature to think of all creatures as just genetic programmes in temporary configuration.
We lose a sense of an owl being an owl, a duck being duck, an oak being an oak tree.
I think that does a disservice, because it desacralises our concept of the meaning of life.’
Rifkin's very good at bringing these questions together into one emotional package, but there are several different dilemmas here, all tangled together.
There are animals rights issues, as exemplified by the SCID-mice.
Even if it's true that unrivalled new opportunities for AIDS study and drugs testing will result, is it morally OK to deliberately build disease into animals from birth?
Take the Beltsville Pig.
At Beltsville in Maryland, a pig injected with human growth hormone grew up to display substantially less backfat (potentially valuable from the AgriBusiness point of view), but it also suffered from arthritis, poor vision, lack of leg coordination and ‘susceptibility to stress’.
‘New’ animals may be subject to‘new’disorders, and ‘better’, more disease-resistant animals may tempt AgriBusiness to keep them in worse conditions.
RESEARCH
This sort of research, which critics describe as ‘playing God’, gets even more morally knotty when it comes to gene therapy, with its potential for monitoring and altering human genes to check for and eliminate hereditary diseases.
The uniquely horrible twentieth century examples of eugenics attempts at social engineering based on breeding towards ‘purer’ human lines haunts any programme to ‘improve’the gene-line.
The Nazis are the most notorious, but the United States also instituted eugenic programmes for a while before WWII.
Last year, FET won a case to block experiments that would insert tailored genes into terminally ill cancer patients.
It wants such work halted until a ‘Human Eugenics Advisory Committee’ has been set up which includes civil liberties experts and representatives for the disabled.
Those who develop ‘improved’ transgenic lines want a return for their money.
As with every other technological innovation, they may attempt to protect their ‘inventions’ which means after altering the genes, they could slap a patent on it, making it possible to own not just an idea and a technique, but the matrix of a living animal.
The OncoMouse, developed at Harvard University by Philip Leder and Timothy Stewart and marketed by pharmaceutical giant Du Pont, became the first patented animal in 1988.
A experimental lab animal with a high susceptibility to developing malignant tumours was created by inserting an ‘oncogene’(a cancer tumour sequence coding) into a fertilised egg.
It is potentially an excellent subject for testing possible cancer vaccines.
The patent extends to cover any ‘non-human eukaryotic animal’(anything that isn't a bacteria).
It also turns a dream into a solid business proposition, worth the considerable investment.
Following a series of decisions in the US courts, the US Patent Office can, in principle grant patents for multi-cellular animals, providing they're non-natural and non-human .
OPPOSITION
This has generated forceful opposition.
Dr Michael Fox, scientific director of the Humane Society of the United States has warned that if such patenting becomes the norm, ‘the wholesale industrialised exploitation of the animal kingdom will be sanctioned, protected and intensified.’
In turn this will accelerate the ‘transformation of life and of the creative process to serve purely human ends, and, as many see it, the end of the natural world.’
Much of the concern hinges on the question of biodiversity.
In principle, genetic engineering increases the diversity of species, but there is a very real danger that big business could concentrate promotional muscle on a small number of successful lines.
For example a big pesticide firm may become the only outlet for a seed resistant to its own weedkiller chemicals, which could force farmers in developing countries especially into potentially ruinous dependence.
Even if it didn't lead to the elimination of all the older, ‘flawed’ models, a narrow range of ‘new’species might well reduce the older ones to huddled groups in farming heritage parks.
With this in mind, banks have already been set up to conserve species, and some theorists are urgently arguing that we should begin to treat genetic information as a ‘fourth resource’, as crucial as land, labour and capital.
In Rifkin's words, ‘whoever controls germ plasm, and therefore genetic engineering, is now as important as who controls oil.’
Meanwhile, with a moratorium imposed by the US Senate still in force, some 60 ‘new’ life forms are awaiting patent decisions.
Bernard Unti, vice president of the American Anti-Vivisection Society, is pessimistic about the chances of rolling back the patent decision, but believes some progress has been made.
‘What will happen,’ he says, ‘is that Congress will look at the new possibilities for animal suffering that genetic engineering itself might create, and they will try and address those in legislation, or public policy…
My own feeling is that we will probably lose the battle, but there will at least be measures in place to protect the animals.’
The story of gene transfer science is not on the whole a tale of villainous practice.
It's not yet old enough to have become corrupted in the same way as the nuclear industry, that Fifties wunderkind gone bad.
The majority of researchers and theorists are driven by the huge opportunities they see for alleviating world hunger and disease.
But money and prestige, also beckoning, can distort the best intentions.
In the UK, biotechnology might just get away with according itself special treatment.
By arguing that stringent safety regulations here will give other, less scrupulous countries the edge, they may be able to blackmail the government into diluting the necessary legislation.
For this reason, campaigners like Rifkin are necessary, and younger scientists especially have a reluctant admiration for him.
As one told me: ‘He's obnoxious and sometimes uninformed, and he preys on people's primal fears and that's a shame.
But maybe it's important that somebody is doing that.’
Meanwhile, many animal rights campaigners acknowledge that they too may have to compromise, particularly in the area of medical research.
Nonetheless, some such as Trans-Species Unlimited and PETA (People for Ethical Treatment of Animals) in America, and of course the ALF (Animal Liberation Front) worldwide will never accept any justification for this kind of research.
Says Dana Stuchell at Trans-Species, ‘We believe that it's morally wrong to alter the genetic material of species.
Particularly for selfish human benefit and that's at the bottom of all animal exploitation.’
Biotechnology is remarkable not just for its promise or its threat.
It's also remarkable that the public have been given the chance to get into the debate early.
None of this technology is yet on the line, in any mass-industrial sense.
It may be the case, as some transgenics junkies are claiming, that in 25 years' time, all chickens on the market will be transgenic but this sounds uncannily similar, in its arrogant implausibility, to the famous Fifties claim that nuclear power would make electricity so cheap it couldn't be metered.
It's arguable that the industry has done itself more damage by its inflated claims than anything else, because they spared people like Rifkin into action.
Certainly the AgriBusiness side of it looks less rosy than it did even two years ago.
For Dr Richard Gill, senior executive in the Pharmaceuticals Division at the British Technology Group, which helps industry seek out and develop new technology originating in universities and institutes, the decision on whether a project goes ahead rests in part on animal welfare issues.
‘We'll look at that when we're looking at the commercial and marketing risk.
If we feel that something is going to be an ethical consideration, then we will probably not get involved in the project…
Certainly we wouldn't look at any products which were being realised at the expense of the animal without a gain to mankind.
If something's a life-saver for medical use, then we'll consider the transgenic animal route.
But it is not always going to be the most economic route.
It's a new technology, but it doesn't have to be the best technology…‘
COMPLACENCY
Because every single aspect of this technology seems to involve genuine promise as well as queasy threat, it isn't always helpful to have a knee-jerk emotional reaction.
Even the poor old Gheep may yet prove to have a redeeming social use.
With the help of genetic finger-printing and the composite embryo techniques the experiment involved, extinct species such as the Dodo may once again be brought to life from tissue preserved in museums.
But equally there are dangers in complacency.
‘This is a technology,’ says the UK Genetics Forum, ‘which should be looked at from the point of view that if something goes wrong, it can't be put right.
Nor can we simply wait for an effect to go away.
The gene becomes a living part of the ecosystem.’
Your own real live Mutant Ninja Turtle (just ‘4,000 at any good BioGenToyPet outlet) is a few years away yet.
Between now and then, the row that biotechnology generates is going to make everyone think anew about what animals are for.
Above: the Gheep is a hybrid goat/sheep made in Cambridge.
Top right: DNA, and the genetic codes we now have the technology to manipulate
As technology improves, there'll be disease-resistant crops, super-woolly sheep and wingless chickens the size of Mini Metros
With the help of genetic finger-printing, extinct species such as the Dodo may once again be brought to life
PEOPLE
DOLPH LUNDGREN
More than guns'n'poses?
It's hard not to feel sorry for Dolph Lundgren.
According to his press pack, the six foot six Swede is virtually a modern day Renaissance man.
He's a trained chemical engineer, an ex-European karate champ.
health guru and all round cosmopolitan bon viveur.
He's even something of a linguist apparently he can grunt monosyllables in five languages.
But he's still mainly known either for having had Grace in his face a few years back, or as the third meatboy in line after Stallone and Scharzenegger; one of that strange Eighties breed of actors who can manage all kinds of complicated weapons, but have trouble with lines of dialogue longer than ten words.
But the big guy is working hard to change people's perceptions.
He's been getting acting lessons and, on the phone from Tel Aviv, where he's shooting a film called The Eleventh Station , he agrees that simple muscled heave is beginning to look a little dated.
‘Every age has its movies.
It was the Regan era, so movies were more aggressive, escapist maybe.
Now it's time for a change.’
So are we about to see a kinder, gentler Dolph?
‘Nah, just, you know, more intelligent, more real.’
According to Dolph,The Eleventh Hour , more conspiracy thriller than action flick, fits this gameplan, as does Dark Agnel , a cop caper about intergalactic drug dealers, due for a July release.
But his latest film,The Punisher , sticks to the Eighties action formula more closely.
Based on the Marvel comic of the same name and filmed back in 1988, it's the usual uncomplicated but enjoyable mix of demolition derby and fuck you one-liners, which features Dolph as a leather-clad psycho-avenger tearing up nightclubs with huge guns, using his karate skills on mob bosses and riding round city sewers on his Harley.
So off screen, is he one of the growing clan of Hollywood stars who hop on a bike to unwind?
‘In my heart, I'm a biker…
Er, but I don't have a bike.’
When he gets time off from a fairly packed schedule after The Eleventh Station he'll be teaming up with the Muscles from Brussels, Jean Claude van Damme, in a film called Universal Soldier Dolph relaxes by playing the drums.
‘Yeah, I've got a band with some friends in LA.
We're called Dolph Lundgren's Zany Libido…
I'm not sure whether you should print that though!’
Grace Jones is not expected to guest on vocals.
Jim McClellan 
EMO PHILIPS
The lunatic fringe
You can't help thinking that Emo Philips has been a bit unlucky.
This hasn't got to much to do with his gangling, freakishly elongated frame, which he's used to evolve a unique form of comedic body language, flapping around on stage as he does like a dislocated stick insect, the missing link between Jerry Lewis and Pee Wee Herman.
Nor is it to sympathise with his asthmatic, Baptist bullied childhood, which forms the staple of so many of his surreal sing-song comic monologues of victimisation, paranoia and infantile revenge.
It's not even got anything to do with his hedge-trimmer pageboy cut or his Oxfam dress sense, which wouldn't look out of place in the background of an Inspiral Carpets video.
It's got nothing to do with the fact that he got bent out of shape at an early age and has been shaping laughs out of the kinks ever since.
It's that at the age of 34, fourteen years after first shambling on stage in downtown Chicago, having criss-crossed the stand-up circuit from coast to coast and guested on very hip chat show from David Letterman to Arsenio Hall, he should be bigger than he is.
While contemporaries like Robin Williams and Steve Martin have collapsed gratefully, if not entirely gracefully, into the moneyed embrace of Hollywood, Emo Philips is still waiting for the call.
He popped up alongside Phil Collins in an early episode of Miami Vice , but nothing came of it.
He appeared in a remake of Jules Verne's Journey To The Centre Of The Earth , but it got shelved.
Like I say, he's been a bit unlucky.
But maybe he thinks Hollywood is less the big break he needs and more a kind of career prat fall.
Bring up the subject and he's hard pressed to take it seriously.
‘Maybe I should finance my own movie, like Spike Lee.
I could call it Do The Right Emo or Do The Emo Thing .
Maybe sex, lies and emotape .’
Maybe.
One thing you soon learn from interviewing Emo (it's his real name, believe it or not) is that you're never going to get any straight answers.
The clowning begins right from the start, with him snatching up the Sony the minute it's on the table, talking into it conspiratorially for the next hour in his trademark, Looney Toons drawl, playing dumb, hijacking questions and spinning them into semantic hyperspace, treating any attempt at conversation as one big word association game (’ No, I'm not a geek; I'm a geek orthodox’).
You soon realise that you're expected to play straight man, but it's hard to complain.
Take the following exchange: ‘You don't mind if I use things from my act to illustrate points?’
I guess you'd have a problem if you didn't, Emo.
‘In my act I would.
Luckily my audience doesn't make that restriction.’
Or this one: What's the question you get fed up with answering most?
‘It's that one, ironically enough.
You guys…
I guess you must have a wavelength going.
It's like lemmings looking for a cliff.’
Emo's bug eyes narrow, and for a moment, just for a moment, the mock-innocence vanishes, and you can see the craft behind the wise-cracks.
It's a rare slip, but what can you say?
Best to sit back and cue him up for the one-liners.
Growing old: ‘Time sure flies when you're in a coma’.
Comedy: ‘It that old saying…there's a thin line between comedy and tragedy.
Especially when people get the tab for one of my shows’.
Sex: ‘I've never paid for it in my life, although I have gambled for it.
You know, I bet you a hundred dollars you won't sleep with me.
I always win, too’.
Emo has been billed as the Protestant's Woody Allen, a comic adept at hyping neurosis into farcical absurdity, but he's actually more lunatic than that, the result of a cerebral head-on collision between Groucho Marx and Tex Avery.
He's a sharp operator, adept at playing the angles, continually bouncing gags off the course of a meandering conversation which takes in flotation tanks (’ They told me they wanted to recreate the conditions of the womb, but that's all I need: some jerk in a white coat stabbing me with an ice-pick for half an hour’): Panama (’Most American casualties over there were self-inflicted, but that's because we have a lot of Hispanics in the armed services and some guys get confused; some Hispanics in the armed services and some guys get confused; some Hispanics shot themselves, they're that loyal’); even, somehow, the British motorway system (’Driving up the M1!
Euch!
That sounds like a horrible sodomising thing you do with a rifle in Vietnam’).
A lot of Emo's gags seem calculated to make you retch and he's not averse to teasing his audience with routines based on taboo subjects like child abuse and necrophilia.
Then again, he's just a likely to throw in a reference to the riddle of the sphinx or the Greek muses.
What is he?
An erudite sicko?
Or someone curious to see just how far his retarded egghead act will allow him to go?
‘Retarded?
I don't act retarded.
Have you ever met a retarded person?’
No, I guess not.
‘Well, you should meet my family then.
They're nothing like me.’
They should be so lucky.
Steve Beard 
Emo Philips plays Glasgow King's Theatre (May 20–21), and Brighton Dome (26), with a London West End run to follow in June
‘Beware of sugar-coated bullets,’ warned Chairman Mao in his Little Red book , not realising that today's politics is tomorrow's pop platitude.
In 1990 SUGAR BULLET (pictured opposite) are an Edinburgh trio fighting for their place on the post-revolutionary dancefloor.
Izzy Avison (vocals), Kenny McLeod and Shaun McCabe (music and machines) had their joint birth artificially induced after winning studio time in a demo competition.
Before long they had signed with Virgin, a company which has always shown an alarming propensity to hire and fire Scots talent at the drop of a CD.
Their debut single, ‘World Peace’, displays a nimble facility in shoplifting from the global counter.
‘Most of the dance music that's coming out now displays a combination of international styles,’ admits McLeod.
On ‘world Peace’, this means ragamuffin hip hop featuring rappers and toasters MC Vital Task, Papa Zebbie and Robert King.
The group acknowledge that Scotland has been slower than the rest of the country to produce credible dance music.
Despite having the healthiest club scene, Glasgow still specialises in churning out cod soul.
But Edinburgh has begun to produce music of note: The Chimes have just celebrated their second number one on the Billboard dance charts, and Paul Haig has recently completed sessions with Curtis Mantronik and Lil Louis.
Technology is the earthshrinker that has allowed musical freedom for all.
As Kenny McLeod says: ‘What we share with these groups is that we can now do what the fuck we like.’
Allan Campbell 
PAULINE KAEL
A lifetime in the movies
Hooked is the title of the latest collection of reviews by film critic nonpareil Pauline Kael, ninth in the essential series which began with 1965 I Lost It At The Movies .
To publish critical anthologies is to court redundancy, but the Kael corpus endures: fast, funny and incisive, her distinctive style remains the most influential, and her opinions the most quoted of any reviewer.
She combines the visceral thrill, the ‘pop kick’ of the best moviemaking with a sure-handed insight that shames most of her fellow professionals.
Personally, Kael is said to dominate an awestruck group of colleagues collectively dubbed ‘Paulettes’, but it's hard to equate the woman genially holding forth in her modest office at the New Yorker with the flinty matriarch of legend.
Kael joined the magazine in 1968 and remains there to this day, her tenure only briefly interrupted in 1978 when Paramount's offer of a consulting job tempted her to Hollywood.
Five months out there was enough, she recalls.
‘I had just turned 60 and thought I might be written out and in need of a break.
But the minute I went away reviewers started putting down films I loved and vice versa.
Also, I learned to appreciate that as a critic you say what you have to say and go on to the next thing in LA you never go on to the next thing.’
Hands-on experience of studio machinery rendered somewhat rhetorical the question posed by Kael's subsequent essay, ‘Why Are Movies So Bad?’
But that was then this is now…
‘They're worse now!’ she snaps.
‘There are some marvellous directors and performers but they just don't get a chance to show what they can do.
The marketing men gradually got in charge and now their corporate thinking and fear can kill any project.
One of the few things that keeps movies worth watching is the vitality of all the marvellous comedians from Saturday Night Live and SCTV: Bill Murray, John Candy and so on, terrific personalities who can bring a vibrancy even to dead scripts.’
Such expectations seem a long, long way from what Kael regards as cinema's golden era, the emergence in the late Sixties/early Seventies of stellar talents like Scorsese, Coppola, Altman and Bertolucci.
‘That was an explosive quality, an urgency in the films that was exciting to write about.
When Vietnam and Watergate were over things simmered down in society and the urgency sort of fell out of film making; the directors didn't quite know where they were, they had no targets.
That's why the negativism in British movies feels so healthy over here you've got Mrs Thatcher.’
Equally at home with highbrow or no-brow cinema, Kael is unapologetic about feeding a sweet tooth for vulgarity which can seem incongruous in the New Yorker 's staid pages.
‘I've never felt that art and self-improvement belong together,’ she says.
‘Some people expect a movie to be more than entertaining if they go and just laugh all the way through, they think there's something wrong.
There are New Yorker readers who can't understand why I liked Raising Arizona and they still complain to me about it.
And they're highly educated and articulate people, so when they don't like what you've said,God can they insult you beautifully!’
A gale of easy laughter closes the Q&A and we leave the magazine's offices together, the critic due at a screening uptown; I offer to help hail a cab but Kael prefers the services of the doorman at the neighbouring Algonquin Hotel.
As we say our goodbyes she explains, ‘They know me here.’
Steven Daly 
KEITH ALLEN
Launched into satellite
As the alternative comedy class of ‘79 slides inexorably towards respectability, one Comedy Store alumnus remains an outsider.
Keith Allen does not get invited to open envelopes, let alone garden fetes.
While others advertise building societies, he has enough problems securing a loan.
Yet many would have had Allen marked down as a real contender.
As the presenter of Channel 4's first youth programme Whatever You Want , the stocky Llanelli-born Allen had the ideal vehicle for his anarchic polemics, the best thing about a scrappy programme that featured The Undertones one moment and an abortion debate the next, planting the seeds for The Tube ,Network 7 and their many-headed progeny.
But Allen's tenure was short-lived.
After impetuously hijacking the tapes of a feature on trade unions which C4's nervous bigwigs wanted cut, he didn't make another appearance on the show, and it has never been clear whether he jumped or was pushed.
The answer is a bit of both.
‘I resigned at the same time as they asked for my resignation.
I think our cabs crossed somewhere in Oxford Street.’
Getting the boot is nothing new to Allen.
The son of a submariner and a waitress, he started his education at comprehensive school before gaining a naval scholarship to public school, where Douglas Hitchhiker's Guide Adams was one year senior.
Swiftly expelled, he returned to the comprehensive system, but a sequence of petty crimes meant that his formal learning was completed in a succession of borstals and detention centres.
Like another graduate of the penal system, Stephen Fry, he acknowledges the similarities between public school and prison.
‘Given the choice I'd go to borstal anyday.’
Terrestrial telly appearances have been spasmodic in recent years, but Allen is currently busy filming his own series,I Love Keith Allen , for BSB.
In it he gets a change to indulge himself, hogging the limelight in sketches, songs, dances and serious interviews with fellow controversial figures ranging from the National Front's Patrick Harrington to mediayob James Whale.
It could do with a bit of script-editing but satellite sceptics expecting a botch-job held together by sticky-backed plastic will be pleasantly surprised.
While Allen rather relishes the fact that his rhetoric is still considered too dangerous for earthbound TV, he is not quite so happy about the programme's title.
‘I originally wanted to call it,I Didn't Know Keith Allen Was White !, then I Detest Keith Allen , but BSB head John Gau wanted something more positive.’
When comedy work has been thin on the ground, Allen has carved out a healthy career as a straight actor, popping up in the unlikeliest of places: as a minion of fictitious Prime Minister Harry Perkins in A Very British Coup , as an impeccably sleazy reporter in Scandal and most recently as permarandy Rex, the dyspeptic boss of Lyne Electronics in the BBC's Making Out .
It's all a long way since his early acting days on the stage in the late Seventies which culminated in playing Lady MacDuff in an all-male production of Macbeth in Glasgow.
Then one day he chanced upon an ad in the Evening Standard inviting aspirant comics for a new venture above a Soho strip club called the Comedy Store.
‘In those days seeing a comedian was the last thing you'd do unless it was in some working men's club.’
During his colourful stand-up career he never prepared an act and developed a reputation as an aggressive, confrontational performer that still haunts him.
He blanches as he reminisces about past indiscretions.
‘I used to spunk it all away.
There was an incident at the Albany Empire one December when I was doing a Solidarity benefit for an audience of worthies, like Sting.
Very bourgeois.
I was taking the piss, suggesting they pour petrol over themselves, set themselves on fire.
Someone threw a beer bottle at me, and hit a guy who was behind me about to pour a pint over my head.
I looked round and there was blood streaming from this guy's head.
I can still remember his immortal line, ‘You've ruined my Christmas.
'’
The early Eighties were a strange purgatory for Allen, which saw him oscillate between nearly making it very big and slipping into total obscurity.
He compered rock gigs for The Clash and Dexy's Midnight Runners (’ Kevin Rowland?
No comment’), directed videos for everyone from Working Week to Status Quo, and was originally slated to play Joe Orton in Prick Up Your Ears .
‘Then the money fell through, and when it was resuscitated Gary Oldman got the part.’
He also ran his own radio station, Breakfast pirate Radio, where he met his wife.
‘She played a token feminist, Rachel Strong.
In real life she went round clubs measuring men's dicks to see if you could tell which club a man frequented by the size of his dick.’
The future should see Allen re-established as a counter-cultural household name again.
He has devised a new C4 show,The Dice Game , loosely based on the idea in the book by Luke Rhinehart.
‘It's not so much a game show, more a study of psychology.’
And perhaps to placate Rhinehart before he sues, there is a documentary on the enigmatic American author in the pipeline, as well as Diary Of A Teenage Health Freak and a children's comedy,Jackson Pace .
And somewhere in the last six months he found time to contribute some enthusiastic atmospherics to New Order's World Cup single, ‘E Is For England’.
A long-time soccer fan, Allen once had professional trials for Southampton.
‘Look at me now, I can't even get up the stairs.’
Suddenly Allen collapses breathlessly into the sofa and gasps at his CV.
‘I ain't ‘alf done a lot…
’Bruce Dessau I Love Keith Allen is on BSB on Thursday nights
BLAZE
Soulmen go new age
‘What's going on, brother?
The struggle's begun without us.
It's time for us to join the fight…and the best way to fight is education…’
So opens Blaze's ‘25 Years Later’, perhaps the best soul debut for half a decade.
Echoing Marvin Gay's best albums, ‘What's Going On’ and ‘Let's Get It On’, the team that unleashed the most emotive house singles of the late Eighties dig deep into the groove and spiritual foundations over 15 songs.
Logically, they've singed to Motown Mary's home and having proved themselves more than an intelligent East Coast dance act, they're series contenders in the face to return the lustre to soul's tarnished crown.
The company is ecstatic: Motown, like fat, degenerated soul music itself, needs a return to spiritual values and Blaze are ready, willing and able.
Kevin Hedges, Blaze's mainman, seems transformed.
Always an out-spoke interviewee, he now taps into spiritual matters immediately you begin to speak to him.
In its longer tape and CD formats, the album has between-track dialogue and Hedges was anxious that the company understood that it was an essential part.
Far from interfering, once Motown heard a couple of songs, they gave Blaze carte blanche.
‘We've devoted the project to social awareness.
The story is of a civil rights leader who was born 25 years ago and it's a day in his life.
Each song is an idea of what's going on inside the story.
Really, it's what Blaze have always been about: we want to see every nationality come together on a peaceful level.
We're trying to bring the knowledge of black history out so that people know where we're coming from and have no reason for prejudice and fear.’
Blaze present this knowledge in the sweetest, most delicious manner they can.
Hedges believes that society today is more divided than ever, and that if things carry on as they are, ‘We're headed for the end.
Blaze have now got the opportunity to help.
I think people felt we were aiming for this point, but we never had the opportunity to do it before.
With an album, you can deliver a deeper message.
But it's not all ‘way of the world’ stuff, there's love songs too.
To me, love is the most important thing of all.’
Hedges, like the Jungle Brothers, X-Clan and other East Coast soul thinkers, looks beyond recent history for guidance.
‘Through my studies I have come to understand that the way humans view animals like primates in a negative light is wrong.
A lot of their ways are really positive.
If you believe in evolution, you believe man is descended from primates, and primates are vegetarian.
They never kill except for protection of their young, they don't eat or drink unless they need to: that's living in harmony.
When I look at animals, I realise we've got a lot to learn from them.’
The new age soul-man is upon is, at last.
Ian McCann 
A LEGEND in His Own Press Release: Meet Matt Lattanzi, ‘the hunky toyboy husband of Olivia Newton-John’ according to the rather lush Mills and Boon-ish press release for his film Catch Me If You Can , out on Medusa home video.
Apparently Matt's ‘smouldering good looks’ caught Livvy's eye in 1980, it was ‘love at first sight’, and a ‘passionate affair’and marriage soon followed.
Fair makes your heart flutter.
Just one thing Matt may have been a toyboy ten years ago, but what should he be called now?
Answers to Medusa
Forget the memoirs and the exposés the historical document of Ronald Regan's contribution to political theory and global statesmanship is Stand Up Reagan , a collection of his after-dinner anecdotes and one-liners from Parkfield Video, £9.99
Horror writer Stephen King on the secret of his success: ‘People want to know why I write such gross stuff.
I tell them that I have the heart of a small boy and I keep it in a jar on my desk’
QUESTION: Who is the man shown below and what's his problem?
Answer: It's Martin Scorsese, trying to look pained and artistic playing Vincent Van Gogh in Dreams , the latest spectacular epic from veteran Japanese director Akira Kurosawa.
Produced by Spielberg, it's out this month
Blaze: Motown's new soul searchers
A LEGEND in His Own Press Release Part 2: Nescafe don't just make coffee now they create micro celebs.
After the Gold Blend yuppies comes Desmond Hamilton.
‘Devilishly handsome’ Des, gushes his press release, will set ‘hearts reeling’when people see him put the kettle on in the second Nescafe ‘Fresh Start’ad.
(In case you missed the first, it featured a woman brewing up in a Beetle.)
Unfazed by the fact that we may be off making a cuppa when his big moment hits the screens, Des has set his sights on playing James Bond in Goldblender , perhaps?
DISINFORMATION
SCENARIO
She's ‘very, very depressed’.
That's not just gossip; it's from her own mouth.
Admittedly she was referring to her feelings about an IRA attack and a Dublin court ruling against the extradition of some Republican suspects.
But she's never used a phrase like that before.
Furious, yes; determined, yes; depressed, no.
Something inside is beginning to wear out.
As for the gossip, though, DisInformation was eavesdropping recently in a little wine bar it knows somewhere in the heart of the South's Thatcherland.
By 2.30 on a weekday, when the country's so-called wealth creators are onto their third bottle, you can read the pulse of Tory Britain like an open Archer novel.
Anyway, the word is and it came from somebody who said he was looking at her in the Chamber the other day that she is going blind.
The presumably Hon.
Member meant it as a medical diagnosis.
But it was obviously a metaphor as well.
Can't see what's going on around her.
Lost her vision.
Nobody seemed to mind very much, all agreeing she works terrifically hard.
Clearly, she's had it.
AN ENTERPRISING US firm is offering guides to US government auctions, where drug traffickers' property can be had at bargain basement rates.
‘I bought A $50,000 Boat For Only $10,’ boasts the headline.
Presumably the 50k is the ‘street value’
GERALD ‘Cannon’ Bull, the mystery murder victim in the Iraqi Drainpipe Affair, was an artillery designer in a class of his own as his Chinese and South African clients would testify.
Now where will Saddam Hussein find another man of his calibre?
APRIL 23rd wasn't the end of the world, despite Guru Ma's prediction (Scenario, May).
But it wasn't a great day for Ma and her followers either.
Judge Byron Robb chose it to rule that work on the cult's nuclear bunkers in Montana had to stop, after their fuel oil tanks were found to be leaking.
WHETHER or not the two Germanies are coming together too quickly, their cars certainly are.
There have already been some 10,000 collisions between West and East German cars this year.
AS THE USSR starts to own up to crimes like the wartime massacre of Polish officers at Katyn, the US is censoring its official records.
State Department publications have been purged of references to CIA actions like setting up the coup that brought the Shah to power in Iran, and overthrowing a liberal government in Guatemala.
AMERICANS piloting helicopter gunships in battles with communist guerrillas: Green Berets about to go in.
Not Vietnam's apocalypse yesterday, but Peru now.
The ‘war on drugs’ looks like turning into a Norteamericano war on the peasants and the ruthless Maoists of Sendero Luminoso.
POLICE STATE good, welfare state bad?
In a survey of carers and schizophrenia sufferers, the police got the best ratings for care of the mentally ill, followed by GPs, psychiatrists, and social workers
FROM THE home of the original Bambaataa the chieftain who led the last great Zulu revolt against white rule comes the African Hip Hop Movement.
African may be big in the US rap at the moment, but the South African's aren't returning the compliment.
The dress code at the Cape Town daytime jams bars such American accessories as dollar-sign pendants.
Public Enemy and James Brown samples are still welcome, though, along with home-produced breaks.
NEW ZEALAND'S sheep will soon be the greenest in the world and the politest.
Looking for ways to cut the country's output of greenhouse gases, the Kiwis have decided to feed anti-flatulence pills to their 60 million woollybacks
ADVICE FOR surgeons on how not to get sued, from a ‘Dr. X’, writing in the Journal of Medical Protection Society: ‘Do not say ‘oops'’
A US-led consortium wants to upgrade the antiquated Soviet phone network using optic fibre.
The National Security Agency objects, because it won't be able to eavesdrop on Soviet phone calls any longer.
Trading for mutual benefit just doesn't appeal to the Securocracy
WHO'LL take the part of jail rebel Paul Taylor in the film of the Strangeways riot, a project inevitably germinating in the head of some tyro movie producer still at film school?
10–1 Sean Ryder, 25–1 Luke Goss, 100–1 Jason Donovan
A NEW SOUTH WALES insurance firm was puzzled to find that car accidents for one company client peaked on Monday lunchtimes.
It turned out that the weekly sales meeting was on Monday mornings.
The sales force would emerge in hypermotivation mode and leap into their cars, all fired up to get out there and damn !!
ROBERT HOPKINS, a young Queensland aborigine, tried to hang himself in a prison cell using a blanket torn into strips.
He got three months for destroying the blanket.
It wasn't a deterrent.
He did it again, this time successfully
THE captain of the USS Vincennes, which shot down the Iranian airbus, has been awarded a medal for ‘exceptionally meritorious conduct’.
An officer on an accompanying ship didn't quite see it that way.
He said the Vincennes' aggressive attitude had got it a reputation as a ‘robocruiser’
A Prime Minister in distress: will she last to the next election
We knew Nelson Mandela would be powerful, disciplined, and clear in his sense of purpose in going to Wembley.
The revelation was that the crowd proved to be those things too.
It knew it was playing a role in history, and it rose to the occasion.
The Germans had the Berlin Wall to dance on, the British had the Wembley pitch; both events were part of the same great story of liberation.
Mandela himself was said to have been overwhelmed by his reception.
Footnote: The Greatest Living Irishman never got to pat the knee of the Greatest Living Human Being, but it wasn't for lack of trying.
The Mandela concert organisers eventually told Terry Wogan's people that they were saving the GLHB for a special edition of Desert Island Discs, to be called Robben Island Discs.
And apparently they believed it, as it did the trick.
MARGINS
JUNK MAIL
by DAVID TOOP
This junk mail is getting beyond a joke.
On Monday I received a circular from a building society urging me, a valued customer, to borrow money for the purpose of investing in the development of a feature film called Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Battle The Lambada Pantie Karaoke Tricksters .
I binned it.
Tuesday there was a brochure advertising something called The Magic Realist Book Club and an introductory offer for the record.
‘Eeeowww!
Forty Greatest Hits of Noise Warfare’ complies all the tracks you ever wanted, really.
Among the comprehensive selection of mini-suites are ‘Panama: Cowabunga Noriega With Jimi Hendrix And Bobby Fuller’ and ‘Sayonara Strangeways To The Eclectic Sounds Of Richard Wagner and Des O'Connor’.
You also get Scottish bagpipes and an interesting world music reconstruction of music played at the battle of Jericho.
I binned it.
I also binned the book club bumpf.
All three Alejo Carpentier novels I once owned disappeared, one by one, in the most mysterious fashion.
I take it that they were too realistically magical to exist in the world as we know it.
Wednesday there was a letter, an imprecation almost, from an investment company warning me of the dire consequences of not having a pension.
I already have a pension, and do not want two.
It was a Frankie Howerd interview that made me realise I do not even want one.
Stand-up comics, actors and writers do not retire, Mr. Howerd pointed out.
He is right, as always.
They drop gracefully off their perches in mid-flow and preferably with as much publicity as possible.
Therefore, I binned it.
On Thursday there was an offer of T-shirts from a company called Monsters Of Leadership.
A charity organisation dedicated to the furtherance of despots, united in stemming the tide of democracy that sweeps the earth, they had three available shirts: Bokassa, Amin and Marcos.
Their artist's impressions were woefully inadequate, though, so I binned it.
Friday was quite a morning.
First, there was the three magazine from the greengrocers.
Roots is the title, and not a bad one, all things considered.
Glossy, full of holiday updates, investment advice, property news, useful information on male fragrances, the latest CD releases, ecologically sound hair gel and motor car tests, plus profiles of great personalities like Nick Faldo and Nigel Mansell.
The big lead story was fascinating.
This was one about the three crooks from London who dressed up in African tribal costumes and tricked jewellers into parting with gear worth £250,000 in exchange for boxes containing carrots and potatoes.
Personally, I felt that my greengrocer's excitement over the vegetable content of this story had overpowered his moral judgement, so I binned it.
My credit card bills all arrived simultaneously, as usual, and some hours passed before I managed to disentangle the statements and envelopes from a considerable volume of frivolous and, one would have thought, peripheral material.
This included a stern order to attend a wine and cheese party in Kensington the following week at which I would be able to collect one of the following gifts; an environmentally friendly tofu griddle and rotisserie; postdated shopping vouchers for the Sock Shop, Tie Rack, Next, Laura Ashley, Habitat, Heals and the Conran Shop; a holiday in Nepal; or a year's supply of irradiated fruit.
I would also be invited to participate in a discussion on the bountiful attractions of timeshare property ownership.
I binned it.
Aside from the usual collection of press releases there was also a letter from an A.N.
Agent, asking for me, somebody, anybody to ghost write an autobiography for Alex Higgins.
I once attempted to read his first book,Alex Through The Looking Glass , but stumbled and fell at page 10 where the Hurricane made this observation on the subject of literature: ‘My favourite read is Robert Ludlum.
I've read every one of his books, some of them two or three times.
The Bourne Identity is the best book I've read or ever will read.
Ludlum's so wealthy he hasn't had to write anything for three years!’
This had already been binned but I binned the offer as well, just in case I ever came close to considering it seriously.
Saturday morning brought a bonanza haul.
The catalogue of executive facilities contained very little that was new, other than a gadget that bleeps and snoops its way into other peoples' answer machines.
What's so great about that?
By all means snoop into my answer machine and sit through 20 messages suggesting I travel on a coach to Grimsby to review a Jive Bunny concert.
Aside from this, there was an invitation to take part in Poll Tax Bingo, an introductory subscription to a new magazine called Torture, Bestiality, Ritual Murder And Game Shows On Cable and Satellite!and a letter which gave me the chance to send £10 notes to ten strangers.
If I chose not to reap the benefits of this scheme then I might consider the fate of a few ungrateful citizens who had thought likewise and then seen their homes repossessed, had been inflicted with uncanny storms that ripped tiles from roof and threw chimney stacks into the street, had undergone torment at the hands of timeshare salespeople, had been billed for new and exorbitant taxes and had been struck off their doctors' registers.
I binned this.
On Sunday there was no mail, but the Post Office will be filling this gap shortly.