

from Austerity to Affluence
Four related words acquired special significance in the Fifties: Austerity and Affluence, Status and Image.
Austerity was Britain's peculiar reward for surviving World War II unbeaten at the cost of selling her foreign assets and taking on a crippling load of debt to the United States.
Germany's peculiar reward for being beaten was an economic miracle financed mainly by American aid and nursed by armies of occupation.
Affluence was the song the sirens sang in the United States, from which war and its economic expansion had finally banished the Depression.
The roaring of the American boom rang round the Western world where everyone in every hard-pressed country saw the new world as an Aladdin's cave of American goods, American entertainment and the American style of living.
But the vision was a long way off from Britain, for which the first two years of the Fifties were a continuation of wartime in civilian clothes.
Rationing, which still applied to meat, bacon, butter, cheese, tea, sugar and sweets, actually became more austere than it had been in 1945.
The meat ration, one shilling and sixpence in 1945, was reduced to eightpence worth (old style — less than four pence new style) in 1951 as a result of a dispute with the Argentine.
It was easier to exhort the country to further sacrifice if, like the Chancellor, Sir Stafford Cripps, you were a vegetarian.
This Christian Socialist, dedicated to equal shares and to soaking the rich (who included his own family), was accepted and frostily admired as an incorruptible thorn in the nation's conscience, forever reminding them that there was no jam today and they could only expect some tomorrow if they had earned it.
‘A strange monastic-looking man,’ said Harold Macmillan, ‘emaciated and said to live off watercress grown off the blotting paper on his desk.’
In fact he used to be seen lunching austerely in his favourite vegetarian restaurant on the corner of Leicester Square, where the permitted maximum of five shillings for the price of a meal could only be spent by earnest application.
‘Our only safety for the future lies in the positive and conscious exertion of spiritual control over material actions,’ Cripps said in a speech to the American Bar Association.
‘The world crisis is thus in my view basically a moral rather than a political or economic crisis.’
It was typical of him to see politics in ethical terms.
Stern appeals to principle might in time have closed the dollar gap in Britain's trade with the United States had not cancer removed this economic dictator-by-consent, greatly weakening the Labour government's authority in 1951.
Cripps gave his name to an era of austerity, queues, shortages and high income tax (9s. 6d. in the pound again in 1951, almost as high as in wartime), flattening the peaks of the income range and lopping off any surviving Matterhorns.
A £15,000-a-year man kept only £5,000 after tax.
Only seventy people were known to the Inland Revenue to keep more than £6,000 net.
Shortages made life difficult, to the point of exasperation.
A coal shortage cut the train services (nowadays it would be staff shortage).
Steel shortage closed the car factories (nowadays it would be a demarcation dispute).
Even Virginia tobacco was so short that favourite brands were kept out of sight under the counter, reserved for favourite customers.
The worst shortage was of housing.
Substantial numbers of families lived in ‘pre-fabs’, flat-roofed boxes made of asbestos sheeting, while rosebay willowherb flowered in purple patches across the untouched bomb sites.
It was in this drab landscape that one of the largest bombed and derelict sites in the centre of London, the South Bank of the Thames was filled by a deliberate gesture of faith in a brighter future, the Festival of Britain.
Officially a commemoration of the Great Exhibition of 1851, to demonstrate British achievement in arts, sciences and design, its chief impact was one of surprise that in these depressing times the government should be capable of sponsoring such a fling.
Herbert Morrison, the minister in charge, announced it as ‘the people giving themselves a pat on the back’.
The organizer, Gerald Barry, promised ‘fun, fantasy and colour’ as ‘a tonic to the nation’.
But plenty of people thought it the height of irresponsibility to allocate £11 million to having a fling.
On the riverside rose the shapes of a possible future: a ‘Dome of Discovery’ with a diameter of 365 feet to keep the rain, which was very plentiful that summer, off the exhibits.
And instead of an Eiffel Tower such as expressed the surging self-confidence of the late-nineteenth-century Paris exhibition, the symbol of the Festival was the Skylon, a useless but elegant exclamation mark supported in thin air by thin cables — like Britain, somebody said, without any visible means of support.
Much to everyone's surprise, when the exhibition and the Funfair at Battersea opened they were an immense success.
Over eight million people came to admire this new concept of an environment where everything was intended to lift the spirits.
The design team under Hugh Lasson and Misha Black (both later knighted) were right in believing that there was hunger for visual stimulation among the British and they got it in the form of sculpture, murals and mobiles by Moore, Hepworth, Piper, Sutherland, Topolski and Epstein as well as a pedestrian precinct which was all grilles and screens and balls and decks and terraces and fountains and colour.
Open-air dancing under the floodlights, often in long mackintoshes and trilby hats, a fountain that fell from bucket to bucket like the omnipresent rain, a bewhiskered Emett railway, a tree-walk alongside a forty-foot Chinese dragon — people queued patiently to enjoy such simple pleasures whose lack of sophistication seemed very exciting to people, most of whom had never had a foreign holiday or seen café tables with coloured umbrellas or indeed any fresh paint for as long as they could remember.
Up and down the country mini-celebrations occurred in what the official guide called in that unmistakeable paternalistic tone of the period, ‘spontaneous expressions of citizenship’.
In practice this meant medieval mystery plays at York, madrigals on the river at Cambridge, and the Edinburgh Festival.
And yet the Festival proved not to be the beginning of the new civically planned and visually gayer Britain of which it held out a promise, but the swan-song of the era in which it was patriotic to put the community first and all pull together, as directed.
In Sir Hugh Casson's words, ‘It made people want things to be better and to believe they could be.’
But the Labour Government which had intended the Festival as a celebration of welfare-minded, egalitarian, planner's Britain — a Britain where identity cards were still not abolished — was, by the time it opened, hanging on by a slender majority of six and, by the time it ended, on the point of being ejected.
All the public-spirited, though rather dull, values the Festival stood for were going to be swamped in a growing tide of individualism and self-enrichment that gathered to its crescendo in the Macmillan years.
In 1951 the words ‘I'm all right, Jack’ still meant, as they meant in the cruder wartime version, a totally reprehensible attitude towards Jack, whom you were supposed to care about.
By 1959 they were a joke and the title of a film which simply stated a philosophy that was taken for granted.
The Conservative victory under the slogan ‘Set The People Free’ that October looked rather hollow when you examined the figures and discovered that more people had actually voted Labour than Conservative.
But it was enough to drive Labour out of power for what they were to call, in their turn, ‘Thirteen Wasted Years’.
Setting the people free took longer than anticipated, but the first casualties were those identity cards and the Festival site, in 1952.
It was two more years before ration books could finally be burned or torn up by a thankful population — meat, bacon and butter were the last things to be freed.
Only two of the industries nationalized by Labour were set free — road haulage and (temporarily as it turned out) steel.
But at least the South Bank was freed.
The Skylon was made into ashtrays.
The other structures were dispersed to linger only in the imagination of designers; in its place Conservative freedom provided London with the first of the giant company headquarters built in the style of Orwell's Ministry of Truth — the Shell building (1958).
It was a monument to the newly discovered Parkinson's Law.
This concept, brilliantly and amusingly elucidated in book of that name published the previous year by Professor C. Northcote Parkinson, stated: ‘Work expands to fill the time available for its completion.’
The Shell complex was proof that it also expands to fill the space available for its proliferation.
To cross the Atlantic in the early Fifties from the modest hopes of Britain to the United, Euphoric, You-name-it-they-had-it States was to court vertigo.
The years of abundance in America began in 1950 with the defence expenditure triggered off by the Korean War, and the boom continued with only a hiccup or two of recession in 1954 and 1958.
Focussing on one tiny segment of the statistics of abundance, let us examine corporation presidents and millionaires.
In 1952 the president of General Motors drew a salary of $201,000 with another $380,000 in bonuses.
The salary and bonuses of the president of Du Pont totalled $503 000.
Quarter-million-dollar incomes (not including bonuses) were drawn by the top oil company bosses.
By comparison the top directors of Shell and Imperial Chemical Industries in Britain were still drawing about £50,000 ($140,000) at the end of the decade.
The Prime Minister's salary was still £10,000 ($28,000).
Only the Queen, with a total annual income from the state of £475,000, came out at better than American rates — $1,330,000 — but two-thirds of that sum was specifically for maintaining her enormous household.
Ten years later there would be four hundred Americans with an annual income like hers, of over a million dollars.
The number of resident American millionaires was estimated in 1953 at 27,000.
In the following ten years it rose to 80,000.
In 1957 Fortune magazine published a list of America's richest men, putting at the top the shy, reclusive, almost unknown J. Paul Getty, who turned out to be living in a modest room at the Ritz Hotel, London, conducting his world-wide oil business through the hotel switchboard with the minimum secretarial help.
Fortune put his personal assets at approximately $1,000 million.
Second and third places also went to American oilmen, H. L. Hunt and S. Richardson.
The British were squeezed by the tax-man until the pips squeaked — Aneurin Bevan's phrase.
Fifty-two of those earning $500,000 in the United States were paying no federal tax at all.
Richesse oblige .
With the spotlight on him, Mr Getty could no longer keep his bolt-hole in the Ritz private and was shortly settling into Sutton Place, the Duke of Sutherland's Tudor manor house in Surrey, with seventy-two rooms and 750 acres.
Characteristically, he later insisted it was a bargain at $500,000.
For this the Getty Oil Company, which paid the bill, got a headquarters and a great deal of publicity, on the whole favourable, since Mr Getty was bowing to the style which England expects.
A long-winded man for such a recluse, he devised an 800-word standard apology for not being able to help out the writers of the 3,000 begging letters he received monthly.
Another curious contradiction in his character led to his installation of a notorious coin-box and enamelled sign, ‘Public Telephone’, for the use of his guests.
Anecdotes of his parsimony abounded.
He admitted he had waited ten minutes to enter an exhibition to take advantage of the cheaper rates after 5.30 p.m.
The only respect in which he was obviously not thrifty was wives — he had already discarded five.
It seemed a very old-fashioned and Victorian success story.
Getty believed in self-help, the philosophy of Samuel Smiles, though smiles were the last thing he could manage in public.
Owner of a fabled art collection in California, which he was too busy ever to visit, his soon familiar face, like a bloodhound lugubriously scenting wasted pennies, was one symbol of the times: if you, too, struck oil you could be as rich and careworn as Getty and have as little time and capacity to enjoy it.
Getty still embodied the old-fashioned American ethic of thrift.
But in the ever-expanding American economy whose production doubled in the decade, it was almost a patriotic duty to consume as conspicuously as possible.
Could consumption be doubled to keep pace?
Well, advertising could be, and was, persuading Americans to throw thrift to the winds with awe-inspiring contortions of logic.
Take an advertisement for Chevrolet (1956) endorsing the case for the two-car family.
Its true reasoning was that doubled car consumption would be good for General Motors and what was good for General Motors, as its president, Charles E. Wilson, memorably announced as his political philosophy, was good for the country.
But how to allay old-style qualms about waste and self-indulgence?
The answer was in the picture — a family happily grilling hamburgers in front of their two cars in their double carport, a sort of burnt offering before the altar of mobility.
‘Going Our Separate Ways We've Never Been So Close’ said the caption boldly.
And beneath, the copy-writers had reared a paradox that would have delighted Lewis Carroll: ‘The family with two cars gets twice as many chores completed, so there's more leisure to enjoy together !’
Having it both ways, it was clearly aimed to assuage the consumer's guilt.
A picture of the American family began to be glimpsed as a super-mobile group that could get together to grill a hamburger only if it drove to the appointment.
But as the decade advanced, guilt noticeably wore off.
The number of two-car families doubled in the Fifties to reach fifteen per cent of American households (and would double again in the next ten years).
The essential discovery, now that everyone had heard of Freud, was that guilt could be harnessed to salesmanship.
It was used aggressively as a selling aid for Gleem toothpaste —‘For Those Who Cannot Brush After Every Meal’(who can?).
It could be assuaged to lower sales resistance —‘To make that job easier, you deserve M and M candy’(after which, naturally, you need Gleem all the more).
One of the psychologists, who moved into the salesman's world like witch doctors and made a killing, was Dr Ernest Dichter from Freud's own city of Vienna, the ‘father’ of Motivational Research, whose institute could be hired to help sell anything for $500 a day.
He was prone to Delphic (and cloudy) utterances such as: ‘To women, don't sell shoes, sell lovely feet.’
Psychologically illiterate sales directors were putty in the hands of such experts in the unconscious mind, with their battery of mumbo-jumbo such as word-association lists, ink-blot tests, lie detectors and eye-blink counters, hypnosis and ‘depth’ interviewing of housewives.
Say the word ‘soup’, Dichter's institute would report, and 80 per cent of subjects tested would reply ‘Mother’.
The merest simpleton could draw the conclusion.
Sell your brand as Mother's soup.
Of course there was nothing to guarantee that the soup you were canning would measure up to the quality or taste of Mother's, nor that other soup canners would not make the same sales appeal.
In fact there was precious little to rely on in the unconscious unless the product was good enough to sell itself to the conscious senses, in which case the unconscious appeal was superfluous.
But this did not prevent claims being made for motivational research and the like as extravagant as those made for corn cures and patent all-purpose medicines by the pedlars and mountebanks of time immemorial.
When baking a cake, manufacturers of cake-mixes were told, women were acting out symbolically the birth of a child (not for nothing was the vulgar phrase for pregnancy a ‘bun in the oven’).
Simply to add water to a dry powder was not enough to satisfy this ritual urge.
Allow them to add an egg to the mixture and the symbolism (of conception presumably) would be fulfilled.
Whether the satisfaction occurred, and whether it outweighed the inconvenience of having to have an egg handy, was as hard to substantiate as most other claims for the wonders of depth psychology.
Deep down in those subconscious depths was the suggestion that you could make people believe anything you wanted them to believe, if only you knew how to pronounce the magic formula that brought the genie from the bottle.
Naturally the next field in which to try out this half-truth was politics, where people have been trying since the time of Demosthenes to fool all of the people all of the time.
The presidential election of 1952 saw the first large-scale hiring of skilled advertising men to do the politicians' persuading for them.
The Republicans put their trust in the advertising experts of Batten, Barden, Durstine and Osborn.
The Democrats had trouble placing their $8 million account.
They finally chose the agency that dreamed up a well-known series of ads that appealed to a deeply buried vein of female exhibitionism: ‘I dreamed I stopped the traffic in my Maidenform Bra’(she wore nothing else).
Unfortunately for Adlai Stevenson, it proved harder to stop the traffic in his egghead's bow tie.
Another shaft of light into the murky depths of the human psyche was alleged to be cast by the discovery of the ‘brand image’.
This was largely the doing of an Englishman, David Ogilvy, who reached Madison Avenue via Oxford and a post in the British Embassy in Washington.
Looking like a scholarly Foreign Office man he took the hard-selling American advertising world of those days aback by the very stealth of his approach.
He dramatized the product, by imagining and scripting two human brand images of conspicuously unAmerican snob appeal: Commander Whitehead of Schweppes and ‘The Man In The Hathaway Shirt’.
Commander Whitehead, a jovial, dashing, red-bearded figure with a Homburg and a briefcase, cheerfully splashing tonic water about on convivial occasions, looked too good to be true.
The surprise was that he really was a former naval commander and actual president of Schweppes' American subsidiary.
His value was partly to bewilder those Americans who felt that to dilute hard liquor with tonic water or soda was in some way unmanly.
Commanders, R.N., are a notoriously hard-drinking breed, which scotched that suspicion.
On top of that he was pictured in such chic situations as the bar of the Metropolitan Opera House confiding such pearls of worldly wisdom as ‘A punctilious barman (or butler) will always serve you Schweppes Club Soda for highballs’.
The parenthesis ‘or butler’ was sheer image building.
So was the use of a word like ‘punctilious’.
Ogilvy was addicted to words that the straight-talking huckster-style admen of the day would blink at.
He called a shirt ‘ineffable’ on one occasion.
It was his inspiration to claim that ‘At 60 miles an hour the loudest noise in this new Rolls Royce comes from the electric clock.’
With ‘The Man In the Hathaway Shirt’ Ogilvy possibly over-stepped into self-parody.
With a black eyepatch, pencil moustache and Viennese or Hungarian look of disdain he was pure Ruritanian musical comedy.
The roles he played in the glossy pages of The New Yorker , for instance, were almost parodies of gracious living and social superiority.
The pith helmet with an attentive elephant in waiting.
The conductor's baton with attendant symphony orchestra.
The book-lined study with a telescope at the open window.
Beside it our hero would be making notes — a gentleman astronomer like that gentleman chemist, Sherlock Holmes.
But it worked.
Eyepatches became the rage at fancy-dress parties.
And Hathaway, ‘a small company of dedicated craftsmen in the little town of Waterville, Maine,’ said their advertisements, ‘who have been at it, man and boy, for 114 years’, sold out their stock of shirts within a week of the first eyepatch appearing in The New Yorker .
In fact the anonymous man in the shirt was a male model but he was also, so it happened, a baron, the son of a Tsarist diplomat, by name George Wrangel.
With curious fitness, fate had it in store for him to marry an heiress and settle down in a castle in Spain — he who had conjured up so many of them in the imagination of junior executives.
‘Images’ were a sort of charade, amateur theatricals to grace the hard face of commerce, and they became popular for their own sake.
Before long workaday products were seeking brand images.
In 1956 the Marlboro cigarette, formerly considered rather a ladylike thing to smoke, acquired its cowboy, with a tattoo on the back of his hand and the message: ‘A man's cigarette that women like too’.
Brands of petrol, it was claimed, had distinctive images and even more so did the brands of automobiles they fuelled.
‘It makes you feel like the man you are’ claimed an ad for Buicks.
But what sort of man was that?
Research (depth research naturally) among some Chicago car owners came up with the following automobile ‘personalities': Cadillac — flashy; Ford — young and speedy; DeSoto — conservative and responsible; Pontiac — stable and conventional; Mercury — assertive and modern.
The amazing Dr Dichter made one of his most celebrated discoveries for the automobile industry: that a man is seduced into the showrooms by a ‘mistress’(a convertible) but comes out having settled for a ‘wife’(a saloon or sedan).
The hard-top — wife and mistress combined in one body — was claimed to be the most successful innovation the industry had made in years.
Once more politics was tempted by the song the sirens sang.
If cars could have images, so could political candidates.
The reason the Republicans won an election was ‘Ike's father image’.
The reason the Democrats lost was that Stevenson lacked ‘the presidential image’— which sounds suspiciously like saying he didn't become president because he didn't become president.
Certainly his ‘egghead’ image fitted awkwardly into a Maidenform-Bra-moulded mind.
Stevenson himself was one of the few to speak out strenuously against the newly received wisdom —‘the idea that you can merchandize candidates like breakfast cereal’.
The truth may be that in the long run, as Lincoln thought, people are not fooled.
But in the short run the new game of image-building spread, even to conservative England, even to the most patriarchal conservative, Harold Macmillan, who by the late Fifties was being promoted with his enthusiastic cooperation as ‘Supermac’ and sold on the hoardings by Messrs Colman, Prentice and Varley, the advertising agents.
A good deal of credulity and nonsense was indulged in the name of psychology but there was no nonsense about the concept of ‘psychological obsolescence’, the new technique for making people dissatisfied with what they had bought more quickly than ever before.
Could people be made to change their durable possessions as if by the whims of fashion?
Again it was the auto industry that led the way in the early Fifties after suffering two costly setbacks.
The Ford ‘Edsel’, unveiled as the car that had everything in the way of advanced engineering, flopped like a dead duck with the public which presumably was little interested in engineering.
Then Chrysler announced in 1953 a slimmer, shorter, more compact and parkable car to meet modern conditions.
This eminently reasonable development cut their sales by half.
Detroit took the hint.
What the public wanted was not economy, practicality, money-saving and engineering quality but extravagance and swagger.
In a word, styling.
For the rest of the decade automotive stylists were gods in the plants of the Big Three: Chrysler, Ford and General Motors.
Chrysler's next Plymouth, the 1955 model, was sixteen inches longer and three inches lower than its predecessor, the longest and lowest car for the money.
Sales lifted immediately and the trend ahead was clear.
Everyone's n model was longer and lower and fancier, as if squeezed underfoot.
The more they were squeezed the more chrome was exuded, as if from a tube, at each end.
Ford's chief designer, George W. Walker (whose salary of $200,000 was perhaps the explanation why General Motors paid its president the curious figure of $201,000), was dubbed ‘the Benvenuto Cellini of Chrome’.
The chief stylist at General Motors, Harvey Earl, paid a visit to an air force base where, seeing the new twin-tailed fighters, he was inspired to ‘intuit’ the automobile shape of the future — twin tail fins.
The Cadillac ‘La Espada’ exhibited at Earls Court in 1955 had tail fins moulded out of its flanks while the exhaust pipes were carried in rocket motor nozzles.
But what was this in front on either side of the radiator, carrying the bumpers like gulls' wings?
Two enlarged bomb-shaped protuberances of pure dazzling chrome — or were they bombs after all?
On closer inspection they were equipped with central nipples of white rubber.
Perhaps Dr Dichter had something after all.
Tail fins grew longer and flashier from 1956 until 1960 when at the limit of evolution they dropped off.
But whatever the possibilities of female protuberances up front, what actually developed were lamps.
Lamps of every size sprouted in pairs where no one had seen the need for lamps before, until there were as many as four pairs on the front of a Cadillac, and there were models which carried fourteen lamps as if they were Mississippi riverboats.
The automobile industry had become as fashion-conscious as the rag trade, and it had discovered how to make people discontented with even last year's model.
By 1960 the average trade-in period of American cars was just over two years while in the London Times you could read an essay on the heartbreak of selling your loved and familiar car.
This attitude was no longer conceivable to an American mind where the basic body silhouette was changing every second year.
The redesigning and retooling involved added $200 to the cost per car, with a further $100 for ‘brightwork’ or ‘Borax’, as functionless chrome was called in the trade.
The heavier load of accessories and metal trim drove up petrol consumption: from twenty miles per gallon the average dropped to fifteen and below.
But who was counting?
The formula was to ‘sell more car per car’.
Everything about the industry glorified waste.
There was a half-hearted and unconvincing attempt to justify fins.
They were claimed to have stabilizing qualities in a cross-wind.
But their true justification was symbolic.
They symbolized all the money that was around, the flamboyance expected of the richest nation on earth.
The front of a 1956 Cadillac looked like a chrome version of an oriental shrine, which is what it was: the object of ritualized washing and polishing on Sunday morning, an observance as solemn as church-going, a service of holy Carmunion.
By 1959 the car body could be streamlined no further.
The Pontiac crouched for a whole foot lower than it did before, and General Motors shareholders were beginning to complain at annual meetings of bumping their heads or not being able to wear a hat in a Buick.
So the designers turned in a new direction, the second-car market.
Detroit-made compacts began to challenge cheap Volkswagens and foreign imports: only, being produced under the Detroit philosophy of more car per car, they were soon so accessorized, automated and air-conditioned that they were no longer cheap.
The advertising for them talked scathingly of ‘one-car captivity’.
And in the richer suburbs there was an intense social pressure — that of the young.
No girl, reported David Riesman, the sociologist, would go to a dance unless she was picked up in a car belonging to or driven by her escort, which was likely to be ‘the second car’.
To be driven to a dance by taxi or one's father would be social death.
It did not take long to see the extension of the concept.
The two-car family led to the two-refrigerator, two-washing-machine, two-bathroom family, along with that favourite Fifties fad, ‘His’ and ‘Hers’towels, toilet articles, perfumes and accessories.
But the basic discovery of the Detroit mentality was that a design did not have to be better engineered, more functional or more beautiful than what was already on the market in order to outsell it; it just had to be newer.
The easiest thing to change was the colour.
Household utensils, vacuum cleaners, telephones, typewriters, baths, wash basins, refrigerators and cookers blushed pink and then into other pastel colours every year or two.
Refrigerators could hardly grow tail fins but they acquired streamlining, a sort of bulbous teardrop shape as if poised for take-off from the kitchen floor.
After modulating through the pastel palette, kitchen equipment came back to its original key — exciting, brilliant white — with a square, boxy outline.
And just as cars acquired more and more lamps, cookers acquired dials.
Control panels bristled with up to thirty-five switches and buttons as if the housewife-technologist required the skills of an airline pilot.
On close examination by the American Consumers' Union, some of these switches were found to be connected to no vital function of the machine whatever.
They were pure ‘gimmick’— a much-used Fifties word which had not yet become a term of abuse.
Who dared abuse gimmicks or any device to keep production and consumption in pace with one another, both bounding inexorably upwards?
The alternative was believed to be another Great Crash.The maxim ‘Waste not, want not,’ became obsolete too; ‘waste not, work not’was the new fear.
Many people expressed it.
Retailing Daily , for instance, declared: ‘We are obligated to work on obsolescence as our contribution to a healthy, growing society.’
You can't do much more violence to sense and language in one sentence than that.
A spokesman for Cornell Business School put it more succinctly: ‘Marketing men have to face the tact that America's capacity to produce may have outstripped its capacity to consume.’
It cost money to grow obsolete ever faster.
The more the styles changed, as the Consumers' Union director, Dexter Masters, pointed out, the greater the disguised price increase to the consumer in shorter-lived products and heavier repair bills.
Things were not being made to last.
It was like riding in an aircraft which had no stable cruising speed.
It had to keep accelerating or it would drop out of the sky.
It was easier to see what was happening if you were a visitor from a less frantically prospering land.
J. B. Priestley, affronted by the impact of Texas on his English prejudices in 1954, described the ugly results with pungency in Journey Down A Rainbow .
He summed up the system of increasing productivity plus high-pressure advertising and salesmanship, plus mass communications, in the word Admass —‘the creation of the mass mind, the mass man.’
One of the characteristics of Admass was the uniformity of the food on offer.
‘If a good Admass man does not order a steak, either he is not hungry or he can't afford the price.’
Between Fort Worth and Dallas he found the nomads wandering from motel to motel, ‘the tuneless gipsies of the machine age’, along roads lined with trailer courts, gas stations, second-hand car dealers, supermarkets, drive-in banks, movie theatres and restaurants, all serving the same food, movies, television, songs and cigarettes.
‘It offers movement without any essential change,’ he wrote, ‘It is a street three thousand miles long.
You burn 150 gallons of gasoline to arrive nowhere.’
This pattern of life was being copied in Britain and all over the motorized world with greater or less fidelity.
Priestley's warning was that it was essentially a cheat.
It did not offer more choice but less than there was before.
The freedom to wander at will is illusory if all the destinations are indistinguishable.
‘The people who live there are dissatisfied, restless and bitter,’ he warned, ‘Especially the women — still girls in a mining camp.’
It may be unfair to picture the horrors of Texas as if they are worse than the horrors of industrial Britain.
The motel-supermarket-hamburger civilization has now been superimposed on what was left of nineteenth-century towns, and has further worn down the differences between one region and the next, but it is doubtful whether the mass mind or the mass man has yet come to pass, except to the extent that people always conform to a prevailing style while it lasts.
It can be argued that mass communications have simply speeded up the whole process of change enormously, rather than imposed a massive and rigid uniformity.
‘I think my pessimism was justified,’ said Priestley looking back on it, ‘I think the odds are very heavy against getting a square deal from anybody about anything.’
It is doubtful whether many of the denizens of Admass society saw themselves as victims in the way Priestley did.
For a time it seemed as though the white working class had vanished.
Tom Wolfe recalls:.
It became impossible at that time to use words like ‘proletarian’, ‘working class’ or ‘Blue Col’.
They had too much money.
They were no longer wearing string vests, they were wearing Lacoste polo shirts with an alligator emblem on the pocket or ‘Cisco Kid’ shirts with diagonal zippers.
You began to see them in the expensive cars.
It was the working class who wanted to use their money for flamboyant display.
The reason American tourists became a byword for vulgarity in Europe was that suddenly they were working-class Americans going abroad.
There had never been such a period before, of such security and stability.
The United States seemed to be in great shape.
We were the most powerful country in the world and the overwhelming fact was that astonishing amounts of money had come into ordinary people's homes.
Hence the cars, the holiday trips, the barbecues, the pets — I remember in 1959 being amazed to discover how many people in the suburbs of Washington were keeping pet chimpanzees !
People with new money spread out into the newly-built suburbs where the houses, like the cars, had got longer and lower and were dignified with the name ‘ranch-style’ as though there were unspoilt acres in which to roam outside, rather than the swallowing of land in highways, parkways, expressways and cloverleaf intersections to enable suburban man to reach what was once a rural neighbourhood.
The newest style was ‘split-level’— a living room with a picture window and an adjoining dining area, a kitchen and, up a few stairs above the double garage, three bedrooms and two bathrooms.
The price would be about $25,000 in a place like Park Forest, outside Chicago.
The suburb was home for thirty million Americans.
Of course, the price and income range varied, and so with it did the ‘life-style’— a term for which the Fifties were still groping.
One of these styles was invented on the eve of the Fifties by Abraham Levitt, who was already seventy years old, on a potato patch on Long Island.
He began building extremely cheap mass housing for war veterans, who camped out for nights to secure a house on no deposit whatever.
He called it Levittown.
By the Fifties his ranch model homes, built in about five varieties of finish and colour scheme, were selling for $9,000.
Leaving behind him a suburban town of 100,000 people on the potato patch, Levitt went on to build bigger Levittowns in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
By the mid-Seventies the $9,000 ranch model was worth $30,000 and more, and the policemen and firemen who originally lived there had been replaced by the middle class.
Community life had faded away.
The object of suburban man was to move onward and upward to a better suburb.
Suburbs dedicated ostensibly to the cult of the the family, centred on children and leisure in a calming, country atmosphere, were striving places.
Sloan Wilson captured the values of ‘Westport’, Connecticut, in a famous book: ‘On Greentree Avenue finances were an open book.
Budgets were frankly discussed and the public celebration of increases in salary was common.
The biggest parties were moving-out parties given by people who were finally able to afford a bigger house.’
That was in The Man In The Gray Flannel Suit , whose title became a kind of cat-call at the conforming commuter who sacrificed his integrity for a safe income and suburban comfort.
Sloan Wilson did not sneer at it that way in his autobiography,What Shall We Wear To This Party :
The war left them (veterans) with a lust for security and permanence, even luxury and prestige.
If big companies of that day insisted on a kind of uniform of the day, be it gray flannel or pinstripe, the eager veterans donned it cheerfully.
The structure of large corporations, with chains of command, was not unlike the armed forces.
In the novel, Tom Rath, a veteran paratrooper, and his wife Betsy are continually complaining at suburban life or feeling guilty about corporation values.
The big company is referred to as ‘the mink-lined rat-trap’ and, after a good talking-to from Betsy, Tom spurns it in favour of old-fashioned American self-reliance.
They resolve to get up early, have a proper breakfast, walk to the station, give away the TV set, and go to church every Sunday instead of lounging about drinking Martinis.
It is almost too virtuous and optimistic to believe, but the Fifties readers seized on it as a model.
Probably Tom's fellow commuters sincerely enjoyed their Sunday morning Martinis, just as they enjoyed shining the tail-fins and chrome of the Plymouth and cutting their grass with power mowers (power mower sales quadrupled).
Betsy's neighbours, the wives, probably enjoyed lives centred on the rearing of so many extra children (the child population under fourteen increased by 50 per cent).
The social round consisted overwhelmingly of scouts and brownies and camp and parent-teacher associations and dancing classes and backyard barbecues and coffee ‘klatches’ and cocktails and canapés…gin imports trebled and vodka sales were multiplied by ten.
If it sounds boring, and it does, well, it also endures.
Indeed, despite the Sixties' experiments with alternative life-styles, the despised suburban style looks like seeing the century through, for all its drawbacks of loneliness, boredom and exasperation, which made the man in the New Yorker cartoon say plaintively at the cocktail party: ‘I want to talk about something else besides kids and illness!’
Sneer though they might, a series of interviews with graduates of the Class of '55 at Ivy League colleges conducted by Time magazine showed the strong streak of conformity of the Fifties.
The overwhelming majority of these, the best qualified young people in the country, said they wanted a protected life in a big corporation, a home in the suburbs and a family of five or six children.
They were, in the title of another influential book, examples of The Organization Man .
William H. Whyte pointed out in his study that the American Dream had changed.
Instead of being a dream of individual salvation through competition, hard work and thrift, it had been perverted by the ‘tyranny of the majority’ into putting loyalty to the organization first.
The corporations increasingly used ‘personality testing’ in selecting their executives.
Whyte even gave tips on how to answer the questions correctly — that is, in the way the corporation would like you to: ‘Repeat to yourself — I like things pretty well the way they are.
I love my wife and children but I don't let them get in the way of company work.’
Herd life extended beyond the office out to the organization man's natural habitat, the suburban community, where he found even watching television was a group activity.
In Chicago's Park Forest, where the modest houses cost $17,000 and the gray-flannel, or rather charcoal-suited, inhabitants were typically earning $6,000-$7,000 and were aged between twenty-five and thirty-five, the house agent's advertisements stressed the feeling of ‘belonging':
A cup of coffee — symbol of PARK FOREST!
Coffee pots bubble all day long in Park Forest.
This sign of friendliness tells you how much neighbours enjoy each other 's company.
Dr Dichter would have been proud of that piece of depth thinking.
Don't sell the house, sell the bubble of the coffee pot.
Soon it was not enough to demonstrate your success in life by the acquisition of material goods.
A refrigerator?— 87 per cent of households had one.
A washing machine?— 75 per cent owned one too.
Vacuum cleaners, pop-up toasters, food mixers — by 1960 they were common to 70 per cent of American families.
Britain could not match these percentages but it was catching up, ‘keeping up with the Joneses’.
In 1958, when hire purchase restrictions were finally abolished, the throttle was opened.
You could become the owner of a Ford Popular for a down payment of £4. 8s. 5d. or of a refrigerator for £3. 3s. 3d., with years to pay.
By the end of the decade, four British families out of five were the hire-purchasers of £1,000 million-worth of goods.
Foreign holidays were abroad by 1960.
Like the Americans, many of them had never crossed the Channel for pleasure before.
They found that £15 or £20 a week went as far in an erstwhile fishing village on Spain's Costa Brava as it did at an English seaside hotel or holiday camp, with cheap wine and reliable sunshine thrown in.
The Spanish were soon obliging enough to provide tea and chips as well.
One of the by-products of contact with Europe was a boom in wine sales, which nearly doubled at home, and a long-overdue improvement in restaurant standards.
British restaurant cooking had been despaired of after fifteen years of siege conditions until the counter-attack of The Good Food Guide , founded in 1951 by Raymond Postgate, a pioneering bon vivant , and compiled by himself, his friends and any members of the public who could be bothered to write in with their recommendations (one who did was a lion tamer).
Slowly an underground resistance movement grew, catering for discriminating customers.
The war-time legacy of the five-shilling legal maximum on restaurant bills was an open cheque for profiteers to pose as restaurateurs.
Gradually the prevailing barbarism was tempered.
This central registry with its annual guide set standards of value for money (‘ample helpings’ was a common form of praise in the early, newly-derationed days) and a little more sophistication of taste than that for which British boarding schools and service canteens had trained the middle classes.
Government-approved ‘mousetrap’ had for so long banished regional English cheeses, for instance, that they were given up for dead.
But with a little encouragement Wensleydale and Caerphilly, Double Gloucester and proper Stilton from Melton Mowbray began to flower again.
British and Australian substitutes for burgundy began to give place to the real thing.
In the early Fifties Oxford and Cambridge parties were launched on a tide of sharp South African sherry, and Commemoration or May balls were danced on cheap, acrid champagne.
It was not the taste buds but the purchasing power of Academe that needed nursing.
Once even one good restaurant in a county, such as The Bell at Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire, started raising standards the word passed along the grapevine and the effect was cumulative.
It is hard to convey to those who do not remember the abysmal depths of post-war British catering what a heady sensation it was to be invited to strike a blow for improvement — or to strike a restaurant off for bad cooking, uncleanliness or lack of attention.
It is America's misfortune that it has encouraged standardized mass catering to swamp the country, coast to coast, with the Admass steak and chicken and seafood.
But it was from America that British consumers took the idea of the founding of the Consumers' Association and its magazine Which ? in 1957, which was soon selling 300,000 copies — almost as many as The Times .
About £7 million was being spent annually on pushing the claims of washing powders such as Tide, Daz, Omo and Persil, compared with £1.7 million on pushing the performances of music, opera, ballet, theatre and visual arts.
Now, for the price of its modest subscription,Which ? and its laboratories revealed that the cleaning power of these rivals was practically identical.
Though they fell far short of the giant-killing exploits of Citizen Ralph Nader in the decade to come, the consumers' organizations provided a rallying point and the hard evidence to contest the claims of £450 million-worth of advertising a year, roughly the same as was spent on schools.
In other respects American firms brought American techniques to bear in the opposite direction.
The advertising was American, led by such firms as J. Walter Thompson and applied to the products of eight hundred American firms dominating the British consumer — Thomas Hedley (Tide and Daz), Hoover, Singer, Heinz, Kellogg, Kraft, Gillette, Kodak, Woolworth, Colgate-Palmolive, Esso and Ford to name only the top twelve.
In the event it was Alaska which became the 49th State of the Union (in 1959) but it could easily have been Coca-Colonial Britain.
When Prime Minister Macmillan uttered the famous slogan ‘Some of our people have never had it so good’, he had even borrowed the phrase from America.
Two years earlier, George Meany, chairman of the combined American unions, the AFL-CIO, proclaimed that American labour had ‘never had it so good’— which was true.
Macmillan had the grace to add the question: ‘Is it too good to last?’
In Britain it was too good to last, but the slogan led to a disastrous period of false optimism.
Macmillan, one of the wiliest politicians of his time, also said, with typical understatement, as the Fifties drew to an end: ‘We have not done badly.
But we have not done quite well enough.’
That blandly papered over the facts that Britain's share of world trade had steadily declined, its prices had risen more and its exports less than those of its ex-enemies, the Germans and the Italians.
Despite what seemed to be a nice little boom, British productivity had grown more slowly than that of any comparable European country: 40 per cent compared with Germany's and Italy's 150 per cent, not to consider Japan's 400 per cent .
Exports had risen by 150 per cent from Germany and 180 per cent from Italy but only 28 per cent from Britain.
The only thing in which Britain held a clear lead was price increases — 10 per cent compared with 2 per cent in Germany.
Alongside the German economic miracle and the U.S. trading surplus with the world, it began to look as if Britain was the new Sick Man of Europe.
Over the next fifteen years of constantly recurring crises it was going to get much worse.
But the original damage was done in the Fifties and it was the product of ignorance and laziness and bloody-mindedness.
The Economist had declared in 1954: ‘The miracle has happened!
Full employment without inflation.’
It was wrong.
The average wage in 1950 (£6. 8s. 0d.) had almost doubled by 1959 (£11. 2s. 6d.) but by then the pound had lost a third of its value.
This was only a modest puff of inflation by subsequent standards: by 1974 the 1950 pound would have been worth only one-third of a pound.
It was a foretaste of the wages-prices spiral and the increasingly futile chase after higher incomes.
To sum up: in a time of unprecedented expansion of world trade Britain, the nation of shopkeepers, paid itself higher wages for producing very little more, while putting up its prices much faster than its competitors.
Ignoring the foundation of the European Economic Community until it was too late to join on favourable terms, Britain lost its position as a first-class trading power without even noticing.
Instead, inspired by Mr Macmillan as Chancellor, the State instituted a national lottery — the Premium Bonds — in 1956.
Instead of putting their money into business, people lent it to the government in the hope that ERNIE (the nickname of the Electronic Random Number Indicator) would select their number for the top prize (then) of a modest £1,000.
The chance was not high, though that never deterred a gambler, and the real winner was always the government which thus borrowed the punters' money interest-free.
The chance of winning £75,000, then the top prize on the football pools, was too small to be visible but in the Fifties this slender possibility mesmerized the nation.
Winners of the Treble Chance swooned at the sight of the cheque and were generally paraded to the Press and public as examples of how, at any minute, any humble citizen who had never had more than a day out at Blackpool could strike gold.
A follow-up study showed that very few of them ever had any higher ambition for using the money than buying a house or two for the family and perhaps a shop or pub.
They declared almost unanimously that it would not change their way of life, which makes one wonder what was so attractive about that way of life (in fact, nearly all pools winners were forced to move, through the envy of neighbours).
But the dream, ‘When I come up on the Pools’ became the Fifties equivalent of breaking the bank at Monte Carlo for the Edwardians.
In the United States it was not the £75,000 cheque but the $64,000 Question, the top prize in a double-your-money television quiz, that dominated people's fantasies.
When the first contestant to go for the top prize, Marine Captain Richard MacCutchin who, oddly, specialized in haute cuisine , pulled it off by describing the ingredients of a royal banquet given by George VI to the president of France, three-quarters of American television sets were tuned in to watch him wrestle for the answers.
Perhaps it was this climate of hysteria and sanctified greed that broke the moral fibre of a mild-mannered English instructor at Columbia University called Charles Van Doren.
He attained the status of a baseball hero by surviving round after round of the quiz ‘Twenty-One’ until the pay-off reached $129,000 and the audience a breathless 25 million viewers.
But, it later came out, he and other contestants were being primed with the answers beforehand.
All their brow-knotting agonies were carefully rehearsed.
Van Doren's excuse to the investigating congressional committee was the most interesting part of the unedifying episode: ‘I was almost able to convince myself that it did not matter what I was doing because it was having such a good effect on the national attitude to teachers, education and the intellectual life.’
In Britain one of the quintessentially Fifties symbols of the search for El Dorado (or the golden calf) was a gold-plated Daimler which belonged to a curious pair of headline-hunters, Sir Bernard and Lady Docker.
To be more accurate, while Norah Docker sought the cameramen Sir Bernard hung about like a good-natured but rather dim St Bernard dog providing the money for her extravagance.
The Edwardian Gaiety girls would have recognized Norah.
Once a café dancer, she, too, showed a talent for marrying rich men — Sir Bernard was the third — and it was she who decided that the Docker Daimler should be gold-plated and that the seats should be upholstered in zebra skin.
‘Mink,’ she explained in a line worthy of Anita Loos, ‘is too hot to sit on.’
Hither and thither rolled the famous car, disgorging Lady D, followed by Sir Bernard, like minor royalty to perform no very clear function other than to open things or attend functions and be recognized.
Norah, for instance, would arrive at a Yorkshire pit village one Sunday morning to be shown round the mine in a white helmet.
Her escort of miners went pink with pleasure at calling her ‘My lady’ in speeches at the pit canteen.
In return she showed them the Daimler and invited forty of them to visit her on the Dockers' yacht,Shemara , where pink champagne was served amid costly fitments which were often detailed in the newspapers.
Norah was a card.
She made the headlines by having a glass of wine thrown over her at the plushy Caprice restaurant in London.
She caused an international fuss and was banned from Monte Carlo by Prince Rainier for tearing up a tiny paper flag of Monaco in pique at a banquet.
But she knew her public.
They liked watching her play out a Cinderella fantasy, wearing gold lamé and riding in a gold-plated carriage to a ball from which she did not return until well after midnight.
Nobody questioned her right to flaunt her way of life.
She was a profession celebrity — one of the last to flourish without benefit of television.
Then the Birmingham Small Arms Company revealed after many a summer that the car she sat in like a burnished throne, and even some of the furs she wore, were not provided by her Prince Charming, Sir Bernard, but by them, the nuts and bolts firm of which he was chairman, as a business expense which they were no longer happy to provide.
That took the gilt off the gingerbread and the Daimler bumpers.
Sir Bernard was ousted as chairman.
Norah complained bitterly that her style had brought the company free publicity worth far more than it cost.
But the curious pair who for a time were so well-known simply for being rich vanished from the public eye — towards a tax haven in Jersey.
There was a fascination with Britain's self-made millionaires, like the former roller-skating rink proprietor, Charles Clore, whose empire included shoe shops and shipyards and even the shores of Loch Ness.
There was the estate agent's clerk, Jack Cotton, whose property developments in Birmingham made him big enough, in partnership with Clore, to take over the Ritz and Selfridges, to put up the $100 million Pan-Am office building in New York and to threaten to present Piccadilly Circus with a hideous skyscraper of advertising signs, while he contemplated his Rembrandt at the Dorchester.
Isaac Wolfson, son of a Russian refugee in the furniture business in Glasgow, became lord of chain store after chain store in the Fifties.
Vast benefactions brought these men knighthoods or baronetcies or honorary degrees from universities they had endowed but not had the chance to attend.
Meanwhile Roy Thomson, once a Scots Canadian radio salesman, bought his way via The Scotsman newspaper and Scottish Television to the proprietorial chair of the Sunday Times and the ailing newspaper empire of Lord Kemsley,en route to The Times itself.
There was one constant factor in the careers of these rich men.
priding themselves on their hard-headedness, they were eventually prepared to take on a poor commercial risk, or found a college as a pure give-away gesture, in order to win a richer prize — prestige.
Thomson said later of The Times , which would cost him millions, ‘It is an honour to underwrite a national institution.’
Harrods was in low water financially when Hugh Fraser, a Scottish draper, made his take-over.
Claridges and the Savoy had to fight off take-over bids with borrowed money.
And the brashly commercial Lord Wolfson (as he became), who went to a State elementary school, was perhaps thinking of his equally unacademic predecessor, Lord Nuffield, when he too, with his endowments, had an Oxford college named after him.
If the millionaires sought their status symbols, so did the world in general.
The term status was popularized in 1958 in an influential book,The Status Seekers by Vance Packard, whose sensitive antennae picked up many new social currents of the time.
He even told his readers how to pronounce it —‘stay-tus’ or ‘stat-us’was permissible.
It was not a new idea, especially to the British who had long known the social significance of the right address or style of house.
Packard's discovery that one particular square mile of high status addresses in New York ran east of Central Park, from 65th to 78th Street, came as no surprise to Londoners who knew the precise social shading between neighbouring postal districts.
After all, the postal map of London S.W.1 had been drawn with a special excrescence to enable Harrods to be included in it and thus avoid the ignominy of falling within the outer darkness of S.W.3 or 7.
So it was no surprise to learn that the inhabitants of an area next o low-status Levittown sued the U.S. Post Office to change their address to ‘North Wantagh’.
American house advertisements lapsed into French when they wanted to indicate high status: ‘Une Maison Ranch très originale’ or ‘Une maison contemporaine’.
Less coyly they would talk about ‘a supreme achievement in luxurious, suburban living.’
Tests in the plusher environs of Philadelphia showed a distinction between chic and unchic speech which in the case of ‘toilet’(chic) and ‘lavatory’(unchic) was the precise opposite of Nancy Mitford's rules for U and Non-U in England.
But the real dynamite in Packard's book was his Status Table of jobs, compiled in a University of Chicago study, in which people were asked how they rated the social standing of one profession compared with another.
In the first grade they put architects, Federal judges, legal partners, medical consultants, bishops and stockbrokers — ahead of such second-rung occupations as newspaper editor, engineer, general practitioner, college professor or county judge.
The distinctions near the bottom were equally interesting: barbers, bartenders and truck drivers, for instance, rated better than waiters, taxi drivers and night-watchmen, who in turn could look down slightly on gardeners, miners and dustmen.
No comparable list existed for England, where it is doubtful if architects and stockbrokers would have rated quite so high or gardeners and miners so low.
But the British professional classes had been examined by the academic team of Lewis and Maude in 1952, who found cause for concern that taxation had reduced the differentials between the professions to such an extent that they feared their quality might not be maintained.
Very few professional men then could expect a net income of £2,000 a year by the age of forty.
Those few were likely to be surgeons, dentists, accountants and solicitors in private practice, certainly not schoolmasters, university lecturers, architects in public service (most of them) or vets.
Yet the income of college-educated Americans of about that time was over $7,000 — considerably more than £2,000 ($5,600).
Meanwhile there was the consolation of rubber plants, wall-to-wall carpeting, panelled executive dining rooms, directors' bathroom suites and, of course, hierarchies of secretaries and secretaries' secretaries to emphasize status in the office.
It was at the end of the Fifties that the joke became popular about one high-powered executive calling another on his car telephone only to be told: ‘He's on the other line’.
The entire cycle of wealth and waste, consumption and status buying, accompanied by the deep roar of the capitalist engine turning over ever faster, needed a name by which to handle its concepts and in 1957 it got one.
An unconventional Canadian professor of economics at Harvard, John Kenneth Galbraith, crystallized all these phenomena in a book whose title,The Affluent Society , meant many things to many people.
For some it was a reassuring catch-phrase like ‘You Never Had It So Good’.
For others it implied that the centuries-old problems of poverty and inequality had been swept away in the tide of prosperity.
The irony of this was that Galbraith's working title for the book was Why People Are Poor .
‘As I dealt with the conditions and consequences of affluence,’ he explained, ‘under which the existence of the poor had been buried, the poverty I had set out to write about got pushed further and further towards the back of the book.
A lot of people never read that far.’
Those who did read from end to end discovered that, far from giving its blessing to ever-expanding production and consumption, it pointed out its futility.
Galbraith challenged the conventional wisdom that everything would be all right if only the Gross National Product were big enough.
By now, sheer production was a self-defeating process.
After a certain point the wants which it is intended to satisfy have to be artificially created in the first place by advertising and salesmanship.
Worse than this, the consuming public was required to incur enormous hire-purchase debts which stimulated chronic inflation, while very low priority was given to ‘unprofitable’ public services such as education, housing and preserving the environment.
The comment, ‘Vacuum cleaners are praiseworthy, street cleaners are an unfortunate expense,’ was a typical piece of Galbraithian ‘Canada Dry’.
It was the picture of public squalor which accompanied private affluence that made the most immediate impact on the thinking of the time.
The most-quoted passage described the affluent American family taking a weekend outing in its mauve and cerise, air-conditioned, power-steered automobile passing through cities made tawdry by litter, blighted buildings and broken pavements, into the bill-boarded countryside where they picnic on packaged food by a polluted stream and camp out on a filthy parking lot.
Just before dozing off on an air mattress beneath a nylon tent amid the stench of decaying refuse they may reflect vaguely on the curious unevenness of their blessings.
Is this, indeed, the American genius?
With an astringent readability and clarity rare among economists, Galbraith's book had a tremendous reception, partly, he believes, because of the Soviet Sputnik which went up into space just before it was published.
It caused anguished soul-searching in the United States.
‘Anything that seemed to offer an explanation of why a vastly less productive society had brought off this breathtaking achievement Was not dismissed but welcomed.’
Looking back, Galbraith now sees the book as having had three forms of influence.
First, it drew attention to the need for a balance between public and private spending.
Secondly, nobody could any longer advance the belief that sheer production — the worship of the Gross National Product — was the final test of a society's economic vigour and success.
Thirdly, it made people aware of the effect affluence was having on their environment.
But he is far from optimistic about how effective these arguments have been in altering policies.
It helped the decision, alas more rhetorical than real, to mount a direct attack on American poverty in the Sixties.
But the basic situation has not changed very much in twenty years.
It's very hard not to contrast the squalor of the public services of the city of New York with the luxury of Park Avenue.
You cannot doubt it would be a better city with more public and less private investment.
Perhaps the book helped to prevent things from getting even worse.
But when I wrote it, nobody had realized anywhere in the world how unbelievably expensive it is to make an agreeable modern city, from managing traffic and removing rubbish to providing better education, housing and transport.
This is still not understood.
We may reach a point where the public costs of city life have to be greater than the private.
Britain has gone farther than any country in the West towards getting a balance between private affluence and public consumption.
It is a costly and difficult thing to aim at but I still think it is right.
Did the experience of plenty bring about a fundamental change in the American or British character?
It is tempting to believe so.
The Fifties began in both countries with a general respect for self-denial, saving and security.
By the time the decade ended self-indulgence was almost the orthodoxy; the fulfilment of economic wants without delay was a virtue.
‘Why deny yourself?’ asked one advertisement (for menswear).
‘Pamper yourself’ cried another, ‘Give yourself this Christmas gift — now!’
‘Hark the Herald Tribune sings, advertising wondrous things,’ sang Tom Lehrer.
What had happened to the old thrifty, puritanical streak which Middle America had inherited from the pioneers?
We have already seen how the creators of wants, the psychology-manipulators in advertising, had set about trying to undermine it.
Perhaps they succeeded better than they deserved.
How else can one explain the emergence of the ‘throwaway philosophy'?
In the Fifties the things you bought to throw away ranged from Kleenex to baking tins, from razors with only one blade (supplied by vending machine) to watches not worth repairing.
New York became conditioned to skyscrapers which were torn down after a few years' life to be replaced by newer skyscrapers.
And the ultimate development in disposable packaging was the TV dinner, the domestic version of the airline dinner, bought complete with disposable tray, containers, cups and utensils, all of them made to be thrown away.
By 1960 the American family was throwing away an average of 750 cans a year.
America, hitherto an exporter of metals, began to import half of those it needed.
It was calculated that the United States was using up eighteen tons of raw material per head of population per year, or ten times as much as the average citizen of the rest of the non-Communist world.
By 1959, its wants took care of 60 per cent of the world's oil production.
Still nobody really worried.
Affluence was not a matter of gold-plated bath taps or Daimlers or tooth-brushes or mink-handled beer can openers — though these were available — it was a matter of 531 competing brands of coffee or 249 brands of washing powder on the American market, whose only raison d'être was that a change of packaging and advertising (New Wonder Ingredient!) gained them shelf space in the supermarkets until the next brand came along.
All this was generally approved of, even though many of the 750 cans (and Coke and Pepsi bottles) thrown away by each family may have cost more to make than the contents.
People reacted to the statistics of plenty with a simple Gee Whizzery.
Nobody questioned the proposition ‘More Is Better’.
In 1954 Fairfield Osborn warned his countrymen: ‘We Americans have used more of the world's resources in the past forty years than all the people in the world had used in the four thousand years up to 1914.
Man is becoming aware of the limits of the earth.’
But was he?
There was no discernible attempt to use less oil, to cut down the size of the cars or the extravagance of the packaging industry.
Nobody was yet greatly concerned about the poverty of what had just been called the Third World.
There was little enough concern with poverty nearer home.
Galbraith pointed out that there were, in 1959, thirteen million American households which were poor in the sense that their family income was below $3,000.
In another influential book Michael Harrington calculated there were between forty and fifty million American poor, the ‘invisible’ third of the nation which existed below the subsistence line in urban ghettos and pockets of rural misery, which he christened ‘The Other America’.
Galbraith recalls that he astonished Premier Nehru in the 1950s by telling him that the Punjab was a better place to live and offered a higher general level of income than rural West Virginia, Georgia and Mississippi.
Instead of worrying about that, the fashionable thing to worry about was how people were going to adapt to all the leisure which the automated future would provide.
‘The creative use of leisure’ sociologists called it and it worried them badly that fret-work and bird-watching might be all there was to fulfil people after pressing the buttons at the fully-automatic, atom-powered, closed-circuit-TV-monitored, computer-directed plant for a couple of four-hour shifts a week.
A false alarm.
‘We failed to see there would come a point where additional leisure would become more stultifying than satisfying and that the mass of men would be incapable of absorbing any more,’ wrote the Harvard sociologist, David Riesman.
More spare time, it was discovered, meant more time spent watching TV, the chief leisure activity for all classes.
Findings from the unions were a surprise to those who had glimpsed Utopia as a world where work became unnecessary: one American union polled its members and discovered that though they thought work was boring, they would rather do that than do nothing.
Industrial workers in general used their shorter working week to do a second job.
All this was to seem academic by the Seventies when the boom finally stopped and the dream future of abundance and leisure popped like a rosy soap bubble.
Looking back at those debates on how we could fill in the time on our hands, the novelist Herbert Gold reflected that the Fifties were a time of ‘happy people with happy problems’.
It was just that the problems were far bigger than people realized.
Instead of automated leisure, enforced unemployment was on its way back.
Instead of how to feed the pockets of rural poor in the overlooked parishes of the affluent society, the problem was how to feed the overpopulated two-thirds of the world.
Instead of how to stimulate demand sufficiently to absorb all that the machines could produce, the problem was what to substitute for the planet's fast-diminishing raw material and energy resources.
But a taste of plenty was such a heady new experience for those lucky enough to get it, especially the war-worn British, that that first, childlike squeal of delight, the deliberate waste, the throwing around of money and goods, is easy to comprehend.
You can forgive people in the Fifties for their eagerness to believe that the problems of highly industrialized societies had been solved, that capitalism worked and that the industrial revolution was at last delivering the goods for everyone…that there were practically no losers.
Well, we know better now.
A Woman's Place
Nothing about the Fifties was more paradoxical than the role women played in it.
After sharing the camaraderie of the fighting services or the hardships of civilian bombing on equal terms, surely women would not go meekly back home to wife-and-motherhood?
But they did, with a fervour that would have amazed the feminists of their grandmothers' generation.
Birth rates soared and career women sank in prestige to the level of drop-outs in the great breeding stakes.
But then, having thrown away the chance of greater equality, women gradually proceeded to win it back by devious ways until by 1960 there had been a stealthy but profound erosion of male dominance with hardly a male being yet aware of it.
A decade which venerated both Dr Spock and Marilyn Monroe was not a simple one.
In the early years the baby boom carried almost all women before it.
Women gave up their jobs in droves and went home to have children in hordes.
The United States population increased by twenty-eight million in ten years, at a rate even faster than India's.
In Britain the birth rate ‘Bulge’, which hit its peak in the late Forties, went down more slowly than anyone had expected.
The marriage age steadily dropped until half of American brides married by the time they were twenty and three-quarters of English girls were marrying by the age of twenty-five.
Why was this?
Partly because the Happy Housewife beamed at the world from countless advertisements, looking out of her gadget-lined nest.
At her side, in popular myth, was an amiably aproned husband demonstrating ‘Togetherness’, the new wonder ingredient in marriage.
Suddenly the climate was imbued with a new Puritan ethic, not the work ethic but the breeding ethic.
The proper function of woman was to raise a brood much larger than women had wanted since before 1914.
The vogue for large families — for third, fourth, even fifth and sixth babies — spread, especially among university graduate mothers.
The most important task to which a woman's higher education could be put was, by wide agreement, raising the next generation.
By the mid-Fifties more than half the girls at American universities were dropping out of college in order to marry and help their husbands to get through.
The Fifties were not a permissive era.
The pressure to marry young went along with a renewed convention of pre-marital chastity.
Once again the rule was that Nice Girls Didn't — certainly not without the understanding that there was a ‘moral’ engagement with their partner, even if he had not yet bought the ring or made the announcement.
Geoffrey Gorer, investigating English attitudes to sex by questionnaire in 1950, found that 55 per cent of men and 73 per cent of women disapproved of women having sexual experience before marriage.
About 50 per cent disapproved of it even for men.
‘The high value put on virginity for both sexes is remarkable and, I should suspect, specifically English,’ Gorer wrote in Exploring English Character .
This may have been due partly to prudence.
Contraceptives in Britain were still kept out of sight, even male ones, and had to be purchased rather furtively, like guilty secrets.
As a result they were often not employed and, even if they were, there was a widespread superstition that the Catholic church made sure that one in twenty (or was it ten?) was faulty, as a sort of divine vengeance.
As for the United States, Betty Friedan testified to ‘the awkward indignity of getting a diaphragm in New York if you weren't married — and sometimes even if you were.’
It was also due partly to the obstacles of fashion.
The would-be seducer of the Fifties had to reckon with an armoury of uncooperative underwear which stood between him and his objective.
The nylon stocking was still suspended from a constricting girdle of unyielding firmness, a fortification virtually impossible to bypass without active collusion, and preferably plenty of time.
Unpremeditated impulses were often frustrated by such hurdles.
The frustrated resorted to petting as a substitute.
‘There was necking (acceptable), soul kissing (exciting, dangerous) and petting, which was subdivided into above the waist and below.
The last two were beyond the pale.
The trick was to stay very, very popular without going ‘all the way’.
Like most girls of my generation, I managed to graduate from High School with my virginity intact,’ wrote Janet Harris looking back on the Fifties in The Prime of Ms America .
In England a debutante of 1957, Anne Browning, looked back on her season in Dance Little Lady in similar terms: ‘If there was sex in the bushes, no one knew about it and it certainly wasn't the accepted thing.
If you went out to dinner, you didn't think of how to get out of going to bed with him, it was how to get out of the car without kissing him.’
The British film Genevieve (1953) was unusually piquant for the time because the old car's destination was tacitly acknowledged to be a ‘dirty weekend’ in Brighton.
It is an extraordinary fact that in 1954 the hero of a bestselling novel like Lucky Jim never once gets to the point of making love to any of the girls he pursues.
One expels him from her bedroom when he is drunk and hopeful with a brisk ‘Out you go!’
Another, after describing her loveless relationship with an unsatisfactory husband, is amazed at Jim Dixon's remark that she would have been better off if she hadn't married.
‘I couldn't do anything else, could I?’
‘Why not?’ he asks, reasonably enough.
‘Christ, haven't you been listening?
I was in love .’
It was still taken as self-evident in even the most up-to-date fiction that being in love normally had only one outcome, marriage.
Wedlock was not only a solution to urgent physical needs, it was a social duty.
‘People got married with the same sense of cultural duty that people today (often the same people) get divorced,’ according to the novelist Malcolm Bradbury, ‘You owed it to yourself and to the times…
There was a secret, suspect taste for girls of rather better background than oneself: hypergamy — marrying upward — a Fifties custom extensively explored in Osborne's play Look Back In Anger .’
Upward sexual-social mobility was a favourite theme of Fifties writers.
It was what got Joe Lampton to the top.
It was the usual reason for the angry young hero's spleen; Jimmy Porter goads the hapless colonel's daughter, Alison, as immobile and submissive as the very ironing board at which she uncomplainingly stands, for being middle class.
But he does not complain of her being a placid, ironing housewife.
Jimmy and Alison ended the play as playmates pretending to be squirrels and bears.
If that sounds nauseatingly juvenile, it had a certain aptness in the Fifties when marriage was for many an institution for recreating one's childhood and  centering life once more on the nursery.
‘After 1949,’ wrote Betty Friedan, ‘Career Woman suddenly became pejorative, denoting a ball-busting, man-eating harpy, a miserable neurotic witch from whom man and child should flee for very life.’
That may be an exaggeration for polemical purposes, but pressures against career women were extreme in the Fifties, especially in America.
It would not have been necessary otherwise to insert an advertisement like this in the New Yorker :
Would You Have Your Baby Delivered By A WOMAN DOCTOR?
An Appeal to women by Eleanor Roosevelt
Women!— Help the institution helping women — The New York Infirmary — 1,145 babies last year — These women doctors have shown their skill and knowledge are in every way equal to the best in the medical profession!
Betty Friedan, who was to give the whole phenomenon of fulfilment-through-motherhood a name —The Feminine Mystique — also made a revealing admission when she came to look back on those unliberated years in a later book (It Changed My Life ):
To be honest, those years were not all self-delusion.
The babies, the bottles, the cooking, the diapering, the burping, the carriage wheeling, the pressure cooker, the barbecue, the playground and doing-it-yourself was more comfortable, more safe, secure and satisfying than that supposedly glamorous ‘career’ in which you somehow didn't feel wanted and knew you weren't going to get anywhere.
This, of course, was exactly what the heroines of women's magazine stories felt in those years when they decided to chuck New York and go home to marry Henry.
Look magazine put out this breath-taking testimonial to the great American mother in 1956:
The wondrous creature marries younger than ever, bears more babies and looks and acts far more feminine than the ‘emancipated’ girl of the Twenties or Thirties.
If she makes an old-fashioned choice and lovingly tends a garden and a bumper crop of children, she rates louder Hosannas than ever before.
Two doctors who attained the status of gurus to the decade added the awesome sanction of Freudian psychology to the doctrine of putting motherhood first — Doctors Bowlby and Spock.
Dr John Bowlby was the author of a bestseller,Child Care And The Growth Of Love (1953), which popularized the theory of Maternal Deprivation, the gist of which was — and is — that the first five years of a child's life are crucial.
Deprived of its mother's constant care in those years, it will grow up emotionally handicapped, incapable of forming deep relationships and might steal in an attempt to compensate for a lack of mother love.
Such a theory might have been tailor-made for the justification of the housebound mother.
Both evidence and conclusions were of dubious general application.
But nobody then dared question the magical properties of the first five years when Oedipal fantasies were supposed to be raging in the unconscious.
Maternal deprivation was made the scapegoat for retarded development, anxiety and guilt feelings, promiscuity, instability and divorce — even for stunted growth.
It took the place in mid-twentieth century demonology that masturbation filled for the Victorians.
Bowlby wrote of ‘the absolute need of infants and toddlers for the continuous care of their mothers.
Some will exclaim ‘Can I then never leave my child?’’
And if some did, the answer was No — or Not for more than a week.
Even then they were warned to expect emotional aloofness on their return.
‘I don't think a week's holiday away from your child is worth the inevitable upset,’ Bowlby declared.
Above all, he insisted sternly, ‘The mother of young children is not free, or at least should not be free, to earn.’
And that was that.
The Fifties graduate mothers were no more inclined to argue with the infallibility of Freud than monsignori argued with the infallibility of the Pope.
You might think there was something wrong with you if you did not enjoy this form of dedicated slavery but at least a woman had someone to share it with: her husband — and that third party in almost every educated parental home, Dr Benjamin Spock.
It was McCalls magazine which coined the emotive new word ‘Togetherness’ in 1954.
Togetherness meant more than keeping each other company; it meant that a man's place was also in the home.
True, he had to make distracting, bread-winning forays away from it but then, with glad and hastening steps, he returned to the true centre of his life, the children whom he helped to feed and bath and dress and play with, even cook for, in domestic servantless days like these.
Man's role was no longer confined to the rough work, the barbecueing and the earnest car-washing.
In ‘the symmetrical family’, as the British sociologist Michael Young christened it, the demarcation of roles was blurred.
‘There is now no sort of work in the home strictly reserved for the wives,’ Young concluded.
‘Even clothes washing and bed making were frequently mentioned by husbands as things they did as well.’
Such conscientious couples even tried to share the child bearing as far as possible.
‘Natural’ childbirth was their ideal.
A process so hedged about with medical mystery and old wives' tales that no man was allowed to share in it now became an experience he must not miss for the world.
Fathers-to-be attended the ante-natal clinics and classes — typically taken by a tough and childless instructress — in order to be taught breathing exercises and given labour notes for the day.
Erna Wright, one of the chief apostles of Dr Grantly Dick Read in England, wrote, ‘The experience ought to be shared as part of Togetherness.’
Togetherness and self-help in the birth process, followed as a matter of course by breast feeding, is now embraced with less evangelical fervour than it was by Fifties pioneer couples.
Dr Spock's Baby And Child Care was published first in the United States in 1947 and in Britain in 1955 and there were mothers who boasted they had worn out several copies.
Its worldwide sale was to reach twenty million copies.
In fact it is more than one book.
The second edition in the Fifties was much revised, and the third edition, the Sixties version, still more so, each time diluting a little more the original message of permissive parenthood.
The ‘Permissive Society’ could be said to have begun in the cradles of the Spock babies of the Forties and Fifties, who became the student  protestors of the Sixties.
Spock's basic purpose was to reassure.
Parents were encouraged to trust their commonsense and instinct (‘You know more than you think you do’).
In contrast with the previous orthodoxy of rigid feeding by timetable and letting babies cry rather than‘spoil’ them, he advised natural loving care as the guide.
He also went along with the Bowlby theory to the extent of discouraging mothers from working: ‘the extra money she might earn or the satisfaction she might receive is not so important after all.’
Later this was revised to the hedging advice to discuss the matter with a social worker before deciding.
But by the third edition Spock had withdrawn a longish way from the doctrine that natural loving care cures all ills.
‘Easy-going parents must not be afraid to be firm,’ he was suggesting, ‘Moderate strictness is not harmful.’
By 1974 he was sounding the danger warning with something like panic.
He prefaced a book called Bringing Up Children In A Difficult Time with a ‘Statement of an anti-permissive author’: ‘How did I ever get the reputation of being an advocate of excessive permissiveness?’ he asked plaintively and disingenuously.
He should have read his earlier editions.
So it was that a generation of highly educated women occupied their minds with Bowlby and Spock and The Joy Of Cooking and little else.
Not only did they disclaim any career but motherhood, they even began to question the need for the higher education itself.
A Guardian article noted: ‘A group of Girton, Cambridge, undergraduates in 1959 agreed on television that politics was not a good career for women.
It was unfeminine and difficult to combine with marriage.
After marriage, only the exceptional woman is now going to go on working outside her home.’
And yet in 1953 another keenly awaited publication lit a fuse which eventually would explode many an illusion of carefully tended domestic bliss.
It was the second Kinsey Report, entitled Sexual Behaviour In The Human Female .
As bombshells went, it outclassed Dr Alfred Kinsey's previous findings about the Human Male.
The sexual behaviour referred to turned out to be sexual misbehaviour by the standards of the time and on a widespread scale.
Half of the 6,000 women questioned admitted to having intercourse before marriage and a quarter of them to adulterous intercourse after marriage.
Pious shock and horror was expressed at this frailty in the face of temptation — far more so than at the evidence that men behaved in the same way.
But the really challenging upshot of the report was not this predictable hypocrisy.
It was the reaction to the evidence that women were the equals, if not more than the equals, of men in sexual responsiveness and capacity.
The established, and now publicized, fact that women's sexual capacity increases with age, at least until the late twenties, and stays at this peak for decades, while men's is already declining, came as a shock both to men, who suddenly discovered they were the unlucky sex, and to women who had not realized what they had been missing.
Kinsey and his colleagues had also broken a taboo by openly discussing the female orgasm, a subject still shrouded in misinformation.
His finding was that the capacity to experience it was much more highly developed in wives who had indulged in intercourse before marriage than in those who had remained chaste — in short there was much to be said against chastity.
The report also found what a lot of sexual incompatibility and discontent existed.
Two-thirds of the marriages investigated were in danger at some point because of sexual dissatisfaction.
Kinsey himself refrained from moral judgments.
But such findings as these were greeted with dismay and defiant incredulity by professional moralists and church leaders.
For the uncommitted public, however, there were two effects of startling importance: sexual frankness took an immense leap forward and the image of women could be said to have been changed for ever.
‘Any picture America had of its women being shy, gentle creatures living sheltered lives, untainted by the world, is shattered by the facts in the report,’ commented one newspaper typically.
Even more than the image was shattered.
If women could enjoy sex as much as men, as the report affirmed, then the implication was that they always should and those who realized they were not achieving Kinsey's statistical norm of orgasm soon asked themselves why not?
Those who had accepted the old beliefs about women — her slower sexual arousal, natural chastity and requirement for serious emotional involvement — were bound to ask themselves whether they had been led up the garden path.
It can hardly be pure coincidence that within three years of Kinsey's appearance the limits of permissible sexual explicitness in the arts and entertainment had radically changed and with them the public image of the ideal woman as projected in, above all, films.
The Fifties saw two quite different examples of femininity held up for admiration.
The model queens of the magazine covers, Suzy Parker in America and Barbara Goalen in England, were ladies who were photographed in long gloves.
Miss Parker said she thanked God for high cheek bones every time she looked in a mirror and, on cover after cover, very little beyond her cheek bones was exposed.
Barbara Goalen seldom appeared without a liberal helping of diamonds or pearls at throat, wrist and ears.
Grace Kelly, every inch a lady on screen, became every inch a princess when she married Prince Rainier in 1956 and became Her Serene Highness of Monaco.
Claire Bloom, Chaplin's girl protégé in Limelight (1952), had none of the waif-like frailty of Paulette Goddard in City Lights (1931) but a look of cool composure and high caste.
Nobody could have called Katharine Hepburn, Ingrid Bergman, Deborah Kerr or Vivien Leigh ‘sex objects’.
They were objects of high style, like Garbo and Dietrich.
But their magnetism was beginning to be challenged as early as 1953 by Marilyn Monroe, playing the busty gold-digger, Lorelei Lee, in Gentlemen Prefer Blondes alongside Jane Russell, whose bust, supported by a specially cantilevered bra designed by her master Howard Hughes, was the most noticeable asset she had.
The bust, bosom or cleavage was for the Fifties the apotheosis of erogenous zones.
The breasts were the apples of all eyes.
Never in this century at least had so much respect been paid to mammary development.
The very concentration of attention on female breasts seemed to swell them with pride to melon-like proportion — or disproportion, for they would flatten and disappear just as mysteriously ten years later.
And Fifties gentlemen actually did prefer blondes.
Three out of ten brunettes dyed their hair blonde to compete.
It was as though men, American men particularly, underwent a wave of nostalgia for maternal breast memories.
Brassieres upholstered with foam rubber were produced as beauty aids even for the well-endowed and even for prepubescent girls.
Whole careers were built on breasts.
Jayne Mansfield's were insured for a million dollars.
According to her publicists, who had little else except her lubricious reputation to publicize, they measured 40 inches.
She herself, taking a deep breath, once claimed 44.
In the competition for titillation Britain put her best bust forward in the equally platinum, equally pneumatic person of Diana Dors (37–24–35, as the newspapers always labelled her).
She was a typical Fifties phenomenon, a celebrity contrived out of sex appeal and publicity alone, both of them rather naive and innocent by the standards of subsequent hype and hoop-la.
The pictures she shot for the cinema were negligible compared to the pictures she shot for pure publicity.
Perhaps the most notorious was the photograph in a mink bikini with rhinestone straps paddling a gondola at the Venice film festival of 1955 — a picture that inspired a musical on the London stage.
When she reached her ambition, Hollywood, over-zealous publicity backfired on her: she was pushed into her own swimming pool by a sensation-seeking photographer along with her husband, Dennis Hamilton, who had vowed to make her ‘the female Errol Flynn’.
The subsequent punch-up led to such headlines as ‘Go Home Mr. Dors And Take Diana With You’.
Hollywood did not welcome British competition at its own game.
Miss Dors, who has since shown herself to be a capable character actress, remembers her bubble-bathing days as a cushion for male dreams with amused tolerance:
In 1951, when I was nineteen, I became the first home-grown sex symbol in austerity Britain.
It was like being a naughty seaside postcard.
Men have always been hung up on breasts, especially American men, and in those days it was the only part of the body which could be shown.
The Americans started it with Jane Russell and were also the most hypocritical about it.
On American television they would insist on putting a piece of gauze across my bosom.
When I was filmed wearing a bikini, it had to have two lower halves.
The one for American showing had to cover the navel.
When I look back on those days now, I think how perfectly harmless it all was by comparison with today's pornography.
We never really showed anything.
Under all those carefully arranged bubbles there was a flesh-coloured leotard.
It was a gigantic con, really.
But nothing could compare with the two universal sex-symbols of the decade, Marilyn Monroe and Brigitte Bardot.
One was the illegitimate child of an insane mother, the product of orphanages and foster homes.
The other was the offspring of doting, bourgeois parents, who should have given off the opposite kind of vibrations.
Yet both women brought a more intense and child-whorish eroticism to the screen than had been seen before, while retaining a suggestion of innocence at the heart of it.
Both appeared as nearly naked as possible after the censor had cut or covered his pound of flesh.
And both were obviously walking, wriggling and giggling embodiments of Dr Kinsey's findings.
Not only did they enjoy, indeed relish, healthy sexual appetites, they made it obvious that they would satisfy them where and when they felt like it, on their Own terms.
Both of them gave out pert repartee in the traditional Mae West manner.
‘What did you have on?’—‘I had the radio on’ said Monroe.
‘How do you like Englishmen?’—‘To tell the truth I haven't tried one yet,’ replied Bardot.
But there the resemblance to the old movie queens stopped.
These two treated men as playthings.
Their deepest emotions were narcissist.
Their true love affairs were with the camera and with those flickering images of themselves which turned on the rest of the public as well.
Their lack of involvement on any deep level with men was, in its way, a liberation and perhaps explains why so many women, too, admired them, copied their looks and envied their freedom of behaviour.
Monroe's neurotic and unhappy character was not then obvious.
Only two or three years before her breakthrough, her anonymous photograph, naked, ripe, glistening and stretched out with parted lips on red velvet, was adorning calendars in half the bars and filling station offices across America.
The calendar was ‘discovered’ to help publicize an early film,Clash By Night (1951), and the fuss put her in the headlines and the box office draw category.
By 1956 she had become Hollywood's best-known female and had married in succession the sportsmen's baseball hero, Joe Di Maggio, and the intellectuals' Broadway hero, Arthur Miller.
She was also the girl most men wanted to go to bed with.
Her prestige could be gauged from the quality of her attendants: Miller, Lee Strasberg, her acting coach, guru of the fashionable Actors' Studio, and Laurence Olivier, her leading man in The Prince And The Showgirl , whom she infuriated by her ‘unprofessionalism’.
She was also a kind of mascot of the liberal intelligentsia — had she not come up the hard way from the very bottom of the heap to stand by Miller's side defying the anti-Communist witch-hunters who wanted to jail him?
On this very honeymoon she arrived in England, an unusually star-struck England, took to bicycling around her home in Windsor Great Park — and hit disaster.
The filming was bedevilled by her personal problems, her sleeping problems, her lateness on the set, her acting problems.
Her Method acting coach, Mrs Lee Strasberg, was banned from the set after telling Olivier, the world's foremost non-Method actor, that his performance was artificial.
Ultimately there had to be added to the list her marital problems.
Miller found himself playing the role of her doctor, manager, analyst and trouble-shooter with an increasingly frustrated, impatient and high-handed Olivier, who was having marital problems himself with the mentally troubled Vivien Leigh, who had just announced a miscarriage at the age of forty-one.
By the end of the decade Monroe's marriage was only just hanging together.
She had needed forty-two takes to get her lines right in one scene of Some Like It Hot .
In Let's Make Love she had a well-publicized affair with her co-star, Yves Montand.
The last service Miller could do was to write the script of The Misfits for her.
She played it opposite Clark Gable just before he died.
She was never more than a light comedy performer who made a virtue of her acting limitations by being amusing as she demonstrated them.
But her caressable curves and wondering eyes and hushed baby voice dominated the pleasanter fantasies of people all round the world.
She did much to mitigate the charmlessness of the Eisenhower-Dulles-strategic-bomber image of America.
It would have been hard for the toughest, most stable and secure character to stand up to being dream symbol to the world.
Norma Jean Baker, her name, her face, her life altered by exploitation and cosmetic surgery, stood on too little solid ground to remain certain of her own identity behind the camera's image and two years later, at thirty-six, she was dead.
It was also the camera that created Brigitte Bardot.
Her picture on the cover of Elle magazine, when she was still a schoolgirl of fifteen from a strict bourgeois family, led her to Roger Vadim, who let her out of her birdcage by marrying her in 1952 despite parental reluctance.
In 1953 he unveiled her at the Cannes film festival where she stole the limelight to such an extent that established stars could only get their pictures taken by posing with her.
On the traditional visit to American aircraft carrier in the harbour, reported Paris-Match : ‘With a toss of her head that sent her ponytail flying, the Midway was engulfed in a streak of lightning from thousands of flashbulbs and cries of admiration.’
Just as Monroe represented the acceptable face of the United States, Bardot symbolized the France which the world liked to imagine.
Bardot's sensuality, too, was not that of a femme fatale but an enfant fatale .
Not for nothing was she dubbed BB — pronounced Bébé.
She was the first of a line of ‘nymphets’ who would also include Carroll Baker in Baby Doll and be raised to the permanence of art in Nabokov's Lolita .
Her baby chin, her drooping petal of lower lip, her tousled mane of blonde tresses, her girlish gingham dresses with white décolletage , combined to create a look of chaste girlhood with a strong hint that she would be quite prepared for you to sully it.
It was a look copied by would-be sex kittens from sixteen to twenty-six all over Western Europe.
She made the calendar girls of the Fifties, with their airbrushed flesh and gleaming swimsuits, look like dinosaurs.
But at first resistance was considerable.
Vadim's Et Dieu Créa La Femme (1956) was the watershed film which liberalized the cinema, but only after it had run into censorship trouble everywhere, especially in the United States where the Hollywood decency code still insisted on separate beds for married couples.
‘The people of Philadelphia don't want this type of film,’ declared its District Attorney, ‘It's dirt for dirt's sake.’
Nevertheless eight million people saw it and, even with the cuts, they were impressed.
What did they see?
In fact: a full-length cinema-scope colour spread of BB on her stomach at the water's edge displaying a bottom ‘as bare as a censor's eyeball’ said Time ; BB rescued from the sea in a clinging wet dress; her wedding night concealed behind some strategically tossed bed linen; and her breasts showing in faint outline through the sheet she is holding up for modesty's sake (they were never seen unveiled).
But in their mind's eye, audiences were convinced she had been virtually naked throughout.
Roger Vadim, a shrewd marketer of his wife's attractions, had calculated this.
He had to show the print a second time to censorship boards to convince them they had imagined the nudity.
He now explains the phenomenon in this way:
The reason people thought she was naked all through the film was because she displayed a different attitude to sex from the one that prevailed in films at that time.
She was not submissive.
Neither was she a whore.
She was not like Deborah Kerr, Grace Kelly, Michele Morgan.
For the Americans it was the first declaration in a film that love for pleasure is not sin.
Even in France, which had been permissive over books and plays, films were treated surprisingly strictly.
The difference between the way we saw life as young people — especially the amoral attitude to sex — and the conventional way of portraying it on screen was so great that I knew we were on the verge of a big change.
After Et Dieu Créa La Femme they accepted the idea that love could be filmed erotically without being pornographic.
Today, of course, it is a film for children.
Though it was far from being a great film it altered the boundaries and opened the way for the New Wave of realism, cinema vérité .
That was the end of the cinematic euphemisms for making love the misty dissolve, the rocketing fireworks or rearing waves which had been the director's equivalent of the novelist's three dots…
With all eyes — or rather all lenses — on her, Bardot soon put her emancipated amorality into practice.
Before filming was finished, she had left Vadim, her director husband, for Jean-Louis Trintignant, her actor husband in the story, a situation which Vadim took with apparent aplomb as he continued to encourage her to strive for even more realism in his rival's arms.
Soon the summer revels of BB at the then uncrowded, unchic little port of St Tropez, with a succession of young actors and guitar players (Trintignant soon withdrew to the peace of Army service), were spied on and peeped at by the photographers and published in countless magazines and newspapers.
She held her Mediterranean court in consort with Françoise Sagan whose bitter-sweet novelettes, like Bonjour Tristesse , also revolved round heroines who chose and discarded their lovers at whim.
 Mademosielle Sagan was celebrated for the variety of her partners and for driving fast sports cars in bare feet as an example of the free life.
Between them these two young women filled the vacuum of French life in the dying days of the Fourth Republic awaiting De Gaulle's return to power.
It was reported that BB was the basis of forty-seven per cent of French conversation — how this was computed is not easy to see but people said such things.
Her smuggled photographs were highly prized and highly priced in Moscow.
And though the whole cult was largely founded on a pout, a posture, a rear view of ponytail and hindquarters and some carefully arranged shower curtains, sheets and wet clothing, the significance of it was that a young woman created a new lifestyle indisputably of the Fifties in which she took a man's attitude to sex.
Or rather, showed that a woman's and a man's attitude to sex could henceforward be one and the same.
Sexual intercourse began
In 1963
Which was rather late for me
lamented Philip Larkin wryly, stating the received opinion about the permissiveness of the Sixties.
But the facts strongly suggest that the current of liberation really began to flow in 1953, the year not only of the Kinsey Report but of two significant debuts: those of James Bond and Playboy .
Ian Fleming's Casino Royale (1953) was not a bestseller but it introduced James Bond, the agent with the number 007, a licence to kill and a taste for the best of everything, especially girls.
His career of sado-sophistication, or ‘snobbery with violence’ as it was dubbed, brought his sales up to eighty million copies and does not need chronicling again except to point the contrast between him and his forbears in popular secret agent fiction.
John Buchan's heroes and Sapper's Bulldog Drummond were as patriotically gritty as he and deserved as well of their country, but their relations with women, if any, were models of chivalry and restraint.
Bond's exotic tastes — the dry Martini shaken, not stirred, and the monogrammed cigarettes, outclassed Captain Hugh Drummond's preference for beer and his cigarette case with ‘Turkish this side, Virginian that.’
But when it came to women, the Captain was a non-starter.
For all his Mayfair address in Half Moon Street, Drummond led an irreproachable married life with Phyllis — that is, when she had not been temporarily kidnapped by a fiend in human shape.
Bond treated each assignment on Her Majesty's Secret Service as an invitation to a gastronomic and sexual binge.
His licence to seduce was as much his right as his licence to kill.
The girls were always willing and always high-caste, even if like the Creole beauty, Solitaire, of Live And Let Die (1954) they were also half-caste:
She took his face between her two hands and held it away, panting.
Her eyes were bright and hot.
Then she brought his lips against hers again and kissed him long and lasciviously as if she was the man and he the woman…
‘Curse this arm,’ he said, ‘I can't hold you properly or make love to you.
It hurts too much.’
But once our hero was free and the villain disposed of, M always granted him ‘passionate leave’, thus setting the seal of HMG's approval on well-earned fornication, unthinkable in Colonel Buchan's day.
And his effortless success compared very piquantly with Lucky Jim's struggles to rouse the opposite sex to carnal delights in the same year of 1954.
Kingsley Amis, who wrote an adventure for Bond as well as creating Jim Dixon, reflects aptly on the reasons for his: ‘What happened was that we came in at the tail end of the literary tradition to the effect that no decent girl enjoys sex — only tarts were supposed to do that.
Buchan's heroes believed this.
Fleming's didn't.
I remember thinking, when Bond arrived, this is more like it.
Bond enjoyed sex without losing his status as a servant of the Queen’.
The linking of sexual enjoyment with social status also proved a golden formula for Hugh Hefner, who had failed as a cartoonist and copy-writer on Esquire in Chicago and was doing none too well as a promoter of a magazine called Children's Activities .
His next venture, worked out on the kitchen table and launched in November 1953, was called Playboy and concerned adults' activities of an uninhibited kind.
He announced his credo unashamedly in his first editorial: ‘We believe we are filling a publishing need only slightly less important than the one just taken care of by the Kinsey Report.’
Playboy was described as a pleasure-primer, its symbol was a rabbit and its bait was the Playmate of the month, the girl who was unfolded in the centre wearing a staple through her navel but not much else.
In the first issue she was none other than Marilyn Monroe in the notorious nude calendar pose, on which Hefner spent $500, most of the capital he had borrowed to launch the magazine.
His priorities proved to have been right.
He sold 53,000 copies (now collector's exhibits) and made a profit.
Before he marketed Playboy — and got fined for sending the Monroe picture through the mails — the only full-page colour nudes outside nudist magazines were the aborigines of the National Geographic Magazine .
By its fifth birthday Playboy was beating Hefner's old employer,Esquire , with a circulation of 850,000.
In the first year it had been careful to disassociate itself from the truck-driver's pin-up image by boasting of the high social and business standing of its readers…‘seven corporation presidents, fourteen vice-presidents, psychiatrists, a mortician and three embalmers’ were listed among the first subscribers.
The embalmers may well have been attracted by the waxed and polished surface of the monthly Playmates.
Miss January and Miss July were posed as carefully to conceal as to reveal.
The retoucher's air-brush was much in evidence and towels, tights, flimsy nightdresses and even scanty skirts were tactfully placed, to mitigate the wrath of the Federal post office.
What Playmates invariably displayed, giving generous measure, were a collector's pair of breasts.
‘If you had to sum up the idea of Playboy it is anti-Puritanism,’ said Hefner at the time.
‘We offered an alternate life-style with more play-and-pleasure orientation.’
In spite of the cumbersome public-relations prose, the editorial message came through loud and clear: enjoy yourself.
The puritan ethic was being replaced by the Hedonist ethic, right there in the heartland.
Hefner himself was soon to develop this idea in his so-called ‘Playboy Philosophy’ at tedious length.
As the Fifties ended he was on the point of multiplying millions by opening the first Playboy Club, in Chicago, where the girls, not the customers, were dressed as rabbits.
Typical of the ambivalence of the anti-Puritan ethic in Hefner's hands, they were supposed to be untouchable.
Their Bunny tails, as Norman Mailer put it, were ‘puffs of chastity which bobbled as they walked.’
The Lucullan excesses which Hefner promised were all in the mind, at any rate as long as the Fifties lasted.
Later he was to acquire his pleasure dome, his fabled mansion, his circular bed, his non-stop room service of food, drink, movies, closed circuit television and girls from the Bunnies' dormitory, the Xanadu of the Middle West over which he presided as Chicago's Kubla Khan.
Or so the stories went, and excellent publicity they proved to be.
But he grew rich on no more than a promise.
He himself was still quietly married to a girl he had been introduced to at high school.
He admitted to have been a virgin at twenty-two.
His friend, Mort Sahl, wrote: ‘It is predictable that a shy man should merchandise anticipation of pleasure — with no delivery date.
For the twenty years I knew him he had been close to only three girls, maybe only one.’
It was the fact that people believed sexual liberation was going on — somewhere else — that was influential, even if it was not really happening.
The effect on the image of the happy, fecund housewife and mother of the suburbs was puzzling.
Women felt they were being asked to fulfil two contradictory roles, that of the homemaker and the seductress, simultaneously.
Traditionally these two stereotypes of womanhood had been kept separate.
The idealized goddess and the erotic temptress were realized in the persons of different women.
When they began to overlap women felt confused and disoriented.
Monroe and Bardot could hardly be held up as examples of the joys of fidelity, domesticity and motherhood which were being hymned in the magazines.
Their liberated lives could not be carried on in the child-centred suburbs.
Sex-as-procreation was being separated from sex-as-fun.
Previous attempts to do this had always foundered on the fact that the fun usually resulted pretty soon in procreation but at this very time field trials of the contraceptive pill were taking place which would soon make the division practical and permanent for the first time in history.
The suburban housewife was the dream image of the young American women and the envy, it was said, of women all over the world…
She had everything that women ever dreamed of.’
So wrote Betty Friedan, who was a suburban housewife in the act of writing the book which was to shatter this image.
The housewives in question found that they were not especially fulfilled.
After all, they were the women who bought and devoured a novel which revealed the unsatisfied desires seething beneath American small-town togetherness —Peyton Place , which earned Grace Metalious $56,000 a year in royalties.
They were also the women who went more and more to seek the aid of psychiatrists and marriage counsellors.
The Marriage Guidance Council, in its infancy in England as the Fifties began, expanded its clientele by 30 per cent to about 18,000 people, and it was then only prepared to counsel those whose sexual relations took place within marriage.
By 1959 a third of those cases were about the way these relations had failed to meet expectations, particularly women's expectation, since twice as many women as men applied to it.
The chief casualties f the Kinsey-backed revolution in sexual attitudes were, interestingly enough, husbands.
‘Many clients try to overcome their difficulties by recourse to books on sexual technique.
This is much commoner among men than among women,’ wrote one of the best-known counsellors, J. H. Wallis, in Marriage Observed .
‘Sometimes, literally, the husband had the book at the bedside…
It is difficult for a woman to understand a man's sensitivity to any slur on his virility.
‘Next time it will be better’ comforts him as little as ‘Never mind, we'll open a tin of something’soothes her wounded self-esteem at a spoiled supper.’
Despite marriage guidance, divorces were climbing steadily.
In 1950 there were 385,000 divorces in the United States compared with 264,000 in the last pre-war year, 1940.
Britain's pre-war rate of divorce had quadrupled from 8,000 to 32,000.
The Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce, appointed in 1951, was greatly alarmed by the trend.
When it reported in 1955 it demanded less permissiveness, not more.
Its members declared that divorce by consent would lead to social disaster.
In a gesture worthy of King Canute they went further: ‘It may become necessary to consider whether the community as a whole would not be happier and more stable if it abolished divorce altogether,’ they wrote.
Why was ‘Togetherness’ proving so difficult to achieve, despite the fact that everybody believed in it?
During the later Fifties a new cartoonist called Jules Feiffer began to contribute faint pencil drawings to an unorthodox paper,The Village Voice .
His tortured men, baffled by neurotic women, were the new decade's equivalent of Thurber's mid-Western Valkyries of the war between the sexes, only now both sexes were tied in impotent knots of ill-understood Freudian theory.
A typical Feiffer couple, solemnly offering each other elaborate explanations of why they could not hit it off, are asking in their thought balloons why the other partner can't, for Pete's sake, make a straight pass.
Sick Sick Sick he called his first collection and subtitled it ‘A Guide to Non-Confident Living’.
‘I'm trying to explain the complete breakdown in communications.
People who are on intimate terms are incapable of expressing themselves to each other,’ said the thin, melancholy Feiffer.
In a revealing article, ‘Men Really Don't Like Women’(Look magazine) he expressed himself capably, though pessimistically, enough: ‘The American woman is a victim.
Her trouble is she is doing comparatively well as a victim.
Her problem is not taken seriously.
Woman is a second-class victim.
And what is her problem?
We all know it is man…
Man has always seen woman as his enemy.
But he needs her.’
What he wrote was already forming in the minds of married women torn between homes and the lure of careers, between the roles of sex objects or earth mothers.
What they had begun to realize was that they were getting a rough deal and that no one else would take any notice.
‘Each suburban wife, as she made the beds, shopped for groceries, ate peanut-butter sandwiches with her children, chauffeured Cubs and Brownies, lay beside her husband at night, was afraid to ask even of herself the silent question, ‘Is this all?’’
The Feminine Mystique , which dared to put the silent question, did not see the light of day until 1963, when it sold three million copies, but it was already being written and its audience was waiting.
In Britain in 1957 a third of married women were working again.
They were being wooed back, because there was already full employment, as teachers and as nurses.
Many of them went only partly for the money.
It was often the better-off women who sought jobs.
It was to escape boredom and the frustration of having no one to talk to all day but children.
In 1958 the Civil Service led the way towards equality by granting equal pay.
In the same year the Church of England led the way out of a moral impasse which trapped the Catholic Church by giving birth control its blessing under the name of Family Planning.
By now there were fewer paeans of praise to fecundity in the magazines; instead they were asking ‘Why Young Mothers Feel Trapped’(Redbook ) or, with more than a hint of desperation, offering ‘58 Ways To Make Your Marriage More Exciting’(Newsweek ), Graduate wives complained bitterly, especially in the Guardian , of living like cabbages.
Ten years before, in the years of the baby boom, Simone de Beauvoir's The Second Sex was met with extreme hostility in France.
In America a critic said confidently she did not know what life was all about.
Years later the feminists were inspired by her most famous statement, ‘One is not born a woman, one becomes one’, to conclude that the inferior status of ‘the second sex’ was not a natural phenomenon but a man-made one.
But at the time, characteristically, it was suggested that the book must have been written by Jean-Paul Sartre, the companion whom de Beauvoir was famous for not being married to.
Once the contraceptive pill (invented in 1952) had become available and accepted and made any further baby boom unlikely, years of frustrated and dammed-up feminism were ready to burst in the new wave of women's liberation.
The Fifties were not ripe for it, but all through their later years the question became more urgent: what is the place of women in the second half of the twentieth century?
The Fifties gave two conventional answers — the home and the bed.
Both were confidently given and both were found wanting.
The cold War
The very words ‘Cold War’ are now almost as dead and emotionally dust-laden as ‘The War of the Spanish Succession’or ‘The War of Jenkin's Ear’.
It is almost incomprehensible that at the height of Cold War Fever (and temperatures ran very high) people like Mrs Eleanor Roosevelt sincerely believed people would be ‘better dead than Red’ as the slogan popularly put it.
The question of the decade —‘Are you now, or have you ever been, a Communist?’— put to thousands of civil servants, teachers, writers and actors at tribunals and loyalty hearings, was sometimes put in another, more colourful form.
‘Are you now, or have you ever been, a member of a godless conspiracy controlled by a foreign power?’
Counsel Richard Arens would thunder on behalf of the listening House of Representatives Committee on UnAmerican Activities.
It was not hard to guess what was the wrong answer.
But it is hard to re-create the atmosphere of fanaticism and fear in which it seemed unsurprising that the gramophone records of Paul Robeson were expunged from the catalogues and the novels of Theodore Dreiser and the detective stories of Dashiell Hammett were purged from public libraries.
You would not have supposed it possible to aid the Communist cause by stripping, yet Gypsy Rose Lee was banned because years before she had spoken up for the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League.
There was a word for that kind of thing: it branded you as a ‘premature anti-Fascist’.
So acutely did some people feel menaced by the ‘godless conspiracy’ that in Brooklyn, when a sewer explosion blew out the manholes, they panicked and shouted ‘The Russians!’; in Boston an antique exhibition barred Russian pieces from being exhibited; in Bournemouth the conductor of the municipal symphony orchestra barred pieces by Shostakovitch from being played.
A Hollywood studio decided it was not safe to make a picture about the peacemaker, Hiawatha, because ‘It might be regarded as a message for peace and therefore helpful to Communist designs’.
In twenty-six states ‘Reds’ were disqualified from running for office, working as civil servants, and some from holding passports or drawing unemployment money.
In Birmingham, Alabama, you could be banished from the city for being seen talking to a Communist, which was held to be committing a public nuisance.
In the Cold War irrational behaviour like this acquired a sort of sacred aura.
No anti-Communist action or pronouncement could possibly be ridiculous.
Fear infected Americans with a mass hysteria which had not been seen since the Great Crash.
Like 1929, 1949 had been a bad year for believing that God was on America's side.
It was the year when Mao Tse-Tung took final control of the Chinese mainland, despite the $3 billion of aid which had been lavished on Chiang Kai-Shek.
Suddenly the 180 million people loyal to Communism at the end of the war had turned into 800 million.
‘The odds were nine to one in our favour in 1944,’ said Congressman Richard Nixon grimly, ‘Today the odds are five to three against us!’
Soon they were longer still.
Far sooner than anyone thought possible, the Russians exploded an atomic bomb.
In June, 1950, North Korean Communists nearly overran the southern half of the artificially divided country, the half which the U.S. had occupied and paid for since the war.
Fortunately for president Truman the American troops dispatched to stop them were officially declared a United Nations army engaged in a ‘police action’ to restore peace.
So, although the North Koreans were soon to be backed by 250,000 Communist Chinese troops, officially there was still no hot war — only a cold one, in two versions, foreign and domestic.
The domestic Cold War began in earnest in Britain with a series of alarming spy cases.
The worst came in January 1950, when Dr Klaus Fuchs, head of theoretical physics at the Harwell atomic research establishment of the Atomic Energy Authority, was arrested on information supplied by the FBI.
Fuchs had worked on the atom bomb project at Los Alamos.
‘When I learned the purpose of my work, I decided to inform Russia…
I had no hesitation in giving all the information I had,’ he said in his confession at the Old Bailey trial.
‘All the information he had’ was enough to save the Russians ten years' research.
The Western sense of security was shattered.
His fourteen-year sentence hardly evened the score.
Congress demanded that the British be trusted with no more atomic secrets.
When interrogated by the FBI in his British jail, Fuchs identified photographs of one of his contacts, Harry Gold, who named a trail of others which led eventually to an obscure machine-shop manager of Russian parentage, Julius Rosenberg, and his wife Ethel.
Ethel's brother, David Greenglass, claimed he had passed on to Julius some sketches and notes from Los Alamos about the plutonium bomb dropped on Nagasaki.
Sentencing the couple to death a year later the judge said, without any visible justification, ‘I believe your conduct has already caused the Communist aggression in Korea, with resulting casualties exceeding 50,000 Americans.’
In fact no one then knew what had caused the Communist aggression in Korea.
Much later, Khrushchev stated in his Memoirs that it was entirely the idea of the North Korean Leader, Kim Il Sung.
‘It is not in my power, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, to forgive you.
Only the Lord can find mercy for what you have done,’ said the judge.
There were many then and there have been many since who believed the Rosenbergs were victims of an FBI frame-up but the American people were baying for scapegoats, not least for the grave reverses in Korea.
Scapegoats were at hand.
Even greater passions were aroused by a spy case of absolutely no strategic significance whatever, the case of Alger Hiss, who was finally jailed in January 1950, after two years of allegation and wild rumour.
What made Hiss significant was his impeccable background, his WASP family, his Harvard Law School education, his career on President Roosevelt's wartime staff and then in the State Department Far Eastern section, his acquaintance with Dean Acheson, Adlai Stevenson and John Foster Dulles.
He was president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace when Whittaker Chambers, a renegade and self-confessed Communist ‘spy’ then on the staff of Time magazine, accused him of having passed him documents from the State Department during the late 1930s.
No more celebrated case was brought before the House UnAmerican Activities Committee, where Representative Richard Nixon made his political reputation with it.
If Alger Hiss could betray his country for the sake of Communism — and he is still trying to establish his innocence — where else among the highest in the land might treason be found?
By now it was all adding up to one conclusion.
The great reverses in China and Korea, the Russian atom bomb, Hiss, Fuchs and the Rosenbergs…the explanation was…conspiracy!
There must be a vast underground network of spies.
In the coming witch-hunt thousands of people were to be deprived of their livelihood and reputation but, as we now know, the most serious spies went undetected.
Donald Maclean had in 1950 been made head of the American department of the Foreign Office after dramatic breakdowns and drinking bouts.
He had been found asleep on the floor of a taxi outside a night club and claimed he had hired it for the evening as his bedroom.
He had lurched about a London drinking club soon after the Hiss case claiming ‘I am the English Hiss!’
No one thought this, and his habit of assuming a second personality whom he called ‘Gordon’ after the gin, should cast doubt on his fitness for promotion.
He had spent most of the Forties in the Washington embassy, sat on the Anglo-American committee on atomic information and had a permanent and unrestricted pass to the headquarters of the Atomic Energy Commission, which he frequently used late at night.
Meanwhile the noisy, more drunken and flagrantly homosexual Guy Burgess arrived to join the Washington embassy with a record of indiscretions which included loudly pointing out the local head of intelligence in a Gibraltar restaurant.
He stayed with the first secretary, H. A. R. Philby, who had promised to keep an eye on him.
Philby's job was to liaise with the FBI and CIA on intelligence matters.
It was thanks to them that he learned that the hunt was on for a leak on the Washington embassy wartime staff which could only have been Maclean.
According to Philby later, the FBI were still very much off the scent.
‘Characteristically they had put in an immense amount of work resulting in an immense amount of waste paper.
It had occurred neither to them nor to the British that a diplomat was involved.’
Philby claimed he thoughtfully put them on the right track to divert suspicion from himself.
At the same time he arranged for Burgess to be sent home to extricate Maclean before the net closed.
Burgess got himself caught for speeding three times in the same day, caused a deliberate rumpus with his inimitable flair for trouble-making, and departed under an engineered cloud.
What Philby did not guess was that, having warned Maclean for him, Burgess would join him on the night ferry to St Malo en route to Moscow, on 25 May 1951.
He and Maclean were next glimpsed by the Western Press in the National Hotel, Moscow, in 1956.
‘We are convinced we were right in doing what we did,’ they said in a prepared statement.
They did not, of course, mention that they fled because they knew the alternative would have been even less attractive, since at that time Philby was still in the West, having been publicly exonerated by Harold Macmillan.
The ‘English Hiss’ would have served as a description of him too.
Between the three of them, they shared intimacy with such Establishment groups as pre-war Cambridge, the Foreign Office,The Times , the BBC and the Athenaeum.
It was not reassuring.
But British concern about a high-placed Communist conspiracy was nothing to American paranoia.
Conspiracy was a favourite word of J. Edgar Hoover, the Top Cop of the FBI for twenty-five years, whose informants, telephone tappers, handwriting experts and double agents provocateurs had been harassing ‘Reds’, whether real or imaginary, since the war ended.
‘A world-wide conspiracy embracing a third of the world's population’ he pronounced the enemy to be, and added that it threatened ‘the erasure of freedom, perhaps for ever, from the parchment of time’…a windy piece of rhetoric typical of the times if not of J. Edgar, whose taste ran to Tarzan movies where the dialogue is less verbose.
However, the more scary his pronouncements, the bigger his budget became.
But there was always room for one more in the Conspiracy hunt.
‘How about Communists in government?’ suggested a friend to Senator Joe McCarthy from Wisconsin, who was looking round for an issue to help get him re-elected.
And so, on 9 February, 1950, to a startled audience of women Republicans in Wheeling, West Virginia, McCarthy raised the favourite bogey: ‘How can we account for our present situation unless we believe that men high in this government are concerting to deliver us to disaster?
This must be the product of a great conspiracy , on a scale so immense and of an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man.’
There was the ultimate, definitive statement of the conspiracy theory of human affairs.
Then, waving aloft a sheaf of papers, he uttered the famous lie that was to catapult him into the limelight for four years: ‘I have here in my hand a list of 205 names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department.’
The list proved a flexible document in the days to come.
Sometimes he said it contained eighty-one Communists, sometimes fifty-seven, sometimes ‘a lot’.
He never actually produced it or named the State Department Communists on it.
His rambling six-hour speech about his ‘cases’ to the Senate left his fellow Senators confused, bewildered and finally despairing of ever making sense of the list.
But he was careful to appeal to the have-nots against the privileged and college-educated ‘who have been selling this nation out — the bright young men who are born with silver spoons in their mouths.’
Just a month after Alger Hiss's conviction, no one felt like arguing.
Even when the Senate's own inquiry reported that his charges were ‘a fraud and a hoax’ it did not stop his rocket rise to influence.
The Republicans, led by Senator Taft, began to sense they had an election winner here.
In that year's elections McCarthy went for Senator Tydings of Maryland, who had pronounced him a fraud, with typical unscrupulousness.
A faked picture in the campaign newspaper showed the senator juxtaposed as if in intimate conversation with a former Communist Party leader, Earl Browder.
Tydings was unseated.
The other great Communist-hunter in Congress, Richard Nixon, was on the verge of being picked for Vice-President.
He got one last bit of mileage out of the Hiss case.
When Whittaker Chambers produced his book Witness , Mr Nixon turned book reviewer in the Saturday Review .
He called it ‘a great book which sheds a withering light on the netherworld of deceit, subversion and espionage which is the Communist conspiracy.’
(What other word, indeed, would meet the case?)
For Chambers, his witness of doubtful character, he found this Nixonian endorsement: ‘Is it not better to tell the whole truth in the end than to refuse, as Hiss did, to tell it at all?’
Chambers, for his part, had given his endorsement in the book: ‘During the case Nixon and his family were at our farm, encouraging me and comforting my family.
My children have caught him lovingly in a nickname.
To them he is always ‘Nixie’, the kind and the good.
I have a vivid picture of him standing by the barn and saying in his quietly savage way (he is the kindest of men)—‘If the American people understood the real character of Alger Hiss, they would boil him in oil.’’
His charm was at its peak.
The Republicans, like Chambers, soon decided they wanted to go back to dear old Nixie.
These were the Cold Warriors who set the tone for the Fifties.
None of them was more enthusiastic to turn on the heat and get the thing over than General Douglas MacArthur, the ‘United Nations’ commander in Korea, who was at pains to point out he had ‘no direct connection with the United Nations whatsoever’.
He, too, had a weakness for hellfire sermonizing —‘There can be no compromise with atheistic Communism, no half way in the preservation of freedom or religion.
It must be all or nothing,’ he declared, appealing to the American people from Korea over the President's head.
After his ‘over by Christmas’ offensive into North Korea had ended in a rout he began to drop dark hints about Red China's inability to wage ‘modern war’.
He threatened ‘an expansion of our military operations to its interior bases’.
He suggested that North Korea should surrender to him personally any time it was ready.
The Bomb sounded as good as dropped.
When he publicly questioned Truman's decision not to use Chinese Nationalist troops in Korea, Truman decided the pretensions of his Caesar had gone far enough.
‘I'm going to fire the son of a bitch right now,’ he said.
And so, after General Marshall had spent a night in meditation on the consequences, the failed haberdasher from Independence, Missouri, took on the seventy-year-old national warhorse with his belligerent scowl, his dark glasses and his frayed, oak-leaf-encrusted battle cap (he was believed to have a man on his staff who did nothing but fray his caps).
‘I never did understand, an old man like that and a five-star general to boot, why he went around dressed up like a nineteen-year-old Second Lieutenant,’ said Truman, reminiscing years afterwards to Merle Miller.
‘There were times when he wasn't right in the head.
And he just wouldn't let anybody near him who wouldn't kiss his ass.’
And so the telegram was sent, a come-uppance which deserves quotation as an act that may have saved the world from early extinction by sheer megalomania: ‘I deeply regret that it becomes my duty as president and Commander-in-Chief of the United States military forces to replace you as Supreme Commander, Allied Powers; Commander-in-Chief, United Nations Command; Commander-in-Chief, Far East; and Commanding General, U. S. Army Far East.
— Harry S. Truman, Commander-in-Chief.’
MacArthur, living legend and darling of the China Lobby which still hoped to see Chiang Kai-Shek back in China, returned to a public uproar which was definitely in his favour.
‘Impeach the Judas in the White House’ was typical of 78,000 telegrams and letters which poured into Washington.
‘The son of a bitch ought to be impeached,’ trumpeted McCarthy.
The dismissed general received a bigger ticker-tape reception than Eisenhower's in 1945.
He addressed Congress and a vast television audience with a Hollywood tear-jerker speech about his fifty-two years service, now ended.
He was fading away ‘like the old soldier in the ballad, an old soldier who tried to do his duty as God gave him the light to see that duty.’
He may not have meant it, but that was precisely what he was about to do.
It may have disappointed many fearless patriots like John Wayne, who presided over the fragrantly entitled ‘Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals’.
Wayne wrote: ‘There are now and there were then (in the early Forties) a tight group of Communist conspirators in our midst…we didn't make ‘Hollywood’ and ‘Red’synonymous.
The Communists, their fellow-travellers and their dupes did that.’
And the Duke made sure that they no longer gave employment in the studios to these conspirators.
It may have disappointed the fearless patriot, Mickey Spillane, who wrote these lines for his detective, Mike Hammer, in One Lonely Night (1951 — sales three million): ‘I killed more people tonight than I have fingers on my hands.
I shot them in cold blood and I enjoyed every minute of it…
They were Commies.
They were Red sons of bitches who should have died long ago.’
The columnist Westbrook Pegler must have approved that passage, for he wrote: ‘The only sensible way to deal with them is to make membership in Communist organizations a capital offence and shoot or otherwise put to death all persons convicted of such.’
For a long time it seemed impossible to refer to Communists without using the words ‘conspiracy’ and ‘sons of bitches’.
But the Cold War was fundamentally one of history's wars of religion, and there were those who realized that the struggle to preserve American Ideals from the ideas of Marx and Lenin had to be conducted on a religious or moral plane.
Billy Graham blasted Communism on the Deity's behalf: ‘A great sinister anti-Christian movement masterminded by Satan has declared war upon the Christian God!’
But the man who combined the gifts of preacher and politician, and who felt called, like John the Baptist (or, to be exact, John the Presbyterian), was Foster Dulles, minister's son, Wall Street lawyer and by divine right Secretary of State.
He had been advising the State Department for two years under Truman.
When Eisenhower made him its head he declared that American policy would be based on ‘openness, simplicity and righteousness.’
‘There is confusion in men's minds and corrosion in their souls,’ he announced, ‘The moral force of Christendom can make itself felt in the conduct of nations.’
If MacArthur had acted as if he thought he was Napoleon, John Foster Dulles, a bleak, remote and charmless human being, acted as if he was, at least, another St Paul.
Dulles' message was exactly what a badly shaken nation wanted to hear — God was, after all, on their side.
Not only that, said Dulles; America was the chosen instrument of God's vengeance on the Communists for ‘trampling on the moral law.
For that violation they can and should be made to pay.’
So the stage was set for the inquisition.
Fuelled by fear, soured by defeat and reinforced by Dulles's essential ingredient, self-righteousness, the American inquisitors devoted themselves single-mindedly to unmasking a conspiracy which did not exist.
The American Communist Party at its peak in the Thirties might have been 100,000 strong and dominated several labour unions.
Any chance it might have seemed to have to influence an election had been disproved by Henry Wallace who, with Communist support, polled only one million Presidential votes in 1948.
By 1950 the party was in a state of disintegration and many of its leaders had been locked away.
None of this abated Joseph McCarthy's crusading zeal in the Spring of 1950 when he found he suddenly had the ear of the nation.
The man he described as ‘the top Russian espionage agent in the United States — Alger Hiss's boss’ turned out to be a blameless university professor and China expert, Owen Lattimore, but it did not matter.
‘I am willing to stand or fall on this one,’ he had said — but when he was proved wrong he did not fall, he rose yet higher.
Protected by Senatorial immunity from ordinary fears of libel, he plastered America's public servants with smears like a bill-poster.
The repertoire of insult was colourful: ‘Left-wing bleeding hearts’, ‘Parlour Pinks and Parlour Punks’, ‘Egg-sucking phony liberals’ and ‘Communists and queers who sold China into atheistic slavery’.
He called Truman and his secretary of state, Dean Acheson, ‘the Pied Pipers of the Politburo’.
He described General George Marshall, the revered Defence secretary, as ‘a man steeped in falsehood, always and invariably serving the policy of the Kremlin’.
He said Hiss had been a supporter of Stevenson whom he called ‘Alger…
I mean, Adlai Stevenson.’
Given his head at the Republican convention of 1952 he accused the Democrats of having been in charge of‘twenty years of treason’, a phrase which stuck, much to the Republican advantage.
‘I will not get into the gutter with that guy,’ said their candidate, Eisenhower, who owed his wartime career to General Marshall's promotion of him.
Yet when his campaign train reached McCarthy's state of Wisconsin, where he planned to speak in defence of his old chief, he thought better of it and let that guy from the gutter stay on the train.
The press had advance copies of the speech in which he was to defend Marshall, so that his climb-down was plain for all to see when he failed to deliver it.
If the President could not afford to defy McCarthy, it was not surprising that Washington career men toed his line.
He boasted of his ‘loyal American underground’ who informed on their colleagues' ideological impurities of deed or word.
Even Dulles found his State Department appointments were being vetted by McCarthy through his henchman, Scott MacLeod.
They almost stopped the appointment of the Moscow ambassador, ‘Chips’ Bohlen, because McCarthy resented the fact it had been made ‘over his head’.
‘The most gifted demagogue ever bred on these shores’, McCarthy's biographer, Richard Rovere, wrote of him.
‘For publicity he had a talent unmatched by any other politician of this century.
He invented the morning press conference for the purpose of calling an afternoon press conference to say he expected to make a shattering announcement later in the day.’
He always carried a briefcase bulging with documents which he said were incriminating and were usually irrelevant to whatever accusations he was making.
His talent for imaginative lying helped to elect him to the Senate after the war as ‘Tail Gunner Joe’.
‘Yes, folks,’ ran his campaign leaflet, ‘CONGRESS NEEDS A TAIL-GUNNER.’
In that case they got the wrong man.
He wasn't one.
His job was to interview pilots on return from their missions.
He invented his military record.
He affected a limp because one leg was ‘full of shrapnel’(he broke it falling downstairs during a party).
He was given the Distinguished Flying Cross, though his service record showed no combat missions, and he waited till 1952 to claim it.
As a con man he knew that paradoxically part of his appeal was his unsavouriness, so unlike the smooth Washington types with silver spoons in their mouths.
He boasted a permanent five o'clock shadow and lived the part of a hard-drinking, hard-swearing, poker-playing small town boy who belched and spoke his mind.
He never caught a single credible Communist.
Even this singular lack of results did not undermine him.
It was the hunt that counted.
Perhaps his most memorable line would come when, having hectored a witness into incoherence, he would say: ‘It makes me sick, sick, sick way down inside.’
Then he strode away — but only as far as the corner of the hearing room, temporarily out of range of the television cameras.
What it was like to be in the hot seat in front of his permanent sub-committee was described by the editor of the New York Post , James Wechsler: ‘The grand inquisitor was by turns truculent, contemptuous and bland.
He acted like the gangster in a B movie rubbing out someone who had got in his way…
It was not quite possible to communicate the horror of examination by McCarthy.
I do not recommend the experience.’
Reputable government officials grovelled to assure him of their impeccable record of loyal activities in the YMCA, as a boy scout, a churchgoer, a Sunday School activist.
When he attacked the Army, the Secretary, Robert Stevens, offered his services to Tail Gunner Joe ‘to assist you in correcting anything that may be wrong’ and ended up offering to resign.
It was not, perhaps, as improbable as it sounds that McCarthy should have made a target of the Army.
America had been amazed for some months by stories of U.S. prisoners of war in Korea who had ‘gone over to Communism’.
When the war ended twenty-three of them refused repatriation, later in 1953 changing their minds.
They were promptly locked up in military hospitals as mental cases, but not before some of them declared they were not victims of brainwashing and mental torture by the enemy, as the Army had claimed.
So a belief that there were Communists in the Army could be made to sound almost plausible.
Another epidemic of fear which McCarthy triggered off was book-burning.
All over the country, and particularly in American libraries abroad run by the International Information Administration, intelligent men rushed to destroy books by ‘suspect’ authors, embracing among others Sherwood Anderson, W. H. Auden, Theodore Dreiser and Edmund Wilson.
The climax to this ludicrous campaign from the Dark Ages came in 1953 with the tour of Europe by McCarthy's two young assistants, Mr Cohn and Mr Schine, who not only sounded like a bad vaudeville act but performed like one.
Roy Cohn, twenty-seven, with a legal background, was the more serious of the two, with an unappealing scowl and an arrogance that would have befitted a crown prince of Prussia.
David Schine, twenty-six, and hired by Cohn as his ‘consultant’, was the heir to a hotel chain, whose proudest achievement was to have made the world's largest collection of specimen cigars.
This pair had already laid waste the ‘Voice of America’ broadcasting staff.
What, Europe wondered, were they looking for on their whirlwind tour which allowed them an average of twenty-eight hours at every city they investigated?
In Vienna they discovered the sinister fact that the Soviet Information Centre stocked Mark Twain, hitherto considered reliably American in outlook.
At one point they fell out and Schine chased Cohn through a hotel lobby swatting him over the head with a rolled-up magazine, to the delight of the large Press corps, who wrote stories headlined after the dialogue of the famous duo, ‘Positively, Mr Cohn!’ and ‘Absolutely, Mr Schine!’
A month later, McCarthy announced that the U.S. Information Service abroad had on its shelves thirty to forty thousand Communist volumes.
We shall never know whether he was counting Mark Twain.
It was his pair of puppies who proved to be his downfall.
Cohn's attempt to get his friend Schine out of his army service backfired.
The Army brought an investigation into McCarthy and the blackmailing pressures he had put on it.
The Army's counsel, a correct and old-fashioned Boston gentleman called Joseph Welch, was finally exasperated enough to tell McCarthy what he was: ‘Until this moment, Senator, I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness.
You have done enough.
Have you no sense of decency, sir, at long last?
Have you left no sense of decency?’
The audience cheered in the hearing room and, in their millions watching him on television, took a hard look and saw that Welch was right.
McCarthy was dumbfounded at the reaction.
‘What did I do?’ he asked.
No more than usual, was the answer, but at last it was enough to break the spell.
The Senate democrats were no longer afraid of him.
Within a few months, in late 1954, the Senate censured him and although Nixon, his loyal backer in the past, considerately struck out the word Censure from the resolution, which condemned him for conduct unbecoming to the Senate, he was finished in Washington.
He lingered on, drinking more heavily, occasionally interrupting proceedings with a bit of the old invective, but nobody took any notice.
His squad of reporters, a dozen strong, who had tailed him for five years, was disbanded.
And when he died of drink in 1957 it was to a strangely quiet Press, considering that only just before his fall he was supposed to have the support of fifty per cent of his countrymen, according to the polls, and a power almost greater than the President's.
But the end of McCarthy by no means meant the end of the witch-hunt.
The House UnAmerican Activities Committee had been sitting before McCarthy and it went on after him and in the long run this damaged more people.
The Fifties were the years of its vendetta with show business, which began in 1947 with the jailing of ‘the Hollywood Ten’, writers who held that their political opinions were no business of the Committee, relying on the First Amendment to the Constitution which guarantees freedom of thought and belief.
This, too, was held to be UnAmerican.
They were given a year's jail for contempt.
In the Fifties the question was whether you could claim protection under the Fifth Amendment, which grants the right not to incriminate oneself.
In practice it made very little difference whether an actor, writer or director accused of being tainted with Communism claimed the right to be silent or not.
He would still be out of work.
People who kept silent were assumed to have something to hide.
They were called ‘Fifth Amendment Communists’ and they were on the ‘Black List’which, officially, never existed.
In effect there were several black lists.
The House Committee published a cumulative index of names and organizations and there was the Attorney General's list of about two hundred organizations which were considered to have been Communist or Communist Front.
These included such ‘subversive’ bodies as wartime committees for Soviet-American friendship or for Russian War Relief.
Two ex-FBI men, Vincent Hartnett and Theodore Kirkpatrick, compiled a handy compendium in book form of members of these dangerous organizations in the communications industry.
It was called Red Channels and a copy was standard equipment for every Hollywood producer and every radio, television and Madison Avenue advertising executive.
To be named in Red Channels was to be unemployable…unless you cleared yourself by making a voluntary appearance before the House Committee or McCarthy's Sub-Committee as a ‘friendly witness’ who shopped his former friends to prove the ‘sincerity’of his repentance.
It was a symbolic act.
Most of the names were well-known to the witch-hunters already.
Larry Adler was blacklisted as a performer throughout the Fifties.
Even as a harmonica player he had to come to England to get work.
Adler recalls: ‘I was listed in Red Channels for being associated with eight organizations.
The one that counted against me most was the Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee, which I worked for in the late Thirties.
I was offered a deal by Roy Cohn.
To clear myself I could appear in secret session before the McCarthy committee so that nobody would know.
I needn't even name names.
They had the names.
All I need do was agree to a list of people who had already been named, so I wouldn't be hurting anyone.
I said to Cohn, ‘If you have the names, why ask me?’
I remained on the Black List.’
The Hollywood Ten could not write movies again, except under pseudonyms (some of them had four).
One of them, Dalton Trumbo, actually won an Oscar in 1957 for The Brave One under a pseudonym, Robert Rich.
Naturally he could not collect it.
But blacklisted television writers, who had to appear in person at the studios, had to ask a ‘clean’ writer (or even a non-writer) to ‘front’for them.
Television had its own witch-hunting body, AWARE Inc, which put out bulletins accusing radio and TV performers of Communist sympathies.
The bulletins were written by Vincent Hartnett, who had been responsible for Red Channels , and AWARE was backed by Laurence Johnson, a supermarket owner with influence on the sponsors of radio and TV programmes, since their products were often sold through his chain of stores.
If he demanded that an artist was dropped, the artist was dropped, nationwide — until a Texan broadcaster, John Henry Faulk, who was blacklisted by AWARE, brought and won a libel action in which he was awarded the record sum of $3,500,000 after a six-year struggle.
‘The terrible thing is,’ he wrote in his book on the case,Fear On Trial , ‘that many of those victimized, and the American people as a whole, accepted this sentence of Guilty.
They accepted the right of the vigilantes to bring the charges, to make the decision and to pronounce the sentence.
And we all kept quiet.
We felt that silence would make us safe.’
‘Every intellectual who is called before one of the committees ought to refuse to testify,’ wrote Einstein in an open letter to a New York teacher, one of thousands required to take a loyalty oath as a condition of further employment.
‘He must be prepared for jail and economic ruin, for the sacrifice of his personal welfare in the interest of the cultural welfare of his country.’
The University of California's loyalty oath caused thirty-seven resignations and two-hundred refusals to sign — but this was an exceptionally high number of  protestors .
At Penn State, for example, one of the English teachers was Joseph Heller, then at work on a novel to be called Catch 22 .
The loyalty oath duly turned up in the book — Major Major is blacklisted and is thereby debarred from taking the oath.
But Heller himself signed, like most people, ‘because otherwise I would have lost my job,’ he recalls frankly.
‘It was an infringement of liberty but it was only a tiny inconvenience compared with having no job.
I weighed it by priority.
Catch 22 , though ostensibly about World War II, was in fact largely concerned with the Korean War and the state of mind prevailing in the Fifties.
There is a reference to the Alger Hiss case in which micro-film is discovered hidden in a tomato, instead of the famous pumpkin from which Whittaker Chambers produced some with a flourish.
‘I was trying to deal with the climate of the Fifties during which there was great disposition among Americans to trust their government,’ says Heller now.
It is only against this background that one can begin now to understand the behaviour of Hollywood and Broadway, of the star names who confessed so eagerly and abjectly to their previous sins and were meat and drink to the H.U.A.C. Like reformed alcoholics, they could not wait to let the world know how misguided they had been and who had led them astray.
Larry Parks is remembered for being one of the first to inform on his Communist friends before the committee, better remembered perhaps than he is for impersonating Al Jolson in two films which made him, at that time, a star.
But his evidence does not read to his discredit nearly so much as to the discredit of the committee.
All day long he insisted that they already knew who the fellow-Communists of his branch had been in the Forties and that he did not want to ‘crawl through the mud for no purpose’.
In the late afternoon the Committee pulled its favourite form of persuasion: it went into secret session, with a direction that if he didn't sing in secret he could expect to be jailed for contempt of Congress (i.e. the committee).
PARKS: I do not believe it befits the Committee to force me to do this.
I don't think that this is fair play.
I don't think it is in the spirit of real
Americanism.
CHAIRMAN: I direct the witness to answer the question.
When he finally named seven people he was told he should be comforted by the fact that all of them were already under subpoena to appear.
‘It is no comfort whatsoever,’ said Parks abjectly.
It was also the end of his screen career.
Elia Kazan, director of Arthur Miller's stage plays and of many films as memorable as On The Waterfront , calculated more shrewdly.
He not only informed on fellow-members of the Communist Party in 1934–6 and requested a public session in which to do so ‘because secrecy serves the Communist cause’; he took a display advertisement in the New York Times to justify himself.
‘Liberals must speak out,’ he declared and, having listed the films he had made, added: ‘The motion pictures I have made represent my convictions.
I expect to continue to make the same kind of pictures.’
Indeed he did.
His statement ended: ‘I have placed a copy of this affidavit with Mr Spyros P. Skouras, president of 20th Century Fox.’
It was Mr Spyros P. Skouras who let it be known that if Kazan did not testify helpfully, the pictures he had just made might never appear and he would not be directing any more.
It was a common enough pressure in Hollywood, where all the studios played the committee's game rather than risk loss at the box office.
Clifford Odets was one of those named by Kazan.
A week later whom should Odets name but Kazan?
No hard feelings there.
Edward G. Robinson, one of those who had supported the Hollywood Ten, was still trying to clear himself in 1952.
He pleaded, hardly sounding like the tough guy the public identified him with, ‘Surely there must be some way for a person falsely accused of disloyalty to clear his name once and for all?
What more can I do?’
There was, of course, something — name some names of those who had duped him, and he duly did.
So did the choreographer Jerome Robbins.
‘I am going to see The King And I tonight,’ said one of the committee to him unctuously, ‘and I will appreciate it much more.’
It was in this atmosphere of craven piety that Lillian Hellman, the playwright who had carte blanche in Hollywood to write what pictures she liked, administered a cold douche to the nation's conscience by stating unequivocally that she refused to inform on anybody else but herself.
With all the hauteur of a Southern lady, the phrasing of her refusal was admirable: ‘To hurt innocent people whom I knew many years ago in order to save myself is, to me, inhuman, indecent and dishonourable.
I cannot and will not cut my conscience to fit this year's fashions.’
This was in a letter to the committee which was read out at her hearing and passed round.
A voice from the press benches said loudly of this rather elementary point of honour: ‘Thank God somebody at last had the guts to say it.’
The flustered Committee did not have the chivalry to accept her terms, so instead of answering questions about herself she pleaded the Fifth Amendment against self-incrimination and was discharged.
It did not save her from the Black List.
She lost her six-figure Hollywood income.
She had to sell her farm and work for a time in a department store.
These penalties, to be sure, fell far short of what she might have expected for speaking out in Stalin's Russia, which she had continued to admire for far longer than many people.
In her book,Scoundrel Time , she put the blame for the lack of guts shown during ‘this sad, comic, miserable time of our history’ on two things: the funk of the studio bosses and the selfishness of the entertainers they paid so well.
‘The loss of a swimming pool, a tennis court, a picture collection, future deprivation, were powerful threats to many people and studio heads played heavy with it…
Only a very few raised a finger.’
In fairness, more than a very few did stand up to the committee in spite of the danger to their swimming pools and their popularity.
Lionel Stander, who played the heavy in innumerable films, stormed on unstoppably at ‘informers, stool pigeons and psychopaths who come here beating their breasts and saying ‘Please, I want absolution, get me back into pictures, ''’ until the hearing was hastily adjourned.
Zero Mostel told the chairman, ‘My dear friend, I believe in the antiquated idea that a man works in his profession according to his ability rather than his political beliefs.’
In that year, 1955, when McCarthy was of no more consequence, twenty-two witnesses plucked up courage not to testify, including the folk singer, Pete Seeger, who got a year in jail for his stand.
In 1956 Paul Robeson was summoned.
He was already ‘blacked’ and refused a passport — possibly because of his Lenin Prize and the fact that a Soviet mountain had been named after him.
Having explained that his Communism was an aspect of his campaign for black equality he thundered at the committee: ‘You are the non-patriots,you are the UnAmericans and you ought to be ashamed of yourselves.’
He finally got his passport and left for Russia in 1958.
Charles Chaplin left for London, to present his film Limelight , and chose exile when he was told he would be examined on his fitness to re-enter the country he had lived in for forty years.
Chaplin's non-appearance before the UnAmerican Activities Committee was one of the great lost opportunities of both their careers.
The committee decided not to summon him, according to Chaplin, when they heard he planned to appear in the costume, boots and battered bowler of the Chaplin tramp.
There was passport trouble also for Arthur Miller.
He was not allowed to go to Brussels for the European premiere of his play The Crucible .
The loud calls for the author, by a curious irony, were taken for him by the U.S. ambassador.
When Miller appeared before the UnAmerican Activities Committee in 1956, he actually did what Lillian Hellman had proposed.
He admitted his previous contacts with Communist and Marxist writers but refused to say who else was present.
‘I am not protecting the Communists or the party,’ he said, ‘I am trying to, and I will, protect my sense of myself.’
He was duly cited for contempt, received a thirty-day sentence to jail and a fine, which were quashed two years later on appeal.
That is what the record shows.
Miller says now that he was offered a deal too, one of the most remarkable even in that committee's history of deals.
‘I was approached with an offer to call the hearing off if the Chairman, Representative Walter, could have his photograph taken with my wife.’
Mrs Miller at that time was, of course, Marilyn Monroe.
What do you say in answer to a proposition like that?
‘You laugh,’ he said.
Miller was quite used to finding that his work fitted into the elusive category of ‘UnAmericanism’.
‘UnAmerican had numerous meanings depending on the level of sophistication to which it was addressed.
Broadly, of course, it meant pro-Russian or pro-Communist but it could also mean an opponent of big business or of big unionism or a proponent of birth control or atheism.
It was a catch-all for every kind of opinion which was literally in any way remarkable.’
In 1952 Death Of A Salesman had been filmed.
Columbia Pictures were so worried by its implications — that for a man like Willy Loman salesmanship did not bring happiness and fulfilment — that they made a documentary short to precede every showing of the picture.
This proved that, in reality, a salesman's lot was a happy one both emotionally and financially.
Thanks partly to Miller's threat to sue, the short was scrapped.
The Crucible , the play which showed the clear parallel between the McCarthy mentality and the Salem witch-hunt of 1692, was perhaps the only enduring work of art to come out of the period.
When it opened on Broadway, in Miller's words,
a sheet of ice formed over the first-night audience when it sensed the theme.
In the lobby afterwards, acquaintances would pass as if I weren't standing there at all.
It was dismissed by the critics until McCarthy and the Terror were safely passed.
One was a hunt for witches, the other for Communists, but they involve the same function of the human mind.
Once you develop a siege mentality, anything is believeable.
The enemy is wily and therefore the more unlikely a person looks, the more likely he is to be the secret enemy.
Once he is under suspicion he can't win.
If he protests his innocence, he is doing just what he would do if he were guilty.
If he doesn't protest he is admitting guilt.
The most disheartening part of the Terror was the way the intellectual, creative, artistic people chickened out as if nothing special was happening.
It was not just a failure of courage or conscience.
It was also a lack of knowledge — 98 per cent of the people didn't know what the arguments were really about.
The American Left has never had a solid basis.
It is not working class.
Any radical critic of society has always come from an unattached group of artists and intellectuals.
So when the Left was attacked — by the old trick of imputing treason to it — they had no allies.
It was our holocaust.
One got to understand very well how the Germans could have made their peace with Hitler.
We weren't shooting the writers, we were only disgracing them — and look how few people came forward in their defence.
Yet we blame the Germans for not defying a regime which would melt you into soap.
A little humility is necessary.
Then Arthur Miller added: ‘The thing to remember is that it has not gone away for ever.’
The Bomb
On 30 January, 1950, after five months of agonized discussion and contradictory advice, President Truman gave the go-ahead for a crash research programme into the hydrogen or ‘super’ bomb, as it was then called.
With that decision people came face to face with the expectation known to the early Christians soon after the Crucifixion and to the deeply religious who shivered at the approach of the year A.D. 1000 — the expectation that they might indeed see the end of the world in their lifetime.
This fear of a new apocalypse began in deep secrecy the previous August when the fall-out from what could only be a Russian atomic test was detected.
All estimates of the balance of post-war power were thrown into confusion.
It was believed that the Soviets already had superiority in conventional armies and weapons.
Now, in an unbelievably four short years, they had caught up with the atomic bomb which alone guaranteed the security of the much-disarmed United States.
It was a month before the President announced the news.
In the next few weeks the scientists of the West were split into two groups: should or should they not try to make an H-bomb?
J. Robert Oppenheimer, the government's chief scientific adviser and head of the Los Alamos laboratory which had produced the atom bomb, called a meeting of the General Advisory Committee on atomic energy.
Edward Teller, in particular, believed the fusion bomb to be theoretically possible.
Oppenheimer was full of doubts.
He wrote to James Conant, President of Harvard, before they both attended the meeting: ‘I am not sure the miserable thing will work nor that it can be gotten to the target except by ox-cart.
It would be folly to oppose the exploration of this weapon.
But that we become committed to it as the way to save the country and the peace appears to me full of dangers.’
The committee's unanimous advice was to shelve the project.
‘We all hope,’ ran its report, ‘that by one means or another the development of these weapons can be avoided.
We are reluctant to see the United States take the initiative in precipitating this development.’
In other words they hoped that by self-denial the Americans could dissuade the Russians from attempting it.
They were also uncertain whether it would work.
But the chief argument was an ethical one: ‘We see a unique opportunity of providing by example some limit on the totality of war, thus eliminating the fear and arousing the hope of mankind.’
And a minority of two physicists, Doctors Fermi and Rabi, added: ‘It is necessarily an evil thing considered in any light…
We think it wrong on fundamental ethical principles to initiate the development of such a weapon.’
No one can say that the scientists showed no conscience at that moment.
But Teller, a large Hungarian with a leather foot (he had lost one under a tram as a student in Munich), felt betrayed.
Those who shared his belief in the ultimate weapon, Pentagon chiefs and Congressional hawks, put pressure on the President.
Truman played for time by appointing a brains trust of three to advise him.
And then, in January, Klaus Fuchs was arrested and revealed that, thanks to him, the Russians knew far more than had ever been suspected.
Four days later Truman cast the die.
The question whether this brought the world nearer to inevitable self-destruction or, paradoxically, made it stabler and safer from major war than ever before was to occupy the best minds of the decade.
The conundrum is still as insoluble as ever.
But it has never since been debated as solemnly, as urgently or as hysterically as it was in the 1950s.
The debate was confused by a tangle of contradictory emotions generated by moral and religious ideology, patriotism, self-righteousness, anxiety for the species, economic and military self-interest and naked fear.
Crudely simplified, majority opinion passed through two well-defined phases in the West: first, it was assumed that war was unthinkable and impossible as a continuation of policy; later, it was suggested that within certain limits nuclear war might still be winnable, if you were sufficiently prepared.
Both beliefs were hedged with doubt.
It took more optimism than most people could summon to believe that man could renounce the time-honoured outlet of war utterly and at a stroke.
But it also strained credulity to believe that any sort of war where any sort of nuclear weapons were available would not eventually lead to full-scale atomic destruction.
Hence the stalemate between the two camps, the Deterrers and the Disarmers, which is still the position.
The Fifties saw the evolution of both points of view.
There is a third point of view: that of weary or wilful ignorance, which has since banished the question almost entirely from intellectual discussion among ordinary, concerned people.
It seems that human attention can only be sustained for a very limited time by any subject, even the prospects of its own destruction.
But, to their credit, the Fifties sustained its interest at maximum heat.
It was a very frightened and concerned decade indeed.
A brief résumé of the order of events helps to illuminate the course of the arguments about them.
It took two years, until 1 November, 1952, to produce Teller's first thermo-nuclear explosion.
It was not a bomb but a ‘device’ with the force of 10 megatons of TNT fixed to a tower.
It vapourized Eniwetok Atoll in the Marshall Islands, turning it into the many-coloured mushroom cloud, 25 miles high and 100 miles wide, which became the symbol of anxiety for mankind.
Nine months later, to the horror of Western scientists, the first Russian H-bomb proper was exploded in Siberia, well ahead of Teller's ‘improved’ version.
This was an actual 15-megaton bomb working on the principle of fission-fusion-fission and exploded on Bikini Atoll, on 1 March, 1954.
Three months earlier, Dulles had warned the world that ‘local defence must be reinforced by the further deterrent of massive retaliatory power’.
Bikini showed how massive this would be.
Both sides seemed appalled for a while by the race they had started.
In 1955, the year of the Geneva summit conference, there were conciliatory gestures towards nuclear disarmament on both sides.
In May the Soviet Union proposed the abolition of 75 per cent of the existing stocks of weapons and offered unimpeded inspection.
In effect Russia was adopting previous Western proposals almost in toto .
The British delegate to the U.N.
Disarmament Subcommittee said ‘We have made an advance that I never dreamed possible.’
The U.S. delegate was ‘gratified’ that his country's proposals ‘have been accepted in a large measure by the Soviet Union.’
There seemed to be nothing to stop nuclear disarmament that summer, when Eisenhower arrived at Geneva and made his ‘open skies’ proposal as a confidence-building measure.
But in September there were obviously fresh instructions: ‘The United States does now place a reservation upon all of its pre-Geneva substantive positions,’ said the delegate.
In other words it was off.
This drew the comment from Bertrand Russell that both East and West did not really want disarmament.
‘Each is only concerned to find ways of advocating it without getting it.’
In January 1956, Dulles, still apparently comforted by his country's nuclear armoury, made his ‘brinkmanship’ speech: ‘The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the necessary art.
If you are scared to go to the brink you are lost.’
It did not reassure his European allies as much as it did him that their continued existence, as sitting targets in any exchange of fire, depended on his skills as a bluffer.
By any standard 1956 was not a reassuring year.
It saw the defeat of Adlai Stevenson whose demand for a suspension of tests brought an off of immediate agreement from Prime Minister Bulganin…to which Eisenhower responded by accusing the Russians of ‘internal interference’ in his re-election campaign.
It heard blithe announcements from two military eminences which were hardly reassuring.
U. S. Defence Secretary Charles Wilson said, with a shrewd businessman's satisfaction, that the new type of H-Bomb tested at Bikini gave ‘a bigger bang for the buck’.
Field Marshal Montgomery wrote breezily in a services journal: ‘If we are attacked, we use nuclear weapons in our defence.
The only proviso is that the politicians have to be asked first.
That might be a bit awkward, of course, and personally I would use the weapon first and ask afterwards.’
All such confident talk from the West was, however, answered in November by four little words from the East: ‘We will bury you!’ declared Mr Khrushchev.
Though he later reinterpreted them, in an economic sense, they sounded an ugly threat.
It was also in 1956 that Teller and scientists from the  Massachussetts Institute of Technology assembled at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, Cap Cod, to solve the problem of firing a nuclear missile from a submerged, and virtually invulnerable, submarine.
The solution — Polaris — took time to be developed.
Before it could be, the Russians trumped the aces being developed by the U. S. military-industrial complex by sending up a Sputnik, on 4 October, 1957, closely followed by two bigger ones.
It was the clearest possible demonstration that they had mastered the problems of the Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile.
The Russian ICBMs, designed by the brilliant engineer Sergei Karolyev, had been tested, according to Tass, over nearly 5,000 miles.
Not with accuracy, it was true.
As Khrushchev later admitted: ‘It always sounded good to say in speeches that we could hit a fly at any distance with our missiles.
But pinpoint accuracy was necessary and it was difficult to achieve.’
He also admitted that Sputniks did not solve the problem of how to defend the country.
For the H-bomb, carried in long-range bombers which took several hours to fly from base to target, was already outdated by the end of the Fifties.
The bombers could be brought down or exploded in the air by Surface-to-Air Missiles and SAMS were being turned out like sausages, according to Khrushchev, in order to ring Moscow and other cities.
But missiles like Polaris and Minuteman and the Russian SS could make the journey within half-an-hour and arrive at 10,000 miles per hour, rendering the SAMS impotent.
Development had started in 1958 on multiple warhead rocket vehicles (MRVS) which separate in flight and could be aimed at several different targets simultaneously.
They were virtually unstoppable.
By 1960 there were enough nuclear missiles and bombs on either side to achieve the state known as Mutually Assured Destruction — or MAD for short.
The state of MADness was a considerable advantage, according to the theory of deterrence, and one should have faith in its beneficent qualities.
Mutually assured destruction, or the balance of terror, rested on two assumptions.
First, that both sides had ‘second strike capability’, i.e., enough weapons buried in silos or submerged in submarines to hit back devastatingly after a nuclear attack.
Second, that no side had ‘first-strike capability’, that is, the ability to knock out the other side completely in a surprise attack.
Given this state of affairs, everyone should, in theory, be able to relax with a tranquil mind, secured by the logical impossibility of anyone winning a nuclear war.
In fact the United States boasted of its capacity for ‘overkill’— another euphemism in the nuclear vocabulary — as if to wipe out one's adversary several times over could only make the world a safer place.
Khrushchev's dry comment on the Soviet lack of ‘overkill’ was: ‘What good does it do to annihilate a country twice?
We are not a bloodthirsty people.’
But they acquired overkill in their turn.
There was one flaw in the logical perfection of the balance of terror which began to trouble the public mind.
If you want to be sure of having deterred the enemy, you have to fire first.
If your rockets are aimed at the rocket bases on the other side — a strategy known as ‘counter-force’— there is no point in firing second, after those enemy rockets have been launched.
In any case, you cannot destroy all the mobile launchers, such as Polaris submarines.
The alternative is massive retaliation by missiles aimed at the enemy's cities, which will stay put.
But, as people began to ask, in what circumstances would such an act of out-and-out mass annihilation be justified?
Anyway, there is no way of confining nuclear fall-out to enemy territory.
The U.S. Army's chief of research and development, General Gavin, casually revealed the vagueness of the calculations to a congressional committee: in the event of a nuclear strike against the Soviet Union, he said, the estimated casualties were ‘several hundred million deaths — that would be either way, depending on which way the wind blew.
If the wind blew to the South-East they would be mostly in the U.S.S.R.…if the wind blew the other way they would extend well back up into Western Europe.’
The British Defence White Paper of 1958 laid down with surprising confidence the circumstances in which it would unleash nuclear weapons: ‘It must be well understood that if Russia were to launch a major attack, even with conventional weapons only, the West would have to hit back with strategic nuclear weapons.’
(‘Strategic’ means the biggest missiles; ‘tactical’weapons, which are supplied to NATO forces, include weapons up to the size of the bomb that ‘took out’— to use another euphemism — Hiroshima.)
Obviously they were assuming that the wind would blow in their favour.
But would the United States go over the nuclear brink to save Britain, France, Germany or any other NATO member from a conventional attack?
And if not, what was there to stop such an attack being made?
The Korean War and several other border wars, backed by the super-powers, had been judged not worth pressing the nuclear button for and it was this consideration which had produced the British H-Bomb in 1957.
The British atom bomb, tested in 1952–3 in Australia, gave simple satisfaction to Churchill (‘We had one and let it off — it went off beautifully’).
Mr Macmillan echoed the same thinking about the H-bomb: ‘When the tests are completed we shall be in the same position as the United States or Soviet Russia…
It will be possible then to discuss on equal terms.’
His anxiety for equal terms in the nuclear club was echoed a few months later by, of all people, Aneurin Bevan, who urged his fellow left-wingers at the Labour Party conference not to vote for Britain to give up nuclear arms with the famous plea: ‘Do not send the British Foreign Minister naked into the international conference chamber!’
He spoke for a large part of the population.
‘It's OUR H-Bomb!’ screamed the Daily Express headline after the British test at Christmas Island, which put paid to the still lively hope that the nuclear club would not extend beyond the two super-powers.
Amour propre ensured that France would emulate Britain (its first test in the Sahara came in 1960).
Simultaneously the Chinese waxed more belligerent.
At the Communist world conference in 1957 held in post-Sputnik euphoria, Mao Tse-tung declared that the East wind was prevailing over the West wind and that nuclear war would mean the end of capitalism but not of communism: if 300 million Chinese were killed, there would still be 300 million left alive.
Khrushchev, however, showed that he had learned the nuclear facts of life in a speech in July 1958: ‘If other countries fight amongst themselves they can be separated.
But if war breaks out between America and our country, no one will be able to stop it.
It will be a catastrophe on a colossal scale.’
He quite possibly made that catastrophe recede by denying the aggressive Chinese access to Russian secrets.
The proliferation of nuclear weapons was given the title of ‘the Nth power problem.’
The question was which would be the Nth power to acquire the bomb which would also be irresponsible enough to start the holocaust.
Few doubted that sooner or later one would.
Nevil Shute, in his scarifying novel On The Beach (1957, filmed in 1959), foresaw the extermination of the human race in a war started by a minor power.
As a mathematician, Bertrand Russell pointed out that while there were two nuclear powers, only those two powers could quarrel.
But with four nuclear powers, six pairs could quarrel, while five powers provided ten possible pairs and so on, the likelihood of war increasing faster than the number of nuclear players.
Hence his proposal of a ‘non-nuclear club’, to be led by a disarmed Britain, to confine the danger within limits.
‘It is not so long ago,’ Russell reminded his readers, ‘since a great power was controlled by a madman.’
The possibility of nuclear war through madness was much on people's minds in the Fifties, together with the spectre of war by error.
‘Dr Strangelove’ was not to be imagined for a few more years but it was n t reassuring to learn that nuclear submarine crews were supplied with pistols with which to shoot any shipmate who showed signs of wanting to fire an unauthorized missile.
It was perhaps even more alarming to learn that the Distant Early Warning System, the chain of radar stations ringing the Soviet Union from Greenland to Alaska, had more than once given the alarm which put Strategic Air Command into the air en route to the target thanks to picking up a moon echo or a flock of geese migrating in formation.
Error, miscalculation or madness seemed perhaps the most likely cause of nuclear war in the early days, before the coming of the ‘hot line’ connecting the Kremlin and the White House in 1963.
The Deterrers were gradually drawn into the relentless escalation of the weapons race by the logic of their beliefs.
Nobody in government seriously considered there was any alternative.
But meanwhile the Disarmers grew in numbers and in influence.
The Fifties was a great time for moral stands, at least on this subject, accompanied by high-level debate and quixotic, brave, sometimes eccentric gestures of persuasion.
Scientists were deeply split on the uses to which the discoveries of atomic physics were being put.
Many felt that, in the words of Robert Oppenheimer, ‘in some sort of crude sense the physicists have known sin — a knowledge they cannot lose.’
It was also a knowledge that could not be unlearned or removed from the human stockpile.
Disarmers were uneasily aware that, even if all existing nuclear weapons were destroyed, the knowledge of how to make them would be revived fast enough in the event of a future global war.
But, on the whole, most distinguished Western scientists, from Einstein downwards, were Disarmers not Deterrers.
They wished to restore the good name of physics.
No such luxury was permitted to the scientists of the Soviet Union but even there Andrei Sakharov, the Russian Oppenheimer, was trying to persuade Khrushchev to abandon testing by 1958.
‘I felt myself responsible for the problem of radio-active contamination from nuclear explosions’, he wrote later.
But, like his brother scientists in the West, he found his advice was ignored.
‘Khrushchev said, more or less, Sakharov is a good scientist, but leave it to us who are specialists in this tricky business to make foreign policy.’
Similarly, the clock on the front of the American Bulletin of Atomic Scientists stood at a few minutes to midnight, but the American government did not heed it.
The scientists did try.
Many of them refused to work on nuclear projects.
Teller did not succeed in attracting more than a handful of Oppenheimer's brilliant team back to Los Alamos to work on the H-bomb.
Oppenheimer himself was refused security clearance in December 1953, four months after the first Russian H-bomb was exploded.
He had actually been denounced to J. Edgar Hoover as ‘more probably than not an agent of the Soviet Union.’
The accuser, a certain William Borden, was a dedicated propagandist for strategic air power — that is, the H-bomb, over which Oppenheimer dragged his feet.
The long hearing of the case before a board of inquiry finally confirmed the ban on the revered ‘Oppy’ in June 1954.
The scientific community was profoundly disturbed by the finding.
Oppenheimer's ‘defects of character’, the political indiscretions and Communist Front connections of his past, were seen to be an excuse for the real reason for his suspension: that the father of the A-bomb was ‘lacking enthusiasm’ and ‘lukewarm’about the H-bomb.
He had opposed it along with the rest of the General Advisory Committee but it was no clear-cut moral stand: ‘I never urged anyone not to work on the hydrogen bomb project,’ he told the inquiry.
Nevertheless a brilliant scientist was being fired from government service and his reputation as a patriot clouded (although he was affirmed a ‘loyal citizen’)— because of what?
Because of his concern for the survival of the human race.
This implication was hardly lessened by the evidence of personal hostility between Teller and Oppy which came out at the inquiry.
‘Do you believe Dr Oppenheimer is a security risk?’
Teller was asked by the board.
‘I thoroughly disagreed with him on numerous issues,’ said Teller, ‘to this extent I would like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which I understand better and therefore trust more.’
It was hardly a statement in the highest traditions of scientific objectivity.
Henceforward the split between the Teller and Oppenheimer camps in the scientific community became total.
The next few years saw several appeals for sanity from top scientists who were Disarmers — in 1955 an appeal to renounce force because radio-activity could wipe out ‘whole nations, neutral or belligerent’ was signed by fifty-two Nobel prizewinners.
The same year brought the Pugwash manifesto, written by Bertrand Russell and signed by Einstein two days before he died, as well as by Professors Max Born, J. F. Joliot-Curie and Joseph Rotblat.
It put the stark question: ‘Shall we put an end to the human race: or shall mankind renounce war?’
The professors went on: ‘We are speaking not as members of this or that nation, continent or creed but as human beings, members of the species Man whose continued existence is in doubt…a biological species which has had a remarkable history and whose disappearance none of us can desire.’
After this the ‘Pugwash Conference’ of scientists from East and West — so named after the site of their first meeting in Nova Scotia — was held annually.
They found little difficulty in agreeing with one another on the current dangers but an insuperable difficulty in communicating enough anxiety to Eastern and Western governments to make them seriously disarm.
Albert Schweitzer appealed for the same cause the following year, and in January 1958 Professor Linus Pauling, the Nobel prize-winning chemist, presented the signatures of more than 9,000 scientists to the United Nations secretary-general, Dag Hammarskjöld, warning the world of the genetic dangers of tests and calling for their immediate end — it was this which immediately influenced Sakharov to make the same appeal to Khrushchev.
But the reasoning of the leading scientific intellects of the age had nothing like so much effect as an obscure little Japanese fishing boat named the Lucky Dragon which was 85 miles from Bikini Atoll when Dr Teller's H-bomb went off.
In the darkness before dawn one of the crew of twenty-three watched the ball of fire, changing from white to yellow to flaming orange-red, and dashed below to tell his shipmates ‘The sun rises in the West!’
About five minutes later as they watched its dying effects a great sound wave enveloped the ship.
Two hours later, as they were hauling in their lines, a light drizzling snowstorm of ash began to fall.
When they reached port and had sold their catch on the market, radio-activity was discovered all over ship, crew and catch.
Japan was hysterical.
Overnight the Japanese stopped eating fish.
The crew fell ill with radiation sickness and after six months, despite intensive care, the radio operator died, the first known victim of the H-bomb.
People throughout the world suddenly became much better informed about radiation hazards.
They learned that the fall-out from the Bikini explosion had covered 7,000 square miles.
Strontium 90, which is absorbed via plants and milk into the bones of growing children and can cause leukaemia, became the best-known radio-active substance.
Even the rain was supposed to be radio-active after the long series of 1954–5 tests.
At first the governments tried to brazen out the dangers.
Eisenhower claimed in 1955 that the tests were not a health hazard.
Macmillan in 1957 claimed the hazards were ‘negligible’.
There was talk of developing a ‘clean’ bomb with little fall-out, a chimera at that time, which simply produced a lot of Carbon-14 which does not decay for literally thousands of years.
But by August 1958 both sides realized that world opinion was turning against them, partly as a result of the scientists' warnings, partly out of revulsion and fear, partly because nuclear disarmament had begun to be a popular political issue — and nothing makes a politician have second thoughts faster than the awareness that he might be losing votes.
So, after that year's very comprehensive tests were finished, Eisenhower announced he would suspend American tests for a year, with extensions if the Russians and the British followed suit.
The pause was to last for three years.
It was not as altruistic as it may have looked.
Both sides were finding it ruinously expensive to keep up in the race.
The American defence budget increased to 12 billion dollars in 1958.
There was some attempt made to reach agreement at the continuous disarmament talks but the only real progress was a pledge not to test in the Antarctic, a gesture of more value to the species Penguin than the species Man.
But it was in late 1957, when the nuclear race was at its most reckless, before the test suspension, that the nuclear disarmament campaign finally germinated.
It was helped by the obvious inadequacy, indeed fatuity, of the governments' plans to protect their populations by civil defence.
Atomic shelters had been on sale in the U.S. (at a cost of $1,995 in 1951) since the first Russian atomic bomb.
Weekly shelter drill became a routine in American schools (‘Bring a woolly toy’ advised one leaflet).
In 1954 a campaign to build fall-out shelters for big American cities was announced though nobody was sure how to do it.
The director of Civil Defence, Mr Val Petersen, suggested concrete pipes sunk alongside main roads, into which the populace should crawl in case of an attack.
But his official estimates of the effects of a 2,500-megaton attack were 36 million deaths on the first day and 72 million by the 60th day, without reckoning on the effects of a breakdown of organized services.
‘Life is going to be stark, elemental, brutal, filthy and miserable’ for the survivors, admitted Mr Petersen, who was in a position to know.
The United States had hopes of at least twenty-five minutes' warning of a nuclear rocket attack.
Britain could expect only four.
The 1957 government White Paper on Defence baldly admitted: ‘It must be frankly recognized that there is at present no means of providing adequate protection for the people of this country against nuclear attack.’
So there.
‘I would have you know,’ said one of the four protagonists of the Oxbridge revue Beyond The Fringe in 1960, ‘that some people in this great country of ours can run a mile in four minutes!’
It was not surprising that it was in Britain that the most effective campaign against nuclear weapons began.
When the British H-bomb was tested, a solitary Quaker couple, Harold Steele and his wife, volunteered to make a suicide voyage into the test area at Christmas Island.
For his pains he was christened ‘H-Bomb Harold’ and ridiculed by the popular press when he reached Tokyo only in time to find that the test had already been held.
Not everyone, however, thought his intended martyrdom was a laughing matter.
In November 1957, after the news of the first Soviet ICBM and Sputnik, and Aneurin Bevan's ‘naked into the conference chamber’ speech, the New Statesman published an article by J. B. Priestley called ‘Britain and the Nuclear Bomb’which started a wave of reaction of tidal proportions.
Letters of approval and calls for action of some kind flooded into the magazine, especially from the Left Wing whose natural leader, Bevan, had just slammed the door on them.
Bevan was the spur to Priestley's powerful pen: ‘The sight of a naked minister might bring the conference to some sense of our human situation, ‘he wrote, ‘What should be abandoned is deterrence-by-threat-of-retaliation.
There is no real security in it, no decency, no faith, hope nor charity in it…
If t re is one country that should never have gambled in this game, i is Britain.
Our bargaining power is slight; the force of our example might be great.’
And he ended with a call to the hearts and consciences of his countrymen to ‘reject the evil thing for ever.’
The force of Britain's example: that was the moral appeal of Priestley's polemic.
It was a form of patriotism — could we still lead the world in moral, instead of military and economic power?
It was some such hope which united the movement that now coalesced from all points of the spectrum.
When the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament emerged from the discussions that followed Priestley's article, it was chaired by a Canon of St Paul's, the gaunt non-conformist cleric John Collins, and presided over by the foremost sceptic and humanist of the day, Bertrand Russell.
On its executive could be found such skilful publicists as Michael Foot, M.P., Kingsley Martin (editor of the New Statesman ), James Cameron, a leading journalist of protest, and Priestley himself.
It was sponsored by a galaxy of British artistic talent: Benjamin Britten, E. M. Forster, Barbara Hepworth, Doris Lessing, Henry Moore, Michael Tippett, Edith Evans and Peggy Ashcroft among them, as well as Sir Julian Huxley and the future Lord Chancellor, lawyer Gerald Gardiner.
The inaugural meeting overflowed the Central Hall, Westminster, where 5,000 people listened to the historian A. J. P. Taylor listing the effects of an H-Bomb explosion.
Then he asked, ‘Is there anyone here who would want to do this to another human being?’
There was a long-drawn hush in the hall.
‘Then why are we making the damned thing?’ he demanded to thunderous applause.
On Good Friday 1958 the first march set out for Aldermaston, the atomic research establishment in Berkshire, under the CND symbol, a black circle forked with a white ‘drooping cross’, the semaphore symbols for N and D, which became the membership badge not only for the campaign but for a certain kind of non-conformity among young people.
Five thousand of them covered the last mile of the march through the Berkshire fields in silence, despite the coldest and wettest Easter for forty years.
The next Easter, when the march sensibly reversed its direction, it stretched for four miles as it wound its way into Trafalgar Square, which held a crowd ten times as big.
Those who marched were a coalition of wildly different elements: pacifists and Christians, Trade Unionists and Little Englanders, anarchists and rationalists, Beats and ravers, the barefoot and the long-haired and also a great many quiet and concerned young parents pushing prams or carrying infants on their shoulders.
There were steel bands and folk singers.
The large proportion — estimated at forty per cent— of the marchers who were under twenty-one sang ‘Ban, ban, ban the bloody H-Bomb’(to the tune of ‘John Brown's Body’) or ‘When the Saints Go Marching In’ and welcomed the fact that there was something different to do for Easter.
The CND was a sort of emotional hold-all.
Most people joined it for humanitarian reasons but it was an outlet for all kinds of disgust.
Some were impatient of disarmament talks which never resulted in the abandoning of a single weapon; some were appalled by Civil Defence pamphlets which advocated spending your last four minutes on earth whitewashing your windows and by planners who talked blithely in terms of‘megadeaths’; some were convinced that Armageddon would be next week: the immensely influential film of On the Beach showed the last survivors, in Melbourne, waiting for death in 1963.
Many were appalled by the thought that a global build-up of radiation was silently threatening the health of their children, present or to come.
They also responded to the idea of Britain asserting a moral lead in the world after the soul-scarring debacle of Suez.
They did not want to play the great power’ game any longer.
They wanted the world back as it was before Hiroshima.
They were marching for a lost innocence.
It was not really a political movement (the Communist Party began by opposing it) but it aimed first to convert the Labour Party to unilateral disarmament and, by getting Labour elected, changing government policy.
Its effectiveness grew through 1958 and 1959 to reach its peak in 1960 when both the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party Conference passed resolutions in favour of unilateral disarmament.
But they were just resolutions.
By then Labour had lost its chance of power and the militant rank and file of the Disarmers were growing impatient with the lack of results.
A new technique of ‘direct action’, with Bertrand Russell's blessing though not as yet his participation, began in December 1958, with a march through the muddy fields of Norfolk leading to the obscure American rocket base at Swaffham.
This time they marched behind not Canon Collins but a fiercer cleric, the Reverend Michael Scott.
The militants trudged along the empty lanes unobserved except by the Chief Constable of the county and his forces.
He met them at the gates of the airfield (still a debris of contractors' equipment surrounded by barbed wire) and informed them gravely that if they entered — no difficult matter — they would be breaking the law.
They replied formally that that was exactly their object.
Civil disobedience on the Gandhian pattern was still strange to Britain and no one knew exactly what to do next.
Both sides were scrupulously polite, as if participating in a chess tournament.
The demonstrators pushed their way in and sat down and were lifted out again, limp and unresisting, by the police.
There was a council of war, a pause for prayer (‘Quiet time, Quakers!’ called someone) and they scrambled past the wire once more.
This time they got their desire.
Some forty were arrested, refused bail by a puzzled magistrate and sent to spend Christmas in prison for drawing attention to their preference for peace and goodwill rather than nuclear threats towards men.
Tiny as the demonstration was by subsequent standards, it won the attention of the country.
The jails where the demonstrators were held were deluged with letters and Christmas food parcels.
But it was also the beginning of the split between law-abiders and law-breakers which was to cripple the movement within a few years and lead to its decline.
While CND concentrated on the aim of British nuclear disarmament, the American Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy — Sane for short — campaigned for general disarmament.
Though this was a less controversial aim it had less emotional kick.
Launched in 1957, it claimed 25,000 supporters by 1958 and by 1960 pacifist members had sailed into the Pacific testing grounds, boarded nuclear submarines or missile bases or simply refused to take shelter during bomb drills.
But during the Fifties the impact of the Disarmers on American public opinion was ‘very marginal’ according to David Riesman, the Harvard sage.
‘Americans envy the ease with which Englishmen discuss alternatives to nuclear war.’
If Americans thought World War III was inevitable, they seemed curiously unbothered by it.
A Gallup Poll taken in the last three weeks of 1959 found that only one person in fourteen listed among their major worries the international situation.
In Britain at about the same time another Gallup poll showed 30 per cent of the populace were in favour of giving up the British H-bomb.
And this was the very winter when Khrushchev announced that Russian scientists were hatching ‘a fantastic weapon’ which turned out, when tests were resumed in 1961, to be the 57-megaton bomb.
Hardly a time for complacency, yet either that or fatalistic resignation seems to have put America to sleep.
The Disarmers' efforts were the only serious attempt made by ordinary citizens to influence policy on this matter of their own life and death.
On the face of it they were an utter failure.
But that is too simple.
Clearly they failed to bring about disarmament, though they may have had a contributory effect on the decision to suspend tests in 1958 and later on the partial test ban treaty.
In Britain they failed to convert more than a faction of the Labour party, which was outvoted the year after it won its victory at the party conference.
But they did educate the public on a subject which it would have preferred to ignore.
‘At a time when political parties couldn't get twenty people in a room, we had to hold overflow meetings everywhere we went,’ recalls Priestley, ‘I don't think we were ineffectual.
At one point it nearly came off.
We changed the climate of opinion.
Before we started, nuclear bombs were sacred objects.
The Labour Party talked of them as if they were filled with caramels.’
Canon Collins now credits the movement with two achievements —‘public awareness of what the nuclear threat was in reality and of the danger from the tests.
Khrushchev explicitly stated to me that one of his reasons for suspending tests was because he had studied the effect of the CND on the British public.
If you believe that, there was a positive result.’
It should also be credited with the fact that within a few years very little more was heard from politicians about the importance of the much-vaunted ‘British independent nuclear deterrent’ against which CND had originally campaigned.
It simply became less credible by the light of educated common sense.
No Prime Minister after Macmillan would maintain the fiction that Britain was on equal terms with the super-powers.
Could anyone imagine Britain unleashing its bomb all alone, and, if so, on whom?
It was in the summer of 1959 that a man with untidy hair, a crumpled suit and pens clipped to his outside breast pocket, looking like a schoolmaster who had fallen on hard times, boarded a plane at London Airport for East Berlin.
He was the man who had started the race for thermonuclear superiority or, if you looked at it another way, prevented America from attaining such superiority.
His name was Klaus Fuchs and the penalty he incurred for his epoch-making betrayal of atomic secrets was already paid, after less than ten years in prison.
He left without a word.
He betrayed no feelings to anyone in the country that had given him asylum.
But that same summer thermo-nuclear war was the subject of a remarkable series of lectures being given at the Princeton Institute of Advanced Study by the futurologist, Herman Kahn, which showed how far human values had been changed during the years Fuchs had been in prison.
Fuchs went to jail leaving behind him a world shocked and horrified by the prospect of atomic warfare.
When he came out, Kahn was advancing the thesis that thermo-nuclear war had to be made into a practical proposition, because a totally disarmed world which renounced war was unbelievable.
people had hitherto talked of the aftermath of nuclear bombing as ‘catastrophic’; he introduced the concept of ‘acceptable damage’.
‘The effects of nuclear war vary greatly’, he asserted, ‘Do you survive with half or less than half your population and productive capacity?
How many years would it take to recuperate?’
His discussions of what was ‘acceptable damage’ in return for striking the first blow was ‘somewhere between ten and sixty million dead.
No American believed that any action would be justified if more than half our population would be killed in retaliation.’
There the thinking at Princeton contradicted the thinking at Harvard where Tom Lehrer, the sardonic mathematics lecturer, put the point in a hectically hopeful ditty:.
We will all go together when we go
What a comforting fact that is to know
Universal bereavement,
An inspiring achievement,
Yes, we all will go together when we go.
‘There; ll be nobody left behind to grieve,’ carolled Lehrer, looking on the bright side, Kahn, on the other hand, advocated massive investment in deep shelters so that at least the lucky half — or should it be the unlucky half?— would be left behind to grieve, and to prove that war need not yet be quite abandoned as mankind's most addictive sport.
On Thermonuclear War , as Kahn's lectures were called, was to be published the following year with much effect on military-political thinking.
The optimism of 1959 which runs through them is quite breathtaking at this distance in time: ‘Some experts insist on talking as if the only choices were immediate surrender, immediate preventive war or eventual world annihilation,’ Kahn declared.
‘We must have an ‘alternative to peace’ including a limited war capability…
We must at least make preparations to fight wars ‘carefully’.’
Presumably his vision of a careful war was fulfilled in Vietnam.
His assurances that it was still possible to declare war and survive were appreciated most of all by the ‘military-industrial complex’— the Pentagon, the RAND Corporation (for which Kahn's research was done) and the thriving weapons industry, Deterrence always had and will have one decisive advantage over Disarmament as a policy: it makes some people a fortune.
Between 1953 and 1960 the Pentagon defence budget swallowed $350 billion.
Britain, with a defence budget of £1,500 million a year, was actually spending an even higher proportion of its wealth on arms — between 8 per cent and 10 per cent of the Gross National Product, a third of its tax revenue.
Those who wanted to know afterwards why British economic recovery was so poor by comparison with that of Germany and Japan in those years need have looked no further.
They were not spending their resources on obsolete weaponry.
A nuclear arms race is a good recipe for national bankruptcy but it is very profitable for those who design and manufacture the weapons.
Each escalation perpetuates the struggle by forcing the other side to match or overtake the enemy's latest threat.
In 1959, at their man-to-man talks at Camp David, Eisenhower and Khrushchev admitted this to each other.
The conversation, according to Khrushchev Remembers , went like this:
EISENHOWER: How do you decide military funds?
KHRUSHCHEV: How do you?
EISENHOWER: My military leaders say ‘We need such and such.’
I say ‘Sorry, we don't have the funds.’
They say ‘The Soviet Union has already allocated funds for such a programme so we shall fall behind’…
So I give in.
That's how they wring money out of me.
How is it with you?
KHRUSHCHEV: Just the same.
Eisenhower made the elementary point that they really should agree to stop such wasteful rivalry but they failed.
It was this conversation, most probably, which made Eisenhower so suspicious at the end of his presidency of the armaments lobby and its effect on policy.
No doubt it was behind the sudden volte-face of the American position on disarmament when agreement came within its grasp in 1955.
As he prepared to leave office five years later he warned the nation to ‘guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence by the military-industrial complex.’
No one has yet been able to stand up to that complex and refuse to give it the money.
The paradox continues that each side's military-industrial complex guarantees the prosperity of the other side's.
So the continued existence of the species, Man, remains in doubt.
The curious thing is that though the facts are the same as they were in the Fifties and the risks are higher, the level of anxiety about them has markedly fallen.
Can this be called an advance?
Hardly.
There is no good reason for it other than that given by Bertrand Russell in that more troubled decade: ‘The world in which we are now living would have seemed, before 1945, too horrible to be endured.
But we have got used to it.’
The man from Moscow
It is a salutary exercise to turn around and look at the Fifties and the Cold War from the East instead of the West.
From the Communist point of view the witch-hunts and loyalty tests of the United States must have looked like the little puffs of smoke and flame of a stage dragon which fooled nobody.
Far more seismic events were giving shocks to the Communist world.
We now know from Russian eyes, particularly from Khrushchev's much suspected but surely authentic memoirs, how precarious and nerve-ridden the future looked to the Communist high command when Stalin succumbed to his stroke on 5 March, 1953.
For years they had lived with his mounting paranoia, the ever-more-irrational purges of his intimates, then entering an even more extreme phase with the totally imaginary ‘Doctors' Plot’.
In Khrushchev Remembers the misery of those telephoned summons to share Stalin's nightly loneliness is vividly caught: the Westerns they had to watch with him, the dinners they had to endure with him, the drinking they had to keep up with him until breakfast time (even Beria arranged to be given coloured water, until Stalin found out).
‘Once Stalin made me dance the Gopak, squat down on my haunches and kick out my heels,’ writes Khrushchev, an image hard to call up in view of his shape, but —‘When Stalin says ‘Dance’, a wise man dances,’added the peasant proverb-spinner in his accustomed vein.
It was a very scared bunch of men, announcing the death of the Dear Father of the Soviet People, who appealed to those people to avoid ‘panic and disarray’.
The next major event was the emergence of Nikita S. Khrushchev as the dear chairman of the Soviet People.
It took a little while to dispose of the competition.
First, the appalling Beria had been arrested at pistol point in the Kremlin and executed as privily as his victims.
Next the collective leadership were ousted under the taint of being an ‘anti-Party group’.
The most memorable thing about the complex power struggle that had this result was the fate of the losers.
They were not shot.
They were not dropped into the oblivion of the Gulag archipelago or the Lubianka.
They were rusticated like naughty undergraduates to remote provinces — Molotov as ambassador to Ulan Bator, Malenkov to run a power station, Kaganovich to run a cement works, while Marshals Zhukov and Bulganin in due course followed them into retirement.
After a few years' disgrace they were back living quietly but comfortably in Moscow.
Perhaps it was a reversion to humane behaviour after Stalin's terror techniques.
Perhaps it was self-interest.
Khrushchev may have been perspicacious enough to imagine the day when his turn would come and he would become Special Pensioner Khrushchev.
But for the remainder of the Fifties the initiative was seized in the Soviet Union, and often the world, by this gifted peasant, a copy-book proletarian, a metal worker who did not read or write until he was in his twenties and who summed up in his character so many of the strengths and weaknesses of the Communist system.
Ruthless as he was, Khrushchev gave the Soviet Union a more human face.
He was crude and shrewd, he was belligerent and boastful, but he was a realist.
As he finally demonstrated over Cuba, he did not think Communist domination was worth the ruin of civilization.
Having risen from Ukrainian coal mines through the party ranks as a tough and brutal Stalinist, once he achieved personal power he wasted no time in opening his mind to the ways of the rest of the world.
He travelled on an unprecedented scale for a Russian head of state — unprecedented, that is, except by Peter the Great.
It would be too much, given his limitations, to talk of Nikita the Great, but there was uncommon ability in him for which the world could eventually breathe more easily.
He broadened the dogmas of Communist orthodoxy in several important respects.
First, he threw the worship of Stalin overboard in his celebrated secret speech at the twentieth Party Congress in 1956.
By the time Khrushchev sat down, Stalin stood revealed not as the dear father but as the mass murderer of his people.
A liquidator of the best men thrown up by the Revolution, a torturer, a racialist on a Hitlerian scale, a defeatist when war was going badly, and a mind of insatiable vanity and paranoid suspicion was exposed.
The statues came tumbling down all over the Soviet Union.
Factories, streets and towns, right up to the hero city of Stalingrad, were hurriedly renamed.
And the corpse in the holiest of Communist Holy Places, the Red Square mausoleum, was hurriedly removed from Lenin's side.
The greatest shock Khrushchev delivered that day was to read Lenin's letters suggesting that the party should remove Stalin for abuse of power and threatening to break off all relations with him because of his affronts to his wife, Nadezhda Krupskaya.
There was commotion in the hall when it was realized that Lenin's heir had been adulated for so long against Lenin's own better judgment.
At the same congress Khrushchev profoundly modified Lenin's tenet that world revolution would come about through inevitable war with the capitalist powers.
War, he said, was no longer‘fatally inevitable’.
Indeed, there could be peaceful co-existence between different political systems.
He had already accepted ‘different paths to socialism’ within the Communist bloc itself when he healed the breach with Tito in 1955.
All these were heresies from a Marxist standpoint but then Marx had not foreseen the coming of nuclear war.
In the same year, 1955, Khrushchev had got his first close view of his adversary, Dulles, at the Geneva summit conference, passing notes to Eisenhower who, Khrushchev decided disapprovingly, was letting Dulles do his thinking for him.
In the end he looked back on Dulles as ‘a worthy and interesting adversary — he always kept us on our toes’.
At least he behaved as Khrushchev expected a capitalist to behave, as a ‘chained cur of imperialism’.
You knew where you were with curs.
But Khrushchev's next visit to the West was one of sweetness and light, to Britain at the invitation of Eden.
He and his straight man, Bulganin, came by battle cruiser, which was the target of much curiosity in Portsmouth harbour, especially since the body of a naval frogman, Commander ‘Buster’ Crabbe, had been found floating there during another Russian naval visit the previous autumn.
No special secrecy was attached to the cruiser — indeed, Khrushchev told the disconcerted Admiralty that he would be glad to sell it to them because cruisers had been out-dated by missiles.
Mr K, as the headlines called him, was pleasantly enough impressed by the hospitality of Eden's dacha, Chequers, by tea with the Queen, and by learning from Winston Churchill how to eat oysters.
He also watched Churchill nodding off in his seat in the Commons.
It was a peaceful scene of bonhomie , but it was shattered by the Parliamentary Labour party.
The dinner they gave him ranks among the epic brawls which regularly give the brotherhood of socialist solidarity a bad name.
Hugh Gaitskell, the party leader, presented a list of Social Democrats imprisoned in Eastern Europe.
Khrushchev asked truculently why he should care what happened to the enemies of the working class.
George Brown shouted, ‘God forgive you’, Aneurin Bevan shook his finger at the guest with the warning ‘Don't try to bully me!’ and Khrushchev roared above the din: ‘I haven't met people like you for thirty or forty years!’
Unused to the rough and ready answering-back of British socialism, he remarked next day that if he lived in Britain he would be a Tory.
There might be any roads to socialism but the Labour Party was not one of them.
After the contents of the twentieth Party Congress speech sank in, there was a general revolt, logically enough, among the East European satellite regimes which Stalin had held in contemptuous subjugation.
Russian tanks were called out against striking East Germans and then against the ‘defiance of Poland’ in 1956, when the Russian divisions marching on Warsaw almost found themselves fighting the Polish army and the armed workers of the capital.
They were pulled back just in time.
Within days Hungary was in open revolt.
The Soviet leadership was thrown into panic.
It was one thing to back down before the poles.
If they gave way in Hungary too, where would it stop?
When 200,000 demonstrators marched through Budapest on 23 October and the imprisoned leader, Imre Nagy, was swept to power, the Army refused to act against the demonstrators and the police handed their batons to the students.
Soon the hated secret police were being hunted down and shot in the streets.
The Russians changed their minds about intervening ‘I don't know how many times,’ wrote Khrushchev.
Frantic consultations went on with the Chinese, the newly-established Gomulka in Poland, with the Romanians, Bulgarians, Czechs, even with Tito.
Only after that did the order go to the waiting troops to smash the uprising on the transparently false grounds that they had been asked to assist in quelling a ‘counter-revolution.’
After three days of violent resistance, with 3,000 dead on the Russian side and 7,000 Hungarians, Budapest fell silent.
General Pal Maletar of the freedom fighters, who was negotiating with the Russians under a safe-conduct pass, was arrested and shot.
A puppet government was moved in behind the Russian tanks.
Imre Nagy, the rebel premier, was assured of his safety if he left the Yugoslav embassy and was promptly seized and later executed.
The naked cynicism of Russian power politics was manifest.
Soviet control was preserved — but at a terrible psychological cost.
All over the West party members resigned in horror.
In Britain, where the Daily Worker refused to publish its own correspondent's eye-witness reports from Budapest, Harry Pollitt, the party secretary, resigned, ostensibly from ill-health.
Young enthusiasts drove across the border to join the freedom fighters who had appealed to the world to help, but the world in general looked on in anguished impotence as the rebels were extinguished.
Britain's only response was to cancel the Royal Ballet's visit to Moscow.
The British government was too embroiled in its Suez adventure to take a stand, or to have any moral ground to stand on.
But it was the moral pretensions of Dulles and his policies which lost most credibility.
For all his-lofty declarations of the Christian mission to liberate the enslaved subjects of Communism, when they pleaded for liberation he remained deaf, if it meant risking war.
He could not have asked for a clearer-case of his anti-Christian enemy ‘trampling on the moral law’ than in Hungary.
But he showed no sign of carrying out his threat that ‘they can and should be made to pay’.
The following Spring, a still shaken Khrushchev called a group of writers to his dacha outside Moscow and told them that the Hungarian rising could have been avoided if a few writers had been shot in time.
If this situation arose in the Soviet Union, he warned them, ‘my hand would not tremble’.
The literary ‘thaw’ which set in after the secret speech was now going too fast for him, as he admits in his memoirs:.
‘We were scared — really scared — that the thaw might unleash a flood which could drown us.’
One of its chief fruits was the submission of Dr Zhivago to the literary magazine Novy Mir in July 1956.
Boris Pasternak, who had published nothing since the Thirties because he refused to submit to censorship by the party, had his manuscript rejected all the same.
That year he gave it under cover to a Milan publisher, Feltrinelli, and in 1958 it appeared in English.
Subsequently Pasternak won the Nobel prize.
In the West its enormous popularity was as a love story set against the epic background of the Revolution and its aftermath.
In Russia, it was the background that caused the sensation.
Here there were none of the accustomed party cant or heroics about the Revolution.
After the Nobel announcement,Novy Mir's letter of rejection of two years before was hastily published to lend justification to Pasternak's expulsion from the writers' union as a traitor: ‘The spirit of your novel is that of non-acceptance of the Socialist Revolution, that it brought the people nothing but suffering and destroyed the Russian intelligentsia…that the Revolution was a mistake and that all that happened afterwards was evil.’
It was too much for the rigid party mind.
Weary with the struggle to be understood, and fearful, like Solzhenitsyn after him, that to collect his prize in Stockholm might prove to be a one-way journey, Pasternak declined his honour, writing to Khrushchev that, for him, exile would mean death.
Khrushchev appears to have taken Pasternak's side — when it was too late.
The book should have been published, he told the writers' union, in a small edition and ‘allowed to be forgotten’.
Khrushchev, who had not read it, was no great judge of what would live; nor did he have any artistic education.
‘Sometimes,’ he cries in one of his disarming bursts of candour, ‘You turn on the radio and say to yourself ‘Who wrote this junk?’.
Then you find out it was written by Tchaikovsky.’
But he was not taking any more chances on writers who might turn out to need shooting.
There was another reason for caution — to the East of him.
Mao Tse-tung had played second fiddle to Stalin as senior revolutionary but Khrushchev was a different matter.
By the mid-Fifties he considered himself the natural leader of world Communism.
Despite all the fraternal banqueting, Khrushchev had returned from his first visit to Peking in 1954 and told his colleagues ‘Conflict with China is inevitable.’
‘We used to lie around a swimming pool in Peking chatting like the best of friends,’ he later recalled, ‘But it was all too sickeningly sweet…
Some of Mao's pronouncements struck me as being much too simplistic and others as being much too complex.’
Such Maoisms as ‘Let a hundred flowers bloom’ and ‘Imperialism is a paper tiger’were anathema to Khrushchev.
In one of the sessions round the pool he was horrified to hear Mao apply kindergarten arithmetic to war.
Between them they had many more divisions and better rockets than the West.
so why didn't Khrushchev go ahead and provoke the war?
That was only the first occasion that Chairman Khrushchev reminded Chairman Mao that the paper tiger had nuclear teeth.
In doing so he was being made to look like a ‘revisionist’, one of the dirtiest words in the Communist vocabulary, their equivalent of ‘UnAmerican’ or worse.
Just as in Washington the favourite McCarthy taunt was that the administration was ‘soft on Communism’, so Mao would accuse him of being ‘so on imperialism’.
After he refused to supply the Chinese with atomic secrets, Chinese propaganda began to be openly anti-Soviet.
The Kremlin leaders were ‘bourgeois pacifists2 who were betraying the revolution by seeking ‘peaceful co-existence’, which was a contradiction of Marx and Lenin.
Soviet technicians, supervising the building of new factories in China, were harassed and their rooms ransacked and searched.
Chinese students sent to university in Russia demonstrated noisily on their cross-country train journeys and, on one occasion that shocked Khrushchev deeply, defecated all over a Mongolian station platform.
By 1960 all Soviet technicians had been recalled, taking their blueprints with them and leaving the factories to be finished as best they could be.
Beneath it all lay Khrushchev's hostility to the ‘cult of personality’, declared at the twentieth Congress and afterwards at the very time that Mao's personality cult was endowing him with almost divine status.
‘When I knew him,’ writes Khrushchev, ‘he was bursting with an impatient desire to rule the world.
‘Think of it,’ he said, ‘You have 200 million people and we have 700 million.’
His chauvinism and arrogance sent a shiver up my spine.’
Towards the end of the decade the long-frozen Cold War postures of East and West began to relax a little.
In 1958 confrontation was avoided.
The Red Chinese were persuaded to call off their bombardment of the Nationalists' offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu.
In a typically devious climb-down they announced they would bombard the island in future on only the odd dates of the month, as though the rain of shells was a form of parking restriction.
In 1959 Macmillan became the first Western head of state to visit Moscow in time of peace, sporting a white fur hat (a psychological mistake, since white was only worn by Finns).
Khrushchev lavished banquets, ballets and banter on him and took him tobogganing — then, with mysterious abruptness, withdrew his favours and gave the British a public drubbing over the Suez adventure and the Berlin question, where he was demanding the evacuation of allied troops.
When they were due to fly to Kiev together he snubbed Macmillan by staying at home ‘to have a tooth filled’.
A day or two later he resumed the courtesies by paying mischievous tribute to the new British drill which his dentist had used to cure him.
‘A mixture of Peter the Great and Lord Beaverbrook,’ was Macmillan's somewhat bemused assessment.
The upshot of the visit was the withdrawal of the Berlin ultimatum in favour of a conference.
Perhaps it was to exploit this slight sign of thaw that Eisenhower immediately afterwards invited Khrushchev to the United States.
The fact that Foster Dulles had been removed from his side by cancer (he died that May) only made this easier.
When he saw the invitation, Khrushchev tells us he could not believe his eyes.
So cold was the Cold War that America had been boycotting the import even of Soviet crab meat, let alone a live and wily Soviet leader.
But he felt a tremendous sense of awe at the invitation to visit the President as an equal.
‘I admit I was worried.
I felt as though I were about to undergo an important test.’
Remembering the humiliation of arriving at the Geneva summit in 1955 in a plane with only two engines, he took the biggest and longest-range jet of its day, the TU 114, to New York.
When it landed, the Americans had no steps tall enough to reach it, a gratifying start except for the fact that the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and his party had to climb down an emergency ladder hand over hand.
The guard of honour, the 21-gun salute, and the reception party overawed Khrushchev, bringing with him an inferiority complex towards the West which was often the cause of his bluster.
The visit hardly went like a breeze from start to finish.
At gatherings of businessmen he was most often asked, ‘Why should we trade with you?
What do you have to sell us?’
He was met with extreme suspicion and often a rudeness that was doubtless considered patriotic, like Gary Cooper's in Hollywood.
He lounged over on the studio lot to deliver the not very perspicacious remark that he was glad to have heard Khrushchev promise the Russians would surpass the Americans because competition was a capitalist idea.
As Khrushchev began to reply, he walked away.
‘I wasn't going to stand there and listen to that stuff,’ explained Cooper graciously.
Nothing went right that day.
At lunch at the commissary of 20th Century Fox, Spyros P. Skouras (he who had insisted that his movie makers clear themselves of Communist taint) asked in his speech where else in the world but in America could a poor Greek boy have become so important a person as president of 20th Century Fox?
Khrushchev was ready to trump that one.
As a poor boy in the Soviet Union he had, he pointed out, become chairman of the Supreme Council of Soviets, a job whose responsibilities compared even with those of running 20th Century Fox.
Then came the visit to the shooting of a dance sequence from an un-remembered film called Can-Can .
Frank Sinatra, pacing the sound stage in his elevator shoes, explained they had all been up late the night before and that their performance might leave something to be desired.
It did.
As a cunning demonstration of the superiority of a free culture the scene required the girls to expose their pantied behinds to the visitor and a chorus boy to run his head beneath Shirley MacLaine's petticoat and emerge with her underwear.
All of this led to Khrushchev's best-remembered comment of the tour: ‘Man's face,’ he said, ‘is more beautiful than his backside.’
Just to round the day off, the Mayor of Los Angeles, Norris Poulson, told Khrushchev at the banquet in his honour that he was well-known to Americans as the man who had promised to bury them.
This remark had haunted Khrushchev, who had several times explained he did not mean it literally, and finally got that famous goat.
Khrushchev rose with dignity and asked his audience to stop reducing the life and death of whole peoples to a joke.
‘One should not play on words,’ he said, ‘We hold positions of too much responsibility.’
The audience applauded.
Back at his hotel Khrushchev raged that he would cancel the rest of his tour, though he was ranting, he explained in his memoirs, for the benefit of the microphones he was sure were concealed in his room, relaying what he said to Henry Cabot Lodge, his ambassador-escort.
But eventually he was mollified and went on his way, drawing all eyes, swapping his watch for a cigar from a factory worker, feeling the maize cobs in the Iowa corn belt, stuffing himself with hot dogs before the television cameras.
This uninhibited tourist did not look like the Frankenstein monster whom many Americans had expected and some of them began to wonder if they had got Khrushchev and his modest and dignified wife wrong.
So he reached Camp David, the presidential dacha which he had first suspected of being an outpost of the American Gulag.
As the president's weekend guest he discovered that Ike had one thing in common with Stalin — they both expected him to watch Westerns.
But the talks themselves were a virtual stalemate.
Khrushchev decided he liked Eisenhower, ‘a reasonable and modest man’, and the much discussed ‘Spirit of Camp David’ meant that a lot of smiling went on in public.
But, though they both admitted they desired it, they could find no way of ending the arms race.
‘Some people might say nothing came of our talks,’ Khrushchev remembered later, ‘My answer to that is yes and no.
We broke the ice which held our relations in a paralysing grip.
The Americans recognized the failure of their past efforts to discredit and humiliate us.’
Was the shade of Foster Dulles listening?
Nobody who had looked at the bald bullet-head and roly-poly self-confidence of the visitor, or heard his folksy repartee, could fail to have been reminded of an American grass roots politician on tour.
He hardly lived up to his Dullesian billing as an emissary of Satan.
Was this what the Cold War was all about?
Although the flight of the U2 spy plane and the debacle of the summit the following year were to put everybody back on guard once more, there were some moments at the end of the Fifties when the fog of ideology cleared enough for realism to creep in.
At such moments it did not seem better to be dead than Red, neither did it seem plausible that there was a godless conspiracy at work wherever one looked.
There was a balance of power — but there had always been a balance of power.
Now it was shifting eastward to include China in the equation.