

FRANKIE DID NOT WANT to think of his mam and the Irishman.
He hated Big Tom Fish, with his cruel jokes and flashing green eyes and rough workman's hands.
He screwed his eyes tightly shut and tried not to imagine what they were doing together in the room with the shuttered window.
Although he was nine years old and would soon be moving up to the big school, Frankie was still frightened of the dark.
It sucked all warmth and courage from his body, leaving him chilled to the bone and fearful of even the smallest movement in the big house.
Shivering, he picked his way down the draughty main staircase to the unlit hall, guided by the grunting and moaning sounds coming from the sitting-room.
He had been crouched on the first-floor landing for a long time, peering through the banister rails to the kitchen at the end of the lower corridor, listening to the ebb and flow of their conversation.
He had heard their laughter, their long silences and the chink of their wine-glasses one against the other.
Then he had watched them walk to the main room with their arms around each other and kiss in the warm light before closing the door behind them.
He did not want to believe that it was so, but he had to know for certain.
He had to see it for himself.
He groped his way through the shadows at the foot of the stairs, located the large brass handle and turned it with both hands.
The door opened on to a glittering, brightly lit room crammed with antique furniture,objets d'art and exotic bric-à-brac.
Here were swords and rapiers hanging from sashes on panelled walls, delicate figurines set on marble pedestals, statues from across the far China seas, carved elephants and lions from Africa, Javanese dancing girls with jointed limbs, fierce ceremonial masks from the mountains of Indonesia.
Here, too, were stuffed crocodiles with needle-like teeth, deadly blow-pipes from the Amazon jungle and glittering brasswork from Burma and Arabia and Ceylon.
A log fire crackled and spat in the grate, sending flickers of light across rugs and draperies fashioned with threads of purest silk.
This was the best room, the Aladdin's cave forbidden to all but his parents, the place where wondrous treasures were kept behind locked doors and heavily shuttered windows.
Frankie blinked in the bright light, then turned his gaze reluctantly to the arched alcove on his left.
There was the weighted velvet curtain that had once hung in the Star Theatre, now fixed to a huge rod with rings so large that Frankie could slip them over his arms like bangles.
There was the big brass bed with its snowy white sheets, its marshmallow pillows and top-cover of fringed ivory lace.
He blinked again and shivered from head to toe.
Despite his terror of darkness and subterranean places, he wanted the ground to open at his feet and swallow him into its blackest hole.
She lay across the big bed with her head thrown back so that her long hair fell like a veil of copper across the coverlet.
She was naked.
Her breasts were crushed and pinched by callused fingers, her thighs lifted to meet the demands of the muscular buttocks thrusting against her.
She was lying there without protest, her flesh quivering beneath the weight of the man who lay grunting and sweating between her legs.
The boy swallowed the lump that had risen to his throat.
Her face was fixed with a strange expression, eyes open, lips parted.
She seemed to be staring back at him with a smile that was almost a grimace of pain yet somehow full of mockery.
Tears of outrage stung his eyes, and something deeper than humiliation sank like a stone into the pit of his stomach.
This was not one of the women he had peeped at on other occasions.
This was not chubby Eileen with the blue-veined legs, or black-skinned Blossom with the frizzy wire-wool hair.
Nor was it some stranger come to drink and dance and lie with a man in a borrowed bed.
This was his beautiful lady, his Sweetheart.
It made him feel sick to his soul to watch the naked Irishman snorting with pleasure on his mam's bed.
He closed the door again with a soft click, shutting out the room's light and plunging the hallway back into blackness.
On leaden feet he moved back to the staircase and made his way to the half-landing at its top.
There the panelled walls and worn linoleum were faintly illuminated by a rectangle of grey light from the frosted glass in the bathroom door.
He sat down on one of the bare wooden steps.
Once his eyes became accustomed to the gloom he was able to make out the double curve of the banister as it snaked from the dark first-floor landing into the inky blackness of the main stairwell.
To his right a shorter flight of steps gave access to an equally dark corridor along which he must walk to reach his bedroom.
It led past the scarred brown door of the Bogeyman's room, where strange noises and unpleasant smells were constant reminders of danger.
At his back, the glow from an outside lamp found its way through curtained windows to touch the glazed bathroom door with an eerie greyness.
Standing in a corner of the half-landing was an old mirror with chipped edges: a tall narrow sheet of glass that had once been pinned to the inside of a wardrobe door.
Now its painted side was crumbling, falling away in patches that left irregular silver stains like a weird mould growing within the glass.
On certain nights the mirror had a faint lustre that separated it from the deeper shadows of the corner in which it stood.
Even when it was too dark to see anything reflected there, the suggestion of movement within the tainted glass gave added weight to the boy's night-time fears.
Frankie was shivering.
He was wearing only a sleeveless vest and a pair of short pants that reached almost to his bony knees.
Although not nearly so cold as the ceramic tiles of the hall, the linoleum beneath his bare feet had a chill that seemed to creep right through his body.
His dark head was bowed.
He was weeping quietly, allowing the tears to run down his cheeks and drip into the dusty shadows around his feet.
It was a long time before his sobs subsided, and by then other, less ugly sounds were coming from the room downstairs.
He heard a man's gruff voice and a loud slap, followed by familiar lilting laughter.
Her gaiety only served to increase his distress.
It somehow belittled him.
Tom Fish was a very tall man with big hands and a cruel sense of humour.
He took a sadistic delight in teasing the boy for his nervousness, taunting him because he was so small for his age and very thin.
He called him a skinny runt and a half-grown whelp, and he bellowed with amusement whenever a threatening movement or a deliberately sudden yell of ‘Boo’ caused the boy to flinch with alarm.
Now Frankie listened to the rumble of the Irishman's voice down there in the darkness and he wished him dead.
More than anything else in the world, he wanted to see that muscular hairy body hanging from a bloody meat-hook in the cellar among the turkey carcasses and slaughtered pigs.
The house called Old Ashfield contained seventeen rooms above ground and a labyrinth of cellars built around an ancient underground well.
Its large terraced gardens formed but a part of six and a half acres of land enclosed on three sides by high walls and locked gates.
Most of the walls were topped by a layer of concrete into which were set jagged pieces of glass from smashed bottles.
Strangers were rarely seen on that private and closely guarded property.
Neither the present occupants nor their noisy assortment of animals extended any kind of welcome to trespassers.
At its front the land dropped down through gardens and woodland to lower slopes choked with thornbushes and tangled weed.
Beyond the perimeter wall ran a vein of the Bradford Beck, its filthy waters gurgling below ground before breaking free for some distance to pass Old Ashfield's wooded hillside.
Then it rushed into a low tunnel, gathering factory and household waste on its long journey to the main flow of the beck near the town centre.
On a few occasions Frankie had found the courage to scale the perimeter wall to look for rats in the mouth of the tunnel.
He had never actually seen one, but he knew they were there.
He had heard their scurrying feet and noisy squeaks, and he had been forced to nip his nostrils closed against their foul stench.
Rats were disgusting creatures.
They lived in filth and fed on shit and vomit and rotting flesh.
One of the boys at school knew a kid whose father worked with a man whose cousin died of rabies after being bitten by a rat from Bradford Beck.
They went for the throat or the genitals, and the smallest scratch from their long black claws could poison a man to death.
There was a pipe jutting through the stone wall at the tunnel's mouth, a wide cast-iron duct that brought nasty stuff all the way down the hillside from the great well in the cellar under the stairs.
On slaughtering days all the gates were carefully locked and a long wooden ramp placed against the cellar steps.
The doomed pigs were grabbed by their hind legs and forced to run on tip-toe down the sloping backyard or along the crazy paving on the front terrace.
They went through the house like so many screaming wheelbarrows, soon to be silenced by men with sharp knives and rubber aprons and boots that did not slip on the bloodied floor.
On such days Frankie had watched the water in the beck change from dirty brown to a rich deep red.
There were even times when the massive outlet-pipe became blocked at the point where it burst from the hillside and through the tunnel wall.
Then someone would have to wade into the mouth of the tunnel with a hooked stick to pull out the blockage so that the blood could run away freely.
He was not allowed to mention the slaughtering to anyone, not even as a special secret between best friends.
It had something to do with the black market and ration-books and the Men From The Ministry.
The spacious stone house had originally been one of three sharing the same hilly and thickly wooded parcel of land.
Too run-down and curiously situated to appeal to most families, it had stood empty for several years before Frankie's parents made it their home.
One particular disadvantage was the fact that its immediate neighbours had been allowed to crumble into decay, leaving Frankie's home sandwiched between two boarded, dilapidated buildings barely ft for storage.
Apart from a small stepped garden directly in front of the house, the grounds were neglected and overgrown, making the terrace steps difficult to negotiate and allowing grass to undermine the paving stones on the long front terrace.
Bushes of prickly blackberry and wild rose had broken free of the lower level and were now marching towards the house like an insidious green army.
On the upper slopes the peonies shared their ground with fireweed and there were tall purple-headed thistles standing among the irises.
In many places the wild greenery formed a natural barrier through which even the dogs were unable to pass.
Old Ashfield was a place of many secrets, a private world neatly encapsulated within its own high walls.
Only sometimes, on very quiet nights, could Frankie hear the hum of traffic or the distant chiming of the Town Hall clock to remind him that a whole city existed beyond the locked gates.
‘Sweetheart.
Sweetheart.’
He whispered the name softly, then sniffed and wiped the dampness from his nose and upper lip with the back of his hand.
Even after all this time, her name sounded strange to his ears.
He wanted to call her ‘Mam’, the way he had a long time ago, but she said it made her feel middle-aged and dull and ordinary, so he must never say it again, especially when other people were around.
The sudden change had not come easy to him, and even now he found himself muttering ‘Mam’ under his breath because that old name was somehow special and precious.
On those rare occasions when it slipped out accidentally, her rage was a clear indication of how deeply his carelessness pained her.
She was Sweetheart.
She was younger and more beautiful and much more clever than any other mother, and she told her friends that Frankie had chosen the name all by himself to prove just how much he loved her.
He wanted very much for her to know how much he loved her, so he had called her ‘Mam’, then ‘Angel’, and now ‘Sweetheart’, because it made her happy.
On the darkened half-landing Frankie rubbed his face to wipe away the last of his tears.
He was very cold.
The room downstairs had grown quiet, yet still the Irishman had not emerged.
In his mind's eye he saw them together in the brass-ended bed, his lovely Sweetheart with her silky hair and creamy-white skin, and beside her the grinning Tom Fish with one more cruel weapon to use against a little boy.
Frankie got to his feet and tip-toed up the steps to the first-floor landing.
A faint sliver of light showed along the bottom of the door on his right.
He held his breath, listening for any sound to indicate that the Bogeyman was standing in the gloom, waiting to pounce.
Sweetheart knew about these things.
She knew that the Bogeyman was a huge bat-like creature who lived in dark corners and feasted on the blood of ungrateful and disobedient children.
Only she could protect him from its hungry clutches.
She took good care of him.
She always warned him, in whispered anxious tones, whenever the Bogeyman was on the prowl.
Tonight she had said nothing, so Frankie almost believed himself safe, yet he lived with the constant fear that one night she would make a horrible mistake and he would walk to his death in the inky shadows upstairs.
His room lay at the very end of the corridor, beyond the locked doors of closets and bedrooms and attic steps.
Keeping his gaze on the thread of light seeping out from the Bogeyman's room, he inched his way along the threadbare strip of carpet.
A smell peculiar to that place assailed his nostrils with its pungency.
He hugged the banister, counting its bar-like wooden rods until he reached the turn where it met the wall.
Then he ran, plunging into a tunnel of darkness less fearful than the imagined horrors lurking behind that heavy dark-brown door.
Frankie climbed into bed, curled himself into a tight ball and pulled the covers up over his head.
His teeth were chattering.
As warmth slowly enveloped his body the spasms of shivering increased.
It was a long time before they subsided sufficiently for him to relax his muscles and lie still in the rough familiar comfort of tangled blankets.
A feeling of nausea had settled in his stomach, leaving a sour taste at the back of his throat that no amount of swallowing would take away.
It was all his fault.
This hateful thing had taken place, and Frankie knew that somehow he must be to blame.
Even as he drifted into sleep, his eyes pricked with unshed tears and his mind was filled with images of the Irishman snorting like a foraging pig around his mam's naked body.
FRANKIE WOKE with a start.
One of the dogs was barking.
That would be Rosie, the brindle Great Dane.
Her temper had worsened since the pups were born, so now she had to be kept tied up all the time in the alcove near the kitchen stove.
He raised his head to listen.
The barking ended on a sudden, very loud howl.
Somewhere in the house a door slammed.
A chink of light from behind the thick curtain told him that it was morning, and the prospect brought with it a deep sense of foreboding.
He had witnessed a bad thing last night.
It had seemed to him that her eyes looked right into his as he stood in the darkened hall, staring into the room.
He had even imagined that she mocked him with her smile, though he could not be certain that she had actually seen him there.
If she had, he would surely be punished for leaving his room and daring to open her private door.
His fate would depend entirely upon her mood, which he knew from experience could shift and change in the winking of an eye.
He could hear the man moving about in the room above his own.
Heavy footsteps crossed the ceiling from corner to corner, striding back and forth, to and fro in a familiar monotonous pattern.
ft was the mindless pacing of a caged animal.
The man had a rasping cough that exploded from his lungs in noisy barks which often left him groaning and gasping for breath.
Sometimes in the night he cried out in a hoarse voice and moaned as if struggling to escape the grip of a bad dream.
And sometimes he wept.
It seemed to Frankie that he had been up there, locked in the smallest of the attic rooms, for a long time.
It was thanks to the man upstairs that Frankie had acquired the enormous army greatcoat with its fancy epaulettes and polished brass buttons.
The stranger had arrived in the dead of night, a sick man unable to walk unaided and noisily man-handled through the darkened house by several other men.
In the confusion his greatcoat had slipped to the floor, where it lay unnoticed by all but the ever-watchful child.
Now it belonged to Frankie, and while he secretly warmed himself in its folds he spared little thought for the comfort of its previous owner.
The boy slept in a large front bedroom whose window, were it not so closely covered by an old woollen blanket, looked out over the once elegant front walkway with its crazy paving and stepped terraces.
There were trees outside, great towering hulks of oak, ash and chestnut that stood almost as tall as the house itself.
On windy nights they tapped at the windows with woody fingers.
When it rained their branches swayed and hissed with a sound like that of the ocean spilling over some distant shore.
Last summer Frankie had climbed the tallest ash and found himself in a whole new world.
From its leafy canopy he could see right over the gardens and the wilderness of the lower grounds to the rows of cobbled streets on the far side of the beck wall.
Beyond them other streets with narrow rear alleyways and outside lavatories stretched all the way to the main road.
He recognized the church of St Andrew with its high spire and the nearby school with its iron railings and tiny concrete playgrounds.
Closer to home were the squat red-brick piggeries, the turkey-huts and chicken-houses, the litter of sheds and lean-tos where he was not allowed to play.
He could see the long walkway below him, the small iron gates at each end with steps leading down to both sides of the house.
He had remained in the tree for a long time, cramped and a little nervous, yet totally fascinated.
He had climbed so high that he could see damaged slates on the roof of the house and sections of guttering choked with leaves and other debris.
Then had come the shock of seeing a face peering out at him from the attic window.
One moment he had thought himself alone amongst the greenery and the next he was staring into grey gaunt features closely framed by a tiny skylight in the angle of the roof.
The face was long and pale, with a shaggy beard and eyes that seemed to look out from deep hollows.
The lips were moving, shaping words that had no sound.
For long moments Frankie was held as if transfixed by the man's gaze.
Then fear overcame curiosity and he scrambled down from the tree with such haste that he skinned his knees and gouged a long deep gash along the inside of his forearm.
He could still recall the sense of dread that hung over him for days as he waited to be thrashed for that escapade.
He would never understand why the man in the attic had not betrayed him.
In a corner of Frankie's room stood a large wooden chest whose drawers were too stiff for him to open.
Its hanging brass handles were damaged and tarnished, its once polished top ruined by years of misuse.
The linoleum beside the chest was badly stained by spills from the big white pot where he relieved himself at night when the house was very quiet and scary.
No matter how he tried, he could not judge exactly when to empty the pot before it became too heavy for him to carry all the way to the bathroom.
His room had a smell that could be found nowhere else in the house.
It was a damp musty smell.
It reminded him of dogs with wet coats, or very old people, or mouse droppings.
There was a large brown wardrobe standing against the wall with a block of wood supporting one of its damaged feet.
Its doors were locked.
Someone had trapped folded paper in the bottom drawer and removed the handles so it could no longer be opened except, perhaps, by a very strong man.
The long space between wardrobe and window was piled high with unwanted furniture, broken chairs, boxes, old gardening tools and stacks of old newspapers.
He slept alone in the big double bed, curled up in his stolen greatcoat beneath a single woollen blanket exactly like the one that was nailed across the window.
Sometimes he wet himself when he was distressed in the night, or when he slept too deeply to heed the warning pains of a full bladder.
Then he would move to another par of the bed, away from the cold wet patch that would take a long time to dry and leave a stiff yellow stain on the mattress.
Nobody ever came into Frankie's room, not even his parents.
It was his room, his very own private bedroom.
Sweetheart told him he must never forget how lucky he was.
She said he must be the only nine-year-old boy in the whole of Yorkshire who had a proper bedroom all to himself.
Under his bed was rolled a piece of carpet with a fringed edge, and among its creases Frankie kept his treasures.
Here was his beloved Mr Ted, the battered, forbidden stuffed bear that Sweetheart had wanted to consign to the bonfire.
Here, too, were knick-knacks and glossy magazines stolen from some of the other rooms: a leather belt with a carved brass buckle that shone like gold when polished with a cloth, a brooch set with brilliant red and yellow stones, an airman's badge, a pen-knife, a fountain pen.
In a strong khaki handkerchief he kept his money, the handful of coins he had managed to save or pilfer and hide away in spite of Sweetheart's threats that she would always find him out if he tried to lie or keep wicked secrets from her.
This was his real treasure.
One day he would be wealthy enough to buy shoes with metal caps and a fur-lined leather jacket, and a big iron skillet filled to the brim with red meat and eggs and mushrooms and sausages and crispy fried bread in sizzling hot fat.
The last item in his concealed hoard was an airtight biscuit-tin whose hinged lid bore a picture of the Old Queen in black mourning robes.
Inside the tin were several small parcels containing measured portions of custard powder and porridge oats, crushed biscuits and cocoa powder mixed with sugar.
Frankie had learned to prepare in advance for those days and nights when he might otherwise go hungry.
Although he had always feared the night, the boy knew the big house in darkness almost as well as in daylight.
He recognized each draught of icy air slicing through cracks in doors made invisible by crowding shadows.
His bare feet could identify all the frayed patches on the long ribbon of carpet and each worn tread on the stairs.
He knew the feel of every cold stone step on the wide staircase leading down to the main hall.
There were no lights except in the downstairs rooms, so he had learned to hold his breath against the muddy darkness to prevent it reaching into his lungs to suffocate him.
Even in the dead of night this was Frankie's house.
He knew its sounds and smells, its forbidden places and inky-black corners.
He had learned to live with its many secrets and its brooding sense of menace.
The man in the attic was coughing again.
A faint smell of frying bacon drifted up from the kitchen.
It drew the hungry child from his bed to the landing, where he glanced nervously at the Bogeyman's room before creeping on tip-toe along the strip of faded carpet.
When he crouched in the gap between the attic door and the first curve of the banister, he could look through the rails and see right along the ground-floor corridor to the kitchen.
The door was open.
Both dogs were straining at their chains, Rosie trampling her five pups and drooling at the mouth, Lady pawing the air with her front feet in a begging gesture.
They, too, were hungry.
He could see Big Tom Fish hunched over a large plate of food, and he recalled afresh, in agonizing detail, the broad naked back and the strong buttocks working between his mother's legs.
He wondered if the Irishman had been surprised by the roughness of her nipples and the prickly coarseness of her pubic hair against his skin.
Frankie remained crouched on the landing until the man in the kitchen pushed his plate aside and wiped the back of his hand across his mouth.
A large mug of tea vanished in a single gulp, then the man and woman moved out of sight towards the outer door in the kitchen's lower corner.
It was some time before the door opened and closed in a muffle of lowered voices.
Sweetheart was alone when she came back into view, and Frankie could not recall when he had seen her look more beautiful.
She twirled and swayed around the room in a slow dance, her skirt billowing and her long hair shining beneath the bright lights.
With her hands she smoothed the front of her blouse until her breasts swelled against the top button.
Her skin was almost as white and silky as the fabric itself.
She was happy.
Her eyes were closed, and she was smiling.
Just watching her made Frankie feel warm inside.
Last year she had come to his school for the first time, and every eye had turned to gape at her long red hair and golden earrings as she swept into the assembly-hall wearing one of her special dresses.
Frankie had felt enormously proud.
No other boy had such a mother.
She was just like a movie star.
While other mams wore sensible shoes and coats of grey or dark brown, Sweetheart dazzled the world in crimson skirts and fabulous coats trimmed with genuine leopard fur.
She wore American silk stockings embossed with beads and flowers, coloured leather shoes with high heels and peek-a-boo toes, and multi-shaded scarves tied gypsy-fashion around her hair.
He did not even care when the teachers stared and some of the bigger boys made rude jokes about her shapely legs and body.
She had warned him to be wary of the coarse and petty jealousies of common people.
She was above them all.
She shimmered and shone like a precious jewel, a princess.
Frankie watched her now with a mixture of awe and delight as she pranced in little pirouettes around the kitchen.
She must surely be the most beautiful woman in the whole world.
After a while she closed the kitchen door without calling Frankie for breakfast.
Knowing he must never go downstairs without permission, he tip-toed back to his room to wait.
There he lifted a corner of the curtain to peer out at the bright patches of daylight filtering through the trees.
He was thinking about school dinners and salty cabbage when he heard her other voice, her harsh, cold, angry voice, screeching from the hallway downstairs.
‘Frankie!
Frankie!
What the hell do you think you're doing up there, you snivelling little brat?
Get yourself down here.
Get down here this minute!’
Her anger sliced through him like a knife.
He could tell by the tone of her voice that today she would be counting, and woe betide him if he failed to reach the kitchen before his allotted twenty seconds were used up.
With his hear pounding in his chest and with barely a glance at the dreaded Bogeyman's door, he raced along the landing and down the main stairs.
He paused only to smooth down his unruly black hair and tuck his vest into his pants before groping his way down the long dark corridor to the kitchen door.
THE KITCHEN was a large stone-floored room whose low ceiling seemed to trap the heat of the stove and hold cooking smells long after the meal that created them had been forgotten.
The outer door was set into the lower corner of the left-hand wall.
It opened on to a flagged walled yard that sloped steeply upward to where steps and a battered gate gave access to the rear driveway, with its ramshackle collection of goat- and poultry-pens.
A window over the deep pot sink looked out on the upper par of the yard, its panes of dusty glass still criss-crossed with scraps of air-raid tape several years after the end of the war.
Its woodwork had softened and split in a number of places, and the once rich velvet of its drapes was now faded in patches and spotted with household stains.
Opposite the window, a coal-burning stove with a chimney stood in the centre of an alcove originally designed to accommodate a massive Victorian cooking range.
There were several hot-water pipes leading off from the stove, heated rails where wet clothes were hung to dry and plates of food were left to keep warm after serving.
Sometimes Buddie stacked trays of eggs above the pipes to incubate, and after a few days there would be dozens of fluffy, chirruping chicks hatching out in the heat.
Like the fire in the best room, the kitchen stove was kept burning day and night, winter and summer.
Sweetheart hated the cold.
Tethered in the deep spaces on either side of the stove were the two dogs, Lady and Rosie, one a short-sighted bulldog of uncertain temperament, the other a bloody-minded Great Dane bent on demolishing or devouring everything that came within reach of her snapping teeth.
Rosie was particularly hostile to the boy.
She seemed to sense his nervousness.
His very presence was sufficient to have her barking in rage or baring her teeth in threatening snarls.
Her recently born pups were five helpless whimpering bundles curled in the dirty sacking at her feet.
Rosie was an indifferent mother.
Her care of the pups was so haphazard that Buddie often fed them milk from a baby's bottle to make sure they were getting enough nourishment.
Frankie did not like the dogs.
They fouled their corners and filled the hot room with their smells, and they frightened him with their incessant snarling.
Rosie had bitten him twice in the past; once when she managed to free herself by chewing through her tethering-rope, and once when she leaped through the window of Buddie's jeep and chased him into the pig-yard.
He still bore the scars of her teeth on his calf and upper thigh.
Lady was old and followed the Great Dane's example because she was too stupid to know any better.
Left alone she was so docile that she ignored Frankie completely, but in the company of the ferocious Rosie she, too, became a dangerous animal.
Now both dogs were fastened to the pipes by heavy chains that rattled each time they moved.
Although he knew that they could not reach beyond the full extension of their chains, Frankie was never fully convinced that he was safe from them.
Two stone steps and a low wide door in the far wall led up to a smaller kitchen, and beyond that was the gloomy pantry where trussed birds and enormous rounds of butter and cheese were stacked on cold stone slabs.
Drums of powdered milk and dried egg were kept there, and sometimes the walls were hung with dead rabbits and the flagged floor littered with bloody skins.
The dogs began to growl as Frankie turned the knob of amber g–ass with both hands and pushed the door open.
Sweetheart was sitting in her favourite chair with her legs crossed at the knee and a magazine spread out on the table before her.
She turned the page with elegant fingers, seemingly unaware that Frankie had entered the room.
She was counting: ‘Nineteen.
Twenty.
Twenty-one.’
He crept into the kitchen and closed the door behind him, making sure its heavy curtain stretched right to the wall on either side.
With both hands he smoothed and adjusted the long sausage-roll of cloth that hugged the bottom of the door to keep out those icy draughts ever present in the rest of the house.
The room was stiflingly hot, and he was late.
‘Twenty-two.
Twenty-three.’
He climbed on to the high stool, acutely conscious of the heat of the stove and the growling dogs behind him.
A plate pushed to the back of the table bore the remains of the Irishman's breakfast: little curls of bacon rind, stains of yellow yolk and the lacy brown edges of eggs fried to a crisp in the pan.
There were tracks in the cooled fat where chunks of bread had been used to mop up the tasty juices of the meal.
On a smaller plate set before Frankie was a sandwich made with thickly sliced bread, best butter and strawberry jam.
It had been cut into four equal portions, two of which still bore the indentations of her fingers.
The big cup with the chipped handle had been filled almost to its brim with milky cocoa.
Its chocolate-scented steam rose to touch his nostrils, reminding him that he was very hungry.
‘Twenty-four.
Twenty-five.’
Frankie knew the drill.
He stared straight ahead, hands clasped tightly in his lap, back straight, head up, shoulders squared.
He must not look at her until she told him to do so.
Nor must he scratch his head or allow his gaze to flicker, even momentarily, to the fleshy white mounds bulging over the slashed neckline of her blouse.
Most of all, he must not look at the food on his plate.
The smallest mistake could cost him his breakfast.
Perched uncomfortably on the high stool, he pressed his ankles together to prevent any movement of his dangling legs.
He was aware of her pale hands with their long crimson fingernails, her fiery-red mouth and the coppery reflections of firelight in her hair.
She drank from a cup so transparently delicate that its contents could be seen right through the patterned china.
Her napkin was of pure silk with a neatly monogrammed corner.
Her butter-knife had a shimmering pearl handle and a blade of polished silver.
She frequently reminded him that she was a gracious lady fully entitled to beautiful possessions.
She told him her perfume came all the way from Hollywood, in America, where she herself would have been living these last nine years if only Frankie's birth had not robbed her of the life of glamour and excitement she deserved.
Now the heady scent of Californian Poppy filled the air and pushed the stale damp smell of the boy's unwashed clothes back against his body.
He wanted to weep.
She shamed him with her pale, clean, movie-star beauty.
‘Twenty-five.’
She repeated the words softly.
Her breasts rose and fell in a deep sigh.
She was always reluctant to punish him.
She would not have the heart to do it, were it not for his own good.
With her finger and thumb she plucked a quarter of the sandwich from his plate and threw it to the nearest dog.
‘You dawdled,’ she admonished in her gentle sympathetic voice.
‘How many times do I have to tell you not to dawdle?
Oh, how can a child of mine be so lazy and disobedient…so ungrateful ?’
His eyes began to sting.
He heard Lady whine her disappointment as the taller, quicker dog snapped another piece of Frankie's sandwich from the air and swallowed it in a single gulp.
Sweetheart poured tea into her cup from a pretty tea-pot, adding milk from a tiny jug and sugar-cubes gripped in small silver tongs.
Her lovely fingers merely hovered momentarily over the sugar-coated biscuits arranged on a china plate with tiny pink flowers and a fluted edge.
At last she sighed heavily, closed her magazine and sat back in her chair with her hands clasped in her lap.
She stared at him for a long time.
He sat perfectly still, waiting.
‘Oh, Frankie,’ she said at last.
‘When are you going to start growing?
You're so small .
Why must you be such a disappointment to me?’
‘I don't know, Sweetheart.
I'm sorry, Sweetheart.’
He muttered the words unhappily.
He hated to disappoint her.
He had tried his very best to grow.
He had even tried to stretch himself by hanging from the limb of a tree by his hands until the skin on his palms was blistered.
Every muscle in his body had ached as if stretched to its limit, but it had not made a scrap of difference to his height.
Someone once told him that horse manure in his wellington boots would make him grow taller, but the boys at school had made fun of him and Mr Sunderland, the headmaster, had called him a stupid gullible boy and made him scrape his boots and wash them clean in the outside drain and scrub his feet in hot water and carbolic soap.
Some of the bigger boys still called him ‘Little Shit-Legs’ and held their noses when he came near.
He did not want to be small.
He was the smallest boy in the class and he prayed every night that God and His Angels would help him to grow.
‘You're a dwarf, that's what you are.’
She leaned forward to hiss the words in his ear.
‘You'll grow up to be an ugly wizened little monster with short arms and a big head.
No wonder your father hates you.
You're a dwarf.
What are you?
Say it!
What are you?’
Frankie swallowed his misery in a choking lump.
‘I'm a dwarf, Sweetheart,’ he mumbled.
‘What?
What are you?’
‘A dwarf.’
‘Say it again,louder !’
‘I'm a dwarf…
I'm a…a…dwarf.’
He tried to sniff back the wetness that had sprung to his eyes, but a few hot tears managed to spill over and course down his burning cheeks.
He flinched as Sweetheart lifted her hands in the air and let them fall back into her lap with a sigh of exasperation.
‘You make me sick.
Do you know that?
Just look at you, whining like a baby.
Oh, you make me so sick.
Stop that snivelling and eat your breakfast,dwarf .’
She returned to the brightly coloured pages of her magazine, leaving Frankie to eat the last remaining quarter of his jam sandwich in peace.
The room was silent save for the angry swishing sound she made each time she turned the magazine's pages.
He sipped his cocoa and placed the empty cup on his plate.
He did not know how to tell her that he was very, very sorry for being small, and for snivelling, and for ruining her life so that she could not go to America to be a film-star.
‘Now get upstairs,dwarf .
Get out of my sight.’
Frankie slid from the stool and walked towards the door on the prickly cushions of numbed feet.
He could hardly believe that she was letting him go, that he was not to be punished for what he had witnessed in the best room in the middle of the night.
The sharp hiss of an angry breath drawn through clenched teeth stopped him in his tracks.
He was appalled when he realized his omission.
Impossible as it seemed, he had forgotten that he must never, under any circumstances, leave her presence without kissing her cheek as a dutiful son should always do.
He turned quickly, his eyes wide and anxious.
She was seated in her chair like a cold stone statue, her face turned upward and away as an indication of her contempt.
He took great care not to touch her or allow his grubby clothes to come into contact with her beautiful skirt and creamy-white blouse.
After wiping the back of his hand across his mouth he stood on tip-toe and stretched up to brush her powdered sweet-smelling cheek with his lips.
She accepted the kiss with icy disdain, and his misery was complete.
Then the two dogs strained at their chains and snapped their teeth at him as he crossed to the door and quietly left the room.
He was stepping from the corridor's linoleum to the chilly tiles of the main hall when he spotted what appeared to be a golden opportunity to redeem himself.
The enormous main door of the house stood open, its metal-lined bulk held by the largest safety-chain he had ever seen.
When he peeped through the gap he could see the big half-pillars supporting the lintel, the rounded stone steps leading down to the paved walkway and the wilderness of garden beyond.
He bent his legs in a squat and strained his head sideways in order to squeeze through the confined space without disturbing the safety-chain.
A moment later he was outside in the bright morning sunshine.
The front walkway was deserted, though he could hear the murmur of voices coming from the pigsties past the trees and bushes.
He descended the nearest flight of steps to where bushes of peonies grew in untidy profusion, their blossoms well past their prime yet still magnificent.
The first few he tried to pull free simply fell apart in his hands, scattering their petals like so much unwanted litter.
He persevered with his task until he had succeeded in collecting an armful and pushing them, one by one, through the partly open front door.
Back inside the house he gathered them into an oversized bunch and headed for the kitchen, leaving a trail of fallen petals in his wake.
She was still reading her magazine.
She did not look up as he struggled to open the door and stepped inside, where he stood perfectly still, hardly daring to breathe for fear of dropping his awkwardly held gift.
‘I thought I told you to get out of my sight.’
‘Yes, Sweetheart, but I…
I…’
‘You what?
Stop that stammering and speak properly.’
‘I…
I…brought these for you.’
As she lifted her head to look at him, he proudly held the peonies at arm's length and prayed she would not notice their many imperfections.
At that precise moment both dogs jumped against their chains and the fearsome Rosie began to bark.
Frankie leaped to one side with a cry of alarm, jolting and almost dropping the bunch of flowers.
The remaining petals fluttered to the floor in a pathetic cascade.
In an instant his fine offering consisted of nothing but a tangle of leaves and twigs and the pale unlovely innards of dead blossoms.
Mortified, he dropped his arms in a gesture of defeat, and the ruined peonies fell like garden rubbish around his feet.
Sweetheart stared at the mess on the kitchen floor, then at the unhappy little boy, then back at the ruined flowers.
Slowly her features softened and her eyes began to twinkle with merriment.
She tightened her lips against the chuckle that began as a small sound deep in her throat, but her amusement would not be contained and soon she was laughing loudly and helplessly.
Stung by her mockery, Frankie hung his head and stared at the remnants of his intended peace-offering.
There were tears in his eyes when he crouched to gather up the debris, scooping it into a pile with both hands while Sweetheart roared with laughter.
She kicked a cardboard box in his direction, and he began piling the leaves and petals inside.
Then he stood awkwardly beside the box, feeling utterly miserable, not knowing what to do next and so deeply humiliated that his face began to twitch.
When Sweetheart spoke again, her voice had lost its caustic edge.
‘Shall we go out to see a film tonight, Frankie?
Just you and me?
We could see Jane Russell again at the Empire, or walk up to the Arcadian to see Sanders of the River .
I think it would be nice to see the Jane Russell film again, don't you, dear?’
Frankie nodded vigorously.
He sneaked a glance at her from beneath his brows, his head still lowered.
He allowed several moments to pass before daring to return her smile.
Then his smile became a sheepish grin and his shoulders hunched in a giggle.
Everything was all right.
She was no longer angry, and he was not to be thrashed for spying on her and Tom Fish.
He had succeeded in pleasing her in spite of everything that had happened.
His gift of stolen peonies was discarded in a cardboard box, and she did not seem to mind at all.
He had made her laugh.
She was pleased with him.
He was to be allowed to go to the cinema with her.
For the moment at least, she had forgotten that he was a dwarf and the biggest disappointment of her life.
She was still shaking her head from side to side and laughing softly when she shooed him from the kitchen and returned her attention to her magazine.
THE MAN IN THE ATTIC began to move about again around mid-morning.
He aimed a noisy jet of urine into the metal bucket in the corner, then emptied phlegm from his throat in a series of growls.
He began to cough in rasping barks that became horribly convulsive before eventually subsiding.
Presently his feet took up the restless pacing that had become the rhythm of his curious existence behind the locked attic door.
By now the sounds of his waking hours were familiar to the boy curled up in an army greatcoat in the room below.
Although Frankie had been dozing, he was too hungry to sleep for more than a few minutes at a time.
He left his cocoon of warmth, closing the folds behind him so that the damp chill of the room would not invade his secret place during his absence.
He crept from the room to the shadowed corridor, tip-toed past the attic door to the little corner where the banister curved into the wall.
He knew he had not been dozing very long because the smells of fried bacon and toasted bread still drifted through the house.
He guessed that she had not yet taken the man his breakfast.
There was still time for Frankie, if he was very quiet and very careful, to eat his fill.
From that angle he could see the lower corridor running from the great square of the hall to the heavily curtained kitchen door.
That area was dark and gloomy even in the daytime, with doors leading to permanently locked rooms, padlocked cupboards and deep curtained alcoves.
Here, too, was the door to the cellar, that awful place dropping beneath the main staircase into the very bowels of the house.
Glancing to his left, he wondered why the Bogeyman chose to live in a room on the first-floor landing instead of making his lair in the cellar, where he would surely feel more at home.
Crouched in the shadows at the curve of the banister, Frankie stared down at the dark jungle of coats and jackets hanging from a row of wall-hooks in the lower corridor.
Below them was a collection of boots and shoes, gardening tools, cardboard boxes, books, cooking utensils, spare vehicle pars and horse leathers.
A pair of wellington boots stood below a big black overcoat in such a way as to give the impression that a very tall man was standing against the wall, watchful and silent.
Frankie had learned to be wary of that place.
He knew how easy it was for someone to conceal himself amongst the clutter of hanging garments, unseen and unsuspected, while even grown-ups went about their business in ignorance of his presence.
He could never pass along that section of the corridor in comfort.
Whenever he stood at the turn of the great stairs, with the entrance-hall and main door at his back, he knew he was facing the very worst the house could offer.
To his left the row of coats like so many black and patient predators; to his right the secret horrors trapped beyond the cellar door; and between them, at the very end of the unlit corridor, Sweetheart's daytime room, the kitchen.
Frankie shifted his position so that his knees would not become cramped.
A smile tugged at his lips when he remembered the dead peonies falling at his feet and Sweetheart's totally unexpected laughter.
He could not recall when last she had laughed at him without ridicule.
The times were few and far between when she could look at him and not be reminded of his many faults and shortcomings.
However hard he tried, he somehow always failed to be the son she wanted; the son she truly deserved.
Without doing anything at all he could make things happen for which he must be punished with slaps, missed meals or verbal assaults that left him trembling and incoherent.
She might break a fingernail or drop a cup simply because he was present in the room.
She might even return to the house after suffering a miserable day because of him.
Her mood could escalate into a screaming rage almost without warning, and for that, too, he was responsible.
There were times when his grandma or his aunties made trouble for him behind his back, or when someone would comment on his lack of height and Sweetheart would punish him for the embarrassment he caused her.
At other times he would come running in answer to her call to find her seated before the stove with her legs stretched out to the fire and her face softened by smiles.
Then he would pick up the silver hair-brush and groom her hair in slow strokes from its dark roots to its glowing auburn ends.
Or he might be handed a file and a tiny silver tool with which to clean her toenails while she dozed in a chair.
He would sit or kneel until his body ached, picking and stroking in his efforts to please her.
On very special nights he was allowed to stand beside her hot tub in a steamy bathroom heated by a small portable fire and smelling of sweet herbs.
He would rub a soft soap-filled sponge over her back and shoulders, and his eyes would widen in wonder at the pure whiteness of her skin and the plump coarse rosebud teats jutting like angry things from her breasts.
Against her creamy paleness his hand was a thin brown intruder, and he knew there were times when she despised him for his swarthy colouring.
Frankie stared through the banisters, willing the kitchen door to open.
When she came with the tray he would slip downstairs and steal what he could from the open shelves in the pantry.
Already his mouth was watering at the prospect of sinking his teeth into a thick slice of bread liberally spread with best butter and sprinkled with sugar from one of the big sacks standing in the corner.
While dozing he had dreamed, and in the dream he had seen Buddie brandishing his long-bladed knife and passing like an avenging angel through crowds of jostling raucous birds in the turkey-pen.
He had been wearing his turned-down wellington boots and long rubber apron, and the gold in his teeth had flashed with reflected sunlight.
Swinging his arm from left to right, he had scythed through one row of skinny necks after another until every bird was decapitated and motionless.
Then the dream had shifted to show him whistling as he worked over the bins.
He reached his hand inside each bird to strip its innards away before tossing the empty carcass on to a pile on the ground.
Gradually one bin became filled to its brim with heads and feet, another with slippery, gaily coloured entrails.
Then Buddie had slapped his thighs and bellowed with laughter as the biggest bin overturned and its slimy contents rushed towards Frankie in an oozing wave.
The boy had woken from the dream with a start.
It always made him sick when he was expected to watch the turkey-killings.
Once he actually fainted in the mud and had to be carried back to the house and revived with cold water.
Buddie had been very angry, but everyone else had laughed at Frankie and called him a snivelling cissy.
Big Irish Tom had pulled down his shorts and grabbed his willy to show everyone that he was truly a boy and not some soppy little girl who fainted at the sight of turkey innards.
It had been a frightening and humiliating experience.
More than that, it had served to prove yet again that Sweetheart was quite justified in calling him worthless and good-for-nothing.
Although Buddie seemed to loom like a lusty giant over Frankie, he was a good deal shorter than the other men who worked around Old Ashfield.
He was even smaller in height than some of the women who came to the house.
Black Blossom dared to tease him about his height and wiggle her huge breasts in his face to show how much taller she was by comparison.
He was a squat muscular man with freckled brown skin, strong arms and dry sand-coloured palms that made rasping sounds when he rubbed them together.
He had a habit of spitting into his hands and licking moisture on to his fingers while he worked.
Buddie had travelled to every country in the world.
On one of his more exotic voyages a skull and crossbones had been tattooed on his shoulder by a Greek sailor who used ordinary blue ink and a sharp pin to stab the design into the skin.
Frankie liked the tattoo.
It reminded him of pirates and buccaneers and fearless men who roamed the high seas in search of adventure.
Buddie always wore a hooped ear-ring in one ear and a chain around his neck decorated with the teeth of strange animals.
Some were human teeth, big molars mounted by their biting edge so that the roots hung against his brown chest like deadly pincers.
Gold tips flashed from his mouth each time he smiled, and his black hair curled in springy coils around his ears and neck.
He was a quick noisy individual who laughed a great deal and sang or whistled constantly.
He was also quick-tempered in a way that sent Frankie scuttling for cover whenever he raised his voice.
He would ride the boy on his shoulders or shove him roughly aside according to his mood.
Frankie never made the mistake of approaching him without invitation.
Instead he shrank warily into the background until coaxed or ordered forward, and always took full advantage of those times when Buddie showed an interest in him.
He looked forward to rare trips through the city in a dirty truck that stank of oil and pig-swill, the occasional shared chore, the songs, the rough companionship.
He only wished he could grow taller and tougher and learn not to twitch and stammer with nervousness, that he could stop biting his nails and scratching his head so that his father would no longer hate him.
The kitchen door opened at last, and suddenly she was framed in its bright rectangle of light.
She looked like a gypsy princess plucked from the pages of a storybook.
Her blouse was scooped so low at the front that it left her shoulders and upper arms bare.
Her waist was pinched by a broad black belt pulled tight by leather thongs.
A full skirt of crimson and black swelled over her hips and was lifted and pinned at one side to reveal a cascade of lacy petticoats.
She was wearing his favourite peep-toed shoes with ankle-straps and deep two-colour wedges.
Her shoes came all the way from America, where such things were only worn by famous film-stars.
Her ear-rings, too, were a gift from some exotic place.
They jangled when she moved and brushed her creamy shoulders each time she turned her head.
The boy rose to his feet, still gripping the banisters and staring down at the figure in the doorway.
He watched her drape a folded sheet and towel over one arm, then pick up a covered tea-tray and step from the bright kitchen to the gloomy corridor.
He backed away, knowing he was invisible on the darkened landing yet fearful of the pale eyes that seemed to penetrate every shadow with their knowing stare.
By the time she reached the shorter flight of stairs on the half-landing, Frankie had retreated all the way to his room and closed the door behind him, leaving only the smallest gap through which he peered with one eye.
She was still smiling.
When he could smell her perfume and hear the soft rustle of her skirt, he closed the door fully and held his breath.
He heard the bolt slide from the attic door, then her tread on the stairs and the muffle of voices as she reached the upper room.
He listened for some time before judging it safe to tiptoe downstairs.
She would be occupied in the attic for some time.
He must take his chance while the rest of the house was quiet.
With half his attention on the attic and the other half on the Bogeyman's door, he slipped from his room and hurried downstairs.
His first priority was to climb on to the rim of the sink and peer through the upper left-hand corner of the kitchen window.
From that position he could satisfy himself that the pig-swill truck was gone from its usual spot in the rear driveway.
Then he took a slice of bread from the wooden board and, keeping as far away from the growling dogs as possible, crossed to the cooker in the far corner near the pantry door.
The fat was still warm in the pan so that it soaked into the bread like water into a sponge.
He turned the bread over to grease its upper side, then climbed on a stool to cut another thick wedge from the loaf.
This he spread right to its crusty edges with butter from the huge round on the shelf.
Then he unfastened one of the big sacks of sugar and pressed the bread, buttered side down, into the sweet white granules.
He wrapped this and the fat-soaked bread in sheets of clean newspaper taken from the bathroom, then climbed back on to the stool to see what else he could find.
He was lucky.
There were plenty of crumbs to be gathered from around the cheese and scraps of meat and tasty skin to be picked from the carcass of a cooked chicken.
Into his small cup he ladled a measure of fresh goat's milk from a jug on the window-ledge.
Then he was ready to carry his stolen feast back to his room.
As he re-entered the main kitchen the dogs leaped to their feet, sniffing the air.
On one of his recent trips they had frightened him so much that he dropped his food and had to watch helplessly while they devoured every last scrap of it.
And once he had heard Sweetheart coming down the stairs, her high-heels ringing on the stone steps, and he had thrown the stolen food in Rosie's corner in a panic.
It was gone in a trice, saving him from a terrible thrashing or many long hours standing in disgrace.
Sweetheart hated thieves.
She had once explained that slaughtering animals secretly and trading on the black market was simply bending the law a little and not really stealing at all, but real thieves were as bad as liars.
They deserved to have their fingers chopped off.
A thick woollen blanket, charcoal grey with a band of dull red stitching across its upper and lower edges, formed a closely fitting blackout at his bedroom window.
It was fastened with nails at its four corners to keep all daylight from the room.
She told him it was there because of the air-raids in the war and even now, in 1951, there were special reasons why it must never be removed.
Frankie freed one lower corner of the blanket and spread his sheet-music copy of ‘Ain't Misbehavin ’ across a section of the dusty window-ledge.
He pulled the blanket around his back and hooked the frayed patch over the nail so that the light from the window would not be spotted if the door was opened.
After wiping his hands very carefully on the tail of his grubby vest, he unwrapped the parcel and placed his food on the makeshift paper plate.
Upstairs in the attic, Sweetheart's laughter was a sound as pretty as music.
Beyond the window, sunshine slanted through the trees to fall across Frankie's face as he enjoyed his morning feast.
It looked like being a nice day after all.
LATE IN THE AFTERNOON Frankie found himself standing awkwardly by the kitchen door wearing polished shoes that pinched his toes and a shirt fastened at the neck with a large safety-pin.
His trousers were properly creased and reached all the way to his ankles.
They were real grown-up long trousers exactly like those worn by the boys at the big school.
He had brushed most of the knots and tangles from his hair and scrubbed his skin until it hurt.
He wanted to look his best so that Sweetheart would not be ashamed to be seen out with him.
He had even threaded a length of wire flex though the tags in his waist-band to stop his trousers from slipping down over his hips whenever he put his hands into his pockets.
Now he stood near the door with his hands clasping each other behind his back and his scalp itching furiously in the heat.
His legs were beginning to get twitchy and fidgety, the way they always did when it was particularly important for him to keep them under control.
The same thing always happened to him at school if he was brought out to the front of the hall for talking in assembly, or if he had to stand in the aisle with his hands on his head for not paying attention in class.
He could never trust his legs, especially when his shoes pinched so badly that they made his feet tingle and twitch with pins and needles.
He had been standing in the kitchen for a long time.
He guessed he was in disgrace again, because neither
Sweetheart nor Buddie had spoken to him since he was called down from his room almost an hour ago.
They were both very angry, but they were silent now because the shouting had stopped, leaving a sharpness, an uncertainty in the atmosphere that Frankie could almost taste on the tip of his tongue.
All that remained of the laughter of that morning was the cardboard box filled with dead peonies and shoved against the wall in the corner by the sink.
A boiled egg and two slices of buttered bread had been laid out at his place at the table.
By now he was hungry again and anxious to eat while he had the opportunity, but he dare not move from the corner until told to do so.
He flinched nervously as Buddie growled to gather phlegm into his throat, lifted the lid off the stove and spat on to the hot coals.
Anger always made him do that.
Frankie stared at the floor and tried not to think of all the things he might have done, or failed to do, to cause this latest upset.
It occurred to him that he had not worn his best clothes for many weeks; not since that confusing afternoon when some of Buddie's friends had rushed through the house carrying boxes, cases and sacks that must not be discovered when the police came to search the place.
The man in the attic had been dragged through the gaps under the roof to one of the empty houses next door, and from there to the bushes down by the beck where the sound of his coughing would not give him away.
The stuff about which they were all so concerned seemed to vanish into the most inaccessible shadows of the house.
After a great deal of hunting around with flashlights, the plain-clothes policemen were forced to go away empty-handed.
Frankie had been told to dress in a hurry, and Sweetheart had taken him to the park near the old railway bridge in Horton Park Avenue.
Wearing his very best clothes and shoes, he had played all alone in the pouring rain while she and a balding detective discussed important business behind the steamy windows of a police car.
Frankie's twitchy legs and itchy scalp pulled his thoughts back to the present.
He managed to shift his weight from one cramped uncomfortable foot to the other.
The movement was slow and sly to avoid drawing attention to himself.
He stole a furtive glance at Sweetheart.
She was wearing a blue costume with a slit skirt that opened when she crossed her legs.
The jacket had padded shoulders and a pinched waist, and its buttons were covered with glossy brown fur.
She had pulled a pretty knitted skull-cap over her head and pinned it in place with metal grips.
Her long hair was pulled through its centre to spring from her crown like a pony-tail that swished from side to side as she moved.
In her ears were clips that matched the buttons on her costume jacket; rounds of soft brown fur lying darkly against her pale skin.
As always, the scent of Californian Poppy wafted about her in perfumed clouds.
Her legs were crossed at the knee, and she was wearing her new wedge-heeled shoes.
He could tell she was very annoyed by the way she jogged her foot up and down as she stared at the window.
Buddie was still wearing his working clothes, though his big wellington boots with the turned-down tops were standing in the yard outside the kitchen door.
His chair was pulled close to the stove so that he could prop one elbow against the chimney as he studied the pages of his newspaper.
The dogs were quiet.
Rosie cringed and showed the whites of her eyes when she looked up at her master.
She was a big ill-tempered animal cowed by a presence more threatening and a temper more volatile than her own.
Her pups were now piled together in a cardboard box lined with an old woollen jumper and several sheets of brown paper.
The Great
Dane curled her long body into the remaining space and lay with her head resting on her front paws, oblivious to the pups' wails of hunger.
‘Give him the damn jacket and stop being such a petty bitch.’
Buddie spoke the words without looking up from his newspaper.
‘I do not accept charity,’ Sweetheart said coldly.
‘Charity my arse.
It's a gift from one of his aunts.
She made it specially for him, and I'm damned if I'll send it back.’
‘I want nothing from those people,’ Sweetheart snapped.
‘Nothing .
She only sent the jacket to spite me.
I have my pride, you know.
I don't see why I should be made to feel embarrassed just because your bloody sister wants to show off with her new sewing machine.’
‘Don't be so damn selfish, woman.
If you could be trusted to look after the kid properly, he wouldn't need clothes from other people, would he?’
‘Have you even looked at it?
It's the wrong size.
It's far too big for him.’
She sighed angrily, then narrowed her eyes into slits and stared at Buddie's broad back.
‘And just who dares to say that I don't look after my son properly?
What likes have your sisters been spreading about me this time?
Answer me, damn you.
I have a right to know what goes on behind my back.’
Buddie continued to stare at his newspaper.
His silence made Sweetheart even more angry.
Her face became twisted and not so pretty, and as her voice grew louder it lost its cultured tones and took on a snarling harshness.
‘It's your bloody mother, isn't it?
What has she been saying?
That interfering old cow has never liked me.
She's a liar, and you know how I hate liars.
She makes up stories just to turn you against me.
She hates me.
She's always hated me.
She's always trying to make trouble for me, because she's nothing but a jealous, vindictive old woman.
They're all jealous of me,all of them.’
Buddie lowered his newspaper and turned his head to look at her from beneath furrowed black brows.
He stared into her pale furious face for a long time.
He did not need to raise his voice or even explain that this was his final word on the matter.
His tone alone was sufficient to convey as much when at last he said, slowly and very quietly: ‘Give the kid his jacket, woman!’
Frankie tensed and lowered his head.
He had known all along that it must be his fault.
He was very sorry, but at the same time he could not help feeling excited by the prospect of owning a new jacket.
He jumped sideways in sudden fright as Sweetheart snatched up a brown paper carrier-bag with looped string handles and flung it across the room.
It struck his arm and fell to the floor, spilling out its dark contents.
In the silence that followed, he cautiously stooped to pick it up, his eyes widening as the gift unfolded in his hands.
He slid his arms into the sleeves and wriggled his shoulders until the stiffened collar stood up around his ears.
He could scarcely believe his good fortune.
Someone had sent him a jacket almost exactly like the ones the famous bomber pilots all wore during the war.
It was so dark a blue as to be almost black, with button-down cuffs and epaulettes and a broad welt that fastened around his hips with a buckle.
Set into the side-seams were two deep slit pockets.
One of them contained a silver sixpence which Frankie turned in his fingers but did not remove in case Sweetheart, in her present bad mood, took it away from him.
Down the front of the jacket was a row of brass buttons similar to those on his precious army greatcoat, and on each breast was a pocket with two pleats and a pointed flap.
He stroked his hands over the dark fabric and shifted his shoulders against the silky lining.
It was a wonderful jacket.
It was thick and heavy and very large across his narrow shoulders, but it was the finest jacket Frankie had ever seen, and it belonged to him .
Buddie turned his head and looked at Frankie from beneath his scowl.
He nodded without smiling.
‘Go upstairs and take a look at yourself in the mirror,’ he said.
Frankie left the room without daring to glance at Sweetheart again.
He would not know what to do if her eyes told him to stay when Buddie had given him permission to leave.
His toes were aching so much that he went upstairs very slowly, walking flat-footed to avoid bending his tingling ankles.
On the gloomy half-landing he stared into the mildewed mirror.
His reflection stared back at him with eyes that were big and dark in a small-boned face.
Even in long trousers and polished shoes and a brand-new bomber jacket, he looked much younger than his nine years.
He was different in other ways, too.
He was not brown like Buddie, with crinkly hair and pale palms, but a certain swarthiness of the skin set him apart from all the other boys he knew.
At school they called him ‘Gypsy’ or ‘Mex’or ‘Tie-Tie-Italiano’.
He had learned to bear their ridicule without so much as a tear, but the names Sweetheart called him when she was really angry could make his body hurt like a bad pain on the inside.
He prayed she was wrong, that he was not really a nigger, because niggers were coal-black people who lived in holes in the ground in darkest Africa.
Their faces were like monkey faces, with thick lips and pointed teeth and ugly flat noses.
Niggers ate children and ran around naked and plastered their skins with dog-dirt.
Frankie could not be one of them, yet he feared in his hear that it might be true, because when she called him ‘Nigger’ it wounded him in a special way he did not really understand.
The scrawny swarthy-skinned kid in the mirror blinked back at him.
He raked his fingers through his hair and watched it spring back around his face in untidy tufts.
He gave his scalp a good scratch, then smoothed his hair down as best he could and twisted the longer bits at the back into a coil which he stuffed inside his collar.
Today it did not matter so much that he was different.
Today he was wearing long trousers and a very remarkable jacket, and it did not even matter that his shoes were too small for his feet or that the safety-pin at his throat was digging into his flesh.
He was luckier than all the kids in all the streets and all the schools in Bradford.
He was going to the cinema for the second time that week, with his beautiful lady, his Sweetheart, who looked and smelt and sometimes spoke like the real-life star of a Hollywood movie.
‘Time to go, Frankie.’
Her voice was warm again.
As he hurried downstairs he heard Buddie leave the house and Lady the bulldog barking excitedly in the yard.
Sweetheart was standing in the kitchen with a small satisfied smile on her face.
She folded some pound notes together and pushed them inside her underslip, then looked over her shoulder to make sure that the seams of her stockings were straight.
In the corner by the stove Rosie whined and pulled against her chain.
While her back legs trampled the pups in the box, her gaze was fixed on the door through which Lady had passed to the freedom of the yard.
If Rosie was released from her collar and chain, she would charge through the house and grounds like a homicidal maniac in search of something to destroy.
She had recently killed some of Buddie's hens and turkeys by gripping their necks between her teeth and shaking them violently from side to side before throwing them into the air.
Buddie had beaten her with a stick until her mouth bled and she could barely stand.
He had threatened to shoot her, and Frankie had dreamed of her blood-stained body dumped in the cellar with all the dead pigs.
Sweetheart's footsteps rang in the flagged yard.
For a brief moment the boy was alone and unobserved in the hot kitchen.
He made a dash for the table, snatched up the boiled egg and stuffed it into his pocket.
By the time she reached the gate at the top of the yard, he was striding dutifully at his mother's heels.
She turned right, taking the route that would be easiest and less damaging to her lovely new shoes.
The goats were tethered on a patch of grassy ground close to one of the gates.
Frankie gave them a wide berth.
He particularly hated the billy, with its ragged white beard and devil's eyes.
The animal seemed to take a perverse delight in terrorizing him.
It would pin him up against the nearest wall and try to eat his clothes, or chase him until his cries of fright attracted everyone's amused attention.
He feared the goats only marginally less than the snorting, grinning pigs, and only then because the five nannies and their billy were usually safely tied up in the long grass.
‘Come along, Frankie darling.
You may hold my hand.’
Trotting after her, Frankie automatically rubbed his hand on his trousers before daring to reach for the gloved hand she offered.
He looked up to see that she was smiling down at him in such a way that he could not help grinning in response.
He felt his nose crease and his eyes screw up with pleasure.
His shoulders lifted towards his ears as if to help the grin along.
Her smile was like a shaft of warm sunshine falling across his face.
It made him so excited that he had to cover his mouth with his free hand in order to stifle a ripple of laughter.
They walked together up the slope from the gate, passing the long high wall of Brooke Parker's chemical works and the wide opening that led to the top of Thorpe Street.
They passed the big houses in Ashfield Place where all the doctors and veterinary surgeons lived, then made a left turn into Great Horton Road, which swept right down the hill to the town centre.
Frankie stared along tree-lined Ashgrove, where all the Americans stayed in specially converted houses with wind-up gramophones in every room.
Its far end was crossed by busy Morley Street before continuing on to Lower Ashgrove, which led all the way to Grandma's house in Lansdowne Place.
Their path took them down beyond the Technical College and the School of Art building, where Buddie and two of his sisters posed as living models for the students.
Sweetheart was going to be a model, too, but not until the school's principal found the good sense to send her maliciously jealous sisters-in-law packing.
Although his aunts had always been kind to him, Frankie tried his best not to like them because he knew they were only pretending to be nice.
He would be poisoned if he accepted food or sweets from them.
Even their kisses might give him a disease from which he would die or become horribly spotty.
Sweetheart knew about these things.
She constantly needed to caution him about the many dangers he was either too young or too stupid to recognize for himself.
While they walked she explained to him that no other boy in the whole of England could even hope to own a bomber jacket like his.
Whatever lies Buddie chose to tell about it, she and Frankie would tell everyone the truth: that it came in a big parcel from across the sea in America.
It was a special gift from a famous actor in California who had tried to persuade Sweetheart to join him on a luxury tour of Europe.
She had declined the offer, of course.
Because of Frankie she had graciously rejected the opportunity of a lifetime.
Much as she deserved to travel the world with people of her own social standing, she could no longer hope to do so with a happy hear and a clear conscience.
Never before had a mother been forced to sacrifice so much for her child.
She could only hope he was grateful, and truly so, for all she was forced to suffer on his behalf.
Frankie was grateful.
Indeed, there were times when his gratitude pressed down on him like a crushing burden slumped across his shoulders.
He had ruined her life.
Sometimes the terrible debt he owed her was a churning sickness in his stomach that often rushed into his throat to warn him that one day it might choke him to death.
He knew that without Sweetheart's loving protection he would be put in a Home with criminals and perverts and mad people who attacked small boys.
For his own good she frequently reminded him of the horrors and deprivations that would befall him there.
Walking beside her now, he prayed she would not notice the peculiar tic that jerked his face into a spasm of nervous twitches and always made her so terribly angry.
THE EMPIRE THEATRE was a wonderful place.
It stood at an angle behind the Alexandra Hotel near the bottom of Great Horton Road, tucked away on the curve of Randall Well Street.
It was a cosy palace of velvet tip-up seats with brass ashtrays and little numbered plaques.
Frankie knew every gilded swirl and cherub, every plaster rose, every painted bulb in each of the hanging light-fittings.
He knew the smell that came from dust and stale cigarette-smoke, from shoes and overcoats and old stained carpets.
The ceiling was painted a dark maroon, with tiny pin-points of light set here and there in the plaster to glow like stars in the night sky.
And when the lights dimmed there was darkness of a different kind, friendly and safe.
The Empire was a warm haven where Frankie could watch his favourite films or close his eyes and sleep without fear.
High on the back wall was the window of the projection room, where strange machinery aimed its flickering beams at the big screen and by sheer magic produced talking, moving, living pictures.
In this place he could find Roy Rogers, Gene Autry, the Lone Ranger and Tonto.
Cartoon characters chased each other across the screen, glamorous women won the hearts of kings, innocent settlers set themselves against ruthless cattle-ranchers, war heroes plotted and schemed and died for their beloved country.
They sat downstairs in a double seat in the back row.
They always chose an aisle seat so that Sweetheart could slip away to talk to her friends without disturbing anyone.
She would stay until the first intermission, then leave him to watch the last complete performance alone.
Sometimes Frankie would curl up in the big seat and sleep until she shook him awake shortly before the second feature came to an end.
Tonight she was smiling as she stared up at the screen, and Buddie had given her money.
If he was really lucky, she would leave him sixpence to buy ice-cream from the lady with the tray.
They had watched the film so many times that Frankie was familiar with every scene.
Jane Russell bore a striking resemblance to Sweetheart.
She had the same smouldering eyes and pouting lips, the same tiny waist and big swelling breasts.
When Sweetheart fixed her hair and make-up a certain way and dressed up in the clothes she made on her treadle sewing machine, she looked for all the world like Jane Russell come to life from the big screen.
She had a marvellous memory.
She could play the heroine's scenes from a score of films or recite long passages from the Holy Bible that she had learned as a child.
Sometimes, when she was all alone in the house, she would call Frankie downstairs to sit with her in the kitchen by the fire.
Even the dogs would be hushed as she told the story of the highwayman who came riding, riding by, or the shipwrecked sailor lost in a terrible storm, or the faithful lady who died by the gun to warn her lover that he was riding into a Roundhead trap.
She conjured wonderful colourful pictures for a boy to see with his mind's eye, her voice pure and confident, her memory pouring out hundreds of lines of poetry in a faultless, almost hypnotic flow.
Frankie glanced up to see her quietly mouthing the words as lights from the screen flickered across her face.
She was so clever.
Other boys' mothers had rough hands and plain faces and knew nothing except cleaning and cooking.
They lived in poor houses with outside lavatories, and their clothes stank with the oil of the woollen mills or the dankness of unaired wardrobes.
They were all bitterly jealous of Sweetheart because she was so clean, with beautiful hands, long painted nails and a face like a film-star's.
And she knew absolutely everything , which must have made her particularly disappointed in Frankie's slow progress at school.
His reading was hesitant owing to a stammer that tied his tongue whenever he was expected to give account of himself before the rest of the class.
His handwriting was so bad that Mr Sunderland had pinned his composition to the notice-board in the hall so everyone could see he was the worst writer in the whole school.
He was baffled by arithmetic and hopelessly confused by those twin horrors, history and geography.
They called him a dunce at school, yet he knew all the words of the records on Sweetheart's wind-up gramophone, and every song Buddie's friends played when they got together with their instruments in the big downstairs room.
He had learned the steps of all the dances and the names of the singers.
He could even identify the more famous musicians by their individual styles.
He knew Duke Ellington, Errol Garner and Louis Armstrong, and singers such as Fats Waller, Ella Fitzgerald, Nellie Lutcher, Vera Lynn, Bing Crosby and a dozen others.
He knew them all, but somehow his special talents always failed to impress those who really mattered.
He could also ride a horse, with or without a saddle, and hit a target ten times out of ten with arrows from his bow, but neither of these things seemed to count.
He was still the school dunce.
Sweetheart sighed heavily as the final credits faded and the lights brightened to reveal only a handful of patrons dotted around the cinema.
She propped her handbag in her lap, took out a small mirror and carefully smoothed the swept-up sides of her hair.
With her little finger she flicked melted lipstick from the corners of her mouth, then dabbed at her nose and cheeks with a small powder-puff.
Finally, she gave her head a shake that set her ear-rings dancing and her pony-tail skimming across the back of her seat.
Frankie knew she was preparing to leave.
When the lights dimmed again she would slip out by the rear exit, and it would be dark outside and very late when she came back.
One night she brought him to see a horror film about the Living Dead, and he was so frightened by the zombies that he fled into the foyer in a panic.
He had expected her to be sitting in the little ticket office with her friend Maureen, but instead he found the office locked and in darkness and the entire frontage of the cinema deserted.
Unable to return to his seat, too scared even to hide in the toilets, he had hovered in the shadows by the door for a long time until he spotted Sweetheart climbing from a car parked on the other side of the street.
Then he had dashed back inside and curled up in his seat with his hands covering his ears until she came to take him home.
Tonight there would be no such frights.
The B film was a Western starring Randolph Scott, and when that was over he would watch Jane Russell again, and somewhere in between he would eat his boiled egg and perhaps sleep for a while.
From the loudspeakers on the corner pillars came a selection of popular songs by Gracie Fields.
People began filling up the empty seats.
Many were wearing their Sunday best, the ladies in hats or newly pressed headscarves, the gents in overcoats and polished shoes.
Most of them went through the ritual of gazing about them with curious eyes in search of a familiar face among the crowds.
Sweetheart appeared oblivious to their stares, but Frankie knew she was aware of all the eyes that turned in her direction as she sat with her legs crossed and her head lifted proudly.
Several courting couples pushed their way along the back rows to cuddle close together in the deep double seats.
There were few children lucky enough to visit the cinema mid-week, as he so often did, and that made Frankie feel particularly privileged.
The ice-cream lady with the curly brown hair walked slowly up the aisle, her head turning this way and that in search of last-minute customers.
The lights began to dim, and the big gold curtains swished back on their noisy invisible pulleys.
Sweetheart reached up to touch the ice-cream lady's arm.
Their heads bent close together, and whispered words were exchanged.
Coins rattled in the tray's money-compartment, then Frankie felt his hands close around the chilly wrapping of a choc-ice.
He stammered his thanks as the Western sprang to life on the screen and Sweetheart slipped from her seat in a waft of perfume.
His heart sank the way it always did when she left him.
By now he was used to spending longer and longer periods alone, yet in that moment when she walked away he always experienced a brief sense of loss that made him want to rush after her and beg her not to go.
Moments later the parting was forgotten as Randolph Scott, flanked by a posse of brave volunteer deputies, galloped across the screen in search of the notorious Bodine Brothers from Kentucky.
Frankie woke with a start.
Someone was shaking him by the shoulder as the band played ‘God Save the King’ and everyone else in the cinema stood to attention.
He scrambled to his feet, knuckling sleep from his eyes with both fists.
He must have fallen asleep during the Jane Russell film.
Now the main lights were on, the ruffled gold curtains closed across the screen, the exit doors wedged open.
It was almost ten o'clock.
Tonight he must face the very thing he had always dreaded.
The show was over, and Sweetheart had not come back for him.
He stood on the bottom step long after the heavy metal grids had been pulled across the foyer and the last of the cinema lights turned off.
It was dark and cold, and he was completely alone.
He heard the Town Hall clock chime the hour and he could not ignore the growing fear that this time the very worst had happened.
She had left him, just as she so often threatened to do.
There were mill-owners in Bradford and Leeds who had been begging her for years to leave Old Ashfield and go to live with them in their fine houses.
She had spoken of a rich businessman in London and a gentleman farmer in Sussex, both of whom were madly in love with her.
Any one of them might have taken her away.
A woman like Sweetheart could have any man she chose, so long as she was willing to leave her son behind.
‘Well, well, well, if it isn't young Frankie from Old Ashfield.’
He started nervously and sniffed back a tear.
He had been too engrossed in the anguish of his own thoughts to notice the approach of the two uniformed policemen.
They came via the narrow snicket leading past the Alexandra Hotel into Great Horton Road.
He wondered if they had come to take him away to a Home for ungrateful and unwanted children.
They stopped close to the step where he was standing.
One of them looked at his wristwatch, pursed his lips and scowled fiercely.
The other was a stout man with a dark moustache.
He winked an eye at his companion and said to Frankie: ‘Been to the pictures, have we, son?’
Frankie nodded and sniffed again.
The frowning policeman bent down to stare into his face.
His breath smelt of cigarette-smoke and peppermint.
‘Where's your mam, Frankie?’
‘She'll be back soon…er…in a minute…,’ he stammered.
The policeman with the moustache stood erect with his hands on his hips.
He was grinning now.
He winked again and nudged the other man's arm.
‘Gone to have a little chat with a friend, has she, son?’
‘Er…yes…
I think so.’
‘Been gone long, has she?’
‘No…no…not very long.’
‘Left you in the Empire all by yourself for a couple of hours, I suppose.
Looks to me like she's forgotten to come back for you, son.
'Appen she had better things to do, eh, George?’
Both men guffawed at the remark, while Frankie looked from one grinning face to the other.
He was embarrassed.
He felt that they were making fun of him, though he could not understand why.
He knew that Buddie hated all detectives and uniformed policemen.
These two seemed friendly enough, but their questions about Sweetheart put him on the defensive.
She had always told him never, under any circumstances, to let other people know their private business.
He must tell them nothing.
Even if they locked him in a dark cell and pulled out all his teeth with rusty pliers, he must keep his promise to Sweetheart and tell them nothing.
His heart leaped and his knees trembled with relief when he heard the unmistakable sound of her footsteps rounding the corner at the other side of the cinema building.
‘Frankie!
Oh, Frankie!’
Her voice was high and anxious as she rushed towards him.
‘Oh,there you are, you naughty boy.
How many times has Mummy told you not to wander off like that?’
She caught him up in a breathless embrace, then gave a little gasp of alarm as she seemed to notice the two policemen for the first time.
‘Oh dear.
Good evening, officers.
I do hope my son has not been making a nuisance of himself.’
The two men grinned broadly and shook their heads.
‘We were just a bit concerned that he was left on his own so late at night.’
‘Oh, but he wasn't left alone, were you, Frankie darling?’
Feeling sick with relief that she had not run away with a rich man, Frankie shook his head vigorously in agreement and clung to her arm.
She laughed prettily and tossed her head, her eyes flashing with amusement.
‘One moment we were all sitting outside the Art School discussing the latest models, and the next moment the boy had wandered off by himself.
Isn't that so, Frankie darling?
I don't mind telling you, I've been almost frantic with worry this last half-hour.
I can't imagine what his father would say if he found out about this.
My husband has such a terrible temper.
He'd probably take a belt to the poor boy.’
She completed her speech with a deep sigh and an extra hug for Frankie.
He wanted to weep.
‘I'm sure there's no need to worry yourself about that, missus.’
The policeman with the moustache was still grinning.
‘Look, George, why don't you walk the boy on ahead while I have a private word with his mother?’
Sweetheart smiled and released Frankie into the care of the other man, who gripped him by the shoulder and looked terribly stern.
‘Go ahead, dear,’ she insisted.
‘Mummy won't be a moment.’
Frankie went reluctantly, straining his neck in order to keep her in his sight.
He watched her throw back her head and laugh at something the policeman said, then move very close to him as he wrote something down in his book.
A few minutes later she hurried back and took him by the hand.
As they walked up towards the main road, he was surprised to see her turn round to wave at the policemen as if they were old friends.
When they reached the main road she pulled him roughly across to where Irish Tom's van was parked.
He was bundled into the back among the old tyres and coils of rope, while she climbed into the front beside the driver.
After a very bumpy ride they alighted at the top of Thorpe Street and the Irishman drove away.
Sweetheart gripped his hand and they hurried in silence down the side of Brooke Parker's and through the iron gate at the bottom of the slope.
The lamp outside the turkey-house was still burning to illuminate their way along the front drive and into the yard.
She paused briefly to tidy her hair and smooth the creases from her skirt, then led the way into the house.
Buddie was sitting on a hard chair with one foot resting on an upturned petrol-tin.
His back was bent over his guitar, his lower lip sucked in and his brows furrowed in concentration.
He glanced at the clock and nodded his approval without breaking the rhythm created by his fingers on the strings.
In spite of everything, they had managed to reach home at their usual time.
‘Bedtime, Frankie.’
Sweetheart's voice was soft, relaxed.
She stooped rather stiffly to offer the boy her cheek.
He kissed it with lips wiped dry and germ-free on the sleeve of his jacket.
Buddie caught his eye and nodded.
Still painfully relieved that he was not to be made an unwanted orphan and bundled off to a Home , Frankie left the room without a word.
He stopped outside the bathroom to remove his shoes and massage the cramps from his toes.
Later he paused at the top of the shorter flight of steps until he was sure it was safe to pass the Bogeyman's door, then tip-toed along the corridor to his room.
Curled up in his army greatcoat, Frankie listened to the snores of the man in the attic and hoped and prayed that neither Sweetheart nor the two policemen would tell Buddie that he had wandered off and become lost.
He dreaded the feel of the big leather belt across his bare legs and buttocks.
Almost as frightening was the bellow of Buddie's voice when it grew huge and powerful with anger, and the shouted words that struck like blows to make Frankie flinch and tremble.
His own imagination offered a punishment far in excess of his crime.
He knew he was guilty, because Sweetheart told him so.
He was almost afraid to fall asleep in case he was pulled from his bed in the middle of the night and thrashed.
‘AS OF TODAY, you must not call me ‘Sweetheart’.’
The boy looked up from his porridge, his spoon poised in mid-air and his face solemn.
He was well aware of the importance of a new name.
He knew he must pay particular attention if he was to avoid the consequences of using the wrong name, especially in public.
She continued to buff her newly varnished nails, smiling a little to herself.
She was wearing something pink and pretty that covered her body in soft folds.
For a moment he entertained the hope that he might be allowed to call her ‘Mam’, the way he used to, or even ‘Mummy’, as she always called herself when speaking to other people.
He was disappointed.
‘My name is ‘Smallfry’,’ she announced.
‘From now on, you will only call me ‘Smallfry’.’
Frankie nodded obediently and stared down at his porridge.
He had heard the name before, in a song recorded by Bing Crosby.
One of the musicians who played in the band with Buddie had once ruffled Frankie's thick black hair and called him ‘Smallfry’ in a way that was not meant to be unkind.
He had liked it.
It was a nice friendly name for an adult to give a child.
There was nothing wrong with the name, but it would embarrass Frankie, so small and thin for his age, to call his own mother ‘Smallfry’.
The boys at school were sure to snigger at him behind his back, and the Irishman and his rough friends would have one more excuse to belittle him for their own amusement.
‘Let me hear you say it,’ she said, her voice cutting into his thoughts.
‘Small …fry .’
He pronounced it as two separate words, very deliberately.
‘Again.
Say it again.’
‘Smallfry,’ he repeated, and the name sounded ridiculous to his ears.
He had wanted so much to call her ‘Mam’.
She smiled and extended both arms to examine her manicure in detail.
When she tossed her head her hair fell around her shoulders and upper arms in a lovely auburn cascade.
Frankie liked her hair.
He enjoyed brushing it, even when she made him stand so long behind her chair that his arms ached and his eyelids started to droop.
He was always happy to help her keep her hair beautiful, even when it was time to use the greenish-brown powder that reminded him of warm cow-dung when she mixed it with water.
She called it graduated henna .
It came from one of the huge stone jars in the herbalist's shop near the bottom of Manchester Road.
The man in the light-brown coat spooned the henna powder on to fancy scales with tiny brass weights, then folded it into a sheet of brown paper tied up with string.
The gloomy cluttered shop always smelt of black spanish and hot blackcurrant juice and strong bitter-sweet sarsaparilla.
Sometimes Sweetheart had to go into the back room to buy something special.
Then Frankie was left perched on one of the high oak stools, staring at ranks of miniature wooden drawers with unreadable labels.
He liked to sniff the parcel of graduated henna for its strong herby smell.
When mixed with warm water the powder became a dense paste which Frankie plastered all over her hair.
He worked from the root, soaking strand after strand until her whole head was covered in the gritty concoction.
When no trace of hair remained visible, he applied strips of newspaper and a warmed towel to complete the process.
Much later, it was his job to rinse her bowed head with bucket after bucket of warm water until her hair was scrupulously clean once again.
He liked the smell of her shampoo and the way it foamed into a soft white froth between his fingers.
Sometimes he even managed to keep for himself the little piece of cotton-wool that she soaked in perfume so that he could rub the henna stains from her skin.
After the treatment her hair shone like burnished copper from scalp to tip, such a beautiful shade of red that people turned in the street to stare as she passed by.
‘Are you listening to me?’
He jerked his senses back to the present with a star.
‘Yes, Sweetheart.’
‘What?
What did you call me?’
‘Smallfry…
I meant to say Smallfry…’
He dropped his gaze from her face to his empty bowl.
‘I'm sorry…
Smallfry…’
He heard her sigh deeply, the way she always did when he let her down in some way.
The two dogs were whining softly in the back of their throats and sniffing the air as if distressed.
Their food was boiling in a pan on the back burner of the gas-stove in the alcove by the pantry door.
The smell of the steaming meat tormented them until their mouths slavered and their eyes rolled.
It bubbled and spat through a layer of brown scum that stained the outside of the pan, but it smelt good, almost as good as the dinners Frankie sometimes had at school.
There was left-over porridge in the smaller pan.
He could see it steaming where it coated the rim and the long-handled wooden spoon.
Although he was still hungry, he decided against asking her for second helpings now that he had forgotten to use her new name at the very first test.
Instead he glanced at her delicate china tea-cup and saucer and marvelled afresh that he had never, in all his life, actually seen her eat.
On Thursday morning the nurse from the clinic arrived at St Andrew's.
She was there to examine the children's heads and bodies for lice, injury, infection or disease.
Her visits were a cause for much speculation and a great deal of dread because her power was infinite.
In a single school term she had once sent to private sanatoriums as many as four boys and two girls with a weakness of the lungs.
As many more were ordered to their homes with notes declaring the presence of head-lice.
One girl's facial impetigo had to be painted with ointment that stung the scabs and branded her with unsightly violet-coloured splotches for several weeks.
Almost a third of the pupils were obliged to eat worm-cakes and do their busy on sheets of newspaper until someone from the clinic was satisfied that they were no longer a threat to the health of fellow-pupils.
Frankie had been one of those unfortunates.
The nauseating taste of the worm-cakes and the humiliation of the treatment were only outweighed by the sheer relief of being freed from an incessant itching in his backside.
Worms were horrible things.
They lived inside a person's body and wriggled about until their presence drove him to distraction.
Now the nurse from the clinic was visiting the school again, and Frankie was the only boy in his class who had failed to return his slip of paper duly signed by a parent or guardian.
He told his teacher he had lost it on the way to school, and Mr Watson promptly rapped his knuckles with a ruler for his carelessness.
Nurse was a thin woman with a lined face and watery blue eyes.
Her hair was twisted into tight steel-grey rolls on which sat her clinic cap with its distinctive badge.
Her hands were cold, dry and unfriendly.
She examined little boys as if they were made of much sterner stuff than mere flesh and bone.
She pinched ears, lips and nostrils, pulled hair and poked her hard fingers into tender places, and she did so with a vexed expression on her face, as if the worried children in her charge deserved to be roughly handled.
The boys queued in sets of five outside the headmaster's room, each clutching his signed slip and praying he would not be singled out for special treatment.
Frankie had scrubbed his hands and feet and dampened his hair with water to make it lie flat and tidy against his head.
He told himself that the itching in his scalp was just a heat rash, and determined not to scratch his head in the presence of the nurse.
He did not want to let Smallfry down again.
Nurse smelt of toothpaste and disinfectant, and crackled when she moved because her clothes were so stiffly starched.
Her shoes squeaked on the polished linoleum.
She exuded power: the power to change a boy's destiny with a stern shake of her head and only a few official-sounding words.
Her antiseptic presence transformed Mr Sunderland's office into a place where children were condemned not to the cane or detention but to threadworms or impetigo or a terrible weakness of the chest that could only be treated in some distant sanatorium.
Frankie had nits in his head.
Nurse found them and cracked them between her fingernails the way Smallfry sometimes did when he was made to kneel with his head in her lap, breathing her perfume and savouring the rare closeness of her.
Nurse found the worst patches around his ears where he had scratched the scalp sore.
She discovered the dirt and thickened wax deep in his ears, the grubbiness at the back of his neck, the hoof-like skin on the soles of his feet, the bitten nails.
She examined Frankie from head to toe with prying eyes and searching, penetrating fingers; and she found him lacking.
He was sent home at lunch-time.
He had brought no money, so he was not allowed to join the untidy crocodile of children forming the dinner queue.
On the opposite side of the corridor were the free-dinner kids, those embarrassed boys and girls who enjoyed a daily privilege for which others were forced to pay.
Frankie often joined his classmates in taunting them because of their poor homes or absent fathers, yet in his heart of hearts he envied them all.
To be a free-dinner kid was to enjoy a full stomach every single day of the week, puddings and all.
By fumbling around in his desk until the others had lined up for dinners, Frankie managed to avoid the harsher ridicule of those in his class who were free of head-lice.
With Nurse's letter folded in his hand, he ran all the way down to the infants' school on the corner before stopping to catch his breath.
On the other side of the road the cobbled slopes of West Brook Place rushed down to the walled beck before the land swept up again, steep and thickly wooded, to the terraces of Old Ashfield.
If he squinted his eyes, he could just make out the greyness of the roof between the trees and here and there the stony finger of a chimney-stack.
He knew he should turn right into Longside Lane, then left down the long hill that was Shearbridge Road, then left again and up to the very top of Thorpe Street.
At this time the men of Brooke Parker's would be loading their wagons with the globular bottles that Buddie called carboys .
Fashioned from smoky green glass, tightly corked and wired, they would be packed with straw for protection and carried on wooden poles slotted through their individual baskets of woven metal.
Frankie liked to watch the loading.
When the factory doors were open, Brooke Parker's became a fascinating place of acrid steam, acid-like smells and grim-faced men in protective aprons.
Frankie hesitated.
It was a long way home via Shearbridge Road.
If he took the short cut across the beck, he would arrive there in a fraction of the time.
The letter in his hand aroused in him a sense of urgency that offset his fear of the narrow enclosed footpath known locally as Dead Man's Alley.
Alongside and beneath the alley, Mucky Beck rushed for half a mile past walled mill-ponds, wasteland and cinder piles all the way from Shearbridge Road to Cheshum Street.
He knew that this tunnel-like place was shunned by tramps and feared even by drunks and peg-sellers.
Mucky Beck was a frightening rat-infested torrent, with steep moss-stained steps at either end of the alley and untold danger lurking in the shadows between.
Frankie's palms were already sticky with perspiration when he crossed the road, ran down West Brook Place and squeezed through a gap in the high brick wall at its lower end.
Here the alley stretched to both left and right in gloomy curves.
He could hear the beck-water rushing beneath the flags at his feet.
He could see the grassy wilderness forming a high bank beyond the old bulging stone wall that held back the encroaching hillside.
The branches of trees stretched out as if to peer over mill walls or rest themselves against the windowless rear walls of factory buildings.
They formed a canopy that robbed the area of light.
It was an eerie place, full of strange sounds and dank smells and things too frightful for a small boy to contemplate.
Frankie hesitated, his heart pounding against his ribs and his mouth suddenly dry.
He had entered Dead Man's Alley at its halfway point.
He was not sure if he should tip-toe slowly and cautiously along until he reached the lower grounds of Old Ashfield, or make a sudden dash for it in the hope of outrunning any danger that might be waiting to pounce.
Smallfry had told him that a body had recently been dumped at the tunnel entrance where the beck came into view for several yards before vanishing again into the darkness below ground.
It was the body of a young woman.
She had been brutally assaulted and strangled, her body mutilated and her throat slashed from ear to ear.
Council workmen checking for land subsidence found the horrible remains close to the tunnel's mouth and ran off in a panic to raise the alarm with their screams.
The killer was still at large, and the activities of hungry rats, as well as the most terrible injuries, meant that the body had never been identified.
Thoughts of butchers' knives and bloodied axes galvanized the boy into frantic action, but he had no sooner broken into a sprint along the alley than the sound of his own footsteps stopped him in his tracks.
He was wearing the leather shoes that had been only for best until they grew too small for his feet and now had to be worn for school.
They pinched his toes and rubbed the back of his heels and made a rat-tat sound on the stone flags that echoed through the spooky quiet to announce his presence.
He pushed Nurse's letter into the pocket of his pants and glanced nervously about him.
Then he sat down on the ground and quickly removed his shoes and socks.
He could run and jump and climb much better in bare feet, and he could do it all without making a sound.
For a moment he paused to massage the circulation back into his tightly compressed toes, then he was racing along the narrow alley as fast as his legs would carry him.
He ran with the blood pounding in his ears and the words of a half-forgotten rhyme spurring him on:
‘Up the airy mountain, down the rushy glen
We dare not go a-hunting for fear of little men.’
He ran without daring to look back.
Walls of red brick rose up on his left like sheer cliffs.
Walls of ancient stone with the hillside at their backs pressed in on his right; smaller and less sheer but still impossible for him to climb.
Then the alley curved sharply, first one way and then the other, and it seemed to Frankie that he would be trapped in that sinister place for ever.
Just as he began to fear that he was running for his life through a nightmare landscape that had no end, the ground suddenly opened to reveal the rushing waters of the beck and the section of crumbling stone wall on its other side.
Up ahead was the tunnel mouth and the outlet-pipe that carried waste down the hillside from the house.
At this point fear was his undoing.
Without pausing to measure the distance, he launched himself into a desperate leap that carried him right across the opening.
His bare feet connected with the smooth slime-covered surface of the conduit and slid away in different directions.
With a shoe clutched in each hand he was unable to make a grab for the rougher stones that might have saved him from disaster.
He toppled sideways with his arms flailing.
An expression of pure horror shaped itself on his features as he slithered helplessly down the slope and plunged headlong into the stinking waters of Mucky Beck.
THE OUTLET-PIPE saved him.
He managed to grab it with both hands as the force of the water, aided by his frantic struggles, propelled him into the yawning mouth of the tunnel.
He saw his own feet thrashing the water like dying fish, and his good leather shoes turning idly in the current as they rushed underground.
Spitting and spluttering, he braced his body across the pipe and clutched with both hands at everything within reach.
The wall close to the tunnel had crumbled, undermined by long years of dampness and pressure from protruding tree-roots.
Clumps of sturdy weed grew wherever they could take a firm hold.
It was to these that Frankie clung as he inched his way upward, making tortuously slow progress away from the slippery edges of the beck.
At last he succeeded in hauling himself over the boundary wall to the solid ground that marked the edge of Old Ashfield property.
There he collapsed in an exhausted heap, all strength drained from his limbs.
He was coughing violently, his stomach heaving against the foul taste of beck-water.
He tried to wipe the wetness from his mouth using the back of his hand, only to find his face smeared afresh with a foamy slime.
He spat the stuff from his lips, then began the long difficult scramble up the hillside, hauling himself from tree to tree by clinging to the network of roots growing above ground.
At the top of the hill he rested.
Nearby was the giant oak where Buddie had tied a heavy rope, knotted at its end, as a Tarzan swing for Frankie.
Two of the bigger boys from Thorpe Street had once tried to outswing him for a dare, but Barry Lock had turned chicken at the last minute and Valance Fraser, who fancied himself as the cock of the street, had managed only a partial swing that left him dangling by his arms in the dirt.
Frankie was an expert.
He hoisted the rope to the very top of the hill, leaped into space with his bare feet wedged against the big knot and soared like an eagle over the tree tops.
At its farthest point, that spot where he hovered high in the air before the rope changed direction, he knew that he was suspended sixty feet above Mucky Beck and the perimeter wall.
The danger of killing himself in a fall was very real, but this was a fear he had learned to master, even to enjoy.
It was the unseen , the quiet menace that defeated him.
He got to his feet and looked round.
He had reached the flatter section of land at the side of the house where vegetables had once grown in neatly fenced patches.
Towards the centre of that area were roses and rhododendrons that had been left to grow like weeds, and a willow tree whose branches reached right to the ground to create a shady den around its trunk.
Beyond the willow and the blackberry hedges was an untidy collection of huts and tin-roofed chicken-pens that Buddie had erected against the far wall.
As always, the big wooden gate in the distance was locked.
Frankie walked towards the front of Old Ashfield.
Overgrown hedges with concealed segments of barbed wire divided the hillside from the terraced gardens, so the front walkway could only be reached via its small wrought-iron gate.
From there the long straight pathway of decorative crazy paving led past the houses to a matching gate at the far end.
Beyond that, and hidden by a wide area of trees and bushes, was the group of squat brick houses where the pigs were kept.
Smallfry often spoke of Old Ashfield as a huge and stylish mansion built by a millionaire mill-owner at the turn of the century.
The man had enclosed his fine acres, including the steep hillside and the land where the slag-heap now stood, in high stone walls to keep the common people out.
Years later it was divided into three houses to accommodate a growing family, and now the middle house and its crumbling neighbours belonged to Smallfry and Buddie.
While other boys lived in cramped homes built back-to-back in cobbled streets, Frankie had his very own room in a mill-owner's mansion too grand for common folk.
He was barely inside the terrace gate when he heard the dog.
Barking ferociously, the big Great Dane rushed from the rear of the house, skidded around the corner and hurled herself at the gate with such force that it creaked under the impact.
Frankie backed away as the animal's snarling head and powerful front legs hooked themselves over the top of the gate and her back legs struggled for a foot-hold on the curves of wrought iron.
He knew from past experience that she was capable of leaping over to the terrace.
She barked in frustration.
Her black eyes were bright, her lips curled back in a fearsome snarl that dribbled saliva and left her tongue hanging.
As she dropped to the ground in a crouch, preparing to make another attempt at the obstacle, Frankie turned on his heels and raced for the house.
He heard Rosie scale the gate and gallop in pursuit.
She was bearing down on him like a bull in full charge when he jumped the wide steps and with a cry of terror threw himself against the front door of the house.
It jerked against the safety-chain, leaving a narrow gap through which he scrambled to safety.
He was followed by a head and a paw as the now enraged Rosie attempted to squeeze herself through the same opening.
Frankie scuttled away on all fours, his wet body skidding on the cold tiles and his breath coming in frightened little gasps.
Moments later the furious barks and snarls became howls of pain as Buddie's wellington boot connected with the dog's jaw.
Frankie got to his feet with difficulty.
He felt sick.
His knees were wobbling as if they might collapse under the strain of holding his body upright.
In the gloom of the hall, Buddie sniffed and curled his lip in distaste.
‘What the hell happened to you, boy?’
‘The beck…the…the beck…’
‘And just what were you doing down there when you should be in school?
Come on, boy, speak up.
Stand up straight and stop that bloody twitching.’
Frankie lifted his head and stiffened his knees in an effort to prevent them trembling.
His eyes blinked violently in a spasm that screwed up his face in rapid jerks.
When he tried to swallow the lump in his throat he found that it tasted of beck-water.
His words came out in a stammer.
‘I had no d-dinner money…
Teacher s-sent me home…
Nurse said…she said…she g-gave me a note…’
He fumbled in the pocket of his pants, withdrew the saturated letter and stared at it in dismay.
‘Where are your shoes and socks?’ his father demanded.
‘The t-tunnel…dropped…
I…f-fell…’
Buddie's face suddenly loomed over him, distorted and shimmering in the poor light.
The boy's knees buckled and the air left his lungs in a small sigh.
He was aware of nothing more until he opened his eyes some time later to find himself lying naked on a sheet of tarpaulin in the backyard.
The long tin bath that usually hung by one of its handles on the wall of the pantry had been placed on the level paving stones at the bottom end of the back yard.
A rubber hose-pipe snaked across the yard from the kitchen window, bringing hot water from the tap in the big sink.
The tin bath was half-filled with hot water into which had been poured the same perfumed green oil that Smallfry always added to her bath.
Buddie worked in grim silence.
First he scrubbed the boy from head to toe, using a piece of towelling and a bar of carbolic soap.
Then he hosed him down with warm water until all traces of the beck had been removed.
He smiled without humour when Frankie sucked at the soap-filled cloth in order to sluice the taste of rancid beck-water from his mouth.
He was sitting at the kitchen table, wearing one of Buddie's shirts and sipping cocoa from a large cup, when his nanny, Buddie's mam, arrived at the house.
His hair had been cut very short but only shaved around his ears and towards the back of his neck.
He was grateful for that.
The boys at school who had to have their heads shaved because of nits were always fair game for the rest of the school.
They suffered the kind of cruel teasing that drew them together, regardless of past differences, into closely knit little groups sharing a common stigma.
Frankie could imagine only one thing worse than being counted amongst the ‘baldies’.
He had always dreaded being singled out as the only boy in the school with nits, a solitary outcast with a shaved head.
His nanny had a cure for nits.
She plastered his head with a yellow liquid that stung like salt when it ran into his eyes.
Then she gave him a fine-toothed comb that would drag the dead lice and their eggs from his hair after the liquid had done its work.
A second application in two weeks, followed by another more careful combing, would completely rid him of the pests.
The comb was made of shiny steel and it was his to keep.
He determined to hide it away in his special tin and only use it on Sundays, and in secret, to keep his head free of the nits.
Nanny was humming softly to herself when she took one of the big tins from the shelf to make a meal of corned-beef slices and wedges of onion fried in batter.
Then she sat at the big table with only a pot of tea for herself while Frankie and his father cleared their plates in silence.
At last she set down her cup and looked pointedly at the clock on the kitchen wall.
‘Well?’ she asked.
‘Where is she?’
Buddie scowled.
‘Leave it alone, Ma,’ he said.
‘Huh!’
Nanny huffed the way she always did when she was annoyed at something.
‘I would have thought it was a perfectly reasonable question.
He might have been drowned, or savaged by that stupid animal.’
‘I've told you before, Ma, not in front of the boy.’
His scowl had deepened, and there was a note of warning his voice.
Frankie held his breath.
An argument was about to begin.
There would be trouble now, and it was all because of him.
He looked at his nanny with desperation in his eyes.
She patted his hand and smiled, then pursed her lips together as if they must be forced not to speak another word.
For a while there was silence around the big table.
Frankie's clothes had been hung to dry over the hot-water pipes at the side of the stove.
He saw Rosie stretch up, catch the damp pants between her teeth and slowly draw them down to her grimy sacking, intent on ripping them to shreds.
Nanny saw it, too.
She rose from her seat and swiped the dog a hefty blow across its snout.
Frankie giggled.
He liked his nanny.
He wanted to forget that she was sly and spiteful and malicious.
Smallfry said that she was a wicked old woman who pretended to be nice just to trick people into liking her and believing her lies.
She accused
Nanny of making up stories about her and saying bad things to get Frankie into trouble.
Smallfry hated liars.
He must always believe the things she told him about other people, especially those in his father's family, but Frankie sometimes found her instructions very hard to understand.
Nanny was good to him.
She often did things and said things that made him feel loved.
Nanny lived in a big house on the corner of Lansdowne Place, near the club and the post office and opposite the big church.
It was a boarding-house where foreigners and theatrical folk lived in upstairs rooms and the kitchens always smelt of stew and roasting meat, currant buns and freshly baked bread.
It was a very noisy place.
People sang or played musical instruments at all times of the day and night.
Sometimes they cleared all the furniture back against the walls so that they could practise their special dance routines, or held rowdy parties in each other 's rooms.
They sat on staircases to talk about poetry or politics, and many of them smoked long thin cigarettes rolled in dark brown paper and smelling of perfume.
Smallfry said the house was a hostel for whores and niggers and criminals on the run from the police.
She hated Nanny.
She called her a tart and a slut because she used to be married to a black man from South Carolina who sang basso at charity concerts all over Yorkshire and Lancashire and dropped dead at the Sun Hotel in Eccleshill in 1927.
All their children, including Buddie, were born with brown skin and crinkly hair and grew up to be entertainers, just like their father.
Nanny Fanny was also a Jewess, which caused a lot of bad feeling because Smallfry called herself a Catholic and so they believed in different pars of the Bible and were supposed to go to church on different days of the week.
Frankie did not understand how it could be so important which end of the Bible they preferred to read or which church they were both too busy to attend every Saturday and Sunday.
Frankie had often spoken to one of the very black men who lived at Nanny's house in Lansdowne Place.
He was a tall handsome man with huge white teeth; a magician who could conjure coins or playing-cards from inside the pockets and behind the ears of small boys.
He said his name was Christmas and he had worked his magic act in theatres and royal palaces all over the world.
He came from Ethiopia, and his skin was the colour of glistening wet coal except for the palms of his hands, which were sandy pale, and the whites of his eyes, which twinkled like sunshine on fresh clean snow.
There were some dancers from Morocco in two of the first-floor rooms and a lady on the top floor who had once sung in an opera-house in Paris, France.
Frankie liked Nanny's house because it was warm and brightly lit, but he was rarely allowed to go there alone because Smallfry knew things about it that he would never understand.
His other nanny lived in a small house on Park Road, close to St Luke's Hospital and not far from the park where Frankie sometimes played.
She was Smallfry's mam, but she never, ever came to visit them at Old Ashfield.
Her house smelt of beer and coal-tar soap, and the water in her taps was always hot.
In front of the fire she kept a dark tab rug that she had made herself from scraps of different-coloured material.
It was here that Frankie hid the black sharp-tasting seeds that he picked from her caraway cake.
This nanny worked in the big brewery down Manchester Road, capping the bottles and loading them into wooden crates.
She wore men's trousers under a wrap-around overall, heavy clogs on her feet and a scarf tied round her head like a turban to keep her hair in place.
Yeast from the beer beer in the brewery had caused a scaly rash to grow on her forearms and across the backs of her hands.
The scales were dry and silver, and fell like little clouds of snow when she had to scratch the skin because the cream from her doctor would not stop the itching.
She kept a pretty green budgerigar called Peter, who once dropped dead in his cage but came back to life when Nanny gave him a few drops of gin squeezed from a wad of cotton-wool.
She was very, very fond of her budgie.
She held it on her finger and sang to it and made little kissing noises with her lips that he tried to imitate.
She made Frankie smile because she believed the bird could say all sorts of real words, when in fact it did nothing but whistle and chirrup and squawk.
His thoughts were brought back to the present when Nanny Fanny gave him a sandwich of buttered bread thickly spread with strawberry jam.
She was watching him so intently as he bit into it that he began to wonder if Smallfry was right to fear she would poison him at the slightest opportunity.
On the rare occasions when he went with Buddie to the house in Lansdowne Place, he must always say he was not hungry and refuse any food she offered him, just in case it was poisoned.
He was often overcome with temptation when faced with such delights as chicken dumplings and ice-cream and treacle suet pudding, and so far he had been lucky.
He had not died or fallen ill, nor had Smallfry been made aware of his lapses.
Smallfry wanted to safeguard him against danger and jealousy.
She could only do that if he kept her secrets and obeyed her instructions to the letter.
Now he stared from the partly eaten jam sandwich to the homely face of his grandmother and wondered if she would dare to murder him in his own home with Buddie sitting right there at the same table.
Nanny smiled.
It made her face crease all over and her dark eyes twinkle.
She was looking at him the way his other nanny looked at her budgie.
She had a pleasant untidy face and chubby warm hands that were nice to touch.
He knew he ought to be afraid of her, yet he found himself returning her smile with an easy grin and enjoying his jam sandwich to the very last crumb.
‘COME OVER HERE, Frankie.
I want you to touch Rosie's head.’
The boy froze.
Buddie was sitting by the fire.
He had picked up one of the pups and examined it roughly before replacing it in the cardboard box with the others.
Frankie had hovered in the background, eager to cuddle the puppy but not daring to approach the bigger dogs.
Now he shrank inside as a wave of apprehension swept over him.
He glanced at his nanny for support.
She was stitching the holes Rosie had managed to rip in the seat of his pants in the few seconds they were in her possession.
She clicked her tongue and shook her head but did not look up from her work when Buddie spoke again.
‘I said, come over here, boy.
It's time you learned how to be around Rosie without making her mad.’
He extended his arm and snapped his fingers impatiently.
‘Do as you're told.
Come here.’
Motionless on his stool, Frankie stared first at Buddie's dark profile, then at the huge brown and black body curled in the corner.
She was watching him.
He could see the longer teeth at the sides of her mouth and the folds of wet black skin that at any moment would draw back in a threatening snarl.
His hear began to pound against his ribs, and his hands trembled.
He could not touch Rosie.
She would tear him to pieces.
She would bite off all his fingers and eat them, the way Smallfry said she would if ever he was caught stealing.
With Buddie's orders ringing in his ears, he stood his ground and made not the slightest move to obey.
Although he feared his father's anger, he was unable to summon the courage to move closer to where the dogs were tied.
Buddie suddenly reached behind him with one hand, grabbed Frankie by the sleeve and yanked him from his seat at the table.
The stool on which the boy had been sitting tipped over and hit the floor with a loud crash.
Rosie immediately leapt to her feet, growling.
‘Down ,’ Buddie said.
‘Get down , girl.
Take it easy.
Come on, Frankie, touch her head.’
‘No…
I can't…’
Frankie pulled back against the hand that gripped him.
He felt himself yanked across the room and flung across his father's legs, his body protected while his outstretched hand dangled like bait in the dog's face.
He struggled and pleaded, curling his exposed fingers into a fist that strained against the bigger, stronger fingers encircling his wrist.
‘No…p-please, Buddie…no…’
‘Don't be a bloody coward, boy.
She won't bite you.’
‘She will…she will…’
‘No, she won't.
Not while I'm here.
Just keep still and don't let her think you're scared.
Quiet .
Get down , Rosie.
Come on, Frankie.
That's it.
Let her sniff your hand.’
‘No…n-no, Buddie…no…’
‘Stop snivelling.
Quiet , Rosie.’
‘No…no…no…’
‘Touch the bloody dog, damn you.’
‘No…
Nanny…
Nanny…
Nanny…’
‘Oh, for heaven's sake…’
Suddenly exasperated, Buddie raised his free hand and brought it down in a resounding slap on the boy's buttocks.
Frankie screamed.
The heavy bulldog threw itself against its chain, barking and snapping.
The Great Dane barked once and sank her teeth into the boy's dangling hand.
Frankie screamed again.
With a roar of rage, Buddie leaped from his chair, kicked the bulldog, struck Rosie a back-handed blow and shoved Frankie aside all in the same movement.
Released at last, the boy scuttled crab-wise across the room, his injured hand hugged to his chest as a double row of livid bruises began to form on his skin.
He scrambled to his feet and made a dash for the door, skidding to a halt only inches short of the now frantic bulldog.
In the bedlam of yelling and barking he danced from one foot to the other in a brief breathless panic.
Then he turned and flung himself into his nanny's arms.
The uproar in the kitchen continued for some time while Nanny pressed his face against her coat and added her own voice to the tumult.
His injured hand was hot and throbbing.
He could hear Buddie yelling at the top of his voice as he thrashed the dogs, and the rattle of chains as Rosie and Lady leaped about, barking and snarling in confused excitement.
‘It's time you got rid of that lunatic Great Dane,’ Nanny shouted above the din.
‘Get rid of her before she does some real damage.’
‘Mind your own damn business, woman,’ Buddie yelled back.
‘Look at your son's hand.
Look at it.’
In her anger she grabbed Frankie's wrist and thrust out his hand so violently that his arm jarred against his shoulder and sent a searing pain through his upper body.
The boy was too shocked and frightened to speak.
Smallfry always threatened to lock him in the toolshed with Rosie if ever he dared tell her secrets to anyone else.
Now he knew that nobody, not even Buddie, would be able to save him from Rosie's deadly teeth.
As he had always suspected, she was just waiting and watching for an opportunity to rip him to pieces.
His fear of the big dog suddenly increased beyond any fear he had ever known.
At last Buddie managed to beat the protesting Rosie into submission.
She cringed in her corner, whining and docile.
Lady followed her example rather than suffer at the hands of her infuriated master.
Buddie snatched up Frankie's hand, prodded the swelling and squeezed the purple bruises in his search for a break in the skin.
Then he kneaded the small hand in his big fists, searching for broken bones.
Fright and the pain of the examination dried Frankie's mouth, turned his legs to jelly and clouded his vision.
‘That was your own damn stupid fault,’ Buddie told him.
‘Why the hell must you always make a fuss?
Why do you panic like a silly girl every time something scares you?
Rosie only bites you because you make her so nervous.
And stop that damn blinking and twitching when I'm talking to you, boy.
Stop it .’
He raised his hand as if to strike Frankie, who instinctively recoiled into the rough safety of his nanny s overcoat.
‘Leave the boy alone,’ Nanny snapped.
‘Save your rotten temper tantrums for those who deserve them.
You can't blame Frankie for what happened.
It was all your fault, you bloody idiot.
You shouldn't have done that to him.
No wonder he twitches.
Between you and the dogs and that stupid bitch you're married to, he's frightened to death most of the time.’
‘Watch your tongue, woman.
Don't you dare slander my wife.’
‘Slander?
Slander ?
It would be easier to slander the Devil himself.’
‘Cut it out, Ma.
I'm warning you…’
Frankie wriggled free so that he could remove himself from the confrontation.
They were cross with each other because of him, and now Nanny was saying bad things about Smallfry that would make Buddie very, very angry.
Just then he saw a familiar shape pass the window on its way to the rear door, heard the tap-tapping of high-heeled shoes on the flags outside.
The door in the corner opened, and Smallfry swept into the room wearing a glossy black costume with white fur trims and decorated combs in her hair.
She dismissed Frankie with a withering stare that warned him to remain silent.
‘What's going on?’ she demanded.
Her eyes narrowed into hostile slits as she met the cold gaze of her mother-in-law.
‘And what is that woman doing in my home?’
‘Taking care of your son while you're out gallivanting, as usual,’ Nanny replied.
She folded her arms across her stout chest and pursed her lips.
‘Well?
And just where was Madam when little Frankie was sent home from school?’
Smallfry peeled off her gloves and moved slowly and elegantly across the kitchen.
She smoothed her hair with both hands, peering at her reflection in the mirror near the sink.
She seemed totally unconcerned by the crackling tension in the atmosphere.
‘Well?’
Nanny demanded.
‘Well?’
She turned to Buddie and tightened her lips into a thin angry line.
‘Ask her.
Go on, ask her where she's been all afternoon, dressed up like a tart and missing for bloody hours.
She does nothing .
Look at this place.
It's filthy.
Why can't you make her stay at home like any decent wife and mother?’
‘Now, you keep out of this, Ma,’ Buddie warned.
‘Like hell I will.
I want to know where she's been and what she's been doing.’
Smallfry turned from the mirror with a brilliant smile.
Her gaze swept over her mother-in-law from head to toe and back again, and her expression was one of open contempt.
‘Where I go in my free time is none of your business, you interfering old cow.’
‘What?
Did you hear what she called me?
I will not be spoken to like that…’
‘Then get back to your own house and stop pushing your nose in where it isn't wanted,’ Smallfry hissed.
‘Go to your room, Frankie.’
He jumped nervously at the sound of his own name.
Buddie had taken out his little silver tin and was in the process of rolling one of those thin straggly cigarettes that flared when lit and vanished after only a few puffs.
Nanny's face had changed colour, and her eyes bulged.
She looked as if she might explode at any moment.
Smallfry was smiling sweetly as she reached for Frankie's sleeve and eased him in the direction of the door.
Beneath the fabric of his borrowed shirt, her fingers trapped and twisted his skin in a burning pinch that told him she intended to deal with him later.
The instant she released him, he turned on his heels and fled.
On the small landing at the top of the main staircase he stopped to examine his reflection in the mirror.
Light from the bathroom filled the area with pale shadows and gave the damaged patches in the mirror an eerie silvery glow.
Dressed in his father's shirt, his mop of black hair savagely pruned and his skin scrubbed and glowing, he looked like a thin bewildered stranger trapped within the glass.
He cradled his injured left hand in his right palm.
He could feel the hotness of inflamed flesh and the steady throbbing of a dozen tooth-sized bruises.
His father's smell seemed to be impregnated in the large cotton shirt that covered him from neck to calf.
It bore no traces of pig-swill or motor oil or animal hair.
It was the man's own smell, and Frankie would have recognized it anywhere.
He moved away from the mirror, seated himself a little way from the top of the main staircase and wrapped the tails of the shirt around his legs.
It was cold on the stairs.
Even in summer, when the grounds and gardens were so warm that Frankie could lie stark naked in the long grass, the house was dark and uncomfortably cold, especially on the big stairs.
He leaned on the banister.
He was sitting directly above the cellar door, close enough to the kitchen door to hear their angry words.
By now Smallfry was using her other voice, the one that screeched shrilly and somehow managed to transform her from a beautiful movie-star into something savage and frightening.
Nanny was also shouting.
He could tell she was upset by the words she used: bad words he had often heard from the men who worked with the pigs or came to the house to drink with Buddie in the music-room.
Even the dogs were quiet while the heated quarrel raged around them.
Frankie heard his name mentioned several times and knew he would be punished when the row was over.
It was all his fault.
If only he had not caught nits and been sent home from school, fallen in the beck, lost his shoes, been attacked by Rosie or injured his hand just because he was too cowardly to follow Buddie's instructions.
‘How dare you accuse me of neglecting my son.’
Smallfry's voice rose to a scream.
‘You foul-mouthed, trouble-making old Witch.
How dare you spread such vicious lies.’
‘That's enough,’ Buddie bellowed.
‘That's enough .’
‘You're a tart,’ Nanny yelled.
‘And you're a spineless little shit, Buddie, if you can't see what's going on and keep your own wife under control.
That little boy is neglected, and all you care about is seeing Madam, here, dressed up in all her bloody finery.’
‘My son is not neglected.
We have a book full of expensive photographs to prove how loved and well cared for he is.
You're a liar, old woman, a bloody liar .’
Frankie nodded his head in the dim light on the stairs.
He could not understand why Nanny was suddenly bent on making the worst kind of trouble for him.
Neglected children were taken away and locked up in Homes where they were made to eat worms.
Smallfry had told him so.
Neglected children were sent to special schools and never allowed to see their mothers or fathers or nannies again for the rest of their lives.
It must be true that Nanny was a liar and a trouble-maker because he could hear her saying all those terrible things that might cause Frankie to be taken away for ever.
It made him feel better when he heard Smallfry mention the book, the special album in which they kept all the photographs of him wearing his best clothes and doing nice things.
There was a big picture of him dressed in a fancy cowboy suit and Stetson hat, riding the pony Buddie had bought from a circus because it wouldn't allow the big men to ride on its back.
There were lots of smaller snapshots of him sitting astride Trigger, or propped on cushions behind the steering-wheel of Buddie's truck, or standing in the garden in his very smartest clothes.
He could also be seen riding on Buddie's back with a shiny red apple in each hand, and again walking beside Smallfry on the day she wore the big yellow roses in her hair.
The pictures were proof that Frankie was not neglected.
He was not certain of the exact meaning of the word, but he knew without doubt that it could not possibly be applied to him.
The photographs in the album were absolute proof of that.
He leaped to his feet as the kitchen door suddenly opened, then crept backwards until he was concealed in the darker shadows beyond the turn of the banister.
Smallfry looked up into the darkness.
She was smiling again, as if all the unpleasantness in the kitchen had meant nothing to her.
‘Frankie darling, would you like to come downstairs and say goodbye to your grandmother?’
He recognized the tone of her voice and the particular expression on her face.
Her hair looked very red in the bright light from the kitchen, and her ear-rings twinkled each time she moved her head.
She seemed to stare directly into his face as he crouched in the shadows on the half-landing.
He knew that smile.
It told him not to move.
‘Come along now, Frankie.
Don't you love your grandmother enough to come downstairs and give her a little goodbye kiss?’
Frankie chewed his lower lip and frowned.
He would never dare openly to disobey Smallfry, but he had learned to listen for every shift in her voice-tone and read for himself the most subtle variation in her smile.
She was asking him to come downstairs.
She was also telling him to stay where he was.
As she turned away with a heavy sigh, he heard her say, almost sadly: ‘The boy knows his own mind.
I can hardly force him to kiss his grandmother when he so obviously doesn't wish to.’
The back door closed with a slam, and Frankie guessed that Nanny had left the house.
He wondered why she had turned against him after cooking him such a nice meal and being so kind to him while Smallfry was away.
Taking the oddly shaped metal comb from the pocket of his shirt, he ran it through the short oily hair on top of his head.
He waited on the cold landing for a long time, nursing his throbbing hand, anticipating the moment when he must face his parents and the serious punishment that was surely due to him.
IT WAS LATE IN THE EVENING when she called him downstairs.
By then he was standing behind the blackout blanket in his room, a comic spread out on the window-ledge where remnants of fading sunshine fell in brassy yellow stains.
Because the room was so cold he had pulled on his bomber jacket over his father's shirt.
On his feet were a pair of odd socks that were holed at the toes.
His door was partly open.
Even as he studied the pages of his comic, his ears and senses were alert to the smallest sounds coming from the rest of the house.
He would know in an instant if the Bogeyman made a move, or if anyone left the kitchen by the doorway into the hall.
At the first sign of activity on the ground floor, he pulled off his jacket and socks, hid them in a corner and positioned himself at the bedroom door, ready to make a dash for the kitchen.
He was downstairs before she could call his name a second time.
She had placed the worm-cake on one of her prettiest saucers.
It covered the space in its centre where the cup was meant to sit: a thick ugly thing against the delicate pink and white porcelain.
Half the size of his palm, the worm-cake was made of bitter chocolate whose only hint of sweetness was in the sparse sprinkling of sugar on its surface.
Mixed with the chocolate was a horrible-tasting substance designed to purge the impurities from a boy's body by wringing out his insides in dreadful spasms.
He recognized Nurse's letter lying amongst the litter on the sideboard.
Someone had dried it out, unfolded and smoothed it until it resembled a sheet of grubby brown parchment.
Nurse had said nothing to him about worms.
He did not know if she had written it down in the letter, or if the cake was to be his punishment for all the bad things he had done.
Already his stomach heaved at the prospect of swallowing and digesting the hateful thing.
A long time ago, Frankie had tried to give one of the worm-cakes to Rosie while Smallfry's back was turned.
The big dog had snapped it from his fingers eagerly enough, but after rolling it around in her mouth a few times she spat it to the floor and pawed at it, growling and sniffing her distaste.
Infuriated by what she called the actions of a wicked little sneak, Smallfry had forced him to eat every last crumb of the cake without allowing him to clean the dirt and animal saliva from its surface.
He had feared he might choke when she stuffed chunks of it into his mouth and held him down, her hand sealing his lips, until he swallowed.
Only her own determination had prevented him from vomiting it back.
He had gagged for hours following the ordeal, convinced that one of the dog's hairs had lodged itself at the very back of his throat where his fingers were unable to reach.
Now he sat at the kitchen table with the worm-cake before him and the taste of nausea already on his tongue.
He glanced at her out of the corner of his eye, wondering if he dare ask for water to help wash the cake down.
She was sitting before a mirror that was propped against a large pan on the stove.
Her hair was newly brushed and hanging loose around her shoulders.
In the heat of the kitchen she had removed her costume jacket and hung it over the back of a nearby chair.
Now she was wearing only a tight white brassière above her skirt.
It seemed almost too small to contain the swelling plumpness of her upper body.
It crushed and lifted her breasts to create the deep fleshy cleavage he always tried so hard not to stare into.
In the gap between the brassière and the pinched waistband of her skirt, her flesh bulged in a pale soft band.
From time to time she dipped her fingertips into a glass jar and withdrew them laden with cream which she smoothed into her face and neck in lazy strokes.
Still peering from the corner of his eye, Frankie stared at her breasts for a long time before he realized with a jolt that she was observing him through the mirror.
He snatched up the worm-cake and bit into it, forcing the bitter chocolate past the awful gagging in his throat.
He was struggling with his second mouthful when Buddie came to his assistance.
The man burst into the kitchen carrying a great mound of kindling which he dumped in a pile by the door.
He hung his heavy axe and rubber-handled flashlight on nails hammered into the edge of a high shelf, then shrugged his jacket from his shoulders and left it to lie where it fell.
His boots hit the linoleum close to the door with a clatter.
Although both dogs had grown quiet and drowsy in the stuffy room, they immediately struggled to their feet with a rattle of chains and a whined greeting.
Even when the noise of his entry had subsided, his very presence seemed to alter the atmosphere in the room in some way.
At the sink he filled a cup with cold water, drank it down in one gulp, refilled it and handed it to Frankie without comment.
He lifted the boy's hand into his rough dry palm and poked at the pattern of bruises on both sides, scowling as he prodded each mark in turn.
The skin was discoloured and quite swollen, but the burning sensation had eased and his whole hand no longer throbbed with the same intense pain.
The boy looked up into his father's dark glowering face and tried his best to smile.
He felt his efforts twisted into a grimace by the soreness in his hand and the awful taste of the worm-cake in his mouth.
‘You shouldn't be sitting around only half-dressed.
Not in front of the boy.’
Buddie kicked an upright chair into a more suitable position and reached for his guitar.
Carefully, almost lovingly, he pulled the instrument across his knees and began to pluck at the strings with a plectrum fashioned from tortoise-shell.
It made a sweet clear sound in the quiet room.
He seemed not to notice that his comment had met with no response.
Smallfry paid him no attention.
Instead she lifted her hair with both hands, smoothing it up from the nape of her neck and piling it on top of her head in a soft copper mound.
The movement brought her breasts into clearer view, pushing them upwards and outwards against the restrictions of her tight brassière.
Stealing a furtive glance into the mirror, Frankie was shocked to see another face, another pair of eyes in the glass.
He looked quickly at the window behind his father's back and spotted Tom Fish outside in the yard.
The grinning Irishman caught his eye, raised one massive fist in a threatening gesture, then pressed his finger to his lips for silence.
Frankie felt his face redden and his cheeks begin to burn all the way up to his scalp.
Smallfry continued to pose before the mirror, smiling and pouting her lips in film-star kisses to the man in the yard while Buddie picked out an intricate melody on his guitar.
Trapped like a guilty thing between them, Frankie lowered his head and took another bite from his worm-cake.
She had given him some newspaper torn into squares and a glass of dark-brown liquid that tasted like spanish water.
He had managed to fall asleep in spite of the lingering taste of the worm-cake in his mouth.
It was pitch-dark and the house was very quiet when the first effects of the treatment woke him.
He found his belly seething and bubbling with movements he could feel quite clearly beneath his hands.
Then the griping pains stared, and soon he was running along the unlit landing in desperate need of the lavatory.
After countless such visits he was afraid to look into the bowl in case something of himself had been lost in his body's writhing struggles to empty itself.
Pain and nausea swept over him in waves that left him hot and sticky and weak at the knees.
For a while he thought he must be dying, that his nanny had managed to poison him after all.
He could see his reflection, turned gaunt and ashen, in the fragment of mirror propped against the lavatory window.
The lamp outside in the yard bathed him in grey light, leaving his eyes in deep shadow so that his face resembled that of a corpse.
It reminded him of the zombies he had seen in the horror film at the Empire.
The sight of his own face scared him.
On several occasions he left the bathroom feeling weak and drained, only to stop on the dark landing at the onset of another wave of nausea.
Then, clutching his belly with both hands and sucking his buttocks tightly together, he made one more panic-stricken dash for the little cubicle.
His squares of newspaper were soon used up.
Exhausted, he sat down on one of the steps leading from the bathroom and leaned his brow against the cool wall.
He had returned his father's shirt and now wore his own vest, washed in the tin bath and dried over the kitchen pipes.
Even in that scant garment he was very hot and sweaty.
He knew he would have to go in search of extra newspaper before the pains came again, but first he must rest and regain his strength after his exertions in the bathroom.
He was staring into the black well of the stairs when he heard the noises.
They were soft scratchings or shufflings, like the sounds made by an animal as it sniffed about in search of food.
Something was moving around in the darkness.
The hairs on the back of his neck suddenly prickled and stood on end.
The noises were coming from behind the dark brown door on the first-floor landing.
The Bogeyman was awake.
Frankie stared towards the shorter flight of steps leading to the landing.
He intended to make a dash for his room and wedge a broken chair-leg under the door to keep the monster out.
Smallfry had forgotten to warn him because he had done so many bad things and caused a lot of trouble.
Either by accident or as punishment for his sins, she had left him to the mercy of the Bogeyman.
The turn of a key in the lock of the brown door stopped him in his tracks.
There was no time for him to get up the steps and past the door before it opened and deadly talons reached for him in the darkness.
With a choked little cry he jumped backwards, turned and plunged into the unseen, gripping the banister and screwing his eyes tightly closed as he ran.
He swung himself around the turn at the bottom of the stairs and raced blindly along the lower corridor.
He reached the kitchen door just as a bright rectangle of light slowly spread across the upstairs wall.
The should of slow labouring footsteps could be heard moving along the first-floor landing as the boy threw himself into the kitchen and slammed the door behind him.
The room was faintly illuminated by the glow from the night-burning stove.
Rosie's shadow loomed monstrously across the ceiling as she lumbered to her feet with a threatening growl.
The bulldog twitched and sniffed the air, started to rise but thought better of it and flopped down with her head on her paws.
The snorting sounds coming from her flattened nose were a half-hearted warning to the boy.
In the other alcove Rosie barked once.
She was straining against her chain with her lips curled over her teeth and her ears pinned back.
It seemed to Frankie that she and her shadow filled the entire room.
He knew he was safe so long as he remained in the kitchen.
Smallfry had told him so.
The Bogeyman would never dare enter the kitchen.
He edged his way to the gap between the gas-cooker and the wall, located the stack of newspapers and pulled a full one from underneath so that nobody would notice the pile had been disturbed.
Then he ventured into the middle kitchen where most of the food was kept.
He was not hungry.
His stomach rebelled at the mere thought of food, but he knew he must not miss this golden opportunity to put something by for another day.
He was looking for the bowl of eggs he had seen earlier.
A small window on to the yard offered sufficient light for him to make out the cheese and butter and sacks of sugar and rice.
He moved into the farthest room, which had a tiny square of window set in its far wall and overlooking the rear driveway.
It was a small dark place with a dank smell, the coolest of the three rooms and often used for stacking the carcasses of rabbits, chickens and turkeys.
Frankie groped around on the shelves until his fingers encountered a deep plate.
He reached in with both hands, only to shrink back in horror when he encountered something cold and clammy beneath his hand.
The plate contained pigs' trotters.
His stomach heaved as he wiped his fingers down his vest.
Pigs' trotters made him sick.
They would be cooked into a greasy stew with vegetables and served up looking exactly as they did when they were raw: pale and nauseatingly realistic, with the toes and claws intact.
He would be forced to eat what was placed before him because pigs' trotters were good for him and would help him to grow.
The lamp outside in the yard suddenly went out, plunging the dimly lit rooms into total darkness.
Through the tiny back window Frankie saw shadows moving along the rear drive.
There were men out there, workmen driving animals and carrying torches whose beams were aimed at the ground.
Frankie forgot the eggs and hurriedly retraced his steps.
Through the middle kitchen window he could just make out the open gate, the wooden ramp covering the steps and the first huge saddle-back sow ambling down into the yard.
The pigs were being driven towards the back door.
Frankie dashed into the main kitchen and passed the window in a stoop to avoid being seen by the men outside.
As he skirted the room to avoid the dogs, Rosie leaped against her chain and Lady hauled herself to her feet to join in the excitement.
The outside door opened and a man entered the house just as Frankie slipped through the other door into the dark corridor beyond.
He had taken only a few hasty steps when he heard the tread of feet on the wooden steps above his head.
The Bogeyman.
He shrank against the wall, felt himself embraced by coats hung one atop the other in untidy layers.
Trapped between twin terrors, he allowed his body to sink within the folds of jackets and overcoats.
One of his feet found its way into an enormous wellington boot.
The other concealed itself in a discarded leather shoe.
In seconds he was completely hidden, his hear pounding against his ribs and the fingers of his uninjured hand still grasping his precious newspaper.
In an almost soundless flurry of activity, the cellar door was opened and the light switched on to reveal the ramped steps.
With little more than a few snorts and grunts, the lumbering animals were coaxed down the ramp.
These were not the short-legged all-white animals that Buddie kept in his pigsties over by the disused cinder-heap.
These pigs were taller and heavier, with a saddle of black colouring thrown across their backs and big metal clips attached to their ears.
They did not squeal and race about in panic, but allowed themselves to be driven through the house and down the steep ramp to the underground slaughter-house without protest.
Concealed amongst the coats, Frankie listened to the grunts of the animals and the low harsh voices of the men.
The last pig was struggling to keep its footing on the ramp when the door to the best room opened and Smallfry stepped into the hall.
She was wearing something pink and delicate that floated around her body when she moved.
The fabric was so fine that she appeared to be naked in the bright light.
At least four of the men were watching her as she stood in the hall, yawning prettily and obviously bewildered by the disturbance.
Irish Tom detached himself from the group of workmen and swaggered, grinning, along the corridor.
‘What is it?’
Smallfry asked.
‘What's happening?’
‘Go back to bed, love.
You'll be catching your death of cold out here in the hall wearing nothing but that little scrap of lace.
Either that, or you'll be giving these dirty-minded men a lot of wicked ideas.’
‘Oh, but I thought…
It was the noise…
It frightened me.’
Tom Fish looked back over his shoulder with a grin and a wink for his friends as his hand slid down the curve of her back to rest on the plump roundness of her buttocks.
Gripping her in this coarse familiar fashion, he steered her into the room and closed the door with a gentle click behind him.
The crude comments and laughter of the other men were cut short by a yelled command from the cellar.
When Irish Tom re-emerged from the best room some minutes later, he was strutting like a peacock and rubbing the front of his pants in a suggestive manner.
Frankie felt his face redden and his hands clench themselves into fists.
He could see Tom Fish standing like a huge black silhouette in the doorway, and he was tempted to rush forward and shove him head-first into the cellar below.
Instead he tensed his whole body and tried to swallow the dryness in his throat.
His belly was beginning to pull itself into painful spasms.
He needed to go to the lavatory.
When at last he dared to creep from his hiding-place and move on tip-toe up the dark stairs, he had counted to 372 and managed to convince himself that any fate was preferable to having an accident down there amongst the coats.
The upper rooms were silent when he finally went to his own room, but before getting into bed he pushed his wedge of broken chair-leg under the door to keep the Bogeyman out.
HE WAS NOT ALLOWED to go to school again until Thursday morning, by which time the missing button had been replaced on the collar of his shirt and he was wearing a pair of smart new shoes of polished black leather and knee-length grey socks with a dark red band around their tops.
Smallfry walked with him all the way to the playground, where the other children bunched together in little groups to stare at the absentee and his beautiful mother.
She looked different.
Her hair was done in pig-tails that hung over her shoulders and were tied at the bottom with satin ribbon.
She was wearing a white dress with big navy-blue spots and a tight white belt.
Its skirt was so full that the slightest movement caused it to swirl and lift about her legs.
Even her make-up was different.
Today it made her look pale and tired.
She had dabbed powder over her lipstick to rob it of its bright crimson lustre, and she had forgotten the little pink patches of rouge that gave her cheeks their rosy healthy glow.
He had watched her apply a smear of eye-black below her lower lashes, then dust it with the palest face-powder until her eyes appeared extra large and dark-rimmed.
When Teacher came out and rang his bell for the children to line up in neat rows, she held Frankie back so that he was the last to obey the signal.
She smiled down at him in a funny way, stroked his head, touched his cheek with the back of her fingers.
When she bent her head towards his with her lips softly pouted, she came so close that for one brief moment he thought she might actually kiss his forehead.
‘Run along, my dear,’ she murmured.
‘Run along.’
Teacher was watching from the doorway when Frankie, the last child in his line, turned in time to see his mam move away from the school gate.
Her hand fluttered in a small wave.
She seemed to be limping very slightly, something he had failed to notice when they walked to school together.
To his complete amazement, Frankie found himself something of a minor celebrity among the children of St Andrew's.
Three of the boys in his class were sporing recently shaved heads as pale and as smooth as newly laid eggs.
One of the girls, the plump one with the freckles and the missing front tooth, looked very plain and dowdy now that she had lost all her pretty blonde curls.
What remained of her hair had been clipped and plastered close to her head in a most unflattering style.
She was sitting apart from those who had once been her friends, her eyes downcast and her cheeks blazing.
Nobody wanted to share a desk with the only girl in the class with nits in her head.
Wally Watmough was the loud-mouthed fat boy who had once beaten Frankie almost senseless in a fist-fight behind the old air-raid shelter in a corner of the boys' playground.
The quarrel had started over something as petty as who could spit furthest after eating half a ginger biscuit.
Then Wally Watmough had called Frankie's mam a gypsy-woman and his dad a little black man, and the smaller boy, enraged, had attacked him without thought for the consequences.
For his pains he received a black eye, a bloodied nose, a split lip, two skinned knees, several bruised ribs and four strokes of the cane on each hand for fighting on school premises.
Now Wally Watmough made room at his desk for Frankie to sit beside him.
Any boy who dared to venture down the Mucky Beck alone was deserving of great respect, even if he had fallen into the water and almost drowned.
A story was circulating around school that Frankie's mother had been very ill and one of his aunts was responsible for him having nits in his head and a dirty body, torn pumps, bitten nails and no dinner money.
Smallfry had visited the school while Frankie was away.
Everyone had seen her arrive during morning assembly, her hair hanging loose as she leaned on a heavy walking-stick for support.
She had swooned in the main hall and had needed to be helped to the headmaster's office and given water to drink and a damp cloth to cool her brow.
Mr Sunderland himself had driven her home in his car, and she had begged him to leave her at the gate so as not to alarm her family.
Everyone said she must have struggled from her sick-bed the moment she realized that the aunt left in charge during her illness had sadly neglected her little boy.
Alan Duffy had overheard Mr Simmons and Miss Craven talking about Frankie's father, who was a real-life American who had been in the Army and the merchant navy and was now a farmer who posed at the School of Art and played guitar in a popular local dance-band.
They all knew about the big house in its own grounds and the genuine Yankee jeep his father drove.
Someone even remembered seeing the famous photograph of Frankie on Trigger, his circus pony.
Now everyone wanted to know him.
His bruised hand was greatly admired and his escapade in Mucky Beck accepted as a terrific adventure.
From being just another kid with nits in his head, the smallest in his class and the only one in the whole school whose skin was a swarthy brown, he suddenly found himself the most popular boy around.
‘You must inform me if your mother becomes ill again.
I had absolutely no idea things had become so difficult for her.
She is a brave woman…a brave and very charming woman.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Mr Sunderland scrutinized Frankie through narrowed eyes, his pursed expression implying that the brave and charming woman of his acquaintance deserved something better than the shabby little boy standing before him.
He made tut-tutting sounds of disapproval through his teeth and fingered the fraying cuffs of his jacket.
His dark pin-striped woollen suit was his uniform, the mute witness to countless terms dutifully served within the sombre walls of St Andrew's Junior School, Listerhills.
The suit bore the wounds and scars of a lifetime's responsibilities in its faded knees and elbows, its sagging seat and greasy tired lapels.
‘You must be good to your mother, Frankie,’ he said now, using the stern long-suffering voice reserved for such interviews as this.
‘And never forget that mothers are very precious people.
We must always take special care of them.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘And you must be grateful to her for everything she does, and for all the sacrifices she must make on your behalf.
Remember that nothing in this world breaks a mother's hear like the raising of an ungrateful child.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘And stay away from the beck.
It's the stick for you, my lad, if you ever go down there again.
Is that clear?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Right.
Off you go, and don't let me hear any bad report of you in the future.’
‘Yes, sir…
I mean…no, sir.’
Frankie left the headmaster's study feeling vaguely troubled.
Something was gnawing at the back of his mind.
He felt that everything had changed during his brief absence from school.
Even the teachers were being nice to him, and he did not understand why.
It was late in the afternoon, during double English, that the answer came to him like a bolt out of the blue.
Smallfry was sick.
She was sick like the pretty lady in the film who went bravely on until she died all alone in her bed rather than compel her beloved family to share her pain.
That must be the answer.
His mam was dying of some rare disease which no doctor could cure and always, but always, proved fatal.
He ran all the way home after school.
At Brooke Parker's there were men reversing a lorry against the bed of concrete that sloped down from the top of Thorpe Street to the wide loading-doors.
He did not stop to watch the unloading.
Instead he ran down the side of the building, past the high wall of its rear yard and through the gate leading to Old Ashfield.
The Great Bane was tied up in the yard.
Frankie peered around the angle of the wall, trying to measure the length of her chain before judging it safe to enter by the back door.
She was lying in the mouth of the great arched chamber Buddie used as a tool-shed.
Set between the shuttered window of the best room and the lower edge of the yard wall, the chamber sank back into the building like a huge stone tunnel.
Inside on the left was a recessed door, now boarded and bolted, that once gave access to the best room.
A similar door on the right was meant to serve the end house.
The ground inside the arch was cobbled, and there were strangely shaped metal fittings set here and there into the walls.
Buddie believed the original owner had kept his riding-carriage there, and the fittings were designed to house horse leathers and travelling gear, but Frankie was not so sure.
He did not see why anyone, even a wealthy mill-owner, would want to drive a horse and carriage backwards down such a steeply sloping yard when he could just as easily leave it standing in the driveway.
Rosie had not noticed him.
She was chewing savagely on something, making nasal snarling sounds as she ripped the thing apart with her sharp teeth.
Frankie narrowed his eyes and squinted at the bloody object lying between her powerful front paws.
It was brown and furry, like one of the big rats from the beck.
He was still trying to identify it when he suddenly felt himself scooped from the ground and hoisted into the air in a wide arc.
‘Whoopee…
Now, here's a fine young fellow if ever I saw one.
In fact he's such a tall strapping chap that he calls his mam Smallfry .
Isn't that so, Mr Big Man?’
Irish Tom's voice boomed with mirth and mockery below him as the airborne child flailed the air with his arms and legs.
Rough hands gripped him by his crotch and the back of his neck, holding him aloft like a defenceless struggling insect tipped on to its back.
‘Smallfry , indeed,’ said another voice.
‘And himself such a skinny little thing.
Now, there's a real case of the stew-pan calling the kettle Grimy-arse.’
He could see very little, but the sound of their laughter told him a whole group of workmen had crept up on him while he was hugging the yard wall, fearful of the big Great Dane.
Tom Fish held him at arm's length over his head, spun him this way and that until the sky turned sickeningly above him.
‘Too high and mighty, he is, to call her ‘Mam’, the way he should.
Isn't that so, whelp?’
‘Let me go.
Put me down, you…you…’
‘Ha-ha, the whelp has fighting spirit.
Tell us what you call your mam, boy.
Come on, tell us all what you call your mam.’
Frankie felt himself gripped more tightly, then shaken so violently that his teeth rattled.
Knowing that they would make fun of him, he had been very careful not to say her new name in front of Tom Fish.
She must have told him herself.
She could not possibly have known the misery such a revelation would cause him, because now he was forbidden to call her by any other name and he knew from painful experience that Tom Fish would not relent until he had his way.
‘Smallfry,’ he choked.
‘Smallfry.’
‘What?
What was that?
Speak up, big fellow, let's all be hearing it.’
‘Smallfry…
Smallfry .’
He yelled the name as loudly as he could.
In the roar of laughter it provoked, he felt himself falling swiftly towards the ground.
He landed on his feet, hitting the narrow pavement outside the yard with such jarring impact that his teeth bit into the edge of his tongue.
Tears stung his eyes.
He felt small and feeble, hemmed in by five or six big broad-shouldered workmen.
Irish Tom shoved him.
He tripped and fell, scrambled to his feet and sprinted out of reach.
The voice of the Irishman bellowed after him: ‘Keep running, whelp.
Let's see if you can make it all the way to the front door before Rosie gets you.
I'm turning her loose right now.
Keep running, kid.
Here she comes.
Go!
Go!
Go get 'im, Rosie!
Go get 'im.’
The terrified Frankie skidded round the corner wall of the end house and raced as fast as his legs would carry him down towards the walkway gate.
He could still hear the men yelling and laughing and whistling after him as he dragged the iron gate closed with a loud clang behind him.
He made a dash for the big front door and threw himself into the gloomy chill of the hall.
Panting, heart pounding, he stood back from the door and waited, safe in the knowledge that the dog was too big to squeeze herself through the gap allowed by the safety-chain.
It was some time before he realized that he had been fooled.
Rosie was not chasing him.
The big Irishman had been teasing him all along, just to make him look ridiculous in front of all those other men.
He had never intended to turn the dog loose, only to scare Frankie into scuttling for safety like a terrified rabbit running ahead of the hounds.
He seated himself on the cold tiles and picked at their dark dusty colours with one finger.
There was a stinging spot on the side of his tongue where his teeth had sunk into the soft flesh.
Last night he had dreamed yet again that the Irishman was doing dirty things in his mam's bed.
It was the same dream as before, only this time Frankie had entered the room with his father's long-handled axe held high above his head.
He had hacked at the man's naked backside until it fell away in bloody pieces ready to be thrown to the dogs.
Smallfry's beautiful bed had become saturated with sticky red blood, but she had pulled Frankie into her arms and laughed and laughed with happiness because now the hated Tom Fish could never do dirty things to her again.
Frankie had enjoyed the dream.
It had left him with a feeling of self-satisfaction, a sense of having done something instead of standing helplessly in the shadows, aching with humiliation and guilty knowledge.
He got to his feet and walked on tip-toe to the kitchen door, where he pressed his face close to the crack, listening for any sound that might tell him what to expect.
She was pinging.
He could hear her voice rising and falling to a tune called ‘Sunny Side of the Street’.
It was Buddie's signature tune, the one his band always played at the start of every session.
It surprised Frankie that she rarely managed to sing all the words in the correct order.
He would never understand how she could memorize all those complex, impossibly long poems, yet forget the words of a simple song she must have heard a thousand times or more.
She stopped singing when he knocked on the door, but he had to wait and knock a second time before she invited him in.
She was standing at the gas-stove, turning a plucked chicken over the flames to singe away the tiny feathers left behind in the skin.
Other carcasses were trussed on the table, ready for cooking.
He counted nine loaves of bread on the highest shelf and a dozen tins of meat stacked on the dresser.
She smiled at him as she poured boiling water into his cup and stirred his cocoa into a miniature whirlpool with a spoon.
She was wearing her rouge and bright red lipstick again, and the childish plaits were gone from her hair.
Her eyes were bright and clear, no longer dark-rimmed.
‘Omelettes for tea,’ she smiled.
In a large bowl on the table was a thick mass of unlaid eggs taken from inside the chickens.
Removed long before the shells had time to form, they were no more than a cluster of marble-sized orange balls in a thick yolky substance.
When fried in the big iron pan they made an omelette that had a taste and a smell like nothing else in the whole world.
Just thinking about it made his mouth water.
With a happy smile she resumed her work at the gas-cooker.
He could see she was preparing for a party.
The chickens would all be cooked by the next afternoon and allowed to cool on the pantry's cold slabs.
Then the legs would be stacked on plates and the remainder of the meat sliced to make sandwiches.
Frankie would be set to work at the big sink, and before he washed each plate and roasting-pan he would scrape it clean with his fingers and eat every last scrap of chicken, sage and onion stuffing, corned beef, sliced Spam and cheese.
Washing up was just one of the many benefits that usually came his way on party nights.
He watched her now as she singed the birds over the gas-flame.
She did not look as if she might be dying of some dreadful disease.
She looked perfectly healthy, but Frankie was not convinced.
He would not be fooled like the man in the film who went cheerfully off to work, leaving his brave young wife to die all alone in their pretty country cottage.