

The Gardener
March 1991
Today's Ideas…
Tomorrow's Gardens
Perfect Primroses: Our Steps for Success
Planting Ideas for Pots
Courtyard and Cottage Gardens on View
Drought Loving Plants
The Fastest Growing Gardening Magazine
From the Editor
A very warm welcome to our sparkling spring issue.
For gardeners this is the most exciting time of year, when all your plans are realised and ideas become reality.
To help you achieve everything you want this year, we're simply bursting with dynamic features, articles and tips that will both help and inspire.
We show how to turn a problem area into an asset — transform a slope into something that you can be proud of.
We whisk you away to visit two beautiful gardens, both completely different in their scope and character.
All of us use compost at this time of year and in light of current concern about peat we take a candid look at the choices now open to you.
These new developments may affect the very way in which we grow our plants.
Finally, I do hope that as many of you as possible will enter our Gardener of the Year competition.
This year we have added a special category for best new garden under three years old to give everyone an equal chance.
I really am looking forward to seeing your entries but don't forget to include photos of your garden so that we can see what you're getting up to!
Garden Market
Clean Cut
Make cut flowers last longer using this new gadget from the USA, an underwater stem-cutter that should be a boon to all flower arrangers and flower lovers alike.
It's clean, quick and simple — taking the mess out of cutting flower stems because it retains all the cut stems in the glass decanter until you actually want to discard them.
Cut flowers should last longer as the stems are cut under water, so that no air or bacteria can enter the stalk to create a blockage.
Also stems are not crushed as they usually are when using scissors or shears.
The cutter is available by mail order from Tepco Marketing, Tepco House, London Road, Petersfield, Hampshire GU31 5AJ for £12.95 including p&p.
Nursery Minder
Make the delicate and time consuming task of transplanting seedlings easier by a simple new innovation from Tuff-Link called the ‘Nursery Minder’.
It is a specially designed kit that fits simply into a 5 in (13cm) pot creating 4, 6 or 8 compartments to hold individual seedlings.
These can quickly and easily be removed from their individual compartments and on to the pricking out stage.
Tuff-Link claim the kits reduce plants check, increase overall plant survival and generally save space, time and are available from most garden centres and DIY outlets for around £2.
TRY ONE YOURSELF FREE
Tuff-Link will send a free nursery minder to the first 200 readers who write in.
To make sure of yours, write today to The Gardener Free Nursery Minder Offer, Tuff Link Ltd, Tuff-Link House, Station Road, Padhame, Nr Burnley, Lancashire BB12 7AR.
The Gardener Help Lines
Don't forget the telephone advise lines for up-to-date gardening information.
These are exclusive to Gardener readers.
On them you will find all you need to know on a variety of subjects such as:
Pests and diseases  Ponds  Vegetable garden  In the greenhouse  Jobs for the month 
Calls will be charged at 44p per peak rate and 33p per minute at all other times.
PowerBreaker
Protect yourself with the PowerBreaker plug electrical gardening equipment always poses a danger for gardeners.
Trailing wires can so easily be cut when trimming back hedges or mowing long grass.
It is vital to take precautions to minimise risks.
A Residual Current Device (RCD) is a simple solution to help protect yourself, it cuts off power automatically within 40 milliseconds of an earth fault being detected.
PowerBreaker produce RCD adaptors, sockets and plugs.
If you fit each piece of electrical gardening equipment with one of the Powerbreaker plugs it will trip as soon as any slight change in current is detected between the live and neutral wires of the cable.
The range of RCDs from PowerBreaker is available from high street stores and DIY Superstores.
They cost around £21.99 for the plug and £17.99 for the adaptor.
Perfect Lawns
The striped hallmark of a perfect English lawn is now possible with the WOLF-tools Centurion range of rotary motors.
WOLF's rotary mowers have always offered versatility and manoeuvrability without the classic striped finish.
The new range overcomes this problem and its unique design also means it doesn't suffer from the inefficient grass collection experienced by many other roller lawn users.
Centurion lawnmower, new from WOLF
The new WOLF design features a cutting width of 16in (40cm) with a specially designed chute that channels clippings from lawn level, ensuring efficient grass collection under any cutting conditions.
The Centurion guarantees quicker, easier and safer lawnmowing incorporating a lightweight chassis and a height adjuster operated at the touch of a button.
The four versions available range from a 1300 watt motor mower for £289 to the largest petrol power-drive 4-stroke engine at £419.
All models are supplied with a large 50 litre capacity solid grass box and for a limited period only this offer includes a 9in (23cm) comfort trimmer to provide a perfect edge to your lawn or finish off difficult areas to reach.
For details of your nearest WOLF dealer contact WOLF-Tools Ltd, Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire HR9 5NE.
Stake Out
Staking multi-stemmed plants in the garden can involved a complicated latticework of cane and string.
Now though, Davies Systems has introduced an easy alternative, the Y-Stake.
A rigid brown, rust-free aluminium tube, pointed at one end, with two arms of galvanised wire at the other.
The arms can be almost closed together to support single-stemmed plants such as lilies or gladioli, or widened for bushier plants such as poppies, dahlias, or chrysanthemums.
When positioned early in the season the plants will develop and foliage eventually conceal the stake.
For even larger plants use more than one Y-Stake.
The eye-hole in each arm can be linked to others, creating a larger area of support.
The stakes are available in different sizes (sizes/prices omitted).
Available by mail order from Davies Systems, Brandsby, York YO6 4SJ.
Warm Frosts
Many house plants freeze to death when left on windowsills at night behind drawn curtains.
Even those that survive are given a severe check and often produce poor growth.
The new Sankey Growarm helps raise the root temperature, inevitably leading to an increase in the temperature around the plant.
The 14-watt windowsill tray base gently warms the compost and strengthens root growth of pot plants during cold weather.
Plants can be stood in the plastic trough or, if preferred, set in compost for permanent indoor display.
The base can also be used to hold capillary matting or moist grit for plants that require humid air.
The Growarm comes in red, green or white cartons and is supplied with a comprehensive instruction and house plant care guide leaflet and is available from most garden centres for around £18.
Garden Focus
Gardening My Way!
Careful planning and structured design play no part in the highly-acclaimed higgle-piggle garden of Connie Franks, says Tony Lord, as he tries to uncover the secret of her success
Visitors to Southside, Steeple Aston in Oxfordshire are often astonished to see the garden of Connie Franks, a riot of colour throughout spring and summer.
Connie's family moved to here in 1914, and ever since then have taken a particular interest in the third-of-an-acre garden which has always been maintained in a traditional cottage garden style.
This is no elaborate, townie's re-creation, overburdened with fancy aesthetics, but a living, breathing original — a mixture of plants for use and beauty, like those that appealed to so many artists around the turn of the century.
Such survivals in the unbroken tradition of the cottage garden are now rare examples of such excellence and are very scarce indeed.
Connie's garden has achieved considerable fame in recent years and has appeared in a number of books.
Photographers arrive at improbably early hours to capture the effect of the soft morning light, film crews struggle up the narrow village street with quantities of paraphernalia, Americans lean over the fence with their cameras and tell their friends to visit too.
Connie is bemused by all the attention, mystified why her garden which is ‘a proper higgle-piggle’ should arouse so much interest.’
‘A cottage garden should be tidy, thoroughly dug and planted, but not regimented.
It can be a complete higgle-piggle with plants growing where they put themselves.’
The grand style of landscaped gardens with carefully planned borders and regimented bedding plants ‘like soldiers all lined up for attention’ is not for her.
‘A cottage garden should be tidy, thoroughly dug and planted, but not regimented.
It can be a complete higgle-piggle with plants growing where they put themselves, but if they look wrong, they will be weeded out.’
She explained some plants have a knack of placing themselves well,Campanula poscharskyana she proclaims ‘a godsend’, particularly for the way it scrambles about, up poles and walls and even over other plants, its stems wreathed with soft blue flowers.
Pink and white lavatera pop up from seed and are left to flourish if they are in the right places.
First Impressions
It is the profusion of flowers which make the first impression on visitors although fruit and vegetables are grown as well.
‘I think it's a waste of time growing vegetables such as sprouts and cabbages that take a long time to grow and are cheap in the shops, but I enjoy growing beans, carrots and marrows.
And tomatoes take over the greenhouse once the bedding plants are out of the way,’ Connie explained.
She enjoys propagating, the rose garden contains pinks and martagon and regale lilies from seed.
Most of the roses are from cuttings and Lavatera olbia ‘Rosea’ is another favourite which is regularly propagated in this way.
In the house some splendid African violets, in Connie's favourite lavender-blue, were propagated from leaves given by a friend, rooted in water.
As in every good garden, there is no quiet spell.
At least every other day, even through the winter, something more must be done to keep the garden in good shape.
It is such relentless attention that makes her garden so spectacular for so much of the year.
In the words of Rudyard Kipling, ‘gardens are not made by singing, ‘Oh how beautiful’ and sitting in the shade.’
The garden is tackled single-handedly and she uses no new-fangled gadgets, except for an old trusty rotary mower which is used for the grass bank alongside the road.
Quite apart from the daytime work in the garden in the late months of the year, the pleasant chore of browsing through catalogues and choosing seeds for next year's display is much enjoyed.
Many plants are left to self-sow and thinned with a hoe, while others are grown from saved seed, but there are always some varieties for which seed must be bought.
Silvery pink Godetia ‘Sibyl Sherwood’ is a favourite, also tall ageratums.
Petunias are raised in the greenhouse, but not the striped or edged sorts which she feels are just a little too bright for her garden.
Next summer,Cosmos ‘Sonata’ is on the seed shopping list, a white-flowered variety, which at 2ft (60cm) will be more manageable than the usual lanky sorts.
‘There is still a place for old favourites such as viscaria, a plant I loved growing as a child although it is not much seen today.
Connie Franks recommends the first week in June as being early enough for putting out the bedding plants.
‘You can't get it into some people's heads that earlier planting risks frost damage and doesn't give an earlier display!’
Colour Schemes
Although the garden is not arranged to a precise colour scheme, Connie has strong views on colour, ‘I can't be doing with strong, deep reds so I use them only in moderation.’
In the summer, blues and pinks predominate but there are always plenty of white flowers, especially the white forms of cosmos and Campanula persicifolia , to set off the other colours.
Some gardeners would be hesitant about adding strong yellow or gold to such a scheme, but there are no qualms here.
French marigolds find a place each year and gloriosa daisies make a splendid late display as well as being marvellous for cutting.
Some dahlias are also grown for cutting, one apricot, one pink and a beautiful small orange pompon.
The spring display uses stronger colours — yellow alyssum, red and yellow tulips, blue grape hyacinths and purple aubrieta are always to the fore.
So too are wallflowers, particularly the ‘Fair Lady’ mixture and ‘Orange Bedder’which shows a subtle colour change from tawny red to apricot orange as the flowers age.
Planted during the last week of September, Connie has been particularly pleased by the wallflowers progress after a generous feed with Vitax 6X fertiliser.
Tulips are bought from the local supermarket and thrive magnificently, without ‘topping up’ from year to year with more bulbs.
Narcissi do not seem to like her garden, and so they have been abandoned.
Pots and Vases
Plants in pots and vases are a great feature of the garden in summer.
Geraniums, including variegated sorts such as‘Frank Headley’ and ‘Mr Henry Cox’, with Helichrysum petiolare or variegated plectranthus thrive in many of the pots standing outside the house.
The geraniums are overwintered in a small conservatory.
Begonias are particular favourites and a gaggle of them gather on the paved area near the front door resplendent in pink, scarlet and yellow.
Again, most come from the local supermarket except for the small, but spectacular scarlet ‘Flamboyant’, brought more than 30 years ago.
The corms have been overwintered every year since then and are now of considerable size.
It is a great shame that such a showy and obliging plant does not seem to be sold by any nursery today.
A visitor once asked Connie the secret of her success with begonias.
‘You need food and drink, don't you?’ came the reply, ‘So do they.’
The visitor might already have known this; Connie Franks' better results are probably more the consequence of giving the right amount at the right time, the sign of greater attention to a plant's needs which marks the best gardeners.
There is nothing complicated about the design of Connie Franks' higgle-piggle garden — all the plants are either useful in some way or simply beautiful, many of them both.
Victorian Values
Plants are never chosen because of a passing fashion, but because of their constant worth.
They have the sort of qualities that have been recognised by gardeners since the beginning of the Victorian era — a good show should never be despised.
The plants grow where they have put themselves or they are planted where they are most likely to thrive, and the best plants are worth repeating time and again.
This is an approach to gardening which looks good because it is good, common sense.
We are none of us too grand or too sophisticated to benefit from the lessons of the cottage garden and we are fortunate that there are still some skilled practitioners such as Connie Franks to show the rest of us how it should be done.
Once spring is over, Connie plants a riotous assembly of summer bedding plants, such as godetia, petunias and mallow among roses and perennials
Dazzling tuberous begonias and pelargoniums form an exhilarating patio display
Campanulas seed themselves around
Summer Treasures
Give lilies a well-drained site with a cool root run and you'll be rewarded by a fantastic summer show
Tiger Flower Tigrida pavonia , produces its distinctive blooms from mid summer
Forget the spring, Brian Davis has plenty of ideas for summer flowering bulbs
Most gardeners are aware of the galaxy of spring-flowering bulbs and corms, but less well-known are the many treasures that can adorn gardens in summer and autumn.
Many are offered in garden centres and shops, loose or prepacked, from February onwards, but care must be taken to plant them at the right time or thy may fail.
This said, bulbs rarely disappoint, so why not visit your local garden centre, or nursery and take advantage of these beautiful plants and use them with zeal in your garden.
You'll be so glad that you did.
Great Gladioli
Gladiolus primulinus is tall-growing with hooded flowers in a wide range of colours.
My choice here would include G. ‘Leonore’(lemon yellow),G. ‘Sabu’(red) and G. ‘White City’(white) but all are worthy of planting.
When used as spot plants in groups of 6 to 10 corms, they offer added height and mid-summer interest to a mixed border planting.
They will need staking and tying to prevent damage from wind and when finished, lift, dry and store them in a frost-free shed for replanting the following year.
I really do love the hardy Gladiolus nanus such as G.n. ‘the Bride’(white),G.n.
‘Desire’(cream),G.n.
‘Prince Claus’(white/pink).
They make ideal dwarf plants for a wide range of usages including rockeries and containers.
Once established they can be left planted year round; in my own garden they have multiplied annually.
Noble Lilies
Lily bulbs benefit from improved drainage and need cool roots, so using as spot plantings amongst other perennial plants and shrubs is ideal.
Choose between Asiatic hybrids and species.
For the hybrids I would look for L. ‘Golden Splendor’(yellow),L. ‘Pink Perfection’(deep pink),L. ‘Tabasco’(crimson red) but the many varieties available are all equally beautiful.
Species such as L. longiflorum , the master lily (blue white),L. speciosum rubrum (pink spotted and L. tigrinum ‘Splendens’, Tiger Lily (orange/black spots) are among my great favourites.
No garden should be without L. regale (regal or Royal Lily) for its scented white flowers.
As well for garden planting for show or cutting, thy make stately pot-grown plants, but only for one year as they are unable to find enough plant nutrients to sustain them for another year.
Once they have finished and died down, they are best planted out in the garden.
A Mixed Bag
The easy-going Crocosmia masanorum with orange flowers and its varieties Cx crocosmiiflora ‘Lucifer,(red) and C. ‘Emily McKenzie’(yellow with red eye) always remind me of Cornish lanes in summer.
After planting they quickly build up into permanent perennial clumps and nothing looks finer in summer than to see them planted in association with a garden pool or other water garden feature.
Hardy gems
Alliums (flowering onion) such as Allium moly (yellow),A. caeruleum (purple) and A. neapolitanum mother-of-pearl pink), planted singly or as mixed groups are true hardy garden gems and in no way resemble their culinary brothers and sisters.
They glower from early summer and when planted with the dainty violas such as‘Jackanapes’, they make an attractive planting to add colour between the winter and summer bedding.
Galtonia candicans , the scented summer hyacinth or spire lily, is always a must in my garden.
Their stately spikes of white flowers lend a certain elegance in early autumn and I will always remember the display at Brodick Castle on the Isle of Arran.
The bulbs may be more expensive than most, but are worth every penny and although tall do not need staking.
When planted in threes or fives they make good clumps to grow and flower above other plantings.
The look superb in white and can be used to cool hot colours such as red and yellow schemes.
Flowering in early summer, the Dutch iris must be one of the most inexpensive bulbs for a bold flower display.
They are available as mixed or straight colours of white, yellow, mauve, purple and blue.
When planted through beds of hybrid tea or floribunda rosea they add interest before the roses come into flower.
Lily Alternatives
In gardens in the south, try out Crinum x powellii .
Which has bold clusters of pink lily-like flowers or white in the case of the rarer C. x p.
‘Album’.
Further north they may need some protection to establish and thrive.
They should be planted in moist soil that is high in organic content for best results.
Often bulbs can be over 45cm (18in) long when established.
I remember digging for what seemed like hours to lift those bulbs, so make sure you plant them where they will not need to be moved and allow ample room for their growth.
They are real show stoppers.
Early summer flowering Allium moly , produces a bounty of brilliant yellow star-shaped blooms
Although the bulbs of the white/pink flowering Amaryllis belladonna (Belladonna Lily), are poisonous they are fully hardy.
Plant with the pink-flowered Nerine bowdentii close to a wall in the sunniest position.
Here you can mimic the conditions they are used to in their native South Africa.
These lovely plants may take time to form large flowering clumps but after a few years are a sight to behold and are worth every bit of effort you expend.
Allium giganteum's striking 5in (13cm) wide spherical heads of deep lilac flowers add interest to a mixed border
Tender Treasures
I would be wrong not to mention bulbs which may not always be hardy in all winter weather conditions.
As a single-season display they are beautiful and the possibility of them establishing themselves should be seen as a bonus.
Some attractive examples are Brodiaea ‘Queen Fabiola’ with light purple flowers; scented freesias, both single and double; the mixed colours of Ixia (African corn lily) and Zephranthes, the wind flower.
The African harlequin flower, the common name for sparaxis, describes well its flowering display, as does pineapple lily, the common name for Eucomis bicolor with its upright yellow flowers and lance-shaped leaves.
Tigridia pavonia is yet another bulb worth trying, and its bright display of white, orange and pink flowers each marked with red spots, clearly show why it is called the tiger flower.
Pots of Pleasure
Container gardening
New Series
Don't let convention cramp your style when it comes to container gardening.
Rather, allow your imagination to run wild, be creative and enjoy yourself
Brim full of flowers, pots tubs and hanging baskets have their own special magic, says John Kelly
‘The secret of potted gardens is to remember to water and feed them throughout the growing season’
Gardening in miniature can be just as rewarding, keep pots and plants in proportion and position where they can be viewed in detail
Group potted plants carefully to create a massed display.
Replace faded specimens with new to keep the display going
Have you come across those people who are always moving their furniture about?
One day the settee is opposite the door, the next it is where the telly was before it was swapped round with the nest of tables.
The carpet gets turned round, your favourite chair feels all wrong, and yet it only takes you an hour or two to wonder why it was obviously never done like this before.
By contrast gardening, much as we love it, is generally a bit static.
You can't just dig up a magnolia one July day and put it in the gap left by the camellia — it will die rather quickly.
Of course, that is partly why we are gardeners.
It suits us that haste is made slowly and that we have to think and plan before we commit ourselves.
On the other hand it is restful and good for us to change tempo even in the things we enjoy most.
To be able to create different effects by changing plants around is exciting, and it also tends to teach us quite a lot about the relationships in spacing of plants, of different shapes and habits of growth.
That is one of the reasons why container gardening catches the imagination.
Then there are the containers themselves which have to be chosen as carefully as the plants that will be grown in them.
Pots and Containers
Pots come in all shapes, sizes and colours.
You can have terracotta ones in the true flower-pot shape or covered with embossed designs in a sort of classical manner.
There are stone pots and earthenware ones with luxury glazes, ancient pots that you find at house sales in the country, and, of course, plastic pots which now come textured and coloured so closely to terracotta that they cannot be told apart.
Places of Interest  Those maddening corners that defeat you — nooks and niches that are too small or too narrow for making a bed or border — cry out for the sort of tubs, urns or vases that will change them from cinderellas into ball-gowned beauties.
Places that are dank in winter but pleasantly cool in summer, are made delightful by a stone bowl or tulips or a tumble of petunias.
You can grow your plants in round vases, graceful urns, square ‘Versailles’ tubs, tubby tubs, old stone water troughs and new, artificial ones.
You can express yourself by planting in ancient wooden wheelbarrows or new ones made of the purpose.
You can garden in a mobile manner with a superannuated birth bath, the sink from a demolished country cottage, or in the sophisticated creation of a top designer.
With hanging baskets, windowboxes, and those tiny gardens in dishes that sit on patio tables there is a whole world from which to make your own, highly personal statement.
containers — for that is what they are — have architectural value, too.
A classical, goblet-shaped stone urn, placed on a plinth at the end of a long, narrow lawn draws the mixed borders on either side together and integrates them.
A small trough, seemingly casually placed at the side of steps winding through a rock garden, suggest a pause — a place to contemplate the intricate display of alpines and other miniature plants.
No Hiding Place  Sitting containers on pallets or bricks goes a long way toward preventing them from harbouring all kinds of pests under their bottoms.
Smaller pots can be moved easily, and it's a good idea to do so, as you can demolish the slugs and creepy-crawlies that have accumulated in the cool dampness beneath.
On the Move
While we are still all romantics at heart we gardeners are also practical.
Containers are heavy, especially when filled with moist compost and topped with hearty plant specimens.
They can also be extremely awkward, never more so than when loaded with the needle-tips of a yucca or the sharks teeth of an agave.
None of this need stop us.
My favourite method is to stand the container on a wooden pallet.
You then take two stout battens and insert them below the pallet like the arms of a fork-lift truck.
You take one pair of ends, your willing helper takes the other, and off you go.
When you move your smaller containers around, take a critical look.
Have you been trawling the sales and picking up every urn and tub that caught your fancy?
If so, is what you have put together really just a motley collection with a messy clash of styles and materials?
Nothing looks more like a junkyard then a junkyard.
We all try to garden economically, but I sometimes despair of the bits-of-old-inner-tube school of gardening.
A mismatched, haphazard gang of pots looks terrible and it is worth investing some decent money in creating a cohesive style.
Don't abandon your individual approach, and avoid making the lace look poverty-stricken.
I use old wooden buckets and half-barrels with noble histories.
They didn't cost a great deal, but they do look quite classy in a boozy sort of way.
Plant Choice
When it comes to the plants, there is just about no limit.
You are freed from the tyranny of a limy soil as long as you use an ericaceous compost.
You don't have to worry about sticky clay, hot chalk or hungry sand.
Obviously you don't choose mighty oaks or plants that need many square feet of space, but apart from that you can grown trees, shrubs, perennials, annuals, cacti — in fact anything.
The secret of potted gardens is to remember to water and feed them throughout the growing season.
Plants in pots and containers require more water than you actually might think, the smaller the pot the more critical the problem.
Watering daily in the evening or before you go to work will pay dividends and keep the plants looking their best.
This small daily job is worth all the effort.
You will find containers open up a complete new dimension to gardening.
Not only do they bring a new breadth of variety, a chance to inject powerful statements of character, and a different level and pace of creativity; they are great fun as well.
Inside and Out
The explosion in conservatory building is rapidly changing the face of gardening in our islands.
All at once the range of plants we can grow has extended to include many of the magically evocative creatures that we encounter on our annual run for the sun.
Oleanders, palms, agaves, erythrina (see right) and even tree ferns reflect our fondness for Tenerife, Rhodes, Orlando and Penzance.
More and more of us are letting the conservatory fill up with pots, urns and tubs in winter, keeping the plants safe from the cold until May, when they can be rolled out on to the terrace, wheeled on to the patio or carried to the paved squares on the lawn where they will put on a show all summer long.
Practical Gardener
Move It!
Diane Carr looks at what is available in wheelbarrows and trollies
Whatever you want to move around the garden, whether its a pile of leaves, tools or building materials, a barrow can make life much easier.
Experiencing a latter day revolution — the wheelbarrow now comes in many shapes and sizes, all finely tuned to suit your special needs.
General Purpose
For most gardeners, a conventional wheelbarrow will cope with most tasks around the garden.
And if you want a wheelbarrow for general purpose garden work, from carrying leaves to moving small amounts of soil, then a lightweight plastic or galvanised metal model will suit your needs.
Metal barrows are a robust, yet economically priced choice, costing from around £20 to £40.
Budget models such as the 2.4cu ft Eltex Bramley at £20.13, the 3cu ft Beldray Sparten (with leg sleeves) at £21.50 and the 75 litre Haemmerlin Garden Plus model which is priced at £30 have solid tyres.
Wheelbarrows made from modern plastics are more expensive size for size, but have the advantage of being lightweight to use yet virtually indestructible.
At the budget end of the market, the compact 45 litre Ryland Pollypak is constructed from black polypropylene and supplied flat-packed for home assembly at just £26.99.
From Corrie, the larger 2.75cu ft Victor, made from red polyethylene with a rust resistant chassis and leg sleeves, cost £39.74, and the new self-assembly polypropylene Fort SB90 which can carry up to 275 lbs, costs £39.95.
In ballbarrows, the 3cu ft Hozelock Husbender at £46.95 can be fitted with a useful grass box extension, price £20.95.
Heavy Duty
For large gardens and tougher jobs, including moving building materials, a heavy duty barrow will be a better option.
The pans on these barrows tend to be bigger so you can carry more, and additional features like pneumatic tyres, front bracing and a tilt bar make them easier to manoeuvre when loaded.
Galvanised barrows cost from around £30.
For sheer budget-priced practically the 4cu ft heavy duty Ryland Navvy at just £28.99 has a solid steel pan, reinforced rims, pneumatic tyre, tilt bar and front brace.
more up-market models include the galvanised 4cu ft Haemmerlin Groundsman at £58.50 which has a deep tray, front brace, tilt bar and pneumatic tyre.
In plastics, specialists in the field, Fort, offer two robust polypropylene models — the 4.5cu ft RK90 with tilt bar at £49.95 and the 5cu ft TK100 at £59.95 which has front brace and deep tray.
Timber Trucks
Both purely decorative timber models for use as patio planters and fully functional wheel-barrows for lightweight jobs around the garden are available.
From M T Woodcraft, a full-sized and fully working barrow in iroko costs £134.
Mr Fothergill's 1991 seed catalogue includes a fully functional model which has a traditional iron wheel and is priced at £179.
Space-Savers
If you're short of storage space and want a barrow to transport grass cuttings, hedge clippings, lawn rakings and other bulky but relatively lightweight garden debris, then try a collapsible wheelbarrow.
New from J B Corrie is the Garden Buggy which looks like a conventional wheelbarrow but has a strong woven polypropylene fabric pan over a rust resistant chassis and easy to manoeuvre polypropylene wheels and pvc tyres.
At £34.96, the beauty of the Garden Buggy is that it folds down to only 10in thick and will easily fit into the boot of a car.
Less conventional in appearance is Black and Decker's top wheeled Barrow Bag, which consists of a tubular steel frame and strong bag fitted with handles for removal — price £14.95.
Garden Carts
If you have trouble lifting or balancing a conventional wheelbarrow, a garden cart may be the answer.
It has two wheels instead on one, this means that you don't have to take any of the weight of the load or keep the cart balanced, so loads can easily be tipped.
Which barrow is right for you?(left to right) Hozelock Ballbarrow, Wickes Builders Barrow, Corrie Garden Buggy, Bosmere Boscart
However, it does take more effort to push or pull a garden cart, and it can be more difficult to manoeuvre than single wheeled barrows.
The rear legs of carts may also catch on steps, or shins!
The Bosmere Boscart is a light, fold-away cart with a tough non-tear woven polythene bag, taking loads of up to 24 lb at £39.95.
Barrows and Trucks
If you need to move lightweight leaves and hedge clippings on the one hand, and hefty bags of peat on the other, then a simple sack barrow may cater for your gardening needs — though they can be awkward to manoeuvre over steps and rough ground.
Both Fort and Corrie offer a good selection, but one of the niftiest is the Haemmerlin Bag-Barrow which has a support hoop for keeping a dustbin liner upright, which makes collecting refuse a lot easier — price £27.50 (including 10 bags).
Some models will also convert from a two wheeled sack barrow into a four wheeled multi-purpose truck which is useful for moving heavy items like paving slabs.
Black & Decker's Tough Truck converts in seconds to a four wheeled truck for use with loads up to 220 lbs — price £29.95.
What Size Barrow!
As a basic rule of thumb you'll need a 2 1/2 ft wheelbarrow for a small garden where you are just moving light loads.
For a larger garden or where heavy loads are being transported you'll need a 3–4cu ft barrow.
Don't forget that for more bulky but light loads, such as leaves, an extension can always be fitted to the top of the barrow.
Points to look for
Extension top
Allows larger cargoes of light materials like leaves, to be transported with much less spillage.
Front brace
Provides added strength for heavy duty loads.
Leg sleeves
Protects the bottom edge of legs from damage, and corrosion.
Tilt bar
Offers greater stability when unloading heavy materials.
Tyres
A pneumatic tyre makes less impact on a lawn than a solid tyre, and is a must for moving very heavy loads.
Wheels
A large ball instead of a conventional wheel makes easier progress over wet ground and soft lawns.
Two wheeled carts are easier to balance than a single wheeled barrow, but tend to be more difficult to manoeuvre.
Composts For the Nineties
It's all change in the world of compost.
Peter Thompson reviews what's happening and offers some timely advice.
What is a Compost?
In essence a compost consists of bulky material which provides congenial conditions for roots to wander in search of water, oxygen and nutrients.
It must be dense enough to support the plant, porous enough to hold water, and open enough for air to diffuse through it to provide oxygen.
Mineral salts are added to supply the nutrients on which the healthy growth of the plant depends.
These are simple needs that can be simply met — plants will grow perfectly well in pure sand — provided they are kept amply supplied with water and a complete nutrient solution.
In bygone days composts were secrets locked in the mind of the formidable head gardeners whose magical mixes blended from leaf mould, old mortar rubble, soot, garden soil, silver sand and twice-sieved sphagnum moss were varied to suit the individual needs of every plant they grew.
The chaos and confusion caused by the conjuring vanished reduced the thousand and one permutations to the famous three — John Innes Number One, and brothers Two & Three.
Then, experiments in California simplified the complexities of compost to a simple major ingredient — peat, and the modern container-grown revolution was suddenly born.
Top-Soil
John Innes and peat have been with us ever since.
The former is loam, that is top-soil taken from a meadow and then sterilised; the other is the semi-decayed remains of sedges or mosses that are preserved from total decomposition in peat bogs by a blanket of water and acidity.
Both have served us memorably.
Each has its good points, and each its disadvantages, as discussed on the following pages.
Limitations
Even now the many and various suppliers of loam-based composts have still to discover how to get their products to customers in a state that is fit to use.
As a consequence peat has been the market leader for the past forty years.
This was once thought to be a productive and praiseworthy way to make the best of almost useless land; but now environmental groups point out how this practice can involve the destruction of important wet-land and wilderness.
In fact, the limitations of both peat and loam have become more obvious than their merits, and once again, there is a strong incentive to find acceptable alternatives.
Today's Requirements
So why should we still be looking around for suitable composts?
Some of the answers have already appeared:
it should be lighter rather than heavy
clean rather than dirty
stable over long periods when sweatily enclosed in plastic bags
consistently and constantly available in very large quantities at economical costs
produced from a replaceable or recyclable resource.
It is these needs rather than those of the plant which have left us still looking for the right materials.
It is our dawning awareness that peat may not be in endless supply, and the prevalent fashion to be ‘green’ that have opened the way to alternatives.
During the next few years many alternative possibilities for compost making will be tried with varying degrees of success, and gardeners will be at the forefront of this revolution.
For seed sowing, peat compost and ‘Jiffy’ pellets are very popular
Composts for the Nineties
When shopping for compost, garden centres of multiple stores can be confusing places now that there are so many brands and types on offer.
Which do you choose?
Soil-based, peat-based or one of the new breed of alternatives?
Still confused?
Our compost portfolio will give you a guide.
Soil-Based composts
The traditional compost for gardeners made from sterilised top-soil to which grit, sand and fertilisers have been added.
Made to a standard formula by many different companies.
There are four types; seed, containing no fertiliser and potting 1–3 containing increasing amounts of fertiliser to suit plants at different stages of development.
Advantages:
Holds plant foods better than peat
Weight adds stability to plants in pots
Structure ideal for long-term potting
Less liable to waterlogging than peat
Disadvantages:
Content and quality can vary
Heavy and difficult to move around
Doesn't seem to store well in bags
Seed sowing can be difficult
Compost Additives
Grits and Sands: Traditional components of soil-based compost.
Many peat composts also include them.
They help to keep the structure open while adding substance and weight to what can be an inconveniently light product.
Vermiculite: more popular in the USA than Britain.
It is very easy to manage, lightweight, clean and water absorbent. useful for rooting cuttings and seed sowing.
Perlite: A volcanic material like vermiculite and with many of the same properties.
When dry it is easily blown around.
Peat-Based Composts
The most universally used compost, with types to suit all purposes — from seed sowing to potting ericaceous plants like rhododendrons.
Widespread use now criticised wetlands are threatened.
Advantages
Universal structure helps ensure comparable standards
Peat is easily combined with additives to make new composts
Clean and convenient to use
Light and easy to move about
Disadvantages
Light, large plants liable to fall over when dry
Requires constant addition of fertiliser for growth
Prone to waterlogging without additives like grit or perlite
Long term potting not advised as structure breaks down
Coir-Based Composts
Coir, the fibrous husk of the coconut, is being hailed as the new alternative to peat, it has many similar properties, ideal for potting or seed sowing.
Buy reputable brands.
Marketed as blocks of pure coir or as loose compost mixed with additives to improve drainage.
Advantages
Can be used as peat
Lightweight
General uniform consistency
Disadvantages
Relatively new and untried
Not suitable for ericaceous plants
Requires more feeding than peat
Other Alternatives
Bark: Already widely used as a mulch, it also shows promise, after suitable treatment, as a substitute for peat.
In fact a purely bark-based compost should be available soon.
Manure: Cow or horse manure can be composted and breaks down into an inoffensive material that is used as a compost base by a number of manufacturers.
Straw: Some is already converted as farmyard manure; and attempts have been made to break it down in other ways to make a compost base.
Recycled Paper: Already being used to produce materials for mulching, it would only be a short step to make it an ingredient in composts.
Seaweed Meal: Available in small quantities after transformation by worms to produce an organic compost and appeals to those averse to using inorganic chemicals.
Problem-Solving Plants For Hot, Dry Places
In the first of a new series problem-solver, Nigel Colborn, offers some planting solutions to garden hot-spots
How do plants survive hot dry conditions?
Plants that can tolerate parched conditions are known as xerophytes.
They have developed a means of cutting down the rate at which water passes through their systems and out through pores (stomata) in their leaves.
Many have instantly recognisable traits which will help when selecting plants from nurseries and garden centres.
Some, like cacti or our native sedums, store water in modified leaves or stems.
Others, like certain heathers or marram grass, have tightly rolled up leaves with pores on the inside.
Silver plants usually have a thick coating of felty fur which slows down evaporation.
Another defence against dehydration is a thick, waxy coating on the leaf surface — in this way laurel and bay are able to withstand drying out.
In some species, the number of leaves is much reduced and in others, leaves have been modified to form thorns.
This diversity is what makes arid lovers such and interesting and worthwhile range of plants to grow.
Dry weather is always bad news for gardeners and the last couple of summers seem to have put our annual rainfall on par with Arizona!
Even on the richest land drought is damaging, but in a garden with sharp-draining soil — especially on a hot, south-facing site — it can create a positive dust bowl, a place where plants just don't seem to survive.
The Dry Zones
Rainfall is at its lowest in the east, where summers tend to be better then in the temperate western half of the UK.
As for soil types, hungry Norfolk sands or flinty Hampshire chalks must surely be among the droughtiest in the country.
Then there are the man-made drought problems — banks which slope towards the sough, sunny walls, terraces or patios — all are often inhospitable to plant life because they have been designed as suntraps.
What You Can Do?
The first solution is to attack the cause of the problem.
Improve the soil by adding organic matter, use thick layers of mulch, create shade or irrigate copiously.
The second, and by far the best option is to recognise the conditions and go with them, selecting plants which, rather than just tolerating dry conditions, will actually thrive in them.
So, instead of thinking that you're cursed with a problem, consider yourself lucky to be able to grow the staggeringly large and varied range of Mediterranean, South African, Australian or even British plants which love an arid home.
Obviously, it will pay to ensure optimum growing conditions by enriching the soil with a little fertiliser and organic matter such as compost or will-rotted manure.
For moisture, mulches are always beneficial, but besides the usual compost or bark ships, gravel is effective and provides better protection against water-logging in wet winters.
Planting Ideas
One of the most exciting features of arid-loving plants is that they are so diverse not only in leaf colour and flower, but also in texture and shape.
Some, like sedums, stay low with fleshy foliage but others, such as the gorgeous American poppy relative Romneya coulteri , will shoot up to 5ft (1.2m) in one season.
One important point about these hot-spot plants is that some can be difficult to over-winter.
Frost is not really the problem, it's the fact that many plants, especially the silver-leaved types, are prone to winter rots.
Sharp drainage is essential, especially in high rainfall areas, but pea gravel or grit mulches help by keeping the necks of the plants dry.
When planting, mix in some sharp grit if your soil is heavy or sticky.
If you have greenhouse or coldframe, a wise insurance policy it to root cuttings of susceptible species in July and over-winter these under glass just in case the parents don't make it through a bad winter.
Skeleton or Outline Plants
The backbone, as with all gardening, should ensure winter interest as well as a summer climax, so you'll need evergreens or plants with good winter outlines.
In a large area, small trees such as Pyrus salicifolia or Salix exigua or the larger but equally silver,Pyrus nivalis could make a centre piece.
Bay Laurus nobilis, can be grown large or clipped to size as can many of the conifers, particularly junipers and thuja, all of which cope well with drought.
Pines, especially the dwarf types, make striking focal points, especially when they become old and gnarled.
Where space is more restricted, evergreen shrubs such as olearia make fine winter shapes.
O. macrodonia has prickly leaves and grey-white flowers, but succumbs to severe frost.
O. x baastii which has smaller dark green leaves with greyish undersides and fragrant white flowers in midsummer.
It has survived well in my cold garden, coming again from the base, even when cut down by severe weather.
Citrus shrubs are wonderfully fragrant evergreens, but quite impossible outdoors without protection.
However, the related ‘Citrange’,Poncirus trifoliata , is hardy and has similar aromatic foliage after a hot summer with scented lemon-type blooms.
Rock roses, especially evergreen species like Cistus x purpureus (huge pink flowers with dark blotches) make straggly shrubs, but have much character and love heat.
Most buddleias will be too tall for restricted sites, but the sweet-scented species B. fallowiana is better behaved and its hybrid ‘Lochinch’— crossed with the common butterfly bush — has silvery foliage and soft blue flowers.
Filling In
Mound plants, if they keep their shape all year, make the planting more appealing.
Little shrubs like Genista hispanica or Hebe ‘Broughton Dome’ make compact green boulder shapes which will contrast with the looser forms of Genista lydia — smothered in acid yellow blooms in early summer — and silvery cotton lavender,, santolina.
However, these shrubs can become untidy if not clipped hard back each year.
My own favourite is Santolina virens ‘Primrose Gem’ whose vibrant green foliage makes a foil for the pale button flowers.
Silver plants are naturals for Mediterranean conditions so, virtually all artemisias will thrive as will the grey-green Jerusalem sage,Phomis fruticosa , all lavenders, and the almost metallic silver,Senecio leucostachys .
More glaucous than silver,Euphorbia characias is a handsome plant which dotes on harsh conditions and graces late winter with lime-green flowers.
Named forms like ‘Lambrook Gold’ or ‘Perry's Winter Blusher’which reddens in frost, are worth seeking.
As for colourful flowers, many of the world's bulbs grow in hot dry habitats and a succession of these will provide star quality in every season.
Little Plants
To finish the planting scheme, there are tiny species which can eke out an existence in a teaspoonful of soil.
If your dry garden borders on to paving, many of these plants will spill over and even colonise the cracks, softening up hard lines and giving a mellow feel.
The British native Helianthemum nummularium , has produced a fabulous range of named varieties in a staggering spectrum of colours, all are indispensable edging plants.
Creeping thymes, especially Thymus serpyllium varieties such as‘Pink Chintz’ and ‘Rusesetings’are marvellous for developing mats of vivid colour.
Pinks, including the tiny, but deeply fragrant, ‘Pike's Pink’ will survive hot conditions.
And there are several super origanum varieties including the low-growing Organum rotundifolium which sports hop-like flowers in cool, apple green.
Gap Fillers
While the permanent plants get themselves established there are bound to be gaps which need temporary fillers.
Besides, even in mature plantings, it's fun to provide a boost with some instant colour.
Annuals and tender perennials are best for this and provide a vast range of colours and textures.
The brilliant orange of gazanias or the taller Tithonia rotundifolia both look effective with silvery foliage.
All perlargoniums, from scented-leaf species to fancy hybrids, thrive in hot sunshine with many blending well with permanent plants.
The most brilliant blues can be provided by Salvia patens and from the morning blooming Commenlina coelestis , both of which flower all summer and are easy from seed.
You can get these varieties from seed merchants such as Thompson and Morgan.
Nothing tolerates drought like the dependable petunia.
The effect will always be better if you limit the number of different shades and coordinate your colours to match the permanent plants, but these days, the choice runs through most of the spectrum.
The creeping Helichrysum petiolare , so popular in hanging baskets, along with Senecto ‘Silver Dust’ makes a useful and quick-growing background.
Finally, don't forget the value of such structural objects as walls, containers, raised beds or even large boulders sited to set off the plants.
Nothing improves plants so much as a pleasant setting — I have a large lump of tufa, a porous limestone rock, planted up with saxifrages, as a centre piece in one of my arid corners.
Look out for this in your garden centres.
Oriental poppies endure drought
The Wall Behind
Quite often, a dry border or terrace is backed by a south-facing wall.
This may be the warmest spot in the garden providing an opportunity to grow wall plants or climbers which might be scarcely hardy elsewhere.
Here is a list.
Warm, bright colours:
Robinia hispido (Pink pea-like flowers, ferny foliage)
Vitis vinifera ‘Purpurea’(Warm purple leaves in autumn)
Rosa ‘Mermaid’(Yellow)
Buddleia colvilei (Striking red flowers — unlike most buddleia)
Campsis radicans (Cool foliage, hot, brick-orange trumpet flowers)
Cool, soft colours:
Wisteria (Any variety from white to deep purple)
Saolanum crispum ‘Glasnevin’(Blue with yellow centres, Dislikes extremes of drought).
S. jasminoides (Less hardy, but has better flowers, especially the white form ‘Album’)
Abutilon x suntense (Mauve-blue flowers all summer)
Jasminum officinale (Surprisingly drought tolerant and very sweetly scented)
Passiflora caerulea (The hardiest specified with blue and green flowers, but try the pink P. antioquiensis for a sheltered nook.)
A Cool Scheme for Hot Conditions
Buddleia x Lochinch Elegant 6ft habit.
Dianthus ‘Doris’ Long flowering.
Mat of blue-grey leaves.
Gypsohpila paniculata ‘Snowflake’ Herbaceous perennial to 3ft.
Mid summer flowers.
Helianthemum ‘Rose of Leeswood’ Double pink flowers.
Mat of small green leaves.
Iris ‘Blue Shimmer’ Evergreen leaves.
White blue-edged leaves, late spring.
Lavendula ‘Munstead’ Compact shrub to 2ft. long flowering.
Rosemarinus officianalis ‘Mrs Harding’ Upright form to 4ft.
Aromatic leaves.
Salvia officinalis ‘Purpurascens’ Low shrub to 2ft. blue flowers in early summer.
An Aromatic Garden
Many hot-spot plants are aromatic and, since patios and terraces are usually paved, this quality can be enhanced by allowing plants to trail or spill on to flagstones — which get hot in the sunshine — so that the aromatic oils which give them their scent are literally vaporised and perfume the air.
Here's a selection for special aroma:
Helichrysum angustifolium — Curry plant.
Silver foliage, yellow button flowers and a smell of chicken tikka.
Prostranthera x rotundifolia — Mintbush.
The leaves have a unique smell midway between eucalyptus and mint.
Bright purple flowers.
Rosmarinus x lavandulaceus —‘Severn Sea’.
— A Tender rosemary but worth a try for its prostrate habit and bright blue flowers.
Lavendula — all lavenders are aromatic and worth growing.
Select varieties for contrasting leaf colour as well as flower, ‘Hidcote’ is silvery leaved and dark blue, ‘Loddon Pink’is green in the leaf pale-lilac pink in flower.
Aloysia triphylla — Lemon verbena.
Tender but the most exquisitely lemon scented shrub in cultivation.
Grow in a pot, so you can take it indoors in winter.
Thymus x citridorus — Lemon thyme.
Grown with other creeping thymes, makes a wonderfully fragrant mat.
Cistus ladanifer — A musk scented evergreen rock rose with sticky foliage and huge white flowers.
Annual or perennial rudbeckias make a dazzling display in full sun
Courtyard Pleasures
New Series
In the first of our new series on small gardens, Rosie Atkins has been to visit a delightful family courtyard garden
Originally, Claudia and John Roberts lived in the top two floors of their tall, double-fronted end-of-terrace house, a walk away from London's Regent's Park and Primrose Hill.
Since the birth of their sons, Felix (now aged four) and Max (one), the Roberts were lucky enough to take over the raised ground floor which not only gave them more space but also allowed them vital access to the garden.
A room with a view into the garden below
The garden had to be shared with the bottom flat, so a dividing wall was built which gave them total privacy.
‘We decided to build a balcony with steps going down to the garden, but our builder advised us to think about the year-round advantages of a conservatory,’ Claudia explained.
They liked the idea but they were concerned about the cost.
Then in an architectural salvage emporium, Claudia came across a wonderful glazed door, with window panels, which inspired their builder.
The result was an unusual; tiled conservatory, totally in keeping with the style of the house.
Existing Trees
To comply with strict building regulations, a discreet garden shed was required.
This has proved really useful for storing tools, children's toys and garden furniture.
While the building of this high-rise conservatory was under way, the Roberts tackled the garden below.
The dividing wall was placed so a well established laburnum remained in one corner of their garden.
A wonderfully gnarled pyracantha remained as a focal point, silhouetted against the painted wall of the neighbouring studio workshop.
The road was screened by another brick wall, topped with trellis, brought to life by a mass of climbers and a large purple flowered lilac.
Perfect Planning
At an early stage the Roberts decided to do away with the lawn which sloped towards the house.
‘It was laid on London clay which dried out in summer and became very muddy in winter,’ Claudia explained.
Now, curved raised bed surround the garden, built in red brick paving, with steps down to an area where a table and chairs catch all the available sun.
Claudia admits the tiered beds suffer from dry shade, but there is no noticeable lack of plants.
The shadiest corner is enlivened with a wall fountain and pool.
‘Before the ivy took over it looked a bit like an African throne,’ said Claudia.
Unfortunately, the water-lily never flowers and the goldfish perished, but the bamboo,Pseudosasa muriel-ae , ferns, hosta and a camellia flourish nearby.
On the other side of the fountain, an evergreen pyracantha forms an oriental umbrella over a large chinese pot containing an Acer palmatum .
‘I like the way the pyracantha looks like an oversized bonsai,’ Claudia explained.
Pyracantha rogersiana not only brightens up shady spots with its bright orange-red berries in autumn, but it also has attractive white flowers in spring.
The Roberts' garden reaches a peak of colour in early May when the yellow flowers of the laburnum contrast with the violet-blue flowers of the Clematis alpina , tumbling through its branches.
On the street side, the lilac and a rampant Clematis ‘Jackmanii’ create a blaze of purple.
Buying Plants
It has become a family ritual to visit Columbia Road Market in the east End on a spring Sunday to stock up with plants.
‘John goes for the foliage and I buy flowers’ said Claudia, who likes bargains and doesn't mind a few surprises.
‘The plants are sometimes wrongly labelled and boxes of mixed plants have been known to come up all the same colour.’
Claudia buys masses of foxgloves which seem to happily self-seed among the tobacco plants in the shade.
Delphiniums and hollyhocks are planted in the sun to give colour and height.
The hardy fuchsias and Hydrangea macrophylla compliment a carpet of white comfrey,Symphytum grandiflorum , Solomon's seal, vinca and violets.
Spring bulbs, daffodils, bluebells and tiny cyclamen add another dimension to this subtle tapestry of flowers and foliage.
‘We learn by just popping things in and seeing how they do.’
Favourite Roses
Claudia loves roses, but they are not always a success.
‘The Iceberg’ rose on the steps to the conservatory hardly flowers but excels at ripping jumpers.’
It was meant to compliment the wisteria, planted four years ago, but Claudia is resigned to the fact it might be still another six years before it puts on a show.
Other roses in the garden perform brilliantly, like ‘New Dawn’ by the fountain, ‘Swan Lake’which is being trained on trellis over the seat and ‘Ballerina’under the stairs.
There is always something to look forward to like the unworldly blue flowers of Ceanothus thyrsiflorus and the passion flower which blooms its head off all year.
Adjustments are continuously being made, too.
Claudia doesn't like the dry summer beards of the marguerites,Argyranthemum frutescens , which have taken over the centre bed.
Like much of the ivy in the garden they once inhabited window boxes.
Pots of oleander, agaves and a yucca give a Mediterranean feel to the garden, although pots brought from France and those filled with tender geraniums and fuchsias have to be overwintered in the conservatory.
Some plants need constant reporting, like a glorious pieris.
‘The Fatsia japonica under the stairs has become a real fatso,’ Claudia pointed out, but she has a more manageable fatsia, which happily shares his pot by the street door by the Clematis montana ‘Tetrarose.’
Work and Play
Claudia explains how little maintenance her town garden needs.
She sweeps the fallen laburnum flowers in the spring and autumn leaves in autumn.
They use the garden like an extra room.
In summer an artificial grass rug comes out of the garden shed for the children to roll about on and a wooden sandpit, brought in Germany, keeps them happy for hours.
‘Once we even used the painted wall opposite as a screen to give a slide show.’
Claudia finds it hard to imagine them doing all of these things in a country garden.
Next month: A secret terraced house garden
A gnarled old pyracantha adds character to this tranquil part of the garden
John and Claudia Roberts
Potted plants like this azalea add seasonal interest
Many large flowered clematis clothe the courtyard walls
Shades of Autumn
Many Congratulations From The Gardener 
In our September issue, last year, we invited Gardener readers to get out their cameras and enter our special The Gardener /Kodak Shades of autumn Photo Competition.
The entries were many and varied, capturing the diversity and richness of the mellow autumn colours as well as the festive spirit of harvest time.
First Prize Winner
First Prize Winner: Mrs K M Green from Shoreham-by-Sea for her composition of the autumn's harvest.
She will receive a fabulous Canon EOS 700 SLR camera complete with a Fogg-London handmade camera bag, PLUS four rolls of film from Kodak's Portfolio range.
Runner Up:
S Chani from Hayes with a photograph of autumn shades of liquidambar leaves collected from a single tree.
Runner Up:
Barbara North from High Wycombe with a picture of a fruiting physalis highlighted by the lengthening shadows of autumn.
Runner Up:
Mrs H. Hiley from Wallington, Surrey with a photograph of an autumn morning at the royal Horticultural Society's garden at Wisley.
Five runners up will each receive an Optex camera bag and four rolls of Kodak film from the portfolio range
Runner up:
K W K Palmer from Norfolk with a portrait of a small tortoiseshell butterfly feeding on an orange marigold.
Runner Up:
Mrs D Sharlotte from Grimbsy with a portrait of harvest time in the orchard.
Buying a Greenhouse?
Make your new greenhouse a success by asking a few essential questions before you buy, says Jonathan Edwards
What a good investment a greenhouse can be if you are prepared to invest the time necessary to make it work for you.
There is no need to become a slave to it, provided you plan ahead and keep up to date with a number of essential tasks.
A greenhouse offers an unparalleled opportunity to extend both the season of growing and variety of plants you can raise.
A greenhouse also enables you to become ‘self-sufficient’ in plants with some to spare, too.
Here lies the greatest pleasure of greenhouse gardening, since there is little to equal the satisfaction of raising most of your own plants from seeds and cuttings, watching them grow and develop until they fulfil their potential planted out in the garden.
This, of course, is a long-term aim and will not be achieved in the first season.
So what things should a potential greenhouse buyer consider before making the purchase?
What size should it be and does it matter which design is chosen?
What Size?
Obviously the size will be governed by several factors.
First, the space available for siting the greenhouse.
Where this is not restricted, then the amount of money you are prepared to pay will limit your choice and, finally, what you intend to grow in the greenhouse.
It is always difficult estimating the room you will need unless you are having the greenhouse built for a specific purpose.
So, the two golden rules when buying are to go for quality and buy the largest you can afford.
Having said that, it is also wise to opt for a greenhouse that can be extended at a later date by adding on another ‘module’.
Its worth contacting the manufacturer to establish this before you actually buy.
The Essex 610 from Cotswold starts at £610
What Design?
The traditional greenhouse shape is a rectangular floor area, near-upright sides and a pitched roof.
Although still the most popular shape, there are many others now on offer.
Some designs have distinct advantages and so these should be considered before purchase.
Simple square or rectangular shapes still predominate and are probably the best bet for anyone wanting to grow a mixed bag of crops.
Whether or not to select a model with sloping sides or vertical ones should be made on the basis of the types of crops you intend to grow.
Straight-sided models offer greater ‘headroom’ and so they are ideal for tall, space-hungry crops such as tomatoes and cucumbers.
Models, with sloping sides, on the other hand, allow better light transmission which may be critical if you want to grow winter crops like lettuce.
The sloping sides of dome-shaped models also give better light transmission, but loose out on ‘headroom’.
If, however, you are intending to grow alpines on staging then this style may be ideal.
In addition, the curved lines of the dome shape offers little wind resistance and may be worth considering if you are planning to erect a greenhouse on a windy site.
I you are short of space and have a conveniently placed wall, then a lean-to model is an option.
Being adjacent to the house it will be much more convenient to use, too.
Wood or Aluminium?
Both materials offer distinct advantages and have certain limitations.
Aluminium looks modern, with clean lines and modern, with clean lines and a bright appearance.
Greenhouses with an aluminium structure cost less and are more convenient because they do not require any regular maintenance to prevent them deteriorating.
The main drawback of aluminium is that, being a metal, it readily conducts heat and so is more costly to heat in the cold winter months.
This cooling effect can also produce unwanted condensation on the inside of the greenhouse dripping on to plants below.
Consequently, disease outbreaks can be much more prevalent.
One often forgotten drawback of aluminium structures is that you need to buy special clips and brackets if you want to add on accessories such as shelves and insulation.
These can add considerably to the cost of setting up a greenhouse, so make detailed enquiries before you buy.
Wood looks good, but you pay for it.
You can pay twice as much for a wooden model when compared to a similar-sized aluminium one.
In addition, wood will deteriorate and eventually rot unless it is given regular maintenance.
This will be an annual task unless you've invested in a cedar model when once every three years should suffice.
Advantages?
Adaptability mainly: you can pin, nail, screw and clip almost anything you like to the inside and outside of a wooden-framed greenhouse.
Adding shelves, shading, insulation or temporary partitioning is simplicity itself without the need for special lock-on clips.
Wood is also a good insulator and so makes more economic sense if you intend heating the greenhouse during the winter.
Glass or Plastic?
Traditional glass is cheap and lasts provided it is not subject to direct hits by flying objects.
Children are the main culprits, especially if they are interested in ball games.
Where you are likely to suffer from regular assaults, it may well be worth considering cladding part or all of you greenhouse with polycarbonate sheeting.
It may be expensive, but is worth it in the long run.
Double-glazed models, such as the Serac Solar Greenhouse, are also worth considering especially if you are to use your greenhouse all year round.
Any Hidden Extras?
Don't buy a greenhouse on the basis of offer price alone.
Some models might seem particularly good value for money when you see the price tag, but end up being an expensive option once you've added on all the ‘optional extras’ you need.
Always compare prices on a like-for like basis when making a purchase.
Any Other Features?
Good access is important to help reduce the time needed to operate a greenhouse successfully.
Check that the door is wide enough for your needs.
If you intend using a wheelbarrow measure it first.
Many models can be fitted with double doors, so this is worth checking, too.
Check that the doorway is high enough, wince there is nothing more annoying than to keep bumping your head every time you walk in.
Good ventilation is essential.
Try to have both roof and side vents so that you can have more control over the greenhouse environment.
Look at the cost of staging and shelving as well as automatic ventilators, insulation and shading materials.
Moving House
It is easy to be put off buying a greenhouse simply because you might be moving house in a few years.
At that rate, you won't buy a greenhouse until you retire!
Perhaps it isn't fully appreciated how easy greenhouses are to move, especially if they are aluminium and just a few seasons old.
If you go back to the original manufacturer, they may well be able to help you out or at least recommend someone that can.
As a rule of thumb, moving a nearly new greenhouse will only cost about the same as it would to have it erected in the first place.
Next Month: Erecting a greenhouse
Starting with…
Primroses
They're simply irresistible, says Graham Rice, as he looks at the best types to grow
Primroses in their various guises have long been popular garden plants.
Romantically associated with the coming of spring, their half-hidden blooms offer a special charm that plays on our inquisitive nature.
Thought to be quintessentially English, primroses actually grow right across Europe from Majorca to Iran and wherever you look they vary slightly.
Near Teheran primroses come in many colours while here in Britain you very occasionally find one with double flowers, or with one set of petals inside another.
Where primroses and cowslips grow together a few will be hybrids between the two with large primrose-like flowers on top of a tall stem, like a cowslip.
This is how the polyanthus originated.
Oxlips and the tiny purple-flowered primula juliae also hybridise freely with the primrose.
Since the 16th century the ease of hybridising all these naturally occurring forms both in nature and by the gardener has given rise to the delightful range of varieties we now grow.
Almost all the variations and hybrids retain that primrose charm, only the modern F1 seed strains have lost their elegance in the foolish search for larger and more garish flowers.
From the rosebud doubles to the richly coloured, eyeless cowichans hybrids and dainty, dark-leaved ‘Garryarde’, they all have something that makes them irresistible.
Care and cultivation
Almost all demand shade and moisture.
That sounds simple, but it's not quite as straightforward as you might think.
Shade is best provided by overhead deciduous trees, but not the dense, almost black shade cast by low beech branches and certainly not shade from conifers.
The sort of shade I mean is the dappled shade cast by mature apple trees and maples or by the high branches of an oak.
Primroses will also grow well under the edge of deciduous shrubs and among the perennials in a mixed border.
Here, they find the light they need in the spring, but as the sun gets hotter the growth of surrounding vegetation gives them some welcome shade.
Moisture is vital and a heavy soil provides a good basis.
It must not be waterlogged, but when improved with garden compost or manure it is ideal.
In scorching summers such as we've had recently, watering will be necessary.
It's still possible to grow good primulas in well-drained soil, but shade, plenty of organic matter and regular watering are even more essential.
Simple Division
Most varieties benefit from being divided every couple of years, indeed many of the doubles will fade away without regular division; immediately after flowering is the best time.
In recent hot summers, red spider mite has become a severe problem in some gardens.
I've found that regular spraying has little effect when the air is dry for so long.
The answer is to ensure that the primulas growing conditions are good, with a rich soil, so they can build up their strength early in the season.
Then, even if they lose their foliage in summer, they will surge into growth again in October, as mine did last year.
Wild and Garden Forms
Wild Types
The familiar wild primrose,Primula vulgaris , likes shade while the cowslip,p. veris , can take more sun.
The oxlip,P. elatior , is a rare, shade-loving, species with flowers like a primrose in size and colour, but hanging to one side at the top of a tall stem.
The tiny P. juliae from the Caucasus has small, shiny leaves and delicate purple flowers.
Double Forms
Having been rare for many years doubles are now much more widely available and many are proving to be good garden plants.
Most are of the primrose type, the old double polyanthus are still difficult to find.
Jack in the Green
A very old form with the calyx (the green leafy parts surrounding the flower) much enlarged to form a ruff in which the flower sits.
They are mostly single, but ‘Dawn Ansell’ is a double white.
Jackanapes
A rare form of Jack in the Green in which the calyx is striped along its length with the same colour as the flower.
Jackanapes on Horseback
A rare form like a Jack in the Green with two ruffs, one inside the other.
Pantaloon
Rather like a Jackanapes, but with the colour in the calyx running around the edge like a frill.
Gallygaskins
A single primrose with a distorted and swollen calyx.
Hose in Hose
Another delightful, old form in which the calyx has mutated into a flower so that one flower sits inside another.
Barnhaven primroses
For many years Barnhaven produced seed strands of a wide range of hardy and very beautiful polyanthus, primroses and auriculas.
Sadly the nursery has now closed and seed is no longer available.
However, a number of nurseries are selling plants derived from these strains and the lustrous, almost eyeless Cowichans are worth looking out for.
Start with
The easiest is ‘Wanda’ with large purple-red flowers for many weeks in spring and it has a hose-in-hose version.
P. sibhorpii , a soft blushed mauve shade, is also tough as are the various coloured forms of cowslip which can even be naturalised in grass.
The lovely dark leaved ‘Guinevere’ with soft pink flowers is a good doer as are ‘Lady Greer’, a tiny polyanthus type with cream flowers and the Cowichans.
The doubles which are now being offered widely are indispensable and I would pick out the deep red ‘Captain Blood’, the white edged purple ‘Marie Crousse’ and ‘Our Pat’in bluish-violet as the best growers.
The many New Zealand doubles are also good plants.
Double primrose ‘Bon Accord’(above) Cowslip, Primula veris (right)
the wild primrose is a refined beauty
Primula ‘Jack-In-The-Green’
Plant Profile
A Passion For Plants
In our continuing series, gardeners from all walks of life write about their favourite plants
Hibiscus
Beauty unveiled
Asking someone who has been closely associated with garden flowers for more than 50 years to name his favourite one is rather like asking King Solomon to name his favourite wife — I love then all!
However, if I have to pick one, then it must be my love of the moment, and that is the showy hibiscus.
Its face is unmistakable.
A broad, flat dish of papery petals just pleading for a visit from passing insects.
For me hibiscus has three faces.
The first I see during my annual sojourn in Florida — the beautiful pendant flowers of Hibiscus schizopetalus with ferny swept-back petals hanging from a 6ft (1.8m) bush.
Back home, there's the much more modest second face — the difficult pot plant Hibiscus rosa-sinensis which, although a thing of great beauty, needs regular misting and temperatures which never fall below 12 ° (55 ° F).
The beautiful blooms only last for a day or two, but there's a continuous succession from spring to autumn.
Now for the third face.
This year I bedded out a few of these house plants in a prominent position in the garden.
Throughout the long, hot summer they bloomed merrily right up to late autumn, while common or garden types like antirrhinum and nemesia wilted under the semi-tropical conditions.
Cultivation
Hibiscus should be grown in a proprietary loam-free compost, preferably in a greenhouse border or in 8–12in (20–30cm) pots.
They retain their foliage through the winter if they are kept moist.
Repot annually in March or early April and give a weak liquid feed at fortnightly intervals from May to September.
Source
Reads Nursery, Hales Hall, Loddon, Norfolk NR14 6NS.
Fuchsia
Dancing ballerinas
My favourite flower among many — in fact all the great flora to be found, both cultured and wild, is the fuchsia.
So many beautifully dressed ballerinas dancing to the merest suggestion of a breeze.
Close inspection makes one marvel at the intricate perfection of nature opposed to the finest fashion houses.
My idea of heaven is a warm sunny day, a varied selection of blossoming fuchsias and Nat King Cole singing ‘Dance Ballerina, Dance’.
No competition!
Tap dancing, trumpet playing, singing and record breaking Roy Castle spends idyllic afternoons crooning to his favourite fuchsias
Cultivation
Tender fuchsias will grow in practically any soil, provided it isn't very heavy and wet.
They prefer a well-drained, sunny site which retains moisture during the summer months.
Dig the site before planting out in May, remove weeds and add a scattering of bonemeal.
Firm soil around roots and stake standard-trained plants using a bamboo cane.
Water thoroughly then mulch with a generous layer of peat, composted bark or garden compost.
Keep fuchsia well watered during prolonged dry spells in summer and feed regularly with a potash-rich liquid fertiliser.
Pot-grown fuchsias in the greenhouse should be kept cool through judicious ventilation.
Keep the atmosphere moist and humid throughout the spring and summer.
Water and feed regularly and shade the glass during mid-summer.
During the winter maintain a minimum temperature of 5 ° C (41 & degree F) and water the plants sparingly.
Source
Arcadia Nurseries, Brasscastle Lane, Nunthorpe, Middlesborough, Cleveland 
Stan Dickenson, retired purchasing consultant for an electronics company adores the beautiful blossoms of tuberous begonia.
Tuberous Begonia
Friends for life
I saw my first tuberous begonias on the Blackmore and Langdon stand at Chelsea many years ago.
They were so beautiful that I decided to have a go at growing them.
I ordered six and from then on I was hooked.
At that time I had a small 8ft X 6ft (2.5m X 2m) greenhouse in which I grew tomatoes and a small section was allocated to begonias.
I ordered some more named varieties and soon decided that from then on I would only grow these fascinating plants.
Membership of the Begonia Society came soon after, which brought me into contact with some wonderful growers and really marvellous people who would help in giving growing tips and providing cuttings of varieties I didn't have.
A visit to any of their shows is a delight and you can see begonias at their best.
Anyone interested in joining the Begonia Society should contact the secretary:
Cultivation
Seed and cutting tubers are started in a propagator set at 21 ° C (70 ° F) at the end of January, and older tubers early in March.
Pot the tubers with their crowns exposed in a loam-free potting compost.
I found it difficult to get cuttings to root in earlier years, but I discovered that by starting them in water for 10 days, then potting up, I lost very few.
Baby jars are ideal for this with the bottom in (6mm) of the cutting in water.
This method requires no bottom heat to encourage rooting.
Source
Blackmore and Langdon, Pensford, Bristol BS18 4JL
On Air!
Peter Acton visits the popular gardening guru and live-wire broadcaster, Harry Smith, to discover how he keeps Radio Kent gardening enthusiasts tuned in and turned on
A meticulously restored 10th century farmhouse situated near Sevenoaks is the nerve centre for the broadcasting exploits of Kent's favourite gardening expert, Harry Smith.
It is from his home, set in ½ acre garden, that Harry has presented over 50 programmes of his popular TVS gardening programme That's Gardening .
Famous Guests
The pre-recorded elements of his programmes for BBC Radio Kent are compiled in a home recording studio come darkroom, as they have been since 1975.
Final dubbing takes place BBC Radio Kent's impressive studios at Chatham, where Harry's programmes are broadcast twice weekly.
Through the years his house and garden have hosted a who's who of gardening.
‘Peter Seabrook helped me build the pond on the programme,’ he pointed out.
Roddy Llewellyn, Tony Clements, Daphne Ledward, Stefan Buczacki, Alan Titchmarsh, and most memorably for Harry, Percy Thrower, are among the many illustrious figures who have visited.
Harry loves to talk about his gardening exploits.
Like many experts in this line he finds his days are taken up by writing and talking about gardening, with precious little time left to get down to the gardening himself.
Which is where his wife Elsie ‘the head gardener’ comes in.
Partners
Together they cultivate a wide variety of plants including tomatoes, potatoes, asparagus: ‘the king of vegetables’, artichokes, runner beans plus flowers and shrubs.
The result: plenty of fresh produce for the kitchen and such delights as crab apple and quince jellies and pickled walnuts.
Harry Smith is clearly a born communicator, delivering his radio talks with distinctively rich, evocative tones and punning sense of humour — broadcasting is obviously in his blood.
As a child he played records to his parents from an adjacent room, darting between the two to make sure they were paying attention.
During the war he was a wireless operator in the Royal Signals, serving in India and Burma.
He is also a veteran radio ham with like-minded friends all over the world.
He even finds himself giving out gardening advice to local radio operators from his car.
There really is no escape from his calling.
A science teacher by profession Harry joined BBC Radio Medway, which became Radio Kent in 1972.
His heated greenhouse is packed out with freesias, overwintering geraniums, solanum, and streptocarpus, impatiens, as well as more unusual plants — cuphea (the Mexican cigar plant) and oxypetalum, avocado seedlings and a 5ft (1.5m) lemon tree grown from seed.
‘The lemon shared the limelight on TV with Una Stubbs’, he explained.
New varieties of seeds, plants and gardening products are sent to Harry to test, a task that he performs with all the analytical skill of a scientifically trained gardener.
Little Gems
On Sunday mornings Harry shares a gardening spot with fellow expert Bob Collard.
Together they have built up quite a following of devotees for their special brand of banter, interspersed with gems of gardening knowhow and Harry's infamous groan-inducing puns.
They have also become successful co-authors through their book — entitled The Radio Kent Gardener's Guide 
Out and About
When asked about the most frequently raised problem Harry replied, ‘The hurricane of '87,’ without hesitation.
‘Kent bore the brunt and we still receive many calls asking about replacement trees.
In the main we encourage the planting of native trees.’
However, far from being tied to his desk, Harry has built up quite a reputation as a roving reporter.
He visits many gardening shows and horticultural industry functions, which, together with the interviews recorded at this home, provided his programmes with an ever-changing, highly diverse element.
BBC Radio Kent is fortunate to have the services of a gardening expert who is also such a broadcasting professional — a producer, editor, presenter rolled into one.
What with his home based TV and radio exploits Harry Smith is quite literally a broadcasting cottage industry.
Practical Gardener
Tomato Look-In
A step-by-step guide to the tastiest, healthiest crop you've ever grown
I don't know about you, but the flavour of a home-grown tomato beats anything you can buy and unlike highly priced supermarket produce, are terrific value and easy to raise.
With modern varieties there are so many ways in which you can grow them, such as unheated greenhouses, outdoor patio pots and tubs and trailing bounteous croppers for hanging baskets.
Sowing Success
Part of the success is to sow them at the right time.
Greenhouse varieties are sown in early March; those for outdoors in late March or early April.
My favourite, no-check method of raising the dozen, or so, plants I need is to set seeds in biodegradable 3in (8cm) Fyba Growpots.
My method is to sow two seeds per pot, a in (6mm) deep, in gently firmed, peat based pbi Multicompost.
If you are vehemently opposed to using peat opt for coir (processed coconut fibres and husks).
It comes in a block and is soaked before use (see page 24 for this month's special offer).
After sowing and gently firming in seeds with a circular tamper, water them in by placing pots in a bowl of water and removing them when the compost is dark and moist.
If, like me, you prefer biodegradable pots, nestle them close together in a seedtray to ensure that their walls stay moist.
Keep Warm
Consign seeds to a heated propagator or a warm, light windowsill.
If using the latter method cover pots with a sheet of glass — turned daily to disperse condensation — topped with paper.
Seedlings soon appear — within 8 to 11 days in a temperature of 18–21 ° C (65–70 ° F).
Strong light is vital for stocky growth.
If your greenhouse is not in full sun, it makes sense, at this time of year, to supplement daylight with a Phillips mercury or  fluorescent lamp.
It's not expensive if you couple it to an off-peak Economy Seven meter.
Sweet 100 is an old favourite that can be grown indoors and out
Damping-off disease is a serious threat, especially if seedlings are crowded.
Reduce this risk by watering with pbi Cheshunt Compound or murphy Traditional Copper fungicide.
Next Move
If you're growing seedlings in biodegradable pots, simply remove the weakest plant of the pair in each pot when seeds leaves have developed strongly and true leaves are just visible.
Then space out the pots close to the glass to give your charges room to develop.
Keep pots moist — it's vital that roots have no difficulty penetrating them — by sitting them on capillary matting.
If you've got a pot or tray of seedlings, prick them out the moment you can handle them — holding them by a seed leaf, never a crushable stem.
Set them singly into 3in (8cm) pots of gritty loam, peat or coconut fibre potting compost so that their seed leaves are about in (12mm) above the compost's surface.
Aim at a daytime temperature of not less than 16 ° C (61 ° F) and a nightly minimum of 10–13 ° C (50–55 ° F).
Planting Out
By late April or early May, greenhouse candidates — for growing as single-stemmed cordons — will be about 6–8in (15–20cm) high and ready for moving to their fruiting containers.
Set out only those which are perfectly healthy, with defined growing points and well-shaped leaves.
Reject any which are ‘blind’ or whose curled, twisted or ferny foliage indicates virus infection.
Set plants 18in (45cm) apart in the greenhouse border, singly in 9in (23cm) pots, or three to a standard-sized growing bag.
I prefer growing bags.
Self-contained units of nourishment, such as Fisons new Tomato Gro-Bag, are formulated to produce better tasting fruit, they make growing easy and give splendid results.
If your plants, cordon or bush varieties, are destined for enhancing the patio — in pots, growing bags or hanging baskets — consign them to their containers about two weeks later.
Gradually harden them off and set them out in late May or early June when nights are no longer frosty.
Caring Comments
Let's start with conventional cordon-trained greenhouse varieties.
Support is essential.
Tie plants with soft string to canes which reach the glass.
Or, fit Marshall's galvanised-steel Growing Cane supports which hold 5ft (1.5m) canes securely in lace.
Canes can be made more secure by fastening to a horizontal wire.
Water freely and tap blossoms daily or mist them with water to disperse pollen and encourage a good fruit set.
Feed weekly with a high potash fertiliser, such as Tomorite or Phostrogen, when the bottom truss of fruit begins to swell.
Nip out side-shoots the moment they appear, to concentrate energy into the growing tip and fruit production.
Ventilate freely and damp down the floor and staging to reduce wilting when the temperature rises above the 27 ° C (81 ° F).
Outdoors, cordon and bush varieties are dealt with similarly except that you won't need to damp-down, mist or tap the blooms, Additionally, sink a perforated ice cream container rim-level next to each plant.
Then, when you water, none is wasted.
Leave side shoots to fruit on bush and hanging basket varieties.
Rogues Gallery
Greenhouse whitefly: tiny sap-sucking nymphs and adults beneath leaves cause leaves to curl, become sticky and pale yellow.
Control: Spray every three days for a month with Phostrogen Safer's house Plant Insecticide or pbi Crop Saver.
Or, use sticky yellow Dethlac glue traps.
Leaf mould disease: Leaves flecked with brown spots above, yellow spots beneath.
Control: Remove and burn infected leaves, ventilate freely and spray the plant with Boots garden Fungicide or Supercarb.
Blossom-end-rot: Sunken black spots appear at the base of the fruit.
Caused by inadequate watering which triggers calcium deficiency.
Control: Watering regularly, especially when fruits are swelling, and apply Chempak calcium nitrate.
Dry set: Flowers appear but fruitlets fail to form.
It's due to air being too warm when pollination occurs.
Control: Misting over flowers
Blotchy ripening: Fruits mottled bright red and yellow and flesh stays hard.
Usually due to intense heat.
Control: Shade the glass.
Split fruit: Splits caused by uneven watering — allowing compost to dry out, then watering heavily.
Control: Keep watering evenly according to growing conditions.
Fern-leaf virus (TMV): Twisted and marbled yellow leaves.
Transmitted by green fly and other sucking pest.
No remedy.
Lift and burn.
Pick of the Best
Type Comments
Conventional
F1 Cumulus Early ripening, medium-sized fruits of superb flavour, greenhouse, crops well; cordon.
Golden Sunrise Sweet, thin skinned, average-sized yellow fruits; greenhouse, outdoors, cordon.
F1 Prisca Yields four fruits to the pound; forms five trusses, then stops; ideal for small greenhouses, cordon.
F1 Tornado Compact, thin-skinned, very sweet; specially bred for British summers; bush.
Cherry
F1 Cherry Delicious bite-sized fruits borne on long trailing Wonder trusses; good disease resistance; free from greenback; greenhouse, outdoors, cordon.
F1 Sweet 100 Old favourite with 18in (45cm) trusses of fruit, loved by children; outdoors, greenhouse, cordon.
Tumbler Bred for hanging baskets; around 9lb (4kg) of fruit per plant; greenhouse, outdoors, bush.
Beefsteak
Dombello Early, fine flavoured, thick meaty walls, excellent for sandwiches, good disease resistance; cordon, greenhouse.
Big Boy Established sandwich favourite with fruits to 11lb (5kg) or more; cordon, greenhouse.
Red Dawn Large fruited; first UK-bred beefsteak variety for outdoors; bush.
Novelties
Tigrella Thin-skinned, red and golden striped fruits, early; greenhouse, outdoors, cordon.
Plumito Smooth Straight-sided red fruits, ideal for freezing or bottling; cordon, greenhouse, outdoors.
Britain's Lemon-shaped fruits, which do not split when ripe, on Breakfast large spreading trusses; cordon, greenhouse, outdoors.
Annual Repeats
Annual favourites are self-seeding wildly, thanks to our milder climate, writes Barbara Abbs.
And some are becoming too much of a good thing.
Most gardeners have their particular ‘self-seeders’, plants that love their patch and which are categorised as flowers, wild flowers or weeds, according to how much we love them as they make their appearance each year.
If the mild weather continues and the greenhouse-effect becomes a reality, many garden plants could be demoted to the status of weeds, as annual and tender plants not only survive the winter but seed prolifically as well.
‘It self-seeds’ could soon become a warning note, striking as much fear into gardeners hearts as ‘It propagates easily from root cuttings’does to anyone who has tried in vain to remove some acanthus or bindweed from a flower bed.
Cherished effects
The cottage gardeners of old allowed their plants to seed themselves around to produce that chaotic, yet much cherished effect.
Many plants were in fact native, such as Red Campion,Silene dioica , aquilegia and violets, and because they were already well adjusted to our climate, found no difficulty in springing up from every square inch of the ground.
Useful fillers
In my garden the yellow Welsh poppy,Meconopsis cambrica, Corydalia lutea , alkanet, the evening primrose,Oenothera perennis ,Alchemilla mollis and forget-me-nots seed themselves freely around.
Some of these are wonderfully useful for filling unexpected places, either in my own or friends' gardens.
Along railway embankments you see colonies of the perennial sweetpea,athyrus latifolius sprawling through the grass, sporting those vibrant pink pea-like flowers.
The hot summers and mild winters of the last few years have added several of more unusual colonisers.
The ornamental tobacco,Nicotiana langsdorfii , usually grown as a tender annual, is a plant that fits in well with almost any situation or colour scheme.
It is about 18in (45cm) high in my garden, a slim rather than substantial plant, with small, lime-green, tubular bell-shaped flowers and bright turquoise pollen.
A few years ago this was only available in specialist nurseries, but I thought I recently caught a glimpse of it in Geoff Hamilton's ornamental vegetable garden on the television, so I suppose it has come of age.
Given that N. Langsdorfii could be a perennial in a mild winter and that it seeds itself even more freely, this could go from being a rarity to a ‘pernicious weed’ in record time.
I have heard my own favourite,Alchemilla mollis a useful hardy gap-filler, described as just that by a fellow gardener.
Now, was it Margery Fish or Vita Sackville-West whose rhapsodies persuaded me that I must have this lime-green foamy-flowered plant with the scalloped leaves edged with silver hairs, in which captured raindrops gleamed like opals, at absolutely any price?
I can't remember now, but I still love it and continue to be amazed every time I see it in a catalogue for it seeds itself as freely as any common plantain.
Newcomers to the list of self-seeders are Scabiosa atropurpurea, Ursinia anethoides, Erodiumpelagoniiflorum and Linum rubrum .
One of last year's Scabiosa atropurpurea seedlings stood the winter like a biennial, and like the over-wintering tobacco plants, began flowering early.
Some seed collected in France had produced plants with 2in (5cm) pin-cushion flowers, the dark velvety-red petals tipped with white.
It was still flowering in November, but the colour had paled to a soft lavender.
This scabious was the first one to reach Britain from Italy in the early seventeenth century, and was known as ‘The Mournful Widow’.
This type is not readily available — its mourning connotations have made it unfashionable.
To my eye, the flower is not at all melancholy but rather luscious.
It is well worth saving the seed of this — and of the drumstick scabious, ‘Paper Moon’— in case of a hard winter.
Dry seed in an envelope in an airtight container (the plastic drums that spray-dried milk is sold in are excellent) and kept in a cool place, retains its viability well enough.
New additions
The scabious Corydalia lutea and Mirabilib jalapa were introduced to Britain in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
John Gerard grew them both, but their fates have been quite different and may well change again, with the weather.
Corydalia lutea is a native of southern Italy that escaped from gardens many years ago to naturalise on walls near cultivated places.
In my garden it has made a swift transition from weed to wild flower to flower.
Commonly called yellow fumitory, it comes up like mustard and cress at the foot of every shady wall in the garden and I used to wrench it out with the ruthlessness I used on sycamore seedlings until I discovered it on sale in a nursery for well over £1 a plant.
It was obviously more than a weed or even a wild flower so I did a quick turn-round and decided that it was quite pretty with its two-tone yellow tubular flowers and ferny leaves.
Now, in the words of the seventeenth century horticulturalist, John Parkinson, I leave it in corners ‘so no place be unfurnished.’
It is very easy to pull out if it does get in the wrong place.
I discovered Mirabilis jalapa on the island of Lesbos several years ago.
This plant with flowers of yellow white, pink and red, often striped or even differently coloured on the same plant, grew out of the walls, and in cracks between the cobbles of the streets.
The flowers opened in the afternoon and were strongly scented.
Nobody could tell me its correct name and it was known simply by the Greek equivalent of ‘night-bloom’.
The round black seed germinated that autumn and the following spring the plants developed long, woody tubers.
Changed Conditions
On my return home I discovered that the plant that I had thought was a weed was in fact ‘The Marvel of Peru’, first brought from Peru to Spain in the sixteenth century and John Gerard used to lift the roots in autumn and keep them in a butter firkin filled with sand.
Mirabilis jalapa was very highly prized and remained popular until the eighteenth century.
Like Nicotiana langsdorfii , the flowers are pretty and intriguing but the plant as a whole is not showy in our climate, making too much stem and leaf.
However, if we continue to have a milder climate, it could mount a takeover bid in the garden.
The woody tubers may survive outside in a mild winter, but if they don't, the seeds certainly do, emerging in thickets the following year.
‘Cool green house’ conditions out of doors could change our gardens dramatically, causing us to weed out the progeny of today's tender treasures and cossetting plants that like cool, moist conditions.
Left to their own devices, most self-sown seedlings cope remarkably well with drought conditions.
In case we do have a hard winter however, it might be worth potting up a few and over-wintering them, if you haven't already saved some of last year's generously produced and well-ripened seed.
Whether you will be nurturing fashionable assets or merely weeds, may be dependent on our future weather.
Letterbox
Garden Duel
Having decided not to use herbicides on a weedy patch, we laid out black plastic to smother the weeds when they grew.
Some time later while walking past this area we looked at the plastic and saw strange movements coming from it.
On lifting the sheet, we were amazed to see two moles fighting.
One had hold of the other by the scruff of the neck and had fetched blood.
The fighting continued for a few seconds before they realised that it was no longer dark.
the winning mole then shot off leaving the other one apparently a little dazed.
However, it soon pulled itself together and shot off in the other direction — no doubt grateful of the intervention which gave its release.
Fancy, gentlemen in velvet scrapping like ragamuffins!
 Mrs R Hodgson Pickering, North Yorkshire 
Mrs Hodgson's letter wins her three tools from Sandvik: Leisure Secateurs, Pruning Saw and Garden Knife, worth £25
Sharp Report From Singapore
Our 1989 Gardeners of the year, Hilary and Norman Sharp, have sent back this report from their holiday prize in Penang and Singapore
‘Selemat Datang’(‘Welcome’) reads the sign at Kaula Lumpar airport.
From then, the charming, helpful and friendly Malaysian people overwhelmed us with the warmth of their hospitality.
We called at a traditional fishing village where time seemed to have stood still and where the houses on stilts looked picturesque, but somewhat less than homely.
Next came a stomach-churning visit to the Snake Temple, where I actually held a snake very briefly, but drew the line at having it photographed around my neck!
After four memorable and enjoyable days we left Penang for our three-day trip to Singapore.
Changi Airport was new, impressive and impeccably clean.
We were driven along the tree and flower lined expressway into ‘Lion City’ as Singapore is known.
It was neat, colourful, disciplined and totally geared to tourism.
We booked into our luxury hotel before visiting Orchard Road, Little India, Empress Palace, climbing Faber Hill and touring the grim Changi Prison.
All too soon it was over and we left feeling we had just scratched the surface of this fascinating Republic.
Back in Penang we took the funicular car to the top of Penang Hill for some panoramic views over the water to the mainland.
This was followed by a step into a small enchanted forest when we visited a nearby butterfly farm.
A final visit to say goodbyes to all our Malaysian friends and intensive packing saw us reluctantly depart for our homeward flight — Penang, Kuala Lumpur, Istanbul, Brussels, London, Yorkshire.
We pinch ourselves and check our photographs to make sure that we have really seen, done and experienced all these wonderful things.
‘Terima kasih’— Thank you to The Gardener and to sponsors DWT London International Travel Services.
Gardener's Tips
Earwig Traps
Quite by accident we have found a good way to trapping earwigs.
Our grandchildren were playing with some large pinecones which got chattered around the garden.
The next day when the pinecones were collected up they were full of earwigs.
Now we fasten pinecones to the dahlia sticks and shake them out every few days.
It's effective and looks neat.
 Mrs B Price Slough, Berks 
Reinforced Wheelbarrows
To prevent the ‘feet’ of wheelbarrows wearing away prematurely, reinforce them with a coathanger wire coiled tightly round a few times.
Use mole grips to secure one end of the wire to the foot while the rest is being looped round.
Twist the wire round the foot so that it sits tightly, forming a protective coil around the tubular feet.
 Peter B Smith Cumbria 
Each letter published earns £5.
So write to Letterbox,The Gardener , Maxwell Consumer Magazines, Greater London House, Hampstead Road, London NW1 7QQ
Waste Not Want Not
After re-decorating my kitchen I had a nearly new vegetable rack spare.
I put it in my greenhouse and stood seedtrays on it.
I looks rather good and each shelf holds one full-size or two half-size trays.
When there's a possibility of frost I cover it with a polythene bin bag — an instant propagator.
 Mrs J Clarke Peterborough, Cambs 
Why not write in and tell us more of your tips — Ed.
Options
New Series
Creating a change in level needs careful planning and construction, but will undoubtedly enhance the appearance of the entire garden.
Geoff Ace offers three ways of achieving this
Building Your Wall
Our cross sectional diagram shows some essential points for success.
Adequate foundations
The width of the foundation should be at least 1 ½ times the width of the wall and at least 6in (15cm) deep for a wall 2ft 6in (75cm) high.
It is always best to be over generous with foundations since any cracking which occurs here will immediately cause cracking in the wall itself.
Cracks look unsightly, and may also cause instability.
Adequate thickness
A retaining wall about 2ft (60cm) high should be 9in (20cm) thick.
When building retaining walls above 3ft (1m) in height seek specialist advice.
Since many building materials are only 4in (10cm) can be built of chap concrete blocks, but these should be tied into the decorative front layer with the same walling ties as are used in the cavity walls of houses.
(Ask at your local building suppliers)
The decorative face
There are many different products available that can be used by the DIY enthusiast to construct the decorative face of a retaining wall.
Manufactured products usually have a regular shape which makes it easier to fit them together.
They are also very durable, standing up to frost much better than many housebricks, which need the protection of the house roof.
Strong Mortar Mix
The mortar should consist of one part cement to four parts of soft builders sand.
This will give a hard mortar, resistant to absorption of water.
Weep holes
Leaving gaps in the base of the wall near ground level will prevent the build up of excessive water in the soil behind.
Just leave some vertical joints without mortar at 2–3ft (60–90cm) intervals.
Filling up immediately behind the wall with porous material such as ballast or gravel will also help to get rid of surplus water.
Waterproof backing
The back of the wall should be painted with special waterproof paint, called ‘tanking’.
This will prevent water continuously diffusing through to the decorative face, causing unpleasant discoloration.
Many people throw up their hands in horror when confronted by the problem of a sloping garden.
However, a slope should be considered as an asset — totally flat sites can be so boring, while slopes allow for interesting changes of level.
This is usually dictated by the need for a flat area immediately next to the house to act as a sheltered sun trap.
In some cases there may be a need to introduce steps to allow for movement to a higher level.
Any change in level will involve soil retention which can become a problem in itself.
Retained soil can become saturated with water and then exert tremendous pressure.
So, it is essential that the retaining wall has adequate strength to avoid bowing and possible collapse in the future.
If the wall is to blend into your garden setting choose a product which complements the materials used in the construction of the house.
The Problem
The slope in this new garden is to be terraced around a circular lawn with steps leading up to the higher level.
Although seeming very slight, the slope requires a wall about 2ft (60cm) high between levels.
Another factor to consider is the style or effect you want to create.
If the garden is in the country near woodland than timber may be the best material to use.
On the other hand a garden associated with an inner city dwelling will usually need to have a more formal approach.
The Solutions
Marchalite Walling
(Marshalls) Here the texture of stone is achieved by splitting the blocks to expose the rough sandstone finish inside.
The three colours, natural, red or buff can be used separately or mixed, though a mixture of colours is not to everyone's taste.
special coping slabs are also available with a similar texture effect to the wall to finish the job off.
Palasade
(Forest fencing) A timber style can be achieved without an excessively rough rustic effect.
The Palisade units produced by Forest Fencing are individually machine turned to give a very neat appearance.
They are also pressure impregnated with wood preservative to give rich colour and guaranteed life of 15 years without rotting.
Ask your nearest stockist for more details.
The timber poles that have been illustrated here are ideal for retaining soil, especially where a rather tight curved wall is needed.
it is recommended that at least half the length of the palisades should be buried in the ground.
You will, therefore, need to buy the 5ft (1.5m) units to construct a 2ft 6in (75cm) wall, rather than the 3ft (90cm) unit.
To further aid stability, concrete can be rammed near the base, but not under the base as this would form a sump where water can collect.
The back of the palisade wall can be lined with polythene which will not only give protection against continuous wetting of the timber, but will also stop soil oozing through.
Countrystone Walling
(ECC Building Products) This product, although made of concrete, perfectly reproduces the look and texture of rough dressed random stone.
The three different unit sizes can be arranged together to form a natural stone effect.
The cold grey resembles the colour of Bath stone, whereas the warm buff looks more like Cotswold limestone.
The top of the wall can be finished using the concrete units arranged on their edge, as you would do when building a drystone wall.
SUBURBAN SPLENDOUR USING MARSHALLS MARSHALITE WALLING
PLANTING IDEAS  The clean lines of Marshalite walling is ideally suited to town gardens.
Plants such as day lilies, hollyhocks, mallows and spiky phormium provide colour.
Geraniums, sea thrift and bedding spill over the edge.
PLANTING IDEAS  The natural tones of timber are matched with ferns, dwarf pines and ornamental grasses such as Miscanthus and Festuea.
Bold bergenias, geraniums and Polygonum affine add interest
RUSTIC APPEAL USING FOREST FENCING PALISADE
OLD WORLD CHARM USING ECC COUNTRYSTONE WALLING
PLANTING IDEAS  For a cottage garden feel mix campanula, white lillies and aquilegias among other perennials such as globe thistles, eryngiums and Crambe cordifolia .
Herbs such as rosemary, sage and lavender make the garden both useful and attractive
OPTIONS
STEP DETAILS
The timber steps illustrated have been made from Forest mini sleepers, which look like logs, but have two flat faces allowing them to be placed one on top of the other.
The normal method of securing is to drive a long nail through the end of the sleeper at an angle into the one beneath.
This would be difficult in a step situation.
An alternative, and probably stronger, method would be to drill holes from the top through the underlying sleeper and drive in metal reinforcing bars (see your local builders merchant).
Each step would need to be made out of two mini sleepers, giving a step of 8½ (21cm).
Either the top or the bottom step would need to be just one sleeper high, to give a total rise of 2ft 6in (75cm).
Each step tread needs to be a flat area of 18in(45cm).
When building timber steps, these treads can be filled in with compacted soil, finishing off with bark chippings.
Bark chippings can also be used as a mowing strip against the wall.
These strips would allow mowing right to the edge of the lawn and would also allow the edge to be trimmed with edging shears.
Steps can also be made from paving slabs and bricks or blocks.
For continuity use your concrete walling blocks as ‘risers’ beneath paving slabs.
Mortar slabs in position leaving a 1 in (25mm) lip over the block and tilt slightly forward so that they shed water.
Mini sleepers make durable steps
COSTING IT OUT
The comparative costs of materials per sq yd of wall (m²)
Forest Fencing 5ft (1.5m) Palisade about £53
Marshalite or Countryside Walling (incl. block backing) about £30
Surprisingly, the cost of timber Palisade is higher than Marshalite or Countryside walling, but is much easier to construct.
CHOOSE YOUR STYLE
STEP BY STEP
Use a template to make neat and continuous curve easy to achieve.
Use a peg or other marker to remind you to leave weep holes at regular intervals
Steps should be laid from the bottom upwards on a solid base of concrete.
Using a spirit level check that each course is level and the wall is vertical.
Lay coping stones across the top of the completed wall and then run a pointing tool or trowel along the mortar joints to produce a neat finish  
OUR THANKS TO ECC BUILDING PRODUCTS LTD FOR THEIR HELP WITH THIS FEATURE
NEXT MONTH: Design options for patio water gardens
PIPPA GREENWOOD'S PROBLEM PAGE
The TV and Wisley Garden plant doctor answers your problems
LOST TIP
Q
I have had an unfortunate accident with my new Ballerina apple tree, the top of the stem has been broken off.
The instructions tell you not to remove the growing tip until the tree has reached the final size you require, do I presume I'm stuck with a 2½ ft tall tree?
A
Although the final shape of the tree will be altered slightly, don't worry, you will find that the tree does get taller.
When damage like this has occurred you should always prune the stem back to a good, vigorous-looking bud.
You should then find that one of the buds near the break point becomes dominant over the others and can be trained to take the place of the original leader.
Once this has happened the tree will start to increase in height but, at the original point of damage there will still be a slight kink in the stem.
LINK STAKES
Q
I've visited several large gardens recently and find that in many cases the plants in the herbaceous borders are supported by plastic-coated wire frames of varying sizes.
I've not seen them in local garden centres, where can I obtain some?
A
From the description and sketch you drew I'm sure you've seen Link Stakes.
It really is advisable to get supports like these in place as soon as possible before the plants put on much growth — this way you'll avoid too much root injury when putting them in position and you'll ensure they're properly sited without breaking developing stems.
Link Stakes are available through several of the seed catalogues or contact the firm direct: Link Stakes Ltd, Upper Boddington, Daventry NN11 6DL Tel:(0327) 00329
BORDER FILLING
Q
Our neighbours have a large tree which grows near our boundary.
The tree itself is beautiful but the combination of the clay soil and the shade from the tree means its not easy to know what to grow in the west-facing border underneath.
I would like to fill it with herbaceous perennials, which would be suitable?
A
The oak will certainly be removing many nutrients from the soil so the first thing you should do is dig the area over well and incorporate plenty of organic matter such as well-rotted manure, garden compost, leaf mould or peat.
Regular feeding with a general fertiliser will help to ensure that the plants are always supplied with adequate food materials.
There are plenty of plants which should grow under the shade of the tree including Chrysanthemum maximum, Campanula glomerata, Anemone japonica, Coreopsis verticallata , bergenia, hererocallis, lupins,Geranium ‘Johnson's Blue’ and oriental poppies.
To get a better idea of all the options you take a look at a few good catalogues, such as tat from Bressingham Gardens, Diss, Norfolk IP22 2AB.
DROUGHT STRESS
A
For the last couple of years my Sambucus racemosa ‘Plumosa Aurea’ has started well in spring, but soon the leaves brown and some even fall early.
I always water with rain water, what am I doing wrong?
A
We suspect that your golden elder is basically quite healthy but, as soon as the warmer, drier weather sets in it is showing signs of drought stress.
Always remember that you can use tap water on it, if you've only used drain water it sill certainly have been a bit short these last two summers.
‘Re-cycled’ bath or washing-up water can be used too.
In spring mulch the soil around it well after giving it a good soaking, this will encourage the soil to stay moist.
SOIL STERILIZERS
Q
Please can you give me the address of a firm which supplies soil sterilizers suitable for use with small quantities of soil?
A
We suggest you contact the following firms: Thermoforce Ltd, Camplex Plantcare Division, Heybridge Works, Maldon, Essex CM9 7NW.
(Camplex Soil Sterilizers treat 34 or 68 litres with dry heat).
Or Nobles (Wellingborough) Ltd, Midland Road, Wellingborough, Northants NN8 1LU.
(The Nobles Soil Sterilizer treats 9 litres by steam).
BLIND DAFFODILS
Q
Two years ago I planted over sixty daffodils, they all seem to have come up, produced plenty of foliage, quite a few had flower buds, but only a handful managed to actually flower.
Do you think they were faulty or have I done something wrong?
A
Your daffodils seem to be suffering from the problem known as ‘blindness’, that is they produce foliage but even when they do produce buds these remain small and dry out before opening up.
This condition is usually associated with bulbs which have naturalised and, having been inadequately maintained, they gradually become less and less vigorous and do not have sufficient energy to produce flowers.
Sadly the very dry weather we have had over the last two summers has meant that even young bulbs have not been able to bulk up their energy supplies and so the following year they have been unable to produce flowers.
You did not say which type of daffodils you had, but generally the problem is most common on multi-headed or double-flowered varieties.
You should find that with regular watering and feeding until the foliage dies down naturally the situation will improve next year.
MOSS PROMOTION
Q
I have a new brick wall, how can I promote the growth of moss and algae that will make it look less new?
A
We suggest you paint it with yoghurt, seaweed liquid fertiliser or a solution made by soaking a hessian bag of manure in water for a few hours.
Whichever substance you use, put it on in as concentrated a form as you can using a large paint brush.
You may find that you need to apply the solution several times and should obviously avoid doing the gob just before a rain storm is forecast.
PROPOGATOR ADVICE
I have recently been given an electric propagator and am keen to grow lots of plants from seed.
Can you give me some general advice please?
Filling you garden with colour from plants raised from seeds you have sown yourself is definitely very satisfying and an experience I'm sure you'll soon enjoy.
FIRST STEPS
Remember that the information such as sowing times, temperature requirements together with the plant's ideal growing conditions should be on the back of each packet.
When you go to choose your seed, take your time and avoid rash purchases.
Many companies give an indication of how easy (or difficult!) each plant is to raise so I'd suggest that for the first year you stick with fairly easy ones, perhaps trying a couple of ‘harder’ ones.
This way you'll make any mistakes with seeds which are more likely to survive sowing error.
Most seed is best sown in trays of either multi-purpose or preferably seed compost.
Fill the tray with sieved compost to within about ½ in (12 mm) of the rim and tamp it down to produce a flat surface.
Water in the compost, using a fine rose on a watering can trying to avoid disturbing the surface too much.
Alternatively, you can stand the trays in shallow water until the compost surface appears moist.
I would tend to favour the first method as you are less likely to let the compost get too wet.
Watering after sowing, means it is all too easy to wash the seeds into clumps.
SEED SOWING
Next carefully sow the seeds, trying to do this as evenly and thinly as you can..
Some people find it easiest to put the seeds in the palm of their cupped hand whilst gently tapping with the other hand so that the seeds are rolled slowly down the groove formed on the palm.
This takes a bit of practice and does not work well if you hands tend to be on the clammy side!
With larger seeds you may find it easiest to use your finger and thumb and drop them onto the compost.
With very fine seed try mixing it with fine silver sand to ensure the seeds are not sown too closely.
After sowing sieve compost over the tray to cover the seeds (unless the packet states otherwise).
Most seeds should be covered to a depth equal to their size, but again check the packet.
Label the trays clearly with the plant name, date and any other relevant information.
Most annuals can be placed straight into the propogator, providing it is set at a temperature within the stated range, but some need to be covered with a polythene bag or sheet of glass.
SEEDLING TROUBLES
Remember, in some cases germination is inhibited by the warmth of the propagator, so again check seed pack instructions.
As soon as the seeds germinate, the tray must be put in a cooler position with full light supplied — if you don't do this they will get weak and leggy and be very prone to damping off disease.
This problem is potentially lethal as the disease kills off seedlings and soon spreads throughout the tray.
To reduce the chances of it troubling your seedlings, always use mains water and give occasional waterings with a copper-based fungicide.
Golden elderberry must be kept moist
Moss growing on a wall takes away a ‘new’ appearance
Sow large seeds individually and lightly cover with compost
DIARY
BY DAVID POPLE
KITCHEN GARDEN
Plant new fruit trees carefully and give adequate support until established
Plant fruit trees and bushes in their permanent positions as soon as possible.
Take care to keep the swollen union of fruit trees — where the top growth is grafted on to the root stock — well above ground level.
After planting, spread a thick mulch of organic matter over the soil around the trees to conserve moisture.
Examine all those planted the previous autumn and winter to see that the soil has not been loosened by frost.
If it has, tread it firm again.
Also, check hardwood cuttings inserted in autumn.
If they have been lifted by frost, push them back down so their bases sit on the soil and refirm the soil.
Plant garlic, shallots and Jerusalem artichokes as soon as possible, early potatoes about mid-month.
Leave onion sets until the end of March or early April when the soil should be warmer.
A cold snap following planting may cause them to bolt.
As soon as the soil is dry enough to rake towards the end of the month, don't delay sowing such hardy crops as cabbage, non-bolting beetroot, lettuce, spinach, peas and broad beans.
Give winter cauliflowers and spring cabbage a feed of nitrogenous fertiliser, if not already done, to spur them into fresh growth and increase their size and tenderness.
Begin picking rhubarb forced under bins or boxes as soon as the sticks are large enough.
Plant strawberries to make a new bed.
Later on remove all their blossom from summer-fruiting varieties to ensure they make strong crowns before beginning to fruit next year.
Pick off just the first flush of flowers from the ever-bearing kinds.
Spray apples and pears, as soon as their buds break, with a combined insecticide and fungicide to control scab.
Repeat when the green blossom buds are clearly visible and again when they change colour before opening.
Remove protective coverings from outdoor figs about mid month if the weather is mild.
Cut out about a quarter of the old bare wood from established trees by shortening some branches back to suitable side branches and severing others at the base.
Weed and thin out where necessary over-wintered rows of peas, broad beans, onions, spinach and lettuce.
Work a dressing of general fertiliser in along either side of the rows.
Give a little extra nitrogen to blackcurrants and cooking apples; extra potash to gooseberries and red and white currants.
SPRING LAWN CARE
Finish turfing before the month is out, if possible.
Also complete the digging of any area to be sown with grass next month
Clean up moss-infested areas of sward with a moss killer.
Trim ragged lawn edges with the aid of a half-moon edging iron.
Use a board or a line as a guide when cutting straight edges or a length of hose pipe for curves.
Clear leaves and other debris from the sward.
Lightly trim the grass using a sharp mower if the surface is looking rough, but do not cut it short.
Use a light roller to resettle turf laid during autumn and winter.
Moss infestations can be cleared from the lawn now
SOWING BEDDING PLANTS
The majority of bedding plants can be sown in warmth this month.
Sow the seeds in trays or pots, depending on the number of plants required.
Prepare the containers by filling loosely to the brim with peat compost, press it down gently with finger pressure around the rim of the tray to ensure there are no air pockets and roughly level it again, then press it down to make a firm, level surface about ½ in (12mm) below the rim.
Water the containers and allow to drain, then sow the seed thinly over the surface.
Mix tiny seeds with a little clean (baked) sand before sowing to get an even spread.
If you take care spacing out larger seeds you'll make it easier to prick them out later.
Cover those seeds that need it with a layer of sifted compost and firm it over them.
Label each container clearly.
Place the sown containers in a warm propagator to germinate.
Alternatively, enclose in clean, clear polythene bags or cover with cling film to prevent moisture loss and stand them in a warm place.
Lightly press the compost before sowing
Carefully sow evenly and thinly
After sowing label each pot clearly
Do not let seed or seedlings dry out
FLOWER GARDEN
Any rock and border plants still to be lifted, split-up and re-planted should be dealt with as soon as possible.
Also plant replacements to fill gaps, or collections to fill new areas.
Set out sweet peas seedlings over-wintered in frames once they are fully hardened off.
As soon as the chance of a severe frost is passed, remover any winter protection from semi-tender plants.
Cut off the top growth of catmint, but leave the pruning of caryopteris and fuchsias until new growth appears.
If the soil is fit to work in late March, sow the hardier annuals like calendulas, cornflower, larkspur, limnanthes, nigella and sweet peas.
Plant gladiolus corms in batches to provide a succession of blooms.
Prune bush roses and any shrub roses needing attention.
Once winter-flowering heathers finish flowering, clamp them lightly with shears to keep them compact.
Towards the end of the month cut santonlinas back hard to prevent them becoming straggly.
Protect alstroemaria , hostas and delphiniums from slugs, beginning before their new growth appears and continuing throughout spring.
GREENHOUSE
Pot up rooted chrysanthemum cuttings.
Take cutting of outdoor chrysanthemums and dahlias.
Prick out seedlings of cabbage, cauliflower and January-sown bedding salvias into trays or individual pots.
Always handle seedlings by a leaf, never by the stem which is easily damaged.
The smaller seedlings of fibrous rooted begonias and lobelia can be moved in small groups of three or four, instead of individually.
Start begonia and gloxinia tubers into growth.
Bury then hollow-side up in a tray of moist peat and keep them warm.
When shoots can be seen, double check that none of the tubers are upside down.
Pot up rooted cuttings of chrysanthemums
COMING NEXT MONTH
BUYERS GUIDE TO BONSAI
IF YOU'RE LONGING TO GROW BONSAI, WE'VE ALL THE ADVICE YOU NEED TO CHOOSE WISELY
POTTED GARDENS PART 2
BRING COLOUR TO YOUR GARDEN BY FOLLOWING OUR CREATIVE BEDDING SCHEMES FOR POTS AND TUBS
PUT UP A GREENHOUSE
ESSENTIAL TIPS FOR POSITIONING AND BUILDING YOUR LATEST PRIDE AND JOY AND YOUR CHANCE TO WIN ONE OF TWO £1000 ROBINSON GREENHOUSES
DESIGN OPTIONS: PATIO WATER GARDENS
OFF-THE-PEG IDEAS FOR TURNING A BLEAK EXPANSE OF PAVING INTO AN ATTRACTIVE CENTREPIECE
STARTING WITH ORNAMENTAL GRASSES
WITH COLOURS FROM ICY BLUE TO FIREY RED AND GROUND-HUGGING MOUNDS TO 9FT GIANTS, WHO CAN RESIST THEIR UNIQUE CHARM?
PLANTS FOR A MOIST SPOT
PROBLEM SOLVING IDEAS FOR THAT DIFFICULT WET AREA
PLUS
PASSION FOR PLANTS JOBS FOR THE MONTH YOUR PROBLEMS SOLVED AND MUCH MUCH MORE 
VISIT TWO SUPERB GARDENS
READ ABOUT VANESSA COOK'S IDYLLIC COUNTRY GARDEN.
IT'S BURSTING WITH BRILLIANT IDEAS
MEET TONY AND LINDA, A COUPLE WITH AN INCREDIBLE RANGE OF UNUSUAL PLANTS — ALL IN A GARDEN 25FT SQUARE
DON'T MISS THE GARDENER'S WORLD EXCLUSIVE COVER GIFT…
TWO DWARF PAMPAS GRASS PLANTS ABSOLUTELY FREE WITH THE APRIL ISSUE ON SALE 7 MARCH.
ORDER YOUR COPY NOW OR WHY NOT SUBSCRIBE USING THE COUPONS BELOW
THE ULTIMATE PAMPAS GRASS
OUR BEAUTIFUL DWARF VARIETY GROWS JUST 4FT TALL, PRODUCING NUMEROUS SILVERY PLUMES IN SUMMER.
YOUR TWO FREE PLANTS COME FIRMLY ROOTED AND READY TO GROW ON.
LAST BUT NOT LEAST…
In this season of conserted garden activity, Nigel Colborn remains faint-hearted at the prospect of springing into action
Whoops!
Here comes the spring again!
You can tell by the signs — not, as you might thin, an early primrose opening its frail petals to the strengthening sun, or the tweet of birds in the tree outside the bedroom window, but by the growing pile of work.
Mind you, it's not the size of the workload that matters — after all, gardening is supposed to be fun — but the agony of deciding which jobs to do first.
WHAT'S TO BE DONE?
Well, the first thing to remember is that things aren't half as bad as you think, so don't panic!
Even if the work has piled up a bit, you wouldn't really want to chicken out, would you?
Would you prefer to move to a flat — one without so much as a balcony and with no windowsills — or to concrete your garden over and spend your days watching your neighbours at work?
Of course you wouldn't.
‘The first thing to remember is that things aren't as bad as you think, so don't panic’
No, all you need, to catch up with spring work, is a little expertise in time management.
Organisation they say — though I've never cracked it myself — is the key to success and you can't hope to be efficient unless, for a start, you have a tidy garden shed or garage, where most people store tools these days!
This was brought home to me recently when I went into mine (a rash and dangerous move at the best of times) to fetch the hosepipe.
The chain of events I sparked off nearly led to my untimely demise.
CHAIN OF EVENTS
I wanted to top up the pond I'd been cleaning out.
The hose was where I'd left it last summer, not neatly stored but tangled in a corner, its untidy coils covering a rake, a batch of canes and a pair of long-handled shears.
I picked up the nearest coil and began to gather it up, but whereas in the summer heat the pipe had been soft and flexible, it now had the consistency of a steel cable and was like trying to lift a bedframe designed by Salvador Dali.
Stepping forward to get a firmer grip, I trod on the rake whose handle leapt up, giving me a nasty crack on the brow and a making me stagger, knocking a bottle of systemic insecticide on to the floor, where it shattered and spread a nauseating puddle at my feet.
I would have kept my presence of mind if the mouse, disturbed by all the commotion, hadn't actually jumped into my welly.
Instead, I ran screaming like a banshee into the garden engulfed in coils of stiffened pipe and looking like some mythical figure being consumed by a serpent.
THE MASTER PLAN
But you see, if I'd been properly organised, none of these disasters would have happened.
Chastened and tearful, I tidied the garden shed and resumed spring work resolving to be more efficient and better organised for the future.
No doubt you're very switched on, when it comes to good productivity but in case, like me, you are more than a touch muddy, here are some helpful hints.
1.
Whatever spot you choose to work in, take everything with you.
What you really need is a shed on wheels which you can pull behind you.
Sadly, mine is a sort of hole in the wall — not possible to move — so I spend more time running back and forth to fetch tools than I do using them.
An alternative might be a pair of gardener's overalls with loops and pockets which will carry absolutely everything.
If they had a hook at the back you could probably tow the lawnmower about with you, too!
2.
Where you have a persistent problem with perennial weeds, label them and tell your friends they are part of your bid to conserve our natural flora.
3.
When sowing annuals, disregard the instructions on the packet.
Stand in the middle of the border, tip the seeds on to the palm of your hand and throw them up in the air as high as you possibly can.
The results will be exactly the same as if you sowed carefully in drill: a total of five seedlings will come up — four on the same square inch and the fifth in the crack on the path!
4.
If yours is still being mended, borrow your neighbour's mower and cut the lawn.
You'll be amazed how much better it will make your garden look.
While you savour the delicious smell of new mown grass, relax for a few moments, drink in the March sunshine and enjoy the prospect of spring — that's what gardening is all about.