

Jahsaxa had summoned Tammuz Malamute to her office before Zambia turned up for treatment.
She seemed, to Tammuz, quite agitated, pacing up and down behind her desk, swishing around in a long, belted gown.
She made hurried inquiries as to Zambia's progress, to which Tammuz responded carefully, alerted by her mood.
‘What I really need to know is, when can Crevecoeur begin…work?’ she said, spitting the words out as if they tasted bad.
Tammuz took that badness full in the face.
A cool, inner part of him was amused to observe how shocked he was.
‘Well…well, I don't like to…
’ He fumbled for words helplessly.
Jahsaxa's stare had become dangerous.
‘I need to know, Malamute,’ she said frostily, and Tammuz knew what she was really asking for was his permission to intrude upon his therapy programme.
‘It's out of the question!’ he blurted.
‘Too soon, far too soon.
Could do irreparable damage.’
Jahsaxa merely raised an inquiring eyebrow at his blather.
‘Well today you had just better fix it so there won't be any damage,’ she said, and then speared him with a saccharin smile.
‘Hadn't you?’
Tammuz had retreated to his office in despair, on his knees before a cold inner voice which nagged unsympathetically.
You knew this would happen.
Crevecoeur is a whore.
Why should you care?
SHe's garbage: polluted, unclean, loathsome.
Hardly even human; a freak.
Be sensible.
His sentimental side gibbered wrathfully in reply.
Zambia Crevecoeur is being abused.
Club Eleusis is an abomination.
Goddess, I can't bear to think of what the scum who come here will do to hir.
Then don't think about it.
Do what Jahsaxa wants and get out of here.
You've walked away from better people than this in your life before.
He hardened his heart and turned on his computer, smiling acidly at the screen.
Crevecoeur's mind-map swam towards his eyes.
Fool, Tammuz told himself.
SHe's been ready for this so-called ‘work’ since about the fourth day.
What the hell were you thinking of doing?
Fool.
He knew that, even after today, he still would not tell Jahsaxa his work was finished.
Things were getting spooky for Zambia Crevecoeur.
Since SHe had begun to feel better in hirself, hir surroundings gradually swam into clear focus.
And what SHe saw turned on hir flight or flee circuit in earnest.
There was no immediate threat but, even to an idiot, it was obvious SHe was virtually a prisoner in Club Eleusis now.
For all hir faults, Zambia did not consider hirself stupid.
There were too many locked doors — all those leading to the street, tame excuses by the staff, brief interviews with Penumbra who claimed she was so busy and that of course Zambia could go out once she was sure SHe was well enough.
‘What would happen if you had a blackout on the street?
Be sensible, Zambia.’
Always that.
Be sensible.
Part of hir was afraid Jahsaxa was planning on more than just keeping hir as a highclass whore.
There were ripples in the air of something bigger, something not altogether pleasant.
Enlightenment, if such can be the word, came on the evening following Jahsaxa's conversation with Tammuz Malamute.
Zambia!
Dinner in my apartment tonight!’
Jahsaxa trilled happily, gliding silkily into Zambia's room after lunch.
Zambia wondered what unpleasantness was concealed behind the apparent privilege.
From Haiku, SHe had learned Ms Penumbra always put a price on everything.
‘Nice,’ SHe said.
‘Oh, what a face!’
Jahsaxa laughed.
Zambia was reminded of a line from a childhood poem: the smile on the face of the tiger.
‘You should be pleased.
We're going to celebrate your getting well.’
‘Are we?’
Jahsaxa put on her business mask and almost forgot to smile.
‘Look your best, Crevecoeur.
There will be guests.’
Zambia had never set foot inside Jahsaxa's personal space before but, as SHe suspected, it was tastefully bare, illumined softly by concealed  lighting.
There was a gigantic salon, clinically white, and in this room sat the collected archons of Sector 23's palaces of pleasure.
Jahsaxa ushered Zambia into the room.
SHe realised with a dreadful clench of the stomach that SHe was a morsel of raw flesh being thrown into a blood-spiced pool of hungry sharks.
The introductions were discreet: a small, perfumed and pomaded man was presented as Club Minerva; another, satanically tall and clothed in black, as Club Hecate; a woman, manifesting the blonde, icy power of a Nordic goddess as Club Adonis.
Altogether, there were six members of Jahsaxa's peer group present.
An exquisite minimalist banquet was laid on for their benefit.
Zambia could not eat a thing.
Jahsaxa's friends politely praised hir appearance, asking flattering questions in soft voices, always smiling.
The conversation passed effortlessly from mundane matters to philosophy, spirituality, politics, art.
Zambia was not deceived.
SHe'd lived on the street too long.
All they were really talking about was fucking.
Wine the colour of clear water sparkled in smoky glass flutes, to accompany the snorting of consciousness-altering powders.
Queen of Night incense smokelessly exuded a heady perfume into the air.
Despite the heavy consumption of intoxicants, no one 's voice ever rose above a husky whisper.
Zambia hunched miserably on a plump floor-cushion, awaiting execution of hir sentence.
Occasionally Jahsaxa would catch hir eye and smile.
Do not fail me, Crevecoeur.
As midnight chimed from her sliver of a wall-clock she rose and proposed a toast.
‘To my beloved child, Zambia,’ she said.
‘Who tonight will demonstrate what I feel will become a sought-after attraction at Club Eleusis.
To you, my friends, I offer the first taste.’
She drank, savouring the flavour with closed eyes.
She was more intoxicated than she looked.
‘To the Goddess, a sacrifice!’ she cried.
The guests moved in with outstretched hands.
Zambia closed hir eyes.
They pushed hir on to hir back.
In haste, in silence, they pulled off hir clothes, exclaiming, oh so softly, at the delights they uncovered.
Zambia could hear Jahsaxa clucking appreciatively somewhere nearby.
‘Disgusting!’ said a man gleefully and stabbed Zambia viciously in the stomach.
That was what it felt like.
‘Greedy!’ said another.
Zambia coughed with pain.
Jahsaxa, kneeling on Zambia's hair spread out on the floor, roughly put her taloned fingers in hir silently screaming mouth, and  jerked hir head backwards.
‘Enjoy, Zambia, my pretty.
You are made for sharing.
Enjoy!’
That was the point when Zambia turned off completely, abandoning hir body to whatever its new job demanded of it.
The next day, SHe would remember less than half of it.
‘So how do you feel today, Zambia?’
Tammuz, sitting opposite the gleaming androgyne of surgery and neural nudging, considered that he himself was feeling far from good that day.
He had a memory of struggling through the darkened recesses of Roirbak's labyrinthine abode late at night, blindly knocking things from his path in an effort to reach the sluice drain before his urge to vomit overcame him.
A gutfucking combination of inexpensive liquor and a couple of ampoules which were supposed to make him euphoric.
Sad really.
He should have known the consequences: half an hour of relative cheer followed by thunderous visceral revenge.
Some time during the muzzy fug of these dissipations, a decision had been reached.
That morning, Tammuz had told Jahsaxa his work was over.
He knew he had to turn his back on Crevecoeur, dreading the day he would see physical signs that SHe had been working.
It was sad that this feeling of desire and affection — so alien to him — had been wasted on such a creature.
Then again, maybe not so sad.
Just a lesson.
His old self would have scorned such sentimentality.
He would not make this mistake again.
Zambia Crevecoeur rested hir chin on hir hand in the habitual siren pose, and said, ‘Well, I feel better than you look, I guess.’
‘I agree that's not difficult,’ Tammuz leaned back, sighed.
He had not yet told Zambia he was leaving.
‘I've been thinking,’ Zambia said.
‘Yes?’
‘You don't like Penumbra that much, do you?’
SHe let the statement hang, perhaps as a prompt.
Tammuz didn't respond.
‘I don't think you like what she did to me much either.’
Tammuz leaned forward.
‘You know nothing of the sort.
This is merely a subjective attempt to externalise your own feelings.
I've told you about this, haven't I?’
‘I'm not going to argue with you.
Will you hear me out?’
‘Go ahead.’
‘Well, with all the things we've discussed, the way you've made me see myself, I've decided I shouldn't stick around here.’
Tammuz rolled his eyes.
‘I know I'm your therapist, but I don't think it's a good idea to tell me this.
Are you aware of how much Ms Penumbra has invested in you?’
‘That doesn't mean diddlysquat to me.
It's my life, my body.
I want your advice.
Your work on me was a success, wasn't it?
I'm not howling crazy anyway.
I think there must be things I can do now, lucrative things, to get me out of this scene.
Am I right?’
Tammuz shrugged.
‘If you want an honest opinion, I reckon there were things you could have done to achieve that before you ever let Jahsaxa persuade you to undergo these changes.’
‘I know that.
I don't need you to tell me.
Can't you answer me straight?’
‘I'm not paid to get involved in ideas of yours to swindle my employer, Zambia.’
Crevecoeur snorted and pushed backwards in hir chair.
‘OK, I get it.
You don't give a shit.
Are you going to tell her what I said?’
Tammuz smiled.
‘I won't need to do that,’ he said, glancing briefly beyond Zambia's shoulder at the wall behind.
‘It seems I've helped you assimilate certain somatic adjustments, but I have not increased your intelligence.’
Crevecoeur looked momentarily shocked; this was followed rapidly by expressions of self-disgust, frustration and finally, a covert cunning.
‘Your advice is for me to stay here then?’
Tammuz' eyes were glassy.
‘Yes, I think you should.
You'll be looked after, and it's hardly work you're not used to.
I've done my job, and quite well, I think.
That's as far as it goes with me.
You're on your own now.
Be sensible.’
After Zambia had left, Tammuz put his head in his hands and groaned.
He didn't even care whether Jahsaxa was watching him or not.
Crevecoeur left Malamute's room energised by frustrated anger.
Foolish not to realise the place was wired.
Malamute must think hir crazy.
And to risk the man's safety that way too.
Unbelievably foolish!
Zambia's self-preservation instinct deep inside was screaming: Time to get out and fast!
If SHe'd known Jahsaxa'd had hir fixed this way just to be an orgy machine, then SHe'd never have gone through with it.
Desperation and hunger had addled hir senses: SHe should have guessed what the score would be.
Jahsaxa's pals had virtually pulled hir to bits.
Zambia was not a squeamish person — couldn't afford to be — but there were limits.
Also, SHe didn't think Parmedes' handiwork was exactly designed for such a pummelling.
SHe had no desire to discover for hirself at what point serious physical injury might occur.
The only time SHe'd ever felt this rough before was after hir last fight with Cab, when he'd tried to kick hir spine out — from the front.
Augmenting hir anger at hir own stupidity was the knowledge that Malamute was right.
There had been things Crevecoeur could have done to get out, such as take advantage of the open invitation to take up with Cab's natro group.
OK, so relations were unsteady with little brother right now, but it would have been better than this.
Today, all the things Crevecoeur had once found repellent about leaving the city seemed intensely desirable.
Freedom.
A heady word.
Also, despite what had occurred in the past between them, SHe needed Cab so badly now it hurt more than the bruises in hir belly.
The Crevecoeurs had always closed ranks in times of crisis, hadn't they?
It was best not to think about what Cabochon would have to say about the sexual readjustment.
Star Eye, however, could be anywhere at present.
SHe needed a more immediate bolt-hole.
The streets were too dangerous.
SHe'd have to speak to Malamute.
Obviously, SHe'd have to ratbelly hir way out of this place first, if only to get Malamute on his own.
SHe knew he was holed up at Roirbak's place, and was convinced hir instincts were right that Malamute hated Penumbra and was coping with moral dilemmas about what he'd done for her.
Malamute was smart and he was a runhide, Zambia was sure.
Call it developing female insight, but SHe somehow knew Malamute was a man with a secret, a man in disguise, and also a man who knew the way SHe could turn this whole mess into an advantage.
Admittedly, SHe foresaw he would probably be difficult about it, but that should not be a major problem.
Once you were a survivor, Zambia told hirself.
Get back in form.
SHe'd been charting possible escape routes for a while now, the main reason for not taking advantage of them being a certain concurrence with Jahsaxa's opinion that blackouts could occur on the street.
Zambia had no wish to be found out cold by someone who might discover what SHe was.
SHe'd heard about how gender meddling had been outlawed because of the high suicide rate among the successfully mutated.
Whatever research still went on in that area remained the privilege of Tech-Green itself: unpublished and hidden.
Knowing all  this only heightened Zambia's caution.
Goddess knew what would happen to hir if SHe was taken by the authorities.
For three endless days, Zambia patiently bided hir time before making an escape bid.
Although SHe suffered a disquieting disappointment when Jahsaxa told hir Malamute would not be coming back (not even a goodbye!), it was probably for the best.
Perhaps Jahsaxa would not suspect Zambia would ask him for help.
The woman had also been the nearest she could get to contrite about what had happened in her apartment.
‘They were a little too eager, perhaps,’ she'd said.
Zambia gritted hir teeth and said, ‘That's OK.
Give me time to stop aching, will you — before the next time.’
Jahsaxa had graciously assented to this.
‘You are a treasure, Zambia,’ she'd said.
‘A triumph.’
Zambia knew there would not be a next time.
Not with any of Jahsaxa's punters.
SHe had hir own ideas about the future of hir body now.
On the third day, SHe waited until the Quiet, those couple of hours before Eleusis opened for business when most people were resting or tanking up their psyches and libido for work.
It was no secret that Jahsaxa monitored Zambia's quarters: the cameras were blatantly undisguised, which Jahsaxa had insisted was for Zambia's own safety.
‘If anything…happened…someone will come over right away,’ she'd said.
‘It's best this way, don't you think?
For now.’
Zambia had been in total agreement at first.
SHe wondered whether, other than through the blunder in Malamute's office.
Jahsaxa was aware of hir change of heart.
She was preternaturally sharp, after all.
Perhaps any attempt to sneak out would be a waste of time.
The humiliation at being caught would be unbearable.
Nevertheless, Zambia slouched into hir showercub as if going to relieve hirself, only partially closing the door.
SHe pissed into the tube and then turned on the shower.
It might cover any sounds SHe might make.
The showercub window was tiny and three floors up.
Below lay a yard, which was sometimes full of empty liquor casings, picked up by the suppliers whenever there was a new delivery.
At present the pile of plasticases was small, but enough to break a fall if necessary.
Zambia was skinny as a leather lace.
SHe shimmied silently through the window crack like a cat through balanced crates.
There were no pipes attached to the wall at this point, and the ground looked  horribly far away.
No matter, you know how to roll, Zambia told hirself firmly.
The casings were a little way to the right, spilling out of a back door to the club.
Grilles in the sheer wall throwing out rods of light indicated the kitchens.
There was no sound coming from there, but people might be working all the same.
Zambia launched hirself from the window, twisting hir body to the right, throwing up hir legs to, hopefully, land on hir shoulder.
The impact was sickening and loud.
Crates, concealing the feral cats who could negotiate them without disturbance, crashed into disarray, furry bodies sleeking out and away.
Zambia allowed hirself the privilege of a suppressed curse.
There was no time to probe for injuries.
As long as hir legs worked, SHe must be out of here.
A nasal voice screeched from inside the building, ‘And what the fuck was that?!’
No time to let them find out.
Crouched low to the ground, Zambia fled across the yard and down the alley at the back.
Pain racked hir back and shoulders, the side of hir face.
SHe had a feeling there was blood flowing.
Hir stomach contracted so fiercely, SHe nearly threw up.
A sanctuary was needed — quickly.
Alix Micklemas part-owned a hi-res tattoo salon three blocks east of Club Eleusis.
Crevecoeur had for a brief, intoxicating time enjoyed intimate relations with Ms Micklemas, an affair whose firepower had been skyfilling and radiant and whose energy devoured itself within two weeks.
They had remained friends thereafter, each possessed of a vague disappointment in the other for which they blamed themselves.
Zambia had not seen Alix for months, ever since she'd set up home with the kid with prosthetic limbs who claimed his disfigurement was due to a variety of fantasies, all of which were subject to detail change, and none of which ever sounded convincing.
Zambia had disliked the boy on sight, despite the sculpted Nordic features and honey skin, and had kept away from Alix-haunts because of this.
Now she was the only person near enough Zambia could think of who could help hir.
The nature of Alix's profession demanded she kept a certain amount of medical equipment around.
Laser viruses were not unknown.
Alix was out front of the premises poking a flickering neon sign with a length of plastic tubing.
She had the first and second floor of a thin, dilapidated building that was a ruin above the third storey.
Her workshop took up all the space on the first floor, her apartment, which had all the inner walls knocked out, the second.
She was a gaudy advert for her own talents; her shaved skull crawling with tattoos that curled down her neck and back like hair.
Zambia noticed she'd grown a tuft of the real stuff back which fell into her eyes.
Her clothes were multi-layered and tattered.
‘Zambia!
Hi!’ she said, noticing hir standing nearby, watching her attack the neon.
‘This looks crazy right?
But it usually works.’
‘Are you trying to turn it off or on?’
Zambia asked, wiping hir cheekbone.
After the quick sprint from Penumbra's, the cut there was bleeding heavily.
‘Neither.
Just stop the bitch flickerin' so.
Goddess, Zam, that blood there or am I just behind in what's glam nowadays?’
‘Got a minute, Alix?’
‘Sure.
Come in.’
She led the way up a flight of stairs, shouting a greeting as they passed the entrance to the ball-scryer's receiving room on the ground floor.
Mammy Crystal was a bona fide crone; a colourful local character.
‘That Zambia?
Zambia Crevecoeur?’ cried a querulous female voice.
‘Yeah, Mammy, how's the future?’
Zambia responded, trying to lower hir voice.
‘Brighter'n yours, I reckon, boy!
I allus seen black around you!’
Alix flicked a sneer over her shoulder as she mounted the stairs, ‘Old hag!’ she hissed.
‘Well, ain't you gonna pop in an’ chew tonguewag with moi?’the fortune-teller screeched.
‘Later, maybe!’
Zambia called back.
Alix opened the door to her salon, revealing a pink-lit interior studded with UV halo-spots and draped with the ophidian coils of her lasers and printers.
She picked up a sleek length of smoked silver.
‘Seen one of these before, Zam?
This neat, right, easy to use as an air-brush, forty pin, with a palette of 252 separate tones.
State-of-the-Art, yeah!
‘Seems like the business is going well.’
‘Yeah.’
Alix wrinkled her nose.
‘The Kid left.’
‘Shame.
Take a look at me, will you?
I just jumped out of a window.’
‘Oooh!
How far up?’
She turned Crevecoeur's head to the side, ‘And, like, why?’
‘Three storeys and the tale is long.’
‘Haven't seen you around much lately.
Been one or two rumours 'bout you too.’
She rolled her eyes.
‘Big rumours!’
Zambia grunted uncomfortably and sat down on one of the couches.
‘Cab called,’ Alix added.
‘He was tryin' to find you.’
‘What'd you tell him?’
Alix grinned.
‘Trust me, Crevecoeur.
Nothin'.
He's on his way in, though.’
Zambia groaned.
‘Fuck!’
Alix brought a chrome bowl out of an open cupboard, set it down ajangle with instruments of torture and turned on the generator for her machines.
Zambia blanched.
‘I want a clean up, not a snakesiren making it with a mongoose on my face.’
‘Relax, it's styptic,’ Alix said, waving a hissing nozzle.
‘Also, antiseptic, antiviral and it cicatrizes.’
‘Is that good?’
‘Sure.’
‘Ouch!’
‘Hold still.
Goddess Zam, you sure look different.
What is this, electrolysis?’
‘Sort of.’
‘Saves time in the mornings, I guess.
Had a chest infection, have you?’
‘Er…
‘Engrossed in her work, Alix flicked off the medstick and applied a lashing of old-fashioned synth-skin from an aerosol.
‘OK, take your clothes off.’
‘Why?’
‘You were limping, also your eyes register pain.
I know these things.
Come on, strip.
There ain't nothin' I've not seen before under there.’
Zambia stood up.
‘The face was all I was worried about.
I'm fine.
Do I owe you?’
‘Don't be ridiculous!’
Alix cackled, pushing hir down again.
‘Come on, what are you hiding?
Let another artist paint your skin, is that it?’
‘In a way.’
‘Shame on you, Crevecoeur!
Listen, you look sick, I'll let you off.
I don't mind.
Just take off the clothes.’
‘No.’
‘Zambia!’
Alix playfully wrestled with hir fastenings.
‘This is not a game!’
Zambia tried to hold her off.
She wouldn't have it.
‘You're not leaving till I scan you,’ she sang.
‘OK, OK, just don't complain right?
And don't scream.’
Alix sat down on a stool, put her head on one side.
‘Zam, what you been up to?’
‘Don't ask.’
SHe kicked off hir boots, stripped off hir shirt and trousers.
It was not even necessary to remove hir underwear before Alix started yelling.
SHe knew it was unlikely SHe could count on Alix's discretion, but the need for medical backup had been worth the disclosures.
After the girl had calmed down enough to operate her scanning equipment, a number of hairline fractures had been revealed and a torn muscle.
Alix's menagerie of coils could fix that, but her hands shook as she used them.
‘Goddess, Zam, you prick, you dogsick prick,’ she murmured, shaking her head.
‘What the hell you wanna do that for?
It's a freakshow.’
She kept her eyes averted from Crevecoeur's stomach with its fleet of  sphincters , mouthing like anemones in pulse with hir pain.
Sulky bruises soured the skin.
‘Lady, your tits are bigger than mine!’
‘That's not difficult.
Be careful!’
‘Lay still.
Goddess, Goddess, I seen it all now, I truly have.
Zambia Crevecoeur, orifice hypermall in person.’
‘All right, all right .
Your nausea is imprinted on my brain.
You don't have to say any more.’
‘Someone's bin joy-ridin' you, ain't they?’
She burrowed in her equipment carryall.
‘Got somethin' to help fix that.
Friend o’ mine was jumped pretty badly some time back…
‘Zambia gasped.
‘Leave it, A!’ don't touch.
Ow!
Stop!’
‘Hold still!
Won't take a minute.’
She appraised her handiwork.
‘Jahsaxa Penumbra did this?
And I mean, like,all of this?’
I shouldn't have said that, Crevecoeur thought, too late.
‘I didn't tell you that.
Forget it.’
‘Where're you going to go?’
‘What you don't know can't be forced from you, sweet Alix.
Now, is that it?’
‘Yeah.
Just don't jump out of any more windows for a week or two.’
She frowned.
‘You're in deep this time, my friend, aren't you?’
‘Luckily I know how to breathe in shit.’
‘How heavy is this?
Is there a possibility I'm gonna hear about this on the news-shot some time?
Sex Shop Freak Found Dead in Gutter, or something?’
‘I hope it won't come to that.’
‘Zam, Penumbra virtually owns this sector.
And her friends own all the others.
You'll have to leave Arcady.’
‘I'll come up with something.
Don't worry.’
SHe pulled on hir clothes.
‘Keep quiet for as long as you can,’ SHe said, without much hope.
‘Got any cred?’
‘No.’
‘Here, I have some cash.
Untraceable.
And take that jacket.
There's blood on your shirt.’
‘Thanks Alix.’
SHe kissed the tattooist's cheek.
‘I owe you.’
‘I draw a line at paying for the funeral, remember that.’
Thanks to Alix's cash donation, Zambia was able to ride the highwire out to Roirbak's workshops.
SHe wondered whether SHe'd been missed from Club Eleusis yet.
It was possible Penumbra would be bright enough to contact Roirbak straight away.
Zambia hoped she'd think SHe'd bolt for the underworld after escaping.
Objectively, that would be the best place to head anyway.
Except that Tammuz Malamute was very much above ground.
Once the highwire had dropped hir off at Acropolis Ramp, the weather cycle changed and a fine mist appeared in the air to fall like rain.
Zambia licked hir cheeks.
The water tasted sweet and pure.
SHe liked the raintimes, but this was no place to savour them.
A covered walkway, already damp with footprints, led under the Midwest Highway that cut the city like a blade.
Zambia emerged into the tailored industrial park, most of which was dominated by Roirbak's hangars.
It was eerily quiet, the only sign of life being a handful of horticultural robots trimming the flora and lawns.
Zambia walked along the wet paths admiring the flushed roses trembling under the weight of moisture, releasing their voluptuous sickroom perfume.
A guide droid, alert for strangers, approached hir and was immediately  thrown into confusion by hir pheromones.
‘May I assist you sirmadamsirmadam?
Hmmm?’
‘Mr Roirbak's reception area?’
‘Do you have an appointment?’
‘I believe I'm expected.’
The concept of belief was another thing guaranteed to upset droids.
‘That way,’ indicated the guide, unaware of how its circuits would be relieved once Crevecoeur had vacated its scent perimeter.
Quincx Roirbak was preparing for an evening out when his receptionist summoned him.
‘An uninvited guest again?
Really Mellissa.
I told you not to disturb me.
I was changing.’
The robot continued insistently.
‘The person asks for Tammuz Malamute, Mr Roirbak.
I have no direct instructions on what action to take in this case.’
‘Have you informed Mr Malamute?’
‘I made a decision.
All accessions have to be reported to you, Mr Roirbak.’
Roirbak sighed.
‘Very well, I'll take a look.’
He considered.
If what he saw through security did not impress him, Tammuz need never know he'd had a visitor.
The mere fact of his suspicions concerning Tammuz dictated he must at least inspect who came calling.
What he saw intrigued him.
He sidled into the reception cubby and addressed his receptionist, an eerily svelte woman-form of perfect shape and minimal, pixie-like features.
‘Identify, Mellissa, if you please, that lifeform on our perimeter.’
‘It is human, age nineteen years, height 1.8 metres, unarmed.
Its gender, Mr Roirbak, I find unspecific, indeed vacillating, if such can be.
May I request information update in this area?’
Roirbak said good-humouredly.
‘Well, well.
I wonder whether our friend Tammuz Malamute is expecting this visitor.’
The doors sighed open and Zambia Crevecoeur ducked warily into the building.
SHe seemed haloed in mist, hair wet and tendrilled, clothes dripping.
‘And from which deep ocean have we risen?’
Roirbak inquired, sauntering out from the reception booth.
‘Sector 23,’ Zambia replied quickly.
‘I apologise for disturbing you.
May I see Tammuz Malamute?’
‘Perhaps.
Who are you and what do you want here?’
‘I'm Zambia, and I want to see Tammuz.’
SHe sensed obstruction and added sharply, ‘Is Mr Roirbak here?’
‘I am Quincx Roirbak.
Which of us do you want to speak with?’
‘Oh…
I'm here to see Tammuz Malamute.
I know it's out of order, me coming here like this, but it's urgent, couldn't wait.’
Roirbak pondered in silence for agonising seconds while Zambia panted with nerves in front of him.
Eventually he nodded.
‘Very well, wait here.
I'll have him informed of your arrival.’
‘Thank you.’
Roirbak began to walk away, then paused and turned.
‘Tammuz Malamute, you say?
Is that the only name you know him by?’
Zambia had slumped.
SHe straightened hir spine.
‘Yes.
I think so.
Yes.’
Tammuz was playing a contest of cunning with his computer.
Over the past few weeks, he'd detected a fiendish intelligence in the machine whose sense of humour he empathised with.
He'd also rigged it into the security systems as a precaution and was thus already rigid with dread when Roirbak communicated with him.
‘There's a visitor for you,’ Quincx said.
‘A delightful young lady that looks like a boy.
One of your creations perhaps?’
‘Name?’
Tammuz inquired in a monotone.
‘Er…
Zambia.
Would this, by any chance, be Zambia Crevecoeur, late of Club Eleusis?’
Tammuz sighed.
‘Late?
I hope not.
AWOL perhaps.
I'll be down, Quincx.
Sorry about this?’
‘No problem.
I'm fascinated.
Pity I have an appointment tonight.
I would like to view your handiwork.’
‘I'm only the French polisher, Quincx.
Another guy's responsible for the true  craftmanship .’
‘I detect distaste.’
‘You detect disturbance.
Where is SHe?’
‘Main gate.
‘Want…it…sent up?’
‘No.
Like I said, I'll be down.’
He flipped off his commset.
‘Damn!’ he told his computer.
‘Beyond my earthly powers!’ came the sassy message on the screen.
What disturbed Tammuz more than Zambia's unexpected visit was Roirbak's parting shot to hir.
Do you know Tammuz Malamute under any other name?
What did that mean?
Was it possible the old  fox had sussed him out and not let it show?
A round of applause for the acting ability of Quincx Roirbak in that case.
Zambia was still standing dejectedly by the reception booth smoking a cigarette the receptionist had given hir out of pity.
Mellissa kept on hand supplies of all delicacies necessary to human well-being.
Occasionally, Roirbak might walk through the door needing liquor, caffeine or nicotine immediately; business meetings could sometimes make him tense.
Zambia was answering the robot's questions about hir gender state when Tammuz sauntered lankily down the colonnaded walkway, hands in pockets.
Zambia's heart did a flip.
What a worn-out, haggard, rakish, unbelievably handsome beast, SHe thought.
‘Zambia,’ said Tammuz, trying to sound pissed off.
‘And what are we doing here, hmmmm?’
Zambia pushed back hir wet hair.
‘I throw myself at your feet, oh Lord Malamute.’
SHe snorted smoke and ground out the cigarette on the floor.
‘Shit, help me, you wise-ass.
Where else could I come?’
‘You realise this compromises me?’
‘So what?
You could be me.
Do I get invited in for a coffee or what?’
‘Anyone know you're here?’
‘You think I'm stupid?’
‘No, I just want to know if anyone knows you're here.’
‘Of course not.
Even I don't know where I am.’
‘Thank you Mellissa.
You can let hir go now.
Come on, Zambia Crevecoeur.’
The robot withdrew a seeking filament from Zambia's neck; SHe had not felt it.
Zambia followed Tammuz into the hangar.
He took hir to the canteen.
One of the domestics hummed up and down behind the counter, polishing the spotless ceraplas.
‘Put on a fresh pot of coffee, Sindy,’ Tammuz called.
‘Sindy?’
‘So, they're people too aren't they?
I don't go in for numbers as names.
Sit down, Zambia.
You hungry?’
Zambia shook hir head.
‘No…
This is some place you've got here, Malamute.’
‘It's Roirbak's, not mine.
I'm just a guest,’ Tammuz answered shortly.
Zambia sighed.
‘You're angry I'm here, aren't you?’
‘Do I look angry?’
‘You look like stone.
That's angry in my data file.’
‘It's not anger, exactly.
It's just I don't relish any of Jahsaxa's colleagues making a nuisance of themselves here.
Mr Roirbak won't like it, and I'm only resident at his pleasure, you understand.’
‘Of course.
They won't think to look for me here, though.
Why should they?’
‘Zambia, my sweet puzzle, I can think of at least two without concentrating.
Why are you doing this?
Didn't you give it any thought before you took up Ms Penumbra's offer?’
‘Yes, of course I did.
I was desperate.
I didn't think it would be…like this.’
‘Then I can't imagine how you did think it would be.
Seemed pretty straightforward from the specifications.
I saw them.
You weren't exactly deceived.’
‘I'm semi-female now, and women've always had the excuse that they like to change their minds.
I claim that as my right now too, OK?’
‘Don't get upset.
What do you think I can do for you?’
‘Don't play with me, Malamute.
Of course you can do something.
You're part of Roirbak's network and he can do anything.’
‘They said that of Tech-Green once and look what happened.’
‘At least let me stay here for a while until I get my head clear.’
Tammuz paused.
‘That's not really up to me, Zambia.’
Zambia slammed hir fists down on the table, causing the Sindy droid to bleep unexpectedly.
‘It's all right for you isn't it!
Goddess, I can't believe the way you're trying to scrape me off your hands!
I've been working with you for weeks.
I know you cared!
You did!
I saw your expression.
I heard the things you didn't say!
Now you get frightened and keep me at arm's length!
Why?
What is it you're hiding, Malamute?
I bet it's more than artificial cunts!’
Zambia's vulgar exclamation echoed round the canteen.
The droid was motionless but for a cautious antenna trembling at its apex.
Tammuz Malamute was indeed like stone, his eyes expressionless, only one finger tapping the table.
‘Goddess, I'm sorry!’
Zambia put hir head in hir hands, rubbed hir face.
‘I'd do anything to go back in time right now, you know.
I'd never have…
’ SHe sighed, ground at hir eyes one more time and blinked at Tammuz.
‘Let's face it, I'm fucked.
I have no future.
Mammy Crystal was right.’
Tammuz had still not cracked.
Zambia stood up.
‘I'm sorry.
I'm really sorry.
That was way out…you know.
I'll go.
OK?’
Tammuz made hir wait until SHe'd wriggled through all the tables to the door.
Then he said, in a carrying voice.
‘I'll speak to Roirbak about this.
I'm not promising anything.
Sit.
Sit and wait.
Sindy'll bring you a coffee.’
Tammuz managed to catch Roirbak just as he was making the finishing touches to his evening regalia: black, matt silk suit with thread-wide yellow pinstripe, understated gold adornments, I-Ching earrings.
Tammuz suspected the man may have eavesdropped on what had occurred in the canteen, but behaved as if he hadn't.
‘I have a problem with Crevecoeur,’ he began.
‘Oh?
Therapy decay?’
‘Not exactly.
Can SHe stay here for a few days?’
‘Why here?’
‘SHe split Eleusis.
This seemed the safest bolthole.’
‘With you…
’ Roirbak turned away from his mirror and fixed Tammuz with a stare.
‘I'm surprised you want to get involved.
You did your job, we got our rewards.
Ms Penumbra will not take kindly if she suspects we're helping one of her employees abscond.’
‘I have realised all this Quincx.
I wouldn't want to embarrass you, but I really can see no alternative at present.
I don't feel I can abandon Crevecoeur after having worked with hir all this time.
I am in no position to judge whether what SHe is doing is right or wrong.’
‘Natro talk, Tammuz.
Each to his own life-curve, I know.
Brotherhood along the way.’
He sighed.
‘Whatever your reasons…
’ Shook his head.
‘I have enjoyed having you around, Mr Malamute, much to my surprise.
It would be unfortunate if something occurred to curtail our partnership.
However, I will let the gynandrous renegade stay here under one condition.
If Penumbra questions either of us, we will not lie.
If she suspects Crevecoeur is here and asks, we let hir go back.
Is that clear?
I will not risk Penumbra's wrath.
R would be a pity to lose business contact with her.’
‘That seems fair,’ Tammuz agreed.
‘I will try to work something out.’
‘Actually,’ Roirbak said, having just thought of it, ‘we may be able to use the natro group Star Eye to help your friend leave the city.
They will be here very shortly.’
‘Whatever you think is best,’ Tammuz replied stonily.
‘You can stay,’ Tammuz said, walking back into the canteen.
Zambia was sitting against the counter, talking with Sindy.
SHe had been impressed with how Tammuz had adjusted the machine to behave just like a real counter-girl.
The droid virtually knew hir life-history now and had made appropriately sympathetic responses.
At the news, Zambia didn't leap up with joy as Tammuz had expected, but dropped hir head on to her hands which were flat against the counter.
‘Thank the Goddess!’
SHe s aid.
‘I'll find you somewhere to sleep, a change of clothes maybe.’
‘I don't want to sleep and my clothes are fine.
It's warm in here.
I've dried out.’
‘I have to do something with you, Zambia.’
‘Can't we talk?’
‘Whatever you have to say will only make me feel uncomfortable.’
‘You have to help me, Malamute!’
‘Look,’ Tammuz said, rubbing his neck in agitation, ‘You can stay here.
It's a hiding place.
Stop behaving as if I'm responsible for your welfare.
I'm not.
I did a job for Penumbra and it's over.
I'm foolish going along with you even this far.
Do what you said.
Get your head together and clear out.
Jahsaxa will have to come here looking for you eventually.
She's not stupid.’
Zambia felt as if SHe'd been punched in the gut.
SHe wondered what SHe was doing there.
SHe'd never begged help off anyone before — hadn't needed to.
Had hir survival expertise been destroyed somewhere during the treatment SHe'd had?
SHe shuddered.
Tammuz was being honest.
All the quiet concern over the past weeks had been professional, nothing more.
The horrendous blunder of thinking it was more than that filled hir with shame.
SHe hopped off the stool, mustering pride.
‘You got me all wrong, Malamute,’ SHe said, ‘I don't need that kind of support from you.
I need clothes, supplies, money.
How can I leave the city without that?’
SHe began to saunter towards the canteen door.
‘After all, I meant what I said.
I know you've got something to hide, and Jahsaxa Penumbra loves mysteries.
If I end up back there, she might just be interested enough in what I got to say to do some investigating of her own.’
SHe didn't risk looking at Tammuz, sensing his simmering rage as an intense heat behind hir.
‘You know nothing about me, Crevecoeur,’ he said.
‘The only thing I have to hide is you.’
‘Sure.
So, show me, where do I sleep?’
Tammuz led the way up to the second floor, where he'd spread himself out through two labs, an office and a washroom.
This was another, remote area of the complex which had remained untouched by Roirbak's artistic caprices, and was still furnished in a bare, functional style.
Tammuz' fury at Zambia's threats rendered him speechless.
He was half tempted to call Penumbra himself and demand she come and collect this viper immediately.
Surely she wouldn't take Zambia's remarks about himself seriously.
Gutter trash!
Tammuz thought.
Ungrateful, grasping, foul-minded gutter trash.
‘You can have this room,’ he said coldly.
At one time it must have been a waiting room for clients.
R was cold in there but Tammuz was so angry he decided he wouldn't turn the heating on.
‘Sorry about the temperature.
The heaters went down years ago.’
‘Got a blanket or quilt for me or something?’
Zambia didn't appear
‘I'll see.
Later.’
Zambia sat down on one of the sofas.
‘You just going to leave me in here then?’
‘I have work to do and no inclination whatsoever to entertain you, Zambia Crevecoeur.’
Triumphant, he slammed the door and marched off down the corridor to his own cosy rooms, smugly requesting his domestic unit to prepare him a toasted sandwich and hot coffee.
He intended to spend the evening having intelligent conversation with his computer, Zambia Crevecoeur shut firmly out of his mind.
He began by telling the machine all about Zambia, to which it responded sagely, ‘In humanity's attempt to obtain the best of both genders, it appears to have harvested the worst.’
‘How true, my friend, my trustworthy, reliable, sensible friend!’
Tammuz declared, feeling vindicated.
‘That observation was aligned to your personal subjectivity, of course, with which I feel familiar,’ the computer appended.
Tammuz again considered that some wit in past years had programmed the machine with something other than Aristotelian logic.
Back at Club Eleusis, Jahsaxa Penumbra was tripping out like the bad queen in a fairy-tale cartoon, the only omission being the thunderclouds and lightning round her head.
She paraded up and down her office, black hair aflow, her fingers flexed to claws, tipped with  glittering red, frightening her security staff.
‘SHe can't just have gone !’ she shouted in a deep, masculine voice, in response to her officers, discovery that no one had seen Crevecoeur since late afternoon, and certainly not in the act of leaving the building.
The Club had been thoroughly searched: there was nowhere the security systems could not probe.
The officers had examined the window in Zambia's showercub but had considered it too small for hir to escape through, the wall outside too sheer.
The staff who had been in the kitchen when Zambia had landed in the packing cases had gone off duty soon afterwards.
What they had heard in the yard and what they had seen upon investigating — spilled crates they attributed to rutting cats — would not be revealed until morning.
‘Call Tammuz Malamute!’
Jahsaxa yelled at her commset.
As far as everyone knew, he had been the last person to see Zambia at the Club.
Her rage was further fuelled by the fact that all she contacted was Roirbak's answering machine.
She was on the point of ordering some of her people to hurry over to Acropolis Park to call in person, when one of her more canny officers, who had lost no time in searching the sector, arrived back at the Club.
Reynard Lennon was astute, analytical, an expert in self-preservation, and very, very polite.
He was also a creature entirely without compassion and because of this rarely failed to uncover information.
‘I checked out most of Crevecoeur's old haunts,’ he said, consulting his memofile, ‘and turned up the goods at Alix Micklemas’tattoo parlour.’
Jahsaxa raised an eyebrow.
Reynard continued.
‘She told me Crevecoeur showed up around 18.00 in a pretty bad way.
Claimed to have jumped from a window.’
Jahsaxa narrowed her eyes meaningfully at her in-house security officers.
‘Anyway, she fixed hir up and Crevecoeur split.’
‘The tattooist did not have the wit to tag Crevecoeur, I suppose?’
Jahsaxa inquired.
Reynard shook his head.
‘Nah.
Doubt she saw reason to.’
Jahsaxa nodded.
‘Fix that.
She may prove useful in the future.
Did she offer any prognosis?’
Reynard flipped off the memofile.
‘In her opinion, she thought Crevecoeur would dive subsurface, hit the labyrinth and, like, mingle.’
Jahsaxa nodded again.
‘Seems likely.
Alert my operatives subcity immediately.’
‘Already seen to it, Ms Penumbra,’ Reynard announced proudly.
The other officers looked at him with loathing.
Later in the evening, Tammuz and his computer decided to investigate an old network tape he'd uncovered in Roirbak's huge stockpile of such material.
It was a programme about the (then) proposed orbital cities, and even boasted an interview with a very youthful Ewan Famber, who had just passed out from the Tech-Green High College weighed down with honours and acclamations.
The programme, in retrospect, was practically science fiction: nothing had been as easy in practice as Tech-Green had declared in theory.
Tammuz had dimmed the lights, put his feet up, and asked the computer to tune in the wall-screen.
He smile in bewilderment at a succession of ads — the psychoprofile of mankind, he thought — and waited for the programme to begin.
A few rooms away, Zambia had become thoroughly tired of trying to get some sleep in such an uncomfortable place, and decided to snoop around the building.
Hir investigations didn't take hir further than the light beneath Tammuz Malamute's door.
SHe heard him laugh, heard him say something.
Did he have a visitor?
Perhaps a lover.
Would that explain his attitude?
Impulsively, suddenly feeling that nothing could worsen the ruins of hir existence, Zambia opened the door and went in.
Tammuz was watching TV alone, eating a bag of Munchi-Chipz.
He had been smiling at the screen, an expression which fell with such abruptness from his face when he looked at the doorway that Zambia was convinced SHe heard it hit the floor with a crack.
‘Stay in your room!’ he said.
Zambia attempted a smile.
‘No.
I mean — look, this is ridiculous.
I didn't mean to upset you.
I shouldn't have said the things I did.
I won't say anything to Penumbra no matter what happens.
I was only teasing you.
It's freezing down there.
I'm sorry.
Can I come in here?
I won't disturb you.’
Tammuz relented.
‘All right.
But I'm watching this, so keep quiet.’
Zambia slid to the floor near Tammuz' chair and picked up a fallen Munchi-Chip to eat.
Tammuz threw hir another bag without comment.
The rustling of packaging caused him to sigh and ask the computer to turn up the sound.
Zambia sucked the Munchis to softness before swallowing them, a procedure that took up the whole of the half-hour programme.
To hir, the grandiose promises of Utopia emblazoned across the screen were not only unconvincing but nauseating.
At the end of it, SHe had to say, ‘The cities might be  Paradise itself, but for how long?
Eventually they'll be just as full of people as the planet.
Then it'll be just as bad up there, I'm sure.’
‘Not everyone in the world is grasping and selfish to the exclusion of all others,’ Tammuz said.
‘They'll be very careful who they let up there, I'm sure.
The Tech-Greens are probably breeding the right kind of people right at this minute.’
‘And you approve of that, huh?’
Tammuz shrugged.
‘More than I approve of most of what I see down here.
Humanity isn't as sacred as it likes to think.
In my view, the sooner the old model is scrapped, the better.’
‘Think of yourself as old model?’
Tammuz flicked hir a cold glance.
‘Do you?’
‘You really don't know anything about me, do you, despite all that wallowing in my mind?
As it happens, I don't think I'm the right person to lead humanity into the future, no.
At least I'm honest about it.
You?
I reckon you think you're kind of special, Tammuz Malamute.’
‘You're right.
I do, and I am.’
‘Oh yeah?
And what is it that's so special about you?’
Tammuz paused, drew in his breath, smothered the expression of one who feared he had narrowly missed being indiscreet.
‘Everybody is special,’ he said.
‘It's just that most people only realise that in dreams.
They are either too lazy or too uninformed to do anything but fail to fulfil their potential.’
‘Weird.
The way you say that it sounds like crap, but I guess the essence of it makes sense.
I think circumstances have a lot to do with it though.’
Tammuz shook his head, frowning.
‘That's just an excuse.’
‘OK, so tell me how I fulfil my potential at this moment.’
Tammuz shifted in his chair.
‘That's something only you can decide.’
Zambia laughed.
‘And you talk to me about excuses?
Come on!
I want your opinion, that's all.
What would you do if you were me?’
‘None of the things you have done for a start.’
‘How can you say that?
It might be the resultant me is a product of the coincidences of my life.’
‘Wonderful.
I have a gutter philosopher on my hands!’
‘I'm surprised someone like you can have such a fixed view of someone else, i.e. me.’
‘I don't.’
‘Yes you do, you think I'm stupid, mindless, amoral.
Shall I go on?
Just because I don't have a Tech-Green sci-cert, doesn't mean I don't have a mind.
Just because I earn my living through my own body doesn't mean I don't have feelings or morals.
Just…
‘Ali right, you made your point.
Zambia Crevecoeur is one of the great minds of our age, whose circumstances prevent hir enlightening knowledge reaching the population.’
‘Goddess, you're a pompous ass, Malamute.
I don't know what I see in you.
You despise me.
Face it, you're narrow-minded.’
Tammuz didn't react as Zambia expected.
Mildly, he said, ‘If you insist on facing things, why not think about how the way you've behaved hardly leads me to think on you as a sensitive soul.
I am familiar with the components of your personality, true, as I am familiar with the liquors in that cabinet over there, but throwing all the different liquors together at random won't make a cocktail, not one that's palatable to me at least .
Perhaps I do know your potential, through the work we've been doing, but you're not a computer: you have autonomy.
I didn't program you.
How you manifest your aspects is your choice entirely.
And I don't have to enjoy the resultant cocktail.’
Zambia, more astute than Tammuz gave hir credit for, knelt against the side of his chair: ‘You reckon the cocktail will give you gut-ache, its taste is questionable, yet it looks beautiful, glowing there in the glass, smells divine, and the buzz it can give you is a temptation beyond endurance.
The only way you can stop yourself drinking it is to lecture the world about how bad it is.
Stop being so uptight.
Be loose.
Give in.
Drink it.
Drink me!’
Tammuz drew in a shuddering breath and glanced at the computer blinking serenely behind them.
‘We have company,’ he said.
‘It would be best if we continued this conversation elsewhere.’
Tammuz took hir to his bedroom.
‘I have wallscreens, music, everything in here and it's…a nicer room than the other one,’ he said.
Zambia gave him a crooked grin.
‘Sure.’
SHe sat down on the bed.
‘You know something, Malamute.
You're like a big kid most of the time.
Are you a virgin, is that it?’
‘Goddess!’
Tammuz clawed air in exasperation.
‘Oh, I'm sorry.
Sit down.
Let's talk.
Tell me about yourself.’
Tammuz poured them both a drink, handing one to Zambia as he sat down.
‘What do you want to know?’
‘How old are you?’
Tammuz pulled a face.
‘Goddess, I don't know.
I've forgotten.’
‘Really?!’
Zambia laughed.
‘OK.
About seven years old, I think.’
‘Uh huh.’
SHe nodded, smiling.
‘Got any family?’
‘Maybe.
Have you?
You never talked about that.’
Zambia sighed and lay flat on the bed, the drink balanced on hir chest.
‘Yeah, I have.
We-ell.’
SHe sat up.
‘It's not really like family, you see.
It was kind of weird, very intense.’
‘Sounds intriguing.’
‘It was hell.
Here, take this.’
SHe handed Tammuz the drink and pulled at hir shirt.
‘See this tattoo on my shoulder?
There's a scar under there.
You can touch it if you want.’
Tammuz put down the drinks and poked it with a cautious finger.
‘I had a brother there once.’
Tammuz withdrew his hand sharply.
‘What?’
‘You heard.
We were separated at birth, physically.
But I have to be honest and say we tried to join flesh again all our lives.
It caused big problems.’
‘I can imagine.’
‘No, you can't.
That's you looking at me, thinking ‘Zambia Crevecoeur, whore’, and making up all kinds of garbage in your head.
It wasn't like that.
We ended up fighting.
Badly.
Hurting each other.
We don't speak now.
I haven't seen him for months.’
‘Oh.’
‘Sometimes I don't think we should speak again either.
Know what I mean?
He's with a natro outfit.
Star Eye, I think they're called.’
Tammuz groaned and put his head in his hands.
‘It would be!’ he cried.
‘What did you say?’
‘Nothing,’ Tammuz said.
‘Nothing.’
He raised his head and grinned weakly.
He wondered, briefly, whether it would be repulsive making love to an intersex, even one whose enhancements were as familiar to him as Zambia's.
He wasn't sure what his subconscious was looking at now: the male or the female in hir.
Maybe neither.
Maybe he saw only the person within the flesh, a person who, for all hir faults, he had reluctantly come to be very fond of.
‘Zambia, can  we imagine, just for now, there's no one in this world but us?
I think we both need the therapy.’
Zambia looked puzzled.
‘OK.
Has what I just told you turned you off or something?’
‘No, no.
It's complicated.
My life's complicated.
Unravel me a bit will you?’
‘Where d'you want me to begin?’
‘About here,’ Tammuz said, and pulled off his T-shirt.
‘No problem,’ said Zambia, rolling towards him.
It was Leila's connection with Quincx Roirbak that swayed Emanuel Lazar's decision to allow his son to accompany Star Eye to Arcady.
Cynically, Leila considered Lazar probably expected Nathan to indulge in a little snooping for him, find out what Roirbak was working on nowadays.
Leila just took his money and waved goodbye.
She was not sorry to see the back of Lazar Farm this time.
Ari, however, found the leave-taking sorrowful, not least because she had to say goodbye to the jellycrusts.
R. J. left her with a few of his abstruse sayings, which she believed meant he was telling her not to worry too much; it was difficult to tell.
Lazarene boys came to throw kisses at the trucks as they left, Justinette and Elice trying to squeeze through the open windows, catcalling back.
Nathan sat, wide-eyed and bewildered next to Ari, reminding her of her own first day aboard.
The engines roared and gushed, and Star Eye were on their way to the city, substantially richer than before they'd made the diversion.
Leila stopped riding in Rentfree Aphrodite completely, but Ari knew she hadn't discussed anything with Jordan yet.
They had just ceased being lovers with no explanation or recriminations from either side being voiced.
The rest of Star Eye warily observed this situation.
Some nights, the atmosphere round the campfire was unbearable.
Ari felt sorry for Cabochon, who spent most evenings sitting apart from the others, chewing his fingernails.
Nathan followed Ari around as if he were a dog and she a bitch in oestrus.
She realised he must be going through some kind of hell waiting for the rime when he could let all his suppressed urges out.
She tried to distract him as best she could, showing him how to make totems, begging Urran to let Nathan use the computer now and again.
The vibratory movement of the truck didn't  help him, she was sure.
Elice occasionally flirted with Nathan to bait Urran.
Ari could see Elice confused the boy; she had the subtlety of a hammer.
In desperation, Ari started marking the days off on a chart, just so she could see the rime they had left on the road diminishing.
A few days out of Lazar Farm, the group celebrated Lithafest.
Leila had planned to keep it rather a subdued affair, but another natro group happened along at the small site they were using and livened things up a little.
Ari held Nathan's hand as everyone greeted the dawn of the Solstice Day.
She reflected on how much she had changed since the last festival, less than seven weeks ago.
What would she be thinking and doing by Lughmas?
Something within her insisted she tell Cabochon what Leila had seen at Lazar Farm.
She left Nathan helping to prepare the Solstice Breakfast with the others and went to find him.
He and Jordan were conducting their own ritual away from the group.
They had exchanged blood; there seemed little point in saying what she planned.
Natros performed bonding ceremonies irrespective of sex.
Ari wondered how Leila would react if she went back to her and said.
‘Your lover has just married another man.’
Resignedly, she kissed Cabochon and wished him well.
The extent of their embarrassment over their bonding was illustrated by the fact they'd held it so privately.
Normally, such affairs called for days of celebration.
Ari felt very old as she walked back to the group.
It seemed that, all around her, things were changing — old, beloved routines that had felt safe and comfortable were decaying into new patterns.
If by working with Roirbak it meant she had to leave Star Eye, it might be for the best.
The Star Eye she had joined at Beltagne would soon no longer exist in the same form, she was sure.
As the trucks made to leave the following day for the final part of the journey to Arcady, Cabochon asked Ari if he could speak with her, and then told her about what he feared waited in Arcady for him.
‘I felt you disapproved last night,’ he said.
‘I want you to know why.
I need support.
I need strength.
If I have a partner, Zambia won't be able to get at me.
It had to be stronger than physical love, Ari, it had to be deeper than that.’
‘And what about Leila?
Has Jordan told her?’
Cabochon shrugged.
‘I doubt it.
Not yet.
Will you?’
Ari shook her head.
‘No.
I won't do Jordan's dirty work for him.’
She sighed.
‘I'm sorry, Cab, I'm not getting at you.
Things are just a bit weird at the moment.
I think you should get Jordan to speak to  Leila soon though, don't you?’
She could have mentioned how Leila was thinking of leaving the group, but held back.
It was not her place to tell anyone.
Because they were so close to the city, the trucks travelled through the night and, by dawn, Cable announced over the intercom to everyone sitting in the back that Arcady's higher domes were now visible on the horizon.
Ari could hardly muster any enthusiasm.
She had been thinking a lot about the conversation she and Leila had had back at Lazar's, the talk of sky cities and escape.
She wanted only to rid herself of the blocks Ewan had inflicted on her and lose herself in a new future.
She was weighed down with a confusing mixture of feelings that sometimes felt so mellow and piquant, it was almost pleasant.
She thought of evening skies, the silhouettes of lonely birds against the sun, and tired land.
She thought of standing against this landscape and of being somehow contained within herself: resolute, alone, but not lonely.
She thought of Nathan, victim to his own juices, almost dehumanised by the urges of a young male brought into such sharp focus by Leila's meddling.
She wanted him to be someone she could love and idealised the future in her head, but then found herself thinking about that most heartwrenching of adolescent discoveries; people rarely are what you want them to be and betray you without malice, unaware of the pain they cause.
No one, not even lovers, are truly psychic, and everyone flounders around each other , misunderstanding, misinterpreting, sending out confusing signals.
Once Arcady came into sight, Ari felt she had learnt a lot during the past few days, irreplaceably important lessons.
Eve, picking up on some of Ari's melancholy without understanding the cause, hugged her as they thundered along the straight, smooth road that led to the city.
Rotors and microlights whirred overhead; the sky was thick with traffic.
Very soon, even before they went under dome, Arcady surrounded them from horizon to horizon, its size so prodigious that it banished all Ari's ideas of what a city might be.
The huge domes seemed to be heaped on top of each other like black barnacles, their polarised, opaque surfaces hiding everything contained within them.
This was another land; the ruin, waste, excitement, wild beauty, sour barrens and unpredictability of the world outside disappeared beyond the stratosphere-scraping reaches of Arcady's domes.
The pace of life palpably increased; colours changed.
Suddenly Star Eye were  somewhere where things happened , time was strictly portioned and progressed at the same rate.
Ari realised she had never felt this before — not even at home, where time had been her own.
Up front, Leila was navigating.
Traffic was strictly regulated in Arcady, ground vehicles being confined to certain routes, especially those that were outside the city regulations concerning fuel effluent, such as the Star Eye trucks.
It was necessary to park the trucks some distance away from Acropolis Park, The freight routes from the factories were via underground subways to different areas of the city, or else, for lighter materials, via the highwire.
They drove into an underground vehicle park where Leila and Cable went off to check them in with security and pay the initial tariff.
Everyone bundled their possessions together and talked about where they would like to stay.
Leila had said it would be presumptuous for them all to descend on Roirbak like an unwelcome plague, so had communicated ahead and reserved rooms in a cheap hostel popular with nomad natros.
It was situated in Athena Gardens, an area near both Sector 2p and Acropolis Park.
Ari's spirits rose slightly once the group had bundled on to the highwire.
A sense of adventure invaded the group, everyone whooping and yelling as they were flung between towers on their way to Athena Gardens, incurring outraged or amused, tolerant glances from the other passengers.
Justinette and Cable listed which nightclubs they intended to visit, while Urran reminisced about favourite sites of conquest.
Ezooli and Eve were more interested in the cafés, while Elice planned tragically which drugs she planned to get hold of.
Stickit squealed in delight, waving at the ant figures far below.
Even Grover was grinning.
‘I love this place!’
Justinette cried.
To Ari, the massive buildings, the height at which they were travelling, were all too overwhelming and disorientating to enjoy.
Nathan seemed unaffected by this.
He leaned over and said to Ari, ‘You were right.
I'm glad you persuaded me to come here.
It's great!’
She smiled thinly in response.
Athena Gardens was an incredibly green place.
Natro shops thronged the uniformly cobbled streets, where people whizzed back and forth on bicycles or skates — often their only form of exercise.
Justinette insisted on linking her arm through Ari's, dragging her to every shop window to exclaim over the bright and tempting, useless gimmickry to be found within.
She was especially taken by statuettes of Astrada; transparent material filled with coloured gas that swirled  and glowed, spinning visions of ancient fields and Arcadian mountains.
Nearly every shop was selling them; it was a current craze.
Further along, cafés and snackbooths filled the air with seductive aromas.
Ari had been struck by the smells of Arcady more than anything.
Everything was so intense and exotic.
Even the air smelt sweet and clean.
Her stomach rumbled.
She was sure she'd never found the scent of cooking food so seductive.
‘We can eat later,’ Leila called, trying to keep order over the group who were wandering about all over the place.
‘Let's just check in at the hostel first, OK?’
Athena Gardens was a low area, no building above five storeys.
It was designed to have a village atmosphere; all the shops and hostels and cafés were built to ‘old world’ design.
In the distance, above the roofs, the high towers of the adjoining sectors could be seen.
To Ari, the constant background noise of the city — vehicles, machinery, human voices — sounded like an unceasing prayer chant, rhythmic yet ululating.
The hostel was named Rameses Villa; a charming anachronism.
R was all very friendly and cosy, the hostel staff on first-name terms with everyone in the group within half an hour.
Two other groups were in residence, along with a handful of loners who had a tendency to sit apart from any gathering, dress in dark clothes with large hats, and smoke long pipes.
This included the women.
Ari was exhausted by the sheer weight of first impressions of the city.
Everything came at you like a meteor, blasting out sound and colour and light.
Local order-wardens mixed with the general population, smiling and laid-back.
There was none of that back-of-the-neck prickle of fear and guilt associated with encountering the zone patrols back at Taler's Bump.
Was it possible for such a large amount of people as inhabited Athena Gardens to be genuinely so cheerful and contented?
Elice, ever a harbinger of gloom, was ready to point out that Athena Gardens was but one sector of Arcady.
‘A natro island,’ she said.
‘Don't believe all of the city is like this.
The reason why there's so much space above our heads here is simple: the climate controllers use it for inducing weather conditions for the whole of Arcady.’
Ari looked up at this prompt.
She could see a highwire directly overhead, above that, air traffic, andbeyond-—.
She squinted.
This couldn't be possible, surely?
Although it was murky, she felt she could  almost pick out the silhouettes of other buildings up there, as if they were constructed on the inside of the dome itself.
Perhaps it was an illusion, or a reflection of some kind.
She didn't mention it to Elice.
Once everyone had claimed their rooms and strewn their possessions around to secure occupancy, Star Eye scattered into the streets, leaving Leila and Ari alone with Nathan.
The boy appeared fretful and disappointed that he couldn't join the others on their excursions.
Leila didn't have the heart to tell him she doubted whether there'd be much opportunity for him ever to do that, at least while he was helping her with Ari.
She put a call through to Roirbak from her room as soon as the others had left, advising him she'd be over with her protégés within the hour.
Turning away from the commscreen, she saw Ari sitting hunched and troubled on the bed.
Nathan was standing defiantly, hands in pockets, near the window.
Leila sighed.
This was not going to be at all easy.
‘Goddess, what time is it?’
Tammuz leaned over Zambia and removed a T-shirt which had hooked itself over the wall-clock in the frenzy of its removal the previous night.
‘You have to go somewhere?’
Zambia asked.
‘No, but I like to work a certain amount of time per day.
It's easy to get lazy around here.
All this space, being alone most of the time.’
‘What are you working on?’
Tammuz pulled his T-shirt over his head.
‘Oh, this and that.
Old theories mainly.
Just catching up really.’
‘You're very close about your work, aren't you?
Is it illegal or something?’
Tammuz laughed.
‘You'd find it very boring.
Want to come down to the canteen?
I'll have Sindy fix us breakfast.’
‘OK.’
Zambia was finding it very hard to see anything sinister in Tammuz Malamute that day.
SHe was also feeling less antipathic towards hir new implants and adjustments.
Because of hir profession.
SHe'd always been able to disassociate ‘work’ from pleasure, clients from lovers, but had been worried that the experience of Jahsaxa's friends mauling hir might have intruded into this objectivity.
It was a needless fear.
Just being in the arms of this unique person, whom SHe'd never been absolutely sure SHe could hook, effectively wiped the unpleasant memory from hir mind for the night.
And the implants had worked just fine, thank you.
SHe appreciated Dr Parmedes' art: it  would have been easy to fix the physical changes, but he had possessed the patience and expertise to make those organs as responsive to stimulation as any natural ones.
The pleasure had been unique and exquisite.
Tammuz had been so gentle that there'd hardly been any pain, expertly coaxing each orifice to orgasm until Zambia felt SHe must die from sensory overload.
The final visions had been almost prophetic.
Zambia had dreaded Tammuz seeing hir battered flesh, feeling sure he would be sickened by the thought of others having been intimate with hir so recently.
‘Who did that!’ he had demanded, pointing to the bruises.
‘Someone who gets off on slapping people around,’ SHe'd answered carelessly.
‘Couldn't do anything else.’
It was just a little lie, SHe thought.
One thing it had made hir certain of:.
such gifts as SHe now possessed must never again become the property of a place like Club Eleusis.
That would be an abomination.
Such was the strength of this conviction, Zambia made a solemn vow that SHe would take hir own life before one of Penumbra's sleazy, slimy patrons ever touched one of hir wonderful, magical organs again.
It was amazing…today SHe had woken up loving hirself.
Tammuz felt in a daze.
As he preceded what he now thought of as a mythical being down to the canteen, he thought about how he'd once found the sight of Zambia's adjustments repulsive and unnatural.
Now, having experienced their purpose, he almost revered them.
A manifestation of deity, he thought.
A new god/dess.
To him, Zambia had been virgin six times over, and each deflowering had been more intense than the last.
He too made a vow.
He would have to die before he could allow Jahsaxa Penumbra to get her hands on such magic and exploit it.
Thank the Goddess Zambia had had the sense to get out before some scuzzie had violated hir by more than just a beating.
He kept replaying the scene in his head when Zambia stood before him, wreathed to hir chest in tangled rats'-tails, an urchin elemental, and removed hir clothes.
‘Look at me,’ SHe had said.
‘I am new.
Totally new.
Remember that.’
It had been a plea.
Don't turn away.
Please don't turn away.
He saw once more the star-form of closed lips, the penis beneath them hanging its head as if in awe, a godlet among goddesses.
He realised this poetic appreciation was stimulated more by Zambia hirself than hir physical shape, but such is the language of adoration.
He knelt and worshipped, kissing each one to show he was not repulsed, and of course Zambia had wept.
Roirbak was sitting in the canteen.
Tammuz was immediately  suspicious because he knew the man never broke his routines unless something out of the ordinary was afoot.
Had he spied on their lovemaking last night?
Zambia was wearing some of Tammuz' clothes and Roirbak thought the khaki and green suited hir far better than the dusty black SHe usually favoured.
Quite a stunning creature, in fact.
That alone made him foresee difficulties.
The bloom in Tammuz' eyes made him apprehensive.
‘Goddess, he's in love,’ he thought dismally.
‘Has Penumbra been in touch?’
Tammuz asked, sitting down.
Sindy hummed over and interrupted, reciting a menu.
‘Anything, anything.
Use your imagination!’
Tammuz snapped.
Sindy bleeped in confusion and went to dredge the supplies' cupboards.
Tammuz ran his hands through his hair, sighing.
‘You created it,’ Roirbak said, ‘Don't be cruel.
Poor thing…
‘This jarred.
Roirbak cleared his throat.
‘As to your question, no, not yet.
I took the precaution of setting the comms to automatic response.
If my gut instincts advise me correctly, Ms Penumbra is by now mightily sick of hearing I am not available.’
‘I want to thank you, Mr Roirbak,’ Zambia began in a husky voice, which Roirbak waved aside.
‘Shush!
I have become fond of this young man.
It is no great inconvenience to help him, either of you, I assure you.
But I am sure you are aware that plans must be made.’
He raised his brows.
Tammuz and Zambia exchanged a glance.
‘Tammuz,’ Roirbak said quietly.
‘I would like to speak with you alone.
Would you excuse us?’
Zambia nodded and Tammuz followed Roirbak outside the room.
‘Forgive me if this sounds intrusive,’ Roirbak said.
‘But I can't help feeling the situation has…intensified somewhat since last night.’
Tammuz averted his eyes.
‘Things have become more honest, more open, perhaps.’
‘Yesterday, I think you would have happily helped Zambia Crevecoeur escape the city and then forgotten about hir.
Now, I’ m not so sure.
Tammuz, don't interrupt, I'll be straight with you.
I don't know what reasons brought you to me or whether they have any connection with certain events — I have my suspicions I'll confess, but I accept it isn't any of my business unless it reaches a point where it outwardly affects me.
However, I feel you have a purpose for being in Arcady, here in particular, and at this time.
Am I right?’
Tammuz nodded painfully, reluctantly.
‘It's all right, I'm not asking you to divulge that purpose.
My point is, I think you want to keep Zambia Crevecoeur very close to you now, and that this is not a temporary arrangement.
Right again?
I thought so.
Don't looked so agonised.
The reason I ask these things is that we will have to look ahead in case certain difficulties present themselves.’
Roirbak put a hand on Tammuz' arm.
‘You're wondering why I'm so concerned?’ he rasped.
‘Dammit, Malamute, I feel I know you, have known you, for a long time.
If I'm right, why you're hiding yourself from me is a mystery.
Don't you know you can trust me?’
Tammuz put his hand over Roirbak's.
‘Of course I trust you.
But knowledge is dangerous.
I don't want to put you in danger.’
‘That would be damned hard.
Unless I'm deceiving myself totally, my position within this community is steel-strong.
Ms Penumbra isn't the only one with friends in high places you know.’
‘Exactly.
I don't want you to have to betray your friends, any of them.
Quincx, I…
Do you know who I am?
Really?
Do you?’
Quincx Roirbak was taken back twenty years, to a time when a young student had asked him questions with the same expression of need for reassurance.
It was the only confirmation he needed.
‘Say nothing,’ he said.
‘You don't have to.
It was only curiosity.
Now, all you need to be is Tammuz Malamute.
Go back to your ladyboyfriend or whatever SHe is.
I have to think.
And so do you.’
By the time Roirbak had reached his workbench and had sat down to ponder over whether he could pay Jahsaxa enough compensation to drop Crevecoeur and why he should want to do that for anyone anyway, Mellissa the receptionist fluted her chimes over his commset.
Roirbak experienced a moment of panic, sure it was one of Penumbra's staff, arrived too soon before he could work anything out, when Mellissa informed him the visitor was Leila Saatchi.
‘Leila, yes, Leila.
Good, good.
Get her shown in, Mellissa.’
He exhaled in relief, blinking.
Tammuz Malamute, or whoever you are, I should not forgive you for this, he thought wearily.
‘Quincx, great to see you, great!’
Leila embraced the man, kissing his cheek.
Roirbak thought,Times have been hard for you girl, haven't they ?
And then smiled and said, ‘Leila, you look wonderful.’
‘Bullshit do I!’
She laughed, flattered in spite of herself.
‘You look younger every time I see you.’
‘I had hoped it wasn't that obvious!’
‘I meant it as a compliment.’
He nodded.
‘Vanity!’ he said.
‘So, did you have a good journey?’
Leila sauntered round his desk, looking intently at the mounds of equipment covering it.
‘Good journey?
Honey, my whole life is a journey!
The stop at Lazar Farm was — interesting…
‘Lazar called me.’
Leila grimaced.
‘Should have known!
Oh,’ she pushed Nathan forward, who'd been hanging sullenly back, making it apparent he thought this visit nowhere near as entertaining as prowling Arcady with the others.
‘This is Nathan, Lazar's son.’
‘Lazar Junior!’
Roirbak exclaimed heartily.
‘How do you do sir.’
Nathan extended his hand.
As Roirbak clasped it formally, Leila added, ‘And this is Ari — Ari Famber.’
Roirbak had mistaken her for another boy: a skinny, awkward creature, but pretty in her own way, he conceded.
Leila stood behind the girl, hands on her shoulders, as proud as if Ari was her own daughter.
Roirbak had the absurd impression he was being offered some kind of religious icon.
There was something of Ewan in her, of course; there'd have to be.
‘I knew your father very well,’ he told her.
Ari shrugged, embarrassed, unsure of what to say.
She could only look on Roirbak as some kind of doctor who would be dealing with her intimately shortly.
It was hard to feel at ease with him.
She had the awful feeling she was expected to behave in some glittering, unusual way to live up to her father's memory.
‘I can't remember him,’ she said, and Roirbak recognised the mechanism of defence.
‘Of course, it's very…sad,’ he said.
‘Well, I'm pleased to meet you now, Ari Famber.
I hope we can help you…
‘He shrank from qualifying that more.
The girl was rigid with shame, poor thing.
Was it possible this urchin was really the repository of cataclysmic sexuality as Ewan claimed?
He should have sent the child to me from the moment she could feed herself, Roirbak thought, sure Ari had been contaminated and spoiled by the life she'd led at Taler's Bump.
‘How is your mother?’ he inquired in a slightly off-key tone that was not lost on Ari.
‘Sick,’ she answered honestly.
‘She drinks.’
Roirbak did not look surprised and Ari immediately warmed to him.
It seemed all of her father's old acquaintances had not been too impressed by his choice of wife.
She felt slightly ashamed that it gave her such satisfaction.
‘Lydia was planning on sending Ari to Amazon House,’ Leila said.
Ari watched with interest the sharp glance that Roirbak directed at her.
‘Is it possible she may inform them…
?’
Leila shrugged.
‘Unlikely.
I put the fear of the Goddess into her.
But then, as Ari said, she drinks.
Lushes do crazy things sometimes, don't they?
She had no idea I was bringing Ari here though.’
Roirbak sucked his lips.
‘I'll take precautions,’ he said, and then looked up brightly.
‘How about you and Nathan go through to my canteen and feed yourselves?’ he said to Ari.
‘A guest of mine has fixed up some domestic droids to act like waitresses.
I think you'll enjoy meeting them!’
‘OK,’ Ari said, aware he wanted to get rid of her to be able to talk straight with Leila.
‘Just go down the plaza here, turn right into the old section of the building, and it's a few doors down on the right.
You can't miss it.’
As Ari and Nathan went through the shop, Roirbak remembered with mixed feelings that Zambia and Tammuz might still be in there, and then wondered if some evil part of him had been aware of that all along.
Surreptitiously he stroked the security eye key to ‘record’ for that room.
Should make interesting viewing later, at least.
Once Ari had gone, Leila slumped, letting out a sigh.
She leaned on Roirbak and hugged him again.
‘Goddess, it's so good to see you.
You're like my Dad, Quincx, the only relative I've got.’
He lifted her face and stroked the hair from her eyes.
‘Leila, you know you and Ewan were always special to me.
I've missed you.
I always miss you.
When are you going to give up the life of a gypsy and settle down here to become eccentric and safe?’
‘Like you?’
‘Like me and with me.’
Leila sat down on his knee.
He could feel the bones through her spare buttocks.
Poor Leila.
It would be a struggle to let her go again.
Her condition was worrying.
‘I didn't think you liked company around here,’ she said.
‘Anyway, what's with this guest of yours?
The last time I saw you, you'd decided  never to let anyone work with you here again.
I take it it is a work relationship?’
‘Hmmm.’
Leila was alerted by the quick downswivel of Roirbak's eyes.
‘Quincx?
What did I ask?
Did I hit a nerve or something?’
He stroked her back, wincing at the sharpness of her spine, the ripple of ribs too close to the skin.
‘I want you to meet him,’ he said.
‘That's all I'll say.
It may be my brain is getting fuddled despite my attempts at rejuvenation and I'm imagining things.’
‘What are you talking about?’
‘Crazy suspicions.’
‘What?’
‘Either I'm mad or people reincarnate, or there's such a thing as possession, or…
’ He paused.
‘Quincx?’
Leila looked worried.
He shook his head.
‘I said more than I meant to,’ he said.
‘Forget it.
You'll meet him later, I expect…
So, tell me, why have you brought Nathan Junior here?’
Leila settled to tell him the story of Nathan's condition and all that had happened at the farm, with certain omissions.
It was not necessary for Quincx to know how Lazar had humiliated her, she thought.
Quincx concurred with her idea and then asked how Nathan felt about it.
‘He didn't seem to be too happy to be here, that's all,’ he said.
Leila smiled.
‘Poor kid, he wants to be off with the Star Eye wenches, sowing overdue wild oats and learning about life.
It's hard on him, being let off the leash Daddy kept him on, being shown the promise of Arcady and then being dragged over here.
At least he and Ari get off on each other.
You have to admit he's superb material for what we have to do.
Thanks to me.’
‘You're still working with your pirate kit then?’
‘Only occasionally.
I've never had a problem with it, never did have.
If you're careful and thorough, I don't think it can fuck up.
It's just that not everyone is as careful and thorough as I am.
It's like working magick you see.
Everything has to be thought out so carefully; what you ask for, that is.
If you ask the wrong question, word it badly, then the result reflects that.
I'm convinced most experienced natros could handle it, no problem.
We have the training you see, to be pernickety.’
‘If I heard that from anyone but you, I'd howl ‘over-confidence’,’ Roirbak said, grinning.
‘You trained me,’ Leila reminded him.
‘So, when shall we start on Ari?
Got any ideas?’
‘Controlled conditions are required.
We had better begin with autostimulation, I think.
Naturally, she won't respond too well if I'm involved.
She's quite uptight.’
‘If you're not going to be involved, why on earth have I come here?’
Leila asked.
Roirbak shook his head.
‘Leila my dear, this may be the Advanced Technological Age, but there are still such things as two-way mirrors, you know.
We needn't even have a camera in the room.
Does she trust you enough to let you be present though?’
‘It's hard to tell.
I'll talk to her.’
Roirbak nodded.
‘Good.
Let her eat lunch and then give her a mild tranquilliser.
We should begin this afternoon.’
‘And what do we do with Nathan in the meantime?
As you saw, he's restless.’
‘Perhaps we can persuade Tammuz Malamute to entertain him.’
Roirbak laughed at the absurdity of the image.
‘Who?
Is that another of your a.i.s?’
Never a truer word is said in jest, Roirbak thought.
‘He's my guest,’ he answered.
‘That guy seems OK,’ Nathan said, as he and Ari tried to find their way through the labyrinth of Roirbak's complex to the canteen.
‘Yeah.
Leila worships him,’ Ari replied.
Roirbak's instructions had been misleading.
So far, they hadn't found the canteen and, twice, had re-emerged into the rococo splendour of the refurbished part of the building.
It was fun though.
Neither Ari or Nathan had ever seen a place like it.
‘So…when does it happen?’
Nathan stuck his hands in his pockets.
‘I don't know.
Isn't this weird?
Like an arranged marriage or something!’
Nathan laughed and ran a few steps in front of Ari, turning back to bow.
‘Madam, may your betrothed take you to lunch?’
‘Certainly, sir!’
Ari replied, batting her eyes and curtseying.
‘Where the fuck is it though?’
She linked her arm through Nathan's and they pushed open a few doors, only to find empty rooms.
‘You know,’ she said, ‘talking of  marriage and all…
Can you keep a secret, Nate?’
He groaned and slapped his forehead.
‘Oh no!
You're already married aren't you!’
She thumped his arm.
‘Stupid!
I just want to tell someone, that’ s all, and you're least involved.
Promise not to repeat it?’
‘All right.’
‘Well, Cabochon and Jordan sort of got hitched, if you know what I mean.’
‘No, I don't.
How?
What did they do?’
‘They cut each other and swapped blood-stains.
They have to swear to stay together or something.’
‘Weird!
What's the point?’
‘Well, it's to do with Cab's brother.
Apparently he's really evil, and follows Cab round when he's in Arcady, being mean.
Cab wants Jordan to look after him, I think.
He's scared of his brother.
They have a strange relationship.
They started fighting last time Star Eye were here.’
‘Wow, Jordan might get beaten up, or even killed!
Cabochon's brother might be a monster.’
‘That's what I thought.
Leila doesn't know.’
She sniffed.
‘I can smell food.
Try that door.
Now, not a word, remember?’
‘OK.’
There were a couple of people already in there, sitting at a table near the counter.
Ari and Nathan hung around in the doorway until they looked up, feeling they needed permission to enter.
A beautiful woman with long, black hair noticed they were there.
She smiled and said, in a boy's voice, ‘Hi.
Looking for something?’
‘Mr Roirbak said we could eat in here?’
Ari answered, making it a question.
‘Well, come in then!’
The man sitting with his back to her at the table looked round.
For a moment she thought she knew him.
He stared at her in a very strange, intense way.
It made her shudder.
‘Who are you?’ he demanded.
‘I…er…we came with Leila, Leila Saatchi,’ Ari replied.
‘But what's your name?’
‘Easy, Tammuz, you're scaring her,’ the black-haired person said in a puzzled voice.
‘What's your name, babe?
Huh?
My friend here is nervous of strangers.’
‘Ari,’ she said, not wanting to add her surname in case these colleagues of Roirbak's had heard of Ewan.
‘Leila Saatchi,’ said the boywoman.
‘That name sounds familiar.’
‘She's with the natro group called Star Eye,’ Tammuz said stonily.
The boywoman went white.
‘You knew about this, didn't you!
You knew!’
Ari and Nathan sat down nervously.
Zambia scraped hir hands through hir hair and sighed.
SHe noticed Tammuz flicking odd looks at the girl.
Something peculiar was going on, that was for sure.
SHe called Sindy and ordered some food for the kids.
‘So, are all of you here, all of Star Eye?’
SHe asked.
Ari shook her head.
‘No, just me and Leila and,’ she jerked her head in Nathan's direction, ‘him.’
Zambia laughed and rolled hir eyes.
‘Thank you, Goddess, for that at least,’ she said.
‘You know them?’
Ari asked.
‘Not really.
Oh, dammit, Sindy's got stuck on that spike again, Tammuz.
Shall I fix it?’
Tammuz waved a hand, examining the remains of his meal as if it was a valuable artefact.
Zambia went to untangle the droid who was bleeping mournfully.
‘Excuse me, is that a boy or a girl?’
Nathan asked Tammuz.
Ari winced at his lack of tact.
Tammuz smiled but it didn't make him look cheerful.
‘It's a combination,’ he said, keeping his head down.
‘An intersex.’
‘Oh.’
Nathan and Ari exchanged a glance.
Ari smothered a grin and shrugged.
Zambia came back with two plates of food and sat down again.
‘I might as well ask,’ SHe said.
‘Is Cabochon Crevecoeur still with you lot?’
‘Yes,’ Ari answered through a mouthful of soyameat.
‘You know him?’
Zambia nodded.
‘Mmm.’
‘Do you know his brother?’
Nathan asked eagerly, leaning across the table.
Zambia flinched inside.
‘Why?’
‘Nath-an!’
Ari sang, kicking him under the table.
‘Oh, so you've heard about Cabochon's brother then, have you?’
Zambia asked, with narrow eyes.
SHe lit a cigarette and puffed furiously.
‘Only that he can be a bit…well, dangerous, I guess,’ Nathan said.
Ari made another agonised sound.
This person might know  Cab's brother, for Goddess' sake!
Was Nate mad?
Tammuz pushed his chair back and stood up.
‘I'm out of here!’ he said, ‘this is trauma city!’and retreated swiftly.
A silence descended over the table.
‘Sorry,’ Nate said.
‘Have I…uh…
‘Zambia exhaled a plume of smoke, tossed hir head and extended a hand.
‘Shake!’
SHe ordered.
Nathan timidly obeyed.
‘How do you do,’ Zambia said silkily.
‘I'm Zambia Crevecoeur, dangerous or not, and I'm very pleased to meet you!’
Later in the afternoon, Roirbak went to extract Nathan and Ari from Zambia's clutches.
Zambia, however, trying to compensate for whatever information they'd picked up about hir, offered to entertain Nathan for the afternoon so that Roirbak could begin work with Ari.
Sheepishly, Nathan agreed to go and watch movies with Zambia, casting agonised looks after Ari as he followed hir from the canteen.
Ari wondered whether she was betraying him in some way by leaving him alone with the dreaded sibling of Cabochon Crevecoeur.
Roirbak led the way to the laboratory annexe of the complex, where he'd already prepared a couple of rooms for their research.
He had decided to get Leila to put the girl under trance before they attempted any experimentation.
Ari would be far too anxious in a fully conscious state.
All the way there she was asking him questions: ‘What are you going to do?
Who's going to be there?’
His heart went out to her trepidation.
‘Try not to worry,’ he said inadequately.
‘You won't be hurt.
There's no need to be shy.
Both Leila and I have done this kind of thing before.
There’ s nothing to it.’
He felt sure Ari was not convinced by such blatant lies.
He showed her into a comfortable room complete with wallscreen, soft lighting and floor cushions.
The setting was designed to put Ari at her ease.
All sensory equipment was well hidden.
‘What are you going to do?’
Ari asked again, one hand firmly clutching her totems and prowling round the room.
She kept looking at the wallscreen with distrust.
‘I'm not going to do anything, Ari,’ Quincx said, in a voice he hoped would be soothing to a young girl.
‘When Leila gets here, I shall leave the room.
We want you to relax and feel comfortable.
Leila will  put you in a light trance.
You probably won't remember anything when you wake up.’
Ari wasn't sure she understood.
‘I won't be…
Nathan isn't going to be part of it?’
‘Not for the time being.’
Ari's shoulders slumped, which Roirbak interpreted as relief.
‘This won't take long, I'm sure,’ he said.
Ari nodded and sat down on the cushions.
Leila entered the room a little too breezily saying, ‘Well the boy's happy.
I don't think he'll be making an escape bid yet!
You OK, Ari?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, I'll leave you to it then,’ Quincx said.
‘Ari there are a couple of things I think we should talk about,’ Leila said, settling down on the cushions beside the girl.
‘What's wrong?’
‘Nothing's wrong.
It's just that what we're going to be doing for the next few weeks means you're going to have to be very open with me, and Quincx to a degree.
If that's going to cause you any problem, we have to thrash it out now before we get started.’
‘Can you explain that more?’
Ari had anticipated that her training, until the consummation with Nathan, would involve being hooked up to machines like the ones Leila had used at Lazar Farm.
She had decided not to think too deeply about the end result just yet.
‘Well, basically you'll be getting used to experiencing sexual feelings, mainly by learning to arouse yourself and coping with resulting power surges.
For safety, it isn't a good idea if you're completely alone while this is happening, which is why I'm around.
I want to know if that's going to inhibit you, put you off.
Obviously we'll be able to use the usual relaxation exercises, but I don't want any subconscious resentment creeping in.’
‘I'll do whatever I have to,’ Ari answered.
‘That is, I'll try.
If somebody has to be here, I'd rather it was you.’
Leila sighed.
‘Good.
Don't worry about making a fool of yourself or anything.
All I care about is helping you.’
She stroked Ari's face.
‘Well, here we are at last!
I think I'm more nervous than you are!
Are you ready to begin?
Today we'll just do a visualisation and try to remove what's left of your father's blocking device.’
‘OK.’
Ari reached for Leila's hand and squeezed it.
‘I have been waiting for this, you know.
I'm scared, but not that scared.’
Leila smiled reassuringly.
‘Well that makes two of us then!
Now, if you lie back on the cushions, I'll just hook you up to an enhancement device so we can share the experience.’
She wondered whether she should have had Ari dress in a bath-robe or something.
It was difficult to anticipate which direction this visualisation would take; it might be entirely subjective or Ari might manifest physical sensations and want to touch herself.
Ari cleared her throat and wriggled on the cushions.
‘Comfortable?’
Leila asked, putting on her own headset.
‘Nearly.’
‘OK.
Just loosen your jeans a little so you can breathe properly.’
Leila began the trance induction, taking Ari down into a deep, relaxed state.
‘How do you feel?’ she asked softly.
‘Nice.
Floaty,’ Ari mumbled in reply.
‘Where are you?’
‘In my private place, where the feather trees are.’
‘You are completely alone.’
Ari's forehead wrinkled.
‘No.
There are animals here; my friends.’
Leila drew in her breath.
‘Right.
OK, but just at this moment you're not with any of them.’
Her voice dropped lower.
‘It's a lovely day among the feather trees.
Warm sun, birds singing and dragonflies skimming over the pool.
Do you see the pool between the trees?’
‘Yes.’
‘It is such a nice day, why not go for a swim?
Walk to the pool.
Take off your shoes.
Feel the soft grass beneath your feet.
Wriggle your toes…
Now, take off your clothes and walk into the pool.’
She paused.
Ari was motionless, breathing regularly beside her.
Leila closed her eyes, visualising for herself the pleasant warmth of Ari's fantasy world.
It was one with which she was already familiar, both of them having helped construct it for regular meditations.
‘Ah, the water feels good!’ she said.
‘You are floating, floating, and your body is warm and comfortable.
You can feel the heat of the sun beating down on the water as it rocks you.
Rocks you.
Gently.
You become aware of the water against your skin.
Feel it touch every part of you.
Gently.
Gently.
It's like being stroked or held.
All of your body is beneath the water, but for your face.
You feel lazy and contented.
You like the feeling of the water against your skin.
Stretch out your arms.
Wriggle your fingers…
Ah, so warm.
Now, stretch out your legs.
Become a star shape in the water.
It is lapping, lapping, stroking your breasts, your belly, between your thighs…
’ Ari took a sharp breath, which  made Leila jump.
She had begun to feel quite horny herself reciting the exercise.
‘What do you feel Ari?’ she asked.
‘A burning,’ Ari said, sounding anxious.
‘Don't you like the feel of the water?’
‘Yes.
Yes.
But the burning is beneath that…somehow.’
‘Does it hurt?’
‘No…not exactly.
It is behind a sort of shield.’
‘Do you think you can touch the shield, or move it?’
Ari was silent for a moment.
‘I think it is possible to move it,’ she said at last, ‘but it will let the burning out.
I am afraid that will kill me.’
‘It can't,’ Leila soothed.
‘The burning is an illusion, and the only way to get rid of it is to face it and absorb it.
Do you understand that Ari?’
‘Mmmm.’
‘Now relax again, float gently in the water.
My words are a guide which you can follow…follow…,
The water closes over her head, but she can see, she can breathe.
There are beautiful waving weeds in the water and everything is blue and green.
Her body rocks and little currents tickle her skin.
She thinks perhaps small fish are nibbling at her, but it is pleasant, it doesn't hurt.
Her awareness is of softness and warmth and pleasure, but there is a sort of hardness, which is dark, that flashes in and out of her perception.
That makes her feel uncomfortable.
Then there is a presence in the water with her.
Ari can see a wavery shape, floating hair, floating gauze.
She identifies this figure as an aspect of the Goddess — water maiden.
The Goddess tells her she can pull the dark, hard thing away, but that Ari will have to help.
Ari star-fish stretches out her limbs and feels the water begin to invade her body.
It is a lovely feeling but spiky things like thoughts are spoiling it, making their presence stronger than the caressing liquid.
The Goddess tells Ari to ignore those things and concentrate on the pleasure.
It isn't easy.
Sometimes it feels like the water is pushing thorns inside her.
Bubbles form around her; the water is restless, roiling.
She can no longer see the water maiden.
A voice says, ‘You must throw the black thing away.
Force it out of yourself.’
Ari strains and tumbles in the foam, but it seems as if her insides have become hard and dark.
She tries to push it out and black beads form on her skin, ribbons of dark flowing out  into the water.
‘That's it!’ says the Goddess.
‘Throw it away.
Push it out!’
‘It won't go,’ Ari says.
‘I can't…
It won't…
‘Push!’
‘I…
’ She makes a huge, agonised effort and there is a sensation of tearing and pain, of being engulfed in cold darkness.
Ari tries to scream and then…
Then the water is full of sparkling light, the foam dances and she is tossed like a fragment of weed.
The darkness has gone, but the unbearable light is almost as bad.
This is the burning.
Water boils around her, full of stars.
Ari cannot breathe.
She gulps and flounders.
‘Drowning!’ her mind screams.
‘No!’ says the Goddess.
‘Take control, Ari.
Condense the light.
Take it in through your skin to become a ball in your belly.
You can do it.
It's easy.
Just think it so.’
She listens to the words of the Goddess, who is surely right, who must know everything.
Ari curls in the water, curls around the light and absorbs it.
She feels full of it and moulds it into a glowing ball deep within.
For a few moments she just floats there, experiencing the feeling.
Laughter bubbles from her lungs up through the water.
‘Now you must use the burning,’ says the Goddess.
‘It can't hurt you.
Do the things that will let it go and then call it back into yourself.’
Ari knows the things that will let the light go.
She doesn't need to be told.
In the water, she rolls into a standing position, still in the star shape, and opens her legs wide.
The light leaps and spits inside her as if trying to escape.
Her fingers swim with the water between folds of flesh and take up the rhythm of the light.
She turns the water to steam and frees the light inside her, twisting and turning in a sparkling, spinning column.
It seems endless.
The Goddess' voice is faint, but it says, ‘Call it back, Ari.
Call it back.’
And, with a little effort, she does so.
‘What's wrong, Tammuz?’
Zambia had begun to watch one of the movies with Nathan, but couldn't dispel the nagging worry about Tammuz.
Why had he marched out of the canteen like that earlier?
What were these kids to him?
What did it mean?
SHe had eventually given in to a desire to seek Tammuz out, even though SHe already recognised the signs which meant he wanted to be left alone.
SHe'd found him in his workroom, staring moodily at the monitor screen.
‘There's nothing wrong,’ Tammuz replied.
‘I'm working.’
He stabbed a few keypads to make the point.
‘I don't believe you.’
SHe stood behind him and put hir hands on his shoulders.
‘Why won't you tell me?’
Tammuz pushed his chair away from the workstation and stood up.
Zambia took a step back, alarmed by the violence of his movements.
‘I need a drink,’ Tammuz said, and stomped over to the liquor cabinet he kept there.
Zambia watched cautiously.
Clearly, whatever was worrying Tammuz was big.
‘Is it me?
Have I done anything?’
‘No.’
Tammuz took a swig from a bottle and then held it out.
‘Want some?’
Zambia nodded and took it.
SHe found two plastic cups and filled them, handing one to Tammuz.
He sighed.
‘Why won't you tell me?’
Zambia asked again.
‘Don't you trust me?’
Tammuz laughed unpleasantly.
‘Trust you?
I don't trust anybody.’
Zambia wondered what had happened to change him so much.
They'd both been riding clouds that morning, now this.
Surely temperamental exchanges of this nature should occur somewhat later in a relationship.
SHe decided to be blunt.
‘It was something to do with those kids then.’
Tammuz narrowed his eyes.
‘You think so?
Haven't you considered it might be the woman they were with?
I once had a thing going with Leila Saatchi.’
‘Oh.’
Zambia experienced cold dread.
‘Are you telling me I'm in your way now or something?’
Tammuz looked as if he was about to make a cutting response but then actually took note of Zambia's expression.
He put down his cup after draining it, and hugged Zambia to him.
‘No, no, not that.
I'm sorry.
It’ s just…
I can't tell you.
I don't want to tell you…or anyone.
I'm sorry.
I'm crazy about you, Crevecoeur.
I don't want to hurt you.’
‘Then tell me what's wrong!’
Zambia put hir hands on either side of Tammuz' face.
‘Tell me.
I love you.
I'll keep your secrets, I promise.
Only I hate you shutting me out like this.’
‘I only just let you in,’ Tammuz reminded hir.
‘Our relationship can be measured in hours, my strange beauty.
We fly on the wings of mutual allure, but I'm not sure whether we've reached the heavy confidence stage yet.’
Zambia kissed Tammuz on the mouth briefly.
‘Won't it help you to tell someone?
What are you afraid I'll do?’
‘Tell someone.
No, no.
I don't mean in that way.
It may be forced from you.’
‘What?!’
‘You see?
I have reasons not to confide in you, or anyone.’
He rubbed his face.
‘Let's have another drink.’
‘Want to go and lie down?’
Zambia asked artfully.
Tammuz smiled.
‘Why not?
It might take my mind off things.’
Thus, as down in the laboratory annexe Ari struggled and swam with a new sensation, above her head, Tammuz Malamute plundered the willing body of Zambia Crevecoeur, causing the building to reverberate with sexual emissions of several different types.
And in the age-old tradition of sirens, whatever their sex, Zambia used the opportunity of post-coital languor, not to mention the accessory of intoxication, to gently squeeze Tammuz for information.
as if dealing with a stubborn splinter fixed firmly and painfully down behind a fingernail, Zambia patiently nudged and pushed and, eventually, the agonising sliver was expelled.
Tammuz lay in hir arms, his head in a shawl of Zambia's hair and said, ‘I am not what you think.
Tammuz Malamute is my name, yes, but only recently.’
Zambia smiled warmly, lovingly, encouragingly, remaining utterly silent so as not to frighten him off.
‘I told you I had an affair with the Saatchi woman.
That's true.
She also thinks I'm dead.’
‘Awkward,’ Zambia couldn't help saying.
Tammuz shook his head.
‘Not really.
I've changed…somewhat since she knew me.
This whole body is new, even my personality to a degree, for it has been shaped by the flesh; but the soul within this flesh is not new.
That girl with Leila is my daughter, Zambia.’
‘You had a child with Leila Saatchi?’
Tammuz shook his head, wrinkling his features.
‘No, no, nothing like that.
It's a long story…
‘So, what else have you got planned for today?’
‘You ever heard of Ewan Famber, Zambia?’
‘The Tech-Green saint?
Yeah.
The one who…uh oh!’
‘Quite.
He's safely buried, I assure you.
A loathsome, crusading creature quite alien to me, in fact.’
‘Tammuz, be straight with me here.
What are you saying?’
‘I'm saying that the me-ness of my consciousness was once Ewan Famber.’
‘Yes, well, that makes a lot of sense.’
‘All right, for the sake of argument, I am Ewan Famber, or the nearest it is possible to get to him now.’
‘Did you kill him?’
‘Figuratively, yes.’
‘But that's impossible.
That's history.
You're not old enough.’
‘Be smart, Zam!
How old do you think Roirbak is?
People like us have access to techniques to banish the effects of ageing.’
‘People with money have access to that stuff.
I don't think you have money, or are my instincts completely wrong?’
‘Listen, rich people have to pay the rejuvenators for the service.
Doesn't it occur to you that the rejuvenators can afford to give themselves a discount?’
‘So you're a rejuvenator.’
‘No, I'm a scientist, but it amounts to the same thing.’
He sighed deeply and rolled away from Zambia, presenting his lean back which Zambia decided was wearing an expression of stubbornness.
‘OK, so what did you do and why and how, and what's with all this secrecy?’
SHe stroked the back encouragingly.
Such young skin, surely not…
?
SHe tried to imagine the soul of a middle-aged man living in this flesh.
It seemed absurd.
‘I uncovered something,’ Tammuz said after a moment.
‘It wasn't a discovery exactly, because it's something humanity has been aware of in metaphor and myth since…well, forever, I guess.
I just remembered it.
I think that's the best way of putting it.
I suppose you could say I found the Goddess.’
He turned round again and propped himself up in the bed.
‘No shit!
How?’
Tammuz pinched his skin.
‘In this.’
Tapped his head.
‘This.’
Poked one of Zambia's orifices.
‘And this.
Everywhere.
Within us.
I deciphered a code that confirmed things scientists have been trying to get at for years; that magick is physics, basically.
It's the fundamentalism of Naturotech and I was an ardent natro back then.’
‘You mean, you're not now?
Not even after seeing the Goddess and all?’
Tammuz smiled and wound a lock of Zambia's hair round his fingers.
‘My dear, sweet love, once you have seen , the whole idea of  religion can only be tawdry, pathetic and…wrong .
You realise there is no point to it all, that your perspective on Universe and life was all wrong.
It's impossible to explain.
The Goddess is alive and powerful and sentient, yes, but she is like blood, within us.
‘Natros say that anyway.’
Tammuz shook his head.
‘Their perspective is wrong.
It's not a spiritual thing, it's neurological: hardware.
And it's hardware that generates the software that affects the hardware.
It's a feedback cycle.’
‘The Goddess is hardware…
’ Zambia shook hir head.
‘You have crazy ways of putting things, Tammuz.’
‘How did you get the best out of your hardware, Zam?’
‘Me in particular?
By being chopped up and reshaped I suppose.
Is that what you want me to say?’
‘And what did I do to that sculpture of flesh?’
‘Came and programmed the software?’
‘Precisely.
That's what I do and that's why I hide.
I know how to program the software that activates the Goddess.’
‘Tammuz you are mad.
What am I doing here in bed with you?’
Tammuz ran his hand over Zambia's belly.
‘It's a pity none of these are actually fertile,’ he said, in a humorous tone.
‘Never mind that,’ Zambia said, enclosing Tammuz' hand in hir own and raising it to hir lips.
‘I want you to begin at the beginning and tell me your life.
I want to know why Ewan Famber wanted to die.
I want to know it all.
Now.’
SHe lay back, pulling Tammuz' head down on to hir breast, where he closed his eyes in a relief that was, strangely, both enervating and exhilarating.
‘Listen then…’ he said.
The new body had been growing steadily for weeks.
Ewan monitored it every day.
He'd equipped his facility on the orbital Tech-Green research base — annexed to Sky City One — with an incuvat; the means to commit virtual suicide in a complete reality.
He was well isolated from his colleagues: nobody ever came over here uninvited.
This had been ideal for Ewan's purposes.
Naturally, the conditions weren't ideal, mainly because part of his research involved understanding what the conditions actually were, but they sufficed.
The incuvat was a state-of-the-art model.
Ewan would stand and gaze wonderingly at  the naked boy forming before his eyes.
Aesthetically, he was in love, but it was still hard to think that eventually this sculpture of flesh and bone must become his soul's vehicle, his robot.
It was unimaginable.
Lydia had no idea what was going on.
She would be taken care of; he'd made sure of that.
She was quite happy playing house back planetside, in the home country with the kid.
He was aware of the risks involved and that he was embarking on a kind of unnecessary surgery that could threaten his life, but it was what he wanted.
He had to get out; completely, utterly.
He was sick of living out the legend of the Tech-Green wunderkind, sick too of the work he was involved in and the knowledge that went with it.
All Tech-Green cared about was the planet itself: the inhabitants were expendable.
Of course, being members of the Tech-Green élite and therefore indispensable, he and his family were already on file for a place on Sky City One should he be willing to move them all up there.
He was not.
The revolutionary technology that it was claimed would revitalise the world's failing eco-systems was already on stand-by.
Outlawed technology, too dangerous to human life.
From the safety of space, it would prove an interesting experiment, one that might be duplicated on other worlds, far away, should it succeed.
Ewan no longer wanted to be part of this.
He would live out one more life, back on the planet, in this new body; let it age and die.
Let it end.
The trouble was, Ewan loved life.
He did not want to die and yet his increasing depression was making existence intolerable.
He knew this was the only way.
Cover his tracks and run.
Begin again.
Forget.
Experience all those things his cloistered lifestyle with the Tech-Greens had denied him.
He wanted to feel the bones of the world beneath his feet, join natro groups, travel, love and live in complete freedom.
The thought of his daughter made him uncomfortable.
He suspected her existence was an obscenity.
He regretted his impulsiveness bitterly, considering his marvellous discoveries were potentially dangerous.
Did humanity really need all this technology?
Was it really progress?
Lately, he had begun to think that evolution was something that would occur in the soul and, in time, the fripperies of science would be revealed to be dangerous toys.
People just weren't ready for all this.
Their bright minds flitted from fruit to fruit upon the tree of knowledge, but the glittering insects were still motivated by greed and selfishness.
There was no true communion between human spirits, so essential to society's progression as a whole, and compassion  had been eroded by the calamities of mankind's mistakes.
Ewan felt he could do nothing about this situation, and there was no use worrying about it.
He would do what he had to do and escape.
Let his colleagues con themselves if they wished but he knew that Tech-Green, for all its grand, humane claims, was no better than the monetarist governments who'd reigned and toppled before them.
A placebo, superficial and cosy, to lull the world into no longer questioning.
Techgreen knows what's right,; they care.
They'll take care of everything .
All the time, while people sat back in their new sky-clawing cities, safely enwombed away from the nasty poisons outside, Tech-Green's brilliant minds developed ever more complex measures to solve the planet's debilities.
The future of mankind, they said, lay in space, where there was no environment to ruin.
Left in peace, the world would eventually heal itself.
It sounded so sensible, but for the fact there were, in some countries, still billions of people struggling in an existence beyond the comforts of geodesic domes.
Somehow, in their calculations, Tech-Green seemed to forget about them, but maybe not.
Ewan had heard of some research projects that made him very uncomfortable about these people's future.
Publicly there were muzzy plans for when the city populations took to the skies en masse.
The poverty-stricken could then take over the deserted metropolises.
Everything would be all right.
Oh yes,of course , these mostly ill-educated people would be given full instruction on how to regulate the dome environments, how to manage the delicate hydroponics farms clustered like eggs round the city skirts.
Of course.
Everything would be fine.
Who are they kidding?
Ewan wondered, and adjusted the temperature of the incuvat.
He delivered his new body from its artificial womb the next day.
Tenderly he wiped its mouth and nostrils and eyes as it coughed into life, vomiting saline nutrient over his hands.
The eyes were open and Ewan could see that, no matter how objective he tried to be, something lived in this body, something which he would soon extinguish with his own, vibrant, developed persona.
The body was not wholly parthenogenetic, but contained elements of himself and Roirbak, though Roirbak was unaware of his participation.
In a way, it was their son, Ewan supposed.
Could it think perhaps?
Sky City One had been built by constructs such as these, their bodies and minds tailored for the job in hand.
They were always occupied by artificial intelligences.
Although the technology existed to use these constructs as  hosts for human personas, this was yet another procedure outlawed by Tech-Green.
Nobody on Gaiah was even aware it was possible.
If he was caught, Ewan would be in deep trouble.
He knew he would not be caught.
The data transfer was the most frightening part.
Ewan had to allow control to pass from himself to his a.i.
— Thoth.
This was the same machine who had computed so many of the calculations involved in designing his daughter.
He knew the machine like an old friend (it would probably be the personality he'd miss most), but he still couldn't trust it as much as he trusted himself.
Time and again, he made it run through the sequence with him.
Everything seemed OK.
But what about when he was helpless?
What if the random factor emerged then?
He shuddered.
This had to be done and he needed to be unconscious.
Although he was tempted to try and remain awake, he realised his sanity might be permanently impaired by that.
What could the sensation of his persona being sucked from one house of flesh and fitted, circuit by circuit, into another possibly feel like?
Tempting, but no.
He needed to be one hundred per cent fit and alert when all this was over.
He hadn't accounted for disorientation.
Upon regaining consciousness, he'd panicked when his limbs, leaden and numb, had refused to obey him.
The muscles had been fully stimulated during the growth period and Ewan had supposed they'd be fully operational immediately.
He feared failure, the horror of being incarcerated within a crippled vehicle.
Luckily Thoth, possessing more compassion than he'd dared hope, soothed him through the transitional period.
It took four hours before he could move, during which time the lifeless body of Ewan Famber that was, leaked fluids off the white table on to the ceraplas floor.
The new Ewan wouldn't look at it.
When he was able, he fed himself with the meal he'd prepared earlier, and stripped off the heavy insulating robe to dress himself in Tech-Green drab.
He sat, shaking, before his a.i. for a few minutes, realising that, whatever he'd thought before, the following procedures might prove even more risky than the persona transfer itself.
Not only would he have to destroy all evidence of his old body, but somehow transport himself planetside without raising suspicion.
Naturally, he had made extensive preparations, but couldn't be absolutely certain they would work.
It involved the self-destruction of his beloved a.i.
— a terrible sacrifice — but no amount of lonely pacing could throw  up any alternative in his mind.
Because of his professed preference for isolation, it would take considerable time before Ewan was missed by other personnel on the base.
This was his greatest advantage.
Although he knew it was to soothe himself rather than a.i.’ he spent a few last minutes communing with Thoth by neural link, explaining yet again how grieved he was to have to ask it to give its ‘life’for him.
Passionately, he told it he still believed that, like a human soul, its essential persona would continue to exist after its hardware was destroyed, because this reality was only one of many possible eigen states.
It was almost a religious conviction he had, and one which gave him the courage to carry out his plans.
Thoth interrupted his stream of self-justification with the sentiment that it agreed the eigen state theory was possible and then humorously pointed out that simply because Ewan had thought of it, it was infinitely more possible.
With the final instruction that Thoth was to cover his tracks until he contacted it from Gaiah, the new Ewan bid a mournful farewell to the facility that had become his home, and stepped out into the walkways of the base.
He was dressed in the garb of a typical construct worker, so that anybody he passed would take him for such.
He proceeded, unchallenged, to the shuttle docks where he'd previously concealed the identity backup so that he could pass himself off as a human shuttle-worker.
He hoped that, because of the participation of his a.i. in the plan, there would be no hitch.
In advance, using the smokescreen of Tech-Green bureaucracy, he'd arranged for this fictional shuttle-worker to be placed on a shift which involved taking a shuttle through the gravity well to Gaiah.
Once planetside, he would contact his a.i. and, within seconds, his old facility would be destroyed, the body of Ewan Famber with it.
His preparations had been so precise, there was little fear the base itself would be seriously damaged.
It would appear to everyone that Ewan Famber had died in a freak accident.
No one would question that.
Everything went as planned.
Tammuz Malamute had stepped off the shuttle port outside Arcady and had delivered the last fateful message to his a.i.
Later, he sat in a café, drinking cappuccino, and watched his own obituary on the network news.
The world grieved for Ewan Famber.
Tammuz grieved for a machine.
He never forgot that sacrifice.
Tammuz Malamute abused the body Ewan had bequeathed him for years, telling himself he'd buried the past, until the day he woke up  and a voice inside reminded him that Ari Famber was fourteen years old.
Ari Famber was nearly a woman.
In the end, he'd just had to see.
And so, while Reynard Lennon, Jahsaxa Penumbra's most valuable operative, combed the dank underworld of the city looking for a runaway, Zambia Crevecoeur became the recipient of Tammuz Malamute's history.
He had explained about Ari, vehemently disagreed with Zambia's suggestion he should make himself known to the girl, and tortured himself out loud with conjectures about how Roirbak and Leila might, at this very moment, be destroying Ari's abilities beneath their feet.
He would not leave his quarters, holing up like some manic, wounded beast, pacing back and forth, drinking, pausing to spout unbelievably complex monologues on genetic theory, which to Zambia sounded more like the ravings of a demented priest.
Occasionally he'd become calm and, during those times, sat at his console and worked furiously, his face tense in the flickering fireflies of scrolling information.
Zambia watched with concern.
SHe couldn't understand Tammuz' mania for disguise, given that nobody knew about what he had discovered, except for his friends below.
SHe couldn't understand how, when he was clearly so wound up and frantic about his daughter's development, he could stop himself from taking part in it.
Tammuz Malamute was an enigma: part crazed, paranoic and possibly dangerous.
SHe considered that, during the delicate process of transferring his consciousness and memory to new hardware, Tammuz had impaired his own sanity.
But, despite hir misgivings, Zambia could feel hir attachment to Tammuz grow more profound with each hour.
Every frenetic gesture engendered tenderness in hir heart.
Tammuz would turn to hir and his eyes — independent of his constrained emotions — would plead with hir for assistance, sanctuary, advice.
Zambia responded in the only way possible, presenting hir body like a softly-glowing flower that could enfold in perfume and smooth petalflesh.
Tammuz would fall into hir, as if with desperation; his cries were like those of pain.
Zambia tried not to think of the future.
Hir own safety seemed unimportant now, hir life had been swamped by the torrent of Tammuz Malamute.
SHe wondered, and dreaded, when hir conscience would insist SHe did something about him.
‘Your guest hasn't shown himself yet then,’ Leila said, biting into a breakfast muffin and taking a mouthful of coffee to wash it down.
It was the day following Ari's first test and Leila, Ari and Roirbak had met in the canteen.
Nathan was still asleep.
‘Tammuz works a lot,’ Roirbak said, himself disappointed that Malamute appeared uninterested in, or was perhaps avoiding, the new company.
He had watched the tape of Ari's meeting with him and had been satisfied by Tammuz' reaction.
What he couldn't understand was, if Tammuz was Ewan, as he suspected, why he had kept away from the girl.
Was he really so hard?
Perhaps he was frightened.
Ari broke into his revery.
‘I saw him yesterday,’ she said.
‘He's…a bit odd, Mr Roirbak.
He looked at me so strangely.
Doesn't he like girls?’
‘He's a bit of a loner,’ Quincx replied, unsure why he didn't just tell Leila his suppositions.
Perhaps later.
It would obviously be too insensitive to say something in front of the girl.
He shrank from confronting Tammuz outright, sensing a kind of insane streak just below the surface which might erupt if he was provoked.
‘So,’ he said to change the subject, ‘how do you feel about yesterday in the light of a new day?’
Ari was no longer embarrassed to discuss it.
Maybe because Leila looked on Roirbak as a kind of surrogate father, she did not feel intimidated by him.
‘Great,’ she answered.
‘It was amazing.
But I can't see how I'd actually be able to use that.’
‘You simply have to teach yourself,’ Roirbak said.
‘With time, you'll be able to craft that raw burning into whatever you choose, and hopefully be able to control it enough to experience it only when you want to.’
‘When would I ever not want to experience it?’
‘It might be a part of yourself you’ d be wiser saving until you know people very well, if you understand what I mean.’
‘Oh.’
Since the block had been removed the day before, and Ewan's program had started to run, she had felt like a cat on heat.
This was even noticeable through the haze of the drug Leila had given her to superficially suppress such feelings.
Leila had told her that what she was experiencing was a kind of installation sequence, which had to be allowed to take its course.
‘It may feel a little uncomfortable,’ she had said, ‘but once we all feel confident about what we're doing, we'll let you loose on Nathan, which should complete the sequence.’
Ari was  coming to like the idea of cornering the helpless Nathan with her whirlwind sexuality.
Little did he know what was in store, she felt.
‘Today I want you to watch some films,’ Roirbak said.
‘The sort of films your mother would not approve of!’
‘Great.
I wonder what my father would think!’
Only Leila noticed Roirbak's quick glance upwards, as if he was trying to peer through the ceiling.
The gesture was covert, automatic, and swiftly stemmed.
Now what could that mean…?
Nathan Lazar woke up late and was unable to find any human sign of life down in the workshops.
He ate in the canteen, spoke with some of the robots, wandered into the sitting room where Roirbak had left him the stack of films, rejected every one as boring, and decided to do a little exploring.
It would be too horrible if he was going to be cooped up alone like this every day.
How long was it going to last?
He wondered what they were doing to Ari.
He thought she was rather a strange girl; more like a boy most of the time, but there were parts about her he really liked.
The curve of her neck and throat and jaw for example, the look in her eyes when she was amused, her ability to crack all her knuckles simultaneously.
From observing Star Eye, he thought she'd modelled herself on Cabochon: she even sat like him and had started scraping her hair back into a ponytail, even though it wasn't really long enough yet.
Nathan thought bitterly about how it was only his abnormality that made him suitable for Leila's purposes.
Someone like Cabochon was wholly more attractive and surely preferable to a girl like Ari.
He was sure that, even though he and Ari got along well, she must have been disappointed when Leila chose him for the job.
Mulling over these gloomy thoughts, he climbed the stairs to the gallery where Tammuz' office and labs were and the corridor which led to the rooms he and Zambia had as living quarters.
It was obvious this part of the building was used regularly.
Machinery was switched on and chattering away to itself.
There was a smell of coffee in the air and a feeling that every room had only just been vacated by somebody.
Nathan had been intrigued by the exotic and androgynous Zambia the day before, and was thankful hir sense of humour outweighed hir outrage at Nathan's ham fisted remarks.
It was fascinating to hear hir talk; pretending first one minute you were talking to a girl, and then the next, a boy.
Nathan had been delighted it was possible to believe it  was both.
There were no people like that at Lazar Farm.
He was beginning to get a bit homesick since they'd stopped travelling and he'd been on his own.
He'd come to the conclusion that he was of a completely different species to Leila and her people.
Away from the others, he thought his attempts to fit in had been rather embarrassing.
Sounds drifted up the corridor: low voices and laughter.
There was a certain tone to it that made Nathan advance more cautiously.
His first discovery was that Zambia and Tammuz made love with the door open.
Subsequent discoveries were rather more stimulating.
Such was the extent of their physical involvement, neither Tammuz nor Zambia noticed the eye peering through the crack in the door until they'd finished.
Nathan wasn't quite sure whether he should skulk away or knock and ask to come in.
He had very little experience of dealing with situations like this.
Then Zambia said, ‘Well, you're leaving it a little late to join in aren't you honey?’
And Tammuz had yelped and cried, ‘What the fuck is that?’
‘Just a little boy,’ Zambia said.
‘Come in.
We won't eat you!’
Nathan advanced a little way.
He couldn't take his eyes off Zambia's stomach which was revealed quite plainly as SHe sat up in bed.
‘Wanna take a look boy?
Come here.’
‘Zam, you are sick!’
Tammuz said, and began pulling on his clothes.
‘You're the kid with Leila, right?’
Nathan nodded wordlessly.
Tammuz leapt up and guided him back into the corridor.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘Sorry, I was just looking around.’
Nathan felt uncomfortable about the way this man was looking at him.
It was very intense.
Perhaps he was angry about being spied on and planned harm.
‘I'm really sorry,’ he said.
‘Hmm?’
Tammuz looked dazed.
‘Oh, that’ s all right.
I'd like to talk to you.
Ask you a few things.
Do you mind?’
‘No.
No.’
Nathan wasn't sure whether that was a truthful answer or not.
He followed Tammuz up the corridor into his office and accepted a plastic cup of lukewarm killer coffee.
Tammuz threw himself into a chair and put his feet up on the edge of his workstation.
Nathan didn't like the close scrutiny.
‘What do you want to talk to me about?’
Tammuz was still looking him up and down like a roving automatic eye.
‘So you came with Leila Saatchi and…the girl.’
‘Yes.’
‘You don't look like a natro.
Have things changed that much?’
He sighed, not wanting an answer and shook his head.
‘I'm not a natro.
Leila asked me to come here with them to…
‘Nathan stopped, feeling he shouldn't say any more.
He'd got himself into enough trouble already by doing too much of that.
Tammuz’ eyes were alight, as if with fever.
‘Go on,’ he said calmly, breaking a pencil on the worktop as he did so.
‘I…
’ He floundered helplessly.
‘It's all right.
I'm Mr Roirbak's partner.
You can tell me.’
Tammuz had the feeling he must be appearing like a predatory beast at that moment, and wished Zambia was there to put the kid at his ease.
‘All right,’ Nathan answered, terrified.
No one had ordered him not to say what he knew.
He briefly told Tammuz about himself and why he was with Star Eye.
As he spoke, he watched with mounting unease the different expressions flitting across Tammuz' face: frustration, annoyance, condescension, anger, humour and, unbelievably, sadness.
His instincts finally rang the bell and told him this man had more than a casual interest in what might be going on downstairs.
‘Dear Leila,’ Tammuz said in a cracked voice when Nathan had stopped speaking.
‘Both of them blundering through…
’ He made a wordless exclamation and stood up.
Nathan flinched.
‘You're not supposed to come up here,’ Tammuz said.
‘If I were you I wouldn't tell them you have.
You'd better go back and…get on with whatever you were doing.’
Needing no further prompting, the boy fled.
Zambia was lying in wait for him downstairs.
Nathan virtually screamed when a hand shot out and grabbed his arm.
‘Calm down,’ Zambia soothed.
‘It's not catching.’
Then SHe realised it wasn't hir Nathan was frightened of.
‘Oh, I see.’
‘Who is he?’
Nathan squeaked.
‘What does he want ?’
‘I wish I knew!
Don't let him bother you.
He's just a bit crazy, but he won't hurt you.’
Zambia accompanied Nathan back to the screen room, and in the space of that short time, gleaned more information than Tammuz could ever hope to.
They sat down and started to look through the movie tapes, Zambia interjecting the odd question here and there.
‘Oh, this one's great.
I saw this some time ago.
Shall we watch it again?
You met all of Star Eye did you?’
‘Yes.
To both questions.’
Zambia inserted the tape.
‘Here, come and sit by me.’
SHe held out hir arm and Nathan happily snuggled against hir.
Zambia Crevecoeur had a kind of motherly/sisterly ambience about hir that day.
‘You've heard a lot of garbage about me, you know.’
‘You aren't going to hurt Cabochon?’
Zambia laughed.
‘Goddess, no!
Tell me about them all.
What are they doing nowadays?’
‘The Star Eye people?
Well, I like them a lot, but they make me feel kind of young and stupid at times.’
Nathan was filled with importance: he carried so much information this mysterious beauty wanted to hear about.
He began to describe the Star Eye members one by one.
And then recited the bits of gossip he'd picked up.
‘That's interesting,’ Zambia said when Nathan had finished telling hir about the pairing of Cabochon and Jordan.
‘Where are they all?’
‘At a hostel in Athena Gardens.
Would you like to meet them?
Maybe you could come with me when all this is over.’
Nathan was enjoying a cosy vision of flouncing back into Star Eye company on the arm of Zambia Crevecoeur.
He felt they should be made to see Cabochon had misrepresented his brother.
Zambia ran a single, slim finger over Nathan's cheek, causing a delicious shiver.
‘Honey, I'd love to, but I'm more or less stuck here as much as you are at the moment.
Perhaps, though, you could get a message to Cabochon for me.’
‘A message?’
Nathan asked, crestfallen.
‘What for?’
He wondered whether he'd said something unwise again.
‘Well, I have a bit of trouble at the moment, and if…well, if anything should happen to me, I think Cabochon should know.’
SHe smiled slyly, looking like all the paintings of powerful seductresses in all the world and twice as lovely.
‘It would have to be a secret though.
Could you do that?’
‘Maybe.’
Nathan was becoming very wary of all the secrets prowling round the complex at Acropolis Park.
He decided it would be wiser not to commit himself.
‘Maybe?
What is this?’
Zambia laughed lightly.
‘I need your help, Nathan.
I'm trusting you.
Please…
’ SHe put hir lips against the boy's mouth and gently pressed, whispering to his skin.
‘Please help me.’
‘All right!’
Nathan said breathlessly.
Zambia drew away after planting another brief kiss.
‘Good.
That's settled then.
Shall we watch the movie?’
In Roirbak's laboratory wing, Ari was watching a movie too, though of a slightly different nature to any Roirbak had set out for Nathan's entertainment.
Artistic pornography slid across the wall-screen, beautifully captured in soft focus and low lighting.
Leila told her this particular film had once won an award.
Ari watched entranced as gleaming skin moved against gleaming skin.
It induced more of an aesthetic high than anything.
Eyes implored other eyes, smoky and dark.
Fingers trailed spines, stroked arms.
And then the close-ups, camera zooming in, and the thrust of sexual organs became almost geological because of their sheer size and arrested movement.
‘Wow,’ Ari said inadequately.
‘Just get into it,’ Leila advised, although she was sitting further back, reading a book by the light of a small lamp.
Soon the screen was obliterated by the fuzz of burning light behind Ari's eyes.
Leila put down the book and quietly knelt beside her.
‘I can't see it,’ Ari gasped.
‘That's all right,’ Leila soothed.
‘I'm going to explode.’
‘Yeah, you are.
Just let it come.
Just relax.’
She cradled Ari's head in her lap as the girl gave in to the overwhelming sensations crashing through her nervous system.
It was clearly far more powerful than the subjective test the day before.
‘Remember to let the feeling out, let it gush out like a fountain, but draw it back afterwards.
OK?’
The robe had ridden up to Ari's waist, exposing her genitals which appeared swollen and engorged to unnatural proportions.
‘Oh boy,’ Leila murmured under her breath.
‘Roirbak…
‘Then she was being thrown violently up and backwards, her spine slamming against the far wall.
‘How did I get here?’ she wondered briefly before a conflagration of raw heat crashed into her face.
‘Roirbak!’
Ari was invisible inside a spinning maelstrom of spitting light, although Leila could see one foot jerking at its perimeter.
Roirbak burst into the room.
‘She can't control it!’
Leila cried, although she doubted whether the man heard her.
The air was filled with a high-pitched whistling.
Roirbak strode purposefully towards the light, his long hair being blown into disorder.
He squatted down, his clothes vibrating against his body, and injected something into Ari's neck.
For a second there was freeze-frame and the whole world stopped.
Then the rampaging  power slipped obediently back into Ari's body and calm descended.
The only sound was rapid breathing and the ululation of an orgasming female on the screen.
Roirbak switched off the film and knelt beside Ari again.
Leila crawled over on hands and knees.
‘What did you do?’
‘Oh, just something I came up with that Ari should be able to do herself.
At least we can induce it artificially, and I know it works now, too.’
‘You mean, you weren't sure?!’
Roirbak smiled.
‘Well, you know how touch-and-go this stuff is.’
Leila gasped and ran her hands over Ari's face.
The girl was lying passively, blinking and swallowing.
‘You monster Quincx!
It could have done anything.’
‘No, it couldn't.
Remember what you were saying the other day.
It was armed with back-up retardants, couldn't have gone maverick.
The worst thing that could have happened was…nothing.’
Leila shook her head.
‘You OK, Ari?’
The girl nodded, unsure.
‘Think so.
What happened?’
‘We were just a little too ambitious for the second test,’ Roirbak said, standing up.
‘Not to worry.
No harm done.’
He marched out of the room.
Ari had started to cry.
‘I'm never going to be able to control it, am I?’ she said.
Leila hugged her.
‘It caught us unawares, that's all.
We'll handle it eventually.’
Privately, she wasn't so sure.
There is nothing in the underworld for Reynard Lennon.
He has been searching the dark realm, a moving shadow flowing through the looping Interiors; dark, dimlit, floodlit.
There are places roped with cablecoil guts as thick as a man, as fine as a whisker; a rumbling kingdom.
He slides among suspicious groups of heat-seeking, light-shunning nomads, who had made temporary camps up lesser conduits, who milk sweet, pure water from above from the gleaming concrete walls.
He insinuates himself, like some sleek-furred thing rubbing flesh, into their company.
They caress him and speak, they offer him nourishment, warmth, sanctuary; but none of them has seen Zambia Crevecoeur.
He moves on, deeper, deeper, creeping down the greasy, slippery ladders to lower levels where luminous shamen weave and sway within the oily smoke of sulky fires, and vaults are low and crumbling.
The information they have to give is more hypnotic: crazed, multi-faceted visions of the future, a hundred possible futures.
They scry and cry, wailing out their prophecies into the echoing dark where the rootless scurry and hide, but none of them can see Zambia Crevecoeur.
Down he goes, splashing now thigh-deep through the refuse-stink of the deeper levels, where human life has degraded along with the rubbish that has fallen there.
Fallen people, slipping down through grids and drains until there is nowhere left to fall.
Would a person like Crevecoeur be so desperate as to seek sanctuary in such a place?
Reynard wears an oxygen mask and breathes pure air.
Just inhaling the thick stench down here can fill a person with incurable disease.
He feels his way through the bowels of the city, conscious of the weight of civilisation above him.
Here are tunnels where the trains once ran.
The city has flowered upon its own offal.
Sometimes, he sees a blade of  light in the darkness and thinks: ‘There is Crevecoeur!
There!’ but it is only a puff of igniting methane…not even ghosts in the lowest vaults.
At length, the passage he has been stooping along opens out somewhat into a low chamber: he has come to the shrine of a goddess.
A living goddess nonetheless.
Scraps of life attend the motionless mass who, Reynard concedes, radiates a certain aura of power.
She is the Blackrag Madonna, and her prophecies are madder, darker and less coherent than those of the wildest shamen two levels up.
He faces her phosphorus glow.
She is shadow-robed and veiled.
He can smell nothing, which is for the best.
Blackrag Madonna is blind as a dead rat.
Her sense of smell has gone, along with her ability to taste, and her hearing isn't too reliable either.
Oh, she hears plenty, but nothing from this world, say her followers.
Her hands are claws she keeps concealed within her rags and tatters.
She does not feel either, it would seem.
Reynard questions this repulsive ghoul, with neither hope nor disappointment.
He retains an open mind.
Far from answering immediately with a negative or affirmative answer to his queries, the Blackrag Madonna puts her ruined head on one side, much as a girl of great beauty might do, and asks him questions in return.
She wants to know all there is to know about Zambia Crevecoeur.
Reynard replies, for the most part, honestly.
The Blackrag Madonna nods as he speaks, then whispers to a scrap of a follower who has been hiding in her robes throughout the interview.
The follower speaks.
‘Our Lady will think upon your problem.
Return later for her answer.’
They can give no time for this appointment.
The low-dwellers have no concept of time as surface people know it.
Reynard retreats to a side tunnel where he squats with his knees up.
He wonders whether it is time to head back to the city with its purified air, sweet, crystal water and groomed inhabitants.
He admits he has no empathy with these squalid filth-dwellers, and Reynard rarely admits to anything.
He always keeps an open mind.
What can this decrepit hag tell him?
Zambia Crevecoeur has never been here, Reynard knows that.
Why linger here in the sordid dark for nothing?
His instincts answer.
A hunch, that's all, they say.
He regularly consults his watch which also provides the only illumination.
He gives her half an hour.
If the answer isn't ready yet, that'll be too bad.
He doesn't intend to wait any longer.
The Blackrag Madonna, it appears, has been waiting for him.
She extends a  mummified appendage from her robes and begins to speak.
‘Float people run fast leave love lust power girlpower boypower out of here go fast light heat star fly riddles in the flesh call strong me feel here feel now feel aaaaah.’
She lapses, makes a few chewing sounds and sighs.
Reynard, despite himself, is stunned.
Was he supposed to divine some sense from that?
‘What do you mean exactly?’ he asks in a smooth voice.
‘Tammuz Malamute,’ says the hag.
Reynard is taken aback.
At no time had he mentioned the therapist by name.
Was this bitch really clairvoyant then?
His scepticism wavers.
‘Tammuz Malamute what?’ he asks carefully.
The hag chews and spits.
‘That's where you'll find the WoMan.
With Tammuz Malamute.’
Reynard cannot help but be cautious about this information, despite its apparent supernatural origin, or perhaps because of it.
‘And how do you know this?’
‘Everything finds its way down here eventually, smoothskin.
Everything.
C'mere!
Wanna listen?’
She delves unpleasantly within folds of rag and greasy hair.
Reynard backs off as she extends a foul paw.
‘Won't hurtcha!’ she crows.
In her palm lies the bright scrap of a highly illegal netfly, something which Reynard has seen only in illustrations before.
Blackrag Madonna, it would seem, cruises the highways of Arcady's information network.
‘Tammuz Malamute talks to his computer,’ says the hag sagely and buries the fly back in her ear.
‘Has plans of his own for your beautiful Zambia, he does.’
‘You want me to pay for this information?’
Reynard asks.
‘With what?’ the hag asks drily, and then her face creases into a sly smile.
‘Yeah, got it.
A mirror.
You bring a mirror some time.’
‘A mirror,’ Reynard repeats, realising this is one of the few times in his life he's been surprised.
‘You heard.
A mirror.’
‘And you trust me to return?’
The hag cackles.
‘You'll be back,’ she says.
‘You know you will.
Now, get out of here.’
Without regret, he does.
Back on the surface, Reynard Lennon hurried back to Club Eleusis, secreting himself within the building and virtually throwing himself into his showercub before anyone could see (or smell) him.
Basking  beneath the spitting jets of aromatic warm water he thought about what Blackrag Madonna had told him.
It made sense, in a way.
Perhaps he should inform Jahsaxa Penumbra about this unusual datafile residing in the city's bowels, and then, perhaps not.
If reserved for his personal use, it might put him at a certain advantage over his employer.
If he thought this thing out carefully, he might be able to steal the netfly from Blackrag and use it himself, but these were future plans.
For now, he had other things to think about.
Declining the unctuous offer of the drymatic machine, he wrapped himself in a towel and sauntered through to his living room, where a sleek computer housed in non-reflecting black sat seductively on a complex work station.
Being Jahsaxa's most esteemed security officer, he had access to many of her personal files (including ones she didn't know about) and enjoyed free-ranging consultation with the public network.
Snuggling into his chair, he settled down for an hour or two's tinkering.
Jahsaxa Penumbra, through her acquaintanceships and affairs, was allowed into the more esoteric corridors of the public mind.
Using her clearance codes, Reynard skipped nimbly into the data terraces he visualised as a vast graveyard, but which were in fact the accumulated records of all known people in Arcady, all employees, current and late, of Tech-Green, all public workers in the country, all suspect characters and a host of other subsections of humanity.
Tammuz Malamute was clearly a highly trained individual; that meant education, and Tech-Green education into the bargain, given the avenues of his proficiency.
Naturally, Reynard started there, drew the first blank, which didn't disconcert him (he would have been disappointed by an easy discovery anyway) and composed himself to delve deeper, perhaps taking it backwards a month at a time, beginning with Malamute's employment with Club Eleusis.
The couple of hours stretched to three and more.
Reynard took a break, frustrated.
He drank coffee and brandy, then dived in for another assault, feeling as if the databanks were deliberately obstructing him.
Names mean nothing of course, but Malamute was on file for iris, finger and dental prints.
Even his genetic code was noted, from when he'd applied for a work permit, but no matter how subtly Reynard interrogated, no matter how bright his ideas of lateral interrogation, every time he drew blank.
Completely and utterly.
Tammuz Malamute had literally come from nowhere.
Before his appearance in Arcady, he simply did not exist.
Anywhere.
At least, not anywhere civilised, Reynard appended.
So what could that mean? he wondered.
And how had Malamute managed to dupe the agencies?
The following afternoon, Reynard Lennon admitted he could go no further in this research and it was time to report to Jahsaxa.
He only wished he'd managed to discover more.
He found her quietly working in her office, surveying the extent of her financial empire on a monitor screen.
Reynard did not mince words.
‘I have reason to believe we'll find Tammuz Malamute is concealing Zambia Crevecoeur,’ he said.
Jahsaxa leaned back in her chair.
‘Impossible.
Roirbak would never allow it.
He is a friend of mine.’
Her eyes glittered unpleasantly.
‘Nevertheless I feel that Crevecoeur is being shielded by Malamute.
It is possible Mr Roirbak is unaware of it, of course.’
Jahsaxa laughed.
‘Quincx unaware of something?
Don't be a fool, Lennon!
What makes you believe this?’
Reynard shrugged and silently handed Jahsaxa the report he'd had printed, showing all the places where Tammuz didn't appear and which, given his profession, he should have done.
Jahsaxa scanned it carelessly.
‘And what does this prove?’
‘On a superficial level, that Mr Malamute is not what he seems.
I infer from that he may have had reasons other than professional ones for taking on the employment you offered him.
Zambia Crevecoeur has vanished.
SHe has eluded me completely, which leads me to believe SHe can be in the only place secure enough to hide from me, namely the Roirbak complex at Acropolis Park.
Have you managed to contact Mr Roirbak yet madam?’
‘No,’ Jahsaxa answered shortly, already tapping in Roirbak's code on a keypad by her hand without looking at it.
‘But I will.
This is most disturbing, Lennon.
I hope your suppositions are incorrect.’
‘If they are, I am convinced it can only mean Zambia Crevecoeur is dead, and all evidence of hir physical existence destroyed.’
‘That is a possibility,’ Jahsaxa said.
Reynard shrugged.
He didn't really think so.
Jahsaxa flinched with annoyance when she realised she'd been connected with the Roirbak answering machine again.
‘Perhaps you'd better get over there,’ she conceded.
‘Apologise for the intrusion, to be on the safe side.’
‘Naturally.’
‘Humbly ask if you may search the premises, and that due recompense will be made for the inconvenience, at my expense.’
‘Of course.’
Reynard bowed and turned to leave.
‘One more thing,’ Jahsaxa said.
He faced her.
‘Yes madam?’
‘Don't damage Crevecoeur.
In any way.
I shall invite Roirbak and Malamute here for a meeting to give you more freedom.
I'll let you know the time.
Take as many staff with you as you require.’
‘Thank you all the same madam, but I prefer to work independently,’ Reynard said.
‘Well, if you are confident ofmanaging-—‘Quite.
Thank you.’
He marched smartly out.
Jahsaxa sat and pondered for a while.
She still doubted whether Roirbak would betray her in this way, but perhaps Lennon was right and Quincx had been duped by Malamute.
She smiled.
Poor Mr Malamute.
He was due for some unpleasant surprises, she felt.
‘Good afternoon, Mellissa.
This is Jahsaxa Penumbra.’
‘Good afternoon, Ms Penumbra.
How may I help you?’
‘Well, like all the other times I've spoken to you, I'd like to be put through to Mr Roirbak.’
‘I'm afraid Mr Roirbak has left instructions not to be disturbed, Ms Penumbra.
He's working.’
‘Are these the same instructions as last time, or has he reissued them?
Did you give him none of my messages?’
‘The messages have all been placed in his pending file, Ms Penumbra.
Alas, I cannot say whether Mr Roirbak has had time to examine them yet.’
‘Look, it is most urgent I speak to Mr Roirbak.
I'm quite sure he will understand if you notify him of this.
I've called over half a dozen times, Mellissa!’
‘I'm afraid Mr Roirbak has left instructions not to be disturbed, Ms Penumbra.
He's working.’
‘Mellissa, it is a matter of life and death that I speak to Quincx Roirbak immediately.
Do you understand that sentiment?’‘…
‘
‘If needs be, and I hate to stoop to this, I can take steps to override your obstruction, from which you might find it difficult to recover!’
‘I'm only carrying out Mr Roirbak's instructions, Ms Penumbra.’
‘Mellissa!
I…
‘One moment please.’
Click.
Soothing music over the line.
‘Jahsaxa?’
‘Quincx?
Oh, thank the Goddess!
You don't know how relieved I am to hear your voice!
That robot of yours…
‘I'm sorry about the inconvenience, Sax.
I've been very busy these last few days.
Interruption could have ruined everything.
What can I do for you?’
‘I'm afraid it's rather a delicate matter.’
‘Oh?’
‘Quincx, Zambia Crevecoeur is missing.
We have reason to believe Tammuz Malamute is involved.’
‘Tammuz?
How?’
‘We received information, I'm afraid I can't tell you how at present, that Zambia is, in fact, in hiding at Acropolis Park.’
‘Here?
In my building?
What are you implying, Sax?’
‘Look, I know this sounds awful.
I'm not implying you're in collusion with them or anything.
Is there any way Malamute could get someone inside Acropolis Park without your knowing?
The information we received was very precise about Crevecoeur's location.’
‘To be honest, I haven't seen much of Tammuz recently.
I've been cooped up with my work, but I'm sure my security staff would have notified me of any unexpected guests.’
‘Listen, Quincx, I beg you to help me.
I've invested everything in Crevecoeur.
I can't afford to lose hir.
Please, would you come over to Club Eleusis and bring Malamute with you so I can speak to him?
It may all be a misunderstanding.
I know this is really putting on you, but…well, I would appreciate it so much and will recompense you in any way I can.’
‘Is that necessary?
I can bring Tammuz to the comm unit if you like.
That might be quicker.
I'm sure he'll be able to answer your questions to your satisfaction.’
‘No!
I mean, please Quincx, I want to talk to him in person.
He must know something.
I want to assure him Crevecoeur is in no danger, but that SHe must return to Club Eleusis.’
‘Well, I'll ask him, but he too is a busy man at present, Sax.’
‘Quincx, please.
This isn't just anybody asking, is it?’‘…oh, very well.
I'll see what I can do.
When do you want to see us?’
‘As soon as possible.’
‘Fine.
Within the hour then.’
Roirbak sighed and rubbed his face.
‘Goddess, goddess, the plot leans more to murk!’ he grumbled.
Mellissa made an abrupt click.
‘That is one bitch mother!’ she declared.
‘Whoever taught you language like that!’
Quincx admonished.
‘Call Tammuz Malamute, and have someone prepare the rotor.’
‘You'd better be a damn good liar!’
Roirbak said to Tammuz as they walked to the hangar where the company rotor was housed.
‘I appreciate this, Quincx.
It gives us time.’
‘Got a plan yet?’
Tammuz shook his head.
‘No.’
‘You look awful.
Is that intersex creature a vampire or something?’
Tammuz laughed.
‘Hardly.
I've got things on my mind.
Problems.’
‘You surely have Mr Malamute, if that is your name.’
Tammuz looked at him askance but said nothing.
‘I hope to the Lady Jahsaxa's instincts haven't been pricked by you, Tammuz,’ Roirbak continued.
‘Why the hell have you got involved with this Crevecoeur nuisance?
Surely you can't afford such complications?’
‘You're right.
I can't.
It's one of those depressing hormonal conditions that effects one's sense of survival.’
‘Oh, that.’
‘Yes.
Poignant, isn't it?’
‘You realise you might have to give hir back, don't you?’
Tammuz fixed Roirbak with a stare.
‘I'll never do that, Quincx.’
‘Not even for your daughter's sake?’
The moment hung, poised.
‘You can't let Jahsaxa come sniffing round Acropolis Park, you know that,’ Roirbak gabbled, quickly, still not entirely convinced his suspicions were correct.
‘It would be worse than Amazon House finding out if she got wind of what's going on.
Damn it!
I'll ship Crevecoeur back myself if necessary.
Ewan .’
Tammuz wheeled around, one hand scraping hair.
Roirbak was afraid he'd pushed him too far, or maybe not far enough.
Roirbak sighed.
‘I'm not going to ask why or how just now, but I'm right, aren't I…
?’
Tammuz' silence was confirmation enough.
‘And you've come back because of Ari, haven't you?’ he asked softly, standing just behind Tammuz.
‘Ask yourself, if you haven't already: why are you here?’
‘Lady, Quincx, I don't know!’
Tammuz faced him and Quincx Roirbak stepped back from the raw emotion on the younger man's  face.
‘I shouldn't be here.
Neither should Ari.
She shouldn't exist.
It's too dangerous.’
‘Is that what you're here for then?
To make sure she doesn't?’
Tammuz wheeled away again.
‘No.
I'm not that cold.
I told you, I don't know why I'm here.’
‘Why didn't you tell me who you were from the start?
How can you stand back and not get involved?
This is your baby, in more ways than one, Tammuz.’
‘There are things you don't know.’
‘Naturally.’
Quincx sighed.
‘Look, everything's out on the screen now.
We'll talk later.
What are you going to say to Jahsaxa?’
‘Deny everything.’
‘That might not be enough.
She seems pretty sure of her information.’
‘What else can I do?’
Roirbak put an arm around Tammuz's shoulder.
‘There may be a way,’ he said.
‘But it means you work for me for the rest of your life to pay me back.’
‘You'd do that for me?
Buy her off?’
‘No, not for you, Tammuz Malamute.
For Ewan Famber, whom I loved, and his daughter Ari, who doesn't deserve this shit.
Come on.
Get on board.
Let's get it over with.’
Leila had not been at all pleased to find she was living under the same roof as Zambia Crevecoeur.
Of all the most damned of coincidences! she'd thought, when Ari had told her what had happened in the canteen that first day at the Park.
It reminded her painfully of Jordan and for the first time she thought about how she was never going to touch him again.
It took only ten minutes of private weeping, however, to clear her head.
Now it is gone, she told herself firmly.
It's all gone.
Nevertheless, rightfully or not, Zambia had come to mean trouble to Leila.
It made her very uneasy having hir in the same building as Ari at such a dangerous and important time.
She tried to banish the thought that Zambia attracted trouble like a magnet, knowing it to be bad magick even to think that, but it was difficult not to.
After Tammuz and Roirbak had left Acropolis Park for their meeting with Jahsaxa Penumbra, Ari and Leila had sat together in the canteen.
‘I'm annoyed Quincx is getting involved in this ridiculous soap opera,’ she told Ari.
‘You are more important.’
Ari shrugged.
‘I don't think Zambia is the person everyone thought SHe was,’ she said.
‘I feel sorry for hir.’
Quincx had insisted on telling both of them the details of Zambia's difficulties, despite protests from Tammuz, feeling both women needed to be given a reason for the delay in Ari's treatment.
‘You wouldn't say that if you'd seen the old Zambia in action,’ Leila said, pulling a sour face.
‘Save your pity.
Think about yourself.’
Reynard Lennon, who had left a trail of confused, temporarily disabled security droids behind him, waited in the shadow of a large rhododendron hybrid in Acropolis Park and watched the Roirbak rotor dance up from the roof, wheel around and head towards Sector 2p.
He blinked his pale grey eyes, took a careless look around himself before walking smartly up the driveway to Roirbak's complex, an array of wafer-thin data cards — the discerning burglar's equivalent of a crowbar — ready to hand.
Introducing himself to the woman-form receptionist in a uniquely unforgettable way, Lennon insouciantly gained access to the building.
Mellissa never knew what hit her, her circuits melding in the robotic equivalent of a cerebral haemorrhage, the doors to the complex opening as if in welcome.
Hands in pockets, Lennon sauntered through the plaza, pausing only to disable any artificial lifeforms that approached him asking questions.
He found Leila and Ari in the canteen.
Leila looked up and saw the man standing in the doorway, recognising him immediately for a creature less human than Sindy or any of her contemporaries.
She instinctively shielded Ari with her arm, drawing her close to her body.
‘What do you want?’ she asked, her mind racing.
Quincx was gone.
How had this person got in?
Was he a colleague of Roirbak's?
‘Where is Zambia Crevecoeur?’
Lennon asked.
He strolled towards the table and helped himself to a biscuit off Ari's plate.
‘Well?’
Leila's mind almost stopped dead.
She could see a decision path dividing in front of her as plainly as if it was real.
A magnet for trouble?
A person in difficulty?
Damn you, Crevecoeur — I should have known something like this would happen!
‘I don't know who you mean!’ she said.
‘Who are you?’
Lennon slapped her sharply across the face.
Ari cried out and cowered.
‘Where is Zambia Crevecoeur?’
Leila sat up straight, brushing hair from her face.
‘I don't know  who the fuck you are, or this Zam…whatever person is!
I'm only a visitor here.
Ask Quincx Roirbak.’
‘Mr Roirbak is out.
Where is Zambia Crevecoeur?’
He flexed his hands.
Leila stood up, quite prepared to defend herself, although she knew a trained assassin when she saw one.
‘Look…
‘Ari could stand it no longer.
She was puzzled as to why Leila should defend Zambia in view of her feelings, but it was senseless to do so.
This man would kill them if they didn't answer, and still find Zambia afterwards, she was sure.
She reached up to touch Leila's arm as a signal.
‘I know who you mean.
It's that man/woman, isn't it?’
Lennon hauled Ari up by her T-shirt.
‘Keep talking little lady.’
‘I've seen him…her…
It's here somewhere.
Upstairs maybe.
With Tammuz Malamute.’
‘Ari!’
Leila hissed.
‘Show me.’
Lennon dragged Ari from her seat.
Leila hurried after them.
What the hell could she do?
Members of Roirbak's staff were apparent, drooping inactive all over the place.
Damn Crevecoeur!
Ari had no positive idea which rooms Tammuz and Zambia occupied and was babbling nonsense to this effect as Lennon hauled her up the metal stairway to the gallery.
The noise attracted Zambia's attention.
SHe'd been entertaining Nathan in Tammuz's office, messing with the computer.
The machine, acting as watchdog, emitted a sharp warning just moments before Zambia heard Ari's anguished cries echoing round the gallery.
‘Wait here!’
Zambia ordered Nathan, who was looking up perplexed.
‘What is it?’
‘Don't know.’
Zambia padded to the door, coming face to face with a wriggling Ari, still firmly in the grip of Reynard Lennon.
‘Hello Zambia,’ Lennon said.
‘Ready to go home now?’
‘Like fuck!’
Zambia cried, and with lightning speed vaulted over the safety rail of the gallery and began shinning down support poles to the floor.
Leila was transfixed on the stairs.
She heard Lennon say, ‘Oh dear,’ and saw him put his hand in his pocket.
‘Look out!’ she screamed.
A volley of razor mosquito-bolts impaled themselves on the ground floor.
Lennon's aim had been fouled by Ari's wriggles.
‘Ooops, clumsy, missed,’ Lennon said, and threw Ari away from him.
He  leaned casually over the railings and aimed his weapon.
Nathan, who had emerged from the room behind, took in the situation at a glance and, with a blood-curdling scream, threw himself at Lennon.
Because of this the shot which Lennon had intended to take Zambia through the leg to disable hir, sliced into hir shoulder, the side of hir neck, and made a messy slash clean to hir belly.
Lennon shook Nathan off but the boy was already leaping down the stairs to where Zambia was writhing on the floor.
Lennon followed at a more leisurely pace, his weapon concealed once more.
He squeezed past Leila and smiled.
‘Kids!’ he said.
‘Zambia, Zambia!’
Nathan moaned helplessly, tears running down his face.
‘Shut!’
Zambia gurgled.
‘Star Eye.
Tell Cab.
Tell Cabochon!’
SHe wheezed, hir eyelids fluttering, blood spilling from hir working lips.
‘Time we were going, Crevecoeur,’ Lennon said.
‘Have the grace not to die on me will you?’
For such a slight figure, he had surprisingly little difficulty slinging Zambia over his shoulder.
‘This is going to make a frightful mess of my suit,’ he said to Leila with another dazzling smile.
‘See you.
Apologies to Mr Roirbak for the disorder.’
Leila stood, stunned, her fingers pressed to her lips.
Ari, rubbing her bruises, had limped over to Nathan who was weeping uncontrollably, telling everyone it was his fault.
The vast chamber seemed to zoom out all around them.
Leila felt tiny and afraid.
Were Quincx and Tammuz safe?
‘Well, Tammuz, I have to know,’ Quincx Roirbak said as the rotor skimmed gracefully between the city towers.
‘Why did you fake your own death?’
He smiled hopefully at the gaunt man beside him.
Now that he knew, Tammuz looked more like Ewan to Quincx with every moment, which was oddly disturbing.
This, after all, was not Ewan's body.
‘Maybe I got fed up being thought of as a saint,’ Tammuz said darkly.
‘A cliché, but maybe,’ Roirbak conceded.
‘I was depressed,’ Tammuz said weakly, inadequately.
‘I came to hate the Tech-Green philosophy and didn't want to live out an expanded life up there somewhere, looking down on the unfortunates left on Earth.
Do you really think the uneducated people they leave behind will be able to keep the artificial environments stable?
I don't.
It's sick.
Humanity, but for its own élite, is expendable to Tech-Green.’
‘We always knew that,’ Roirbak said shortly.
Tammuz' jaded beliefs were not that novel: Quincx had heard them spill from many a Tech-Green's lips; but then Ewan had always thought himself unique.
Tammuz shrugged.
‘It all became too much.
I can't explain how I felt.
I was living a lie.
Ewan was an icon, nothing more.
I hated him.
One night I got stoned and saw exactly what I'd become — a spoiled, heartless little shit.
Sorry to say this, but I didn't feel as if I liked any of the people I was involved with either.’
He shrugged again, a little embarrassed for having said that.
‘I needed out.
Completely.’
‘Not that completely, obviously.
Look at you: you're still very much here.’
Tammuz grinned.
‘I love life,’ he said.
‘And I wanted to live it.
Not just as squeaky clean, boring Ewan Famber but as a man.
I wanted to experience my existence, discomforts and all.
So I grew myself some new flesh and got into wearing it.
Tammuz Malamute was a great adventure for me — and still is.’
‘Especially so since Crevecoeur, hmmm?’
Tammuz nodded thoughtfully.
‘An area I'd never really looked into — intersexing.
A mistake on my part, I think.
Now, if I could combine Ari's DNA with Zambia's physical make-up…
‘Goddess!’
Quincx cried.
‘I thought you said you'd abandoned Ewan!’
Tammuz smiled wryly, but didn't respond to the remark.
‘So, how are you getting on with Ari?’ he asked.
‘I did think about her a lot, you know.’
Roirbak flicked him a narrow glance.
‘Not as well as I'd hoped.
That's a flash little powerpack you made there, Tammuz.
More powerful than you guessed, I suspect.’
Tammuz grinned with pleasure.
Since he'd opened up to Roirbak his appearance had visibly improved.
Now he merely looked tired.
It had been a relief to tell Roirbak all about himself.
In a way, he felt guilty because he'd confessed to Zambia first.
‘Reckon it might help if Ari had her daddy to work with now?’ he asked.
Roirbak laughed.
‘Lady, it's good to have you back!’ he exclaimed, reaching over to slap Tammuz' thigh.
‘You rogue!
I should hand you over to the Tech-Greens if I had any sense!’
Then he stopped laughing, his face hardening.
‘Goddess, boy!
Why the hell didn't you come to  me when you were so messed up?
None of this might have been necessary!
You had me.
You had Leila.
You've always had Leila.
I can't understand it.’
Tammuz sighed.
‘Don't try.
I don't regret it though.
I've spent years on the road with natro groups, mostly abroad, just bumming around.
It was…well, Nirvana for me, I guess.
I needed it, Quincx.
So bad.
I needed to be someone else, someone new.
I love Tammuz Malamute much more than I loved Ewan Famber.’
Roirbak grinned crookedly.
‘Well, the name is pretty slick!’ he said.
They landed on the roof of the Club Eleusis building and took the elevator down to the third floor.
‘You think this will work?’
Tammuz asked.
Roirbak shrugged.
‘Jahsaxa's a law unto herself.
However, I feel sure she values her friendship with me enough to play it our way.
Perhaps if we offered to replace Crevecoeur for her…
You could say you'd do a better job next time.
Ham it up.
Make out there was room for improvement.
Make suggestions she could mention to her surgeon.
I don't know.
Think you can do that?’
‘Yes.
I don't see why not.’
‘Tonight I feel we should all celebrate, don't you?’
Tammuz wriggled uncomfortably.
‘You mean tell Leila and Ari…everything?’
‘I think you should.’
Tammuz sighed.
‘If you insist.
I only hope it doesn't ruin your party atmosphere!’
‘Boy, they thought you were dead!
You'll find everyone's just happy to discover they were wrong.’
‘I'm not sure Leila will share your delight, or Ari for that matter.’
Roirbak frowned.
‘Tammuz, you're Ari's father.
Remember that.
She is not just an experiment, but a lively and very likeable young woman.
Let this new person you have become learn how to love…
‘He stopped himself abruptly.
Perhaps that had been too personal a remark.
‘I have already learned that,’ Tammuz said serenely, and turned to Roirbak with a grin.
‘Just why do you think I'm here?
Ewan wouldn't be doing this, now would he?’
‘How should I know?
Ewan, apparently, did a lot of surprising things,’ Roirbak replied drily.
‘Now hold on!’
Leila was trying to keep order.
Nathan had recovered enough to tell Ari what Zambia had said to him and also something of the conversation they'd had before.
Both of them now wanted to hurry over to Athena Gardens.
‘But we must tell Cabochon!’
Ari cried.
‘Zambia has just been…kidnapped !
SHe's hurt!
There’ s no one here!
What else can we do?’
Leila ran a nervous hand through her hair.
‘We wait for Quincx to get back first.
Zambia was his guest.
It's nothing to do with us.
We can't just go haring off into the city like that.
Quincx and Malamute are handling this.
If we get involved, we might only make things worse.’
‘I promised Zambia I'd send a message to Cabochon,’ Nathan insisted.
‘at least let me go!’
‘No!
We don't know who or what's out there!’
Their first action had been to run to the comms unit, only to find it disabled.
Mellissa had been discovered slumped over her workstation, leaking viscous fluid and very clearly lifeless.
That had turned Leila's stomach more than seeing Zambia being shot.
Mellissa was just a servant, for the Goddess' sake!
Because Roirbak had built the machine to appear humanoid, more so than any of the others in the building, it was like seeing a real dead body lying there.
Now the three of them were hovering in the reception area, arguing about what to do.
Leila's first responsibility was to Ari and the boy.
She was sorry for Zambia, but it really wasn't her problem.
She could not see how telling Cabochon would help.
She only hoped that Quincx and Malamute would come back.
If they didn't, it would mean she'd have to get Ari out of Arcady and fast.
Her gut instinct had been right: Zambia Crevecoeur had always meant trouble.
Looked like things hadn't changed.
In Athena Gardens, Jordan and Cabochon were lying in bed sharing a joint of particularly sweet weed.
The rest of the group had been too busy out enjoying themselves to think about the potential consequences of Leila's absence.
Cabochon, however, had been thinking about it deeply.
This took his mind off the painful subject of Zambia.
On reaching Arcady, he'd attempted to call Zambia's old apartment and had explained himself to the woman who now lived there.
She'd been sympathetic, but could offer no information.
‘I just took the  place on, soul, oh, about two weeks ago.
Didn't know who lived here before.
Sorry.’
So far, Cabochon had refrained from getting in touch with Alix Micklemas.
Instinct told him something big and bad had occurred and that the moment he called Alix it would all be dumped on him.
It was unfair!
He wanted to bask in the developing closeness he and Jordan were enjoying, surfing sensorial highs, and being utterly open, perhaps for the first time in his life.
He felt safe with Jordan, and for this reason viciously pushed all thoughts about Zambia to the back of his mind.
Didn't I bind myself to Jordan for that reason? he thought.
To be free?
Leila was a much safer subject for consideration.
‘Something has to be resolved one way or the other,’ Cabochon said, expending a vast amount of mental energy mustering concern for the group.
‘It can't go on like this.
It's not fair on her.’
‘What's not fair on her?
Where is she?’
Jordan, from his expression, didn't give a damn about either Leila or the group.
‘You're cold-blooded.
You know that?
Leila loves you, you dumb shit.
That doesn't exactly make me feel good.
I respect her and I don't like her hating me.’
Jordan sighed.
‘So what you want me to do?’
‘Just put her straight.
Tell her it's over once and for all.
Be honest.
Stop torturing her.
We can't keep this a secret any more.
You must see that.’
He got off the bed and walked to the window.
Jordan considered what an unselfconscious poseur Cabochon was at times.
‘Maybe I don't want it to be over with her.
Not completely.
Have you thought of that?’
‘Honey, I know you don't want it to be over completely.
That's cool, I can handle that, but she can't.
It's all or nothing with her.
So you've got to do something, say something.
She sure as hell won't.’
He flopped down on his stomach and took the joint from Jordan's hands.
‘If you won't do that, then it shows what we did was a sham and doesn't mean anything.
We've got to sort this out, for everyone else's sake, not just ours.
If not, it's over with us, blood-brother bond or not.
I mean it.’
‘From where I'm lying that sounds like another woman saying, it's me or her or else.’
‘Well, you would think that!
Things will just get worse if you don't face this thing.
At least talk about it with her.’
Jordan reached out and stroked Cabochon's shoulder.
‘For you, all right.
So what about your problem?’
Cabochon rolled away.
‘I don't have one.’
He sucked furiously on the joint, staring at the ceiling.
‘Not any more.
There's nothing I can do.’
‘You're a liar.’
‘That's not a lie.
There really is nothing I can do.’
‘And you don't care?’
‘I'll always care, but I've also turned my back on it.’
‘Cab, you and your brother, well, you don't have the kind of relationship you just turn your back on.
Even I know that, painful though it is to admit it.’
‘We are not joined at the hip,’ Cabochon said, and smiled bitterly.
‘In case you haven't noticed, other than that first call, I've made no attempt to try and find him since we've been here.’
‘No, I haven't noticed,’ Jordan said.
‘But then you're not exactly joined to my hip either, are you?’
‘I wouldn't lie to you,’ Cabochon replied.
‘As far as I'm concerned, Zambia Crevecoeur is dead.’
‘Come here and say that!’
Jordan hugged Cabochon to him, more relieved than he could understand.
Zambia had always been a black cloud in Jordan's sky, but he could never work out why.
‘Say it!’
Jordan teased, laughing.
‘Say it again.
Say Zambia Crevecoeur is dead to me!
Say it!’
Cabochon laughed.
‘It's bit creepy but…oh!’
‘What is it?’
‘Invocation!
Goddess!’
‘What?!’
Cabochon scrabbled out of Jordan's hold as if blind.
‘What is it?’
He was making strange, gulping sounds, sitting on the side of the bed, his head in his hands.
Jordan leaned over him.
‘Cab?
You all right?
Listen, you don't have to say that.
It's stupid.
I know.
I'm sorry…
Cab?’
In reply, Cabochon's body heaved and he vomited copiously on to the floor.
There was blood in the mess.
Cabochon wiped his mouth and looked at Jordan with panicked eyes.
‘Zambia Crevecoeur is dead to me,’ he said weakly.
‘Goddess!
What the fuck's happened?’
‘Quincx!
Darling!’
Jahsaxa swept into the tasteful reception room she'd been keeping Roirbak and Tammuz waiting in for over half an hour.
She held out her arms, trailing drapery, her hair smoothly coiffed, lips ruby red, pursed for a kiss.
Roirbak stood up and embraced her.
‘Jahsaxa,’ he said, carefully, in greeting.
‘I'm so sorry to have kept you, but we had a little emergency!’
‘Oh dear.
Nothing serious I hope?’
Her eyes sparkled.
‘Well…it seems your little visit is actually unnecessary now.’
Roirbak and Tammuz exchanged a glance.
‘Zambia has come back to us,’ Jahsaxa said, dabbing the side of her mouth with a fingernail.
She smiled.
‘No!’
Tammuz cried.
‘Yes,’ Jahsaxa said sweetly.
Her eyes appraised Tammuz with dangerous cold.
He dropped his gaze.
‘I regret one of my operatives was a little heavy-handed at your place, Quincx,’ she continued.
‘Invoice me for damages.’
‘How dare you,’ Roirbak hissed slowly.
‘How dare I what?
Reclaim my property?
He was there, Quincx, you can't deny that.
I admit my man was out of order tackling it in the way he did, for which he will be disciplined, I assure you.’
‘How dare you think you can just barge into my property!
How dare you send one of your killers to Acropolis Park!’
‘None of your people was hurt.’
‘You deliberately had us come over here, didn't you!
You lowdown, filthy bitch!
Just so your scuzzies could raid the Park!’
‘My hand was forced, Quincx.’
Jahsaxa kept her cool.
Roirbak straightened his jacket.
‘Come on, Tammuz.
I've heard enough.
You, Jahsaxa, will be hearing from my lawyer.
Consider our friendship void!’
Jahsaxa hesitated for a moment, then shrugged.
Tammuz stood his ground.
‘I'm not leaving,’ he said.
Jahsaxa's head snapped up.
‘Is there something you wish to say, Mr Malamute.
It is Mr Malamute isn't it?’
Roirbak grabbed Tammuz' arm.
‘No, he has nothing to say.
Tammuz, come on.
Don't worry.
Slavery is outlawed in Arcady.
She can't claim to own Crevecoeur.
And I am quite prepared to pay whatever he owes her.
A court of law will handle this.
Just be patient.’
‘Don't try to take me on, Quincx!
I have more power than you.’
‘Clandestine power maybe.
But I have more friends who are willing to admit publicly that they know me!
If you want to make this a popularity poll, go ahead, but my assets still overtake yours, I think!’
‘You'll regret this!’
‘A cliché, Sax.
Old and tired.
If you have any sense you'll let me pay you what Crevecoeur cost you now and let hir come back with us.’
‘Out of the question!’
‘Then I have nothing more to say to you.
Come along Tammuz!’
‘I want to see hir!’
Jahsaxa laughed.
‘How touching!
It really is the old story of the doctor and patient falling in love, isn't it?
How quaint!’
‘Don't waste your breath, Tammuz,’ Roirbak said.
‘Let's go.’
He managed to manhandle Tammuz out of the door, to the sound of Jahsaxa's malevolent laughter.
Roirbak bundled Tammuz into the elevator and they rode halfway up the building in silence until Tammuz said: ‘I can't believe this!’
‘Believe it.
That woman is one bitch mother as Mellissa refers to her.
Keep cool.
We'll sort this out the slow way.
I hope Leila and the kids are OK.’
‘Goddess!’
‘Cool, Tammuz, cool.
We can't do anything until we get back.’
As soon as they were aloft in the rotor, Roirbak called Acropolis Park.
The sky was dark now, the city and the domes a blaze of winking lights around them.
He tried to disguise the anxiety he felt when he found the comms system down, but Tammuz was nearly hysterical by this stage.
‘They could all be dead, Quincx!
Goddess, won't this thing go faster?’
‘Calm down.
Not even Jahsaxa would presume she could get away with multiple murder.
Her man probably just glued up my communications, that's all.’
He was afraid that if Tammuz wound himself up further he'd cause the rotor to crash.
‘I'll get in touch with my lawyer now.
Keep quiet, and sit still, would you?’
Tammuz sat and gnawed his knuckles as Roirbak made the call.
Roirbak made sure the firm would act on his, and Crevecoeur's, behalf by initiating procedures first thing in the morning.
‘We can do nothing more for now,’ he said.
‘Oh dear, Acropolis Park looks suspiciously dark!’
‘You don't fool me, Crevecoeur.
It's not just love, is it?!’
Jahsaxa Penumbra hissed at the helpless form of her recaptured employee.
‘What are you two up to?
Who is Tammuz Malamute?’
Zambia could hardly speak, despite the prompt attention from Dr Parmedes.
Hir throat was raw and hir mouth metallic with the taste of blood.
SHe shook hir head on the bloody pillow.
‘No matter.
You will tell me, eventually.
‘I'll be back later.’
Dr Parmedes was standing near the door looking very uneasy.
He sensed the imminence of some kind of public display and that made him very nervous indeed.
‘Parmedes!’
Jahsaxa snapped.
‘Use whatever method you can, but I want this little vixen barking in four hours’ time at the latest!’
‘Ms Penumbra, I…
I have to get home.
My wife…
I- —‘
Jahsaxa hissed suggestively.
A wordless sound that spelt discomforts of every sort.
‘I'll do what I can,’ Parmedes said resignedly, cursing the day he ever set foot in Club Eleusis.
Roirbak was aghast when he saw what had happened to Mellissa.
Tammuz watched helplessly as Quincx sadly sifted through the remains.
‘I'm not sure I can fix this,’ he was saying in a thick voice.
‘I think I'll have to start from scratch.
Oh, Mellissa, I'm sorry!’
Tammuz didn't know what to say.
He was itching to get further inside and check on Ari, yet appreciated Quincx's robots were like children to the man.
He'd built every one himself.
All of his staff had been damaged in some way, but for those who were shy, or clever enough to hide themselves from Lennon's advance.
‘It's like a battlefield,’ he kept saying as he and Tammuz walked through the building.
‘It's like a battle field.
By all the gods that ever were, that bitch will pay for this!’
They found the canteen door barricaded, Leila and the others hiding inside.
Leila threw herself on Quincx, gabbling about what happened.
Both Ari and Nathan looked sullen and had clearly joined ranks over something.
Tammuz looked at his daughter and thought, ‘Now I can tell her.
Now…if I want to.’
He put a hand on her shoulder, and then one on Nathan's.
They both looked as if they needed it.
‘Will you tell me what happened?’ he asked.
‘Cabochon, do my eyes deceive me?
Well, well, well, this is long time no see, soul!’
‘Alix.
Hi.
Can I come up?’
‘Sure.
The Crevecoeurs are out in force this season!’
The security screen blanked and the door opened.
Followed by an intrigued Jordan, Cabochon sprinted up the stairs.
Mammy Crystal poked her head around her door to shout.
‘No good'll come of the province of the flesh, sonny!’
Alix was working on a customer, a young cinder-head naked on his belly on her couch, lasers primed and crouching like birds of prey all around.
‘Don't tell me, you're lookin' f'Zam, right?’
‘Mammy been giving you lessons?’
Cabochon said.
Alix laughed and prodded her client.
‘Deadman, this is Cabochon, and a friend, I guess.
Say hello.’
‘Greetings, soul.’
‘Hi, Deadman.
Yeah, you're right Al, we're looking for Zam.
He in trouble?’
Alix rolled her eyes.
‘Say that again and you won't be wrong, soul!’
‘Oh shit.
What is it?’
Cabochon sat down on an empty couch.
‘Well, put it this way, you ain't got a brother no more.’
‘What?!’
‘Hey, don't white-out on me.
Didn't mean that way, sugar.
What I mean is he's gone for a chop-job.
Pussy all over the place.
It was weird, I'm telling’ you.’
‘Explain Alix.’
‘What I'm sayin' is, the fuckin' fool went and sold out to Penumbra — bad lady twice over.
She had him fixed à la intersex.
Geddit?’
‘Jahsaxa Penumbra?
He sold out to her ?
Never!’
‘Believe it true, my pretty boy.
He did a runner on her, turned up here with a split bone or two, which I fixed, and then he headed off again.’
‘Where?’
‘Only the Great Lady in the Sky knows that, boy.
Some shadespit came by lookin' for Zam.
I sent him underground, though I doubt that's where Zam went.
He had a look about him, like he had a place to go.
Know what I mean?’
‘You've no idea where, Al?’
Alix shook her head.
‘Uh Uh.
Sorry.
Can I help any ways?’
‘You could keep your ears open.’
‘I'll spread the word.
You hear that Deadman?’
‘I hear you, soul.’
The prone figure raised a compliant hand.
‘Where you stayin'?’
Alix asked.
Cabochon told her and she burned the address into the wall with a laser.
‘If I hear a tweet I'll sense you out, be sure.’
‘Thanks, Alix.
Any suggestions where we try next?’
She shrugged.
‘Ear to the ground, sweet brother, that's all I know.
Be lucky.’
‘Cheers Al.
Be seein' you.’
‘Bye.
The boyfriend's cute, by the way.’
Cabochon grinned at Jordan.
‘Cute he ain't, but you can't have it all.’
They went back into the street.
‘This was going to be a celebration tonight,’ Roirbak said, disconsolately gathering the pieces of a robot Lennon had been particularly vicious with.
Leila was trying to help but it was hard to concentrate on anything.
Her mind kept flicking back to the python smile of the assassin, conjuring images of what might have been: death, blood, pain.
‘A celebration for what?’ she asked, trying to identify a burst coil of metallic wire.
‘Does this belong?’
‘No, that's a shaving.
A celebration for a reunion.’
‘Who with?’
Roirbak sighed, and dropped the last piece of droid into the plastic sack he was carrying.
‘I'm not sure whether I should tell you.
Two shocks in one day might be too much.’
Leila felt her face flame.
She'd immediately thought of Jordan.
‘Who have you brought here?’ she asked sharply.
‘Not a case of brought here.
They just arrived.
Come with me.’
He led her into one of his work alcoves where a hi-res VDR was set up.
‘Just look at this and tell me if you recognise this man.’
‘Oooh, mystery.’
Leila smiled shakily and Roirbak adjusted the  brightness of the screen.
It showed a replay of Tammuz meeting Ari for the first time in the canteen.
‘Which one?’
Leila asked.
‘The skinny dude with the leather smile.’
Leila laughed.
‘That Malamute character?
Some description, Quincx!
No, I don't recognise him, other from seeing him here.
Should I?’
‘Look again.
Pay attention.’
He magnified the picture which swam lazily and grainily into some kind of focus.
‘Watch the hands.’
He replayed several times a shot of Tammuz pawing at his face, messing with his hair; anxious gestures.
‘Well?’
Leila shrugged.
‘He just looks paranoid.’
‘He is.
That's Ewan Famber, Leila.’
Leila laughed and shrieked.
‘What?!’
‘I'm serious.’
‘You can't be.’
She peered at the screen again.
‘Can you?’
‘I am.
Listen.
He didn't die.
It was a set-up.
I don't know all the details, but he turned up here several weeks ago.’
Leila had gone pale.
‘Are you sure, absolutely sure?’
‘I am now.’
‘Goddess, how long have you known?
Why didn't you tell me?
Goddess, Quincx, this is…
’ She swung round and grabbed his arm.
‘He's with Ari!
Now!
Quincx?’
‘It's all right.
I know.
It's best she's told.’
‘At this stage?’
She sat down on the edge of the worktop.
‘I can't believe this.
Are you sure he's not faking?’
‘Quite sure,’ Roirbak answered quietly.
‘I wouldn't tell you unless I was.
He tried to hide it, but there was too much of Ewan left not to arouse my suspicions.
If either of us had had any sense we'd have realised from the start something like this had happened.
Ewan was never careless.
His accident was a joke, which we both fell for.
I'm kicking myself now.’
‘But why?
Why did he do it?
All that…
’ She closed her eyes and shook her head, trying to dispel the memory of her agonising grief all those years ago.
‘It was hateful, hateful!’ she said.
‘No, I don't believe it!
He wouldn't have…
‘But he did, Leila.
For whatever reason, he did.
Now he's come back to us.’
‘This is obscene,’ Leila said.
Ari did not like Tammuz Malamute.
She did not like the way he'd dismissed Nathan in order to talk to her.
She had nothing to say to this man.
He was weird.
Now he was pacing round his office like a stalking beast getting ready to pounce and tear.
She had begun to sweat with discomfort.
Did he think she was somehow responsible for what had happened to Zambia?
There could be no other reason he wanted to question her.
Perhaps someone had told him it was she who'd informed the assassin Zambia was here.
‘I had to tell him,’ she blurted.
‘He was going to hurt Leila.’
Tammuz stopped pacing.
‘What?’
‘The assassin, when he asked where Zambia was.
I had to tell him.’
‘That wasn't an assassin, Ari.
That was a lowlife bum.
And you had no choice but to tell him.
Don't blame yourself.
He'd have found Zambia anyway.
Forget it.’
‘Then, then what do you want to ask me?’
He squatted down in front of her chair, disturbed by what he saw in her eyes.
Why did he have to frighten people so much?
Had he always been this way?
This was his daughter.
He remembered his sporadic visits back to Taler's Bump, the shy little girl who'd been virtually a stranger to him, his awkward attempts at being a family man when all the time he'd only been yearning to get back to work.
‘What do you remember about your father?’ he asked.
Ari squirmed uncomfortably.
‘Not much.
Why?’
‘Were you ever scared of him?’
She laughed nervously.
‘Of course not!
Why are you asking that?’
‘Do you believe he's dead?’
Ari wriggled away from the chair and backed towards the door.
‘I don't like your questions, mister.’
Tammuz sighed and clawed his hair.
‘Come back, Ari.
Don't be frightened…
‘You're weird!’
Ari said, ‘And I don't want to talk to you.
Especially about my father.
What's it got to do with you?’
Tammuz surveyed this fractious teenager impatiently.
How the hell are you supposed to deal with these people? he wondered helplessly.
If Zambia was here…
But Zambia wasn't, and Tammuz didn't have hir knack for communication.
‘Ari, I am your father!’
Now she really thinks I' m crazy, Tammuz thought.
Ari remained stone-faced.
‘OK,’ she said, in an attempt to pacify what she thought might be a dangerous lunatic.
‘No, I mean it.
I really am.
I'm Ewan, Ari.
I never died…exactly.’
‘Sure, sure,’ Ari said, and bolted for the door.
Tammuz let her go.
It hadn't exactly been a poignant reunion.
Down in Roirbak's workshop, Ari skidded to where Leila and Quincx were still re-running the surveillance vid.
‘Keep that crazy away from me!’ she screeched, grinning.
‘You can't imagine what he just said to me!’
Roirbak and Leila exchanged a glance, and Roirbak shrugged, turning back to the screen, passing responsibility to Leila.
‘What did he say?’ she asked.
‘He thinks he's my father!
Isn't that weird!
What's wrong with him?’
‘Yes, it is weird, and I don't think he is completely right in the head, Ari, but I'm afraid it looks as if he might be telling the truth.’
Ari was silent, the grin dropping right off her face.
‘Look,’ Leila said quickly, ‘I know this is a bit shocking and incredible and all, but…
‘Ari shook her head.
‘No, you're wrong.
That's not my father.
He's dead.’
‘Look, he faked his own death, Ari.
He never died.
It's the truth.’
Ari was shaking her head more vigorously, although her face had crumpled.
‘No, no, I know it isn't.
That thing is not my Dad.’
Leila reached out to touch her but Ari stepped backwards.
‘You are both sick, d'you hear?
Sick!
My father died seven years ago.
They found the body.
It wasn't faked.
It wasn't!’
Silence was filled with the echo of her denial.
‘I've heard it from his own mouth, Ari,’ Roirbak said gently.
‘And I believe him.
Tammuz Malamute is Ewan Famber.’
‘It's a lie!
I don't believe it, any of it!’
Ari cried, although both Leila and Roirbak could see that, painfully, she was preparing to.
‘If he was alive, he'd have come back to us!
He wouldn't have just…vanished !
Look what he did to me!
Would he just have left me…
?’
Abruptly, her face became devoid of expression.
‘He's here,’ Ari said, softly.
‘He's here — now.’
She looked over her shoulder, shook her head again, and began to walk back towards the stairway to the gallery.
‘Ari?!’
Leila called, and then turned to Roirbak who mouthed silently, ‘Let her go.’
Leila leaned against him.
Her heart ached: for the death of love, for the death of innocence.
‘Goddess, this is being handled badly ,’ she said.
Jahsaxa stooped confidently over the prone form of Zambia Crevecoeur.
The blinds were squeezed shut, the door locked, the lights dim, and she had Zambia to herself, but for the anxious presence of Dr Parmedes behind her.
‘Can I speak yet?’ she asked quietly.
‘The doctor cleared his throat, coughed drily.
‘You can try.
Keep it simple.’
‘Zambia?’
‘Unnh?’
‘I know you can hear me.
I want you to tell me a few things and then I'll let you go back to sleep, all right?’
‘Mmm.’
‘Who or what is Tammuz Malamute?’
‘He's dead.’
‘No, Zambia, I don't think he is.
Come on, don't be silly.
Answer the question.’
‘He's dead.’
Jahsaxa sighed and stood up straight.
‘Parmedes, this is intolerable.
Increase the dosage.’
‘I don't think that's…
‘Parmedes!’
‘Very well, but I want to make it quite clear this is your responsibility.’
‘Just do it.
Now!’
She exhaled slowly, shudderingly, holding her breath as Parmedes injected Zambia in the neck.
Zambia flinched, hir face pale, eyes bruised, lips cracked and dry.
It was a pathetic sight.
Jahsaxa sat on the edge of the bed and brushed Zambia's hair back from hir face.
‘Tell me the story,’ she said gently, and then, with a harder edge, ‘All of it.’
Ari sat across from the man she'd been told was her father, appraising him with a critical eye.
She had listened to his story without interrupting, learning (simultaneously with Jahsaxa Penumbra across the city) why and how Ewan Famber had ‘died’.
After the outburst with Leila and Roirbak downstairs, she'd walked, quite calmly, back into this office.
Tammuz had turned around from his workstation.
The expression on his face had been wary, but what more could she possible hope for?
A long time ago, she'd learned just how dear she'd been to Ewan Famber: an experiment.
Coolly, she'd walked right up him and said, ‘You really are my father?’
He nodded, frowning.
He's knows nothing about people, Ari thought.
He doesn't know what to say to me.
She spat in his face.
‘That is for what you did to me,’ she said.
He hardly flinched, just stared at her in horrified amazement.
A delicious tide of powerful rage surged within her, giving her the courage to slap his face hard, right on the place where her spittle had landed.
‘And that's for deserting me, you bastard!’
To her annoyance, although quite what she'd expected him to do after that she couldn't think, Tammuz grinned.
He wiped his face.
‘Ouch!’ he said shakily, ‘And Quincx told me you were a likeable young woman!’
‘You left me to cope with this alone,’ Ari said accusingly.
There were so many ways she wanted to tell him this, all of them inadequate to express her feelings.
He had the grace to stop grinning.
‘I know.
I know.’
‘Why?’
It was an agonised cry.
‘That's what I want to tell you.’
‘Are you sorry for what you did?’
‘No.’
She sat down, defeated.
‘I think I still hate you.’
He shrugged.
‘When Leila told me about you, when I read all that shit you left her, I pitied you,’ she said bitterly.
‘Now, I suppose I should pity you more.
This is crazy!’
She shook her head, frowning.
‘Am I going to wake up soon?’
‘I hope so,’ her father replied.
Ari found it was strangely comforting to be told how confused Ewan had been at the time he'd turned his back on his family.
She had been surprised by his view of the Tech-Greens, however, and dismissed much of what he said about them as paranoid hysteria.
It seemed that, psychologically, there hadn't been much improvement in Tammuz since then.
She felt she could partially excuse his megalomaniac meddlings in her genes now that she knew he was mentally unstable.
Geniuses were like that, weren't they?
Satisfied with this flimsy explanation for the time being, she moved on to a more intimate subject: herself.
Here was the man who could answer all those questions Leila was so vague about.
Where Leila groped in the dark, this man emanated light.
A pity he was so crazed.
Even though she almost wholly accepted who Tammuz was, if only as an abstract, she still found it very difficult to look upon him as her father in flesh and blood.
The best she could manage was to imagine him to be a person who had known Ewan well.
That model worked comfortably, so she used it and said to him, ‘Tell me about myself.’
‘I was unsure whether my theories would work,’ he answered.
‘Mostly I hoped they hadn't.’
Ari frowned and shook her head.
‘But why did you make me this way?’
It was the fundamental question.
Tammuz sat down in a chair opposite her and picked up a pen to fiddle with.
‘Why?
The answer is traditional: because I thought I could.
That is the root condition.
Secondary to that, I anticipated what could possibly be done with such power.
I supposed mainly that, instead of being passive victims of our own reality, we could, through utilising this technique, become masters of it.
When the condition you refer to as ‘the burning’ surges through your flesh, what you are given is the capacity to step beyond the strictures of the logical  universe humans have inflicted upon themselves.
Does that make sense?’
Ari pondered.
‘Not really, no.
Tell me what it means in ordinary words.’
It was amazing how eloquent he became when talking about his work.
He sighed.
‘It's difficult.
Explain to me what you've experienced so far.’
‘You really want me to tell you that !
Are you kidding?’
Her face flamed at the thought of it.
Tammuz frowned.
He had obviously not considered Ari's feelings.
‘Are you embarrassed to tell me about it?’
‘Goddess!’
‘I am the only one who can help you, Ari.’
She considered for a moment.
‘All right.
But don't look at me.’
He raised his hands.
‘Fine.’
Once she began, it was not as difficult as she'd imagined, mainly because it was so plain her father had only a scientific interest in what she was saying.
Malamute stared earnestly at the floor, nodding vigorously at certain points in her narrative.
But he did not look up until she'd finished speaking.
‘Good, everything seems to be going well,’ he said.
‘Leila and Roirbak don't think so.
I can't control it.’
Tammuz squeezed his eyes shut and shook his head.
‘No, no.
Listen.
What you refer to as ‘the burning’— all that light and turmoil — is not an effect , Ari, but non-reality.
Consciousness you raise through your sexuality allows you to enter that non-reality and use it.
‘But why through sex?
I don't understand that.
Why can't anybody have ‘the burning’?’
Tammuz smiled.
‘Well, they could in theory, but — you know those blocks I put on you?
They were only meant to be temporary, but humankind has barriers just like them in their own heads — permanent ones in most cases.
Only a few people can train themselves to get beyond them.’
‘Yeah,’ Ari said, nodding, ‘Leila and R. J. talked about that.
I still don't really see what it is you're getting at though.’
Tammuz pulled a face.
‘OK.
I'll try to explain.
What you must remember is that sexuality is as basic a consciousness as information.’
‘What?!’
Tammuz raised his hands to silence her.
‘I know, I know.
Just listen.’
He spoke slowly and carefully, punctuating his words with  emphatic hand gestures.
‘Information is present as reality — always, as everything.
Information is just the same as a state of consciousness, be it ordinary, everyday perception, heightened perception using drugs or, as in your case, using sexuality.
What I'm trying to say is, when you're in the state of consciousness triggered by sexual stimulation, you should be able to breach time and space.
This will give you access to what I call potentia, and potentia is non-reality.
There are other ways to access this world, but utilising sexuality is the way I discovered we could — perhaps — manage to do so using the human nervous system.
Astrada is another word for potentia — goddess.’
‘Ah!’ said Ari, brightening, as if things were beginning to fall into place in her mind.
Tammuz didn't let her speak.
‘This force has always existed within Nature and has been worshipped by human beings in various forms for aeons.
In earlier times, I believe people actually had more direct access to it.
Primitive people didn't have our self-imposed restrictions, you see.
Those restrictions came about because of certain people's encounters with what they symbolised as the ‘unknown’, and the results of those encounters.
Later, the restrictions solidified into blocks which became part of the genetic make-up of humanity.
‘Earlier people were more receptive to the universe around them than we are.
They couldn't make judgements or try to inflict order on their world, but simply flowed with it.
They used symbols for what they didn't understand — and remember they were quite happy with not understanding — such as Goddess and God.
Connecting with their deities, through consciousness raised by ritual, through dance or song, through drugs or sexual congress, they were really connecting with this primal force.
Many early religious cults revolved around sexuality.
Unfortunately, as mankind became more ‘civilised’, and there were more people around restricted by the blocks, they estranged themselves from Nature and their deity symbols became logic and order.
Simultaneously, sexuality became a control factor as a purely pleasurable or procreative experience.’
Tammuz' face had lit up as he spoke.
Now, he stood up and began to pace purposefully round the room, making Ari's head whirl as she tried to follow him with her eyes.
His hands clawed the air.
‘Order froze the world, Ari, and those who set themselves up as leaders of society used everything they could to control people around  them.
Humanity’ s excursions into its own future became entirely cerebral.
Science developed.
The province of the mind.
People strove to be free of Nature, seeing it as something outside of themselves.
Its innate chaos repelled them.
Soma, or body, and bodily functions, were regarded as unclean or shameful.
Their gods became sexless, spirit without flesh, without fleshly drives, pure thought.
And people strove to emulate their creation, while telling themselves they were striving for purity as possessed by the entity, or entities, that had created them .
At the start of the last millennium, things were beginnings to change a little.
Some people were waking up and seeing through the disguise humanity had constructed around its deities.
By that, I do not simply mean the gods, but human culture itself as well.
Tech-Green and Naturotech were both phenomena that evolved from that changing consciousness, but I felt that science was still too much the province of logic and order.
To me, it seemed it should be a meld of mind and body, order and disorder, logic and nonsense…
, He sighed and squatted down by her feet.
‘I was researching along these lines, the end product of which was you.
I felt, by doing that, I had effectively stepped back in time and discovered the one thing that should have been thought of before we even harnessed electricity.
Science and technology must surely have progressed in a different way if these principles had been embraced from the start.
Humanity had begun to chart the universe and impose its own blinkered logic upon it.
A mistake.
Universe is neither predictable nor logical but because of its very nature of chaos, anything is possible within it, even the logic and order.’
‘Stop!’
Ari said, her hands flying to her face.
She was laughing.
‘Stop it!
My brain is steaming!’
Tammuz grimaced.
‘OK, it's a lot of information to take in, but it is important you understand these things — my thoughts.’
He stood up and sauntered to his coffee pot.
‘It is only my view, of course, but you should still hear it.’
‘But if you really had discovered this way of changing people, why did you stop?’
Ari asked.
‘Why run and hide?
Why the secrets?’
‘Because it was a fluke.
Humanity isn't ready for it.
It was the penalty for estranging ourselves from Universe.
I realised it was only my ego wanting to control this thing, and that it wasn't a natural evolutionary step as I'd told myself.
If I'd published my results, the consequences could have been disastrous.
I didn't want to take that risk.’
‘Disastrous in what way?’
‘Well, humanity is still into control and being controlled.
The only possible way your ‘burning’ could have been used was as yet another tool of control.
No way would those in power want every individual suddenly to become ‘free’.
Their structures would crumble.
And, believe me, Ari, if you have developed as I hoped, you are truly ‘free’
‘In what way?’
She accepted the lukewarm mug of coffee he gave her and sipped it.
It was foul.
‘Firstly, at its most mundane level, you will not look at the world through a narrow tunnel of perception.
Ridiculous tribal codes such as hierarchies and power struggles will seem farcical to you, because you will have passed beyond the point where you need them to exist successfully .
Now do you understand what it would be like if everyone was like that?
The fabric of our society would be seen to be the ridiculous thing it is.
No one could have power over others any more.
‘Secondly, and this is more important, you will have the capability to influence your own reality in a profoundly greater sense than at any time in mankind's history.
The problem is, you are unique.
Wouldn't it be wonderful if we woke up tomorrow and everyone had become like you?
They won't though, and what you are could only be beneficial if absolutely everyone was like you too.
I think…
‘Ari frowned.
‘Hold on, are you saying that, if I wanted to, I could make people do things , obey me and stuff?’
Tammuz shook his head.
‘No, don't even think that way!
That is a gross over-simplification, and one upheld by so-called workers of magick since time began.
What you will influence, if you like, is the timestream as you perceive it.’
‘It amounts to the same thing, surely!’
‘Only because you perceive it that way.
And it is vital that you don't.
Everything is subjective to your current reality.’
‘I'm lost.’
‘At present, maybe,’ he said.
‘Ari, I want to work with you.
Leila and Quincx are tackling if from the wrong angle.
It's my fault because my notes were so damn impenetrable!
When they think of sexual power, they're still thinking of a single reality situation.
You know — like pyrotechnics and abracadabra!
They are not capable of directing your experiences.
R's like they are putting you in a helpless position and expecting you to be able to operate from there.
It's nonsense.
You  should be equal to whatever you can evoke from your own impulses.
After all, it is you .’
‘You mean if I got kind of aroused right now, I shouldn't fight it or flounder, or try to control it, but just be it.’
Tammuz smiled.
‘Sweet child,’ he said.
‘You may look like a brainless little urchin, but you are certainly the daughter of my flesh.’
Ari frowned.
‘If we work together, does that mean you have to be with me when…
?’
She grimaced.
‘Another mistaken belief,’ Tammuz said, smiling.
‘No one but you can influence what happens.
All I would want is for you to make the journey into the burning, and then come back and report.
We can discuss the results and try to analyse what we learn.’
‘What if I can't come back?’
‘Perhaps my metaphor was deluding.
Don't think of it as leaving .
You are still here in this reality, but simultaneously experiencing others.
If you are afraid, the experience will be frightening.
If you are calm, it will be tranquil.
If you believe you can return to this reality whenever you wish, you will.
It's that simple.’
‘How can you be so sure?’
‘I can't, but we won't get anywhere by you being squeamish, will we!’
‘It will be hard not to get scared.
When all that rushing light and stuff comes, I panic.’
‘In that case, look upon the scariness as part of the process.
Accept it and use it.’
‘Tammuz Malamute.
I don't think I understand as much as you think I do!’
‘If we think back to what I said earlier, perhaps understanding as such would be disabling rather than helpful.
I don't think it's necessary for you to ‘understand’.
Simply experience it.’
‘And when I've got used to all this, how will I use it then?’
‘That's up to you.
Power-hungry people would want to use it as a weapon — which it could very successfully be utilised as — or else as a way of controlling others en masse.
I can only tell you what I think I'd do in your position and it is this.
Use it to further your own evolution.
Get out of this reality and off this fucking planet!’
Ari was taken aback by the vehemence of his last remark.
‘Offworld?
To the sky cities?’
‘To begin with,’ he answered, smiling.
‘Leila wanted to do that.
Just me and her.
Is that where you want to go?’
She dared fantasise, for just a moment, that she had some kind of family again, perhaps with Leila as a surrogate mother, the three of them heading for the stars.
Oh, grow up! a bitter part of her spat darkly.
‘I don't know where I'll end,’ Tammuz said.
He patted her knee.
‘I'm not parent material, Ari.’
(Could he read her mind?)
‘What if I stayed down here?
Couldn't I try to help people?’
She was thinking of the jellycrusts.
Tammuz smiled wistfully.
‘Altruistic gestures are all very well, but the fact is, you couldn't do enough, Ari.
People would expect you to do everything for them; revitalise the planet, solve all their problems, etc.’ without doing anything themselves.
By their very nature they would foul up whatever you accomplished, for which they'd blame you.
Then they'd turn on you.’
‘I can't take such a dim view of people!’
Ari said hotly.
‘You're wrong.
Not everyone's like that.’
‘I know.
Not everyone is like that, but I still think your future lies off-world.
Gaian reality, I feel, is mostly responsible for the way we are.
That was all very well for the adolescent mankind, but in order to evolve, we have to realise we've grown up and it's time to leave home.
Isn't that how you felt about leaving Taler's Bump?’
‘I see your point.
I think.
Although you seem to have changed your mind since you fried poor old Ewan, haven't you?
You couldn't wait to get back down here then and didn't want anything to do with space exploration.’
Tammuz sighed.
‘I had to come back here to return to the basic me-ness.
I rebuilt myself from there.
I missed out on so much, Ari, important life lessons.
My Tech-Green status, even a lot of the concepts I worked with, had been imposed on me.
I wasn't myself.
Now I am, for better or worse.
I strongly believe that this world, and its reality, is the wrong place for you to develop your ultimate potential.
It would be like you were trying to rival Gaiah herself, the planet-soul.
I can't see anything good coming from that.’
He stood up.
The inner light had faded from his face.
He's thinking of Zambia Crevecoeur, Ari thought.
Are we really closer to each other than we think?
She hopped off the chair.
‘I'm glad I spoke to you,’ she said.
‘Sorry about the spitting and things.’
Tammuz pulled a face.
‘There are no excuses for the past, kid.
I won't even try to think of any.
You owe me no loyalty.’
She wanted, at that moment, to hug him fiercely.
She wanted to love him.
What a lonely man he is, she thought.
Has he learned how to do something about that?
Is he different to how he was?
Somewhere, in this sprawling city, Zambia Crevecoeur was lying injured and imprisoned.
Perhaps SHe was thinking of Tammuz too.
He is alone, but not lonely, Ari thought, and I do not pity him any more.
I don't have to.
She left him standing there, thinking.
Jahsaxa was not surprised by most of what she heard: Tammuz' life story pouring out from the lips of Zambia Crevecoeur.
As a privileged, and — clandestinely — highly-placed member of Arcady society, she knew pretty well which direction the world was heading in, and had had a place booked in Sky City One for over a decade.
She despised the weakling sentiments of Ewan Famber.
Naturally, she'd heard of this legendary Tech-Green, and was disappointed someone of such intelligence and vision had allowed maudlin dross to get in the way of his career.
What a fool!
And what an over-reactive, stupid gesture he had made!
Still, it was interesting information to learn he was still alive.
Tech-Green had mourned his passing with hysterical fervour; no one had replaced him in their pantheon.
He lived on, a myth, in their fond memories.
She wondered coolly how his erstwhile mentors would react once they learned what he'd become, and what they'd be prepared to offer to keep that quiet.
It could be quite embarrassing for them.
Roirbak, naturally, must be aware of Malamute's identity.
It was no secret the man had groomed Ewan Famber to perfection all those years ago, and it was too typical the new, perhaps-not-improved Ewan would eventually end up back under Roirbak's wing.
But what else?
What was this about his daughter?
‘Parmedes, you do realise what you are hearing is highly confidential material, don't you?’
‘Madam, I was never here!’
Parmedes concurred with feeling.
Jahsaxa poked Zambia in the arm.
SHe had lapsed into a doze, the drug having worn off.
‘Give hir another dose,’ Jahsaxa said.
‘There is more I have to know.’
‘Ms Penumbra, I really don't advise that, unless you're not worried by the possibility of losing the subject.’
Jahsaxa flashed her eyes at the doctor.
‘For your information, sir, this little bitchdog is a damn sight hardier than you give hir credit for!
I expect SHe hardly gets off on this stuff.
Don't be a fool!
Zambia has clung to the streets for years!’
Parmedes sighed.
‘Very well.
If you would just let me through.’
So, this is the secret you've been incubating, Roirbak, Jahsaxa thought, curled in her office late at night, turning a glass of rich, golden mezcal in her hands.
The hours rolled towards dawn and she sat alone, thinking about all she had learned from Zambia Crevecoeur.
Her curiosity had been whetted rather than slaked, because Zambia could only tell it as far as SHe understood, and hirs was not a scientific mind by any standard.
Two words revolved glitteringly in Jahsaxa's mind: sex and power.
The two gods at whose shrines she'd sacrificed for many years.
Now, it seemed, the gods had become one, emerging as a singular, doubly vital entity.
In her limited understanding, she could see a way to the upper strata of Arcady society and beyond it to the stars.
If, for example, she had this girl Ari under her protection, she could, through strategic matings, harvest power right to the top.
She felt she had Roirbak and Malamute in a corner: it was just that they hadn't yet looked over their shoulders to see the walls closing in behind them.
And no way, in a million, million years, would she ever let them take Zambia from her again.
‘Roirbak, it's me, Jahsaxa.’
‘I have nothing to say to you.
As I told you, you'll be hearing from my lawyers today.’
‘Quincx, please.
I've been up all night, thinking.
This is ridiculous.
Surely the situation can be assuaged without resorting to the interference of outsiders.’
‘You were the one who happily ordered your man to come and trash my workshops, Jahsaxa.
It is very easy for you to decide to be magnanimous.
I am the one who is hurt.
You've overstepped this time.
You have to be punished in some way, and you know as well as I do that your case lacks substance.
I will win and you will be shamed, and doubtlessly heavily fined.
Compensation to Crevecoeur may also be a possibility for you to consider.’
‘There are, perhaps, things for both of us to consider.
Zambia has been telling me a lot, you know.’
‘Say what you mean!’
‘For example, lovers have no secrets, Quincx.
You know that, don't you?
Instead of getting all hot and bothered and self-righteous, how about calling your legal weasels off this morning and coming over later for a meeting.
Bring Ewan Famber with you, of course…
, ‘There is absolutely no proof of that…
‘Hush!
I am quite sure that, even after all this time, with their sophisticated technology, Tech-Green could quite easily qualify the suppositions.
There would still be traces, Quincx, I'm convinced of that.
And the daughter of course, with her little talents…
‘Jahsaxa, don't push me this way!’
‘Tch, tch.
Don't sound so threatening darling!
We are civilised people.
Common sense should tell you I'm simply reacting in the most intelligent way.
He shouldn't have stolen Crevecoeur, Roirbak !’
‘How can somebody steal something that no one can own!’
‘Don't be naive, Quincx.
What time will you be here?’
Roirbak was physically shaking by the time he'd broken the connection with Jahsaxa.
Agreeing to her suggestion of a ‘meeting’ would buy them time, but for what?
Dare they call her bluff and just let her get on with whatever she thought she could do to inconvenience them?
He tried to think of the worst that could happen.
Tech-Green, in the interests of community and armed with their official regulations concerning public safety, would be quite within their rights to take Ari away from them.
She was a potential danger after all.
Tammuz had enmired himself, no doubt, in a veritable maze of minor and major legal infringements: destruction of Tech-Green equipment and forging documents were the first that sprang to mind.
He would very likely end up being confined for psychological tests, and Roirbak doubted whether, in Tammuz' present teetering condition, he'd be strong enough to face them and emerge intact.
The business with Crevecoeur was another matter.
Although it required official sanction to perform intersexing, Roirbak doubted whether Jahsaxa was careless enough not to have seen to that.
And it was entirely likely she'd produce documented evidence that Crevecoeur had signed a contract with her, effectively handing over hir body for however long the contract stipulated.
It would be easy enough to break such an arrangement.
Although not illegal, it would be considered unethical, and as long as Crevecoeur could pay back whatever money Jahsaxa claimed SHe'd cost her, the contract would be dissolved.
In  Roirbak's opinion, Zambia was pretty safe, and the least of their worries.
What the hell could he do?
Everyone but Nathan had gathered in the canteen that morning and Roirbak, when he joined them, was aware of a certain tension indicating no one dared think the worst was over.
He told them without elaboration the content of his conversation with Jahsaxa Penumbra.
He sighed and said, ‘Well, if anyone has any ideas about what to do…
‘Quincx,’ Tammuz said, miserably.
‘Think about this.
All it involves really is myself and Ari.
I've caused all this mess and it's ridiculous you and Leila should involve yourselves.
Ari and I will leave here.
Jahsaxa can do nothing then.
Even Zambia will probably be safer without me around.’
‘I don't want to leave!’
Ari cried, appalled.
‘I don't want to go with you!
Leila?’
She appealed to the woman.
Leila put her arm round Ari.
‘Be sensible, Malamute, where would you go?’
‘You survive on the road well enough.’
‘Don't be a fool.
Tech-Green will hunt you down, both of you, wherever you go.’
‘I've escaped before, Leila.’
‘Have you?’
‘Stop it!’
Roirbak said.
‘Squabbling won't help.
Tammuz, we will go and speak to Jahsaxa.
Hear what she has to say.’
‘Give in to her, you mean?
Let her have her own way?’
Tammuz thumped the table with a closed fist.
‘You know as well as I do that if she knows about Ari, she'll want a piece of the action.
Are you really suggesting we go along with that?’
Roirbak sighed.
‘Nothing will happen immediately.
We just need time to think, and if that involves letting Jahsaxa believe we've given in, then so be it.’
‘This is horrible!’
Ari cried and pulled away from Leila.
She glared at Tammuz Malamute.
‘I wish I'd never been born.
I wish you'd stayed dead!
This is horrible!’
She ran from the canteen, furiously knocking chairs from her path.
Leila rose to follow her but Tammuz put a hand on her arm.
‘She has to be brought to maturity immediately!’ he said.
Leila tried to wrest her arm from his hold.
‘She's right about you!’
‘Listen, once Ari's in control of herself, no one can hurt her, in any way.
This is true.’
He looked at Roirbak.
‘You know this, Quincx.
Ari may be our only salvation in this matter.’
Roirbak sighed and shrugged.
‘I'm not convinced it is a process that can be completed quickly.’
‘But I know it is.’
He let go of Leila who rubbed her wrist, holding it close to her chest.
‘I agree we go and see Penumbra, try and stall her.
But after that, we come right back here and get to work with Ari.
The final test is due!’
‘You're disgusting!’
Leila hissed.
‘That's a girl of flesh and blood you're talking about.
A girl with feelings, for Goddess’ sake!
Stop thinking of her as another damn computer!’
She took a deep breath.
‘Now, I'm going to go and apologise to her.
For all of us.
Fuck Crevecoeur, fuck Penumbra, fuck you , Tammuz Malamute!’
She stormed out without further words.
Tammuz opened his mouth at Roirhak who merely took a sip of coffee.
‘Maybe she's right, Tammuz,’ Roirbak said.
Friends don't come back from the dead, Leila thought, rampaging through the corridor from the canteen.
Zombies do, vampires do, but friends don't.
Like Ari, she had no difficulty accepting the idea Tammuz had once been Ewan, but there was no way she could really feel this odd, crazed man was the one she'd loved before.
There had been so much to admire in Ewan, even though he'd been so self-centred.
His essential humanity had always shone through.
Tammuz Malamute, on the other hand, was utterly alien.
She would be ashamed if he found out the way she'd sanctified the memory of his alter ego over the years.
She hunted round the building, gradually calming down, but there was no sign of Ari.
Eventually, she deduced the kid must have gone to find Nathan, who'd slept in that morning and missed breakfast.
Leila felt bad about the way things had gone for Ari.
There she was, poised on the brink of some great, unbelievable experience, and everyone else was more concerned with their own problems, their own lives.
She wondered whether Ari had noticed that and resented it.
If she'd been in the kid's place, she'd have run off by now and left them all to it.
What are we playing at? she wondered.
We're not equipped to help the girl.
If anything, we're a hindrance.
She paused in the doorway of Nathan's room.
As she expected, Ari was in there, cradled in Nathan's  arms, being comforted.
Leila could hear her crying.
Oh, hell, she thought.
Where and when and how will this all end?
She leaned her face against the doorframe.
Neither of the kids had even noticed her standing there.
Nathan's hands were smoothing Ari' s hair.
Leila could hear him murmuring softly.
He leaned down to kiss Ari's face protectively.
The posture, the nurturing were unmistakable.
Leila straightened up and softly, silently began to back away.
They don't need us, she thought.
And that's the truth.
Without us, it might work.
They don't need us.
‘You know what,’ Ari said, wiping her face, ‘I wish I could just run away and forget all this.
It sounds childish, doesn't it!
And impractical, and selfish, and stupid, and…
‘Hey!’
Nathan interrupted her.
‘I know.
It’ s OK.
Sometimes I think Leila and Quincx don't really give a damn about you.
Not as a person, I mean.
You're just an experiment to them.
And that Malamute, well!’
Ari squinted up at him, still nestled against his chest.
‘Oh, don't say that, Nate.
Leila does care about me.
I know she does.
You may be right about the other two though.’
She sighed.
‘My father.
He made me a monster, and in his own image, I guess!’
She tried a watery laugh.
Nathan squeezed her.
‘Monster?
You?
No way.
Goddess, you're beautiful, and you feel good , Ari!’
Ari tried to wriggle away from him a little, somehow annoyed he could say a thing like that at a time like this.
She narrowed her eyes and Nathan shrugged, embarrassed.
‘Isn't it…well, you know, how I'm supposed to feel about you?’
She made an angry sound.
‘Yeah, with Quincx, Malamute and everyone looking on taking measurements!’
That wasn't entirely true, but she felt a little nervous.
Nathan ran one finger down her face, on to her neck.
She shivered.
‘Nathan.
Don't.
You know what'll happen.’
‘So let it.
At worst,if what you say is true, we'll both be fried; but what a way to go!’
A radiant expression fleetingly crossed Ari's face, followed by clouds.
‘Are you suggesting…like, here, now, without Roirbak, or Leila, or…anyone?’
Nathan rubbed his face.
‘Ari, the world, our world, is breaking up around us.
At any minute Penumbra's killers could burst in here and  carry you off.
Compared with that, is taking the final step with me so scary?
I don't think we have much to lose.’
She thought about what Tammuz had told her, his ravings.
‘We don't know what might happen,’ she said, trying to be firm.
Nathan touched her face again.
‘I'm not scared.’
No, you wouldn't be, Ari thought bitterly.
No pain for you, no burning, no loss of control, of one-ness .
Dare she?
Tammuz had told her to relax into the fire, swim with it, let go.
Was he simply crazy or the one person who knew the truth, the right way.
as if in reply, as a prompt, a tingle ignited in her belly.
Here I am , whispered the power, purring deep inside.
Experience me, Ari Famber, I'm waiting .
She gulped and took a deep breath before falling against Nathan's chest.
Her hands clawed his shoulders.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Let's do it, Nate!’
Dimly, she thought that wasn't the romantic kind of thing she'd envisioned saying at this point, but what did it matter?
She hoped Nathan couldn't be hurt.
It felt as if she was facing death: what would be on the other side?
Nothing could have prepared either of them for what they experienced.
It was awkward at first, and Ari felt a little embarrassed.
Noses bumping as they kissed, fumblings with clothes.
She wondered whether Nathan was too inexperienced to carry this off.
She, even though virgin, had imaginative ideas about what they should do, mainly picked up from conversations she'd had with Justinette and Elice.
She gently pushed him away and removed her clothes herself.
‘You too,’ she told him.
Nathan seemed happy to comply.
Once naked, she pushed him back on the bed, ran her hands over his smooth skin.
He lacked Cabochon's muscle and Urran's expertise, but he was beautiful in his own way.
He was also, if only for this minute, hers.
She tasted his skin, calmly observing the way this kindled the burning within her.
It was a harsh white in her belly.
She gently bit his nipples, making him squirm and laugh.
The burning responded accordingly: a single, spear-like leap of interest.
She imagined she was cupping this white-hot power in her womb, and that the walls of it contained the fire.
She could hold it there.
Slowly, so as to maintain control, she continued her oral investigations of Nathan's body, noting the different tastes and smells of arms, belly, genitals, thighs.
The burning had changed colour within her.
Soon, she felt, she would just have to  relinquish control and let it carry her.
She took Nathan's cock in her mouth.
He pulled her hair, bumping her shoulder with his knee.
She tasted the sea, her own element, in the salt juice oozing from him.
Now she could hear the roar of her own energy in her ears.
She must let go.
Nathan made to roll on top of her, but she pressed a hand against his chest.
‘No, not yet.
The tantra is in the tongue.’
It was the only way she could express it, remembering Justinette's assertions of how she had experienced altered states of consciousness this way.
Surely this was fine and perfect ritual to fuel the fire.
She felt Nathan's breath on her thighs and let go .
It was the only way.
Flashbacks: ‘The power of the orgasm.
Boy, was he into that .’
Leila's face; shining.
Tammuz Malamute.
Zambia Crevecoeur.
Flaming stars.
The knowledge he gave me.
Are we closer than we think?
Nathan?
She reached to him with her thoughts, became his lapping tongue.
Became the eye of the Goddess.
Floating.
It was a calm sea, endless.
Blue horizon.
Forever sea.
Lapping.
Sea horses on the gentle foam.
So calm.
She had entered the reality of her power.
In the eye of the storm there is tranquillity.
She extended her senses outwards, seeking the spiralling cone of power that contained her.
She could sense Nathan's soul, a hot, bright radiance, inextricably joined to the essence of her being.
She visualised him as a dolphin, rising up out of the waves, the moisture on his sleek, dark skin as bright as stars.
Then she herself had become a star and he a streaking comet flying towards her.
She awaited for the impact: an eternity.
There was no pain at all, only a kind of stretching.
‘Look, Nate,’ she thought and he answered, ‘I don't know where we are,’but it was without fear.
The friction of their two radiances created a third; they could sense it building up between them and around them.
Ari lazily observed its ripening crescendo.
Shivers like blossoms fell upon her incorporeal form, silver rain and bright bubbles of light.
The experience had become pure music, each note torturous yet unbearably sweet.
It was a tune she wanted to enter,be .
As the melody soared and spiralled, Ari and Nathan spun within it, reaching for the highest notes.
Then Ari could feel flesh around her, the bedsheets beneath her body.
For a frozen second she was back in reality, just a second, before the core of power erupted within her, spraying up molten gobbets of light from every pore of her body, from the base of  her spine to the centre of her mind.
She screamed, half terrified, half ecstatic, feeling like a mote of dust tossed on an endless ocean.
There was no control, no way to stop it, no way to harness the wild strength pouring from her.
Then Nathan was in her head, part of her mind.
He was the lightning rod and could earth the power within her.
‘Silly,’ his voice murmured, ‘just make it into rain.
Rain of light.’
This was the answer.
This.
They had been so mistaken, Quincx and Leila.
She could not control the power alone,was not meant to .
Her lover, whoever that may be, male or female, should direct the new reality out of the force.
She attuned to his visualisation.
He, so untrained, had known.
They were lying panting, in the muddled bed, with a thousand thousand sparks of fire falling down upon them, vanishing, gently as snow, as they landed.
Ari sighed deeply.
She heard the sound of rotors chirring through the air outside.
She heard Nathan panting.
She felt her body, the sweat that held them together, Nathan's heart beating frantically against her chest.
How can we speak? she wondered.
How can we ever speak again?