

Simple oscillatory structures
I still reserve the right at any time to doubt the solutions furnished by the modulor, keeping intact my freedom which must depend upon my feelings rather than my reason.
Le Corbusier
The need for pulsation
Walt Disney once revealed that his key discovery, making it possible to animate his Mickey Mouse and other cinematograph drawings, was not the technique of  hinging and synchronising the limbs to move at 24 frames per second.
It was the introduction of pulsation into their forms so that they appeared to swell and contract rhythmically.
It is this quality that gives them the semblance of life!
In his description of melody , Otto Károlyi states that analysis of large numbers of melodies shows that an ascending melodic line is sooner or later balanced by a descending one, and vice versa.
Oscillation seems to be a property of all forms of energy.
Certainly it is a property of life and a need for a balance of reciprocating flows is observable throughout the arts and sciences.
It applies to any structure, physical and sensual.
A structure exists by a set of laws, principles, perhaps even axioms that appear to bind the parts into a unity.
Each structure has a programme .
A study of simple programmes that encourage oscillation between growth and decline can be both instructive and a spur to the imagination.
This chapter examines a selection, using graphics as a medium.
Designing into a boundless, regular, squared grid, let black represent the occupation of any square.
Let adjacent mean adjoining and parallel with the sides.
Therefore squares diagonally adjoining are not adjacent.
This 1 2 4 series will repeat, generation after generation, into eternity.
It can be read in either direction, but with a difference of inflection.
The 1 2 4 2 series is better balanced.
It oscillates.
The 1 2 1 4 series is more jagged.
Planar growth and decline
Unless stated to the contrary, all rotary generations in these examples are clockwise on a rectilinear grid.
Introvert series occur when a programme inhibits itself and can grow no further.
Extrovert series are apparently limitless in growth.
To comprehend them we must examine a part as being typical of all other parts…as in Leibnitz's infinite universe!
The part is at once somewhere and anywhere.
To fix it locally, the part is finely focused and the peripheral area diffused, greyed and lost.
Attention can be concentrated also by a symmetrical change of scale from the centre of interest, by AP or GP.
The growth of an extrovert series can be restrained by generation within a boundary that is absolute and does not permit flow across it.
This is not to be confused with the framing of part of a limitless series, a microcosmic view of the macrocosm.
The boundary can be used as a reflecting surface so that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection.
The generations could be colour coded to reveal the evolutionary process.
In the ultimate, within a reflecting boundary, all squares will be occupied.
Whether adjacency be permitted or not, the evolution of the series will be halted, or swamped in a black mass, unless earlier generations decline and make room for their successors.
Our solar system
After the conquest of North Africa by Alexander the Great during the fourth century BC, the city of Alexandria was founded as a seat of learning.
In its massive library both Babylonian and Greek records of the heavenly bodies, going back hundreds of years, were housed, studied and debated.
The records showed that the heavenly bodies subdivided into two groups: the Sun, the Moon and the containing sphere of the background stars orbited the earth in near circular paths.
The abundance of records enabled Hipparchus to use the properties of similar triangles and sine tables to calculate the diameter of the Earth and the distance of the Moon with amazing accuracy, to within a few miles of today's agreed figures.
But the five known planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, were a different problem.
Their paths about Earth were variously epicyclic and prompted a study of a geometry of curves for some 2000 years.
The mathematician Aristarchus suggested that the problem could be simplified if all the planets, including Earth, were to orbit the Sun but, after much controversy, his argument was lost.
During the second century AD the astronomer Ptolemy summarised all the geographical knowledge amassed in his Geographia .
The Ptolemaic theory, putting the Earth at the centre of the universe, went unchallenged, except by mystical nonsense, for over a thousand years.
By the time of Copernicus, in the fifteenth century, the interaction of 77 mathematical circles, forming cycloids and ellipses as necessary, was required to account for the apparent motion of the Sun, Moon and five planets about the Earth.
His calculations, putting the Sun at the centre of a solar system in which the Earth was one of six planets, reduced the number of circles required to 31.
Within a hundred years, Kepler resolved these by translating the planetary orbits into ellipses with the sun at a focus of each ellipse.
Today we observe the planetary orbits to be near ellipses as the solar system revolves about its common centre of gravity, to which the Sun is the major contributor.
The cycloid
The cycloid is the locus of a point on the circumference of a circle rolling on a straight line.
Therefore, the length of the base line from cusp to cusp is 2π a , where a is the radius of the circle.
The length of a complete arc of a cycloid is 8 a .
The area between one arch and the base is 3π a ², which is three times the area of the generating circle.
The arc of a cycloid offers the path of quickest descent between two points.
In the example, if the two balls are released from A together, the ball on the cycloidal path will arrive first at B .
A curtate cycloid is generated when the point P is inside the generating circle;OP is less than a .
A prolate cycloid is generated when the point P is outside the generating circle;OP is more than a .
A hypocycloid is formed when the rolling circle is inside a master circle.
An epicycloid is formed when the rolling circle is outside a master circle.
The properties of the cycloid, can be adapted to the hypocycloid and epicycloid.
If the rolling circle in a hypocycloid has a radius half the length of the fixed circle, point P simply moves to and fro along a diameter.
C , the centre of the rolling circle, can be attached to a revolving circle that is concentric with the fixed outer circle.
As the central circle rotates, it causes the rolling circle to give point P a reciprocating action.
This mechanism was much used as an  ancilliary pump in nineteenth century steam engines.
When a disc is rolled about a disc of equal diameter, the roller makes two revolutions about its own centre.
This principle is used in differential gears.
If a particle moves under gravity along a smooth curve in the form of a cycloid with its cusps pointing vertically upward, the time of descent to the lowest point is independent of the starting position.
The Geneva stop is an intriguing device for translating continuous rotary motion into intermittent rotary and stopped motion.
It is, therefore, an elementary timing device.
Rollers
It is reasonable to suppose that man discovered the roller before developing the wheel.
Their difference is important.
The roller is independent of the vehicle that it transports so that, if the rollers have a circumference of three feet (or, say, one metre) then the slab will move forward six feet (say, two metres) per rev.
This is known as the roller and slab theorem.
Rollers do not need to be circular in order to offer constant breadth.
Curves of constant breadth can be irregular; however the simplest are based upon the equilateral triangle, the regular pentagon and septagon.
The introduction of short radius curves can soften the corners.
Such curves develop an organic flavour that is particularly useful to designers.
Transition curves
Rounding off is a familiar device for softening harsh corners.
It can serve both utilitarian and aesthetic purposes; however its effect can be crude when a simple radius curve joins two straights.
When travelling along an edge or a line, the senses, the fingers, the eyes are subject to the same physical laws as other moving bodies.
They have inertia, mass and momentum and obey centrifugal force.
If a railway engine travelling along a straight length of track is suddenly introduced to a radius curve, it will jump the rails.
The railway engineer, therefore, provides a transition curve to ease the engine from one radius to another while adjusting the superelevation , or cant, to counter the centrifugal force.
The length of the transition curve depends upon the total change of radius, the velocity of the engine and the permitted superelevation, bearing in mind that the cant must not be so great that if an engine is halted it will topple over.
The desirable rate of change of curvature will vary with a design specification.
Railway transition curves are usually related to the velocity cubed — a cubic curve is comparatively easy to set out with a theodolite.
An exponential curve might be more accurate.
In general design where practical considerations are paramount, a series of short circular arcs with radii in AP or GP will offer sensory continuity of the transition.
The superellipse
An ellipse, and the other conic sections, the parabola and the hyperbola, as discussed in Chapter 11, offer beautiful transition curves.
The circle is a special case of the ellipse in which the two axes are equal in length.
The Theorem of Pythagoras can be applied to the rotating vector of unit length to reveal, as it describes a circle centred on the origin O that:x ² + y ² = 1² = 1
It can also be shown that a general equation for an ellipse is of the form:
= 1 where a and b are the maximum and minimum radii.
If the indices are raised, say, from 2 to , then the closed curve produced has more character than a simple rectangle or a simple ellipse…it becomes a superellipse .
An approximation to such forms, which will be discussed as an aesthetic later in the book can be achieved by the projection illustrated.
The projection of triangles
Projective geometry evolved out of the geometric perspective, beloved of Renaissance architects, engineers and painters.
Its first exponent was Gérard Desargues (1593–1662), a self-educated architect and engineer.
His innovations developed from a deduction, long accepted by painters, that parallel lines meet at infinity.
Previously, Euclidean geometry had stated that parallel lines never meet.
Desargues's Theorem concerns projections from a point O .
The illustration shows how painters had observed differing sections of the same projection.
By simplifying the projection to a plane triangle, Desargues found that:The pairs of corresponding sides of two triangles' perspective from a point meet, respectively, in three points that lie on one straight line.
This property can be translated into a chain of paired triangles.
The theorem is applicable to polygons whose constituent triangles share the above properties.
The perspective can be to a point at such an elevation that the projection lines appear to be parallel.
Blaise Pascal, of Pascal's triangle , extended the theorem to:If a hexagon is inscribed in a circle, the pairs of opposite sides intersect, respectively, in three points which lie on a straight line.
Brianchon's Theorem (circa 1820) states:If a hexagon is circumscribed about a circle the lines joining opposite vertices meet in one point.
In Chapter 6, a dynamic series was developed between parallel lines using a control point on one of the parallels and a GP was projected between parallel lines using a control square.
It is possible to programme variations on these by using both divergent and parallel curved and straight lines.
Their important quality is that they present a rate of change that is clearly and definitely structured.
Some regular polygons
Cyclic, rotary motion produces regular polygons and polyhedra.
The simplest polygon is the equilateral triangle which echoes itself at 60° intervals.
It bisects into two right angled triangles, with sides of 1:2: √3 and angles of 30°, 60°, 90°.
It divides and stacks into smaller replicas of itself.
Its 180° (or 60°) image superimposed upon it forms a star hexagon .
Three superimposed equilateral triangles at 40° intervals form a star nonagon.
The squares circumscribing the triangle do not mesh conveniently in the plane, but are critical to the formation of the three dimensional octahedron.
The regular hexagon comprises six radial equilateral triangles.
It is an isometric view of a cube.
Three superimposed √3:1 rectangles at 60° intervals give a continuous planar structure.
The node heights are: 0.866 and 1.732.
The regular pentagon , in association with the hexagon, has been credited with magical powers throughout recorded history.
Looking hard at one's hands, and at life generally, it is not surprising!
Two complementary regular pentagons can be superimposed to form a decagon.
This reveals much of the interstructure of the pentagon which conforms to a Fibonacci series.
The node heights are: 0.951 and 1.539.
The regular decagon can be formed by rotating a π1; rectangle at 36° intervals.
It came as no surprise to mystics that DNA is found to function like a right handed helix in which each tread is of the same size and turns at the same rate of 36° per tread.
On each tread the chemical lattice is coded in hexagons and pentagons!
The regular septagon is the most  inaccessable of the primary polygons…probably because it cannot be constructed accurately with only ruler and compass.
The three node heights, compared with unit base, are: 0.782, 1.757 and 2.190.
Its external angle is 51° 26′ approximately.
The regular octagon is a rotating θ1; rectangle (see Chapter 6).
Its three node heights are: 0.707, 1.707 and 2.414.
The regular duodecagon is formed by the superimposition of four equilateral triangles per rev, at 90° intervals.
Alternatively, it records the rotation of a 2 + √3:1 rectangle at 30° intervals.
The node heights are: 0.5, 1.366, 2.366, 3.232, 3.732.
Polygons with more than seven sides are into the range of plenty .
However we are sensitive to parallels and symmetry so that polygons with an even number of sides can fold into the elementary range.
Polygons with eight, ten and 12 sides are instantly recognisable, whereas nine, 11 and 13 sided polygons are not.
The nonagon is easier to comprehend if its three fold symmetry is revealed.
A useful ruler and compass construction for a regular polygon of n number sides on a known sidelength is:(1) Using the base of the polygon as a radius, draw a semicircle. (2) Mark off n number equal intervals on the arc.
(3) From the centre of the circle produce straight lines through points 2, 3, 4, 5…to n .
(4) From point 2 cut off side lengths to form polygon.
Labyrinths and mazes
Reciprocal movement can be suggested by constructions that offer alternative paths.
In past centuries these led to considerable artistry in the devising of labyrinths and mazes.
Reciprocity in vegetation
Rooted vegetation radiates in two directions.
The root hairs absorb water and simple inorganic compounds of nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, potassium, magnesium, sulphur and iron.
These, with certain trace elements, are taken up the woody fibres and much of the water evaporates at the leaf surfaces, while photosynthesis takes place.
Light energy from the sun is absorbed by the chlorophyll in the leaves and the water molecules are split.
The hydrogen in the water combines with carbon dioxide in the atmosphere to form organic compounds while oxygen from the water is released into the atmosphere.
Rooted vegetation takes water upwards and sunlight downwards.
It takes carbon dioxide and gives oxygen.
It is, therefore, the complementary life form to the animals of Earth.
Many artists and ecological scientists hold the view that both practical and aesthetic fulfilment are conditional upon an interaction of animal, vegetable and mineral properties.
Symbiosis
Nature, as we observe it, is built upon reciprocal relationships of dissimilar organisms, bacterial, vegetable and animal.
Such dependence is referred to as symbiotic, under three broad headings;(1)Commensalism , in which food or space is shared, without harm to either organism and with possible benefit to one.
(2)Mutualism , in which both partners benefit.
(3)Parasitism , in which the host is subject to varying degrees of injury while the parasite benefits, albeit temporarily.
Typical examples of mutualism, which is the aspect most commonly referred to as symbiotic, are:(a) The bacteria that decompose compost heaps of organic waste to form humus that in turn feeds new vegetation.
(b) Pilot fish of the pompano family (Carangidae ) who keep the company of sharks.
(c) Starling-like oxpeckers who live on the backs of large animals such as elephant, rhinoceros and cattle, in equatorial Africa.
These birds clamber all over and under their hosts, devouring whatever bloodsucking ticks and flies they find.
The large animals not only tolerate and, by their presence, protect the birds; they also use them as lookouts for predators.
Contemporary science is revealing complex symbiotic relationships that contribute to a shared environment to establish a balanced ecology.
It is a matter of concern that much of mankind's industrialisation and urbanisation is disrupting the natural ecology of the Earth, both on a small and large scale.
Works of art, any things that acquire identity from the interaction of dissimilar parts, are likely to exhibit characteristics of ecology and symbiosis.
Their study, therefore, can be a source of inspiration for the artist and designer.
Bottom right : Six generations of a 1, 1, 3, 5 series, multiple occupancy permitted, with reflectance from a normal boundary.
In this programme, the first generation has three items, of magnitudes 1, 2 and 3, turning through 180°.
The second generation is a repeat of the first.
If adjacency and multi-occupancy are forbidden, growth ceases after two generations.
If they are permitted, four generations complete the introvert figure, left.
In the introvert, clockwise 1, 3, 5 series each generative five unit has two offspring, 1 and 1.
When adjacency and multiple occupation are permitted, the figure becomes extrovert, expansionist.
When denied, as illustrated, the figure is introvert.
In the anticlockwise, extrovert evolution of L's, each unit has two offspring, adjacency forbidden.
Above left : A 1, 1, 3, 5 series, multiple occupancy permitted, reflecting diagonally on the boundary of a square within an AP tartan grid.
Above : A marching, extrovert programme.
Programmes into a triangular grid.
Top left : A series can be colour coded to represent an ageing process, thus revealing multiple occupancy.
Top right : A 2, 3, 1, 1 reflective series on a diamond square grid.
A unit can be rotated and counterchanged within the grid.
Rotary generations take many forms, however they are all based upon rhythmic rotation through an angle and could be expressed graphically as a waveform along a time axis.
A model of successive views of an outer planet as seen from an inner planet as they revolve in concentric orbits about a sun.
Planets of our solar system known today are:
The length of a cycloid equals diameter of generating circle times 4.
If the two rollers are released simultaneously from A , that on the cycloidal path will reach B first.
Two epicycloids and a hypocycloid, each with five cusps.
A curve of constant breadth must remain in contact with two parallel lines as it is rotated.
Any of these could be used as rollers but only the circle has a constant centre, permitting a hub.
Bottom left : Non-circular rollers can be constructed by assembling vertically opposite pairs of acute angled isosceles triangles.
Above : The introduction of a transition curve requires a lateral shift of the line.
Movement along a curved path is an acceleration.
The length of a transition curve reveals the rate of change of acceleration.
The superellipse is, in effect, a continuous oscillatory transition curve, having four fold symmetry.
The ever changing acceleration charges it with energy; a semblance of life that is discussed in Chapter 14.
The drawing technique of shared radii can be used to construct a variety of curvilinear shapes.
Transition curves were temporarily eliminated from the pure geometric shapes of the twentieth century: in part, as a reaction to Art Nouveau but also as a means of getting a firm grip upon design.
The peg and string method of devising near biomorphic forms has been used by Naum Gabo and Armin Hofmann.
The absence of transition curves is disguised by the pulsation of positive and negative, convex and concave curvature.
The water molecule, H 2 O, has two hydrogen atoms attached to the big oxygen atom at angles that discourage the formation of equilateral triangles.
As a snow crystal grows in free fall, the angular deviation within the molecules sets up stresses and the hexagon will not close completely.
The resultant strain tends towards symmetry as the crystal grows, so that although snow crystals exhibit great variety of detail, little difficulty arises in their recognition.
In this respect they share a property of living organisms.
Two methods for construction of the regular pentagon.
The pentagram:
The maze in Chartres Cathedral (thirteenth century).
The ‘Little world of me’.
Top : On a square grid selected diagonals are switched through 90°.
Bottom left : Diagram of the maze at Hampton Court.
Right : Variation on a maze by Greg Bright.
The projection from a semi-circle is reminiscent of certain forms of seashells.
The moving point
The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ,
Moves on; Nor all your Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a line,
Nor all your tears wash out a Word of it.
from The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam English version by Edward Fitzgerald Note : Omar Khayyam (1050–1132 AD) was a Persian mathematician.
The Theorem of Pappus
It was Pappus, one of the great mathematicians of Alexandria in the fourth century AD, who recognised that space could be filled by a moving point.
A point moving in one dimension produces a straight line.
This line, moving in a dimension at right angles to the first, defines a rectangle.
The rectangle, moving in a dimension at right angles to the previous two, defines a rectangular prism.
This concept can be used when the point moves along curved paths to describe more complex areas and volumes.
It has made possible the massive evolution of mechanics in modern times and has inspired Constructivist art forms that regard space as a continuum.
Open planning and inside=outside sculptural and architectural forms of the Modern Movement are expressions of the moving point ; works which use string, wire, glass, perspex, standard steel sections, footpaths and textures to define movement through space…concepts evolving out of the work of many brave pioneers, such as van de Velde, Mackintosh, Wright, Braque, Picasso, Balla, Klee, Arp, Gabo, Van Doesburg and Mondrian, are all expressions of the moving point.
The Theorem of Pappus is basic, therefore, to all scanning mechanisms; however, recent developments in mathematics, particularly the work of Mandelbrot on Fractals , permit a three dimensional symmetry of movement.
The path is a continuum, of infinite length, defining a finite space.
If A is the centre of a straight line travelling along a curved path, the area traversed can be calculated by multiplying the length of the line by the length of A 's path.
No matter how the path of A wriggles on the plane, this calculation will be applicable provided that:(a) The line is always at right angles to the path.
(b) Deductions are made for areas swept more than once.
The area swept by a curved line is described by the effective length , perpendicular to the path of B .
B is the centre of the effective length, the centroid of the line.
The area swept by the curved line, in the plane, compensates at each end of the quadrilateral so that the area is: length of B 's path times the effective perpendicular length of line.
A line can be programmed to vary in effective length.
These principles can be projected into a third dimension to describe complex volumes; and then into a time dimension, as in the cinema and television.
Lines of infinite length
It is possible for a moving point to describe a path of infinite length that yet encloses a finite area.
A star hexagon can be produced by superimposing two equilateral triangles in opposition.
The perimeter of this figure is 4:3 longer than the original triangle.
The perimeter can be increased further by superimposing equilateral triangles on the prongs of the star.
The process can be repeated indefinitely.
At each stage the perimeter lengthens by 4:3.
White and Brownian Motion
This method of lengthening a perimeter indefinitely can be applied to any polygon or shape and can be extended to the complete occupation of an area or volume.
The study of such curves, originating perhaps in the Ancient Greek spiral, can be traced in modern times from the work of Giuseppe Peano in 1890 and Helge von Koch in 1904 to Mandelbrot's book,Fractals: Form, Chance and Dimension (1977).
This concept of a line of infinite length has a remarkable property in that its detail is unaffected by a change of scale.
A magnification or a diminution reveals the same pattern.
Mandelbrot compares it with the phenomenon of scaling noises .
Normally when a tape of a sound is played faster or slower, its pitch and character are changed.
But scaling noise behaves quite differently.
If the sound is played at a different speed, only adjustment of the volume control is necessary to make it sound as it did before.
White motion gives the simplest form of scaling noise.
It is a completely random distribution, within limits, about a mean which sounds and looks like the snow-like flurries on television screens when there is no input.
White melodies can be produced by using random spinners that are weighted about a datum to produce a sequence of notes.
A simple spinner using a pentatonic scale might be subdivided into five symmetrically weighted sectors.
Each note could then be generated by random use of the spinner.
Brownian motion is a form of scaling motion characteristic of the random movements of particles and molecules suspended in a liquid.
Each molecule moves, step by step, along a random path through the liquid.
But although each step is random, the path has sequence and location; yet it does not have a datum.
A spinner for the production of Brownian noise would require simple numerical instructions such as: -2, -1, 0, +1, +2.
Use of these instructions on a spinner to produce a random walk on the notes of a piano must end, after perhaps much meandering, by wandering off the keyboard.
The location of a point
The following experiments cannot be entirely satisfactory on the page of a book for they are influenced by other illustrations, the rectilinearity of the page, the test and the general environment.
However, using graphics as a research medium, suppose that a dot is dimensionless and floating in a void.
Can it be lost?
No; for it belongs anywhere and nowhere.
It can have location, and thus suffer loss of location, only by relationship with another event.
At minimal level, this would be a second dot.
Of course, the second dot could be me , permitting a dialogue between subject and object .
This experience can happen when at sea.
In a vast ocean, empty of all else but one's own boat and a tiny speck on the horizon, attention is drawn to the other boat.
Vision moves to and fro between the vessels, setting up a visual and, if one has been long at sea, an emotional tension between them.
Science finds that a surface tension on the water can draw the boats together, like toy boats in a bathtub.
But also there is a magnetism, a gravitational force or curvature of space, call it what they will, an attraction between them.
If we attempt the role of bystander, then two dots are observed in reciprocal tension.
The force between them has some correspondence with Newton's finding that the gravitational force is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them .
Perception of the two dots swings along the easiest path.
The vision can wander about the void but one part of a void is like another and there can be no consciousness of movement until two locations have been defined, either by two dots or by the displacement of one dot, which requires memory of its path.
The dots mark the extremities of countless possible paths which, if they were recorded, would become lines.
The distance between two points
In normal circumstances, certainly on this printed page, the shortest unhindered distance between two points is a straight line.
Drawing such a line, between the dots but not touching them, provides a path to guide the eye and ease its journey.
The stress between the dots is increased or charged , and becomes a useful method of bringing attention to a pair .
When the straight line touches and incorporates the dots, the force field is discharged .
The eyes can travel freely along the series of dots comprising the line.
All are equal; but as in Newton's universe, the terminal dots have emphasis…they have neighbours on one side only.
This too is a useful design tool: a dazzling, disquieting pair, or duality , can be resolved by discharging them into a line.
If their terminal positions still retain too much emphasis, then the line can be continued beyond them.
Paul Klee found that if any path other than a straight line is offered between two nodes, the stress can be increased.
Derivatives of this concept have become a major symbol in modern art.
They can be seen very clearly in the work of Juan Miró.
An embracing two dimensional path connecting powerfully juxtaposed terminals is a means of securing space.
It is an emphatic enclosure : the more so because it permits movement, through its mouth, between outside and inside.
Countless examples can be studied in living creatures, seaboard harbours, great castles and manor houses, pots, bottles, soccer goalposts and pinball machines.
It is a favourite military tactic…the pincer movement!
In a suitably designed circuit the terminals will have a forcefield between them, similar to the potential difference on the plates of an electrical  condensor .
Any dissimilarity between the dots suggests weighting and they will cease to be dimensionless.
However small they may be, the introduction of a hierarchy makes them again more important than the interval between them.
A study of three dots
Study of three dots, charged, discharged and variously weighted reveals that:(1) Symmetry, as presented in a void by the equilateral trio, is static.
(2) Conversely, asymmetry suggests movement and the movement is towards the greater concentration of energy .
Note : Asymmetry is not necessarily chaos or limbo.
The word is used to define an order or programme that is not constructed symmetrically.
(3) Asymmetry suggests hierarchy.
When a trio of dots are in GP by both size and interval, the group is most stable when the largest is on the shortest arms and the smallest is on the longer arms.
The forcefield is maximised and the dots appear to behave like a solar system, orbiting about their common centre of gravity.
The circumscribing circle
It is possible to construct a circumscribing circle through any three points.
The centre of the circle is stabilised when it is occupied by a fourth dot.
We respond to the sense of completeness given by four points that lie on a circle.
The cyclic quadrilateral so formed has an important property; its opposite angles add to 180°.
This is linked with another property of the circle: the angle subtended by a chord at any point on the circumference, within the same segment, is a constant.
The corners of any regular polygon rest on the circumference of a circumscribing circle.
The angle subtended at the centre of the circle by any one side of a regular polygon will equal 360 °/; n ;, where n = number of sides.
The differential weighting of n events displaces their common centre of gravity.
The configuration can appear stable, however, when perceived as taking place on the circumference of a circle and viewed in perspective.
This requires recognition of a third dimension, depth, in which the nearest events are also the largest.
The spiral
The alternative distribution programme on a plane, the spiral, requires a minimum of five events for its spiral form to become evident.
Three examples are:(1) AP by distance from centre and preceding dot (2) GP by distance from centre and preceding dot (3) AP by distance from centre, at fixed angular intervals.
An arrangement of more than four similar events into a circular orbit emphasises the centre, which may be occupied or not.
Consequently, when interest is to be directed upon the series of events, a spiral is needed.
Experiments with seven and more dots remind us, almost uncannily, of the growth and decline of living creatures.
The two spirals illustrated have vitality as extrovert and introvert gestures.
The spiral and its three dimensional expression, the helix, have a handedness that is intrinsic.
A clockwise spiral remains clockwise whatever its orientation in the plane.
To change from clockwise to anticlockwise it must go through a third dimension to become a mirror image .
Similarly, no matter how it is turned about, a right handed helix remains a right handed helix.
To change to a left handed helix it must pass through a fourth dimension.
This too could be a mirror image.
The two dimensional spiral and the three dimensional helix are asymmetric .
Right and left
Helices are common in the plant world: in stalks, stems, and tendrils, and in the arrangement of leaves around a stalk.
A majority of climbing plants coil right handedly, in the direction of a woodscrew as it is driven into the timber.
There are, however, thousands of varieties that coil the opposite way.
A species usually has its own handedness that never varies.
Honeysuckle, for example, always twines into a left handed helix.
A very few species have both right and left handed varieties.
For helices to entwine together they must be of the same handedness, like the strands of a rope.
Helices of opposing hands cannot embrace.
The molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid, DNA, that provides the programme for living creatures, is formed by a pair of right handed helices in parallel.
Science is still puzzling on the handedness of all sub-units of protein and nucleic acid in earthborn living cells.
It is a mathematical possibility that our mirror images exist on another planet.
Perhaps, in the primordial soup, left and right handedness were in free competition until some small chance advantage became overwhelming through the evolutionary progress.
But it is more likely that a physical restraint influenced the swirling liquids — just as bad weather cyclones and hurricanes are anticlockwise in the northern hemisphere and clockwise south of the equator of spinning planet Earth.
Neither does science know why a majority of humans prefer using their right hands to their left hands.
But perhaps more important, why a minority of persons are left handed.
Certainly left handed people are ill-served in western society.
They become so accustomed to handling scissors, screwdrivers, drawing boards, drills and similar mechanisms in what is, for them, the more difficult posture, that they do not demand proper service from manufacturers.
I write on paper turned clockwise through 70°, with an understanding born of experience.
Clockwise
The Earth's land masses are largely in the northern hemisphere.
Consequently the most influential civilizations originated north of the equator and share a common view of movements in the heavens.
The Sun, the Moon, the planets and stars seem to move clockwise across the northern sky.
Pictorially this visual time sequence can be used to suggest morning, high noon, afternoon and evening.
The clockwise journey can suggest the rotation of the seasons and the rise and fall of life's cycles.
All motion is relative.
One object moves relative to another.
The railway train effect gives a good example of visual counterpoint, when two trains are halted on opposing lines in a station.
As one train starts to move, a passenger gazing through his carriage window, observes movement but is unsure whether it is his own train that is moving or the train on the opposite line.
To form a judgement he seeks further information.
Is his carriage vibrating?
Is the platform moving with respect to himself?
This means that to all change there must be counterchange.
If something is getting bigger then its measure is getting smaller.
As an object approaches and enlarges, the surrounding background recedes…so it is with the intellect, the emotions, loves and hates.
To the northerner, the apparently clockwise movement of the Sun and the stars results from an anticlockwise rotation of the earth.
To a southerner, in Australia for example, the movements are reversed.
Mathematicians have chosen the anticlockwise rotation of a vector to be positive.
The events that it scans during its journey are conceived as the experiences of a positive vector.
It is moving against the sun.
Challenging the elements
To undertake a positive journey, challenging the elements, a vector must be thrustingly determined, with high motivational energy.
In all northern cultures, oriental and occidental, an anticlockwise rotation is aggressive as mankind, with courage and fortitude, contends with the problems of survival.
For example, the challenging, rampaging storms of Turner's seascapes are, like most romantic paintings, energetically anticlockwise.
A good theatrical director knows that aggression comes from the right wing of a stage.
When filming a combat he pans round two adversaries so that, as each in turn assumes the aggressive role, he is observed moving in from the right.
Attack from the left is retaliatory.
In battle scenes the villainous attackers move in from the right and the valiant defenders, usually the good guys obstinately rejecting defeat, are on the left.
In another mood, secure and easy movement, optimistic and pleasantly anticipatory, goes with the sun and the moon; westwards…the migratory direction of the human race in modern times.
At the end of the film, the successful hero moves left to right out of the frame, to follow the setting sun.
Experiments with a mirror confirm that the meaning of many famous paintings can be inverted or negated by reversing the picture.
The demeanour of a virgin can be converted into that of a coquette.
And so it can be for a building or a workbench.
There is a right and there is a left way in which to rob a bank.
The handedness of a sequence of activities affects their human significance, materially, emotionally and intellectually.
Movement in depth
Movement in depth has emotional effects, probably inherited from primordial survival patterns.
An object advancing directly towards its target, unflinching and undeviating, is threatening unless the approach is relieved by a smile or some gesture that establishes friendly intent.
To suggest a casual relationship, the approach needs to deviate, hesitate and show a certain sensitivity by inflection to minor incidents along the way and a disinterest in the awaiting subject.
Its behaviour thus offers the subject ample opportunity to assess and accept the amiability of the approach.
Of course, the subject could be deceived and get a nasty shock.
But that is in the nature of art and artfulness: the establishment of laws so that we can break them.
The emotional overtones of movement away from the subject are entirely dependent upon the manner of the retreat.
The artistic variations are inexhaustible but can be summarised under three headings:(1) The retreat backwards: the object has his attention and face directed towards the subject…in love or fear…as he moves pace by backward pace into the middle distance; then turns and hastens away.
(2) Withdrawal at a gentle gait, slowly accelerating, with frequent turning salutes to the subject…epicycles?(3) The determined stride into the distance without a backwards glance.
These descriptions are theatrical but are applicable in many contexts.
They can describe a street, a landscape, a hotel or a prison corridor, an industrial complex, a workbench, a symphony or a painting.
Movement in depth cannot by rhythmic unless it reveals at least three stages: foreground, middleground and background.
Motions occurring in one ground may acquire differing emotional and physical attributed in another ground.
A man brandishing a sword 100 feet away, preferably on the far side of a river, is a very different experience to the same man brandishing the same sword just 10 feet away.
Similar principles apply to the gestures of friendship and sexuality!
Reciprocal motion
Reciprocal motion, positive and negative at constant mean velocity, is unnerving, mechanistic and inhuman.
It can be an hypnotic.
Certain frequencies, such as seven cycles per second, are of ill-repute.
When aimed directly towards the subject, reciprocal motion is fearsome.
Children are taught, for sound historical reasons, that to point is rude.
In the past, and even today with gun in hand, it is threatening.
Without the gun but armed with suitable words, symbols or grimaces, a pointing gesture can be intimidating to the recipient.
The reciprocal motion of pointing is asymmetric.
The thrust forward has more concentrated power than the withdrawal.
It can be compared with a civil engineer's piling hammer, when the great weight is hauled to the design height and released by a slip catch.
At the moment of impact the kinetic energy possessed by the hammer is proportional to its mass times the square of its velocity.
Asymmetric reciprocal motion is common n electronics: rapid charge and slow discharge of a  condensor is fundamental to oscillatory circuits.
In another context it becomes syncopation and swing .
Electromotion
Confirmation of the three dimensionality of localised space can be found in electromotion.
When a length of wire is suspended in a magnetic field, the wire will move at right angles to the magnetic flux whenever an electric current is passed along it.
A mnemonic for this phenomenon is to set the first and second fingers and thumb of the left hand at right angles to one another.
If the first finger points from magnetic north to south and the second finger points in the direction of the electron flow, from negative to positive, then the thumb is the direction of the electromotive force.
It is this force that translates electricity into rotation in an electric motor.
It is also this force that converts the motion of a turbine into the electrical output of a generator.
The left hand can also be used to demonstrate the magnetic flux surrounding a wire carrying a current.
When the fingers are curled round the wire and the thumb points in the direction of the electron flow, the fingers will point in the direction of the current's magnetic field.
The flow of a magnetic field is taken from magnetic north pole to magnetic south pole.
This means that the giant magnet that serves our earthly navigation has its south pole in the northern hemisphere and its north pole in the southern hemisphere.
The Earth's magnetic flux is, therefore, from  Antartica to the Arctic and a compass needle aligns itself with this.
The triad of electromotive power is therefore asymmetric.
It will be interesting to study experiments in graphic and theatrical design that attempt to explore this relationship.
For example, an energy flow from left to right through a flow from foreground to background should produce an upwards driving force that becomes diagonally anticlockwise.
Emotional spirals
The emotional content of a spiral is expressed through a combination of at least two properties: is it opening or closing, slowly or rapidly?
A spiral opening clockwise is happy and optimistic.
A spiral opening anticlockwise is aggressive.
A spiral closing clockwise is going to sleep.
A spiral closing anticlockwise is in pain.
Similar principles apply to helices:
A right handed helix, moving forward, is anticlockwise and aggressive.
A right handed helix, moving away, is the departure of a friend.
A left handed helix, moving forward, can be a jolly challenge to a dance.
A left handed helix, moving away, is a vanquished enemy.
In all cases the movements are assumed to be continuous.
The introduction of epicyclic forms can augment or suppress the emotive content.
A useful mnemonic reminds us that movement with the heavens is passive; movement against the sun and moon and the stars is aggressive and/or courageous!
A Greek spiral was a means of using a line to describe an area.
In the year 1912 the Polish mathematician, W. Sierpinski, constructed a limiting curve that can completely fill a square.
The principle can be extended to fill both space and time.
The initial generations of a line of infinite length as discussed in Fractals, Form and Chance by B. B. Mandelbrot.
Variations upon the embrace — welcome!
A few of the symbols of Juan Miró.
To find the circumscribing circle, the bisectors of the chords meet at the centre,O .
left hand right hand Only helices of the same hand entwine together.
In the rectangular canvas, the four suns are located by an equilateral triangle.
To find the time of day, use a slip of white paper to blank out three of the discs.
It's a long way to Tipperary, Mandalay and Bedford Square.
What is the time of day?
The embrace can be used as an architectural welcome.
A long repetitive corridor or tunnel produces an Alcatraz syndrome.
Top right : Two very different paths.
We enjoy winding paths packed with friendly variety and affording appetising glimpses of future delights with their assurance of survival into the middle and far distance.
In horse opera , the aggressor in the black hat moves in from the right…
The valves of a reciprocating pump are designed to enable one side of the moving piston to suck fluid whilst the other expels fluid.
In electronics, an oscillatory circuit is based on the reciprocal charging and discharging of a  condensor through an inductance.
It can be argued that Monsieur Guillotin was the true founder of democracy by eliminating class distinction in public executions.
Coiling the wire into a loop permits directional flow of the magnetic flux through the loop.
When the suitably insulated conductor is wound round a rod of soft iron it forms a bar magnet.
On Earth, the westerly winds that blow against the sun are aggressive, whilst the easterly trade winds are warmer and kinder.
In the northern hemisphere, a bad weather cyclone has a centre of low pressure that sucks air at ground level in an anticlockwise spiral, to form its eye into a right handed helix.
These patterns are associated with the Coriolis force that expresses the Earth's rotation.
A maximum velocity at the equator reduces to a theoretical nil at the poles.
An average hurricane disperses the energy equivalent of about 10 000 atom bombs.
The aggressive anticlockwise spiral is a common phenomenon in the northern hemisphere.
It can be used to encourage competition on a racecourse and, by inversion, to reduce aggression in public places.
The ends of a helix can be joined to form a continuous ring or torus.
If each revolution of the helix slips inside its neighbour a beautiful form emerges, common in nature, with a section approximating to the above drawing.
Mechanically, it has great flexibility, malleability and elasticity.
Bottom left : The continuous linking of parallels can be used to suggest a third dimension.
On lines and edges
Hamlet : Do you see nothing there?
Queen : Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
from Hamlet, Prince of Denmark , William Shakespeare
A line is a line in many ways.
It can be the mind's abstraction for an edge, a crack, a fissure or a chain of dimensionless points, linking their extremities.
How long is a piece of string?
As long as it takes to get from one end to the other!
A line can be the contour, the silhouette, of a series of magnitudes such that the mind may run over them, as Descartes required, until they are entirely memorable.
The line then becomes the envelope of a series of events.
It is the trace of a moving point; a record of its passing, to guide and ease subsequent trips and become firmly established with use.
But, although in its twisting and turning a line may circumscribe an area and even a volume, it is not a description or an experience of them.
It can define only the quantity and quality of its journey.
A means of describing area and volume by line was mentioned in Chapter 9.
The struggle to explore the inner space of their materials has driven sculptors to dig deep.
The ageing Rodin hacked with a scalpel at the sensitive, sinewy perfection of his clay figures.
Gabo, Moore and Hepworth took sections and punched holes to get at the space within.
Architects have reduced their buildings to class clad skeletons in search for space…but the creative challenge is far from resolved.
A line is a path that can offer an interesting and varied journey; rhythmic and with occasional, pleasurable surprises.
Thus is one tempted to take the journey again.
This is as true for a line of music by Mozart or Gershwin as for the skyline of Salisbury Cathedral of the Taj Mahal.
It is absolutely vital to the sales of a popular car, a hi-fi radio, a camera or an evening dress.
From the hand of a Toulouse-Lautrec, a Michelangelo or a Picasso, a line becomes a poem of infinite sensitivity with a bitter-sweet irony inflected by compassion and love.
The human eye, which is but an extension of the fingertips, enjoys travelling not only along a line but also between two that provide an open roadway.
In its journeying the eye needs guidance and will reject ambiguity as a form of dazzle.
Therefore, the line seeks direction and magnitude at each brief episode of the journey.
If it is to take the eye with it, the line becomes a series of vectors.
They can vary in length, weight and continuity, but their direction should never be in doubt, if they are to maintain a co-ordinated space and time.
The charging of lines
A uniform straight line is ambiguous.
The eye can move in either direction and seeks a greater concentration of energy at one end of the line.
The eye moves towards the thicker, heavier end of a graduated line.
If the line wriggles or curves then the movement is towards the tighter curves.
The line can be charged by setting one form of energy against another: one end against the other, one length against another.
Stress in the centre of a line fixes the eye and is an irritant.
This can be countered by applying energy nodes to the ends of the line, forming a triad that will then require a hierarchy.
A discontinuity in the line, involving a jump, attracts the eye and has energy.
This can be used as a full stop …charging both the line and the dot.
Harmonic lines
Simple harmony occurs when an event is supported, strengthened or echoed by others.
Harmonic lines are most commonly in two forms:(1)Parallels that may be straight, or curves of similar radius, concentric curves or mixtures of these.
(2) Straight or curved lines that radiate from a common centre, but do not necessarily pass through it.
And combinations of these.
Linear discord
Maximum linear discord is achieved when lines cross at right angles.
The eye is held and the point is static.
The resulting cross is an hypnotic.
In its upright form it represents the vertical thrust of life across sedimentary layers of earthly matter.
Mondrian and his colleagues in de Stijl considered this discord to be the ultimate concord and  spacial equilibrium.
Opposing lines — the cross
A vertical line is highly energetic in its defiance of gravity.
Its physical attributes are shared visually.
More energy is needed to move the eye vertically than horizontally.
It is more difficult for man to look up than to look down.
He respects,looks up to , objects placed on a pedestal…but only within limits!
A line stretching beyond the range of his vision, above or below him, becomes a fearsome thing — at its worst when curving over and behind him.
A horizontal line is calm and secure.
We are accustomed to the infinite length of the horizon all about us.
Even when it is hidden from view, we know it is there, securing the plane on which we act our lives.
It is the withdrawal of this assurance that contributes to the widespread dissatisfaction with home life in a tower block.
If the blocks were truly large, as Corb originally envisaged them, then they could become honeycombed hills.
Their vast horizontal planes of activity could then provide a substitute horizon.
When the right angular cross is in the diagonal position, with two lines in conflicting 45° slopes, it becomes the most combative linear symbol available to us…like crossed bayonets.
It is the grid for a scene of battle, whether it be the Rout of San Romano by Uccello or Guernica by Picasso.
Whereas both vertical and horizontal lines have stability, sloping lines are in a state of change from one condition to the other.
They are dynamic and stressful, needing props or ties to gain a semblance of equilibrium.
Lines can thus represent the cycle of growth, fulfilment, decay, death, rebirth…
In summary: horizontal lines represent repose, calm eternity, security, the material of earth.
Vertical lines represent presence, life, man, God, potential and (sometimes) kinetic energy, dreams and aspirations.
Sloping lines suggest movement, change, kinetic energy.
When two lines cross, the degree of discord varies with the included angle.
The clash is absolute and stable when they cross at 90°.
As the angle reduces, so does the discord.
As lines approach one another their form is inflected.
All sensory forms are affected by proximity and this is particularly noticeable amidst networks of lines.
Grids
When formed into a grid, two sets of parallel lines create a series of similar crosses.
Each one is a potential hypnotic and competes for the attention.
If they have similar voices the effect can be dazzling unless:(a) The number of lines is restricted to about seven in each direction.
This provides 36 squares, and even at this low number, a potential for dazzle emerges.
The 16 central squares compete for attention and would be happier if reduced to nine by the elimination of one line in each direction.
This tends to confirm the findings of psychologists who report an optimum memory faculty for five items in any one dimension.
Painters have been consistent throughout the ages by dividing their canvases into nine areas.
Three by three is the minimum rhythmic subdivision of an area.
It is also the most versatile structure on which to build complex graphic detailing.
(b) If the number of lines per set becomes plenty , dazzle will certainly arise unless a method of grouping or pattern is introduced into the grid.
This requires the introduction of patterning into the grid (see Chapter 2).
(c) If the grid is taken just beyond plenty into multitude a network establishes a positive, negotiable space .
It becomes a special measure.
Therein lies the popularity of tiled and wood block floors, the patterns of architectural fabrics and fenestrations. (d) Deeper into multitude the grid becomes texture .
But textures vary in quality, from deeply to finely etched, rounded to jagged, course to smooth, and seek to be brought into rhythmic, scalar relationship with larger, sculptural elements.
The concrete finishes of buildings, for example exposed aggregates of fluting, can affect the apparent scale at short distances, beyond which the texture is lost into the surface colour .
These distances vary with lighting and climate, the character (sharp or smooth edges) of the aggregate, its colour and the degree of weathering.
The dazzle effect of grids can be subdued by establishing a hierarchy of one set of parallels over another.
This can be achieved in many ways:(1) by differing frequencies and wavelengths in the two sets (2) by differing rhythmic groupings so that one set of parallels is more energetic than the other (3) by flexing one set of parallels more than the other.
Architecturally this can be achieved by chamfering, softening or rounding one set of edges.
Graduated chamfers can convert a set of lines into vectors.
Hierarchy in a grid is most readily achieved by superimposing one set of parallels over the other.
This suggests the third dimension, depth.
The lines now represent the leading edges of receding planes that can cast shadows.
Normally the leading set will be in harder focus than the rear set.
A reversal of focus can be exciting.
The leading set can be rounded into a near cylindrical section while the rear set retains hard edges.
When used as a counterchange this is the columnated classical tradition.
Recently, photographers have discovered, via the zoom lens, the aesthetic possibilities of putting a distant object into hard focus while the foreground is fuzzy.
Memorable examples can be found in films such as Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and Lawrence of Arabia .
The latter film also exploited the effects of atmosphere on visual distance.
The dazzle of a grid can be alleviated by weaving, permitting parallels to alternate in domination.
Tartan patterns and plaids are applications of this theme.
When lines cross, focus upon the near line throws the far line out of focus in the immediate vicinity of the cross.
This has led to the legitimate graphic device of breaking the further line as it passes behind the near line.
A simple proof is to cross the first fingers of your two hands, one at 30 inch range, the other at 15 inches.
It is not possible to focus upon both simultaneously.
This observation leads to a common visual problem arising in painting when a line in the background is brought hard up to the edge of a foreground object.
The works of the masters have usually lost background lines, most times by diffusion, as they pass behind foreground incidents.
A crossing of curved lines softens the hypnotic.
The four quadrants are no longer symmetrical.
Eliminating one limb of a cross, the remaining effect is of one line butting against another.
If the junction is right angular, movement is arrested; the point is static unless other stresses are introduced.
The need for a hierarchy is essential, particularly if such junctions occur near the edge of a design.
In a good painting, an horizon line butting the vertical edges of a canvas would be lost into the atmosphere and probably turned slightly downwards at the ends.
Apart form losing the hypnotics, the end curvature (what a transport engineer might call a filter road ) can suggest the positive robustness of the earth swelling beyond the frame.
Upwards curvature at the ends is reminiscent of a liquid in a glass.
Arrows
Half of a right angular cross is a corner, an arrow.
Attention is drawn along both lines to the point of juncture with sufficient energy for the eye to jump an interval to a target.
The optimum distance of the target depends upon the energy of the arrow.
The velocity induced by arrows is dependent mainly on the angle of juncture; there are fast arrows and slow arrows.
Arrows have a sensory effect only when a target is offered.
The conventional arrow symbol signifies the existence of a target.
It is disappointing, therefore, to experience an arrow that points at nothing and nowhere.
A series of arrows becoming progressively tighter increases the velocity.
A series that becomes looser slows the movement.
Arrows provide a second linear means of expressing movement, and therefore the passage of time upon a canvas.
The properties of an arrow can be enhanced or reduced by  ancilliary lines or dots.
Arrows occur at the corners of polygons and tend to make the sides seem concave.
It is a problem that applies through  viseo -tactile design and is discussed in Chapter 14.
The arrow and its target should differ, with a clearly established hierarchy of sensory weight.
Graduated lines can strengthen or weaken an arrow.
Closure of the arrow to form a triangle transforms it into a symbol.
A symbolic arrow can function only if it has a target, explicit or implicit.
At what stage does a graduated line become an elongated triangle?
When the overall dimensions have a ratio exceeding 7:1.
The critical ratio varies with local conditions.
The arrow, expressed as a wedge form, can minimise turbulence and drag in supersonic flight and in automobiles travelling beyond about 75 mph (120 km per hour).
The wedge also happens to be erotically fashionable at this time.
Emotive curves.
A straight line can be defined as a curve of infinite or very large radius.
Mathematicians find it useful to assume that a tiny part of the circumference of a large circle can be regarded as straight.
Perhaps this is why straight lines do not suggest movement along their length as effectively as slightly curved ones.
When the complete line has only one curve in it, it is a simply curved line.
If it curves in positive and negative directions it is a compound curve .
Fast compound curves are most effective when hierarchic and interweaving, apparently at random but with avoidance of competing energy centres.
In other words, careful grouping procedures must be applied to the number of lines and to the curves.
Whereas fast compound curves suggest smoke, silks and delicate, tenuous traceries drawn by a breeze, slow compound curves are like the muscles of a weight lifter — powerful, even ponderous and writhing when taken to extremes.
In nature, the packing, the pushing and the pulling rarely permits curves of constant radius.
Most of nature's curves are bent , like bending a length of brass rod for use as a ruler.
The curves approximate to hyperbolae and incorporate the principles of transition curves discussed in Chapter 8.
A group of too many curved lines, without the structural rigidity of straights, tends to become sweet and sentimental.
Many aesthetes have insisted that the essence of drawing lies in the relationship between compound curves and straights.
It was an awareness of this contrast that led to the Cubists' interest in the violin and the guitar as plastic forms around 1910.
Hogarth devised a line of beauty that has an uncanny similarity to a woman's back!
Delacroix based his combative, romantic works on the compound curve.
He recognised the vigour that these imparted to the works of Rubens and Veronese.
John Ruskin, writer and critic, champion of Turner and the Pre-Raphaelites, also favoured the reverse curve.
Art Nouveau Such flourishes evolved into Art Nouveau in the 1890s, which, in the search for new sensory experience, contributed to the emergence of the art forms of the twentieth century.
In Art Nouveau the movement, the flow, the rhythm of a design became pre-eminent.
The sinuous yet elegant complex curve was decorative yet was charged with tension and emotion: to such extent that at its best Art Nouveau assumed an organic quality.
Henri van de Velde, the movement's leading theorist, believed that ornamentation and functional forms should appear so intimate that the ornament seems to have determined the form .
A prime mover of Art Nouveau was A. H. Mackmurdo, but so were many famous artists — from Aubrey Beardsley, book illustrator, to Henri Guimard, designer of Paris Métro stations; from the glassware of Louis Conford Tiffany to the architecture of Antoni Gaudi and early Frank Lloyd Wright — that any list of them is likely to be incomplete.
Du Cubisme
Du Cubisme , by Gleizes and Metzinger, was published in 1912.
This manifesto proclaimed:
What the straight line is to the curve the warm tone is to the cold in the domain of colour.
It was with such proclamations that the Cubists confirmed our lurch into the twentieth century and confronted us with the sometimes harsh realities that are alternative to the Renaissance view of mankind and certainly far removed from the elegances of Art Nouveau, Tiffany's, the Moulin Rouge and the Paris Métro.
Even so, they are not unrelated…
The first phase of Cubism, about 1906, had rejected the traditional single point view of objects in order to explore their structure, both internal and external.
Influenced by Cézanne, early Cubists such as Picasso and Braque recognised a continuity of space and found that initially this required a rejection of the continuity of line associated with Art Nouveau.
The penetration of total space required fragmentation of the object and its environment and the adoption of superimposed multiviews, translucency and transparency.
High or analytical Cubism , the second stage, lasted from 1909 to 1912.
To permit absolute fidelity to the fragmentisation process, texture and surface colour were largely excluded from the paintings.
Late or synthetic Cubism (1912–1914) continues with variations today.
Tactile qualities, colour and personal handling were reintroduced, incorporating collage and the bringing together of disparate materials for emotionally provocative purposes, and encouraging the innovation of individual forms of symbolism.
Orphic Cubism originated in 1912 to exploit the emotional, musical qualities of colour.
Cubism was used as a vehicle for the laws of simultaneous contrast of colour, derived from Chevreul via Gauguin, Van Gogh, the Symbolists and the Fauves , by Robert and Sonia Delaunay.
At an early stage the Delaunays recognised the importance of juxtaposing curved and straight lines of colour, a quality taken to maturity by Matisse.
Purism
Après le Cubisme , published by Le Corbusier and Ozenfant in 1918, accused the Cubists of turning to mere decoration.
Purism was to be unsullied by ornament, fantasy or individuality and was to be inspired by the machine.
Its severity was echoed by parallel opinion in the Netherlands (de Stijl) and Germany (the Bauhaus) and its most famous painter in France was Fernand Léger.
Its widespread influence in architecture has linked it with a joyless form of economic and technological functionalism that was not the intent of the originators.
The works of Léger and Corb have, on occasion, a great deal of fun in them.
At their most severe, Purism and its allies virtually eliminated modulation and transition curves from their works.
Linear elements were largely restricted to the straight edges and radius curves that symbolised machines.
The quality of a line
An important property of line is its texture and resolution.
It can be consistently hard like the cutting edge of hardened steel, or it can offer the iridescence of tulle draped into a soft light.
Firm and decisive edges belong to rocks, crystals and the mechanisms of man.
Intermittent, soft, broken, variable and dotted lines suggest the cylindrical, conical and ellipsoidal forms of living organisms.
If a cube is sidelit and viewed against a neutral background, its vertical edges can be seen in sharp relief.
A cylinder viewed under similar circumstances will reveal edges that are soft as they turn away from the observer.
The quality of edges, and therefore the lines that express them, is conditioned by the manner in which a surface retreats from the observer.
An edge expresses a change of  spacial quality from one density to another.
The change need not be abrupt.
In fact, most living creatures prefer a transition zone of bark, moss, hair, fur or clothes.
Many examples of ornamentation in the arts are functional in this way.
The elaborate carving and tiling that clothes most traditional architectural forms; the row of badges and lamps that decorate the grille of an enthusiast's motorcar, the roses and shrubs in front of a suburban house; all act as buffer zones between differing activity spaces.
Parallax
Our attitude towards edges is affected by our binary form.
We have two hands, two ears, two eyes, two nostrils.
To fully comprehend space we need stereoscopic touch, hearing and vision.
Nowadays we are all conversant with the effect of multispeaker audio transmissions.
The principles of parallax apply in all senses.
When examining a sculptural form, a symmetrical examination of opposite sides by left and right hands simultaneously is more informative than a single handed action.
The embracing stereoscopic action gives a truer measure of volume, mass and space.
The translation of bifocal vision to design upon a canvas was a major concern of Cézanne.
He realised that we can see more than half way round a small cylinder and that three views are available: that of the right eye, that of the left eye, and the total sensation, giving three outlines.
If a line, perhaps the far edge of the table, passes behind a beaker, then it will be only semi-evident in the proximity of the beaker.
Since most people have their eyes set side by side, only vertical edges are normally affected by parallax.
Parallax, both visual and tactile, reinforces the feeling that verticality is more vibrant, more assertive, more claspable than horizontality.
This probably explains why little children favour tall animals, that they have never seen in reality, to animals that slither and scuffle across the ground.
Giraffes and upstanding bears are more popular than snakes, rats and spiders.
The location of the perimeter of a square can be described by continuous lines.
The artist goes first.
Before him lies a dark, trackless, formless, chaotic field, which he probes with the antennae of his techniques and ideas, seeking by his action to transform it into pure presence.
Designs based upon interpenetration studies by Paul Klee.
Lines can acquire emotional attitudes such as elegance, determination, anger, fatigue, tension, kindness.
One opposing or discordant curve in a set can deter rotation and suggest a clasping, a containment of area that contradicts the radiation.
To be harmonic, simple radiating curves should be of the same hand.
Complex curves need to share parallelism or radiation through part of their length.
Some traditional theses require that they may be tangential (in fact or promise).
A transition in hierarchy of opposing vertical and horizontal lines developed by Mondrian, in about 1915 (detail of major composition).
Rectangles whirling on a master diagonal.
A vigour of random needles.
The essential character of a grid is retained to fine focal limits.
A graduated chamfer can convert a linear element into a vector, having magnitude and direction.
The triangle, rectangle and hexagon form the only regular tessellations suitable for development into space grids of uniform thickness, as discussed in Chapter 13.
Of these, the planar hexagonal grid cannot fold.
Many semi-regular grids have been discovered, a few of which are shown.
Areas of shapes, based on unit side length are: Square: 1.00000 triangle: 0.43301 hexagon: 2.59808 octagon: 4.8284 duodecagon: 11.19615 The square based grid at bottom left uses pentominoes: simply connected sets of five squares.
The pentagonal grid, bottom right, is attributed to Dürer.
Arrows can point up to heaven or down into hell.
The romantic ‘line of beauty’ has been associated with curvature of a woman's back and is an asymmetric reverse curve.
The guitar outline evolved into the classic profile of Picasso's middle and late periods.
Art Nouveau offered an ambiguous space invaded by interactive, complex, flame-like curves.
Above left : Curvilinear structure of Zombor (1949–53) by Victor Vasareley.
Note the meticulous asymmetry of bent curves.
Top : A linear analysis of Still life (1920) by Juan Gris.
Above : Expanding perspective in a Mogul picture c 1585 (after Thouless).
Schemata of Violin and Pitcher (1910) by Georges Braque.
When parallel lines are closely hatched the eye prefers to assume that light flows along them.
Therefore a form is softened by hatching, fluting or texture that wraps round it and is hardened by lines that run lengthwise.
The interrelationship of planes is affected by the direction of the hatching.
The eye can read the lower cylinder as standing in a pool of water!
Use of parallax in synchronised photographs and radar to reveal the height of objects on the ground was developed during World War II.
The principle is currently used by one camera taking timed exposures from an orbiting space satellite.
The view of a matchbox held close to the viewer's nose gave a clue to the multiple vision of Cubism and Futurism.
Allowing for parallax, the weaving pattern above needs wider gaps either side of the verticals.
A geometry of curves
Past, considered as receding back
established in the view point present
from mutually conceptual planes projects
an undreamed future that awaits ahead.
As pale projections on retinal film
spring new found reason from forgotten form
so seen are things beyond us to construe
the very fabric of a higher skill
perceiving through reflecting all as will.
from ‘Kaleidoscope’, Christopher Ryan
A geometry of curves has evolved from attempts to solve the  spacial problems of engineers, architects and astronomers in terms of the physical, sensory and emotional properties of lines.
Historically it has been convenient to explore them as an evolution from the works of Euclid.
In Chapter 5 the equation for a straight line was given as:y = mx + c where m is the slope and c is the point where the line cuts the y axis.
The parabola
The Cartesian equation for a horizontal parabola is usually given as y ² = 4 ax , where the vertex of the parabola passes through the origin and the curve has one-fold symmetry about the positive x axis.
Distance a locates the focus of the parabola on the x axis.
The parabola has the important property of reflecting to its focus all lines parallel to the x axis.
A paraboloid can be used therefore as a mirror in telescopes to focus a maximum of light from a distant star or galaxy at a viewing point that can be some ten metres or more above the mirror.
Conversely a parabolic mirror can be used behind a spotlight to project a parallel beam from a point source of energy.
To draw a parabola
Draw a straight line BAC and mark focus F a right angular distance from A .
Place a set square PQR such that right angle Q rests on AB and side PQ passes through F .
Draw line QR .
Repeat the exercise with Q in many positions on AB .
The overlap of the series of lines QR forms the envelope of the parabola.
A is the vertex and F is the focus.
To draw a parabola with an included angle exceeding 140°, draw two straight lines and mark on each a series of equal intervals.
The second series need not be equal to the first.
Number them in sequence 1, 2, 3 etc, left to right on each line.
Join corresponding numbers to form an envelope .
Properties of a parabola
All parabolas are similar.
Focal length a determines the magnitude .
The simplest Cartesian equation is y ² = 4 ax .
The polar equation is 2 a = r (1 — cos θ).
The area bounded by a parabola is two-thirds of the rectangle having the same base and height.
It is the form assumed by a hanging chain under a uniformly distributed load, UDL.
Compare with the catenary.
The cable of a suspension bridge can be considered as parabolic when the horizontally distributed applied load greatly exceeds the self-weight per unit length of cable.
It is the bending moment diagram for a simply supported beam under UDL.
Thus:M at any point =  and maximum M at mid span = 
Inverting the situation, a shell can be paraboloid when the applied (live) load greatly exceeds the self weight and is distributed horizontally .
The parabola is the section of a right circular cone on a plane parallel to the slope of the cone.
The name parabola , meaning equal, derives from the work of  Appollonius (circa 250 BC).
Translated into Cartesian terms:
The quadratic equation,y = ax ², can be plotted to form a parabola symmetrical about the y axis.
The vertex passes through O and the focus is on the y axis at & a /4;.
If the equation is completed to y = ax ² + bx + c , the function (bx + c ) moves the parabola about the grid.
Similarly a family of vertical parabolas is of the form y = ax n  , where n is an even number.
Algebraically, quadratic equations can be solved by the formula:
Let y = ax ² + bx + c = O then x = 
To draw an ellipse
Draw a circle, centre O and a diameter AOB .
Let F be any point on AO .
To any point D on the circumference of the circle draw FD .
Using a set square, project the right angle FDG such that DG is a chord of the circle.
Repeat for different positions of D .
The envelope of DG will be an ellipse.
AOB is the major axis of the ellipse.
The minor axis passes through O at right angles to AOB .
The nearer F is to A , the narrower the ellipse.
The ratio of OF to OA is known as the eccentricity .
Conventional symbols are used such that OA = a and OF = ae .
The point F is one of two foci possessed by the ellipse.
For a circle eccentricity e = O .
To draw an ellipse using a length of string, tie the string, length = 2 a (1 + e ), into a continuous loop.
Fix pins at distance 2 ae apart; these become the foci.
Drop the loop of string over the pins, draw it taut to form a triangle with a pencil point.
Keeping the string tight, draw the pencil around the foci.
If the two foci of an ellipse are points O and P , and D is any point on the circumference, the OD + PD is a constant for that ellipse.
The circle is a special case of the ellipse, when the two foci are coincident.
A circle may be considered as an ellipse that is seen full frontal , at right angles to the central visual ray of the eye, the CVR .
As the circle is turned from the frontal plane 75°, 60°, 45° etc to the CVR so the minor axis becomes shorter.
Ellipses can thus be referenced in terms of their angle θ° of tilt to the CVR .
At 0° the circle is seen edge on, as a straight line; at 90° it registers as a circle.
If the major axis is 2 a , then the minor axis = 2 a sin θ.
Properties of an ellipse
The Cartesian equation, origin at centre, is
= 1
The polar equation is
& l /r ; = 1 + e cos θ, where l = a (1 —e ²)
The eccentricity e is less than 1.
The area = π ab , where a and b are the semi-axes.
The ellipse is a section of a right circular cone by a plane cutting at a slope less than the slope of the cone.
It is the orthogonal projection of a circle onto a plane inclined to its own plane.
From a point outside the ellipse two tangents can be drawn, and they subtend equal angles at a focus.
The five centred arch
The five centred arch can approximate to an ellipse.
Given the major axis AB and the minor semi-axis CD , complete the rectangle ACDE and draw its diagonal AD .
EO is at right angles to AD , locating O on the vertical axis DC extended.
EO cuts AC at X .
Y is any point within triangle XCO such that XY = YO .
X ,Y and O are centres of three circles.
Repeat for the other side of the arch.
Kepler published his discovery of the elliptical orbits of planets in 1609.
The eccentricities of planetary orbits are small: the Earth about  Mercury about ⅕ Mars about  and Pluto about ¼.
Halley's comet has an eccentricity of about 0.9675 permitting it to visit us every 76 years.
A majority of comets have either parabolic or hyperbolic orbits.
The Earth is an ellipsoid, probably due to its rotation.
The equatorial diameter exceeds the polar diameter by 26 miles.
This gives an eccentricity of  approximately.
To draw a hyperbola
Draw a circle with diameter AOB .
Mark any point F on BOA produced.
Using a set square, select any point on the circle Q and draw the right angle FQP , external to the circle.
Repeat for many positions of Q .
The envelope of lines QP will be a hyperbola.
AOB is called the transverse axis and the complete hyperbola is symmetrical, with two foci, equidistant from O .
The distance of a focus from O compared with the radius of the circle is called the eccentricity e ;e for a hyperbola exceeds 1.
If OA = a , then OF = ae .
The above drawing will reveal a limiting position for Q , at T .
FT is tangential to the circle and PT extended passes through O .
PTO extended is an asymptote of both halves of the hyperbola.
The slope of the asymptote to the transverse axis is such that: sec FOT = e .
The rectangular hypothesis
If e = √2 the asymptotes are at right angles and the curve is called a rectangular hyperbola.
The Cartesian equation is:x ² —y ² = a ²
With the asymptotes as axes, the Cartesian equation becomes:
2 xy = a ² or y =  occupying the first and third quadrants.
A series of rectangles of equal area based on the origin O of a Cartesian grid have a hyperbola as their envelope.
In each case, area A = xy hence y = & A /x ;
The difference of the focal distances is a constant.
Whereas in an ellipse m + n = constant, in a hyperbola m —n = constant.
The growth relationships of m and n are in AP .
As one grows the other grows in direct proportion.
This property can be employed as a method of drawing a hyperbola.
A hyperbolic mirror will reflect light from a point source at focus F so that it is dispersed from focus F .
Alternatively a hyperbolic mirror can gather data from a distribution focused at F 1 and reflect them to F .
This property has given the hyperbola an important role in radar and radio communications generally.
Properties of a hyperbola
The Cartesian equation is (& x /2;) ² —(& y /b ;) ² = 1
Using x and y axes as asymptotes, the Cartesian equation is 2 xy = a ².
The polar equation, pole at focus, is
& l /r ; = 1 + e cos θ where l = a (e ² — 1)
The hyperbola is a section of a right circular, double cone having a steeper slope than the cone.
It is the envelope of a series of parallelograms of equal area and sharing two sides.
Energy radiating from one focus is reflected by a hyperbola as if to radiate from the other focus.
The cubic curve
A cubic curve is a compound curve passing through O .
Its Cartesian equation is  or  where m is an odd number.
Similarly vertical parabolas are of the form  where n is an even number.
At the point of contraflexion, at O , the cubic curve is horizontal.
Its two halves are asymmetric and cannot be folded to be superimposed without first turning one of them over.
The negative curve y = —ax ³ has the opposing slope.
Reversing the axes reverses the curvature:y ³ = ax 
The addition of parabolic and cubic curves
When a cubic curve is added to a parabola the resultant curve will depend upon which order is higher, odd or even.
The curve of y = ax ³ + bx ² will give a cubic curve with a pronounced s form near the origin.
The curve of y = ax 4 + bx ³ + cx ² will give an essentially parabolic form with a ripple appearing near the vertex.
In all cases the addition of a straight line component (px + q ) would serve to move the curve about the grid.
Roulettes
Of the many curves that have been explored by mathematicians, the roulettes are formed by a curve rolling along another, fixed curve and are fundamental to mechanics.
The cycloids have been mentioned.
The conchoid
A curve of great interest to Ancient Greeks, and used to provide entasis in their columns was the conchoid.
To draw a conchoid of a straight line :
Select a point A that is not on the straight line.
Select a straight edge BCD that is bisected at C .
Place BCD so that it passes through A and cuts the fixed straight line at C .
Three cases of the conchoid arise: with the fixed distance less than, equal to or greater than the distance of A from the fixed line.
Other forms of the conchoid are based upon fixed curves that are not straight.
The limacon is a conchoid of a circle.
If the fixed distance equals the radius of the circle, it becomes a cardioid .
It is possible to draw conchoids of the ellipse, hyperbola, parabola and other curves.
To draw a catenary and tractrix
Mark equal intervals upon a baseline and number them 0, 1, 2, etc.
Erect verticals upon the odd numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7, etc.
With points 0, 2, 4 etc, as centres draw quadrants of circles with radius = 9.
Let P 1 be the top of the catenary, on vertical line number 1.
From P 1 draw a tangent to circle centre 2, at T 2 .
Where this tangent P 1 T 2 cuts vertical number 3, mark P 3 .
From P 3 draw a tangent to circle centre 4, at T 4 .
The points P 1 ,P 3 ,P 5 , etc, will lie approximately on a catenary.
The catenary is the evolute of the tractrix .
To draw the tractrix , draw the tangent to circle centre O , from P 1 to find T .
Join T ,T 2 ,T 4 , etc, to obtain an approximate tractrix.
Continue to find points T 6 ,P 7 ,T 8 ,P 9 , etc until the tractrix and catenary meet.
This locates the vertex of both tractrix and catenary and their vertical axis of symmetry can be erected.
The right hand half of each curve can be drawn as a mirror image.
Properties of a catenary
Length of arc of a catenary : let the length of arc from P 1 to the vertex = s , then s = √ (y ² —c ²) where c is height of the vertex above the baseline.
The Cartesian equation is y = c cosh (& x /c ;).
This means that a catenary can be obtained by plotting the values of hyperbolic cosines obtained from tables.
s = c sinh (& x /c ;)y ² = s ² + c ²
A catenary is the locus of the focus of a parabola as it rolls on a straight line.
It is the evolute of a tractrix.
It is the form of a uniform chain hanging under its self-weight.
Trigonometrical ratios
The trigonometrical ratios sine, cosine and tangent were used by Hipparchus during the second century BC to calculate the diameter of the Earth and the distance of the Moon with amazing accuracy: 7900 and 238 000 miles respectively.
There is evidence that the Babylonians were using sine tables, recorded in cuneiform symbols on clay tablets, long before Hipparchus.
In any triangle ABC , right angled at C 
Sine A = & BC /AB ; = & a /c =  = 
Cosine A = & AC /AB ; = & b /c =  = 
Tangent A = & BC /AC ; = & a /b ; =  = 
These can be plotted as Cartesian graphs as described in Chapter 4.
In angular measures 1 rev = 2π radians = 360° = 400 gradians.
Hyperbolic trigonometrical ratios
Whereas sin θ, cos θ and tan θ are projected from a circle, sinh θ, cosh θ and than θ are based upon a hyperbola. cosh x = ch x (abbreviation) =  sinh x = sh x = sinh x =  tanh x = th x = tanh x =  =  = 
Hyperbolic functions are commonly used in kinetics : eg, the speed of waves in water over a shallow bottom is given by:V ² = 1.8 L th (6.3 d /L ) where V is velocity in knots and L is the wavelength in feet.
The equiangular spiral can be related to the tractrix.
If four dogs are stationed at the four corners of a square and released such that A chases B , while B chases C ,C pursues D and D follows A , the path of each dog will describe an equiangular spiral.
In these curves the tangent at any point makes a constant angle with the radius drawn to that point from a fixed point.
The hyperbolic paraboloid
The hyperbolic paraboloid can be formed from an array of parallel rods, resting equidistant on a horizontal plane to form a square.
Their midpoints should be fixed and hinged along their central axis so that they can be rotated at equal intervals into the form of a helix.
Thus, on a square plan ABCD ,corners B and D rise above corners A and C and the plan view becomes rhombic.
Positive curvature of edges can be trimmed away, if necessary, to give straight edges in plan.
The surface curves in two directions to form the hyperbolic paraboloid, with a positive parabolic section in one diagonal of the rhombus and a negative parabola in the other.
A horizontal slice through the shell will reveal a hyperbola.
It will be found that a second set of parallel rods, at right angles to the first group, can overlay them.
However the second helix will have the opposing hand to the first helix.
Thus a construction can be in laminated form, helix upon helix, to produce a very rigid, lightweight, integral shell of invaluable use to architects.
Hyperbolic paraboloids can be grouped to form undulating shells that present a continuous waveform.
Shells
Shell structures can be formed from catenaries .
A condition of the catenary is that the force in the hanging chain be a constant when the uniformly distributed load is per unit length of the chain.
The distribution of loading can continue to obey these conditions when chains are suitably linked to form a hanging network in three dimensions.
These may be simple or complex, forming saddles when intermediate chains are shortened.
If the chains are converted to rods, theoretically the system can be inverted, with uniform distribution of self-loading throughout the net.
Thus a suspended network, uniformly loaded, can be used as a negative model for a convex shell.
The lightweight catenary shell offers advantages and problems similar to those of the suspension bridge: good strength to weight ratio and long spans versus undue flexibility, twist and anchorage difficulties.
The Vesica piscis
On the diameter of a circle an equilateral triangle is described centrally such that its apex just touches the circumference.
The height of the triangle therefore equals the radius of the circle and its sidelength is 1.155 r .
Using this as radius, circular arcs are drawn from the apex through the other corners of the triangle to produce the form of a fish .
This was a mystical word in Ancient Greece under which Christ was later denominated.
The Vesica piscis became an important emotional symbol and also a practical geometrician's tool throughout Gothic architecture, sculpture and painting.
The intersection of two similar circles about an equilateral triangle became the Greek symbol for justice.
This, in turn became a basic geometry for the pointed gothic arch.
By approximating √3 to 1.75, the magic number 7 could be invoked.
The equilateral triangle already proclaimed the magic of 3.
Placing a square or a cross on the circle increased the geometric possibilities.
These are under renewed scrutiny, in our own day, by Vasareley.
Geodesic shells are discussed in Chapter 12.
The versine
When dealing with large radii it is convenient to refer to them in terms of their versines.
The versine of a circular curve for a known length of chord is the perpendicular distance between the mid-point of the chord and the mid-point of its arc.
These can be related by Pythagoras' Theorem for a right angled triangle.
Given chord AB , length = c , on circle centre O and radius R , to find the versine,v :v = 
Note : when v is very small,v ² can be neglected.
Complementary curves are needed to contain, define and stabilise a particular space and time.
A curve in one direction needs balancing by a curve or curves in the opposing direction.
Such an equilibrium is a first stage in the development of presence , and can be readily observed in living organisms.
Linear analysis of Navigable Space (1954) by Singier.
A teenager.
Note the slender hips and plump legs.
A parabola is the locus of a point that moves such that it is equidistant from a fixed point, the focus, and a straight line, the directrix.
At any location of the parabola PM = PF .
The curvature of a ceiling can render a space introvert or extrovert.
UDL on a simply supported beam gives a parabolic bending moment diagram.
Conic sections: circle ellipses parabola hyperbola
The 53° 9′ ellipse is of special interest, related to the π series.
It exhibits the dimensions shown: the axes have the ratio 5:4; the eccentricity is 3:5;OD + PD = m + n = 5.
Eccentricity e decides the slenderness ratio of an ellipse.
When e = 0, the ellipse is circular.
When e = 1, the ellipse is a straight line, such that:b ² = a ² (1 —e ²).
Whereas the extremities of a parabola become parallel to its major axis, the asymptotes of a hyperbola cross one another.
The axes of an ellipse are at right angles.
Desargues's Theorem for the projection of a triangle can be extended to the circumscribing ellipse.
Kepler found that the velocity of a planet varies such that the area swept by its arc in a given time is a constant.
Members of the solar system revolve about their common centre of gravity.
This is dominated by the enormous mass of its central star, the Sun, as compared with its planets.
Even so, their various masses, velocities and distances cause minor fluctuations in their paths.
Graphs of y = ax ³ y ³ = ax y = ax ³ + bx ² y = ax 4 + bx ³
The nephroid; the cardioid; the conchoid
If a string is attached to load W which is free to slide without interference, then movement of the string in the direction of the arrow will cause W to describe a tractrix.
A catenary can be constructed from table of y = cosh x .
The principles used by Hipparchus were: To climb a mountain of known height and measure the angle between the horizon and the vertical.
Then sin A = & r /(r + h );, giving the Earth's radius r .
He established a system for locating points on the Earth's surface similar to our latitude and longitude.
To find the distance BC between the centres of the Earth and Moon, cos B = & AB /BC ; where B is the latitude.
The equiangular spiral can be related to the tractrix.
The astroid can be a graphic representation of interrelated hyperbolic paraboloids.
Above left : Schematic plan of New College Chapel, Oxford.
Right : Linear structure of a painting by Modigliani, 1917.
A geometry of solids
Nature, that framed us of four elements,
Warring within our breasts for regiment,
Doth teach us all to have aspiring minds,
Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend
The wondrous architecture of the world,
And measure every wandering planet's course,
Still climbing after knowledge infinite,
And always moving as the restless spheres,
Will us to wear ourselves and never rest,
Until we reach the ripest fruit of all
Tamburlaine the Great (Part One), Christopher Marlowe
Stereographic drawings
Some of geometry's greatest advances have followed attempts to solve the problems of navigators.
Stereographic drawings translate the surfaces of solids onto a two dimensional plane, some form of charting.
Two projections are well known.
The Cartesian projection , narrowing towards the poles, is practical for detailing and is used in most coastal ordnance surveys.
The Mercator projection gives a popular, rectilinear picture of the Earth's surface but grossly exaggerates dimensions near the poles.
Canada looks as big or bigger than Africa, which is not correct.
On a Mercator projection, Great Circle routes appear as curves.
More recently, in an age of man-made satellites, the polar stereoscopic projection and the equatorial stereoscopic projection have become important.
By comparing photographs obtained on slightly different orbits or times, the topography of the body is revealed.
As mentioned in Chapter 10 under ‘Parallax’, the techniques perfected during the 1939–45 War for taking synchronous photographs are now performed automatically by satellites.
Futurism
Effects of parallax have influenced the work of many twentieth century artists.
Between 1909 and 1915, the Futurists, an Italian group who exhibited in Paris, were inspired by moving pictures.
They recognised the staccato slicing of time, at so many frames per second, as an aggressive march of mechanisation .
In 1909.
Marinetti, the writer, announced ‘a new beauty, a roaring motor car, which runs like a machine gun’.
In 1910 they issued two manifestos: ‘We wish to represent machines or figures actually in motion…movement or light destroy the substance of objects.’
The best Futurist works went deeper into the human paradox than these early statements imply.
By 1911, Umberto Boccioni who was dead by 1916, was grappling with the emotions of modern life; the impact and anxieties of living in the stroboscopic uncertainties of a mechanised urban environment.
Although Futurism succumbed to the ravages of the First World War and its surviving adherents were later to be put to flight by Mussolini, many of its observations and its leading artists, such as Severini, Picabia, Boccioni and Balla continue to inspire the main stream of modern art.
Orthographic projections
Orthographic projections are right angled views ideally suited to the study of everyday objects.
The object can be sited within an imaginary transparent cube, offering six possible views on the axes of three dimensional space.
The views are taken from infinity and translated onto each intervening face of the cube.
In architecture, the worm's eye view is rarely required.
The master drawing is usually the ground floor plan, taken as a section at one metre height.
It is the roof plan that would form the conventional orthographic projection onto the top of the transparent cube.
Elevations and vertical sections are treated similarly.
The observer's line of sight is perpendicular to the plane of the cube and, therefore, all planes parallel to the drawing surface are represented without foreshortening or distortion.
They are two dimensionally true to scale.
Paraline drawings
Paraline drawings are useful because most people find them easy to understand, while their axonometric lines (lines parallel to the x ,y and z axes) are true to scale .
Their construction suggests a three dimensional depth .
But this does not diminish with distance and can be optically disconcerting if long lines are involved.
Non-axonometric lines may not be true to scale.
This varies from one method to another.
The isometric projection gives equal emphasis to all three dimensions, which are orientated at 120° intervals.
Non-axonometric lines are not true to scale.
No areas or shapes are true to scale.
Plan oblique projections provide a plan true to scale , with plan axes at 90°.
Verticals are erected from the plan to provide vertical surfaces that are not true to scale.
A 45° plan oblique projection is sometimes referred to as an axonometric projection .
Although a plan oblique projection can be set at any angle to the horizontal, the other common form is 60°, 30°.
Elevation oblique projection is uncommon.
A vertical plane remains parallel to the drawing surface and is true to scale.
The third dimension is taken at a paraline angle to the horizontal.
It usually needs scaling down visually.
Geometric perspective
Perspective, the visual effect of distance, was first expressed in cave drawings.
Early man observed that things appear to get smaller and to climb up the picture plane.
As civilisation evolved painters noted that near objects can overlap distant objects.
Overlapping remains a major tool of the designer as a means of establishing hierarchy.
There is evidence to suggest that by the time of Euclid these observations were occurring in a cone of vision .
Certainly recent excavations at Pompeii reveal that the Romans made use of vanishing points.
The earliest recorded study of modern optics was produced by Alhazen, an Islamic geometer of circa 1000 AD.
A translation of his book appears in the Vatican library, annotated by Lorenzo Ghiberti.
The development of geometric perspective during the Renaissance in fifteenth century Italy is credited to the architect Brunelleschi.
Further contributions by Alberti, Masaccio, Uccello, Piero della Francesca and Dürer developed it into an instrument capable, in the visual arts, of freezing time.
A specific point of view of a space, in a fleeting moment of time, could be held in utter stillness.
The subsequent evolution of geometric perspective in Europe has been devoted to means by which this property could be used and adapted to suggest movement and change: by the introduction of multiple points of view and interlocking spaces; by the concentration and diffusion of light and light sources; by the Impressionist fragmentisation of surfaces.
The basic assumption of geometric perspective is that although parallel lines never meet, they appear to do so at a vanishing point , on a distant backcloth.
The vanishing points for horizontal lines are located upon the horizon.
Until Cézanne decided to realise his sensations , geometric perspective sometimes represented a one-eyed view of the work, for the basis theory requires that the observer closes one eye.
The cone of vision
The cone of vision is assumed to be right regular.
Its major axis is the central visual ray, CVR, the centre line along which the eye is focused.
The cone can be sliced lengthwise by two planes at right angles, offering a vertical-horizontal cross like a gunsight to the eye.
The horizontal plane is eye level .
The vertical plane is referred to, incorrectly, as the CVR: it should be the central vertical plane .
These correspond visually with x and y axes in general geometry.
If the gaze is directed upwards or downwards, eye level will not coincide with the horizon.
The assumption that straight lines remain straight is not seriously incorrect if the internal angle of the cone is restricted to 30°.
In practice it is enlarged to 60° and obvious distortions around the fringes of the work are adjusted by eye.
Parallels to the CVR meet at origin O in the familiar railway line effect.
A depth scale can be devised by directing diagonals of a receding series of squares to VPd (vanishing point for diagonals).
The squares are seen to diminish in GP.
Gradients in perspective
The railway slopes uphill when its VP or vanishing point is moved above eye level; for a downhill slope the VP falls below eye level, EL.
For left and right movements the VP must move to left and right of the CVR.
A set of nine VP's can suffice to permit the representation of a winding, even helical path.
The short lengths of straight lines thus produced are vectors.
These can be brought into continuous curves by freehand softening of the joints.
This should not be overdone:bent lines emphasise the direction and structure of planes.
The geometric perspective box
The geometric perspective box created the stage upon which the great dramas of European painting, theatre, internal and external architecture and materialist thinking generally have evolved since the Renaissance.
The scale can be vast, embracing a mighty landscape, or it can be intimate, to contain a bowl of apples.
Whatever its size, it is this trapped space that has fascinated both artists and scientists.
It offers a stable, secure and finite universe to be explored by painters as emotionally diverse as Masaccio, Bellini, Hobbema, Vermeer, Claude, Turner, Cézanne, Monet and Picasso.
One observation is essential to the construction of a GP box and that is the location of the vanishing point for diagonals of the squared plan grid, VPd, on the eye level.
This is conveniently simple.
The observer's eye E on the CVR, and VPd, on the backcloth, are equidistant from origin O .
The method of projecting a geometric box forward from a backcloth is ideally suited to the exploration of interiors .
The great paintings of Europe since the Renaissance, even the major landscapes, have been conceived within a finite box, They are interiors, constrained by a rigid three dimensional matrix within which movement is permitted.
Men of genius — Dante, Leonardo, Milton, Blake, Turner, Wagner, for example— have attempted to punch holes in the box or to replace it by a stack of boxes.
However it is not until this twentieth century that variable space has become a conceptual reality (see Chapters 5 and 14).
Within the box it is possible to describe slopes and turns as numerical ratios, as tangents.
The illustration shows a right handed square helix.
A slope of one in two, with landings, is taken round the box.
An orthographic projection can be converted into a geometric perspective by inscribing the ground and roof plans on the bottom and top of the box respectively; and the left, right, fore and aft elevations on the vertical sides of the box.
Cross referencing within the box will circumscribe the geometric perspective view.
Two point perspective
Two point perspective is based on our ready response to the right angle.
Considering the problem in plan (on a plane parallel to eye level) a series of parallel lines meet at their vanishing point on the backcloth (or picture plane).
The VP 1 of these lines is located by the line that passes through the observer's eye E .
It reaches the backcloth PP in the illustration at M .
Parallels at right angles to the first set have a vanishing point VP 2 at N .
It follows that:
For example, if E is 100 metres from PP and θ is 33°, then:OM = 100 tan 57° = 154 m ON = 100 tan 33° = 65 m
Of course VP's can be found by projective geometry without calculations.
Given the plan of a house, its VP's can be found simply by drawing parallels to its walls from E to the PP .
The picture plane
Geometric perspective is based on similar triangles.
Therefore the geometry is not affected if the picture plane (which receives the projection) is behind, intermediate to, or in front of the subject.
Its position relative to E affects only the size of the projection.
Height lines
Height lines are a quick way of establishing a vertical scale.
In plan, extend any vertical plane until it cuts the picture plane, PP.
At that point, and that point only the vertical plane will be true to scale in the perspective drawing.
A vertical scale, erected at that point, can be projected through the drawing by using the VP for the vertical plane.
Such heights can then be taken round the drawing.
Most drawings require only two height lines.
One for working, the other as a check.
The finest check of all is:Does it look convincing ?
Geometric perspective is an approximation , after all!
Effect of moving the eyes
Within the cone of vision it is assumed that all lines and planes parallel to the picture plane are true to scale.
They do not have vanishing points.
However if the head is turned to pursue the full length of an apparently straight line, beyond the initial cone of vision, it is seen to approximate to an ellipse, with a VP at each end.
Observation of this property led the masters of geometric perspective, such as Canaletto, Turner and Van Gogh, to use positive curvature to emphasise the spaciousness of their works.
A turn of the head or eyes turns the CVR.
Rival visual boxes in a painting, building or landscape can thus be used to suggest spaciousness.
Vertical movement of the head reveals that a third VP, for parallel verticals within the cone of vision, is beneath one's feet.
This series of squares is disquieting as it heads for the horizon unless it allows for the curvature of the Earth.
Three point perspective
If a cube is orientated so that three of its sides are viewed symmetrically, then three VP's will be equidistant.
The diagram shows the limiting size of a cube to be viewed through a 60° cone.
Gross distortion is present and, unless a fish eye view is required, the three point perspective should be restricted to a 30° cone.
If one were gazing at the vertex of a tetrahedron, would the view be different?
Turning the eye reveals a different view through the cubic grid; the three point geometry is based upon a pyramid sliced from the corner of a cube.
A longitudinal section shows that the vertical distance between an horizon containing two of the VP's and eye level can be compared with the distance of the third VP below eye level.
If the angle between ground or datum level GL , and eye level EL is α, then
& a /b ; =  therefore c ² = a (a + b )
Three point geometric perspective can be constructed without resort to calculations.
Several methods are available and can be found in any good book on perspective drawing.
They must transfer a horizontal plan and height line to the sloping ground level, through the angle α.
Curves in perspective
Geometric perspective is a vectorial process.
Therefore all curves must be developed from a continuum of short straight lines, related to VP's by rectilinear grids.
Reflection as symmetry
Symmetry never ceases to fascinate the human being.
A visual axis of symmetry is offered by a plane mirror; because light is reflected such that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection .
If an observer's eye is on the plane of reflection, perfect symmetry can be obtained.
But that is theory!
In practice the eye must be at least very slightly above the mirror plane to obtain a reflection.
The resultant observation is asymmetric, but can be interpreted by association as symmetry in perspective.
Sciagraphy
The art of shadow projection has evolved because our eyes work by recognising differences of lighting levels.
We see, essentially, by comparing adjacent visual areas of value, or tone, reflectance, luminosity — quantities of energy per unit area: lux.
Our basic vision is on the black-white scale through a series of greys.
Hues of the spectrum — red, orange, yellow, green, blue and purple — can be regarded as qualitative refinements to the quantitative black-grey-white scale.
This is why a black and white television screen is satisfactory as a means of communication.
Sciagraphy has grown as a convention used by architects and engineers because it can be used to reveal detail in forms that might otherwise be lost in orthographic linear projections.
Convention has it that the source of parallel rays of light is behind the observer's left shoulder at 45° to the x ,y and z axes.
The Platonic solids
The Platonic solids, the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron and icosahedron, were thought by Plato, the Athenian philosopher, to have universal significance.
They are completely regular solids: each has all of its faces repeating a regular polygon, triangle, square or pentagon.
They can be found by the close packing of similar spheres and are in two categories:(1) The tetrahedron, cube and octahedron grow in succession, cycle after cycle, by each encasing its predecessor.
The grid, made up of similar spheres, is a constant, no matter what the size of the solid.
The packing is in AP.
(2) The dodecahedron and icosahedron alternate, one encasing the other, but the spheres must grow in size if they are to close pack.
The initial icosahedron requires a void, representing the first term of a GP, at its centre.
The packing is in GP.
The tetrahedron has four faces, each an equilateral triangle.
Its full  spacial beauty becomes evident when the leading edge is vertical and the remote edge is horizontal.
The space between them is the third dimension.
If this third dimension is represented by a spine, a series of rods can rotate upon it, step by step, from the vertical to the horizontal.
They form a helix.
If it is not to be a positively charged convex curve, the intermediate rods need to be trimmed to form a straight edge.
The cube , clearly defining a three dimensional space, is the most readily comprehended of the Platonic solids.
The tetrahedron is contained within the diagonals of its six faces.
The vertexes of an octahedron are at midpoints of the faces of the cube.
The corners of an octahedron can be located by erecting a perpendicular, height equal to half the side length, on the midpoint of each face of a cube.
The cross-section of an octahedron is a square, producing eight triangular faces.
The dodecahedron has 12 regular pentagonal faces.
All the magic of the pentagon is transferred to this solid.
A group of six pentagons folds naturally to form a serrated hemisphere.
Each vertex can be regarded as a triangular pyramid with a base to edge ratio of π.
The angle subtended by a side at the centre of the circumscribing sphere is 41° 52′.
An icosahedron has 20 faces, each an equilateral triangle.
It can be formed from the face-centres of the dodecahedron.
Both the dodecahedron and the icosahedron can be structured by rotating a π rectangle about the centre.
The pentagonal base of a pyramid formed by five equilateral triangles can be set upon each face of a dodecahedron to form a polyhedron of 60 faces.
By further subdivision semi-regular solids of increasing variety can be devised.
Alternatively, truncating the vertexes will produce the Archimedean solids.
The Archimedean solids
These 13 solids are formed by truncating, cutting off the vertexes, of the Platonic solids.
The process can be repeated to produce complex patterns which introduce the regular hexagon and octagon to the faces.
By Euler's Law for semi-regular solids: let V = number of vertexes;F = number of faces; and E = number of edges; then:V + F = E + 2.
Geodesic structures
The surfaces of regular and semi-regular solids lend themselves to geodesic shells in which all the vertexes touch the surface of a circumscribing sphere.
A geodesic distance is the shortest between two points on the surface of a sphere.
It is, therefore, the arc of a great circle, the plane of which passes through the centre of the sphere.
Geodesic shells have a repetivity of edges that is suitable for industrialisation or prefabrication of parts to form a lattice that is rigid and lightweight while offering equitable distribution of loading.
It can be used at both small and large scale, in the construction of aircraft and in the architecture of their vast shelters, hangars, stadia and the like.
The principles can be applied to ellipsoids,sausage forms, barrel vaults and rings such as the torus.
Buckminster Fuller has made a life-time study of geodesic domes.
His books and publications are authoritative.
Pendentives
The problem of securing a round dome to a square plane was solved in Mesopotamia some 4000 years ago, using the spherical pendentive.
Geometrically, it is a segment of a sphere with radius equal to one half the diagonal of the square bay to be covered by the dome.
Later designs introduced lanterns under the dome and used ellipsoids, paraboloids and more complex curves.
Bravais lattices
Only 14 kinds of unit cell can form an extended regular lattice.
In crystallography, each lattice point can accommodate more than a single atom.
Despite the restraints of symmetry in the growth of crystals, a great variety of materials, using different groups of atoms and molecules, become possible.
But all will conform to one of the 14 lattices.
Crystal structures can be dislocated by sheer, fault or edge dislocation which involves the sliding of crystals along a sheer plane.
They are also subject to screw dislocation and a mixture of the two,mixed dislocation .
Our observation of these, as recordings of the frozen energy of nature, can be highly emotive.
Particularly when contrasted with the grindingly abrasive and ultimately polishing actions of ice, sea, wind and rain: nowhere better illustrated than in the works of Henry Moore.
The five Platonic and 13 Archimedean solids.
Early models of the cosmos were based on concentric spheres (they still are in most minds).
Platonic cosmology contained elements: Tetrahedron — fire; Octahedron — air; Icosahedron — water; Cube — Earth; Dodecahedron — ether.
Top : Bartholomew's ‘Nordic’ projection gives the Antipodes half the scale of the North Polar Basin.
If the scales were equal the projection would be Cartesian.
Above right : The international time zones, reviewed in June 1962 for the Times Atlas of the World , uses a Mercator projection.
Gnomonic projection (limited polar stereographic) of the North Polar Basin.
Equatorial and polar projections.
Since the human eye moves horizontally with less fatigue than vertically, the cone of vision tends to be flattened.
The classic √3:2 rectangle nicely contains an elliptical backcloth.
A single point view, without moving eye or head, restricts the vanishing point of diagonals of the square grid to a maximum range of 3.5:1.
Therefore a backcloth is restricted by the viewing frame.
Top right : Restraints on the single point view show in plan and elevation the effect of rotating the head at 22½° intervals, horizontally.
Top : Effect of moving the head vertically.
Above : Introduction of two perspective boxes into the viewing frame suggests a panorama.
This principle can be extended creatively (ref: Leonardo da Vinci, Turner, Cézanne, Cubism, late Monet).
Top : Diagram of the resultant shadow projection at 45° to all three axes.
Centre : An orthographic projection of a vertical cylinder and its shadow.
Above : Initial packing of similar spheres to form Platonic solids.
A majority of materials in the Earth's crust are silicates with molecules comprising four oxygen atoms linked to one atom of silicon.
The cubeoctahedron, dodecahedron, icosahedron and various other semi and demi-regular solids have been used as models for geodesic domes.
Particular favourites are the truncated octahedron (dymaxion) using squares and hexagons, and the truncated icosahedron, using pentagons and hexagons (the international soccer ball).
Below : Surfaces of the icosahedron and the octahedron.
Bravais lattices.
Top right : Right handed and left handed quartz crystals.
Edge, screw and mixed dislocations.
Energy and equilibrium
The hidden harmony is better than the obvious.
Fragments , Heraclitus (c 500 BC)
The conservation of energy
Man assumes, and observes, balance in the universe.
The conservation of energy postulates that no energy is lost and none is gained.
It can be changed only from one form to another, one location to another, while its total remains a constant.
This law has been axiomatic in the evolution of the sciences.
However the comparative ease with which energy can be transferred requires a neat balance of opposing forces if any object or event is to persist or acquire longevity.
Within the atom, for example, the number of protons is electrically balanced by the number of electrons.
One for one.
If a surfeit or deficiency of electrons occurs, the atom becomes electrically charged, negative and positive.
The character of an element is decided by the number of protons in its nucleus.
Hydrogen has one, helium has two, carbon has six and lead has 82.
The number of protons in the nucleus gives the atomic number of the element, which must necessarily be integer: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 to 92.
Within the atom
Particles obey principles similar to magnetism; like poles repel, and unlike poles attract.
Therefore protons normally repel one another.
Within the nucleus of a stable atom, the interproton repulsion is overwhelmed by the strong nuclear force that binds the protons firmly together with neutrons .
The presence of neutrons explains why the atomic weights of elements do not correspond with their atomic numbers.
The number of neutrons within the atomic nucleus of an element can vary, producing isotopes , for example, graphite, charcoal and diamond are isotopes of carbon.
Each has six protons in its nucleus but the number of neutrons differs.
Every atom seeks equilibrium at the lowest energy level, giving off surplus energy as radiation.
If it is positively charged electrically, it will seek electrons.
If negative, it will gladly discharge electrons.
But within the atom, the electrons must accept a hierarchy.
By Pauli's exclusion principle in quantum theory:No more than one electron in a given atom can have a given set of the four quantum numbers.
The quantum numbers represent energy levels.
We may visualise them as wavelengths and orbits about a nucleus — with some similarity to a miniature solar system.
Thus Pauli's principle ensures that each electron within the atom has identity , and status (see Chapter 1).
Although they are similar, they are instantaneously different!
In a multi-electron atom, the lowest energy shells fill up first.
Within the nucleus
An atomic nucleus is very small; less than 10 -15 metres in diameter.
If an atom were to be magnified to 100 metres diameter, the size of a large concert hall, then the nucleus in its centre would be about the size of a grain of salt.
The space of the hall would be defined by an electron cloud: the volume required for one or more electrons to revolve about the nucleus at high speed.
An electron is never stationary.
Although it occupies much space, it is very tiny.
It has mass, but so little that the nucleus has some 99.99 per cent of the weight of an atom.
Nucleons are either protons or neutrons, locked together into a boiling cauldron that is the nucleus.
The nucleons are whirling about within a sphere of only 10 -15 m at 100 000 km per second.
The proton has positive electrical charge, the neutron has none.
Otherwise they are similar, although the neutron has slightly more mass.
A neutron in a free state will decay in about ten minutes into a proton, after giving off one unit of negative electrical energy in the form of a negative pion.
The selection of elements below is quite revealing.
We can deduce that a nucleus of beryllium has four protons and five neutrons, iron has 26 protons and 30 neutrons, lead has 82 protons and an awful lot of neutrons.
It is interesting to observe that hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and carbon, which are so important to life on Earth, are all of low atomic number.
The high melting point of carbon may also be significant.
As the surface of the primeval Earth cooled, carbon will have been one of the first elements to solidify.
But, of course, its major service to us carbohydrates is its ability to link hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and trace elements into the complex molecules of earthly life.
This selection of elements also reveals the increase in atomic weight over atomic number.
The atomic weight is a ratio quite distinct from the weight in grams.
A search for symmetry
The principle of the conservation of energy implies balance in all interactions, from the largest at the intergalactic scale to the smallest at the elementary particle scale…with somewhere between them, the human scale.
To take a simple example: if we assume that the force of gravity permeates the whole material universe and that it is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between any two atoms anywhere, then two interesting propositions arise.
If the universe is homogeneous, then the long range forces in all directions balance out — by definition of homogeneity, they will be in equilibrium, forming a continuous forcefield or texture.
Consequently only short range variations and perturbations in the field need be considered when studying the behaviour of a particle.
The precise definition of short range will be conditional, in each study, upon the permissible tolerances.
The other proposition arising is that as two atoms touch, the gravitational force will maximise and crush them out of existence, unless the long range weak gravitational forcefield is balanced by a strong short range repulsive force.
Indeed such a force exists and permits atoms to assemble into molecules by sharing some of their electrons, while their nuclei have short range repulsion.
Observed on its larger scale the universe reveals a clustering of atoms to form stars, and of stars to form galaxies, it would not be unreasonable to anticipate the possibility of a clustering of galaxies.
Sure enough, there is observational evidence of such clusters going back to the 11 000 nebular objects listed in J. L. E. Dreyer's New General Catalogue , in the 1890s, long before Hubble's discovery of their true nature.
A typical rich galactic cluster appears to have three major components: galaxies, and a giant central galaxy and an enormous halo of hot gas studded with additional stars.
The bulk of the atoms in the universe is hydrogen.
The hot stars radiate energy as this hydrogen is converted to helium in their nuclear furnaces.
As stars cool, so the heavier elements are formed.
The balance of forces is between implosive gravitation and explosive nuclear reaction.
When nicely balanced, these forces permit the star a lifecycle as it radiates energy to finish as a lump of heavy elements.
If imbalance occurs, then the star may explode as a supernova , or implode to entrap its own radiation in a black hole .
Such an equilibrium of forces is not symmetry.
On the other hand it is not chaos, and within the context of this essay it is regarded as asymmetry …a balance of dissimilar forces.
Symmetry
Symmetry requires mirror imagery, on the principle of the child's folded ink blots.
Folding is its essential property along an axis of symmetry so that the two halves make a perfect overlay.
Thus a butterfly has one-fold symmetry.
Superficially, the human being has one-fold symmetry based upon duality.
There are obvious functional advantages in the possession of two legs.
Three would involve complex skeletal and muscular problems tending to impede rather than improve mobility.
Although the kangaroo has a fast turn of speed on the plan, he is handicapped when climbing trees.
Similarly, we are two eyed, two handed, two eared.
Yet the distribution of internal organs is asymmetric.
It seems that symmetry is a useful means of combating a dominant force, such as gravity.
It is a unidimensional clasping, gripping of its own centre.
Symmetry is therefore essentially introvert, egocentric, finite and independent: ideally suited to a palace, of creature or God.
It is reasonable to anticipate that wherever in this universe life evolves on the surface of a massive ellipsoid like the earth, the advanced forms will have one-fold symmetry.
They will probably have two eyes, two hands, two legs with which to move in one direction at a time.
Ears and nostrils?
Well that will depend upon the atmosphere in which they originate!
Symmetry is the stuff of paradise: the home of Plato's perfect, regular solids.
A straight, uniform and finite line has symmetry about its midpoint.
A finite curved line can have symmetry; and asymmetry!
A shape can have multifold symmetry.
For example, the square has four-fold symmetry, the pentagon has five-fold, the hexagon has six-fold symmetry.
A circle is multi-fold, whereas an ellipse has two-fold symmetry.
A regular solid can fold: edge on, face on, vertex on.
The tetrahedron is 2, 3, 3 fold.
The cube is 2, 3, 4 fold.
The icosahedron is 2, 3, 5 fold.
The spiral and the helix are not symmetrical.
Symmetry can be used to convert a unidimensional vector into a two or three dimensional truss.
For example, gravity can be opposed by a single, vertical prop but the slightest eccentricity will cause it to gyrate and buckle.
The structure can be stabilised by a triangulation that is most economic when symmetrical and evolves into the familiar forms of roof trusses, bridges, arches and vaulting.
Our senses are responsive to symmetry, recognising instantly that is has an independence from its environment.
It may be a thing?
Attention is drawn towards the axis.
Symmetry thus has focus and possesses an internal force field.
It becomes essential to vectorial movement through any uniform fluid.
A rudderless boat must be perfectly balanced if it is to follow a straight course.
Any curvature or flaw in the line of its keel must be countered by a rudder, with consequent loss of energy.
Similar principles apply to all vehicles that are required to travel in a straight line.
Symmetry is thus associated with, and can be used to suggest, movement in the direction of its fold.
Asymmetry
The stillness, the poise, of perfect symmetry are not of the everyday world.
Where the wind blows from one direction at a time, with a prevailing bias, in tenderness or fury, and every tree must flex its fibres to withstand the stresses of life, there we find asymmetry.
Similarly, the human being, right handed or left handed, but because he is one or the other, is not perfectly symmetrical.
Only Gods can be!
Absolute symmetry, in its very stability and self-sufficiency, tends to be superhuman and resistant to change.
While we seek its security, we find a repetitive and invariant sameness to be lifeless.
So the human being seeks variations within a theme of symmetry : a sensitive balance of dissimilar forces…we seek an equilibrium, an order, that permits variety yet is not chaos.
We seek asymmetry.
The Law of Moments
The moment of a force about a point is equal to the magnitude of the force multiplied by its perpendicular distance from the point.
On a uniform rod, unit weights can be balanced equidistant from the fulcrum.
We have symmetry of loading, in terms of a force attributed to gravity.
If the downwards forces are each one Newton at distances of plus and minus four metres, then the anticlockwise and clockwise moments equate at 4 Nm.
The rod is in equilibrium.
The rod can be kept in balance by adjusting forces and distances so that their product is a constant:
1N x 4m = 2N x 2m = 4N x 1m = 8N x 0.5m
Equilibrium can be maintained by balancing several forces about a fulcrum, such that the sum of the anticlockwise moments equals the sum of the clockwise moments.
Centres of energy
Given a set of forces and an assurance that equilibrium prevails, the human sense of balance is so finely developed that it directs us to their focus.
Most visitors to London, left freely to move, gravitate to Piccadilly Circus and Leicester Square.
Most visitors to Paris find the banks of the Seine and Notre Dame.
In New York, by tradition, it is Times Square.
Is it still?
All thriving, interactive conglomerates of forces develop centres of energy.
The inverse square law tends to apply.
The centripetal force is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the centre .
It is the responsibility of a designer to ensure that the centre of energy of any organisation is where it should be.
This requirement is as relevant to an industrial organisation as to a city, town or village.
As vital to a painting, building or symphony as to a multinational trading corporation or the kitchen of a domestic house.
All mechanisms have a centre of energy to which constituent elements contribute and refer.
Every living cell and every atom has a nucleus.
Recent developments in particle physics suggest that every nucleon may itself have a nucleus.
Foveal and peripheral awareness
Our senses, and our thought processes too, function through centres of energy.
Brainy people are said to have power of concentration .
By which is meant that they have developed their ability to focus both senses and mind upon a thought process.
This foveal acuity can be of high definition, to be beamed like a searchlight on any tiny part of the surrounding,peripheral environment.
Peripheral awareness becomes progressively blurred as it recedes from the foveal zone and adjusts to an overall equilibrium.
Repetitive stimuli are relegated to background noise and, like the ticking of that clock , are not heard until they stop.
Yet the peripheral zone is hypersensitive to sudden change.
The human eye can detect unexpected movement at almost 90° to its central visual ray, or CVR.
A flicker, caught by the corner of an eye, will cause the head to turn and invite foveal scrutiny.
Working within a frame
A designer, working into a defined space, should recognise that both the space itself and the forces bearing upon it will develop centres of energy.
These need to be clearly formed into a hierarchy so that an observer can move freely from one to another using both peripheral and foveal receptivity.
For example, the normal centre of energy of a rectangle is just above the geometric centre…this allows for effects of gravity.
The natural place to mount a small drawing is on this centre.
When the energy centres of both drawing and containing rectangle correspond, attention is focused upon the content of the drawing.
If the drawing is moved towards the edge of the rectangle it gains weight as a thing, a unit, a shape.
Its moment about the centre of the rectangle increases and it needs balancing by one, but preferably two, additional drawings.
Alternatively it can be balanced by the large expanse of blank, negative mount, which will assert its texture.
Whatever the location of the drawing, an adequately bounded, or framed, rectangle will retain its centre of energy.
As it is moved away from the centre of energy towards the edge of the rectangle, the drawing will appear smaller and heavier while the significance of its content will become subordinate to its overall shape.
A design that inverts the desirable situation, filling the peripheral zone with fine detail and leaving the fovea blank, is disconcerting, even bewildering, and sometimes frightening.
In the hands of a great designer — Mondrian, de Staël, Rothko, Turner, Klee — the central void can be stressed until it appears to radiate energy.
It then becomes the dominant element in the design, just where it should be, near the geometric centre.
Forming a language
As Descartes made clear, the mind, like the senses, prefers to focus only on one event at a time.
But it can learn to comprehend a series of events by bringing them together into a cohesive, learned pattern to form a language .
The mind learns to hold the elements of a properly structured language in both peripheral and foveal zones so that particles are magnified in and out of the group instantaneously.
Using regular polygons, simple languages can be structured from AP, Pythagorean and other series.
Most languages, when arrayed in order, offer a rhythmic transition series or sensory structure.
Potential and kinetic energy
In mechanics, energy is considered in two general forms:potential energy that is held within a body by virtue of its location, temperature, even chemical state, and Kinetic energy by virtue of its velocity or rate of change.
A basic example occurs in an electron beam — so important in television and radio.
The potential energy of an electron will be eV where e is its charge in coulombs and V is the applied voltage to cause the acceleration of the electron.
The accelerating electron increases its kinetic energy at the expense of its potential energy and, if it is treated as a particle : ½ mv ² = eV when m = mass and v = velocity
A more common description of potential energy is of an object such as a ball resting precariously on a ledge.
It possesses the potential to fall by virtue of its position.
Energy in one form or another has been invested in it to get it up there.
If it is nudged so that the ball falls, the potential energy is progressively converted into kinetic energy such that E = mv ².
At the end of its journey this energy is converted into heat, into further movement or deformation of the bodies in collision.
Concepts of potential and kinetic energy are fundamental to the fine arts.
It is a great accomplishment in singing to take a melodic line up to a position of potential energy, and to hold it there, poised and ready to plunge like a kingfisher.
And to wait while another is brought up to join it; and another; and another; until a monumental cluster of notes are permitted the final lunge into kinetic energy.
The master of such an accumulation of potential energy was, and is, Beethoven.
It is top weighting .
The optimistic, structuring of an art form until it appears to be on tiptoe in defiance and compliance with gravity…or whatever the dominant forcefield may be.
Building up to a climax !
Top weight
Memorable architecture is top weighted…whatever the period or culture.
Until the new technologies of steel and prestressed concrete arrived the masonry of buildings was heavily based.
Top weighting had to be achieved by the disposition of proportion, ornament and light.
In Gothic cathedrals the light flows up to dominate the downward flow of masonry.
In both Byzantium and Islam the surface enrichment, though opposed in motivation and manner, draws the eyes up to the arches and the vaulting.
And what is European Classicism if it is not about propping magnificently sculpted and weighted pediments upon tall columns.
Memorable paintings are top weighted.
This is the crowning glory of Van Gogh's maize and corn fields.
Most of the canvas is blown by the wind n the fore and middle grounds, while a strip of distant but finely detailed farmhouses, trees and human  paraphenalia grips the top of the canvas.
Sometimes, as in the Dutch and East Anglian landscape paintings, the detailing of the sky becomes the top weight.
Sedimentary weighting
If a container of mixed aggregate, from broken flintstone and river ballast to fine sand, is placed on a vibrating table, the mixture separates out into sedimentary layers.
It becomes graded so that the smallest and smoothest particles are at the bottom and the largest and most angular are at the top.
Similar processes occur in water courses, rivers and tidal streams.
Hards , where seamen may step ashore without muddying their boots, occur where the water velocity is sufficient to carry away fine clays and sands.
We are acutely sensitive to sedimentary layering, perhaps because of our origins in prehistory?
Certainly its emotive possibilities go beyond obvious applications in architecture and landscaping to a structuring, by analogy, of graphics and music.
Considering the simplest case that can be rhythmic, a minimum of three sedimentary layers — light, medium and heavy; 1, 2, 3 — can be permuted into six possible relationships.
Experience, and tradition, teach that their orderly sequence is most readily understood and welcomed when sandwich effect is avoided.
Reading from top to bottom, the series 1, 2, 3 is known as architectural form , an unfortunate and misleading phrase derived from the bottom weighting of masonry, necessary to its stability.
The series 3, 2, 1 is known as graphic form and is a time honoured layout for newsprint.
Most tabloid newspapers are emphatically graphic in the presentation of their headlines and subheadings.
But when recognised as an interpretation of top weighting, their methods are basically similar to those of fine artists who seek monumentality in their works.
Other layouts, in which the lightest or heaviest layer is in the middle, are difficult to handle with conviction.
They succeed best when the decision to form a sandwich is clear and uncompromising.
The problem of clarifying a sensory structure can be eased by putting the trio into dynamic, harmonic or GP series and then linking them through another dimension.
Texture, line or a prop or plinth are useful unifying agents.
The moon effect
It is generally agreed that objects appear smaller and heavier as they move upwards.
The moon effect can be tested with a torchlight on a dark night and, sure enough, the light disc appears to get small and more intense as it rises.
This effect has immediate graphic, sculptural and architectural applications.
Typefaces at the top of a page of a newspaper need to be larger than those lower down.
On the face of a building or in civic sculpture, the raising of objects above eye level will reduce their apparent size and due allowance for this must be made.
If a grid, an uncompromisingly repetitive though rhythmic grid, is provided, the eye-brain complex makes due allowance for height and perspective and recognises the continuity of the scale into the distance, both vertically and horizontally.
The moon effect , therefore, is applicable only to isolated sensory stimuli.
Note : Given adequate clues, the human facility for making due allowance for effects of perspective permits the designing of architectural elevations by orthogonal means.
Planar proportions that are harmonic on the drawing board will remain so in the structure, provided effects of overlapping are taken into consideration.
This means also that proportions in elevations are expressions of the plan.
Catastrophe theory
Catastrophe theory was developed by mathematician, René Thom, as a general theory of morphogenesis (the changing form of things).
The growth of an organism is seen as a series of gradual changes triggered by, and in turn triggering, sudden jumps in the biochemistry.
 Catastrophies , involving sudden change from one state of equilibrium to another, as stress and strain build up, are familiar to all of us, emotionally and physically.
A unidimensional catastrophe can be plotted geometrically by the introduction of an additional dimension .
The path marked by a ball rolling down a corrugated graph paper would reveal a gap when the paper is later flattened.
A stiffened metal panel, subjected to a prod, can clank suddenly from convex to concave.
The hyperbolic umbilic governing its strength was discovered by G. W. Hert, after Michael Thomson.
Cusp  catastrophies occur in snowflakes and inkblots.
The freezing of energy
In some art forms, such as music and cinema, kinetic energy can be employed to express its own dynamic.
There are few film directors who can resist a good car chase.
Similarly intermittent acceleration is basic to the innovatory music of recent history, including the popular forms of ragtime ,jazz and rock .
Quite apart from the obvious expression of kinetic energy in the mechanics and electronics of contemporary kinetic arts , static forms of painting, sculpture and architecture can freeze kinetic energy during the process of their creation.
The act of casting, carving, moulding and placing materials can be clearly recorded in the substance and surfaces of the product.
Similarly, even in that most abstract of arts, music, the playing of a musical instrument can inscribe the peculiar energy of the act of plucking, blowing or striking into its sound such that it is rendered unique or concrete.
These arts lay stress upon the manipulation of materials and the instruments of communication, upon craftsmanship and crafts, old and new.
Inevitably this has led many twentieth century artists to an interest in folk arts and foreign forms which previously might have been classed as primitive .
The working of a material can convert kinetic energy into potential energy as an aesthetic process; just as the energy expended in lifting a one kilogramme weight to a height of one metre invests it with one kgm of potential energy.
Like any small boy who scribbles on a wall that ‘Johnny was here’, so the gestures of talented individuals can record, on behalf of all of us, that ‘we were here’.
One of mankind's first artistic gestures was to cover his hand with charcoal and press it on to a cave wall: ‘I, man, was here!’
The record of the craftsman's gesture in the design and production of any object establishes its scale and its humanity.
Kinetic energy is thus invested in the product, augmenting its presence .
Abstract expressionism
Two million years ago an ancestor or cousin, Australopithecus, made simple stone tools by putting a cutting edge to a pebble.
Those tools are our first examples of frozen actions or gestures, an art that evolved into the sophistication of a Rubens, Delacroix and Pollock.
Abstract Expressionism ebulliently asserted post-war individual freedom during the 1950s, as Action Painting or Tachism , to become the first truly international art form since the flintstones.
Influenced by Dada and Surrealism , it explored subconscious responses to configurations of dots, dribbles, shapes, textures and juxtaposed materials as a means of instantaneous communication…a visual music!
Abstract expressionism exploited heuristics and programmed chance, using, in its poetry, both analogy and metaphor (ref: Chapter 15, ‘The Design Spectrum’).
Many of the illustrations in this book are expressionist.
Constructivism
Parallel with Expressionism , a major design form of the twentieth century is Constructivism, devoted to the assembly of an intellectually emotive language.
While at the hand of a Gabo, a Victor Vasareley or a Ben Nicholson its poetry enjoys analogy and metaphor, its strength is based on scientific methodology, inductive and deductive reasoning (ref: ‘The Design Spectrum’, Chapter 15).
This continuing exploration of sequential thought forms has embraced a number of major movements of the twentieth century.
Constructivism is thus devoted to the conscious organisation of all forms of energy, potential and kinetic, into enduring and memorable identities and things.
The geometric origins of Constructivism can be found in the work of Pythagoras and its philosophy was prepared by Plato.
I do not now intend by beauty of shapes what most people would expect, such as that of living creatures or pictures, but…straight lines and curves and the surfaces of solid forms produced out of these by lathes and rulers and squares…
These things are not beautiful relatively, like other things, but always and naturally and absolutely .
Constructivism, and its complement, Expressionism, are thus the media of a search for a philosophy in this twentieth century that is commensurate with current technology and scientific discovery.
Their abstraction permits the use of graphic forms as a means of research comparable with, though less stimulating and more contemplative than, music.
The motivation of this book is, therefore, constructivist.
Space grids
Constructivism has led, inevitably, to a study of space grids based upon research in crystallography.
Homogeneous, repetitive units are braced, by triangulation, to form a continuous space grid.
The three dimensional lattice is formed by the superimposition of two dimensional grids.
Double layer space grids
Space grid geometries have evolved from the construction of similar pyramids upon the nodes of a regular or semi-regular grid.
The apexes are connected to form a second grid.
The removal of selected pyramid modules can offer internal openings and improve the strength to weight ratio of the system, while not sacrificing stability.
Double layer space grids comprise two single layer grids, superimposed and interconnected by bracing members.
The upper and lower grids are arranged in four ways:(1)Direct grid : The two grids have similar form and scale, matching node to node.
(2)Offset grid : The two grids have similar form and scale, but are offset in plan while remaining directionally consistent.
(3)Differential grid : Two grids may differ in design yet interconnect to form a regular pattern.
In specifications, the top grid is given first.
(4)Lattice grid : This is a direct grid that has upper and lower members comparatively close together so that they can be braced to form a series of girders prior to erection.
Polar projection of the northern hemisphere of the sky, centred close to the Pole Star.
Above : Vertical and horizontal composition from Theo Van Doesburg (1916).
The two orbiting electrons of the helium atom form a shell.
The nucleus has two protons and two neutrons.
The mass of the proton is 1836 times that of an electron, yet their electrical charges equate.
The mass of a neutron slightly exceeds that of a proton and, when isolated, a neutron decays into a proton and a negative pion.
An electrically charged atom is known as an ion, positive or negative.
The helium atom without its electrons is known as an alpha particle, and is therefore positively charged.
The diagrams show electron shells of six of the lighter elements.
In elements with multiple electron orbits, the smallest orbits correspond with the lowest energy and these fill up first.
The chemical character of an atom is chiefly determined by the number of electrons in the outermost shell.
Top : Model of a two dimensional electron wave orbiting a nucleus of hydrogen.
The first diagram is incorrect.
The wave cannot be discontinuous.
Below : A graphical representation of: The crystalline structure of silica.
The network structure of glassy silica.
Soda-silica glass.
Top : Model of carbohydrate.
Three natural crystal forms of diamond, which are lattices of carbon formed under great pressure.
The eye seeks and recognises the singularity of a symmetrical pair.
Folding of square, pentagon, ellipse, spider and tetrahedron.
Trees on the English southern coasts usually lean to the north east, obedient to the prevailing wind.
The Law of Moments can be demonstrated on a balance.
A group of similar objects direct attention towards their fulcrum, according to the Law of Moments.
An alternation of foveal and peripheral experiences can be rhythmic and alive.
A series of ellipses, arranged to balance according to the Law of Moments, assume a depth scale by size.
The Law can also be applied to the depth dimension, with a fulcrum in the middle ground.
Three other members of the family are reminiscent of medieval shields.
The Pythagorean harmonic triads are found in Islamic structures, linking a dome to a square base.
These can be related to the master series: 3, 4, 6, 8, infinity.
The π series has an air of mystery.
The scale of textures affects the apparent size and distance of similar shapes.
An alphabet of the pentagon.
Despite interference from elsewhere on this page, the black on the left should seem smaller and more intense than that on the right.
Provision of a strong ground line is essential to the moon effect.
Cusp catastrophe model.
Opposite page : Drawing of a gaseous nebula taken from a photograph published by the Lick Observatory, contrasted with an impression of a hand.
A basic concept, associated with Malevitch, in the search for a maximum expression of energy with minimal means.
Constructivism, by name, originated in Russia but is now international.
A meticulous hierarchy expressed through a maximum interpenetration of simple forms invigorates a structure.
The most convenient forms of lattice grid are direct or offset.
Studies for Kinetic Murals
Stress and strain
Elastic and plastic
A force, tensile or compressive, bearing upon an object is transmitted through its fibres, its grain, as a stress, measured in so many kilogrammes force per square metre of cross section, kgf/m², or pounds force per square foot.
Stress tends to move, or strain , the fibres, crystals, granules or molecules and cause them to slide over one another into a deformation of the material.
If the stress is within the elastic limit of the material, then the deformation will be temporary and the object will resume its original shape when the force is removed.
In the arts, elasticity is usually expressed by attenuation or flexure of a previously established grid: eg, a square pattern becomes a diamond pattern.
Similarly, flexed and bent lines can appear elastic when they are roughly hyperbolic but not turned through more than 45°.
Plasticity occurs in two forms.
It can display the faults, schisms, dislocations, crystalline fractures and slip planes of hard materials or the malleable lattices, folds and lumps of fabrics, plasticine and modelling clay.
Regular polygons represent matter in its coldest state, whereas it is usually more energetic in plastic, viscous, liquid, gaseous and volatile forms in which particles readily inflect, deflect and jostle one another.
Positive form
Whatever the intrinsic properties of a form may be, its reception by our sensory equipment may be distorted by one or other of the many factors that we have considered.
For example, an isolated regular polygon, such as a geometric square, meticulously ruled and cut from plane board, is not necessarily felt and seen as a true square.
The straight edges can seem slightly curved and concave.
The four corners have more energy than the sides and attract attention.
Also they are arrows, pointing outwards and confirming the concavity of each side.
To convert an engineer's square to a sensory square, the concavities can be opposed by positive stressing .
Internal pressure, introduced as a uniformly distributed load, can appear to inflate the square.
If the corners are pinjointed hinges, the sides become parabolic.
If point loads are used, one per side, then each side tends to become hyperbolic, its acuity dependent on the elasticity of edges.
In some circumstances a better curve for countering an apparent concavity of form can be a very flat cycloid, like a five centred arch.
In the extreme, this can convert a geometric rectangle into a superellipse.
Positive stressing of the geometric square could be achieved by the application of negative forces.
External pressure applied diagonally to compress the hinged corners would again convert the sides into positively stressed curves.
Positive and negative stressing
Positive and negative pressures applied to straight edged polygons and polyhedra convert them from the crystalline forms of rocks and earths to the positive and negative, male and female, expressions of life.
The rate of change of curvature reveals the distribution and the relative intensity of internal and external stress and strain, from soft and gentle to cruel and violent.
It can be employed progressively to modulate, by stages, from one shape to another.
Modulation sets up a structural series that echoes the mutative processes of nature.
An equilibrium achieved by balancing the internal and external forces along a continuous boundary will reveal the qualities of the skin.
Whether it is of constant length or is ductile will affect both the area and the shape.
In the case of the square, a perimeter of constant length must pull the corners inwards, as the sides flex outwards.
If the corners are fixed and immoveable, then the square will appear to maintain its rigid shape until it bursts.
Even so, some slight positive curvature can be expected immediately prior to the explosion.
Under normal conditions of plasticity, if the internal and external stresses are not balanced, the form will either expand or contract until equilibrium is achieved.
The strain absorbs the stress.
When the body is elastic, the strain converts kinetic into potential energy…like drawing the string of a longbow, or winding the spring of a clock, or charging an electrical  condensor , or filling a balloon with hot air…and it looks to be alive.
Boundary, skin and lip
A body is motionless, in equilibrium, when all the forces, internal and external, equate to nil along its boundary and at its centroid.
An imbalance of forces can cause rotation when the resultant is non-radial (does not pass through the centroid) and forms a couple with the inertia of the body.
When a resultant is radial, the body can take off, like a rocket or a jet engine.
Alternatively, imbalance of forces can be absorbed into the body, as strain or deformation, until the elastic and plastic limits are reached and the body disintegrates.
The form of a malleable body thus reveals the forces bearing upon it.
The asymmetric deployment of forces can be used to change one geometric form into another.
The intermediate elements comprise a formal series or structure.
It follows that for a shape to assume constancy it must be closed and possess a skin , or comprehensible boundary.
An open form, with even the tiniest of openings, invites entry and permits a continuity of inside and outside space.
Open plan design permits free flow between outside and inside, yet demands both internal and external skins.
The differential stresses set up about an opening usually modify the skin to form a lip.
This is as true of volcanoes and meteoric craters as of the functional orifices of animals.
Similarly, the punctuation of changes of state, such as window frames, doorways, bearings and edging strips are as expressive in painting and music as they are necessary in architecture and mechanics.
A duality of explosion and implosion
A reversal of direction, in space or time, is implicit in the duality of explosion and implosion.
This can be explored graphically as a principle of basic design that is applicable in other arts.
For example, a finite straight line can be transformed into its two dimensional form and thence into its linear dual by applying compressive and tensile forces.
Similarly, more complex forms such as superpolyhedra can be directed through a modular structure to arrive at their duals.
In the diagrams the applied forces are linear and uniformly distributed for simplicity's sake; however this need not be the case.
In the age of Computer Aided Design (CAD) that is arriving, complex modes of transposition and modulation become accessible from linear to volumetric; radial to circumferential; open to closed.
Pneumatic structures
A children's rubber balloon is a positive stressed skin structure of stable and lightweight volume form, provided it is maintained at constant relative pressure ratio and nobody sticks a pin in it.
Recent advances in technology have provided large sheets of nylon, Terylene, PVC and allied byproducts of the fossil fuel industries.
These can be welded to form large scale balloons of varied and ingenious shapes in which human beings might dwell.
Pressure losses, at airlocked entrances for example, are compensated by a service pump geared to a pressure gauge inside the structure.
Pneumatic structures are flexible, lightweight, collapsible and thus comparatively easy to transport and repair.
Their usage is likely to increase wherever their advantages overcome their vulnerability to puncture and the service pump can be provided with a constant fuel supply.
All stressed skin structures exhibit a minimum surface tension that can contain the applied forces.
Some of their characteristics can be observed in soap bubbles and films.
Surface tension
Soap films, obtained by withdrawing a closed frame from a soap and water solution, were first investigated by Joseph Plateau (1801–1883).
Planes of soap solution have the property that only three can intersect along an edge at an angle between them of 120°.
The tension in the films draws them towards minimum surface area.
Sometimes alternative configurations are formed by either fundamental or local minima.
The thickness of a soap film in thermodynamic equilibrium is between 30 and 70 Angstrom units.
According to Helmholtz, the free energy F in a system always tends towards a minimum.
Therefore F = TA , where T is a constant surface tension and A is the surface area.
If air is trapped in the system, producing a bubble,F has a contribution,F °, from the bubble:F = TA + F °.
Models based on soap films have many practical applications in the investigation of minimum surface areas.
All organisms exhibit these properties in varying degree; however they are displayed in purest form in the skeletons of micro-organisms such as Radiolaria .
Reciprocal forces
The duality of forces is expressed by movement and change.
Reciprocity of movement recognises that as I move towards A ,A moves towards me.
Movement is always relative.
Yet the two activities can precipitate opposite emotional qualities.
My movement is active, by my energy, with A as target.
On the other hand A 's movement renders me passive, as its target.
These can be very different experiences.
The boat and tide story can illustrate another source of illusion.
Given a 4 mile stretch of placid water above a lock, a round trip in a 4 mph rowing boat will take 2 hours.
If a 2 mph current flows when the lock is released, the round trip will take longer.
The assistance of a fair tide is not as great as the hindrance of a foul tide — as any boatman will tell.
With the current, the 4 miles takes ⅔ hours.
Against the current, the 4 mile trip takes 2 hours.
Total time = 2⅔ hours.
The Doppler effect
The Doppler effect is an example of the effect of the movement of a radiating body on the wavelength of radiations.
A train whistle or siren has a higher pitch as the train approaches than when it recedes.
The wavelength of radiations is compressed ahead of the train and expanded behind it.
Light is also obedient to this effect so that light received from an approaching body has a blue shift and from a receding body a red shift .
Observation that the red shift in light received from distant galaxies increases with distance, has led to theories of an expanding universe that originated in a big bang.
Optical illusions
The recognition of things creates a figure and ground relationship (see ‘Foveal and peripheral vision’; while focusing on the object, the background is out of focus).
We judge the size of an object by direct comparison of the figure and ground scales and this can be a source of illusion.
Similarly the desire for closure, usually necessary to the recognition of an object, can lead to illusory assumptions.
This is most common in the case of overlapping when it can be falsely assumed that part of a continuous form is obscured from view.
The recognition of a closed form is so intense that it seems to condense.
The intervals seem proportionately to increase.
In a regular line of buttons, their spacing will seem greater than it actually is, unless they are touching.
The perception of depth is not entirely dependent on bifocal vision.
This faculty is supplemented by seven secondary factors: superposition or overlapping; comparative size in perspective; shadow projection; atmospheric perspective that blues and greys distant objects; height on the picture plane; filled and empty distance; and parallax of movement.
Flexure
Any two stimuli, brought into juxtaposition, affect one another.
They inflect or deflect to a common force field, physical, sensual or emotional.
For example, the branches of a tree diminish in section according to their loading.
It is therefore very difficult to draw a tree, however improbably, with branches that get thicker towards the top.
The product asserts a strange, supernatural vigour.
Sometimes this property can be suggested visually by putting the subject into extreme perspective, offering a close-up, end-on view.
Normal tree branches are, like the limbs of most living things, cantilevers capable of dealing with considerable bending and tortional or twisting moments.
These tend to be greater at the junctions which are strengthened by additional flowlines of fibres.
The skeleton of a vertebrate reveals a similar thickening of the bones near the joints, augmented to permit rotation of the hinges.
These principles can be applied to energise and bring to life the hard edges of Euclidean geometry and of the drawing board.
Lines should vary in thickness according to their loading.
Even the principle that struts should be shorter and stouter than ties can be applied to lines.
They can recognise also that the joints of a tie must withstand tearing, whereas those of a strut must resist buckling.
All may be subjected to tortion, while their elasticity may vary.
But at all times, if they are of one body, they will display continuity of programme.
These conditions can be extended into all aspects of human communication and design, even including the design and selection of type faces.
Tensile structures
Structures predominantly based on tensile members offer big savings in self weight and lend themselves to lightweight and long span conditions.
A uniformly distributed load can be supported by a hanging, catenary chain one thirtieth the cross section of a simply supported beam.
The chain can have the disadvantage of deformation under a superimposed point load.
Its depression immediately under the load is compensated by elevation elsewhere in the chain.
Such deformation can be minimised by linking suspension cables to tensioning cables, converting them into a series of straight lengths.
The tensioning cables need not be parallel in plan to the suspension cables.
They are often most convenient at right angles in plan, but could be devised on a semi-radial principle.
Verticality is exciting
Some human dimensions command more energy than others.
Looking upwards is more tiring than looking down.
Verticality generally is more energetic than horizontality.
A stimulus thrusting towards one is more energetic and aggressive than a similar stimulus moving away.
Moving into a situation is usually less tiring than backing away.
These experiences affect our perception.
A measured, geometric square, stood on edge, seems too tall.
To become a sensory square it can need a reduction of as much as a twentieth in its height.
Experiment will reveal that any regular polygon needs similar adjustment to transform a geometric shape into a sensory image.
Most people, asked to stride a slope of 1 in 10, will regard it as quite steep.
It is the maximum allowed in most driveways for safe use of motorcars.
Yet it represents an angle to the horizontal of less than 6°.
Because of its demands on our energy in dealing with gravity, we take it to be steeper than in fact it is.
Certainly verticality can be used to transform a small and uninteresting garden.
For the cost of a few cubic feet of topsoil, the garden can be terraced excitingly onto, say, three levels.
With risers of nor more than a foot, it will put more interest into the garden than twice the planting in the plain.
Distance by impediment
Most journeys are measured by the energy needed to traverse them.
Distances are judged accordingly.
Visually it is less tiring for the eye to follow a smooth than a serrated or intermittent line.
Consequently the former seems shorter.
Similarly any path filled with impediments and matters of diverse interest will seem longer than an uninterrupted and invariant passage.
Experiment also shows that the eye learns to travel along the upper edge of a line in preference to the lower edge.
The silhouette
When objects are subject to gravity or are otherwise attached to a deck, the silhouette is more significant than the ground line.
Memorable works of art have memorable silhouettes, whether they be architecture, sculpture, painting or, by analogy, writing and music.
Whenever identity can be encapsulated by the plot, the plan, the theme, the outline, it will command a silhouette.
In a large construction the silhouette of the ground floors, entrances, exits and more intimate areas can take precedence over the structure as a whole (see ‘Foveal and peripheral vision’) and thus become its representative.
The microcosm becomes the macrocosm: the key to the whole universe may well be hidden in one hydrogen atom.
In traditional music, melody provided a silhouette, usually established in the treble clef, while the bass provided a ground line, with periodic counterchange.
In contemporary experimental music, the emphases are sometimes reversed.
A highly repetitive, textured and grouped baseline is promoted by a series of small mutations that do not interrupt its continuity.
It can thus encapsulate a space-time, acting as a skin or silhouette within which local perturbations and even isolated notes can command attention.
Architecturally, the Pompidou Centre in Paris employs such characteristics.
Scanning and perception
The scanning and perception of an area, and thus a volume, depends on two activities.
Exploration of the closed silhouette describes a perimeter to give it shape, while a scanning of the content reveals an internal space.
The two activities can occur independently.
The quality of a line, hard or soft, lost and found, can be merely recording the random movement of, say, a pencil point that makes no conscious claim upon area.
Similarly, the textural and structural elements of a space can be surveyed to reveal an intrinsic scale and intensity of energy.
Is it close or open packed?
Has it a dimensional or polar bias?
Without necessarily revealing a shape or boundary.
The perception of area, volume and movement is a complex activity in which the space and its boundary are interdependent and the quality of one affects the other.
The boundary becomes a skin.
The space becomes a shape.
In the example, top right, the apparent shape of the rectangles is influenced by their content.
The aim of our theoretical work is always, in one form or another, the organisation of differences into unity, the combination of organs into an organism…
The analytical approach is useful to us because it makes us familiar with the parts and the way they work together.
A work, however, is not primarily a product, a work that is, but first and foremost genesis, work in progress.
No work is predetermined; every work begins somewhere with a motif and outgrows its organ to become an organism.
Likewise structure, which is what we are aiming at here, does not spring up ready-made, but is developed from interior and exterior motifs into its parts and thence into a whole…
In summing up we may say: something has been made visible which could not have been perceived without the effort to make it visible.
from The Sixth Exercise given by Paul Klee at the Bauhaus, 3 July 1922 from Paul Klee Notebooks Volume 1: The thinking eye 
Variations on a theme of dot, line and circle.
Positive form can be introduced into any polygon or polyhedron by regarding it as a closed skin subjected to internal expansion.
The positive rectangle can approach the superellipse, reminiscent of the Desmid , an algae of about 0.5 mm (0.02 inch) diameter.
The positive forms of living creatures express the internal pressure of their circulatory systems.
Concavity and negative forms are associated with elastic orifices, suction, closure and decline.
Positive and negative forms can be combined to form limbs.
An unclosed form is in a state of change, opening or closing, sucking or pouting.
Change from one form to another is shown by transition forms.
This technique can relate a shape to its dual, eg, a dual of a horizontal line is a vertical line.
Their duality can be resolved  spacially into a square.
Similarly, the dual of a square is a linear cross: the dual of a nought is a dynamic cross.
Stress patterns likewise reveal an opposition of tension and compression patterns in radial and circumferential forcefields; like cracking patterns.
Top : A transition from a triangular grid to an hexagonal grid.
Bottom : Interactive dualities in Platonic solids:(a) Two tetrahedrons (b) A cube and an octahedron (c) A dodecahedron and an icosahedron.
The distance between the black diamonds seems longer than their diagonals.
The outer boundary of a closed figure usually defines its size.
The concept triangle can be evoked by selected parts.
Bottom right : Spacial illusion derived from work by Ames.
Top left : Chevron grids affect superimposed lines and can lead to moiré effects.
Top right : Thiéry's figure demonstrates a visual ambiguity arising from a lack of vanishing points.
The Sander Parallelogram distorts the apparent dimensions of an isosceles right angled triangle.
Lines and edges inflect to one another as they approach and cross.
The three overlapping squares actually comprised one square and two L's.
Bottom left : The Müller-Lyer illusion.
The compressive strength of most constructional materials exceeds their tensile strength; therefore, the failure of a strut is usually due to buckling or gyration.
In most cases the slenderness ratio of effective length to minimum diameter of a strut at mid-span should not exceed 20:1.
The squeezing and elongation of materials is a basic design expression, nowhere better explored than in Baroque architecture of the eighteenth century and, more recently, abstract expressionism of the twentieth century.
Sliding a pattern along a series of slip planes imparts energy.
The square and the triangle on the left have been slightly reduced in height.
The rectangles have the same geometric dimensions, yet the vertical rectangle seems longer.
Top : The energising of a surface by apparent rotation of a square was devised by Victor Vasareley.
A serrated upper edge of a line lengthens the journey.
A minimal outline is sufficient to suggest familiar things.
The silhouette of St Peter's, Rome, is dominated by Michelangelo's dome (built between 1546 and 1581).
Left : Which ellipse appears largest?
Which claims precedence?
Endotropic treatment, a favourite painter's device, loses the corners of a rectangle and emphasises the centre.
Exotropic treatment emphasises the edges.
Dramatisation
We are so made that we can derive intense enjoyment only from a contrast and very little from a state of things.
Civilization and its Discontents , Sigmund Freud Translated by James Strachey
Drama and antidrama
Dramatisation is the process of making an experience more exciting, vivid, emotionally stirring and memorable.
This is visually achieved by emphasising some aspects of an experience at the expense of others.
Selection, abstraction and hierarchy are of its essence: and these to be reordered, grouped and juxtaposed to maximum effect.
Overemphasis,hamming it up , leads to the exaggerations of satire, cartooning, melodrama and farce.
The converse of drama, antidrama, is the predictable, invariant mishmash of everyday life that leads everywhere and gets nowhere.
It is the greyed inconsequence of peripheral events.
Antidrama should not be confused with the studied understatement, the unrepentant modesty of the true gentleman, for this is a product of drama.
Understatement is most effective when in stark contrast with a highly charged force field.
The calm sufficiency of the born leader is most dramatic when confronting, like Columbus, the inadequacy of his cringing, fearcrazed crew!
Drama is a communication of contrast and change, of conflict, collision and rivalry, both crude and subtle, whereas antidrama is an unrelenting repetition that leads through boredom to apathy and oblivion.
In an urban society, which by its sheer size and evolving technology is largely insulated from even the seasonal changes of nature, the sense of social antidrama can be profound.
Unfortunately, much of the drab utilitarianism of urban existence has come to be associated with the design philosophy of functionalism.
But this is unjust to what has been a most important influence on modern design.
Functionalism
The idea that a design should fulfil required functions to maximum efficiency, unprejudiced by past practice, opinion or fashion, has achieved massive successes, particularly in the design of multiples and mass production.
Le Corbusier's opinion that a house is a machine to live in is no longer disputed; just as planners now regard a town as a machine to live in.
Failures in the application of Functionalism have derived from an incorrect definition of ‘live in’.
Functionalists have not always given sufficient priority to man's joy in his senses, and the need for enrichment and ornamentation of his environment.
Appropriate sensory requirements, a hint of unique to me , should be included in the design criteria of every object to be used by mankind.
As its title suggests, Functionalism tends to reduce a problem, and its solution, to bare essentials.
A simplistic analysis and synthesis of function is pursued and this tends to eliminate the interlocution, the din and the vigour, the extravagances and the variety that casual solutions might offer.
Attempts to order, regulate and to ‘tidy up’ the apparently haphazard configurations of nature can themselves be regarded as neutral processes.
Their occurrence seems to be cyclic and may well express the evolution of levels of consciousness.
Levels of consciousness
Most cultures recognise three broad stages of development, in both the individual and the group:(a)Primitive response to nature : Nature is accepted as containing all systems of order and mankind attempts its interpretation by immediate response to its stimuli.
The process can involve great technical skill.
(b)Conscious order : By means of number, geometry, language and reason mankind seeks to impose an intellectual order on his observations of nature.
Working through the design spectrum (discussed later in this chapter) he seeks algorithms and risks being entrapped by them.
(c)Superconscious order : A few privileged mortals (artists and scientists alike) have worked through stage (b) to emerge with a hypersensitivity to the interrelated principles involved.
They commune with the subtleties of organic growth and decay and work with an intuition of a higher order than in stage (a).
Emotive fragments
Our emotions are aroused by symbols and associated ideas that can be classified as emotive fragments.
These can be local family and club emblems and songs such as those to be heard in soccer stadia.
Or they may be national anthems, flags and romantic notions, like the English thatched cottage under a spreading chestnut tree.
Every group of human beings has a set of agreed emotive fragments.
Beyond these, at a deeper level, images exist that can trigger emotions in all mankind.
It is these that modern art, and science, is seeking.
Julian Huxley, the biologist and writer, believed that the intellect is the sum of all emotions.
If so, then the intellectual enrichment of the forms and surfaces of our general environment will also offer emotional stimulation.
Similarly, the dramatisation of emotive fragments can stimulate the intellect.
The enrichment of forms and surfaces acts as a social catalyst.
Its traditional use as ornament on and in temples, churches, stadia and other public buildings serves to integrate the social and personal roles of every citizen.
Its neglect has imperilled both the culture and the respect for social order in many contemporary towns and cities.
Inside the home it continues to express the status and intimate preferences of the occupants.
The competitive pressures of the market place have restrained industrial designers from the austerities that afflicted architects.
Most successful businessmen recognise that sensuality, not always of the most edifying quality, positively affects their sales.
Fortunately their customers are becoming more sophisticated and the styling of motor cars, typewriters, telephones and the like is now as critical as their engineering properties.
The design spectrum
The solution of problems is approached by seven broad methods, often referred to as the design spectrum.
(1)Ratio and proportion : simple comparisons of number, size and quality (Herbin, Rothko, Kline).
(2)Induction : reasoning from the particular to the general (Van Gogh, Cézanne, de Staël).
(3)Deduction : reasoning from the general to the particular (Miró, Moore, Pasmore).
(4)Analogy : partial similarity.
If things agree in one particular, they may agree in others (Klee, Mondrian, Matisse).
(5)Metaphor : substitution of objects or actions that emphasises selected characteristics (Chagall, Gauguin, Magritte).
(6)Heuristics : The exploration of chance; discovery by trial and error; nature's method (Klee, Pollock, de Kooning).
(7)Algorithm : computation by prearranged steps intended to solve a specified problem (Seurat, Monet, Vasareley).
These processes are used by scientists and artists alike.
The painters listed are examples of the dramatisation of the methods .
Although they may not have used the above terminology, their written statements confirm the evidence in their work.
In fact, therein lies the key to their achievements, for a work of art is the solution to a problem.
It has differed from science in that the solution has also been the problem.
This is no longer the case: scientists today are facing a similar dilemma!
Elegance of solution = 
This is derived from a Fechner-Birkoff formula for assessing works of art.
It has, today, been adapted to measure the effectiveness of operational research .
Our journeys on the whiteboard suggest that it holds the key to our concepts of beauty.
The formula attains a high mark when a diversity of variables is woven into a unified design.
The methods of the design spectrum can be subdivided into two groups, pivoting about ratio and proportion to form a cross:
Vertical thinking
Vertical thinking is an alternation of the processes of deduction and induction to find and prove algorithms that hold true for all known applications.
When new information arrives that cannot be satisfactorily accepted by the existing algorithm or model , then it must be adjusted or a search for a more comprehensive algorithm commences.
Vertical thinking is, therefore, the major tool of the mathematician, the philosopher and the scientist.
The following problem solving technique is derived from the practice of work study and management consultancy.
To be successful it should be applied in meticulous detail.
Even so its application is not reserved to science and technology.
Though he may not know it, it is broadly the procedure of a creative artist who seeks to redefine his criteria of success , perhaps over the period of his lifetime.
Stage 1 A Define the problem B Simplify definition of the problem C State criteria of success D Put criteria into hierarchy E Define critical criterion of success Stage 2 F Redefine the problem, from Stage 1 findings G Define the parameters H Reconsider the criteria of success and their hierarchy Stage 3 J Subject findings to critical examination K Repeat the procedure for each emergent detail, as for the whole
Critical examination procedure (Stage 3, J above )
A
State the activity
B
Why is it necessary?
C
How is it to be performed?
D
Can it be eliminated?
E
Can it be combined with another activity?
F
Can it be done at a different time?
G
Can it be done at a different place?
H
What is its hierarchic significance?
Horizontal thinking
One flaw in the techniques of vertical thinking is that they proceed from the known into the unknown.
They are built on axioms that may or may not be universally true, and can carry false assumptions with them.
Consequently it is possible, even likely, that their observations may have a built-in bias that is the more confining because it is unconscious.
It is as though the information, induced and deduced by the techniques, were observed through tinted spectacles that obscure certain types of information.
Our means of removing such spectacles is by way of horizontal or lateral thinking (see the works of Edward de Bono).
The conscious use of analogy, metaphor, playing a hunch, brainstorming, sheer chance, trial and error or heuristics are the stuff of the think tank , where lively minds, well versed in vertical thinking, strike imaginative sparks one from another.
For history reveals, time and again, that while vertical thinking can bring our full intellectual powers to bear upon a problem and thus to consolidate a position, it is chance that causes us to stumble upon it (both the problem and its possible solution) in the first place.
But is it chance?
Could it be an incident in a Masterplan that we do not yet comprehend?
Nature uses heuristics.
But, as we observe it, nature is not evolving completely at random.
Its use of mutation and chance seems to occur within restraints; within an algorithm that we are still trying to decipher.
Certain axioms seem self-evident.
The first being survival: of the individual, the group, the species, of life itself.
Of the big bang?
Of chance?
Certainly nature's use of chance, by accident, incident or mutation, is therefore selective and subject to sensitive principles of a physical, chemical, organic and (many of us suspect) a spiritual, balance: a universal ecology.
Chance
The conscious exploitation of random configurations is an essential and exciting technique in both modern art and modern science.
But chance without restraint is chaos .
A bedlam in which its disordered assault upon the senses becomes repetitious .
To achieve coherence, therefore, the designer must state his parameters, his criteria of success, as precisely and restrictively as possible, before setting up conditions that exploit chance variations on a theme.
This is the essential condition for all forms of extemporisation, as exemplified in jazz music.
Stravinsky commented in Poetics of Music :
My freedom thus consists in my moving about within the narrow frame that I have assigned myself for each one of my undertakings.
I shall go even further: my freedom will be so much the greater and more meaningful the more narrowly I limit my field of action and the more I surround myself with obstacles.
Whatever diminishes constraint diminishes strength.
The more constraints one imposes, the more one frees one's self of the claims that shackle the spirit.
It can be argued therefore that the restraints of Functionalism, if prepared with the genius of a Stravinsky, a Mondrian, a Nervi, a Lloyd Wright or a Corbusier permit magnificent freedom within each disciplined field.
Algorithm
The antithesis of chance is an ordered structure, repetitious and predictable: an algorithm.
A waveform such as 1 2 4 3 5 6 8 7 9 10 12 11 remains peripheral.
So does 134213421342, the conventional firing order of a four cylinder internal combustion engine.
This sequence was selected to reduce the likelihood of standing stress waves in the body of the engine.
Once the engine is running smoothly, a backfire can be dramatic.
Timed to occur just when you are selling a car, a backfire can be memorable!
It is a violation of expectation .
Violation of expectation
Violation of expectation can occur in both melodic and harmonic lines; however it is subject to certain restraints.
If a pattern of anticipation is to be disrupted, it must first be established.
The pattern must suggest a capacity to continue after the violation, if only as an echo.
Therefore, to have meaning, the disruption must share at least one dimension with both the structure and the observer.
Drama can be produced by juxtaposing the ordinary with the extraordinary, the usual and the unusual.
In science fiction, for example, two forms of confrontation are available.
Either quite normal people, like the neighbours next door, are transported into extraordinary circumstances, or a routine everyday humanoid way of life is invaded by strange creatures possessing extraordinary powers.
Although the experiences of strange creatures in a strange setting may be highly imaginative, they become dramatic only when we can identify with them emotionally.
Science fiction thus illustrates a principle of all drama: it is a confrontation between normality and abnormality, security and insecurity, known and unknown, to be or not to be!
Drama is a meeting and a rivalry of human antitheses.
Dada
Dada is an event that took place between 1916 and 1922 releasing such creative energies that its reverberations and influences remain part of our daily lives: particularly among the young at heart and the rebellious.
Dada claimed to be a nihilist reaction to the positivist disciplines of Traditionalism, Expressionism, Cubism and Futurism.
Yet in both its anti-art and anti-dada stages it makes a positive contribution to modern art.
Its manifestation, in neutral Switzerland during the First World War, rapidly spread through post-war Europe as a declaration of personal freedom.
To this end, every object, every thought, everything idolised and admired was turned on its head, mocked and misplaced.
Johannes Baader later wrote:
Dada was a state of mind feverishly exalted by the freedom virus, a unique mixture of insatiable curiosity, playfulness and pure contradiction.
And Marcel Duchamp claimed:
If I say it is a work of art, it is work of art.
Therefore a urinal or a bicycle wheel, presented as an objet d'art , at a suitably exorbitant price, became a desirable objet d'art .
Of course the principle is open to exploitation.
That was the point of Dada's challenge to all established values.
Dada was an assault upon  hypocracy and humbug.
It also exploited the means of asserting  hypocracy and humbug, creating its own contradiction.
Dada released an amazing fount of creativity that had been largely repressed by the ethics of previous centuries.
To quote Hugo Ball:
It was an adventure even to find a stone, a clock movement, a tram ticket, a pretty leg, an insect, the corner of one's own room; all these things could inspire pure and direct feeling.
When art is brought into line with everyday life and individual experience, it is exposed to the same risks, the same unforeseeable laws of chance, the same interplay of living forces.
Art is no longer a ‘serious and weighty’ emotional stimulus, nor a sentimental tragedy, but the fruit of experience and joy in life.
Odd man out
Changing the order or magnitude of just one term in a series is a violation of expectation.
In the kingdom of the blind the one-eyed man is king…but he is usually very lonely…
Any unusual incident in a peripheral series will attract attention.
Dada consciously explored chance configurations of visual and aural signs, symbols and images, in both deed and word.
Duchamp and Man Ray attempted to anaesthetise judgement and choice when exhibiting found objects .
Their poetry emerged from found words and phrases .
By the random selection of single items, they drew attention to the multitude of peripheral experiences that form the texture of life itself.
Yet they failed to achieve absolute chance.
In Lieschen , Kurt Schwitters finds:
There is no such thing as change.
A door may happen to fall shut, but this is not by chance.
It is a conscious experience of the door, the door, the door, the door.
Surrealism
Surrealism was inspired by the Freudian exploration of dreams and launched, in 1922, by André Breton into the intellectual ferment caused by Dadaism .
The world of dreams, with its irrational juxtaposition of images, challenged the constructivist endeavour to build a new, modern, geometry.
From the first, Surrealism was theatrical.
To quote Lautréamont:
Beautiful as the chance encounter of a sewing machine and an umbrella upon an operating table.
Its use of analogy and metaphor exploited a simplistic emotive imagery that could be readily interpreted.
The use of  invertions of hierarchy, anecdote and paradox by de Chirico, Magritte, Ernst, Dali and many others in painting quickly found expression in the cinema and all forms of commercial promotion and later in ‘pop’ art, ‘pop’records and ‘pop’posters.
Biomorphic forms
At poetic levels the subtler ironies of Dada guided the geometry of Constructivism into the biomorphic imagery of Arp, Picasso, Klee, Miró, and, of course, Moore.
In Moore's work flintstones, ground and chipped by sun and sea, are married to bones that have strained to flesh, sinew and muscle, to breed positive forms.
Creatures, men and women and things, of bronze and marble, breathe the same air as we do.
They do not illustrate or copy familiar images, but live their own independent lives according to their own programmes.
The artist has thus become a God, privileged to breathe life into otherwise inanimate material, paint, clay, metal or stone.
The making of things
Modern art is motivated by the idea of art for creativity's sake , energising an intrinsic life force and asserting independence of both artist and observer.
The artist is involved in the manufacture of things, individual things: like the works of Modigliani, or Kupka, or de Kooning, de Staël, Matisse, Moore, Braque, Miró, Picasso, Bacon, Rothko, Newman, Kline…
Vasareley!
Modern art is directed at a public largely untutored in the fine arts amidst a rapid expansion of the means of communication.
Attempts to energise old materials by bringing them together in new ways compete with experiments in new materials, such as electronics and rapid hardening plastics.
Inevitably, novelty is confused with genuine innovation.
Only the passage of time is revealing a broad evolutionary stream that springs from Constructivism and is nourished by various forms of Expressionism, such as Dada and Surrealism.
Dramatic configurations
The use of logic in modern art is multifaceted.
Herbert Read described Constructivism as an ‘Art of Determined Relations’.
Neoplasticism dispensed with all curvature while Cubism was contrasting it with straights.
Purism was an exercise in reason and even the Dadaists arrived at their apparent absurdities by a process of rational thought.
Modern art has been quite self-conscious in its exploration of psycho-physical data and its use of dramatic purpose.
It has thus, even in its periodic rebellion against itself, built an academism.
The exploration of dramatic configurations has revealed possibilities that are so many and varied that any list would be incomplete, if only for lack of tomorrow's development.
However certain basic principles have emerged and a selection from these are discussed.
Proximity was discussed in Chapter 4, in terms of events, intervals and clustering.
It can also be considered in terms of the observer's situation.
Is he remote, viewing from a safe distance, or really involved?
The remote view reveals the degree of isolation of a cluster in the vastness of space; like a fly on a blank wall.
As it is approached, its shape, then major, then minor subunits can be discerned progressively until it is under close scrutiny, from a safe distance.
Although it may fill both our physical and mental viewing frames, we remain detached from it and have not entered the cluster.
If we get sufficiently close, the experience can be memorable, but for high drama we need to summon our courage to enter the cluster.
Touch it, taste it, feel it.
Such intimacy requires careful selection of a detail that is representative of the whole.
When the microcosm presents an experience of the macrocosm, it is dramatic indeed.
Like man's first steps upon the Moon.
For centuries we had studied the Moon through telescopes and, latterly, from satellites.
But no previous experience compared with the handling of real Moon rocks, in situ, and their subsequent journey to Earth.
Analogous situations in our everyday lives are too obvious to require further comment, other than that they, too, have dramatic potential.
Sun and satellites — the juxtaposition of large and small, like medieval dwellings clustered about the foot of a towering chateau or cathedral; or like ducklings seeking the protection and domination of their mother.
To provide a dramatic contrast that is also a unity, the sun must be truly dominant and its satellites must be a family that shares a common property of shape and size: just like an atom or a solar system.
The near miss is exciting; even shocking.
And so is that instant of anticipation when it seems that two bodies must collide, brutally, and one is helpless to stop it.
Yet for the moment there is still hope, a desperate hope of a near miss.
Or like the boulder, poised precariously on the very edge of a cliff so that the slightest puff of wind will bring it crashing down.
Or that moment that all warriors know, the hush that seems to silence the wind itself, as the day of battle dawns.
The prod is not to be confused with the caress which gently brushes a surface.
Whereas the former invades territory, the latter respects boundaries.
They can thus be suitable adversaries for a dramatic confrontation.
The embrace can be taken to extremes.
It can be a clasp that grips and devours and from which there is no escape.
Or it can be an offer of shelter, of friendship, a port in a storm.
Similarity groups tend to be more unified than proximity groups, and they can be set in competition .
The alternation of stretching and squeezing can be rhythmic.
It can be used to dramatise the competition between proximity and similarity.
Dramatic potential can be found in any challenge to an established normality.
A man doing a handstand in the town centre is likely to arouse interest.
Five men doing handstands are likely to be regarded as a conspiracy against the public interest.
Their relationship with the community has considerable dramatic potential.
Just like the cube standing on a vertex, discussed in Chapter 7.
Catastrophe , as discussed in Chapter 13, can be linked with inevitability, to assert dramatic power.
Once a repetition has been observed to flow, it can be dammed like a river, building up the pressure until it becomes irresistible and the dam bursts.
Hit and rest
Repetition dulls receptivity (as discussed in Chapter 3).
Even the most exciting events require a period of rest in which their reverberations may subside, before they are repeated.
The interval permits time for contemplation and anticipation.
Rhythmic grouping procedures organise the alternation of hits and rests.
Robert Mitchum, the Hollywood film star, once described his films as:
A sequence in which they knock me down and I get up.
Then they knock me down, I think it over and get up.
So they knock me down and I shake my head and I get up.
So they knock me down…
In a first-rate film this happens plenty of times.
The designer's problem is to devise sufficient variety of ways to knock him down, revive him and weave a pattern of rests between the peaks of conflict.
Ian Fleming's James Bond stories each contain about thirteen peaks, offering plenty of excitement.
A major triad of characters comprises Bond, the Master Villain, the primary Girl Friend.
The secondary triad comprises a rival agent, a vicious hit-man for the opposition and a series of pretty girls.
Ancillary triads are formed at the headquarters of both Bond and the Master Villain.
Hierarchy and number
In any memorable play the characters are scaled.
It is the genius of Shakespeare that his plays offer plenty of fully written parts to a band of players.
In Macbeth , for example, the organisation of numeracy of players, hits and rests, is magnificent.
Duncan, King of Scotland, has two sons.
He is murdered by Macbeth, Thane of Glamis (and later of Cawdor), so that Macbeth can claim the kingdom.
Seven other thanes figure in the story, of which Banquo and Macduff hold key roles.
Banquo is a passive symbol of friendship betrayed.
Macduff is an active instrument of righteous vengeance.
Of the two wives, lady Macbeth is active and Lady Macduff is passive.
Three weird sisters,three other witches and three murderers figure in the plot to provide on-stage movement.
The contents of the witches brew has a touch of Dada .
The second witch's contribution is, for example:
Fillet of a fenny snake
In the cauldron boil and bake;
Eye of newt, and toe of frog,
Wool of bat, and tongue of dog,
Adder's fork, and blind-worm's sting,
Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell-broth, boil and bubble.
Counterpoint
Ultimately drama resolves into the juxtaposition of antitheses.
Though they are interdependent, the head and tail of a coin battle for supremacy.
In counterpoint, two contrasting themes which share a common space-time scale discuss, compete, debate, argue, fight for their points of view.
Each must be a convincing contender and although the conflict may be resolved in the favour of one, the other cannot be obliterated.
When the coin comes to rest head up, the tail must be underneath!
One sustains the other.
As one rises the other declines and the discourse is maintained through variations upon the two themes and alternation of supremacy.
Drama, counterpoint can be enriched beyond bald competition between two themes by the use of transitions and interweaving sub-plots.
The scenario
Everything designed by man, actively by the making of a thing or passively by the comprehension of signals, acquires a scenario.
Its locality, outline and centroid may define a town centre, a kitchen, a command module or a cassette player, but within it a hierarchy of players and activities will emerge.
The enrichment of the master plot by interweaving sub-plots renders it significant and memorable.
The cassette player becomes a music centre !
The fulfilment of expectation
It is not possible to predict the unimaginable.
Therefore any expectation is a projection into the future of past experiences or a combination of past experiences.
And to be anticipated these should have a capability of fulfilment, if only as fantasy.
It then becomes a dramatic possibility to violate the anticipation.
A subsequent fulfilment becomes the happy ending.
Alternatively the violation can be inverted; like a black comedy, or the assertion of a stark revenge or retribution.
Useless information
Perhaps the essential clue to dramatisation was given in the discovery that new born babies enjoy solving problems .
We enjoy mysteries, so long as they do not threaten our person.
Better still, we enjoy solving mysteries: and if we cannot solve them then, when the auspices are right, they can acquire the aura of magic.
To this end, disguise can be part of nature's game.
But it must not be false; that would be downright cheating and nature cannot cheat.
Nature misleads to a purpose, like the use of camouflage to deceive predators.
Nature's mysteries frequently stem from ambiguities and extremes of scale: for example, an x-ray scanner is needed to show that over 99 per cent of solid matter is empty space.
Yet we have been programmed to be curious, to question, to probe and to seek to solve riddles.
And as part of that process, we attempt to imitate and parallel nature's wonders and its creativity.
To this end there can be no such thing as useless information.
Each item can reveal some facet of nature's purpose and can become a spur to our imagination.
If it appears useless then we have not yet understood its function in the order of things: it is not yet woven into a personally cohesive pattern of ideas and events.
Knowingness
Yet to function as designers, our priority is the need to comprehend a cohesive pattern that contains the problem we wish to solve.
For at the moment of creativity, the designer draws upon a knowingness , an intuition either subconscious or superconscious that is a multidimensional encapsulation of both problem and solution.
Momentarily these two become one.
The problem is the solution.
The solution is the problem.
Overall comprehension of this order requires either a complete assimilation of all relevant information on the lines described by Descartes, or an instant of penetrating insight that we may classify as a Gift from God .
By either course we need a considerable background of information that may seem to be largely useless until the creative moment arrives.
This is perhaps why many an ageing schoolteacher smiles benignly when his students demand: ‘Why are you giving us this information?
We see no use for it.’
Knowledge is knowledge.
Who can say what will or will not contribute to the solution of problems?
In 1896, as a 21 year old French medical student preparing a thesis for his MD degree, Ernest Augustin Clement Duchesne unmistakably demonstrated the antibacterial action of Penicillium (see Scientific American , November 1978) and recommended that further research might lead to new developments that could prove directly applicable to prophylactic hygiene and therapy.
This pioneering work was ignored by his contemporaries and when Alexander Fleming first noted, by chance, the antibacterial action of Penicillium mould in 1928, he was completely unaware that his discovery had been anticipated.
In 1945, after sharing with Chain and Florey the Nobel prize for physiology and medicine, Fleming, in a speech given in Lyon, paid generous tribute to the work of Duchesne, which by then was known to him.
For nigh on fifty years Penicillium had been useless.
Technological scales
Similarly, it seems only yesterday that we romantics were vigorously defending the vast technological resources invested in space research and travel.
The critics argued that the space probes were a useless waste of money in words that were amazingly similar to those recorded against Columbus some four and a half centuries earlier.
Yet today information sent back from extraterrestrial space is unveiling an awesome picture of our physical universe.
Not only of its fastnesses and vastnesses but also of the minute detailing of existence upon our own planet: its climatic patterns and the plate tectonics that give rise to earthquakes, volcanoes, fold mountains and the oceanic ridges.
But perhaps more important, at this time when the infancy of our species must end, we have an astronaut's view of Earth rise above the horizon of the Moon to teach us that we live on a tiny island in a vast ocean of energy, space and time.
Meanwhile the massive technological ‘spin-off’ from the space programmes promises to change our social and working lives completely during the next two decades.
The age of microelectronics, automation and biological engineering has arrived.
These technologies carry their own intrinsic scales which are not human yet can render unprecedented service to mankind.
It is therefore more than ever essential that we modulate our human scale through all the new processes of social order that are about to dawn.
And from a few basic observations we have learned that even all may be relative.
Total space
The idea of total space no longer sounds strange to the European whose once implacable materialism has been subjected to both Dada and contemporary science.
Oriental philosophies have long been conscious of the ultimate duality of awareness.
Just as up cannot exist without down, left without right, hot without cold, so existence is a condition of non-existence, space of non-space, being of non-being.
It is interesting to learn that nuclear scientists are now seeking the particles necessary to anti-matter and may have found some of them.
Flux and the echo sounder
Form thus becomes a condition of non-form and, however stable it may seem, all that can be observed in our universe is the existential process of change from one state to another.
If this is viewed with an optimism that assumes and seeks ultimate order, then the artist, the technologist, the scientist, each in his way a designer of things, are embarked upon a common voyage.
Upon the vast ocean of the whiteboard , each is a navigator in need of a chart, a bell and the joy of discovery!
The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies —
Such a carriage, such ease and such grace!
Such solemnity too!
One could see he was wise,
The moment one looked in his face!
He had bought a large map representing the sea,
Without a vestige of land:
And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be
A map they could all understand.
‘What's the good of Mercator's North Poles and Equators,
Tropics, Zones and Meridian Lines?’
So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply
‘They are merely conventional signs!’
‘Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
But we've got our brave Captain to thank’
(So the crew would protest)‘that he's bought us the best —
A perfect and absolute blank!’
This was charming, no doubt: but they shortly found out
That the Captain they trusted so well
Had only one notion for crossing the ocean,
And that was to tingle his bell.
from ‘The Hunting of the Snark’, Lewis Carroll (1876)
Note : Lewis Carroll was, in everyday life, a teacher of mathematics.
Decompositions of the square
Right : Permutation on a theme of ‘S’ in which both positive and negative elements are permuted.
Top left :The Studio (1927–29) by Picasso.
A tree of star hexagons.
A Dickensian Christmas; a setting sun; a dainty damsel.
A set of 25 rectangles can be grouped, for comprehension and variety, into 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
The sequence can be row by row, with bonding into groups of five.
Overall unity can be reaffirmed by reasserting similar rectangles.
A rectangle is subdivided into one large and two small squares such that the overlap is constant width.
As the two small squares grow so the trio reaches a peak of energy and declines into a single large square.
Throughout the transition the area of total overlap becomes foveal.
The computer programmed graded distribution in which the detail is random.
Below : A chance configuration of black squares.
Each has a free choice from four locations within the grid.
An ageing leaf, suggested by random blobs upon a shape evocative of a leaf.
In a series, just one item has more energy than its colleagues and emphasises their inertia.
Copies of a famous wash drawing by Hans Arp (1916); and a phonetic poem by Man Ray (Paris, 1924).
Biomorphic forms arranged to suggest the rich, linear tangencies of Art Nouveau .
The Apollonian Gasket , attributed to Apollonius of Perga, is bounded by three large circles tangent two by two.
A dominant circle is inserted, tangent to the three arcs of the circular triangle.
Progressively smaller circles are inserted, generation after generation.
At each generation the unfilled, negative area between the circles is the Apollonian Gasket.
Copy of a pen drawing by Paul Klee (1917).
Above : Chartres Cathedral: north rose window and west rose window.
Opposite page, top left : Copy of ancient Egyptian writing,c 1450 BC.
This figure may suggest colour by ocular diffraction.
If so, then it is possible for one form of communication (white and black, positive and negative light) to suggest the existence of another dimension (colour).
Ships embrace their own scenario, the sea; and so do motor cars and teapots.
We find it odd, even offensive, if a boat looks like a teapot and at best quaint when a teapot looks like a boat.
Right : The Vauxhall Chevette looks what it is: a nippy, small family hatchback saloon car.
The two enantiomorphic polyhedrons are exactly alike in all geometric properties yet they are not identical.
The mobius strip has a single continuous surface.
The Klein bottle has a single continuous surface that passes through the bulb to connect inside with outside.
A finite area needs no more than four colours to distinguish the boundaries of its subdivisions, no matter what the configuration.